The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, Vol. 5
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/the-international-standard-bible-encyclopedia-volume-4_202608>. Public domain.

CORNELL
UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY


CORNELL UNIVERSITY 1 1BRARY


IAA


_3 1924 063 472 8


Cornell University


Library


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.


There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924063472835


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD
BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


THE
INTERNATIONAL STANDARD


BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


JAMES ORR, M.A., D.D., GeneraL Epitor


JOHN L. NUELSEN, D.D., LL.D.
EDGAR Y. MULLINS, D.D., LL.D.


ASSISTANT EDITORS


MORRIS O. EVANS, D.D., Px.D., Manacine Eprror


VOLUME V


SOCKET—ZUZIM
INDEXES


CHICAGO
THE HOWARD-SEVERANCE COMPANY
1915
J


Copyricut, 1915, py
Tue Howarp-Srverance Company


All Rights of Translation and
Reproduction Reserved


International Copyright Secured


The Publishers supply this Encyclopaedia only through
authorized sales-agents, Booksellers cannot obtain it.


Printed by The Lakeside Press
Types cast and set hy the University of Chicago Press
Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.


2821


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Snuffers
Solemn


SOCKET, sok’et (JT, ’edhen): The tabernacle
in the wilderness being constructed as a portable
building without permanent foundation, its stability
was attained by the use of ‘sockets’ into which
the pillars and boards forming its walls were sunk.
The word therefore is used solely in relation to the
tabernacle, except m one poetic passage (Cant 5
15), where the legs of the beloved are compared to
“pillars of marble set upon sockets of fine gold.”
In all, the tabernacle with its court rested upon 165
bases or sockets, apportioned thus: (1) silver sockets,
each a talent (c 95 lbs.) in weight (Ex 38 27),
viz. 96 to support the 48 boards of the tabernacle
(Ex 26 19 ff); 4 for the pillars supporting the veil
(ver 32)=100; (2) bronze sockets, weight not
given, viz. 50 to support the 50 standards on which
were hung the curtains of the tabernacle on N., 8.
and W. (27 10 ff), 10 to support 10 pillars on the I.
(vs 13 ff), and 5 to support the 5 pillars upholding
the screen at the tabernacle entrance (26 27)=65.
The site for the tabernacle being chosen and
leveled, these sockets would be “laid” upon it
(Ex 40 18), and the tenons of the boards, or pro-
jecting base of the pillar, inserted into holes made
for the purpose. W. Saaw Ca.vgcotTt


SOCOH, s6’k6 (M3TW , MW, sokhoh, “branches”),
SOCO (DU, sdkhd [in Ch only]; Zoxd, Sachd,
most usual, but many forms in LXX and in AV:
Socoh, Shochoh, Shoco, Shocho) :

(1) A city in the Shephelah of Judah mentioned
along with Jarmuth, Adullam, Azekah, ete (Josh
15 35); the Philis “gathered together at Socoh,
which belongeth to Judah, and encamped between
Socoh and Azekah” (1 8 17 1); it is mentioned
as one of the districts from which Solomon drew
his supplies (1 K 410, AV ‘“Sochoh’); the
association of Socoh in this verse with Hepher is
worth noticing in connection with 1 Ch 4 18
(“Heber”). Soco (AV “Shoco’’) was one of the cities
fortified by Rehoboam for the defence of Judah
(2 Ch 11 7); it was captured by the Philis in the
time of Ahaz (28 18). The site is, without doubt,
Kh. esh Shuweikeh (Shuweikeh is a diminutive of
Shaukeh, “‘a thorn”), a rounded, elongated hilltop,
showing clear traces of ancient city walls. The
situation is one of considerable natural strength on
the south side of the Vale of Elah just where the
Wady es Sar makes a sweep to the W. and becomes
the Wédy es Sunt. Like so many such ancient
sites, the hill has very steep slopes on 3 sides (6.,
W., and N.), and is isolated from the ridge of
higher ground to the E. by a narrow neck of lower
ground. In the valley to the 8.W. is a plentiful
spring. The site was known to Jerome in the 4th
cent. He described it as 8 or 9 Rom miles from
Eleutheropolis (Beit Jibrin) (PEF, III, 53, 125, Sh
XVII, BR, I], 21). The Sucathites (1 Ch 2 55)
were probably inhabitants of Soco.

(2) A city of Judah in the &., associated (Josh
15 48) with Shamir and Jattir. This is doubtless
Kh. Shuweikeh, a large ruin occupying a low hill,
10 miles S.W. of Hebron; there are many caves
and rock-cut cisterns as well as drafted stones.
Cheyne doubtfully locates the Socoh of 1 K 4 10
here. See PEF, 404, 410, Sh XXV; BR, I, 494.

E. W. G. MastermMan

SOD, SODDEN, sod"n. See SrEtTue.

SODA, sd’da. See Nirre.

SODERING, sod’ér-ing (PJ, debhek): AV in
Isa 41 7, RV “soldering,” of smith work.


SODI, 86’di ("TIO, sddht): One of the spies,
representing the tribe of Zebulun (Nu 13 10).


E SODOM,sod’um (B79 , s*dhdm; Zé5opa, Sédoma) :
One of the 5 Citrus oF THE PLAIN (q.v.), destroyed
by fire from heaven in the time of Abraham and
Lot (Gen 19 24). The wickedness of the city
became proverbial. The sin of sodomy was an
offence against nature frequently connected with
idolatrous practices (see Rawlinson, History of
Phoenicia). See Sopomire. The fate of Sodom
and Gomorrah is used as a warning to those who
reject the gospel (Mt 10 15; 11 24; 2 Pet 2 6;
Jude ver 7). The word is used in a typical sense
in Rev 11 8. Sodom was probably located in a
plain §. of the Dead Sea, now covered with water.
The name is still preserved in Jebel Usdum (Mt.
Sodom). See AraBan; CiTims oF THE Puan;
Drap Sea.

Literature.—Dillmann. Genesis, 111 f;
BR, Il, 187 ff; G. A. Smith, HGHLE, 505 ff; Blancken-


horn, ZDPV, XIX, 1896, 53; Baedeker-Socin, Pal,
143; Buhl, GAP, 117, 271, 274.


Grorce Freprrick Wricut
SODOM, VINE OF (O5077D4, gephen s*dhom):
“For their vine is of the vine of Sodom,
And of the fields of Gomorrah:
Their grapes are grapes of gall,
Their clusters are bitter’’ (Dt 32 32).
This must be distinguished from the “Apples of
Sodom” (q.v.), described by Jos (BJ, IV, viii, 4),
which appear to have been an actual species of fruit,
robably either the colocynth or the fruit of the
sher tree, Calotropis procera. It would appear,
however, from the above, the only passage referring
to the Vine of Sodom, that this expression is meta-
phorical and does not refer to any particular plant.
E. W. G. Masrerman
SODOMITE, sod’om-it (Wp, kadhésh, tem.
MOP , kedhéshah): Kadhésh denotes properly a male
temple prostitute, one of the class attached to cer-
tain sanctuaries of heathen deities, and ‘“conse-
crated” to the impure rites of their worship. Such
gross and degrading practices in Jeh’s land could
only be construed as a flagrant outrage; and any
association of these with His pure worship was
abhorrent (Dt 28 17f). The presence of Sodomites
is noted as a mark of degeneracy in Rehoboam’s
time (1 K 14 24). Asa endeavored to get rid
of them (15 12), and Jehoshaphat routed them
out (22 46). Subsequent corruptions opened the
way for their return, and Josiah had to break down
their houses which were actually “in the house of
the Lord’ (2 K 23 7). The fem. kdhéshah is
trd “prostitute” in Gen 38 21.22; Hos 4 14; in
Dt 28 17 “prostitute” (AVm “sodomitess,” RVm
transliterates). The Eng. word is, of course,
derived from Sodom, the inhabitants of which were
in evil repute for unnatural vice. W. Ewina


Robinson,


3 SODOMITISH, sod’om-it-ish, SEA. See Dap
EA.


SODOMY, sod’o-mi.


See Sovom;
Crimes; PUNISHMENTS.


Sopvomits;


SOJOURNER, soj’ér-nér, sd’jir-nér, suj/ér-nér.
See STRANGER AND SOJOURNER. :


SOLDERING, sod’ér-ing. See Soprrina.


SOLDIER, sdl’jér. See Army.

SOLEMN, sol’em, SOLEMNITY, sé-lem’ni-ti:
The word “‘solemn” had (1) at first the meaning
“once in the year,” through its derivation from
Lat sollus, “whole,” annus, ‘year.’ As, however,
a regular annual occurrence is usually one of par-
ticular importance, the word took on (2) the mean-


Solemn Assembly THT INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Solomon


2822


ing ‘‘ceremonious.” From this is derived (3) the
usual modern force of “grave” in opposition to
‘Soyous.” This last meaning is not in Bib. Eng.,
aud the meanings of “solemn” in EV are either (1)
or (2). Nor is there any certain case of (1), for
the word is always a gloss in EV and, although fre-
quently introduced in references to annual events
(Lev 23 36, etc), it is even more often used where
“annual” is foreign to the passage (2 K 10 20;
Ps 92 3, etc). The use of the word in AV is unsys-
tematic. It is always (except in Jer 9 2) found in
conjunction with “assembly”? when (10 t) the latter
word represents ‘dcdrah (‘dcereth) (Lev 23 36, etc)
(retained by RV with m ‘‘closing festival,’’ Lev 23
36; 2 Ch 79; Neh 8 18). AV uses ‘“‘solemnity”
or ‘solemn day,” “feast,” etc, 17 t for the very
common word mé‘édh (“appointed” time, etc;
see Fmast),


RV’s treatment of these passages defies analysis.
‘*Solemnity" is kept in Isa 33 20; Ezk 46 11, and
“solemn” in Lam (4 t);_ Hos (3 t); Zeph 3 18. In
Ezk 86 38; 45 17; 46 9 it is replaced by sappeinted
elsewhere (and for mé'ddhéth, 2 Ch 8 13) by “
The margins further complicate the renderings.
also uses ‘‘solemn”’ with hagh, ‘'feast,’’ 4 t, and with
haghagh, “keep a feast,’’ in Dt 16.15. The word is
dropped by RV, except ERV in Ps 81 3. Finally, AV
and RV have ‘‘solemn sound"’ for higgayén, in Ps 92 3.
The context, however, demands ‘resounding melody.”
And 11 t_RV has introduced '‘solemn”’ to represent the
Intensive in the form shabbath shabbathén (Ex 16 23, etc),
where AV has simply ‘‘sabbath”’ or ‘‘sabbath of rest.’’
RV here has imitated the adverbial ‘‘solemnly”’ in the
similar intensified expressions in Gen 43 3; 1 8 9.


RV Apoc translates en hémérais katrov, “in the
days of the season’ (Bar 1 14), by ‘‘on the days of
the solemn assembly” (AV ‘solemn days”), and
both AV and RV have “solemn feast days” for dies
festos (2Esd131). Otherwise AV’s use of “‘solemn”
is dropped by RV. Burton Scorr Easton


SOLEMN ASSEMBLY (MEETING) See Con-
GREGATION; Fasts anv Frasts; SoLemMn, SoLeM-
NITY.


SOLOMON, sol’é-mun (Mid>W, shelomon; NT
Zoropov, Solomén):


I. Earzy Lire
1. Name and Meaning
. Sources
. Birth and Upbringing
. His Accession
. Closing Days of David
EION oF SOLOMON
. His Vision
. His Policy
. Its Results
. Alliance with Tyre
. Alliance with Egypt
. Domestic Troubles
18 BULLDINGS
. The Temple
. The Palace
. Other Buildings
. The Corvée
1s CHARACTER
Personal Qualities
His Wisdom
His Learning
Trade and Commerce
. Officers of State
Wives


cup oto


II.


ra


Oop wh


II.


baal)


woh


IV.


Revenues

. Literary Works

LITERATURE

I. Early Life.—Solomon was the son of David and

Bath-sheba, and became the 3d king of Israel. He
was so named by his mother (2 8 12

1. Name 24, Keré; see Text), but by the prophet

and Mean- Nathan, or by his father (Vulg), he

ing was called Jedidiah—‘“loved of Jeh.”
The name ‘‘Solomon” is derived from

the root meaning “to be quiet” or “peaceful,” and

8. was certainly the least warlike of all the kings

of Israel or Judah, and in that respect a remarkable

contrast to his father (so 1 Ch 22 9). His name


NOG go Ey


in Heb compares with Irenaeus in Gr, Friedrich in
Ger., and Selim in Arab.; but it has been suggested
that the name should be pronounced shillimah, from
the word denoting “compensation,” Bath-sheba’s
second son being given in compensation for the loss
of the first (but see 3, below).
The oldest sources for the biography of 8S. are
doubtless the ‘Annals of Solomon’’ referred to in
1 K 411 41, the “history of Nathan the
2. Sources prophet,” the “prophecy of Ahijah
the Shilonite’ and the “visions of
Iddo the seer,” mentioned in 2 Ch 9 29, all which
may be merely the relative sections of the great
book of the “Annals of the Kings” from which our
Books of K and Ch are both derived. These ancient
works are, of course, lost to us save in so far as they
have been embodied in the OT narrative. There
the life of S. is contained in2 8 12 24f; 1 K 1-11;
1 Ch 22—2 Ch 9. Of these sources 2S 12 24f
and 1 K 1, 2 are much the oldest and in fact form
part of one document, 2 § 9-20; 1 K 1, 2 dealing
with the domestic affairs of David, which may well
be contemporary with the events it describes. The
date of the composition of the Books of Ch is about
300 BC—700 years after the time of S.—and the
date of the Books of K, as a completed work, must,
of course, be later than the exile. Nothing of
importance is gained from citations from early
historians in Jos and later writers. Far and away
the best source for, at least, the inner life of S. would
be the writings ascribed to him in the OT, could we’
be sure that these were genuine (see below).
The children of David by Bath-sheba are given in
1 Ch 3 5asShimea, Shobab, Nathan and Solomon.
Cf also 2S 6 14; 1 Ch 14 4, where


3. Birth the same persons evidently are named.
and Up- It would thus appear that 8. was the
bringing 4th son of Bath-sheba, supposing


Shimea to be the child that died.
Otherwise 8. would be the 5th son. There are
therefore some events omitted in 2 S 12 24f, or
else the names Shobab and Nathan are remains of
some clause which has been lost, and not proper
names. Like the heir apparent of a Turkish sultan,
S. seems to have spent his best years in the seclusion
of the harem. There he was doubtless more influ-
enced by his mother than by his father, and in close
intimacy with his mother was the prophet Nathan,
who had given him his by-name of fortunate import
(2 8 12 25).
It was not until David lay on his deathbed that
S. left the women’s quarters and made his appear-
ance in public. That he had been
4. His Ac- selected by David, as the son of the
cession favorite wife, to succeed him, is pre-
supposed in the instructions which
he received from his father regarding the building
of the Temple. But assoon as it appeared that the
life of David was nearing its end, it became evident
that S. was not to have a ‘walk over.”’ He found
a rival in Adonijah the son of Haggith, who was
apparently the eldest surviving son of his father,
and who had the support of Joab, by far the
strongest man of all, of Abiathar, the leading, if
not the favorite, priest (cf 2 S 16 24 ff), and of the
princes of the royal house. S., on the other hand,
had the support of his mother Bath-sheba, David’s
favorite wife, of Nathan the court prophet, of Zadok
who had eclipsed Abiathar, of Benaiah, the son of a
priest, but one of the three bravest of David’s sol-
diers, and captain of the bodyguard of Cherethites
and Pelethites, and of the principal soldiers. It is
esp. noted that Shimei and Hushai (so Jos) took no
active part at any rate with Adonijah (1 K 1 8).
The conspiracy came to nothing, for, before it
developed, 8. was anointed at Gibeon (not Gihon,
1 K 1 33.38.45), and entered Jerus as king.


2823


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Solemn Assembly
Solomon


The age of S. at his accession is unknown. The
expression in 1 K 8 7 is not, of course, to be taken
literally (otherwise Ant, VIII, vii, 8).
5. Closing His reign opened, like that of many an
Days of oriental monarch, with a settlement in
David blood of the accounts of the previous
reign. Joab, David’s nephew, who
had brought the house within the bounds of blood
revenge, was executed. Adonijah, as soon as his
father had breathed his last, was on a nominal
charge put to death. Abiathar was relegated to his
home at Anathoth (1 K 2 26). Conditions were
imposed on Shimei which he failed to keep and so
forfeited his life (2 36 ff). These steps having
been taken, S. began his reign, as it were, with a
clean slate.
Il. Reign of Solomon.—It was apparently at the
very beginning of his reign that S. made his famous
choice of a “hearing heart,” i.e. an
1. His obedient heart, in preference to riches
Vision or long life. The vision took place at
Gibeon (2 Ch 1 7, but in 1 K 3 4f
the ancient versions read “upon the altar that was
in Gibeon. Andthe Lord appeared,” etc). Thelite
of 8. was a curious commentary on his early resolu-
tion. One of the first acts of his reign was appar-
ently, in the style of the true oriental monarch,
to build himself a new palace, that of his father
being inadequate for his requirements. In regard
to politics, however, the events of Solomon’s
reign may be regarded as an endorsement of his
choice. Under him alone was the kingdom of Israel
a great world-power, fit almost to rank beside
Assyria and Egypt. Never again were the bounds
of Israel so wide; never again were north and south
united in one great nation. There is no doubt that
the credit of this result is due to the wisdom of 8.
S. was by nature an unwarlike person, and his
whole policy was in the direction of, peace. He
disbanded the above-mentioned foreign
2. His legion, the Cherethites and Pelethites,
Policy who had done such good service as
bodyguard to his father. All his
officers seem to have been mediocre persons who
would not be likely to force his hand, as Joab had
done that of David (2 8 3 39). Even the forti-
fication of Jerus and of the frontier towns was under-
taken with a view to repel attack, not for the
purposes of offence. 8. did, no doubt, strengthen
the army, esp. the cavalry arm (1 K 4 26; 10 26),
but he never made any use of this, and perhaps it
existed largely on paper. At any rate S. seems to
have been rather a breeder of and dealer in horse-
flesh than a soldier. He appears also to have had
a fine collection of armor (10 25), but much of it
was made of gold (10 16f) and was intended for
show, not for use. Both in his reputation for
wisdom and in his aversion to war S. bears a striking
resemblance to King James VI of Scotland and
I of England, as depicted by the hand of Sir Walter
Scott. It was fortunate for him that both the
neighboring great powers were for the time in a
decadent state, otherwise the history of the kingdom


-of Israel would have ended almost before it had


begun. On the other hand, it has been remarked
that if S. had had anything like the military genius
of David and his enthusigsm for the religion of
Jeh, he might have extended the arms of Israel from
the Nile to the Tigris and anticipated the advent


‘of Islam. But his whole idea was to secure him-


self in peace, to amass wealth and induige his love
of grandeur with more than oriental splendor.

S., in fact, was living on the achievements and
reputation of his father, who laid the basis of
security and peace on which the commercial genius
of §. could raise the magnificent structure which he
did, But he took the clay from the foundations in


order to build the walls. The Hebrews were a mili-
tary people and in that consisted their life. S.
withdrew their energies from their
3. Its natural bent and turned them to com-
Results merce, for which they were not yet ripe.
Their soul rebelled under the irksome
drudgery of an industry of which they did not reap
the fruits. §S. had in fact reduced a free people
to slavery, and concentrated the wealth of the whole
country in the capital. As soon as he was out of the
way, his country subjects threw off the yoke and
laid claim to their ancient freedom. His son found
himself left with the city and a territory as small as
an English county.
Solomon’s chief ally was Hiram, the king of Tyre,
probably the friend and ally of David, who is to be
distinguished from Hiram the artificer
4. Alliance of 1 K 7 13ff. Hiram the king en-
with Tyre tered into a treaty with S. which was
to the advantage of both parties.
Hiram supplied 8. with cedar and pine wood from
Lebanon, as well as with skilled artisans for his
building. Tyrian sailors were also drafted into the
ships of S., the Hebrews not being used to the
sea (1 K 9 26f), besides which Phoen ships sailed
along with those of 8S. The advantages which Hi-
ram received in return were that the Red Sea was
open to his merchantmen, and he also received large
supplies of corn and oil from the land of Israel
(1 K 6 11 corrected by LXX and 2 Ch 2 10).
At the conclusion of the building of the palace
and Temple, which occupied 20 years, 8. presented
Hiram with 20 villages (1 K 9 11; the converse,
2 Ch 8 2), and Hiram made S. a return present of
gold (1 K 9 14; omitted in 2 Ch).
Second to Hiram was the Pharaoh of Egypt,
whose daughter S. married, receiving as her dower
the town of Gezer (1 K 9 16). This
5. Alliance Pharaoh is not named in the OT.
with Egypt This alliance with Egypt led to the
introduction of horses into Israel (10
28 f), though David had already made a beginnmg
on a small scale (2S 8 4). Both these alliances
lasted throughout the reign. There is no mention
of an alliance with the eastern power, which was
then in a decadent state.
It was probably nearer the beginning than the end
of Solomon’s reign that political trouble broke out
within the realm. When David had
6. Domestic annexed the territory of the Edomites
Troubles at, the cost, of the butchery of the male
population (cf 2 S 8 14; Ps 60, title)
one of the young princes of the reigning house
effected his escape, and sought and found an asylum
in Egypt, where he rose to occupy a high station.
No sooner had he heard of the death of David and
Joab than he returned to his native country and
there stirred up disaffections against S. (1 K 11
14 ff; see Hava), without, however, restoring inde-
pendence to Edom (1 K 9 26). A second occasion
of disaffection arose through a prophet having fore-
told that the successor of S. would have one of the
Israelite tribes only and that the other ten clans
would be under Solomon’s master of works whom
he had set over them. This officer also took refuge
in Egypt and was protected by Shishak. He re-
mained there until the death of S. (1 K 11 26 ff).
A third adversary was Rezon who had fled from his
master the king of Zobah (1 K 11 23), and who
established himself at Damascus and founded a
dynasty which was long a thorn in the side of Israel.
These domestic troubles are regarded as a conse-
quence of the falling away of S. from the path of
rectitude, but this seems to be but a kind of antic-
ipative consequence, that is, if it was not till the
end of his reign that 8. fell into idolatry and poly-
theism (1 K 11 4).


Solomon
Ss Servants


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2824.


If. His Buildings.—The great undertaking of
the reign of S. was, of course, THE TEMPLE (q.v.),
which was at first probably considered
1. The as the Chapel Royal and an adjunct
Temple of the palace. The Temple was begun
: in the 4th year of the reign and finished
in the IIth, the work of the building occupying
7% years (1 K 6; 7 13 ff). The delay in beginning
is remarkable, if the material were all ready to hand
(1 Ch 22). Worship there was inaugurated with
fitting ceremony and prayers (1 K 8).
_ ToS., however, his own palace was perhaps a more
interesting undertaking. It at any rate occupied
more time, in fact 18 years (1 K 7
2. The I-12; 9 10; 2 Ch 8 I), the time of
Palace building both palace and Temple
being 20 years. Possibly the building
of the palace occupied the first four years of the
reign and was then intermitted and resumed after
the completion of the Temple; but of this there is
no indication in the text. It was called the House
of the Forest of Lebanon, from the fact that it was
lined with cedar wood (1 K 7 2). <A description
\ef it is given in I K 7 1-12.
8. also rebuilt the wall of the city and the citadel
(see JERUSALEM; Muto). He likewise erected
castles at the vulnerable points of the
3. Other frontiers—Hazor, Megiddo and Gezer
Buildings (1 K 915), lower Beth-horon and
BaaLatH (q.v.). According to the
Keré of I K 9 18 and the ancient VSS as well as
2 Ch 8 4, he was the founder of Tadmor (Palmyra);
but the K*thibh of I K 9 18 reads Tamar (cf Eizk
47 19). Some of the remains of buildings recently
discovered at Megiddo and Gezer may go back to
the time of 8.
8. could not have built on the scale he did with the
resources ordinarily at the command of a free ruler.
Accordingly we find that one of the
4. The institutions fostered by him was the
Corvée corvée, or forced labor. No doubt some-
thing of the kind always had existed
(Josh 9 21) and still exists in all despotic govern-
ments. Thus the people of a village will be called
on to repair the neighboring roads, esp. when the
Pasha is making a progress in the neighborhood.
But S. made the thing permanent and national
(1 K 6 13-15; 9 15). The immediate purpose of
the levy was to supply laborers for work in the
Lebanon in connection with his building operations.
Thus 30,000 men were raised and drafted, 10,000 at
a time, to the Lebanon, where they remained for a
month, thus having two months out of every three
at home. But even when the immediate cause had
ceased, the practice once introduced was kept up
and it became one of the chief grievances which led
to the dismemberment of the kingdom (I K 12 18,
Adoram=Adoniram; cf 2 8 20 24), for hitherto
the corvée had been confined to foreign slaves taken
in war (I K 9 21). It is said the higher posts
were reserved for Israelites, the laborers being
foreigners (9 22), that is, the Israclites acted as
foremen. Some of the foreign slaves seem to have
formed a guild in connection with the Temple
which lasted down to the time of the exile (Ezr
2 55-57; Neh 7 57-59; sce NETHINIM).
IV. His Character.—In S. we have the type of a
Turkish sultan, rather than a king of Israel. The
Heb kings, whether of Israel or
1. Personal Judah, were, in theory at least, elect-
Qualities ive monarchs like the kings of Poland.
If one happened to be a strong ruler,
he managed to establish his family, it might be,
for three or even four generations. In the case of
the Judaean dynasty the personality of the first
king made such a deep impression upon the heart of
the people that the question of a change of dynasty


there never became pressing. But 8. would prob-
ably have usurped the crown if he had not inherited
it, and once on the throne he became a thorough-~
going despot. All political power was taken out
of the hands of the sheiks, although outward respect
was still paid to them (1 K 8 1), and placed in the
hands of officers who were simply creatures of 8.
The resources of the nation were expended, not on
works of public utility, but on the personal aggran-
dizement of the monarch (1 K 10 18 ff). In the
means he took to gratify his passions he showed him-
self to be little better than a savage, and if he did
not commit such great crimes as_ David, it was
perhaps because he had no occasion, or because
pe cme loyed greater cunning in working out his
ends.
The wisdom for which 8. is so celebrated was not
of a very high order; it was nothing more than
practical shrewdness, or knowledge of
2. Wisdom the world and of human nature. The
common example of it is that given in
I K 8 16 ff, to which there are innumerable paral-
lels in Indian, Gr and other literatures. The same
worldly wisdom lies at the back of the Book of
Prov, and there is no reason why a collection of
these should not have been made by 6., just as it is
more likely that he was a composer of verses than
that he was not (1 K 4 32). The statement that
he had breadth of heart (4 29) indicates that there
i nothing known which did not come within his
en.
The word “wisdom,’’ however, is used also in
another connection, namely, in the sense of theo-
retical knowledge or book learning,
3. Learning esp. in the department of natural his-
tory. It is not to be supposed that 8.
had any scientific knowledge of botany or zoélogy,
but he may have collected the facts of observation,
a task in which the Oriental, who cannot generalize,
excels. The wisdom and understanding (1 K 4 29)
for which 8. was famous would consist largely in
stories about beasts and trees like the well-known
Fables of Pilpai. They included also the “‘wisdom”
for which Egypt was famous (4 30), that is, occult
science. I+ results from this last statement that 8S.
appears in post-Bib. and Arabian lit. as a magician.
S. was very literally a merchant prince. He not
only encouraged and protected commerce, but
engaged in it himself. He was in fact


4. Trade —_ the predominant, if not sole, partner in
andCom- a great trading concern, which was
merce nothing less than the Israelite nation.


One of his enterprises was the horse
trade with Egypt. His agents bought up horses
which were again sold to the kings of the Hittites
and the Aramaeans. The prices paid are men-
tioned (1 K 10 29). The best of these 8. no doubt
retained for his own cavalry (1 K 10 26). Another
commodity imported from that country was linen
yarn (1 K 10 28 AV). The navy which 8. built
at the head of the Gulf of Akaba was not at all for
military, but purely commercial ends. They were
ships of Tarshish, that is, merchant ships, not ships
sailing to Tarshish, as 2 Ch 9 21. They traded to
Oruir (q.v.), from which they brought gold, silver,
ivory, apes and peacocks, the round voyage lasting
3 years (1 K 9 26 ff; 10 22). Special mention is
made of “almug” (10 I1) or “algum” (2 Ch 9 10 f)
trees (q.v.). The visit of the Queen of Sheba would
point to the overland caravan routes from the Yemen
being then open (1 K 10 15). What with direct
imports and the result of sales, silver and cedar
wood became very plentiful in the capital (10 27).

The list of Solomon’s officers of state is given in
1K42¢ff. These included a priest, two secretaries,
a recorder, a commander-in-chief, a chief com-
missariat officer, a chief shepherd (if we may read


2825


ro‘eh for ré'eh), a master of the household, and the
head of the corvée. The list should be compared
with those of David's officers (2 8 8
5. Officers 16 ff; 20 23 ff). There is much re-
of State semblance, but we can see that the
machine of state was becoming more
complicated. The bodyguard of foreign merce-
naries was abolished and the captain Benaiah pro-
moted to be commander-in-chief. Two scribes
were required instead of one. Twelve commissariat
officers were appointed whose duty it was to
forward from their districts the supplies for the
royal household and stables. The list of these
officials, a very curious one, is given in 1 K 4 7 ff.
It is to be noted that the 12 districts into which
the country was divided did not coincide with the
territories of the 12 tribes. It may be remarked
that S. seems as far as possible to have retained the
old servants of his father. It will be noticed also
that in all the lists there is mention of more thau
one priest. These “priests” retained some of their
original functions, since they acted as prognosticators
and diviners.
Solomon’s principal wife was naturally the
daughter of Pharaoh; it was for her that his palace
was built (1 K 31; 7 8; 9 16.24).
6. Wives But in addition to her he established
marriage relations with the neighboring
peoples. In some cases the object was no doubt to
cement an alliance, as with the Zidonians and
Hittites and the other nationalities (11 1), some of
which were forbidden to Israelites (Dt 7 3). It
may be that the daughter of Pharaoh was childless
or died a considerable time before S., but his favor-
jte wife was latterly a granddaughter of Nahash,
the Ammonite king (1 14 21 LXX), and it was
her son who succeeded to the throne. Many of S.’s
wives were no doubt daughters of wealthy or
powerful citizens who wished by an alliance with
the king to strengthen their own positions. Yet
we do not read of his marrying an Israelite wife.
According to the Arabian story Bilkis, the Queen of
Sheba who visited S. (1 K 10 1 ff), was also
married to him. He appears to have had only one
son; we are not told of any other than Rehoboam.
His daughters were married to his own officers
(i K 4 11.15).
§. is said to have started his reign with a capital
sum of 100,000 talents of gold and a million talents
of silver, a sum greater than the nation-
7, Revenues al debt of Great Britain. Even so,
this huge sum was ear-marked for the
building of the Temple (1 Ch 22 14). His income
was, for one year, at any rate, 666 talents of gold
(1 K 10 14), or about twenty million dollars.
This seems an immense sum, but it probably was
not so much as it looks. The great mass of the
people were too poor to have any commodities
which they could exchange for gold. Its principal
use was for the decoration of buildings. Its pur-
chasing power was probably small, because so few
could afford to buy it. It was in the same category
as the precious stones which are of great rarity, but
which are of no value unless there is a demand for
them. In the time of S. there was no useful pur-
pose to which gold could be put in preference to
any other metal.
It is not easy to believe that the age of S., so
glorious in other respects, had not a literature to
correspond. Yet the reign of the
8. Literary sultan Ismail in Morocco, whom S.
Works much resembles, might be cited in
favor of such a supposition. S. him-
self is stated to have composed 3,000 animal stories
and 1,005 songs (1 K 4 32). In the OT the fol-
lowing are ascribed to him: three collections of
Proverbs, 1 1 ff; 10 1f; 26 1ff; The Song of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Solomon
S.’s Servants


Songs; Pss 72 and 127; Eccl (although 8S. is not
named). In Prov 26 1 the men of Hezekiah are
said to have copied out the following proverbs.


Litsrature.—The relative portions of the histories by


Ewald, Stanley (who follows Ewald), Renan, Wellhausen
and Kittel; also H. Winckler, Alitestamentliche Untersuch-
ungen; and the comms. on the Books of K and Ch.


Tuomas HunTeR WEIR
SOLOMON, ODES OF. See Avrocatypric
Lirerature, B, III, 2.


SOLOMON, POOLS OF.
MON.


SOLOMON, PSALMS (PSALTER)
Avocatyptic Literature, B, Il, 1.


SOLOMON, SONG OF. See Sone or Sonas.


SOLOMON, WISDOM OF. See Wispom or
SoLomon.


SOLOMON’S PORCH. See Porcu,
MON’S.


SOLOMON’S SERVANTS (Mia>e "737,
‘abhedhé shelaémoh; Sobor Daropdyv, doviloi Salomén):
“The children of Solomon’s servants” constituted
a company or guild of the Jewish exiles who returned
with Zerubbahel from Babylonia to Jerus in 537
BC, pursuant to the decree of Cyrus; they are
mentioned 5 t (Ezr 2 55.58!|Neh 7 57.60; Neh
11 3). As the prime purpose of the returning
exiles was the rebuilding of the Temple and the
restoration of Jeh’s worship (Ezr 1 2.3), it was
important that those who held the privileges of
sanctuary service as a family heritage should go back
to their duties. This included, besides priests and
Levites, the NetHinim (q.v.) and Solomon’s Serv-
ants. In every reference to them, Solomon’s Serv-
ants are connected with the Nethinim, who had
been “given” or dedicated (n‘thinim or n*thinim is

ass. participle of nathan, ‘to give,” “to appoint”)

y David ‘for the service of the Levites” (Ezr 8
20); so Solomon’s Servants traced their official
beginning back to Solomon’s appointment, as their
name indicates. In the joint references they always
fallinto the natural chronological order, i.e. following
the Nethinim. It is possible, therefore, that they
are referred to in Ezr 7 24 also, under the title
“servants of this house of God,” which immediately
follows ‘‘Nethinim”’ in the list of those exempt from
taxation and tolls.

What their duties in the house of God may have been
is not stated in the records. These must have been
more or less menial, the more formal and honorable duties
being reserved for ‘‘the priests and Levites, the singers,
{and] porters’ (Ezr 7 24). When the ark was brought
to Jerus by David and the ceremonial of the sacrificial
system was more strictly observed, the services of
priests and Levites were greatly increased, and to meet


the needs of the new order David appointed the Nethinim
(Ezr 8 20; cf_1 Ch 9 2). Likewise the much greater
increase in such duties on the completion of Solomon's
Temple was the occasion for the dedication of an addition-~
al number of these assistants to the Levites.

The number of those who returned with Zerubbahel
was not great, together with the N ethinim being only
392. This does not appear to have been sufficient for the
needs of the sanctuary, since Ezra, in preparation for his
expedition in 458 BC, made special appeal for Nethinim
to go with him, of whom 220 responded (Ezr 8 15-20).
No doubt at the first their service was considered to be
lowly; but by the time of the exile, certainly after it,
their position had developed into one of considerable
honor and _ constituted them a privileged class in the
nation. While many of the people were required by
Nehemiah to live in Jerus, they were allowed to dwell in
their possessions ‘‘in the cities of Judah’’ (Neh 11 3).


A question of some interest and of difference
of opinion is whether Solomon’s Servants were
Levites or non-Israelites. The latter view is the
more generally held, for the following reasons:


See Pooits or Soto-


OF. See


SoLo-


Someis
Son of God


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2826


(1) After the completion of the Temple and his
other great buildings a large body of workmen,
whom Solomon had drafted from the non-Israclite
population, were without occupation, and might
well have been assigned to the menial duties of the
Temple (1 K 9), their name in LXX (douloi)
properly indicating such a class; (2) Ezekicl excludes
non-Israelites from the service of his ideal temple,
as though they had been allowed in the preéxilic
Temple (44 9); (8) they are always clearly dis-
tinguished from the Levites in the lists of religious
bodies.

But, on the other hand, equally strong arguments
favor their Levitical descent: (1) Levites also are
called douwloi in 1 Esd; (2) it is more probable that
Ezekiel refers to the abuses of Athaliah, Ahaz and
Manasseh than to the institutions of David and
Solomon; (3) Ezra specifically classifies the Nethi-
nim as Levites (8 15-20); (4) there is not the slight-
est intimation in the text of 1 K 9 15-22 that the
gentile bondservants were assigned to temple-
service after completion of the great building
operations; such an interpretation is wholly infer-
ential, while, on the contrary, it is more probable
that such an innovation would have been men-
tioned in the narrative; and (5) it is not probable
that Ezra and Nehemiah, or Zerubbabel, with their
strict views of Israelitish privilege (cf Ezr 2 62),
would have admitted non-Israelites to sacred
functions, the less so in view of Ezekiel’s prohibi-
tion. There is more ground, then, for holding that
Solomon’s Servants, like the porters and singers,
were an order of, Levites. Epwarp Mack


SOMEIS, sd’mé-is (Lopecls, Someeis; AV Samis):
One of the Israelites who put away their foreign
wives (1 Esd 9 34)=‘‘Shimei” in Ezr 10 38.


SOMETIME, sum’tim: In modern Eng. means
“occasionally,’’ and is so used in Sir 37 14 for évlore,
eniote. Otherwise the word means “‘at some past
time,” and is the tr of moré, polé. RV changes to
“aforetime’ in Wisd 6 3; 1 Pet 3 20; to “once”
in Eph 2 13; 5 8; to “in time past” in Col 1 21;
while in Col 3 7 ERV has “‘aforetime,”’ ARV “once.”
AV does not distinguish between ‘‘sometime”’ and
“sometimes.”


SON, sun, SONS, sunz: (1) In Bib. language the
word “gon” is used first of all in its strictly literal
sense of male issue or offspring of a man or woman.
In a few cases in the OT, asin Gen 3 16; Josh 17
2; Jer 20 15, the Heb word bén, is tr? correctly
in the Eng. by the word ‘‘child” or ‘‘children,”’
as it includes both sexes, as in Gen 3 16, or is
limited to males by the use of the modifying term
‘male.’ Closely connected with this meaning of
direct male issue or of children is its use to denote
descendants, posterity in the more general sense.
This usage which, as in the case of the sons (chil-
dren) of Israel, may be regarded perhaps as originat-
ing in the conception of direct descent from the
common ancestor Israel, came in the course of
time to be a mere ethnographic designation, so that
the term “‘the children of Israel” and ‘‘the children
of Ammon’ meant no more than Israelites or
Ammonites, that is, inhabitants of the lands of
Israel or Ammon respectively. An extension of
this usage is to be found in the designation of a
people as the sons or children of a land or city; so
in Am 9 7 “children of the Ethiopians,” or Ezk
16 28, where the literal rendering would be “‘sons of
Asshur,” instead of the Assyrians, and ‘‘the children
of Jerus” in Joel 3 6. See Bar (prefix); Brn-.

(2) More characteristic of Bib. usage is the
employment of the word ‘“‘son” to indicate member-
ship in a class or guild, as in the common phrase


“sons of the prophets,’ which implies nothing
whatever as to the ancestry, but states that the
individuals concerned are members of the pro-
phetic guilds or schools. In the NT the word
‘sons” (huiot) in Lk 11 19, rendered “children” in
Mt 12 27 AV, means, not physical descendants, but
members of the class or sect; according to Mt the
Pharisees, who were attacking Christ.

(3) The word “son” is used with a following
genitive of quality to indicate some characteristic
of the person or persons described. In the Eng. the
word “son” is usually omitted and the phrase is para-
phrased as in 2 S 3 34, wherethe words trt “wicked
men” in AV mean lit. sons or children of wickedness.
Two examples of this usage may be cited: the
familiar phrase “sons of Belial” im the OT (Dt
13 13 AV, and often), where the meaning is simply
base or worthless fellows (cf Nu 24 17, m “children
of Sheth” {Expos T, XIII, 64b]); and in the NT the
phrase “sons of thunder,”’ which is given in Mk 3 17
as the explanation of the epithet ‘“Boanerges.”
This use is common in the NT, as the phrases ‘‘chil-
dren of the kingdom,” “children of light,” etc,
indicate, the general meaning being that the noun
in the genitive following the word children indicates
some quality of the persons under consideration.
The special phrases,‘‘Son of man” and ‘‘Son of God”
are considered in separate articles. See also
RELATIONSHIPS, FaMILy.

Wattrer R. BETTERIDGE

‘SON-IN-LAW. See RevationsHirs, Famizy.


SON OF GOD, THE (6 vids cot, ho huids theot):


. Use of Title in the Synoptists

. Meanings in the OT

Sense as Applied to Jesus

. Physical Reason

. Alleged Equivalence to ‘‘ Messiah”’ (Baptism, Temp-
tation, etc)—Personal Sense Implied

Higher Use by Jesus Himsel

The “Son” in Mt 11 27

. In Mk 13 32

. In Mt 28 18-20 ;

10. Apostolic Doctrine: Deity Affirmed

11. The Fourth Gospel: Deity, Preéxistence, etc
LIrERATURE


While the title “the Son of man” is always, except
once, applied by Jesus to Himself, “the Son of God”
is never applied by Jesus to Himself


COND TPwWHe


1. Use of in the Synoptists. When, however, it
Title in the is applied to Him by others, He accepts
Synoptists it in such a way as to assert His claim


to it. Now and then He Himself

employs the abbreviated form, ‘‘the Son,’’ with the

same intention; and He often speaks of God as “‘the

Father” or ‘‘my Father” or ‘“‘my Father who is in

heaven” in such a manner as to betray the con-
sciousness that He is the Son of God.

While to the common mind “the Son of man” is

a title designating the human side of Our Lord’s

person, “the Son of God’’ seems as


2. Mean- obviously to indicate the Divine side.
ings in But scholarship cannot take this for
the OT granted; and, indeed, it requires only


a hasty glance at the facts to bring this
home even to the general reader, because in Scrip-
ture the title is bestowed on a variety of persons for
a variety of reasons. First, it is applied to angels,
as when in Job 2 1 it is said that “the sons of God
came to present themselves before Jeh”; they may
be so called becanse they are the creatures of God’s
hands or because, as spiritual beings, they resemble
God, who is a spirit. Secondly, in Lk 8 88 it is
applied to the first man; and from the parable of
the Prodigal Son it may be argued that it is appli-
cable to all men. Thirdly, it is applied to the Heb
nation, as when, in Ex 4 22, Jeh says to Pharaoh,
“Israel is my son, my first-born,”’ the reason bein:
that Israel was the object of Jeh’s special love an


2827


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Someis
Son of God


gracious choice. Fourthly, it is applied to the kings
of Israel, as representatives of the chosen nation.
Thus, in 28 7 14, Jeh says of Solomon, “I will be
his father, and he shall be my son’’; and, in Ps 2 7,
the coronation of a king is announced in an oracle
‘from heaven, which says, “Thou art my son; this
day have I begotten thee.’’ Finally, in the NT, the
title is applied to all saints, as in Jn 1 12, “But as
many as received him, to them gave he the right to
become children of God, even to them that believe
on his name.”’ When the title has such a range of
application, it is obvious that the Divinity of Christ
cannot be inferred from the mere fact that it is
applied to Him.
_ it is natural to assume that its use in applica-
tion to Jesus is derived from one or other of its OT
uses; and the one almost universally
3. Sense fixed upon by modern scholarship as
as Applied that from which it was derived is the
to Jesus fourth mentioned above—that to the
Jewish kings. Indeed, it is frequently
asserted that in the Jewish lit. between the OT
and the NT, it is found already coined as a title
for the Messianic king; but the instances quoted
by Dalman and others im proof of this are far from
satisfactory.
When we come to examine its use in the NT
as applied by others to Jesus, the facts are far
from simple, and it is not applied in a
4. Physical uniform sense. In Lk 1 35, the fol-
Reason lowing reason for its use is given, ‘“The
Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and
the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee:
wherefore also the holy thing which is begotten shall
be called the Son of God.” This is a physical
reason, akin to that on account of which the angels
or the first man received the title; but it is rather
curious that this point of view does not seem to be
adopted elsewhere, unless it be in the exclamation
of the centurion at the foot of the cross, “Truly
this was the Son of God” (Mt 27 54). Asa pagan
this soldier might be thinking of Jesus as one of
those heroes, born of human mothers but divine
fathers, of whom the mythology of his country had
so much to tell (ef m).
(1) Baptism, Tempiation—It has beeu con-
tended, not without plausibility, that for Jesus
Himself the source of the title may
5. Alleged have been the employment of it in the
Equivalence voice from heaven at His Baptism,
to Messiah ‘‘This is my beloved Son, in whom J
—Personal am well pleased” (Mt 317). B
Sense these words, it is usually assumed,
Implied He was designated as the Messiah;
but in the adj. “beloved,’’ and the
words “in whom I am well pleased,” there is some-
thing personal, beyond the merely official recogni-
tion. The same may be said of the voice from
heaven in the scene of the Transfiguration. Milton,
in Paradise Regained, makes Satan become aware
of the voice from heaven at the Baptism; but this
is also implied in the terms with which he ap-
proached Him in the Temptation in the wilderness,
“Tf thou art the Son of God” (Mt 4 3, etc); and,
if this was the sense in which the prince of devils
made use of the phrase, we may conclude that in
the mouths of the demoniacs who hailed Jesus by
the same title it must have had the same meaning.
(2) At Caesarea Philippi—When, at Caesarea
Philippi, Jesus evoked from the Twelve their great
confession, this is given by two of the synoptists in
the simple form, “Thou art the Christ’”’ (Mk 8 29;
Lk 9 20); but Mt adds, “the Son of the living God”’
(Mt 16 16). It is frequently said that Heb
parallelism compels us to regard these words as a
mere equivalent for “Messiah.” But this is not
the nature of parallelism, which generally includes


in the second of the parallel terms something in
excess of what is expressed in the first; it would be
quite in accordance with the nature of parallelism
if the second term supplied the reason for the first.
That is to say, Jesus was the Messiah because He
was the Son of God.

(8) Trial before Sanhedrin——There is another
passage where it is frequently contended that
“the Christ” and “the Son of God’’ must be exactly
parallel, but a close examination suggests the
reverse. In the account of the ecclesiastical trial
in the Gospel of Lk, He is charged, “If thou art
the Christ, tell us’; and, when He replies, “If I tell
you, ye will not believe: and if I ask you, ye will
not answer. But from henceforth shall the Son of
man be seated at the right hand of the power of
God,” they all say, “Art thou then the Son of God ?”
and, when He replies in the affirmative, they
require no further witness (Lk 22 67-71), Matthew
informing us that the high priest hereupon rent his
garments, and they all agreed that He had spoken
blasphemy and was worthy of death (Mt 26 65 f).
The usual assumption is that the second question,
“Art thou... . the Son of God?” implies no more
than the first, ‘Art thou the Christ?’; but is not the
scene much more intelligible if the boldness of His
answer to the first question suggested that He was
making a still higher claim than to be the Christ,
and that their second question applied to this? It
was when Jesus affirmed this also that their angry
astonishment knew no bounds, and their sentence
was immediate and capital. It may be questioned
whether it was blasphemy merely to claim to be
the Messiah; but it was rank and undeniable
blasphemy to claim to be the Son of God. This
recalls the statement in Jn 6 18, “The Jews
sought the more to kill him, because he not only
brake the sabbath, but also called God his own
Father, making himself equal with God”; to which
may be added (Jn 10 33), “The Jews answered
him, For a good work we stone thee not, but for
blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man,
makest thyself God.”

Naturally it is with the words of Jesus Himself
on this subject that we are most concerned. He

speaks of God as His Father, and to the
6. Higher disciples He speaks of God as their
Use by Father; but He never speaks to them
Jesus Him- of God as their common Father: what
self He says is, “My Father and your

Father” (Jn 20 17). H.J. Holtzmann
and others have attempted to make light of this,
and even to speak of the opening words of the
Lord’s Prayer, “Our Father who art in heaven,”
as if Jesus might have uttered them in company
with the disciples; but the distinction is a vital one,
and we do not agree with those who can believe
that Jesus could have uttered, for Himself along
with others, the whole of the Lord’s Prayer, includ-
ing the petition, ‘Forgive us our debts, as we also
have forgiven our debtors.”

Of the passages in the Synoptists where Jesus
speaks about God as “‘the Father” and Himself as


“the Son,” a peculiar solemnity
7. The attaches to Mt 11 27 | Lk 10 22,
Son” in “All things have been delivered unto


Mt 11:27 meof my Father: and no one knoweth

the Son, save the Father; neither doth
any know the Father, save the Son, and he to whom-
soever the Son willeth to reveal him.’’ There is a
Johannine flavor in these words, and they reveal
an intimacy of the Son with the Father, as well as a
power over all things, which could not have been
conferred by mere official appointment, unless there
had been in the background a natural position war-
ranting the official standing. Not infrequently has
the word ‘Messianic’ been allowed by scholars to


Son of God
Son of Man


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2828


blind them to the most obvious facts. The con-
ferring of an office on a mere man could not enable
him to do things beyond the reach of human powers;
yet it is frequently assumed that, if only Jesus was
Messiah, He was able for anything, even when the
thing in question is something for which a mere man
is wholly incompetent.
There is a saying of Jesus (Mk 18 32) about His
own Sonship which may seem to refute the church
doctrine on the subject, as in it He
8. The confesses ignorance of the date of His
“Son” in Second Coming: “Of that day or that
Mk 13:32 hour knoweth no one, not even the
angels in heaven, neither the Son, but
the Father.” Yet, while there is much in this
passage fitted to produce sane and sober views as
to the real manhood of Jesus, there are few sayings
of His that betray a stronger consciousness of His
being more than man. Four planes of being and
of knowledge are specified—that of men, that of
angels, that of Himself, and that of God. Evi-
dently the Son is above not only men but angels,
and, if it is confessed that Heis ignorant of anything,
this is mentioned as a matter of surprise.
The conclusion would seem to be that He is a
being intermediate between the angels and God;
but this impression is corrected by


9. The the greatest of all the sayings in which
“Son” in He calls Himself the Son (Mt 28 18-
Mt 28: 20), ‘All authority hath been given un-
18-20 to mein heaven and on earth. Goye


therefore, and make disciples of all the
nations, baptizing them into the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit: teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I commanded
you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world.” Here the Son is named along
with the Father and the Holy Spirit in a way sug-
gesting the equality of all three, an act of worship
being directed to them jointly. By those who dis-
believe in the Deity of Christ, the most strenuous
attempts have been made to get rid of this passage,
and in certain quarters it is taken for granted that
it must have been an addition to the text of this
Gospel. But for this there is no ground whatever;
the passage is the climax of the Gospel in which it
occurs, in the same way as the confession of Thomas
is the climax of the Gospel of Jn; and to remove it
would be an intolerable mutilation. Of course to
those who disbelieve in the hodily resurrection of
Our Lord, this has no more substance than the other
details of the Forty Days; but to those who believe
in His risen glory the words appear to suit the
circumstances, their greatness being congruous with
the entire representation of the NT. ‘ ;
Indeed, it is the Son of God, as He appears in this
final scene in the First Gospel, who dominates the
rest of the NT. Thus, in Acts 9 20,
10. Apostol- the beginning of Paul’s testimony as
ic Doctrine: a Christian is given in these words,
Deity “‘And straightway in the synagogues be
Affirmed roclaimed Jesus, that he is the Son of
od’; and what this meant to Paul
may be gathered from his own statement in the
opening of Rom, “Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ,
called to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of
God, which he promised afore through his prophets
in the holy scriptures, concerning his Son, who
was born of the seed of David according to the
flesh, who was declared to be the Son of God with
power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the
resurrection from the dead; even Jesus Christ our
Lord” (Rom 1 1-4). In He the equality of the
Son with the Father is the theme throughout the
entire book; and in Rev 2 18, “the Son of God,
who hath his eyes like a flame of fire,” speaks from
the right hand of power to the church.


On this subject there was no division of opinion
in the apostolic church. On many other questions
the followers of Jesus were divided; but on this one
they were unanimous. For this the authority of
Paul is often assumed to be responsible; but there
was a prior and higher authority. This was the
self-testimony of Jesus in the Gospel of Jn. Though
this may not have been put in literary form till all
the other books of the NT had been completed,
it was active and influential in the church all the
time, affecting Paul and the other NT writers.

There is no real disharmony between the expres-
sion of Our Lord’s self-consciousness in the Synop-

tists and that in Jn; only in the latter
11. The — it is far ampler and more distinct.
Fourth Gos- Here Jesus is not only called “the Son
pel: Deity, of God” by others, but applies the
Preéxist-. title to Himself in its full shape, as
ence, etc _— well as in the abbreviated form of “the

Son.” He further calls Himself, the
“only begotten Son of God” (3 16.18), that is to
say, He is Son in a sense in which no others can claim
the title. This seems expressly to contradict the
statement, so often made, that He makes others
sons of God in the same sense as Himself, or that His
Sonship is ethical, not metaphysical. No doubt
it is ethical—that is to say, He is like the Father in
feeling, mind and will—but it does not follow that it
is not at the same time metaphysical. In fact,
the perfection of ethical unity depends upon that
which is metaphysical. Between a dog and a man
there may be deep sympathy, yet it is limited by
the difference of their natures; whereas between a
woman and a man there is perfect sympathy, be-
cause they are identical in nature.

Another feature of Sonship in the Fourth Gospel
is preéxistence, though, strange to say, this is more
than once connected with the title “Son of man.”
But the strongest and most frequent suggestions
as to what is implied in Sonship are to be found in
the deeds attributed to the Son; for these are far
beyond the competence of any mere man. Thus,
He executes judgment (5 22); He has life in Him-
self and quickeneth whom He will (5 26.21); He
gives eternal life (10 10), and it is the will of the
Father that all men should honor the Son, even as
they do the Father (5 23). Nevertheless, the Son
does nothing of Himself, but only what He hath
seen the Father do (5 19); and only that which He
hath heard of the Father does He speak (14 10).
In short, God is not only His Father, but His God
(20 17). To statements such as these a merely
official Sonship is not adequate; the relation must be
ethical and metaphysical as well; and to a perfect
Sonship all three elements are essential.


Lirerarvre.—See the books on the Bee OOny of the
NT by Weiss, Beyschlag, Holtzmann, Feine, Schlatter,
Weinel, Bovon, Stevens, Sheldon; and on the Teaching
of Jesus by Bruce, Wendt, Dalman; Gore, The Incarna-
tion of the Son of God, Bampton Lectures, 1891, and
Dissertations on Subjects Connected with the Incarnation;
Robertson, Teaching of Jesus concerning God the Father;
full bibliography in Stalker, Christ’s Teaching concerning
Himself.

James STALKER

SON OF MAN, THE (6 tids rod dvOpdmrov, ho
huiés tot anthropou):


1. Use in NT: Self-Designation of Jesus
2. Questions as to Meaning
I. Source or roe Titie
1. The Phrase in the OT—Pss, Ezk, Dnl
2. “Son of Man” in Dnl 7—NT Allusions
3. Expressive of Messianic Idea
4. Post-canonical Literature: Book of En
II. Way Jesus Mave Use or rae Tite
1. Consciousness of pone the Messiah
2. Half Concealed, Yet Half Revealed His Secret
3. Expressive of Identification with Men in Sym-
peuny, Fortunes and Destiny
4, Speculations (Lietzmann, Wellhausen, etc) on
Aramaic Meaning: These Rejected (Dalman, etc)
LITERATURE


2829


This is the favorite self-designation of Jesus in
the Gospels. In Mt it occurs over 30 t, in Mk 15t,
in Lk 25 +, and in Jn a dozen times.


1. Usein It is always in the mouth of Jesus
the NT: Himself that it occurs, except once,
Self-Desig- when the bystanders ask what He
nation of | means by the title (Jn 12 34). Out-
Jesus side the Gospels, it occurs only once


in Acts, in Stephen’s speech (Acts 7
56), and twice in the Book of Rev (1 13; 14 14).

At first sight it appears so apt a term for the

human element in Our Lord’s person, the Divine

element being. similarly denoted by
2. Ques- ‘“‘the Son of God,” that this was sup-
tions as to posed to be its meaning, as it still is
Meaning by the common man at the present

day. As long as it was assumed that
the meaning could be elicited by merely looking
at the words as they stand and guessing what they
must signify, this was substantially the view of all,
although this common conception went in two direc-
tions—some noting esp. the loftier and more idcal
elements in the conception, while others emphasized
what was lowly and painful in the human lot; and
both could appeal to texts in support of their view.
Thus, the view ‘that Christ by this phrase repre-
sented Himself as the head, the type, the ideal of
the race” (Stanton, The Jewish and the Christian
Messiah), could appeal to such a saying as, ‘“‘The
Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath” (Mk 2 28);
while the humbler view could quote such a saying as,
“The foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven
have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to
lay his head” (Mt 8 20).

The more scientific investigation of the phrase
began, however, when it was inquired, first, what
the source was from which Jesus derived this title,
and, secondly, why He made use of it.

I. Source of the Title.—That the phrase was not
one of Jesus’ own invention is manifest, because it

occurs often in the OT. Thus, in


1. The Ps 8 4 it is used as an equivalent for
Phrase in ‘man’ in the parallel lines,

the OT “What is man, that thou art mindful
(Pss, Ezk, of him?

Dnl) And the son of man, that thou


visitest him ?’


This passage has sometimes been regarded as the
source whence Jesus borrowed the title; and for this
a good deal might be said, the ps being an incom-
parable exposition both of the lowliness and the
loftiness of human nature. But there is another
passage in the Pss from which it is far from incredible
that it may have been derived: in Ps 80 17 occur
the words,


“Let thy hand he upon the man of thy right hand,
Upon the son of man whom thou madest strong for


thyself."

This is an appeal, in an age of national decline, for
the raising up of a hero to redeem Israel; and it
might well have kindled the spark of Messianic
consciousness in the heart of the youthful Jesus.

There is a book of the OT in which the phrase
“the son of man” occurs no fewer than 90 t. This
is the Book of Ezk, where it is always applied to
the prophet himself and designates his prophetic
mission. In the words of Nésgen (Christus der Men-
schen- und Gottessohn): “It expresses the contrast
between what Ezekiel is in himself and what God
will make out of him, and to make his mission appear
to him not as his own, but as the work of God, and
thus to lift him up, whenever the flesh threatens
to faint and fail.” Thus there was one before
Jesus of Nazareth who bore the title, at least in
certain moments of his life; and, after Ezekiel,
there arose another Heb prophet who has put on
record that he was addressed from the same high


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA
——_,——


Son of God
Son of Man


quarter in the same terms; for, in Dnl 8 17, it is
written, ‘So he came near where I stood; and. when
he came, I was affrighted, and fell upon my face:
but he said unto me, Understand, O son of man”—
words then following intended to raise the spirit of
the trembling servant of God. By Weizsiicker and
others the suggestion has been made that Jesus may
have borrowed the term from Ezk and Dnl to
express His consciousness of belonging to the same
prophetic line.
There is, however, in the same Book of Dnl
another occurrence of the phrase, in a totally
different sense, to which the attention
2. “Son of of science is more and more being
Man” in drawn. In 7 3ff, in one of the
Dnl 7—NT apocalyptic visions common to this
Allusions prophet, four beasts are seen comin;
out of the sea—the first a lion wit
eagle’s wings, the second a bear, the third a four-
headed leopard, and the fourth a terrible monster
with ten heads. These beasts bear rule over the
earth; but at last the kingdom is taken away
from them and given to a fifth ruler, who is thus
described, ‘I saw in the night-visions, and, behold,
there came with the clouds of heaven one like unto
a son of man, and he came even to the ancient of
days, and they brought him near before him. And
there was given him dominion, and glory, and a
kingdom, that all the peoples, nations, and languages
should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not pass away, and his king-
dom that which shall not be destroyed” (vs 13.14).
Compare with these words from Dnl the words of
Jesus to the high priest during His trial, ‘“Hence-
forth ye shall see the Son of man sitting at the right
hand of Power, and coming on the clouds of heaven”’
(Mt 26 64), and the echo of the OT words cannot
be mistaken. Equally distinct is it in the great
discourse in Mt 24 30, ‘Then shall appear the sign
of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the
tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son
of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power
and great glory.”
The use of this self-designation by Jesus is esp.
frequent and striking in passages referring to His
future coming to judgment, in which


8. Expres- there is necessarily a certain resem-
sive of blance to the apocalyptic scene in
Messianic Dnl. In such utterances the Messianic
Idea consciousness of Jesus is most emphati-


cally expressed; and the passage in
Dn! is also obviously Messianic. In another con-
siderable series of passages in which this phrase is
used by Jesus, the references are to His sufferings
and death; but the assumption which explains these
also most easily is that they are Messianic too;
Jesus is speaking of the fortunes to which He must
submit on account of His vocation. Even the more
dignified passages, expressive of ideality, are best
explained in the same way. In short, every pas-
sage where the phrase occurs is best understood from
this point of view, whereas, from any other point of
view, not a few appear awkward and out of place.
How little, for example, does the idea that the phrase
is expressive of lowliness or of brotherhood with
suffermg humanity accord with the opening of the
judgment-scene in Mt 25 31, “But when the Son
of man shall come iu his glory, and all the angels
with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his
glory’’!

The son of man, or rather “one like unto a son
of man’’ mentioned in Dnl, is primarily the Heb
people, as is expressly noted in the prophecy
itself; but Jesus must have looked upon Himself
as the representative of the people of God, in the
same way as, in the OT generally, the reigning
sovereign was regarded as the representative of


Son of Man
Song of Songs


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2830


the nation. But the question has been raised
whether this transference of the title from a col-

lective body to an individual may have
4. Post- been. mediated for Him through post-
canonical canonical religious literature or the
Literature: prevalence among the people of ideas
Book of En generated through this literature. In
the Book of En there occur numerous
references to the son of man, which bear a remarkable
resemblance to some of the sayings of Jesus. The
date usually assigned to this production is some
200 years BC; and, if these passages in it actually
existed as early as this, the book would almost re-
quire to be inchided in the canonical Scriptures,
though for other reasons it is far from worthy of any
such honor. The whole structure of the Book of
En is so loose and confused that it must always
have invited interpolation; and interpolations in
it are recognized as numerous. The probability,
therefore, is that the passages referring to the son of
man are of later date and of Christian origin.

Il. Why Jesus Made Use of the Title.—The
conclusion that this title expresscs, not the personal
qualities of Jesus as a man, but His functions as
Messiah, may be disappointing; but there is a way
of recovering what seems to have been lost; because
we must now inquire for what reasons He made use
of this term.

The first reason, of course, is, that in Dnl it
expressed Messiahship, and that Jesus was con-

scious of being the Messiah. In


1. Con- the OT He was wont all His days to
sciousness read His own history. He ranged
of Being over all the sacred books and found
the Mes-__in them references to His own person
siah and work. With divinatory glance


He pierced into the secrets of Scrip-
ture and brought forth from the least as well as the
best-known portions of the ancient oracles meanings
which are now palpable to all readers of the Bible,
but which He was the first to discover. From the
passage in Dnl, or from some other passage of the
OT in which the phrase “the son of man” occurs,
a hint flashed out upon Him, as He read or heard;
and the suggestion grew in His brooding mind,
until it rounded itself into the fit and satisfying
expression for one side of His self-consciousness.

Another reason why He fixed upon this as His
favorite self-designation may have been that it
half concealed as well as half revealed


2. Half His secret. Of the direct names for
Concealed the Messiah He was usually shy, no
Yet Half donbt chiefly because His contempo-
Revealed raries were not prepared for an open
His Secret declaration of Himself in this char-


acter; but at all stages of His ministry
He called Himself the Son of man without hesitation.
The inference seems to be, that, while the phrase
expressed much to Himself, and must have meant
more and more for those immediately associated
with Him, it did not convey a Messianic claim to
the public ear. With this accords well the per-
plexity once manifested by those listening to Him,
when they asked, ‘Who is this Son of man?’
(Jn 12 34); as it also explains the question of
Jesus to the Twelve at Caesarea Philippi, ““‘Who do
men say that the Son of man is?” or, as it is in the
margin, “that I the Son of man am?” (Mt 16 18).
That He was the Son of man did not evidently mean
for all that He claimed to be the Messiah.

But when we try to realize for what reasons
Jesus may have picked this name out from all
which presented themselves to Him in His inti-
mate and loving survey of the OT, it is difficult to
resist the belief that a third and the principal
reason was because it gave expression to His sense
of connection with all men in sympathy, for-


tunes and destiny. He felt Himself to be identified
with all as their brother, their fellow-sufferer, their
representative and champion; and, in


3. Expres- some respects, the deepest word He
sive of ever spake was, “For the Son of man
Identifica- also came not to be ministered unto,
tion with but to minister, and to give his life a
Men ransom for many” (Mk 10 46 ||).


In 1896, Hans Lietzmann, a young Ger.
scholar, startled the learned world with a speculation
on the “Son of man.” Making the assumption_ that
Aram. was the language spoken by Jesus,
he contended that Jesus could not have


4, Specula- applied to Himself the Messianic title,
tions on because he is notnine comesvow ne
i with it in Aramaic. e only term
ara approximating to it is barnash, which
eaning means something very vague, like ‘‘any-


one” or ‘‘everyman’’ (in the sense of the
old morality play thus entitled). Many supposed Lietz-
mann to be arguing that Jesus had called Himself Anyone
or Everyman; but this was not his intention. He tried
to prove that the Messianic title had been applied to
Jesus in Asia Minor in the first half of the 2d cent. and
that the Gospels had been revised with the effect_of
suhstituting it for the first. personal pronoun. But
he failed to show how the MSS could have been so
universally altered as to leave no traces of this operation,
or how, if the text of the NT was then in so fluid a state
as to admit of such a substitution, the phrase should
not have overflowed into other hooks besides the Gospels.
Although the hypothesis has secured wide attention
through being partially adopted by Wellhausen, whose
view is to be found in Skizzen und Vorarbeiten, VI, and
at p. 66 of his Comm. on Mk, it may be reckoned among
the ghosts which appear for an hour on the stage of
learning, attracting attention and admiration, but have
no permanent connection with the world of reality.
Dalman, the leading authority on Aram., denies the
foundation on which the views of both Lietzmann and
Wellhausen rest, and holds that, had the Messianic
title existed, the Aram. language would have been quite
capable of expressing it. And in 1911 Wellhausen him-
self explicitly admitted this (Hinleitung in die drei ersten
Evangelien?, 130).

LireraturE.—See the books on NT Theology b
Weiss, Beyschlag, Holtzmann, Feine, Schlatter, Weinel,
Stevens, Sheldon; and on the Teaching of Jesus by
Wendt, Bruce, Dalman; Abbott, The Son of Man, 1910;
very full bibliography in Stalker, The Teaching of Jesus
concerning Himself.

: James STALKER

SONG (UD, shir, WWW, shirah): Besides the
great collection of sacred songs contained in the
Psalter, as well as the lyric outbursts, marked by
strong religious feeling, on great national occasions,
it is natural to believe, and we have evidence to
show, that the Hebrews possessed a large number
of popular songs of a secular kind. Song of Songs
(q.v.) of itself proves this. Probably the very
oldest song or fragment of song in the OT is that


“To the well” (Nu 21 17).

W. R. Smith (Religions of the Semites, 167) regards
this invocation of the waters to rise as in its origin
hardly a mere poetic figure. He compares what Cazwini
1, 189, records of the well of Ilabistan: ‘‘When the
water failed, a feast was held at its source with music
and dancing, to induce it to flow again.” however,
the song had its origin in an early form of religious belief,
it must have been secularized later.


But it is in the headings of the Pss that we find
the most numerous traces of the popular songs of the
Hebrews. Here there are a number of words and
phrases which are now believed to be the names or
initial words of such lyrics. In AV they are
prefaced with the prep. ‘‘on,” in RV with “set to,”
i.e. “to the tune of.” We give a list: (1) Azjeleth
Shahar AV, RV_ Aijeleth hash-shahar, ‘ayyeleth
ha-shahar. The title means (RVm) ‘“‘The hind of
the morning,” but whether the original song so
named was a hunting song or a morning serenade it
isuseless to conjecture. See Hinp or THE Mornina.
(2) Al-taschith (AV), Al-tashheth (RV), ’al-tashheth,
i.e. “Destroy not,” Pss 67-69, 75, is apparently
quoted in Isa 66 8, and in that case must refer to a
vintage song. (3) Jonah elem rehokim or Yénath-
’élem rhokim (Ps 66), RVm “The silent dove of
them that are afar off,’”’ or—with a slightly different


2831


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Son of Man
Song of Songs


reading—“The dove of the distant terebinths.”
(4) Mahdlath (Ps 68) and Mahdlath Iannath (Ps
88). Mahdlath may mean ‘“‘sickness,’’ and be the
first word of a song. It might mean, on the other
hand, a minor mode or rhythm. It has also been
held to designate a musical instrument. (5) Math-
labbén (Ps 9) has given rise to many conjectures.
Lit. it may mean “Die for the sou,” or ‘Death of
the son.” An ancient tradition referred the words
to Goliath (death at the hand of the son [?7]), and
they have been applied to the fate of Absalom.
Such guesses need only be quoted to show their
worthlessness. (6) Lastly, we have Shaishannim=
Lilies’ (Pss 45, 69), Shishan ‘Hdhith= “The lily
of testimony” (Ps 60) ; and Shishannim ‘Edhath=
“Lilies, a testimony’ (Ps 80), probably to he
explained like the others.

The music to which these songs were sung is
irretrievably lost, but it was, no doubt, very similar
in character to that of the Arabs at the present day.
While the music of the temple was probably much
more elaborate, and of wider range, both in notes
and expression of feeling, the popular song was
almost certainly limited in compass to a very few
notes repeated over and over in long recitations or
ballads. This is characteristic of the performances
of Arab minstrels of today. The melodies are
plaintive, in spite of the majority of them heing
in major keys, owing to the 7th being flattened,
as in genuine Scots music. Arab music, further,
is marked by great variety and emphasis of rhythm,
the various kinds of which have special names.
See Sprrituau Sonas. James Mitiar


SONG OF SONGS (OVO VW, shir ha-
shirim; LXX "Acpa, Asma; NAC,”“Acpa dopé-
rev, Asma asmdtén; Vulg Canticum Canticorum):

I. CaNnoniciTy

II, Text
III. Avrnorssir anp Date
IV. History or INTERPRETATION
1. The Allegorical Interpretation
2. The Typical Interpretation
3. The Literal Interpretation
. Crosine Hints anno SuaorstTions
LitBRATURE

The full title in Heb is ‘The Song of Songs, which
is Solomon’s.’’ The book is called by some Can-
ticles, and by others Solomon’s Song. The Heb
title implies that it is the choicest of all songs, in
keeping with the dictum of R. ‘Akiba (90-185 AD)
that “the entire world, from the beginning until
now, does not outweigh the day in which Canticles
was given to Israel.” a

I. Canonicity.—Early Jewish and Christian
writers are silent as to the Song of Songs. No use is
made of it by Philo. There is no quotation from it
in the NT, nor is there any clear allusion to it on the
part of Our Lord or the apostles. The earliest dis-
tinct references to the Song of Songs are found in
Jewish writings of the lst and 2d cents. AD (4 Esd
5 24.26; 7 26; Ta'inith 4 8). The question of
the canonicity of the Song was debated as late as
the Synod of Jamnia (c 90 AD), when it was decided
that Canticles was rightly reckoned to “defile the
hands,” i.e. was an inspired book. It should be
borne in mind that the Song of Songs was already
esteemed by the Jews as a sacred hook, though prior
to the Synod of Jamnia there was probably a goodly
number of Jewish teachers who did not accept it as
canonical. Selections from Cantieles were sung at
certain festivals in the temple at Jerus, prior to
its destruction by Titus in 70 AD (Ta‘dénith 4 8).
The Mish pronounces an anathema on all who
treat Canticles as a secular song (Sanhedhrin, 1012).
The latest date for the composition of the Song of
Songs, according to critics of the advanced school,
is toward the close of the 3d cent. BC. We may be


sure that it was included in the K*thubhim before
the ministry of Our Lord, and so was for Him a
part of the Scriptures.

Text.—Most scholars regard the text of
Canticles as comparatively free from corruption.
Gratz, Bickell, Budde and Cheyne have suggested a
good many emendations of the traditional text,
a few of which commend themselves as probable
corrections of a faulty text, but most of which
are mere guesses without sufficient confirmation
from either external or internal evidence. For
details see Budde’s able commentary, and articles
by Cheyne in JQR and Expos T for 1898-99 and
in the Expos, February, 1899.

Ill. Autharship and Date.—The title in the
Heb text ascribes the poem to Solomon. That this
superscription was prefixed by an editor of Canticles
and not by the original writer is evident from the
fact that the relative pronoun employed in the title
is different from that employed throughout the
poem. The beauty and power of the book seemed
to later students and editors to make the writing
worthy of the gifted king, whose fame as a composer
of both proverbs and songs was handed on to later
times (1 K 4 32). Moreover, the name of Solo-
mon is prominent in the Song of Songs itself (1 5;
3 7.9.11; 8 11f). If the traditional view that
Solomon wooed and won the Shulammite be true,
the Solomonic authorship may even yet be defended,
though the linguistic argument for a later date is
quite strong.

The question in debate among recent critics is
whether the Song was composed in North Israel
in preéxilic days, or whether it is post-exilic. The
author is at home in Heb. His vocabulary is
extensive, and the movement of the poem is grace-
ful. There is no suggestion of the use of lexicon and
grammar by a writer living in the period of the
decadence of the Heb language. The author is
familiar with cities and mountains all over Pal,
esp. in the northern section. He speaks of the
beauty of Tirzah, the capital of North Israel in
the 10th cent. BC, along with the glory of Jerus,
the capital of Judah (6 4). The recollection of
Solomon’s glory and pomp seems to be fresh in the
mind of the writer and his contemporaries. W. R.
Smith regarded Canticles as a protest against the
luxury and the extensive harem of Solomon. True
love could not exist in such an environment. The
fidelity of the Shulammite to her shepherd lover,
notwithstanding the blandishments of the wealthy
and gifted king, stands as a rebuke to the notion
that every woman has her price. Driver seems
inclined to accept a preéxilic date, though the argu-
ments from vocabulary and philology cause him
to waver in his opinion (LOT, 8th ed, 450). An
increasing number of critics place the composition
of Canticles in the post-exilic period, many bringing
it down into the Gr period. Among scholars who
date Canticles in the 3d cent. BC we may name
Gritz, Kuenen, Cornill, Budde, Kautzsch, Marti-
neau and Cheyne. The chief argument for bringing
the Song into the time of the early Ptolemies is
drawn from the language of the poem. ‘There are
many Heb words that are employed elsewhere only
in later hooks of the OT; the word pardég (4 13)
is a Pers loan-word for “park”; the word for “palan-
quin’” may be Indian, or possibly Gr. Moreover,
the form of the relative pronoun is uniformly that
which is found in some of the latest books of the
OT. Theinfluence of Aram. is apparent, both in the
vocabulary and in afew constructions. This may be
accounted for on the theory of the northern origin
of the Song, or on the hypothesis of a post-exilic
date. The question of date is still open.

IV. History of Interpretation.—All interpreters
of all ages agree in saying that Canticles is a poem


Song of Songs


of love; but who the lovers are is a subject of keen

debate, esp. in modern times.
First in point of time and in the number of
adherents it has had is the theory that the Song
is a pure allegory of the love of Jeh


1. The and His people. The Jewish rabbis,
Allegorical from the latter part of the 1st cent.
Interpreta- AD down to our own day, taught that
tion the poem celebrates a spiritual love,

: Jeh heing the bridegroom and Israel
the bride. Canticles was supposed to he a vivid


record of the loving intercourse between Israel and
her Lord from the exodus on to the glad Messianic
time. The Song is read hy the Jews at Passover,
which celebrates Jeh’s choice of Israel to be His
spouse. The Tg interprets Canticles as an allegory
of the marital love of Jeh and Israel. Origen made
the allegorical theory popular in the early church.
Asa Christian he represented the bride as the church
or the soul of the heliever. In more recent centuries
the Christian allegorical interpreters have favored
the idea that the soul of the believer was the
bride, though the other type of the allegorical view
has all along had its advocates.

Bernard of Clalrvaux wrote 86 sermons on the first
two chapters of Canticles; and a host of writers In the
Roman church and among Protestants have composed
similar mystical treatises on the Song. Devout souls
have expressed their fervent love to God in the sensuous
Imagery of Canticles. The imagery could not become
too fervid or ecstatic for some of these devout men and
women in their highest moments of beatific vision.
Whatever may be the final verdict of sane criticism as
to the original purpose of the author of the Song, it {s a
fact that must not be overlooked by the student of
Canticles that some of the noblest religious souls, both
Heb and Christian, have fed the flame of devotion by
interpreting the Song as an allegory.

What justification is there for the theory that
Canticles is an allegory of the love between Jeh and
His people, or of the love of Christ and the church, or
of the love of the soul of the believer and Christ?
It must be frankly confessed that there is not a
hint in the Song itself that it is an allegory. If the
modern reader of Canticles had never heard of the
allegorical interpretation, nothing in the beginning,
middle or end of the poem would he likely to snggest
to his mind such a conception of the poet’s meaning.
How, then, did the early Jewish interpreters come
to make this the orthodox interpretation of the
Song? The question is not easy to answer. In
the forefront of our answer we must recall the fact
that the great prophets frequently represent the
mutual love of Jeh and Israel under the symbolism
of marriage (Hos 1-3; Jer 3; Ezk 16, 23; Isa
50 1; 545.6). The Heb interpreter might naturally
expect to find some echo of this hold imagery in the
poetry of the K*thubhim. In the Torah the fre-
quent command to love Jeh might suggest the
marital relation as well as that of the father and
son (Dt 65; 7 7-9.13; 10 12.15; 30 16.20),
though it must be said that the language of Dt
suggests the high ethical and religions teaching of
Jesus in the matter of love to God, in which the
sexual does not appear.

Cheyne suggests (ZB, I, 683 f) that the Song was too
joyous to be used, in Its natural sense, by the Jews after
the destruction of Jerus, and hence they consecrated it
hy allegorical interpretatlon. The suggestion may con-
tain an element of truth.

It is an interesting fact that the Psalter has so few
expressions in which love to Jeh is expressed (31 23;
97 10: 145 20; cf 18 1; 42 1; 63 1). In this manual
of devotion one would not be surprised to find the expan-
slon of the image of wedlock as expressive of the soul's
relation to God; but we look in vain for such a poem,
unless Ps 45 be capable of allegorical interpretation.
Even tbat beautiful song of love and marriage contains
no such highly sensuous imagery as is found in Canticles.


Christian scholars found it easy to follow the
Jewish allegorical interpreters; for the figure of
wedlock is employed in the NT by both Paul and


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2832


John to represent the intimate and vital union of
Christ and His church (2 Cor 11 2; Eph 6 22-33;
Rev 19 7-9; 21 2.9 ff).

The entire body of true believers is conceived of as the
bride of Christ. Naturally the purity of the church is
sullied through the impure conduct of the individuals
of whom it is composed. Hence the appeal to individuals
aud to local churches to live pure lives (2 Cor 11 1).
To the unmarried believer the Lord Jesus takes the place
of the husband or wife as the een whom one is most
eager to please (1 Cor,7 32f). It is not difficult to
understand how the fervid, sensuous imagery of Canticles
would appeal to the mind of a man like Origen as a Bre
vehicle for the expression of his passionate love for Christ.

Soher inquiry discovers no sufficient justification
of the allegorical interpretation of the Song of
Songs. The pages of the mystical commentators
are filled with artificial interpretations and con-
ceits. Many of them practise a familiarity with
Christ that is without example in the Bib. devo-
tional literature.

The allegorical interpreters, for the most part,
saw in the Song of Songs no historic basis. Solo-

mon and the Shulammite are mtro-
2. The duced merely as figures throngh whom
Typical In- God and His people, or Christ and the
terpretation soul, can express their mutual love.
In modern times iterpreters have
arisen who regard the Song as primarily the expres-
sion of strong and passionate human love between
Solomon and a heautiful maiden, but by virtue
of the typical relation of the old dispensation,
secondarily, the fitting expression of the love of
Christ and the church.
The way tor this modern typical interpretation was
repared by Lowth (Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews, Lects
ood XXXI) in his modified allegorical view, which is
thus described by Canon Driver: “Bishop Lowth,
though not abandoning the allegorical view, sought to
free it from its extravagances; and while refusing to press
details, held that the poem, while describing the actual
nuptials of Solomon with the daughter of Pharaoh, con-
tained also an allegoric reference to Christ espousing a
church chosen from among the Gentiles’’ (LOT, 451).
Few interpreters have been found to follow Theodore of
Mopsuestia and Lowth in their view that the Song cele-
brates the marriage of Solomon and an Egyp princess:
and Lowth’s notion of a reference to the espousal of a
church chosen from among the Gentiles is one of the
curiosities of criticism. Of the typical interpreters
Delitzsch is perhaps the ablest (Comm. on Ecclesiastes
and the Song of Songs).

The typical commentators are superior to the
allegorical in their recognition of Canticles as the
expression of the mutual love of two human beings.
The further application of the language to Jeh and
His people (Keil), or to Christ and the church
(Delitzsch), or to God and the soul (M. Stuart)
becomes largely a matter of individual taste, in-
terpreters differing widely in details.

_ Jewish interpreters were deterred from the literal
interpretation of Canticles by the anathema in the

Mish upon all who should treat the
3. The poem as a secular song (Sanhedhrin,
Literal In- 101a). Cheyne says of Ibn Ezra, a
terpretation great mediaeval Jewish scholar, he “‘is
oe so thorough in his literal exegesis that
it is doubtful whether he is serious when he pro-
ceeds to allegorise.”’ Among Christian scholars
Theodore of Mopsuestia interpreted Canticles as a
song in celebration of the marriage of Solomon and
Pharaoh’s daughter. This strictly literal inter-
pretation of the Song was condemned at the second
council of Constantinople (553 AD). For the next
thousand years the allegorical theory reigned
supreme among Christian interpreters. In 1544
Sebastian Castellio revived the literal theory of the
Song, though the allegorical view remained domi-
nant until the 19th cent.

Herder in 1778 published a remarkable little
treatise entitled Lieder der Liebe, die dltesten und
schénsten aus dem Morgenlande, in which he ad-


2833


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Song of Songs


vanced the theory that Canticles is a collection of
independent erotic songs, about 21 in number, which
have been so arranged by a collector as to trace “the
gradual growth of true love in its various nuances
and stages, till it finds its consummation in wedlock”
(Cheyne). But the greatest and most influential
advocate of the literal interpretation of Canticles
was Heinrich Ewald, who published the Ist ed of
his comm. in 1826. It was Ewald who first de-
veloped and made popular the theory that two
suitors compete for the hand of the Shulammite,
the one a shepherd and poor, the other a wise and
wealthy king. In the Song he ascribes to Solo-
mon 1 9-11.15; 22; 4 1-7; 6 4-13 (quoting the
dialogue between the Shulammite and the ladies of
the court in vs 10-13); 7 1-9. To the shepherd
lover he assigns few verses, and these are repeated by
the Shulammite in her accounts of imaginary or
real interviews with her lover. In the following
passages the lover described is supposed to be the
shepherd to whom the Shulammite had plighted her
troth: 1 2-7.9-14; 1 16—2 1; 2 3-78-17; 3 1-
5; 48—5 1; 6 2-8; 5 10-16; 6 2f; 7 10—8 4;
8 5-14. The shepherd lover is thus supposed to be
present in the Shulammite’s dreams, and in her
waking moments she is ever thinking of him and
describing to herself and others his many charms.
Not until the closmg scene (8 5-14) does Ewald
introduce the shepherd as an actor in the drama.
Ewald had an imperial imagination and a certain
strength of mind and innate dignity of character
which ‘prevented him from dragging into the mud
any section of the Bib. lit. While rejecting entirely
the allegorical theory of Canticles, he yet attributed
to it an ethical quality which made the Song worthy
of a place in the OT. A drama in praise of fidelity
between humau lovers may well hold a place beside
Eccl and Prov in the Canon. Many of the ablest
OT critics have followed Ewald in his general theory
that Canticles is a drama celebrating the loyalty of
a lowly maiden to her shepherd lover. Not even
Solomon in all his glory could persuade her to be-
come his queen.

Within the past quarter of a century the unity of
Canticles has been again sharply challenged. An
account of the customs of the Syrian peasants in
connection with weddings was given by the Prussian
consul at Damascus, J. G. Wetzstein, in 1873, in
an article in Bastian’s Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie,
270 ff, on “Die syrische Dreschtafel,”’ in which he
illustrated the OT from modern Syrian customs.
Driver thus describes the customs that are supposed
to throw light upon Canticles: “In modern Syria,
the first seven days after a wedding are called the
‘king’s week’; the young pair play during this time
king and queen; the ‘threshing-board’ is turned
into a mock-throne, on which they are seated,
while songs are sung before them by the villagers
and others, celebrating them on their happiness,
among which the wag¢f, or poetical ‘description’ of
the physical beauty of the bride and bridegroom,
holds a prominent place. The first of these wagfs
is sung on the evening of the wedding-day itself:
brandishing a naked sword in her right hand, and
with a handkerchief in her left, the bride dances in
her wedding array, lighted by fires, and surrounded
by a circle of guests, half men and half women,
accompanying her dance with a wagf in praise of
her charms” (LOT, 452). Wetzstein suggested the
view that Canticles was composed of the wedding-
songs sung during “the king’s week.’’ This theory
has been most fully elaborated by Budde in an
article in the New World, March, 1894, and in his
comm. (1898). According to Budde, the bridegroom
is called King Solomon, and the bride Shalammith.
The companions of the bridegroom are the 60
valiant men who form his escort (8 7). As a


bride, the maiden is called the most beautiful of
women (1 8; 5 9; 6 1). The pictures of wedded
bliss are sung by the men and women present, the
words being attributed to the bride and the bride-
groom. Thus the festivities contmue throughout
the week. Budde’s theory has some decided ad-
vantages over Ewald’s view that the poem is a
drama; but the loss in moral quality is considerable;
the book becomes a collection of wedding-songs
in praise of the joys of wedlock.

V. Closing Hints and Suggestions.—Having
given a good deal of attention to Canticles during the
past 15 years, the author of this article wishes to
record a few of his views and impressions.

(1) Canticles is lyric poetry touched with the
dramatic spirit. It isnot properly classed as drama,
for the Hebrews had no stage, though much of the
OT is dramatic in spirit. The descriptions of the
charms of the lovers were to be sung or chanted.

(2) The amount that has to be read between the
lines by the advocates of the various dramatic
theorics is so great that, in the absence of any
hints in the body of the book itself, reasonable
certitude can uever be attained.

(3) The correct tr of the refrain in 2 7 and3 5
(cf 8 4) is important for an understanding of the
PUPS of Canticles. It should be rendered as

ollows:


‘I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem,

ae the gazelles, or by the hinds of the fleld,
That ye stir not up, nor awaken love,

Until it please.’

Love between man and woman should not be
excited by unnatural stimulants, but should be
free and spontaneous. In 8 4 it scems to be implied
that the women of the capital are guilty of employ-
ing artifices to awaken love:

‘IT adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
Why do ye stir up, or awaken love,
Until it please ?’

That this refrain is in keeping with the purpose of
the writer is clear from the striking words toward
the close of the book:

‘Set me as a seal upon thy heart,
As a seal upon thine arm:
For love is strong as death;
Jealousy is cruel as Sheol;
The flashes thereof are flashes of fire,
A very flame of Jehovah.
Many waters cannot quench love,
Neither can floods drown it:
If a man would give all the substance of his
house for love,
He would utterly be contemned” (8 6 f).


(4) Canticles discloses all the secret intimacies of
wedded life without hecoming ohscene. The imagery
is too sensuous for our taste in western lands, so that
words of caution are often timely, lest the sensuous
degenerate into the sensual; but I have been told hy
several Syrian and Palestinian students whom I have had
the privilege of teaching, that Canticles is considered
quite chaste among their people, the wedding-songs
now in use among them being more minute In their
description of the physical charms of the lovers.


(5) Canticles is by no means excluded from the
Canon by the acceptance of the literal interpretation.
Ewald’s theory makes it an ethical treatise of great
and permanent value. Even if Canticles is merely
a collection of songs describing the bliss of true
lovers in wedlock, it is not thereby rendered un-
worthy of a place in the Bible, unless marriage is
to be regarded as a fall from a state of innocency.
If Canticles should be rejected because of its sensu-
ous imagery in describing the joys of passionate
lovers, portions of Prov ould also have to be
excised (Prov 5 15-20). Perhaps most persons
need to enlarge their conception of the Bible as a
repository for all things that minister to the welfare
of men. The entire range of man’s legitimate
joys finds sympathetic and appreciative descrip-
tion in the Bible. Two young lovers in Paradise


Song of Children
Sons of God (NT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2834


need not fear to rise and meet their Creator, should
He visit them in the cool of the day.


Lirerature.—C. D. Giusburg, The Song of Songs,
with a Comm., Historical and Critical, 1857; H. Ewald,
Dichter des Alten Bundes, III, 333-426, 1867; F.C. Cook,
in Bib. Comm., 1874; Franz Delitzsch, Hoheslied u.
Koheleth, 1875 (also tr); O. Zéckler, in Lange's Comm.,
1875; 8S. Oettli, Kurzgefasster Kommentar, 1889; W. E.
Griffis, The Lily among Thorns, 1890; J. W. Rothstein,
Das Hohe Lied, 1893; K. Bndde, art. in New World,
March, 1894, and Kommentar, 1898; ©. Siegfried, Predi-
ger u. Hoheslied, 1898; A. Harper, in Cambridge Bible,
1902; G. C. Martin, in Century Bible, 1908; art. on ‘‘Can-
ticles’’ by Cheyne in EB, 1899.


JoHNn RICHARD SAMPEY
SONG OF THE THREE CHILDREN:
Name
. Canonicity
. Contents
. Author and Date
. Original Language
. Text and Versions
LiIveRATURE

For general remarks concerning the Additions to
Daniel see BEL AND THE Dragon.

This Addition has no separate title in any MS
or VS because in the LXX, Theod, Syr and Lat
(Old Lat and Vulg) it follows Dnl 3 23
immediately, forming an integral por-
tion of that chapter, viz. vs 24-90
in the LXX and Vulg. It is the only one of the
three Additions which has an organic connection
with Dn]; as regards the others see preliminary re-
marks to BEL AND THE Dragon. The title in EV
is ‘The Song of the Three Holy Children,” a title
describing its matter as formerly understood, though
a more rigid analysis shows that in the 68 verses so
designated, we have really two separate sections.
See 3, below.

See introductory remarks +o Ben ann THE Dracon.
The order in which the three ‘‘Additions to Dnl’”’ are
found in the (Separate Protestant)
Apoe is decided by their sequence
in the Vulg, the Song of the Three
Children forming part of ch 3, Sus of
ch 13, and Bel of ch 14 of Dnl.

Though the Eng. and other Protestant VSS treat
the 68 verses as one piece under the name given

above, there are really two quite
3. Contents distinct compositions. These appear

separately in the collection of Odes
appended to the Psalter in Cod.A under the headings,
“The Prayer of Azarias’” (IIpocevx} ’Afgaptov, Pros-
euché Azariou, Azariah, Dnl 1 6f) and ‘The
Hymn of Our Fathers” (‘Tuvos rév rardpwr tyr,
Himnos tin patérin hémén); see Swete, The OT
in Gr, 3804 ff, and Intro to the OT in Gr, 253 f.
Luther with his usual independence makes each
of these into a separate book under the titles, ‘‘The
Prayer of Azaria” (Das Gebet Asarjas) and “The
Song of the Three Men in the Fire” (Der Gesang
der drei Ménner im Feuerofen).

(1) The Prayer of Azarias (vs 1-22) (Dnl 3 24-
48).—Azariah is the Heb name of Abed-nego (=
Abednebo, “servant of Nebo’), the latter being
the Bab name (see Dnl 17; 2 49, etc). This
prayer joins on to Dnl 3 23, where it is said that
“Shadrach, Meshach and Ahed-nego [Azariah] fell
down bound into the midst of the burning fiery
furnace.” 98 (the VS of Theodotion; see ‘Text and
Versions” below) adds, ‘‘And they walked (Syr adds
‘Gn their chains’’] in the midst of the fire, praising
God, and blessing the Lord.” This addition forms
a suitable connecting link, and it has been adopted
by the Vulg and in modern VSS which are made
from @ and not from the LXX, which last was lost
for many centuries (see BEL AnD THE Dragon, IIT).
In the LXX the words with which the Prayer was
introduced are these: ‘‘Thus therefore prayed
Hananias, and Azarias and Misael and sang praises
[hymns] to the Lord when the king commanded


ore cope


1. Name


2. Canon-
icity


that they should be cast into the furnace.” The
prayer (offered by Azarias) opens with words of
adoration followed by an acknowledgment that the
sufferings of the nation in Babylon were wholly
deserved, and an earnest entreaty that God would
intervene on hehalf of His exiled and afflicted people.
That this prayer was not composed for the occasion
with which it is connected goes without saying. No
one in a burning furnace could pray as Azarias does.
There are no groans or sighs, nor prayer for help
or deliverance of a personal nature. The deliver-
ance sought is national.

(2) The Song of the Three Holy Children (us 28-68)
(Dnl 3 61-90).—This is introduced hy a brief con-
necting narrative (vs 23-27). The king’s servants
continued to heat the furnace, hut an angel came
down and isolated an inner zone of the furnace with-
in which no flames could enter; in this the three
found safety. Rothstein (Kautzsch, Die Apok., 175)
is inclined to think that this narrative section (vs
23-27) stood between Dn] 3 23 and 3 24 in the
original Heb text. The “Song” is really a ps,
prohably a tr of a Heb original. It has nothing to
do with the incident—the three young men in the
furnace—except in ver 66 (EV) where the three
martyrs call upon themselves by name to praise
and bless the Lord for delivering them from the
midst of thefurnace. This verse is an interpolation,
for the rest of the Song is a long litany recalling
Ps 103 and esp. Pss 136, 148, and Sir 43. _TheSong,
in fact, has nothing to do with the sufferings of the
three young men, but is an ordinary hymn of praise.
It is well known from the fact that it forms a part
of the Anglican Prayer-hook, as it had formed part
of many early Christian liturgies.

(1) We know nothing whatever of the author
besides what may he gathered from this Addition,

It is quite evident that none of the
4, Author three Additions belong to the original
and Date text of Dnl, and that they were added
because they contained legends in
keeping with the spirit of that book, and a song in
a slight degree (ver 66 EV) adapted to the situation
of the three Heb youths in the furnace, though itself
of an independent liturgical origin.

For a long time the three Additions must have circu-
lated independently. Polychronius says that ‘The Song
of the Three Holy Children" was, even in the 5th cent.
AD, absent from the text of Dnl, both in the Pesh and
in the LXX proper. Rothsteln (Kautzsch, Die Apok.,
176) contends that the Additions formed a part of the
LXX from the beginning, from which he infers that they
were all composed before the LXX was made. What
was the date of this VS of Dnl? Since its use seems


implied in 1 Macc 1 54 (cf Dnl 1l 31; 1211), it
would be safe to conclnde that it existed about 100 BO,


(2) Date of the Prayer of Azarias.—In ver 15
(EV) it is said that at the time the prayer was
offered, there was no prince, prophet or leader, nor
sacrifice of any kind. This may point to the time
between 168 and 165 BC, when Antiochus IV
(Epiphanes) profaned the temple. If written in
that interval, it must have been added to Dnl
at a much later time. But on more occasions than
one, in later times, the temple-services were sus-
pended, as e.g. during the invasion of Jerus by the
Egyp king, Ptolemy IV (Philopater).

(3) Date of the Song—We find references in the
Song (vs 62 f EV) to priests and temple-servants, and
in ver 31 to the temple itself, suggesting that when
the Song was written the temple-services were car-
ried on. This, in itself, would suit a time soon after
the purification of the temple, about 164 BC. But
the terms of the Song are, except in ver 66 (EV), so
general that it is impossible to fix the date definitely.
On the date of the historical connecting narrative
(vs 23-27) see 3, (2), above.


2835


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Song of Children
Sons of God (NT)


(1) Romanist scholars in general and several Protes-
tants (Elchhorn, Hinleit., in das AT,IV, 24f; Hinlett. in
die apok. Schriften, 419; Vatke: De-

6. Original litzsch, De Habacuci, 50; Zockler, Bissell,
* Ball, Rothstein, etc) hold that the original
Language language was Heb. The evidence, which
is weak, is as follows: (a) The style ls He-
braistic throughout (mot more so than in writings known
to have been composed in Alexandrian Gr; the idiom
xararcxuverCat- and, hatatschunesthai+ap6=7 WD, bash
min [ver 44 EV; LXX ver 44], ‘to be ashamed of,”
occurs in parts of the LXX which are certainly not tr).
ieee three Heb martyrs bear Heb names (ver 66 EV).

is only shows that the tale ls of Heb origin. (2)
Most modern non-Romapist scholars hold that the
original language of the Song (and Prayer) was Gr. So
Keil, Fritzsche, De Wette, Schiirer, Kénig, Cornill,
Strack, etc.

Some grounds: (1) The Hebraisms are comparatively
few, and those which do exist can be paralleled in other
weave composed in Hellenistic Gr. (2) It can be
proved that in Dnl and also in Bel (see Intro to Bel in the
Oxford Apoc, ed R. H. Charles), Theodotion corrects
the LXX from the Heb (lost in the case of Bel); but in
Three, Theodotion corrects according to Gr idiom or


grammar. It must be admitted, however, that the


evidence is not very decisive either way.

As to the text and the various versions of the
Song, see what is said in art. BrEL aND THE Dracon,
: It is important to note that the tr® in
6. Text and EV are made from Theodotion’s Gr
Versions version, which occurs in ancient VSS

of the LXX (A BV Q“%) instead of the
true LXX (Cod. 87).


LireratuRe.—See art. Be, anp tHE Dracon; Mar-
shall (HDB, IV, 754); W.H. Bennett (Ozford Apoe, ed
R. H. Charles, 625 ff).


T. Witton Davies
SONGS OF DEGREES. See Drcress, Sones
oF; Drau or Awaz, 7.


SONS OF. See Son, Sons.


SONS OF GOD (OT) (=n sta) "DA, bene
hé-élohim, “sons of God” [Gen 6 2.4; Job 1 6;
2 1); DSN “Qa, bené 'éldhim, “sons of God’
[Job 38 7]; DSN "22, bene ’alim, “ye mighty,”
AV; “ye sons of the mighty,” AVm, RV; “sons of
God” or “‘sons of the gods,” RVm [Ps 29 1]; “sons
of the mighty,’’ AV and RV; “sons of God” or “‘sons
of the gods,” RVm [Ps 89 6 (Heb 7)]; LXX viol
To® Oot, huiot tov theo, ot ayyehou TOD cod, hot
dggeloi tou theo (Gen 6 2}; viol rod Gc0%, hutot tort
theot [Gen 6 4]; of GyyeXou Tod Geod, hoi dggeloi tov
theo [Job 1 6; 2 1); GyyeAol pou, dggelot mou [Job
88 7]; viol cod, huiot theot [Ps 29 1; 89 6; ef
Dnl 3 25)):

This article will deal with this phrase as it is used
in the above passages. In the passages from Job

and Pss it is applied to supernatural
1. Job and beings or angels. In Job the “sons
Psalms of God” are represented as appearing

before the throne of Jeh in heaven,
ready to do Him service, and as shouting for joy
at the creation of the earth. In the Pss they
are summoned to celebrate the glory of Jeh, for
there is none among them to be compared to
Him. The phrase in these passages has no physical
or moral reference. These heavenly beings are
called ‘‘sons of God’’ or ‘‘sons of the ’élohtm’’ simply
as belonging to the same class or guild as the
*élohim, just as “‘sons of the prophets” denotes those
who belong to the prophetic order (see A. B. David-
son, Comm. on Job 1 6).

Different views, however, are taken of the pas-

sage in Gen 6 2.4: ‘The sons of God saw the
daughters of men that they were fair;
2. Gen and they took them wives of all that
6;2.4 they chose..... The Nephilim were
in the earth in those days, and also
after that, when the sons of God came in unto the
daughters of men.” See Giants; NePuILim.


(1) "Sons of God" is interpreted as referring to men,
(a) to sons of the nobles, who married daughters of the
common people. This is the view of many Jewish
authorities, who hold that it is justified by the use of
‘élohim in the sense of '‘judges” (Ex 21 6; 22 8f, etc).
But this cannot be the meaning of ’élahim here, for when
‘adham, ''men," is used to denote the lower classes, it is
contrasted_with 'tsh, as in Ps 49 2 (Heb 8), not with
"éléhim. When contrasted with 'tlahim it signifies the
human race. (b) Some commentators hold that by
‘sons of God” is to be understood the pious race de-
scended from Seth, and by “daughters of men” the
daughters of wordy men. These commentators con-
nect the passage with Gen 4 25f, where the race of
Seth is characterized as the worshippers of Jeh and is
designated as a whole, a seed (cf Dt 14 1; 82 5; Hos 1
10 eb 21]). They consider the restricted meaning
they put_upon_‘‘men” as warranted by the contrast
(ct Jer 32 20; Isa 43 4), and that as the term “daugh-
ters'’ expresses actual descent, it is natural to under-
stand “sons” in a similar sense. The phrase ‘took
wives,” they contend also, supports the ethical view,
being always used to signify real and lasting marriages,
and cannot, therefore, be Sopa to the higher spirits in
their unholy desire after flesh. On this view vs 1-4 are
an introduction to the reason for the Flood, the great
wickedness of man upon the earth (ver 5). It is held
that nothing is said in ver 4 of a race of giants springing
from the union of angels with human wives (see paragraph
2, below), and that the violence which is mentioned
along with the corruption of the world (ver 11) refers to
the sin of the giants.

_ (2) Most scholars now reject this view and
interpret “sons of God”’ as referring to supernatural
beings in accordance with the meaning of the expres-
sion in the other passages. They hold that Dt
14 1, etc, cannot be regarded as supporting the
ethical interpretation of the phrase in a historical
narrative. The reference to Jer 32 20, etc, too, is
considered irrelevant, the contrast in these passages
being between Israel and other nations, not, as here,
between men and God. Nor ean a narrower signi-
fication (daughters of worldly men) be attached to
“men” in ver 2 than to “men” in ver I, where the
reference is to the human race in genera]. This
passage (Gen 6 1-4), therefore, which is the only
one of its kind, is considered to be out of its place
and to have been inserted here by the compiler
as an introduction to the story of the Flood (vs
5-8). The intention of the original writer, however,
was to account for the rise of the giant race of
antiquity by the union of demigods with human
wives. This interpretation accords with En chs
6-7, etc, and with Jude vs 6 f, where the unnatural
sin of the men of Sodom who went after ‘‘strange
flesh” is compared with that of the angels (cf 2 Pet
2 4ff). (See Havernick, Intro to the Pent; Heng-
stenberg on the Pent, I, 325; Oehler, OT Theology,
I, 196 f; Schultz, OT Theology, I, 114 ff;
Comms.on Gen by Delitzsch, Dillmann, and Driver.)
But see ANTEDILUVIANS, 3; CHILDREN oF GoD;
Grants; NEpHILIM; REPHAIM.

JaMES CRICHTON

SONS OF GOD (NT): Two Gr words are tr4
“gon,” réxvov, téknon, vids, huids, both words in-
dicating sonship by parentage, the
former indicating that the sonship has
taken place by physical descent, while
the latter presents sonship more from
the legal side than from the standpoint of relation-
ship. John, who lays special emphasis on sonship
by birth, uses ¢eknon, while Paul, in emphasizing son-
ship from the legal side, as referring to adoption,
which was current among the Romans but scarcely
if at all known.to, or if known, practised by, the
Jews, uses the word huios (Jn 112; Rom 8
14.16.19; Gal 4 6.7; 1 Jn 3 1.2).

Men are not by nature the sons of God, at
least not in the sense in which believers in Christ
areso called. By nature those outside
of Jesus Christ are “children of wrath”
(Eph 2 3), ‘of disobedience” (2 2),
controlled not by the Spirit of God
(Rom 8-14), but by the spirit of disobedience


1. NT
Terms


2. NT
Docirine


Soothsayers == THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2836
(Eph 2 2-4). Men become sons of God in the ee but in RV “plague”; similarly in the Dedi-


regenerative and adoptive sense by the acceptance
of Jesus Christ as Lord and Saviour (Jn 1 12f; Gal
3 26). The universal brotherhood which the NT
teaches is that brotherhood which is based on faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ as the Divine and only
Saviour of the world. And the same is true of the
universal Fatherhood of God. It is true that all
men are ‘‘his offspring” (Acts 17 28 f) in the sense
that they are God’s created children; but that the
NT makes a very clear and striking distinction
between sonship by virtue of creation and sonship
by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, there can be no
reasonable doubt.

Sonship is the present possession of the believer
in Christ (1 Jn 3 2). It will be completed at the
second coming of Our Lord (Rom 8 238), at which
time the believer will throw off his incognito, by
reason of which the world may not have recog-
nized his sonship (1 Jn 8 1.2), and be fully and
gloriously revealed as the son of God (2 Cor 6 10).
{t doth not yet appear, it hath not yet appeared,
what we shall be; the revelation of the sons of God
is reserved for a coming day of manifestation.

The blessings of sonship are too numerous to
mention, save in the briefest way. His sons are
objects of God’s peculiar love (Jn 17 23), and His
Fatherly care (Lk 12 27-33). They have the family
name (Eph 8 14f; 1 Jn 3 1); the family likeness
(Rom 8 29); family love (Jn 13 35; 1 Jn 3 14);
afilial spirit (Rom 8 15; Gal 4 6); afamily service
(in 14 23f; 15 8). They receive fatherly chas-
tisement (He 12 5-11); fatherly comfort (2 Cor
1 4), and an inheritance (Rom 8 17; 1 Pet 1 3-5).

Among the evidences of sonship are: being led by
the Spirit (Rom 8 14; Gal 5 18); having a child-
like confidence in God (Gal 4 5); having liberty of
access (Eph 3 12); having love for the brethren
(1 Jn 2 9-11; 5 1), and obedience (1 Jn_5 1-8).

Witiram Evans

SOOTHSAYERS, s60th’sa-érz. Sce AsTROLOGY,

1; Divination.


SOP, sop (poplov, psdmion): A thin, wafer-like
piece of bread dipped into the common dish as a
sort of improvised spoon, is thus designated in Jn
13 26 ff. See MorseEt. 4


SOPATER, 380’pa-tér, sop’a-tér (Zamarpos, Sdpa-
tros): RV the son of Pyrrhus; AV omits. A man
of Beroea who is mentioned with some Thessalonians
and others as accompanying Paul as far as Asia on
his return to Jerus after his 3d missionary journey
(Acts 20 4). He is probably the same as the
“Sosipater’ of Rom 16 21.


SOPE, sop. See Soar.


SOPHERETH, s6-fé’reth, sof’é-reth, s6’fé-reth
(MRO, sdphereth): One of the remnant returning
from captivity (Ezr 2 55 AV; Neh 7 57). In RV
of Ezr 2 55 it is ‘‘Hassophereth,” the def. art.
being transliterated.


SOPHONIAS, sof-é-ni’as (LXX Zodovias, Sopho-
nias): The form in AV and RV of 2 Esd 1 40 for
Zephaniah the prophet.


SORCERER, s6r’sér-ér, SORCERY, sér’sér-i.
See AstroLoGcyY, 1; Drvination; Magic; Wircu-
CRAFT.


SORE, sor (substantive) (733, negha'; kos,
hélkos, vb. Axdopat, helkéomai): In the account of
the appearance of leprosy (Lev 13 42{) the spot
on the skin is called by this name, which in AV is tr4


cation Prayer (2 Ch 6 28f) RV has altered the
rendering of negha‘ for “sore” to “plague” as it has
done also in Ps 38 11. The word literally means a
“stroke” or “blow,” and so is applied to a disease or
infliction from God. TPh0 M3!2, makkah fertyah,
in AV is rendered “‘putrifying sores,’ ERV “‘fester-
ing sores,” ARV and ERVm “fresh stripes.” See
Stripes. In the only other text in the OT in
which “sore” is used as a substantive in AV (Ps
77 2), the word used is ya@dh, which lit. means the
“outstretched hand,” hence RV renders the text:
“My hand was stretched out in the night and slacked
not.” In the NT the ulcers on the limbs of Lazarus
which were the result of poverty and hardship
(Lk 16 20), and were licked by the pariah dogs
(ver 21), are called “sores.” Sores also which are


called noisome and grievous, were the result of the
outpouring of the first of the seven bowls of the
wrath of God (Rev 16 2-11).
ALEx. MacaLisTER

SOREK, sd’rek, VALLEY OF (p72 om:,
nahal sérék, “the valley of the choice [sdrék] vine”
[see Vine]; gophx, soréch): ‘“[Samson] loved a
woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was
Delilah” (Jgs 16 4). Jerome (OS, 1531, 6) mentions
a, Capharsorec which was near Saraa (ancient ZORAH
[q.v.]); this latter is undoubtedly the village of
Surah, high up upon the northern slopes of the
great Wddy es Surar. About 3 of a mile W. of this
is Khurbet Sirik, which is certainly the site referred
to by Jerome, and possibly marks that of a more
ancient town which gave its name to the whole
valley. This valley is of importance in the his-
torical geography of Pal out of all proportion to
its scanty mention in the OT (HGHL, 218 ff).
The Wady es Surar is an expansion of the ravine
Wady Isma‘in (which itself is formed by the junction
of the great Wdédy Beit Hanineh, which rises near
Bereh, and the Wady es Stkkeh, which drains the
“Plain of Rephaim’”’ near Jerus). The Jerus-
Jaffa Railway traverses successively the Wddy es
Surar, the Wady Ismai‘n and the Wddy es Sikkeh
to reach the Jerus plateau. The Valley of Sorek is
a name which probably belonged only to the open,
fertile valley, well suited for vineyards, which
traverses the Shephelah. It is now given over
almost entirely to the cultivation of wheat, barley
and maize (durra). The valley passes between the
lofty hillof Sara‘h (Zorah) to the N. and ‘Ain Shems
(Beth-shemesh) and Tibneh (Timnah) on the S.
Standing on the ruins of Beth-shemesh, one can
watch the modern railway train winding for miles
up the valley along almost the very road from
Ekron (now ‘Akiv), upon which came the strange
sight of the milch kine dragging the ark (18 6 12).
Very probably it was in this valley that the Philis
were defeated (18 7 5-14) (PHF, III, 53, Sh
XVII). E. W. G. Masturman


SORREL, sor’el: RV in Zee 1 8 for “speckled.”
See Coors.


SORROW, sor’d (237), hebhel, }193, yaghon,
2182, makh’dbh, etc; Aiwy, lipé): The OT has
very many words tr? “sorrow,”’ those named being
the most frequent; in the NT “sorrow” is usually
the tr of lupé (Lk 22 45; Jn 16 6; 2 Cor 2 3.7,
etc). Pénthos, tr’ “sorrow” in Rev 18 7; 21 4, is


in RV “mourning.” Oduiné, of pain and distress,
is thus rendered in Rom 9 2; 1 Tim 6 10 (cf the
vb. in Lk 2 48; Acts 20 38). RV frequently gives
a more literal rendering of the words used, as ‘‘toil”’
(Gen 3 17), “pangs” (Ex 15 14), “pining” (Dt ‘28
65), “distress” (Isa 5 30), “lamentation” (Isa 29
2), etc; sometimes also it uses ‘sorrow’ for other


2837


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Soothsayers
Soul


words, as for “grief”? (2 Ch 6 29; Ps 31 10; 69
26; etc; 2 Cor 2 5), “heaviness’ (Rom 9 2; 2
Cor 2 1).

Sorrow or grief is necessary for discipline, for the
development of the finer feelings.and higher nature
of the soul and spirit (Eccl 7 3, “Sorrow is better
than laughter; for by the sadness of the countenance
the heart is made glad,” m “better’). Sorrow
inevitably follows sin, and is its punishment, yet the
righteous are not exempt from it. The “Servant
of Jeh” was “a man of sorrows” (Isa 63 3). Chris-
tians learn how to be “‘sorrowful, yet always rejoic-
ing” (2 Cor 6 10; 7 4; Col 1 24; 1 Thess 1 6;
etc). In the New Jerus it is predicted that there
shall be no sorrow, for sorrow shall have done its
work, and the first things have passed away (Rev
21 4). W. L. WaLKER


SOSIPATER, sé-sip’a-tér (wolmarpos, Sadsi-
patros): Sosipater unites with Lucius and Jason in
sending greetings to the Rom Christians (Rom 16
21). He is a “kinsman” of Paul, by which Paul
means a Jew (Rom 9 3; 16 11.21). It isthe same
name as SopaTER (q.v.). “Sopater of Beroea’”’ was
one of the companions of Paul on his journey from
Philippi after his 3d missionary journey (Acts 20 4).
These two are probably the same person, Paul
having with him in Corinth, at the time of writing
to the Rom Christians, the two Macedonians, So-
pater of Beroea and Jason of Thessalonica. The
name Sosipater is found on a list of politarchs of
Thessalonica. 8. F. Hunter


SOSTHENES, sos’the-néz (ZwoPévys, Sdsthénés) :
Chief of the synagogue at Corinth (Acts 18 17).
Possibly identical with the co-worker (afterward)
of Paul mentioned in 1 Cor 1 1.


SOSTRATUS, sos’tra-tus (Zéorpatos, Sdsiratos,
in V Zoo-, Sos-): ‘‘The governor of the citadel’
of Jerus under Antiochus IV (Epiphanes). His
duty was to gather the revenues of the city and
province for the imperial treasury. He made a
new departure in demanding from Menelaus direct
the sum promised to the king in 2 Macc 4 27 ff
(for Jason had the privilege of sending the money
by his own messenger to the king [2 Macc 4 23]).
This claim the usurper Menelaus disputed; con-
sequently he and the governor were both summoned
to appear before the king. No more is told, and
Sostratus is otherwise unknown. ANGUS


SOTAI, 80’ti, sd’td-i, s6-ta’i (WD, sdiay): One of
those who returned from captivity, being descend-
ants of Solomon’s servants (Ezr 2 55; Neh 7 57).


SOTTISH, sot’ish (SDD, sakhal, “thick-headed”):
“They are sottish [stupid, very foolish] children”
(Jer 4 22).


SOUL, sdl (W53, nephesh; pux4, psuché; Lat
anima):
(1) Soul, like spirit, has various shades of mean-
ing in the OT, which may be summarized as follows:
“Soul,” “living being,” “life,” “self,”
1. Shades “person,” “desire,” “appetite,” ‘“emo-
of Meaning tion” and “passion” (BDB, s.v.). In
inthe OT the first instance it meant that which
breathes, and as such is distinguished
from bdsdr, “flesh’’ (Isa 10 18; Dt 12 23); from
sh ér, “the inner flesh,’’ next the bones (Prov 11 17,
“his own flesh’); from beten, “belly” (Ps 31 10,
“My soul and my belly are consumed with grief’),
ete.
(2) As the life-breath, it departs at death (Gen
3518; Jer 16 2). Hence the desire among OT


saints to be delivered from Sheol (Ps 16 10, “Thou
wilt not leave my soul to Sheol’) and from shahath,
“the pit” (Job 33 18, “He keepeth back his soul
from the pit’; Isa 38 17, “Thou hast ... . deliv-
ered it [my soul] from the pit of corruption’).

(3) By an easy transition the word comes to stand
for the individual, personal life, the person, with two
distinct shades of meaning which might best be
indicated by the Lat anima and animus. As anima,
“soul,” the life inherent in the body, the animating
principle in the blood is denoted (cf Dt 12 23.24,
‘Only be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the
blood is the soul; and thou shalt not eat the soul
with the flesh’). As animus, ‘“‘mind,” the center of
our mental activities and passivities is indicated.
Thus we read of ‘a hungry soul’ (Ps 107 9), ‘a
weary soul’ (Jer 31 25), ‘a loathing soul’ (Lev 26
11), ‘a thirsty soul’ (Ps 42 2), ‘a grieved soul’
(Job 30 25), ‘a loving soul’ (Cant 1 7), and many
kindred expressions. Cremer has characterized
this use of the word in a sentence: ‘‘ Nephesh [soul]
in man is the subject of personal life, whereof
pneima or rah [spirit] is the principle” (Lexicon,
s.v., 795).

(4) This individuality of man, however, may
be denoted by pneuma as well, but with a dis-
tinction. Nephesh or “soul” can only denote the
individual life with a material organization or body.
Pneuma or “spirit’’ is not so restricted. Scripture
speaks of “spirits of just men made perfect”? (He
12 23), where there can be no thought of a material
or physical or corporeal organization. They are
“spiritual beings freed from the assaults and
defilements of the flesh’’ (Delitzsch, in loc.). For an
exceptional use of psuché in the same sense see Rev
6 9; 20 4, and (irrespective of the meaning of Ps
16 10) Acts 2 27.

(1) In the NT psuché appears under more or less
similar conditions as in the OT. The contrast here

is as carefully maintained asthere. It
2. NT Dis- is used where pnewma would be out
tinctions of place; and yet it seems at times to

be employed where preuma might
have been substituted. Thusin Jn 19 30 we read:
“Jesus gave up his pneuma’’ to the Father, and, in
the same Gospel (Jn 10 15), Jesus gave up His
‘‘nsuchéfor the sheep,” andin Mt 20 28 Hegave His
psuché (not His preuma) as a ransom—a difference
which is characteristic. For the pneuma stands in
quite a different relation to God from the psuché.
The “spirit”? (pneuma) is the outbreathing of God
into the creature, the life-principle derived from God.
The “‘soul” (psuché) is man’s individual possession,
that which distinguishes one man from another and
from inanimate nature. The pneuma of Christ was
surrendered to the Father in death; His psuché
was surrendered, His individual life was given “a
ransom for many.” His life “was given for the
sheep.” :

(2) This explains those expressions in the NT
which bear on the salvation of the soul and its
preservation in the regions of the dead. ‘‘Thou
wilt not leave my soul unto Hades” (the world of
shades) (Acts 2 27); “Tribulation and anguish,
upon every soul of man that worketh evil” (Rom
29); “Weare... . of them that have faith unto
the saving of the soul”’ (He 10 39); ‘Receive ....
the implanted word, which is able to save your
souls” (Jas 1 21).

The same or similar expressions may be met with
in the OT in reference to the soul. Thus in Ps 49
8, AV “The redemption of their soul is precious,”
and again: “God will redeem my soul from the
power of Sheol’? (Ps 49 15). Perhaps this may
explain—at least this is Wendt’s explanation—
why even a corpse is called nephesh or soulin the OT,
because, in the region of the dead, the individuality


Sound
Speech


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2838


is retained and, in a measure, separated from God
(cf Hag 2 18; Lev 21 11).
The distinction between psuché and pneuma, or
nephesh and rah, to which reference has been made,
may best be described in the words of
3. Oechler Ochler (OT Theology, 1, 217): ‘Man
on Soul and is not spirit, but Aas it: he is soul.
Spirit . ... In the soul, which sprang from
_ the spirit, and exists continually
through it, lies the individuality—in the case of
man, his personality, his self, his ego.” He draws
attention to the words of Elihu in Job (33 4):
‘God’s spirit made me,’ the soul called into being;
‘and the breath of the Almighty animates me,’
the soul kept in energy and strength, in continued
existence, by the Almighty, into whose hands
the inbreathed spirit is surrendered, when the
soul departs or is taken from us (1 K 19 4).
Hence according to Oehler the phrases naphshi
(“my soul’), naphshekha (“thy soul’) may be
rendered in Lat egomet, tu ipse; but not rah2 (“my
spirit”), ruhdkha (‘thy spirit’’)—soul standing for
the whole person, as in Gen 12 5; 17 14; Ezk 18
4, etc. See Psycaoioey. J. I. Marais


SOUND, sound: In Isa 63 15 AV has “the
sounding of thy bowels,” a painfully literal tr of
hémon méeykha, with the similar phrase, ‘my
bowels shall sound like an harp,” in 16 11 (cf Jer 48
36). The intestines were considered a seat of emo-
tion, and at times of great excitement were thought
(in poetry, at least) to become tense and to give
forth a musical sound. RV (following AV in Jer
48 36) substitutes “heart’”’ for “bowels” in Isa 16
11, thus obscuring the figure but preserving the
sense. In Isa 63 15 RV paraphrases ‘the yearning
of thy heart’? (ERV “‘bowels’’), a needless change
from 16 11. See also Bata Kou; Soren, So-
LEMNITY. Burton Scotr Easton


SOUNDINGS, sound’ingz. See
Boats, ITI, 2.


SOUR, sour: (1) 102, béser, “immature,” “un-
ripe’: “The fathers have eaten sour grapes” (Jer
31 29f; Ezk 18 2; cf Isa 18 5 AV). (2) WO, sar,
“to turn aside,” “‘degenerate’’: ‘“Their drink is turned
sour” (AVm “‘gone,’”’ RVm ‘Their carouse is over’).


SHIPS AND


SOUTH, south: (1) 333, neghebh, according to
BDB from ¥ 13), ndghabh, meaning ‘‘to be dry,”
the word oftenest used, in RV capitalized (Sonth) in
those places where it seems to denote a particular
region, i.e. to the 8. of Judah. (2) [%)), yamin,
“right hand,” “right.” The derived meaning,
“south,” seems to imply an eastern posture in
prayer in which the right hand is toward the S.;
ef Arab. utes yamin, “Tight,” and ured yemen,
“Yemen,” a region in Southwestern Arabia. (8)
72M , téman, from the same root as (2), is often
used forthe south; also for the south wind (Ps 78 26;
Cant 4 16). (4) DY, yam, lit. “sea’’ (Ps 107 3).
(5) DIN, darom, etymology doubtful (Dt 33 23;
Ezk 40 24). (6) "B70, midhbar, lit. “desert”
(Ps 76 6, reading doubtful).

(7) My, ips, “south west wind” (Acts 27 12).
(8) pernuBpta, mesembria, lit. “mid-day”; “south”
(Acts 8 26); ‘noon’? (22 6). (9) véros, nétos,
“south wind’ (Lk 12 55; Acts 27 13; 28 13);
“south”? (1 Mace 3 57; Mt 12 42; Lk 11 31;
13 29; Rev 21 13).

The south wind is often referred to: see Cant 4
16; Job 37 9 (cf 9 9); Zec 9 14 (cf Isa 21 1);
Lk 12 55.


Of the passages where South (neghebh) clearly
refers to a particular region between Pal and Sinai
see: ‘And Abraham journeyed, going on. still
toward the South’ (neghbah) (Gen 129; 13 1;
Dt 17). Weread of “the South of the Jerahmeel-
ites,” “the South of the Kenites’” (1 5 27 10);
“the South of the Cherethites,” ‘the South of
Caleb” (1 8 30 14); “the South of Judah” (2 Ch
28 18); ‘‘Ramoth of the South” (1 8 30 27).

In Ps 126 4, ‘‘Turn again our captivity, O Jeh,
as the streams in the South,” we have a figurative
reference to the fact that, after a long period of
drought, the dry watercourses are finally filled with
rushing streams. The reference in Ezk 20 46f to
“the forest of the South” is to a condition of things
very different from that which exists today, though
the region is not incapable of supporting trees if
they are only planted and protected.

AuFrep Evy Day

SOUTH, CHAMBERS OF THE: The twelve
constellations of the Zodiac. See AsTRONoMY,
TI, 12.


SOUTH, QUEEN OF THE (Mt 12 42).
QUEEN oF SHEBA.


SOUTH RAMOTH. See Ramorts.


See


SOUTHEAST. See NorrHeast.


SOW, sou. See Swine.
SOWER, sé’ér, SOWING, sd’ing. See AarRI-
CULTURE.


SPAIN, span (Zravia, Spania): The country in
the S.W. of Europe which still bears thisname. It
was Paul’s purpose, as stated in Rom 16 24.28,
to visit Spain. If, as is probable, he ultimately
carried out this intention, it must have been after a
release from his first imprisonment. Clement of
Rome speaks of the apostle as having reached “‘the
extreme limit of the W.” (Ep. of Clem., v). See
PavL, THE APOSTLE; TARSHISH.


SPAN (1, zereth; omBapy, spithamé): A mea-
sure of length equal to half a cubit or about 9 in.
(Ex 28 16; 399; 1817 4, etc). Lam 2 20 AV
is a mistranslation; see RV. See WsIGgHTS AND
MEASURES,


SPARK, spirk. See LeviaTHAN.


SPARROW, spar’d (VBR, cippor; orpovdlov,
strouthion; Lat passer): A small bird of the
Fringillidae family. The Heb ¢ippér seems to have
been a generic name under which were placed all
small birds that frequented houses and gardens.
The word occurs about 40 t in the Bible, and is
indiscriminately tr? “bird,” ‘fowl’ or “‘sparrow.’’
Our translators have used the word “sparrow”
where they felt that this bird best filled the require-
ments of the texts. Sparrows are small brown
and gray birds of friendly habit that swarm over
the northern part of Pal, and W. of the Sea of
Galilee, where the hills, plains and fertile fields
are scattered over with villages. They build in the
vineyards, orchards and bushes of the walled gardens
surrounding houses, on the ground or in nooks and
crannies of vine-covered walls. They live on seeds,
small green buds and tiny insects and worms.
Some members of the family sing musically; all
are great chatterers when about the business of life.
Repeatedly they are mentioned by Bible writers,
but most, of the references lose force as applying
to the bird family, because they are tr? “bird™


2839


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Sound
Speech


or “fowl.” In a few instances the word “sparrow’’
is used, and in some of these, painstaking commen-
tators feel that what is said does not apply to the
sparrow. For examplesee Ps 102 7:
“T watch, and am become like a sparrow

That is alone upon the housetop.”
The feeling that this is not characteristic of the spar-
row arises from the fact that it is such a friendly


Sparrow (Fringilia domestica).


bird that if it were on the housetop it would be
surrounded by half a dozen of itskind; so it hasbeen
suggested that a solitary thrush was intended.
There is little force in the change. Thrushes of
today are shy, timid birds of thickets and deep
undergrowth. Occasionally a stray one comes
around a house at migration, but once settled to the
business of living they are the last and most in-
frequent bird to appear near the haunts of man.
And bird habits do not change in one or two thou-
sand years. In an overwhelmed hour the Psalmist
poured out his heart before the Almighty. The
reason he gaid he was like a “‘sparrow that is alone
upon the housetop” was because it is the most
unusual thing in the world for a sparrow to sit
mourning alone, and therefore it attracted attention
and made a forceful comparison. It only happens
when the bird’s mate bas been killed or its nest and
young destroyed, and this most cheerful of birds
sitting solitary and dejected made a deep impres-
sion on the Psalmist who, when his hour of trouble
came, said he was like the mourning sparrow—
alone on the housetop. Another exquisite song
describes the bird in its secure and happy hour:
“Yea, the sparrow hath found her a house,

And the swallow a nest for herself, where she may

Eyon thine, altars, O Jeh of hosts,

My King, and my God’’ (Ps 84 8).
When the mind of man was young and he looked on
the commonest acts of creatures around him as
filled with mystery, miracle and sign—he held in
superstitious reverence any bird that built on a
temple, because he thought it meant that the bird
thus building claimed the protection of God in so
doing. For these reasons all temple builders were
so reverenced that authentic instances are given of
people being put: to death, if they disturbed temple
nests or builders. Because he noticed the sparrow
in joyful conditions is good reason why the Psalmist
should have been attracted by its mourning. There
is a reference to the widespread distribution of these
birds in Prov 26 2:


“As the sparrow im her wandering, as the swallow
in her' flying,
So the ee se that is causeless alighteth not.’”


Once settled in a Jocation, no bird clings more


faithfully to its nest and young, so this ‘‘wander-
ing” could only mean that they scatter widely in
choosing locations. Mt 10 29: ‘Are not two
sparrows sold for a penny? and not one of them shall
fall on the ground without your Father.” This
ig a reference to the common custom in the East of
catching small birds, and selling them to be skinned,
roasted and sold as tid-bits—a bird to a mouthful.
These lines no doubt are the origin of the oft-
quoted phrase, “He marks the fall of the sparrow.”
Then in ver 31 comes this comforting assurance:
“Fear not therefore: ye are of more value than
many sparrows.” Lk 12 6: “Are not five sparrows
sold for two pence? and not one of them is forgotten
in the sight of God.” This affirms the implication
of Mark that these tiny birds were an article of com-
merce in the days of Jesus, just as they are now in
the Far East. GENE STRATTON-PoRTER


SPARTA, spir’ta, SPARTANS, spar’tanz
(Zardprn, Spdrté [1 Macc 14 16], Zrapriarar, Spar-
tidiai; Lacedaemonians [AV 1 Mace 12 2.5.6.10.
21; 14 20-23; 15 23; in 2 Macc 5 9, Gr Lakedai-
ménioi]): The passages in 1 Macc relate to a
correspondence initiated by Jonathan, the priest,
during the Maccabean revolt, and continued after
his death with his brother Simon, between the Jews
and the Lacedaemonians or Spartans, with a view to
a friendly alliance. The proposals, curiously based
on a claim to kindredship, were favorably received
by the Lacedaemonians. See the letters (1 Macc
12 5ff.19 ff; 14 16ff). The claim to blood-rela-
tionship (cf 1 Mace 12 21; 2 Macc 6 9) is of
course absurd, but there is no good reason to doubt
the genuineness of the transaction described. See
Arntus; Asmonrans; LaceparmMonians; Macca-
BEANS, etc. James ORR


SPEAKING, spé’king, EVIL. See Evit-sprax-
ING; SLANDER.


SPEAR, spér, SPEARMEN,
Armor, III, 4; Army, 7.


SPECIALLY, spesh’al-i (383, m°’ddh [Ps 31 11
AV]; padurra, mdlista): Used in an emphatic sense;
derived from a superlative. While usually em-
ployed for emphasis, it carries with it slightly the
idea of something additional. Not used in the OT
in RV, the sense of the Heb being expressed more
clearly by ‘“‘exceedingly,” ‘“‘very.” Its ordinary
NT usage is, “mostly,” “particularly,” “chiefly”
or, “most of all’’ Paul in his practical exhortations
says: “But if any provideth not for his own, and
specially his own household, he hath denied the
faith” (1 Tim 5 8; cf Gal 6 10; 1 Tim 4 10).

Watter G. CLIpPINGER

SPECKLED, spek’l’d: Zec 1 8; RV “sorrel.”

See Cotors; Hyena.


spér’men. See


SPECTACLE, spek’ta-k’1 (@éarpov, théatron):
Occurs twice in the NT: (1) of the place where
assemblies or exhibitions were held (Acts 19 29,
“theatre’’); (2) figuratively of the suffering apostles
(1 Cor 4 9).


SPEECH, spéch (TYAN, 'imrah, 31, dabhar,
etc; Adyos, légos): “Speech,” the articulate utterance
of thought, is the tr of various Heb terms which
convey this idea of ‘saying’ or ‘‘word”’; so, in the
NT, the term generally so rendered is logos, “‘word.”
See Locos; Worp. Fulogia in Rom 16 18 is
‘fair speech’; lalid in Mt 26 73; Mk 14 70 AV;
Jn 8 43 is simply “talk.” RV has “speech” for
various other words in AV, as “matters” (1 8 16
18, m “‘business’), “communication” (Mt 6 37;


oa THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2840
at
Eph 4 29), “words” (Lk 20 20; 1 Cor 14 9); SPIDER, spi’dér ({i] WIAD7, ‘akkabhish; cf


“persuasiveness of speech” for ‘‘enticing words’
(Col 2 4), ete. W. L. WaLKER


SPELT, spelt (MAQD, kussemeth; Sdvpa, dlura,
téa, zéa [Ex 9 32, AV “rye”; Isa 28 25, AV “rye,”
m ‘spelt’; Ezk 49, AV “‘fitches,”’ m_ “spelt”;
RV adopts “spelt,” influenced by LXX, in all
passages|): Spelt is the seed of Triticum spelta, a
kind of wild wheat. Several writers would identity
this kussemeth with the Arab. kirsenneh (Vicia
ervilia), a kind of vetch much used as camels’ fodder.


SPICE, spis, SPICES, spi’sis, -sez:.

(1) (OW2, besem [Ex 30 23], OWA, bésem, pl.
DAWES, besamim, all from root “to attract by
desire,” esp. by smell): The list of spices in Ex 30 23
includes myrrh, cinnamon, “sweet calamus and
cassia.’ These, mixed with olive oil, made the
“holy ahointing oil.’ Officials of the temple had
charge of the spices (1 Ch 9 29). Among the
treasures of the temple shown by Hezekiah to the
messengers of Babylon were the spices (2 K 20 13).
They were used in the obsequies of kings (2 Ch 16
14) and in preparation of a bride for a royal marriage
(Est 2 12, “‘sweet-odors” =balsam). Spices are fre-
quently mentioned in Cant (4 10.14.16; 5 1, m
and AV “balsam”; 5 13; 6 2, “bed of spices,”
m “balsam’’; 8 14). These passages in Cant may
refer in particular to balsam, the product of the
balsam plant, Balsamodendron opebalsamum, a plant
growing in Arabia. According to Jos it was cul-
tivated at Jericho, the plant having been brought to
Pal by the Queen of Sheba (Ant, VIII, vi, 6; see also
XIV, iv, 1; XV,iv,2; BJ, I, vi,6). See Myrru.

(2) (OAD, sammim [Ex 30 34, “sweet spices’’]):
“Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha,
and galbanum; sweet spices with pure frankin-
cense.”’ Itis a general term for fragrant substances
finely powdered. Cf Arab. re shamm, “a


smell’ or “sense of smell’’; generally tr’ “sweet |


incense’ (Ex 25 6; 307; 31 11; 36 8.15.28;
89 38; 40 27 [AV only]; Lev 47; 16 12; Nu 4
16; 2 Ch 2 4 [AV only]; 138 11). In Ex 87 29;
40 27; 2 Ch 2 4, we have DYAO NIP, ketoreth
sammim, “incense of sweet spices.”

(3) (N22, nkho'th; Ouuduara, thumidmata [Gen
37 25, “spicery,”” m “gum tragacanth or storax’’|;
Ouulaya, thumiama, “incense’’ [43 11, ‘“spicery’’;
some Gr versions and the Vulg have ‘‘storax’’]):
Storax is the dried gum of the beautiful Styrax
officinalis (see PopLtar), which was used as in-
cense—a, different article from that now passing
under that name. Tragacanth is the resinous gum
of several species of milk vetch (N.O. Leguminosae),
esp. of the Astragalus gummifer. LXX “incense”
is probably the best tr.

(4) (MPI, rekah, “spiced’’ wine [Cant 8 2]). See
WINE.

(5) (pwpa, drama, “‘spices” [Mk 16 1, AV “‘sweet
spices’; Lk 23 56; 241; Jn 19 40; in ver 39
defined as a mixture of aloes and myrrh]). See
PERFUMES; BURIAL.

(6) (duwuov, dmomon [Rev 18 13], m “‘amo-
mum’; AV “odours’’): The Gr means “blameless,”
and it was apparently applied in classical times to
any sweet and fine odor. In modern botany the
name Amomum is given to a genus in the N.O.
Zingiberaceae. The well-known cardamon seeds
(Amomum cardamomum) and the A.grana Paradisi
which yields the well-known “grains of Paradise,”
used as a stimulant, both belong to this genus.
What was the substance indicated in Rev 18 13
is quite uncertain. E. W. G. MasterMan


3 “Or
Arab. cag Kis is, ‘ankabii, EV “‘spider’’; LXX
dpdxyn, ardchné [Job 8 14; Isa 59 5]; [2] MAY,
semamith, “lizard,” AV ‘spider’; LXX KkakaBdrys,
kalabétés [Prov 80 28]): Semamith of Prov 30 28


Spider (Clubiona atror).


is probably the gecko, a kind of lizard, as LXX and
RV haveit. See Lizarp. In Job 8 14 the spider’s
web is an emblem of frailty: ‘‘Whose confidence


SPIKENARD, spik’nard (373, nérd; vapbos,
ndrdos [Cant 1 12;
414), DUR, nvra-
dhim; vap8o., ndrdoi
[Cant 4 18], ‘“spike-
nard plants’; vapfos
miorTiKh, ndrdos pistiké
(Mk 14 3; Jn 12 3),
“pure nard,” m ‘‘liquid
nard’’; the Eng. word
is for “spiked nard,”’
which comes from the
Nardus spicatus of the
Vulg): Spikenard is
the plant Nardostachys
jatamanst (N.O. Va-
lerianaceae); in Arab.
the name Sunbul hind,
“Indian spike,” refers,
like the Eng. and Lat
name, to the ‘“spike’’-
like shape of the plant
from which the per-
fume comes. The dried
plant as sold consists
of the ‘withered stalks
and ribs of leaves co-
hering in a bundle of
yellowish-brown cap-
ullary fibres and con-
sisting of a spike about
the size of a small
finger’ (Sir W. Jones, : ;

As. Res., II, 409); in eit
appearance the whole


2841


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Spelt
Spirit


plant is said to look like the tail of an ermine. It
grows in the Himalayas. The extracted perfume is
an oil, which was used by the Romans for anoint-
ing the head. Its great costliness is mentioned by
Pliny.

With regard to the exact meaning of the miorixy,
pistiké, in the NT, there is much difference of
opinion: “pure” and “‘liquid’’ are both given in m,
but it has also been suggested among other things
that this was a local name, that it comes from
the Lat spicita or from pisitd, the Sanskrit name of
the spikenard plant. The question is an open one:
either “genuine” or ‘pure’ is favored by most com-
mentators. E. W. G. MastermMan


SPINDLE, spin’d’l.
SPINNING, spin’ing: Although spinning must


have been one of the commonest of the crafts in
Bible times, it is mentioned definitely in three pas-


See SPinnING.


Spindles.


sages only, namely, Ex 35 25f, where 10, tawah,
is so tr4, and in Mt 6 28; Lk 12 27 (vide,
néthein), where Jesus refers to the lilies of the field
as neither toiling nor spinning.

The materials commonly spun were flax, cotton,
wool, goats’ hair. Goats’ hair required little prep-
aration other than washing, before spinning. Wool
was first cleansed and then carded. The present
method of carding, which no doubt is of ancient
origin, isto pile the wool on a mat and then detach
the fibers from each other by snapping a bow-string
against the pile. The bow is specially constructed
and carefully balanced so that 1t can be easily held
with one hand while with the other the string is
struck with a pestle-shaped mallet like a carver’s
mallet. The same instrument is used for carding
cotton.

Flax was treated anciently as today, if the Egyp
sculptures have been rightly interpreted. The
stalks after being stripped of their seeds were first
retted. This operation consisted in soaking the
stems in water until fermentation or rotting had
so loosened the fibers that they could be separated
from each other by combing. A series of washings
and long exposure to the weather finally produced
what was termed snowy-white linen.


The various fibers, mentioned above, to be made
into thread, were gathered into a loose rope which
was wound around a distaff or about the left hand.
From this reel it was unwound as needed, the fibers
more carefully adjusted with the thumbs and two
first fingers of both hands, and then the rope twisted
by means of a spindle. The spindle varied in form
but was always a shaft, 8 to 12 in. in length, pro-
vided at one end with a hook or other means of
fastening the thread and at the other end with a
circular wharve or whorl of stone or other heavy
material to give momentum to the rotating spindle.
When 2 or 3 ft. of the rope was prepared as men-
tioned above, the spindle was twirled with the right
hand or laid on the thigh and rotated by passing
the hand over the shaft. After the thread was
twisted it was wound on the spindle, fastened, and
a new portion of rope prepared and twisted. The
rope was sometimes fastened to a post and the
spindle twisted with both hands, in which case
the whorl was not necessary (see Wilkinson, Anc.
Egypt, 1, 317; II, 170,172). Spinning was the work
of both men and women in ancient Egypt. The
Bible characterizes it as the work of women (Ex
35; Prov 31 19). The same method of spinning is
still used by the women of Syria, although imported
yarn is largely taking the place of homespun thread
(see DistTaFF). JAMES A. PatcH


SPIRIT, spirit (71, rah; mvetpa, pnetima;
Lat spiritus):
1. Primary and Figurative Senses

(1) As Wind, Breat

(2) As Anger or Fury

3) As Mental and Moral Qualities in Man
2. Shades of Meaning
3 As Life-Principle
(2) As Surviving Death

(3) Spiritual Manifestations
3. Human and Divine Spirit

(1) The Human as Related with the Divine

(2) peed A of the Divine Spirit as Third Person

of the Trinity

4. OT Applications
5. Various Interpretations


(1) Used primarily in the OT and NT of the
wind, asin Gen 8 1; Nu 11 31; Am 4 13 (“cre-
ateth the wind’); He 17 (angels,
1. Primary “spirits’’ or ‘winds’? in m); often
and Figura- used of the breath, as in Job 12 10;
tive Senses 15 30, and in 2 Thess 2 8 (wicked
consumed by “the breath of his
mouth’). (2) In a figurative sense it was used as
indicating anger or fury, and as such applied even to
God, who destroys by the ‘“‘breath of his nostrils”
(Job 4 9; Ex 15 8; 2S 22 16; see2 Thess 2 8).
(3) Hence applied to man—as being the seat of
emotion in desire or trouble, and thus gradually of
mental and moral qualities in general (Ex 28 3,
“the spirit of wisdom’’; Ezk 11 19, ‘‘a new spirit,”
etc). Where man is deeply stirred by the Divine
Spirit, as among the prophets, we have a some-
what similar use of the word, in such expressions
as: “The Spirit of the Lord came .... upon him”
(1 8 10 10).
(1) The spirit as life-principle in man has various
applications: sometimes to denote an apparition
Mt 14 26, AV “saying, It is a spirit”’;
2. Shades Lk 24 37, AV “had seen a spirit’’);
of Meaning sometimes to denote angels, both fallen
and unfallen (He 1 14, “ministering
spirits’; Mt 101, “unclean spirits’; cf also 12
43; Mk 1 23.26.27; and in Rev 1 4, “the seven
Spirits .... before his throne’). (2) The spirit is
thus in man the principle of life—but of man as
distinguished from the brute—so that in death this
spirit is yielded to the Lord (Lk 23 46; Acts 7 59;
1 Cor 6 5, “that the spirit may be saved”). Hence
God is called the “Father of spirits’? (He 12 9).


Spirit
Spiritual Gifts THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2842


(3) Thus generally for all the manifestations of the
spiritual part in man, as that which thinks, feels,
wills; and also to denote certain qualities which
characterize the man, e.g. “‘poor in spinit’”’ (Mt 5 3);
“spirit of gentleness’ (Gal 6 1); “of bondage”
(Rom 8 15); “of jealousy” (Nu & 14); ‘‘of fear’
(2 Tim 1 7 AV); “of slumber’ (Rom 11 8 AY).
Hence we are called upon to ‘rule over our own
spirit” (Prov 16 32; 25 28), and are warned against
being overmastered by a wrong spirit (Lk 9 55 AV,
“Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of’’).
So man may submit to the “spirit of error,” and
turn away from the “spirit of truth” (1 Jn 4 6).
Thus we read of the “spirit of counsel’ (Isa 11 2);
“of wisdom” (Eph 1 17).
(1) We go astep higher when we find the human
spirit brought into relationship with the Divine
Spirit. For man is but a creature to
3. Human whom life has been imparted by God’s
and Divine spirit—life bemg but a resultant of
Spirit God’s breath. Thus life and death
are realistically described as an impart-
ing or a withdrawing of God’s breath, as in Job 27
3; 33 4; 34 14, “spirit and breath” going together.
The spirit may thus be ‘“tevived’? (Gen 45 27),
or “overwhelmed” (Ps 148 4), or “broken” (Prov
15 13). And where sin has been keenly felt, it is
“a, broken spirit”? which is “a sacrifice to God”
(Ps 61 17); and when man submits to the power
of sin, a new direction is given to his mind: he
comes under a “spirit of whoredom”’ (Hos 4 12);
he becomes “proud in spirit’? (Eccl 7 8), instead
of being “patient in spirit’; he is a fool because
he is ‘“‘hasty in spirit”? and gives way to “‘anger’’
(Eccl 7 9). The “faithful in spirit’ are the men
who resist talebearmg and backbiting in the world
(Prov 11 13). Insuch instances as these the differ-
ence between “soul” and “‘spirit’’ appears. Sce
Sout; PsycHoLocy.


18.20; 1 Thess 1 5.6); the “Spirit of God’’ (1 Cor 2
10 ff; 3.16; Rom 8 9.11; h 3 16, etc); the ‘' Spirit
of Christ’’ (Rom 8 9; 1 Cor 317; Gal 4 6); or


simply of ‘' Spirit,'' with distinct reference to God (1 Cor
210; Rom 8 16.23, etc). God Himself is Spirit (Jn
4 24). Hence God's power is manifested in human life
and character (Lk 4 14; Rom 1 1; 1 Cor 2 4; esp.
Lk 24 49). The Book of Acts may be termed th
Book of the Holy Spirit, working with power in man.
This Spirit is placed on a level with Father and Son in
the Apostolic Benediction (2 Cor 13 14) and in the
arting message of the Saviour to His disciples (Mt 28
73). As the agent in redemption and sanctification
His work is glorified by lives ‘‘renewed” in the very
“spirit of the mind’'—a collocation of terms which has
puzzled many interpreters (Eph 4 23. 24), where pnetima
and notis appear together, to indicate a renewal which is
all-embracing, ‘renewed in the spirit of your mind, so
that the new man is put on, created in righteousness and
true holiness’ (see also Jn 14 17.26; 15 26; 16 13;
1 Cor 12 11, ete).
In the OT this spirit of God appears in varied functions,
as brooding over chaos (Gen 1 2; Job 26 13); as
descending upon men, on_ heroes like
4, OT Othniel, Gideon, etc (Jgs 3 10; 6 34),
pote on prophets (Bzk $7 1), on “cunning
Applications workmen,” like Bezalel and Aholiab (Ex
31 2.3.4, ‘filled with the Spirlt of God"),
and specially in such passages as Ps 51 11, where the
very presence of God is indicated by an ahiding influence
of the Holy Spirit: ‘The Spirit of Jeh is Jeh himself.”
May we not reach a still higher stage? Wendt in his
interesting monograph (Die Begriffe Fleisch und Geist),
of which extracts are given in Dickson's
5. Various ‘St., Paul's Use of the Terms Flesh and
Int t Spirit, draws attention to the transcendental
nterpreta- influence of the Divine rich in the OT as
tions expressed in such phrases as ‘to put on’
(Jes 6 34), ‘to fall upon’ (14 6.19), ‘to
settle’ (Nu 11 25f). May we not then rightly assume
that more is meant than a mere influence emanating
from a personal God? Are we not right in maintain-
ing with Davidson that “ there are indeed a considerable
numbcr of passages in the OT which might very well
express the idea that the Spirit is a distinct hypostasis
or person’? (seeSussTance). Rejecting the well-known


passage in Gen: '‘ Let us make man after our own image,”
which some have interpreted _in a trinitarian sense, we
oint to such texts as Zec 4 6, “by my _ Spirit’’;


may I :
Isa 63 10.11, ‘‘They rebelled, and grieved his holy
Spirit’; ‘Where is he that put his holy Spirit in the


midst of them?’ This is borne out hy the N'T, with its
warnings against ‘grieving the Holy Spirit, ing
against the Holy Spirit,’’ and kindred expressions (Eph
30; Acts § 3). Itis this Se which “ beareth witness
with our spirit, that we are children of God”’ (Rom 8 16)
—the spirit which, as Auberlen has put_it (PRE, art.
"Geist des Menschen"’), ‘‘appears in a double relation-
ship to us, as the principle of natural life, which is ours
by birth, and that of spiritual life, which_we receive
through the new birth (Wiedergeburt).”” _Hence Paul
speaks of God whom he serves ‘' with his spirit’’ (Rom 1
9); and in 2 Tim 1 3 he speaks of serving God ‘‘in a
ure conscience.’’ See Conscience; Fuirsu; Horry
PIriT; PsycHoLocy; Sout.


SPIRIT, EVIL. See Saran;
MONIAC.


SPIRIT, FAMILIAR. See FamruisaR SPIRIT;
Divination; PrtHon.


SPIRIT, HOLY. See Hoty Spirit.
SPIRIT OF DIVINATION. See DivinaTIon.


SPIRIT, UNCLEAN (OR EVIL).
DeEmonlac.


SPIRITS, DISCERNINGS OF.
INGS oF Spirits; SpirirvuaL GIFTs.


J. I. Marais
Demon, Der-


See Demon,


See Discern-


SPIRITS IN PRISON. See Prison, SpPrrits IN.


SPIRITUAL, spir’it-t-al (aveuparixés, pneuma-
tikés, “spiritual,” from mvetpa, pnetima, “spirit’’):
Endowed with the attributes of spirit. Any being
made in the image of God who is a Spirit (Jn 4 24),
and thus having the nature of spirit, is a spiritual
being.

(1) Spiritual hosts of wickedness (Eph 6 12), in
distinction from beings clothed in ‘‘flesh and blood”’
—the devil and his angels. This use of the word
has reference to nature, essence, and not to character
or moral quality. God, angels, man, devil, demons
are in essence spiritual. The groundwork and
faculties of their rational and moral being are the
same. This limited use of the word in the NT has
its advb. equivalent in Rev 11 8, ‘“‘which [the great
and wicked city] spiritually is called Sodom.”
As the comprehensive term moral includes immoral,
so spiritual includes unspiritual and all that per-
tains to spirit.

(2) With the above exception, “spiritual” in the
NT signifies moral, not physical antithesis: an es-
sence springing from the Spirit of God and imparted
to the spirit of man. Hence spiritual in this sense
always presupposes the infusion of the Holy Spirit
to quicken, andinform. Itisopposed (a) to capxtxés
sarkikés, “fleshly” (1 Cor 3 1), men of the flesh an
not of the spirit; (b) to puxids, psuchikés, ‘natu-
ral,” man in whom the pnetima, “spirit,” is over-
ridden, because of the Fall, by psuché, the principle
of the animal life, “‘soul’’; hence the unrenewed
man, unspiritual, alienated from the life of God
(1 Cor 2.14; 2 Pet 212; Jude ver 10). See
Man, NaTuRAL; (c) to natural, meaning physical,

- ++. 80wn a natural body; »...Taised a

spiritual body” (1 Cor 15 44).
_ (3) In the NT and general use “spiritual” thus
indicates man regenerated, indwelt, enlightened,
endued, empowered, guided by the Hely Spirit;
conformed to the will of God, having the mind of
Christ, living in and led by the Spirit. The spiritual
man is a new creation born from above (Rom 8
6; 1 Cor 2 15; 3 1; 14 37; Col 1 9; 1 Pet 2 5).

(4) Ecclesiastically used of things sacred or


2843


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Spirit
Spiritual Gifts


religious, as spiritual authority, spiritual assembly,
spiritual office. See Srrarr. Dwicut M. Prarr


SPIRITUAL BLESSING (etdAoyla avevparixh,
eulogia pneumatiké): Any blessing administered in
the realm of the spiritual life; specifically the
blessing of the Spirit in introducing the believer into
“the heavenly places in Christ”? (Eph 1 3); a term
expressing the fulness of blessing in God’s gift of
eternal life in Jesus Christ.


SPIRITUAL BODY (capa wvevparixdy, sdéma
pneumatikén, “hody spiritual’): The resurrection-
body, a body fitted to the capacities and wants of the
spirit in the celestial world; an organism conformed
to the spiritual life at the resurrection (see 1 Cor
15 44). See Bony, Sprairvat.


SPIRITUAL DRINK (avevparixdv mépa, preu-
matikén péma): Having a spiritnal significance,
as referring to the water that flowed miraculously
from the smitten rock (1 Cor 10 4; Nu 20 11).
Symbolic also of nourishment for the thirsty soul in
the sacramental cup and the outpoured blood (lite)
of Christ. See Rocx, 2, (1); Sprriruay Rock.


SPIRITUAL GIFTS (xaplcpara, charismata):


1. Gifts Connected with the Ministry of the Word
3} Apostleship
3) Discernings of S
iscernings of Spirits
i Teaching
5) The Word of Knowledge
‘83 The Word of Wisdom
(7) Kinds of Tongues
8) Interpretation of Tongues
2. Gifts Connected with the Minlstry of Practical


Service

(1) Workings of Miracles

{23 Gifts of Healings

3) Ruling, Governments

(4) Helps
LITERATURE

The word chdrisma, with a single exception (1 Pet
4 10), occurs in the NT only in the Pauline Epp.,
and in the pl. form is employed in a technical sense
to denote extraordinary gifts of the Spirit bestowed
upon Christians to equip them for the service of the
church. Various lists of the charismata are given
(Rom 12 6-8; 1 Cor 12 4-11.28-30; ef Eph 4
7-12), none of which, it is evident, are exhaustive.
Some of the gifts enumerated cannot be said to
belong in any peculiar sense to the distinctive cate-
gory. “Faith” (1 Cor 12 9), for example, is the
essential condition of all Christian life; though
there were, no doubt, those who were endowed with
faith beyond their fellows. ‘Giving’ and “mercy”
(Rom 12 8) are among the ordinary graces of the
Christian character; though some would possess
them more than others. “Ministry” (Rom 12 7),
again, i.e. service, was the function to which every
Christian was called and the purpose to which every
one of thespecial gifts was to be devoted (Eph 4 12).
The term is applied to any spiritual benefit, as the
confirmation of Christians in the faith by Paul (Rom
111). And as the general function of ministry
appears from the first in two great forms as a minis-
try of word and deed (Acts 6 1-4; 1 Cor 1 17),
so the peculiar charismatic gifts which Paul men-
tions fall into two great classes—those which
qualify their possessors for a ministry of the word,
and those which prepare them to render services
of a practical nature.

(1) Apostleship (1 Cor 12 28 f; ef Eph 4 11).—
The name “‘apostle” is used in the NT in a narrower
and a wider sense. It was the peculiar title and
privilege of the Twelve (Mt 10 2; Lk 6 13; Acts
125f), but was claimed by Paul on special
grounds (Rom 1 1; 1 Cor 9 1, ete); it was prob-
ably conceded to James the Lord’s brother (1 Cor


15 7; Gal 1 19), and in a freer use of the term
is applied to Barnabas (Acts 14 4.14; ef 1 Cor

9 5.6), Andronicus and Junias (Rom
1. Gifts 16 7). From the Didache (xi.4 ff)
Connected we learn that the ministry of apostles
with Minis- was continued in the church into the
try of the sub-apostolic age (see LITERATURE
Word Sus-apostoiic). The special gift and

: function of apostleship, taken in the
widest sense, was to proclaim the word of the
gospel (Acts 6 2; 1 Cor 1 17, ete), and in par-
ticular to proclaim it to the world outside of the
church, whether Jewish or gentile (Gal 2 7.8). See
APOSTLE.

(2) Prophecy (Rom 12 6; 1 Cor 12 10.28.29),
under which may be included exhortation (Rom
12 8; cf 1 Cor 14 8). The gift of prophecy was
bestowed at Pentecost upon the church as a whole
(Acts 2 16 ff), bunt in particular measure upon cer-
tain individuals who were distinctively known as
prophets. Only a few of the Christian prophets are
directly referred to—Judas and Silas (Acts 15 32),
the prophets at Antioch (18 1), Agabus and the
prophets from Jerus (11 27 f), the four daughters of
Philip the evangelist (ver 9). But 1 Cor shows
that there were several of them in the Corinthian
church; and probably they were to be found in
every Christian community. Some of them moved
about from church to church (Acts 11 27 f; 21 10);
and in the Didache we find that even at the celebra-
tion of the Eucharist the itinerant prophet. still
takes precedence of the local ministry of bishops
and deacons (Did., x.7).

It is evident that the functions of the prophet
must sometimes have crossed those of the apostle,
and so we find Paul himself described as a prophet
long after he had been called to the apostleship (Acts
13 1). And yet there was a fundamental distinc-
tion. While the apostle, as we have seen, was one
“sent forth’ to the unbelieving world, the prophet
was a minister to the believing church (1 Cor 14
4.22). Ordinarily his message was one of “edifica-
tion, and exhortation, and consolation” (1 Cor
14 3). Occasionally he was empowered to make
an authoritative announcement of the Divine will in
a particular case (Acts 13 1 ff). In rare instances
we find him uttering a prediction of a future event
(Acts 11 28; 21 106).

(8) With prophecy must be associated the dis-
cernings of spirits (1 Cor 12 10; 14 29; 1 Thess
5 20 f; cf 1 Jn 4 1). The one was a gift for the
speaker, the other for those who listened to his
words. The prophet claimed to be the medium of
Divine revelations (1 Cor 14 30); and by the
spiritual discernment of his hearers the truth of his
claim was to be judged (ver 29). There were false
prophets as well as genuine prophets, spirits of error
as well as spirits of truth (1 Jn 4 1-6; ef 2 Thess
2 2; Did., xi). And while prophesyings were never
to be despised, the utterances of the prophets were
to be “proved” (1 Thess 6 20f), and that in them
which came from the Spirit of God spiritually
judged (1 Cor 2 14), and so discriminated from
anything that might be inspired by evilspirits. See
DiscERNINGS OF SPIRITS.

(4) Teaching (Rom 12 7; 1 Cor 12 28 f).—As
distinguished from the prophet, who had the gift of
uttering fresh truths that came to him by way of
vision and revelation, the teacher was one who
explained and applied established Christian doc-
trine—the rudiments and first principles of the
oracles of God (He 5 12). Possibly (5) the word
of knowledge (gndsis) and (6) the word of wis-
dom (sophia) (1 Cor 12 8) are to be distinguished,
the’ first as the utterance of a prophetic and
ecstatic intuition, the second as the product of
study and reflective thought; and so are to be


Spiritual Gifts
Spiritually


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2844


related respectively to the functions of the prophet
and the teacher. See TEACHER, TEACHING.

(7) Kinds of tongues (1 Cor 12 10.28.80).—
What Paul means by this he explains fully in ch 14.
The gift was not a faculty of speaking in unknown
foreign languages, for the tongues (gléssai) are
differentiated from the ‘voices’ or languages
(phonat) by which men of one nation are dis-
tinguished from those of another (vs 10.11). And
when the apostle says that the speaker in an
unknown tongue addressed himself to God and not
to men (vs 2.14) and was not understood by those
who heard him (ver 2), that he edified himself
(ver 4) and yet lost the power of conscious thought
while praying with the spirit (vs 14f), it would
appear that the “tongues” must have been of the
nature of devout ejaculations and broken and dis-
joited words, uttered almost unconsciously under
the stress of high ecstatic feeling.

(8) Parallel to this gift was that of the interpre-
tation of tongues (1 Cor 12 10.30). If the gift
of tongues had been a power of speaking unknown
foreign languages, the interpretation of tongues
would necessarily have meant the faculty of inter-
preting a language unknown to the interpreter; for
tr from a familiar language could hardly be described
asacharisma. But the principle of economy makes
it improbable that the edification of the church was
accomplished in this round-about way by means of a
double miracle—a miracle of foreign speech fol-
lowed by a miracle of interpretation. If, on the
other hand, the gift of tongues was such as has been
described, the gift of interpretation would consist
in turning what seemed a meaningless utterance
into words easy to be understood (ver 9). The
interpretation might be given by the speaker in
tongues himself (vs 5.13) after his mood of ecstasy
was over, as he tr¢ his exalted experiences_and
broken cries into plain intelligible language. Or, if
he lacked the power of self-interpretation, the task
might be undertaken by another possessed of this
special gift (vs 27.28). The ability of a critic
gifted with sympathy and insight to interpret the
meaning of a picture or a piece of music, as the
genius who produced it might be quite unable to
do (e.g. Ruskin and Turner), will help us to under-
stand how the ecstatic half-conscious utterances
of one who had the gift of tongues might be put
into clear and edifying form by another who had the
gift of interpretation. See Tonauss, Girt or.

(1) Workings of miracles (1 Cor 12 10.28.29). —
The word used for miracles in this chapter (dund-

meis, lit. ‘“‘powers”) is employed in
2. Gifts Acts (8 7.13; 19 11.12) so as to cover
Connected those cases of exorcism and the cure
with Prac- of disease which in Paul’s list are placed
tical Service under the separate category of “gifts

of healing.”’ As distinguished from the
ordinary healing gift, which might be possessed by
persons not otherwise remarkable, the ‘‘powers”
point to a higher faculty more properly to be
described as miraculous, and bestowed only upon
certain leading men in the church. In 2 Cor 12
12 Paul speaks of the ‘‘powers’’ he wrought in
Corinth as among “‘the signs of an apostle.” In
He 2 4 the writer mentions the ‘‘manifold powers”
of the apostolic circle as part of the Divine con-
firmation of theirtestimony. In Rom 16 18 ff Paul
refers to his miraculous gifts as an instrument
which Christ used for the furtherance of the gospel
and the bringing of the Gentiles to obedience. The
working of “powers,”’ accordingly, was a gift which
linked itself to the ministry of the word in respect
of its bearing upon the truth of the gospel and the
mission of the apostle to declare it. And yet, [ike
the wider and lower gift of healing, it must be
regarded primarily as a gift of practical beneficence,


and only secondarily as a means of confirming the
truth and authenticating its messenger by way of a
sign. The Book of Acts gives several examples of
“powers” that are different from ordinary healings.
The raising of Dorcas (9 36 ff) and of Eutychus
(20 9 ff) clearly belong to this higher class, and also,
perhaps, such remarkable cures as those of the life-
long cripple at the Temple gate (3 1 ff) and Aeneas
of Lydda (9 32 ff).

(2) Gifts of healings (1 Cor 12 9.28.30).—See
HEauinG, GIFTS OF.

(3) Ruling (Rom 12 8), governments (1 Cor 12
28).—These were gifts of wise counsel and direction
in the practical affairs of the church, such as by and
by came to be formally intrusted to presbyters or
bishops. When Paul wroteto the Corinthians, the
ministry of office had not yet supplanted the minis-
try of inspiration, and Christian communities were
guided and governed by those of their members
whose wisdom in counsel proved that God through
His Spirit had bestowed upon them the gift of
ruling.

(4) Helps (1 Cor 12 28).—This has sometimes
been understood to denote the lowlest Christian
function of all in Paul’s list, the function of those
who have no pronounced gifts of their own and can
only employ themselves in services of a subordinate
kind. But the usage of the Gr word (antilémpsis)
in the papyri as well as the LXX points to succor
rendered to the weak by the strong; and this is
confirmed for the NT when the same Gr word in its
verbal form (antilambdéno) is used in Acts 20 35,
when Paul exhorts the elders of the Ephesian church
to follow his example in helping the weak. Thus,
as the gift of government foreshadowed the official
powers of the presbyter or bishop, the gift of helps
appears to furnish the germ of the'gracious office of
the deacon—the ‘minister’ par excellence, as the
name didkonos denotes—which we find in existence
at a later date in Philippi and Ephesus (Phil 1 1;
1 Tim 3 1-13), and which was probably created, on
the analogy of the diakonia of the Seven in Jerus
(Acts 6 1 ff), as a ministry, in the first place, to
the poor. See, further, Heures.

Litzraturs.—Hort, Christian Ecclesia, Lect X;
Neander, Hist of the Planting of the Christian Church, I,
131 ff; Weizsicker, Apostolic Age, II, 255-75; Lindsay,
Church and Ministry, passim; EB, IV, art. ‘Spiritual
Gifts”; HRE, III, art. ‘‘Charismata”; PRE, VI, art.
“ Geistesgaben.”’

J. C. Lampert

SPIRITUAL HOUSE (ofkos mvevparikés, ofkos
pneumatikés, “house spiritual’): A body of Chris-
tians (a church), as pervaded by the Spirit and power
of God (1 Pet 2 5}; a term applicable to God’s
house: “‘house of prayer,” the temple (Mt 21 13);
to heaven: “my Father’s house’? (Jn 14 2); to
the tabernacle: “Moses ... . faithful in all his
house” (He 3 2); to saints: as “the household of
God” (Eph 2 19), and “the temple of the Holy
Spirit” (1 Cor 6 19); hence any “habitation of
God in the spirit” (Eph 2 22) in which His glory
dwells and His power and grace are manifest.


SPIRITUAL MAN (6 mvevpatixés, ho pneumati-
kés): In distinction from the natural, the unre-
newed man (1 Cor 2 15); man in whom the Holy
Spirit dwells and rules. This Divine indwelling in-
sures mental illumination: ‘He that is spiritual dis-
cerneth [AVm] [or interpreteth] all things’: moral
renewal: “a new creature’ (2 Cor 5 17); “a new
man” (Eph 4 24); spiritual enduement: “Ye shall
receive power’’ (Acts 18). See Sprriruat, 2 ‘
Sririrvauity; Man, New.


SPIRITUAL MEAT (Bpdpa arvevpariksy, broma
pneumatikén, “food spiritual’): Nourishment for
the soul, referring specifically (1 Cor 10 3) to the


2845


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Spiritual Gifts
Spiritually


manna by which the children of Israel were miracu-
lously fed and which was made by Paul prophetically
equivalent to the broken bread of the Christian
sacrament symbolizing the body of Christ. Hence
(1) Christ Himself as the food of the soul: “I am
the bread of life’ (Jn 6 48-58); (2) anything that
nourishes the spiritual life: (@) obedience to the
will of God: “My meat is to do the will of him that
sent me’’ (Jn 4 32-34); (b) the truths of God in the
Scriptures: ‘Word of righteousness” = “strong
meat”? (He 6 12-14); “word of God” (Mt 4 4);
(c) the things of the Spirit (1 Cor 3 1-2; cf ch 2).
Dwicur M. Pratt

SPIRITUAL ROCK (avevpatixhy wérpa, pneu-
matiké pétra): Having a spiritual significance:
supernatural, manifesting the power of the Divine
Spirit; allegorically applied to Christ as fulfilling
the type in the smitten rock in the desert, from
which water miraculously burst forth to nourish
the Israelites. A tradition current among the Jews
affirms that this rock followed the people in their
journeyings and gave forth a living stream for their
SUPPLY: Paul made this ever-flowing rock a beauti-
ful and accurate symbol of Christ: “The rock was
Christ” (1 Cor 10 4).

Without the characterizing word “spiritual,” this
figurative term, with the same significance, is common
to the Scriptures; applied (1) to Jeh, God: ‘Rock of
his salvation,” ‘‘their rock is not as our Rock” (Dt 32
eee “‘Jeh is my rock’’ (Ps 18 2; cf Isa 26 4; 82 2;
18 22; 2S 22 2); (2) to the foundation-stone of
Christian confession and testimony (Mt 16 18; cf
Hep 220; 1 Cor $11; 1 Pet 2 6-8), and thus to
Christ Himself; (3) in Christian nyu ology. to Jesus
crucified and spear-pierced: ‘‘ Rock of ages, cleft for me.”’

Dwicatr M. Pratt

SPIRITUAL SACRIFICE (avevpatixal @vola,
pneumatikat thustai): A figure taken from the victim
slain and offered on the altar, as e.g. the paschal
lamb; thus signifying the complete and acceptable
offering of the self-dedicated spirit. As the temple,
priesthood and God Himself are spiritual, so is the
sacrifice of the consecrated believer (1 Pet 2 5);
cf “living sacrifice’ (Rom 12 1); “sacrifice of
praise’ (He 13 15.16). Any self-dedicating act
of the inner man; the devout, renewed, consecrated
spirit, e.g. Christian benevolence (Phil 4 18); “to
do good and to communicate” (He 13 16); “‘mercy”’
and “knowledge of God,’’ instead of material and
outward sacrifice (Hos 6 6). This is defined and
beautifully illustrated in the classic verse on. this
theme, ‘“The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit,”
etc (Ps 51 17). Dwicur M. Pratr


SPIRITUAL SONGS (¢50l mvevparical, ddai
pneumatikat): 6%, odé, Eng. ‘‘ode,’”’ is the general,
and generic word for ‘song,’ of which “psalms
and hymns” are specific varieties (Eph 5 19; Col
3 16). It includes all lyric poetry, but is limited
by the word “spiritual” to songs inspired by the
Holy Spirit and employed in the joyful and devo-
tional expression of the spiritual life. While songs,
like psalms and hymns, were used in public wor-
ship and praise, they were more intended for, and
suited to, persona] and private and social use; as,
eg. in family worship, at meals, in the agdépai
(“love-feasts’’), in meetings for prayer and religious
intercourse from house to house. The passages
above cited give apostolic authority for the use of
other than the OT pss in public praise, and rebuke
the narrowness and unbelief that would forever
limit. the operations of the Holy Spirit and the
hymnology of the church to the narrow compass
of the Davidic era and the Davidic school of poetry
and song.

The ‘‘new song” of Rev 6 9; 14 3, and “‘the song
of Moses and of the Lamb’ (16 3), indicate that
spiritual songs are to be perpetuated in the eternal
melodies of the redeemed. Dwiacut M. Pratt


SPIRITUAL THINGS (ra rvevparicd, fd pneu-
matikd): Things proceeding from the Holy Spirit
and pertaining to man’s spiritual life, worship,
service. Contrasted in 1 Cor 9 11 and in Rom
16 27 with 74 capxixd, td sarkikd, things fleshly,
physical, which have to do with man’s sensuous,
corporeal nature, such as food, raiment, money.
By “spiritual things’’ Paul signifies the benefits
accompanying salvation, the gifts of the Spirit—
faith, hope, love, justification, sanctification, peace
—all the fruits and blessings and aids of the regener-
ate life.

Ecclesiastically: Things pertaining to spiritual
office, the ministry of the Word, or the service of
the sanctuary. Dwieut M. Prarr


SPIRITUALITY, spir-it-t-al’i-ti: The state of
being spiritual in the higher use of the word. It is
purely a religious term and signifies the state of a
soul vitalized by the Divine Spirit and made alive
unto God. It covers the entire range of man’s
faculties: intellect, feeling, will—all the attributes
of personality.

The intellectual can be divorced from the spiritual,
but the spiritual can never be divorced from the

intellectual. If a man is spiritual,
1. Intellect his intellect is touched with the

Divine life and comes under the power
of the Divine baptism. One word describes this
mental quickening and illumination—‘vision.”
“The pure in heart shall see God.” Paul affirms
(1 Cor 2 12.13) that the Spirit of God operates
directly on the mental faculties, adjusting reason
and intellect to the Divine reason, and enabiing
man to think God’s thoughts and discern His
purposes, nature and will. The common use of
the word “spirituality” limits it mistakenly to
religious experience, narrowly interpreted, but as
spirituality brings the intellect into harmony with
the Divine reason in every realm of mental action,
it may be as manifest in science, art, philosophy,
commerce and law as in religion.

The feelings and emotions are fertile soil for the
spiritual life. Love is the beginning and end of


true religion. Spirituality in the realm
2. Affec- of the affections is that state of soul
tions in which the heart with its holiest
love is centered on God as revealed
in Christ. The specific and supreme work of the


Holy Spirit is to shed abroad God’s love in the
heart (Rom 5 5). Spirituality sets the affections
on things above and brings the entire emotional
nature under the regulating and redeeming sway of
the Holy Spirit.
A spiritually-minded man is-one whose will is
set on God as well as his intellect and affections.
In every fiber of his moral being, and
3. Will in all the activities of his soul, he is
under the guidance and dominion of
the Holy Spirit. The affections present motives,
the intellect. estimates their worthiness, the will
decides upon the course of action. When this
trinity of mental operation—necessary to normal
manhood—is under the sway of the Divine Spirit,
man possesses spirituality, a state in which all the
faculties of the soul are voluntarily and joyfully
under the dominion and guidance of Christ’s in-
dwelling Spirit. When intellect, heart and will focus
their encrgies reverently and affectionately upon
Him, love—a passionate, ever-present, everdom-
inant love—is the result. This is the triune sphere
of the Holy Spirit’s indwelling and activity, and the
character of such a God-centered and Spirit-filled
life is described by the exalted word “‘spirituality.”
Dwicsr M. Pratr
SPIRITUALLY, spir’it-t-al-i (rvevparinds, pneu-
matikés): As in 1 Cor 2 14, “spiritually judged,”


Spit
Stall


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2846


le. by means of the spirit renewed and enlightened
by the Spirit of God; having the mind of the Spirit
is to be spiritually-minded (cf AV and RV Rom 8


6).

Allegorically used also (Rev 11 8) to characterize,
in a bad sense, the qualities of the spiritual (i.e. the
spirit’s) life: ‘which spiritually is called Sodom.”
See SprriTvAL.


SPIT, spit, SPITTLE, spit] (p7>, yarak, Po,
rok; [&p]ario, [em]ptid): Spitting in a person’s
face indieated gross contempt (Nu 12 14; Dt 25
9; Job 30 10; Isa 50 6; Mt 26 67; 27 30, etc);
when performed by an unelean person it produced
defilement (Lev 16 8) which necessitated washing
the elothes and a bath. When David allowed
his spittle (7, rzr) to run down over his beard,
it was his purpose to behave like a lunatie (1 S 21
13). ‘Till I swallow down my spittle’ (Job 7 19)
has the same import as the Eng. ‘in the twinkling
of an eye’ (1 Cor 15 52). Spittle was used by
Our Lord in restoring sight and speech (Mk 7 33;
Jn 9 6) as signifying His will to eure. It was a
widespread belief that spittle, accompanied with
magical formulae, possessed medicinal qualities.
“Oil” possessed a similar virtue (Mk 6 13; Jas
5 14). T. Lewis

SPOIL, spoil. See Booty; War, 8.

SPOILER, spoil’ér (TWO, ha-shddhédh, “the
spoiler’): A favorite expression of the prophet
Jeremiah by which he describes generally the
enemies that invade and devastate a country—
with special reference to enemies that invade Judah
(Jer 12 12; 15 8); to enemies who devastate
Moab (48 8.18); to enemies from the N. who are
to assail Babylon (51 48), and in one case (6 26)
to Nebuchadrezzar making an irresistible advance
upon Jerus. ARV uniformly renders ‘‘destroyer.”


SPOKE, spok (1 K 7 33). See Sma, MoLtTen.


SPONGE, spunj (oméyyos, spdggos): The word
“sponge,” AV “spunge,” occurs only in the accounts
of Our Lord’s erucifixion in Mt 27 48; Mk 15 36;
Jn 19 29. Sponges have been known from the
earliest. periods. They are mentioned by Homer,
Aeschylus, Aristophanes and other ancient writers.
The sponge fisheries of the Eastern Mediterranean
are still among the most important in the world.
Sponges are animals of a very simple organization,
fixed to rocks or other objects in the sea or in fresh
water. The marketable sponge consists of a mass
of soft interlacing fibers which constituted the
skeleton of the living animal. The sponge fishers
of the Levant dive from boats, with or without
diving apparatus, and tear the sponges from the
rocks with their hands. The sponges are allowed
to die and rot in the air and are then thoroughly
washed until nothing but the skeleton remains.
Sponges which have caleareous or silicious skeletons
are unfit for use. ALFRED Ey Day


SPOON, spé6n (2, kaph; LXX Ovtokn, thuiské,
except in Jer 52 18, where it is Kpedypa, kredgra,
lit. “fork’’): A hollow vessel, a censer; a small
vessel in whieh incense was to be burnt, as is seen
from the account given in Nu 7 of the oblations of
the princes of the tribes after the setting-up of the
tabernacle. Beginning with ver 14 of this chapter,
we meet at every succeeding 6th verse the state-
ment, “one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of
incense,” till at ver 86 the summary statement is
made, “the twelve golden spoons, full of incense.”


SPORTS, sports. See GamEs.

SPOT, spot, SPOTTED, spot’ed (D4, mim;
omidos, sptlos): The Heb word is used to denote a
blemish whieh mars the perfection of the face, as
in Cant 4 7; Job 1115. It is tr’ “blemish” in
Lev 24 19f, where it means an injury the result of
violence, and is rendered “blot” in Prov 9 7,
where it signifies “‘shame”’ or “disgrace.” The
“spotted” eattle of Gen 30 32-39 are animals of
variegated color axbp , tala ; cf Ezk 16 16, ‘“‘decked
with divers colors’; Josh 9 5, “‘patched”). For
hdbharburah in Jer 18 23, see Leoparp. Spilos
is used in the figurative sense of astain of sinin2 Pet
3 14, and similarly along with rhutis (‘‘a wrinkle”)
in Eph 5 27. The ‘‘garment spotted [vb. spiléomat]
by the flesh” of Jude ver 23 is, as Calvin has para-
phrased it, anything that in any way savors of sin
or temptation. The “spots” of Jude ver 12 AV are
spilddes, ‘“‘hidden [sunken] roeks”’ which are betrayed
by the surf beating over them (as in Homer Od.
iii.298), and areso rendered in RV. “Spot” in Lev
13 is referred to under FRECKLED Spot; LEPROSY;
TETrTerR.

“Without spot” in Nu 19 2, ete, is dmim, a usual
word for ‘“‘perfect”’ (so RVm); dspilos (the negative
form of spilos) occurs in 1 Tim 6 14; 1 Pet 1 19;
2 Pet 3 14, with Jas 1 27 (“unspotted’”’). For AV
He 9 14 see BLEMISH. ALEX. MACALISTER


SPOUSE, spouz (9122, kallah, “bride,” “daughter-
in-law”): RV gives “‘bride”’ for AV “spouse” in
Cant 4 8ff, and “brides” for “spouses” in Hos
413f (m ‘‘daughters-in-law’’). See Espousau;
Marriace; RELATIONSHIPS, FAMILY.


SPREAD, spred, SPREADING, spred’ing:
Alone, or in phrases like ‘‘spread abroad,”’ ‘‘spread
forth,” ete, “spread’’ represents very many Heb
terms, principally WH, paras; in the NT the act
of spreading is orpdyvuu, strénnumt, where in Mt 21
8) AV has “strawed”’ (q.v.); compound in Lk 19 36.
For “‘spread abroad” in Mk 1 28; 1 Thess 18
(exérchomat), RV has “went out” and “gone forth”;
eonversely, RV has “spread abroad” for AV “‘break
forth” (Isa 54 3) and “‘published’’ (diaphéra, Acts
13 49), and for “commonly reported” (diaphemizé,
Mt 28° 15).


SPRING. See Fountarn; WELL.


SPRINKLE, sprin’k’], SPRINKLING, sprin’kling
(PM, edrak, TT}, nazah; pavritew, rhantizein):
The first word means “to toss” or “seatter abun-
dantly,” e.g. in handfuls, as dust on the head (Job 2
12) or blood from a bowl (Ex 9 8). The other
Heb word is used of sprinkling with the finger (Lev
147; 16 14, ete). In the account of Jezebel’s
death the word is used in its literal meaning of
“spurt’? (2 K 9 33),

Sprinkling (blood, water, oil) formed an impor-
tant—if not the essential—part of the aet. of sacrifice.
A eonsideration of the ehief passages in the OT will
reveal the prominence and the significanee of sprin-
klng as a feature of the saerificial act. The sig-
nificanee of the sprinkling of blood is seen in the
account of the establishment of the eovenant be-
tween Jeh and Israel (Ex 24 6-8). Half the blood
was sprinkled on the altar as representing the Deity,
while the remainder was put into a basin and then
sprinkled on the people. This ceremony is a sur-
vival in a modified form of the communal meal in
which the tribal god and his worshippers sat to-
gether and participated in the same food, and in
this way eame to possess the same life. The two-
fold sprinkling of blood resulted in the establishment


2847


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Spit
Stall


of an inviolable bond (Nu 18 17; 2 K 16 15). In
the account of the consecration of Aaron and his
sons (Ex 29 16.20.21) the blood of the ram of the
burnt offering was sprinkled on the altar, while
the blood of the ram of consecration was put on the
altar and sprinkled on Aaron and his sons and on
their garments. Water of purifying was sprinkled
on the Levites at their ordination (Nu 8 7). Lev
gives detailed information in regard to sacrificial
sprinkling. In the case of burnt offering the blood
was sprinkled round about upon the altar (Lev 1
5.11). The same practice obtained in the case of
peace offerings, whether ox, lamb or goat (Lev 3
2.8.13). When a sin offering for sins inadvertently
committed was made, the priest dipped his fingers
in the blood and sprinkled it seven times before
Jeh, before the veil of the Holy Place (Lev 4 6).
Elsewhere (Lev 16 11.15) we read that Aaron took
the blood of the sin offering and sprinkled it with
his finger upon the mercy-seat, eastward, 7 t (see
also Nu 19 4). Sprinkling constituted part of the
process of purification. But it is obvious that the
sprinkling, even in this case, was a religieus act,
and not part of the actual physical cleaning. A
simple kind of sprinkler was made by fastening a
bunch of hyssop to a cedar rod by a piece of scarlet
thread or wool and then the patient was besprinkled
7 + (Lev 14 7), while oil was sprinkled with the
finger, also 7 t, before Jeh (Lev 14 16; see also Ex
12 22; Nu 19 18; Ps 61 7). The house in which
the leper lived was disinfected in the same thorough
manner (Lev 16 51). j

In the case of persons who had contracted unclean-
ness through contact with a corpse, sprinkling with the
‘“water of separation’’ was part of the process of cleans-
ing. The water of separation consisted of the ashcs of
a red heifer (slain for the purpose) mixed with running
water (Nu 19). A sprinkler was used as in the case of
the leper (19 18). The final sprinkling—on the 7th day
—was followed by @ bath (ver oa The ‘tent’? in


which the corpse lay, together with all the contents, were
thoroughly disinfected (see Hetrer, Rep).


According to Ex (9 8.10) the plague of “boils
and blains” was caused through the sprinkling of
ashes (“soot’”? RVm) in the air toward heaven,
which settled on man and beast and produced the
eruption. The narrative gives no clue in reference
to the connection between the ashes and the erup-
tion, but the religious character of the act is obvious.
By means of it, the assistance of the Deity was
invoked. According to primitive thought, there
was no necessary connection between the religious
act and the consummation devoutly wished for.
The purpose of the religious observance was to
influence, or bring pressure to bear upon, the Deity
so that He might exert Himself on behalf of the
worshipper. It is evident that sprinkling as part
of the act of worship was believed to be religiously
effectual. It was not symbolical nor morally sig-
nificant. It was a religious act. It is not denied
that in some passages sprinkling is symbolical.
According to Ezk (86 25) the restored community
will experience moral and spiritual renewal. There
will be a “new heart” and a “new spirit.’ The
sprinkling with clean water is the outward symbol
of the inward lustration. In Isa 63 3 the sacrifi-
cial allusion is obvious. The conqueror who strides
triumphantly from Bozrah is “besprinkled” with
the life-blood (or juice) of his victims. In Isa 52
15 “sprinkle” is a doubtful rendering. There is no
apparent connection between bodily disfigurement
and national purification. RVm renders “startle”
(lit. “cause to spring’). The exalted dignity of
the ‘martyr’ will excite the wonder of kings and
peoples.

In 1 Pet 1 2, “sprinkling of the blood of Jesus
Christ” is used figuratively of its cleansing efficacy
(cf He 9 13.14; 10 22). T. Lewis


SPURIOUS, spiri-us, ACTS, EPISTLES, GOS-


PELS. Sce ApocrypHaL Acts; APocRYPHAL
Episties; ArocrypHAL GosPELs.

SPY, spi. See Esry.

STACHYS, sta’kis (Zrdxus, Sidchus): The


name of a Rom Christian to whom Paul sent greet-
ings. The name is Gr and uncommon; it has been
found in inscriptions connected with the imperial
household. Pau! designates him “my beloved”
(Rom 16 9).


STACK, stak: Ex 22 6 AV, RV “shocks’’ (of
grain).


STACTE, stak’té (F102, ndl@ph, “drops” [Job
36 27]; oraxrh, siakié, meaning “‘oozing out in
drops’): One of the ingredients of the holy oint-
ment (Ex 30 34; Ecclus 24 15, m “opobalsamum,”
AV “storax”). The marginal reading is a con-
cession to Jewish tradition, but see Spicz, (1).
Dioscorides describes two kinds of stacte, one of
pure myrrh and one of storax and a fat mixed.
See Myrrz. This ndétaph must have been either
myrrh ‘“‘in drops,” as it is collected, or some other
fragrant gum, similarly collected, such, for example,
as gum tragacanth.


STAFF, staf: Many Heb terms are represented
by this word. The “staves” of the ark translate
the word 2, badh, lit. “a part,” hence branch, bar,
ete (Ex 26 13.14.15.27.28, etc). Other words, as
matieh, makkél, shébhet, used of the staff in the
hand, the shepherd’s staff, figuratively, “staff of
bread” (matteh, Ezk 4 16; 5 16; 14 13), as indis-
pensable for support of life, are dealt with under
Rop (q.v.). The NT word is j¢8dos, rhdbdos (Mt
10 10 || Lk 9 8; He 11 21). See also Sceprnz.

STAIR, star. See House.

STAKE, stak: Isa 33 20; 64 2 for I), yathedh,
“tent-pin,” or, perhaps, ‘‘tent-pole’ (Ex 27 19;
Jgs 4 21, etc). AV Sir 43 19, “The hoar frost,
. .. « being congealed, lieth on the top of sharp
stakes,” is of course meaningless, RV “When it is
congealed, it is as points of thorns” renders the Gr
very exactly, but the Heb would indicate for the
original meaning “forms frost-flowers of sapphire.”


STALK, sték: In Gen 41 5.22 is for map ,
kanéh, “cane”; in Josh 2 6 for V2, ‘é, “wood.”
In Hos 8 7, RVm has “stalk” for MOP, kamah,
“that which stands.” RV’s “standing grain” ig
due to this meaning of kémah in Ex 22 6, ete, but
this tr spoils the figure. The meaning is, ‘They
sow the wind, a worthless sowing, for such seed pro-
duces no stalk, it yields no grain.”


STALL, stl ([1] PSS, marbék, lit., “a place
for tying up’ [Am 6 4; Mal 4 2], [2] DAN, ’abhas,
“to give fodder’ [Prov 15 17], [3] NTN, ’urvah, ‘to
pluck and feed” [1 K 4 26; 2 Ch 9 25; 32 28],
{4] MDT, repheth, “a resting place’ [Hab 3 17];
[5] ddrvn, phding, ‘‘a manger” or “crib” [Lk 13 15;
ef O° , ebhiis, tr4 “crib” in Isa 1 3; Prov 14 4]):
During the season when cattle are not being used
they are allowed to roam in the fields. Otherwise
they are tied in rooms in the winter time, or under
shelters made of green boughs in the summer, and
all their food brought to them. Horses and cattle
alike are haltered and the chains fastened through
holes made in stones projecting from the walls. No
stanchions and no separating partitions between


Stammerer
Stars, Falling


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2848


animals are used. The horses are usually hobbled
as well. James A. PatrcH


STAMMERER, stam’érér: Isa 32 4, 359,
“ilégh, “inarticulate speaking.’ In Isa 28 11;
33 19, i‘g (pointing uncertain) is rendered ‘‘strange”
by RV, with “stammering” in AV, RVm. Prob-
ably the word means both, as primitive people
always think that their own language alone is
clearly pronounced. Or the word may mean
“mocking.”


STANDARD-BEARER, stand’ard-bar’ér.
War, 5; Banner.


STANDARDS, stand’ardz.
NER; Astronomy, II, 7.


STANDING, stand’ing. See ArrrrupEs.
STAR, star, STARS, starz.


See


See War, 5; Ban-


See Asrronomy,


STARGAZERS, star’ gaz-érz.


STAR IN THE EAST. See Star or rae Maa;
Maai.


See Asrrotoey, 5.


STAR OF BETHLEHEM. See STAR OF THE
Mac.


STAR OF THE MAGI:
The Magi
Herod’s Enquiry
Two Facts concerning the Star
The Wisdom of the Magi Not Astrologlcal
The Prophecy of Balaam
The Star Not a Conjunction of Planets
The Star Not Nova Cassiopetae ©
The Legend of the Well
Lesson of the Narrative
The birth of Our Lord was announced in a super-
natural manner not only to Jews by the angelic
message to the shepherds, but also to
1. The Gentiles, for “Wise-men from the
Magi east came to Jerusalem, saying, Where
is he that is born King of the Jews?
for we saw his star in the east, and are come to
worship him” (Mt 2 1.2). The word which has
been rendered “‘wise men’? in AV and ERV (ARV
“Wise-men”) is ‘“Magi.’’ These, according to
Herodotus, were originally a tribe of the Medes
(Herodotus i.101) and from their supposed skill
in divination the term was applied to the learned
and priestly caste among the followers of Zoroaster;
they were thus in principle worshippers of one only
God, and rejecters of polytheism and _ idolatry.
The simple creed and high morality, which Zoroas-
trianism in its purest form professed, were well
adapted to prepare its faithful disciples to receive
a further revelation, and we may reasonably believe
that the wise men who had been thus guided to
worship the new-born king of the Jews had been
faithful to the light afforded to them, for “in every
nation he that feareth him [God], and worketh
righteousness, is acceptable to him” (Acts 10 35).
See Maa. : ;
The gospel tells us that the arrival of the Magi at
Jerus threw Herod the king and all the city into
great excitement, and Herod at once
2. Herod’s called a council of all the chief priests
Enquiry and scribes of the people that he might
learn from them where the Messiah
should be born. In reply they quoted to him the
prophecy of Micah which had indicated Bethlehem
as the destined site, ‘Then Herod privily called the
Wise-men, and learned of them exactly what time
the star appeared. And hesent them to Bethlehem,


$0.00 Ge Cues 2 RO


and said, Go and search out exactly concerning the
young child; and when ye have found him, bring me
word, that I also may come and worship him. And
they, having heard the king, went their way; and
lo, the star, which they saw in the east, went before
them, till it came and stood over where the young
child was. And when they saw the star, they
rejoiced with exceeding great joy” (Mt 2 7-10).
So much, and no more, are we told of the star of the
Magi, and the story is as significant im its omissions

as in that which it tells us. ‘
What sort of a star it was that led the wise men;
how they learned from it that the King of the Jews
was born; how it went before them;


3. Two how it stood over where the young
Facts con- Child was, we do not know. We are
cerning the indeed told but two facts concerning
Star it: first, that its appearance in some


way or other did inform the wise men,
not of the birth of @ king of the Jews, but of the
King of the Jews for whose coming, not Israel
only, but more or less consciously the whole civilized
world was waiting; next, that, when they had come
to Judaea in consequence of this information, the
star pointed out to them the actual spot where the
new-born King was to be found. It went before
them till it came and stood over where the young
Child was. It may also be inferred from Mt 2 10
that in some way or other the wise men had for a
time lost sight of the star, so that the two facts
mentioned refer to two separate appearances. The
first. appearance induced the Magi to leave the East,
and set out for Judaea; the second pointed out to
them the place at Bethlehem where the object of
their search was to be found. Nothing is told us
respecting the star except its work as a guide.

There can be no doubt that the Magi took their
journey in obedience to direct revelation from God,
and since we are told that God warned them in a
dream not to return to Herod, so that they departed
to their own country another way, it is but reason-
able to suppose that their outward journey had been
directed in a similar manner.

It has been conjectured that as the Magians were


credited with a great skill in astrology they may have
been able to forecast the birth of Our Lord


4. The hy the rules of their art. But this con-
Wisd f jecture must be peremptorily rejected. It

isdom Of ascribes to the pseudo-science of astrology
the Magi =a reality to which it has no claim, for it is
Not Astro- inconceivable that the planetary configura-
logical tions can really foretell the birth of princes.
ogica. Even if it were admitted that such could


as... , be the case, no such event could be taken
as indicating the One Birth for which the world was
waiting, unless some direct and explicit revelation from
God had been received to that effect. For that Birth
was necessarily unique, and science can deal only with
repeated events. No astronomical research is now,
or was at any time, competent in itself to supply the
indication needed; it was not in virtue of any natural
learning that the wise men understood the meaning of the
star. And if a mere astronomical research was helpless
to supply any such power of prediction, still more
emphatically must the claim of ‘occult knowledge” be
disallowed. So far as occult Imowledge has had any
basis in fact at all, it has been simply a euphemistic
way of describing tie frauds, impostures and crimes by
which debased heathen priesthoods and ‘medicine
men’’ have imposed upon the gross superstition of their
followers. , The very suggestion that, by means lke
these, God’s purpose would be made known shows that
those who suggest it have not entirely shaken off the
influence of heathenism.


The suggestion has often been made that the
prophecy of Balaam, ‘There shall come forth a
star out of Jacob, and a sceptre shall


5. The rise out of Israel’? (Nu 24 17), may
Prophecy have been preserved in the East
of Balaam and have furnished the clue upon


which the Magi acted. It is a pleasing
thought that these devout Gentiles had thus pre-
served and meditated upon the prophecy given
through one who may well have been of an allied


2849


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Stammerer
Stars, Falling


order to themselves; but that prophecy can surely
not have been sufficient in itself, and some much
more direct intimation must have been vouch-
safed to them; though the prophecy may have
aided their faith and have dictated the form in
which they announced their mission to King Herod
and the Jews.


We are not told how the Magl learned the meaning
of the star, neither are we told what kind of a star it was.
some bhree g CeauU les Hep the ioe eus

and devou epler supposed that he could

6. The Star identify the star arith s coniuncdon of the


Not a Con- planets Jupiter and Saturn in the constella-
junction of tion Pisces, the two planets being so close
Planets as to seem a single star. This conjunc-


tion took place in the month of May,
__7 BC, not very long before the birth of
Our Lord is supposed to have taken place. But the late
Professor Pritchard has shown (Nature and Revelation,
243-55), first, that a similar and closer conjunction
occurred 59 years earlier, and should therefore have
brought a Magian deputation to Judaea then. Next,
that the two planets never approached each other
nearer than twice the diameter of the moon, so that they
would have appeared, not as one star, but as two, and
thirdly, if the planets had seemed to stand over Bethie-
hem _as the wise men left Jerus, they would assuredly
not have appeared to do so when they arrived at the
little city. Ingenious as the suggestion was, it may be
sed as unworthy of serious consideration.
i Another suggestion has received at times a very wide
popularity. In the year 1572 a wonderful new star
appeared in the constellation Cassiopeia.
7, Not Nova At its brightest it outshone Venus and
Cassi - . was visible in the daylight, and though
asstopeiae it, gradually declined in splendor it was
not lost to sight until after 16 months.
There have been other instances of outbursts of short-
lived bright stars, and in the annals of the years 1265 and
952 some brief notices have been found which may
have referred to objects of this class, but more probably
described comets. The guess was then hazarded that
these three events might all refer to the same object;
that the star in Cassiopeia might be a ‘‘variable”’ star,
bursting into_brilliancy about every 350 years or s0;
that it was the star that announced the birth of Our
Lord, and that it would reappear about the end of the
19th cent. to announce His second coming. This rumor
was widely spread, and from time to time ignorant people
have noticed the planet Venus which shines with extraor-
dinary brilliancy when in particular parts of her orbit,
and have imagined, esp. when she has been thus seen as
a morning star in the east, that she was none other than
the star of Bethlehem at its predicted return. There is
no reason to suppose that the star of 1572 had ever
appeared before that date or will ever appear again;
butin any case we are perfectly sure that it could not have
been the star of Bethlehem, for Cassiopeia is a northern
constellation, and the wise men in their journey from
Jerus to Bethiehem had Cassiopeia and all her stars
behind their back.


The statement that the star ‘went before’ the
Magi gives the impression that it was some super-
natural light like the shkhinah, “glory,” resting
upon the tabernacle, or the pillar of fire which led the
children of Israel through the wilderness. But this
view raises the questions as to the form in which it
first appeared to the wise men, when they were still
in the East, and how they came to call it a star,
when they must have recognized how un-starlike it
was. On the other hand, if what they saw when
in the East was really a star, it seems most difficult
to understand how it can have appeared to go
before them and to stand over the place where the
young Child lay. ;

Yet there is a legend still current in Pal which
may possibly explain how an actual star may have

fulfilled this part, and there is a well
8. The at Bethlehem that is still shown to
Legend of pilgrims as the means whereby the
the Well wise men “saw the star” the second

time. It is said that when they had
reached Bethlehem, apparently nearly at mid-day,
one of them went to the well of the inn in order to
draw water. Looking down into the well he saw the
star reflected from the surface of the water and
knew that it must be directly overhead. Its re-cb-
servation under such unusual circumstances would
be a sufficient assurance to the Magi that they had


reached the right place, and inquiry in the inn
would soon inform them of the visit of the shep-
herds, and of the angelic message which had told
them where to find the babe ‘born in the city of
David, the Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.’

If we may accept this legend we may take the
star as having been what astronomers know as a
“new” or “temporary” star, like that of 1572.
When the Magi first saw it, and in consequence set
out upon their journey, it may have been an
evening star and thus, being seen only in the west
shortly after sunset, it would appear, evening after
evening, to point them their way to Judaea. As
they journeyed thither it probably faded as tem-
porary stars in general quickly do. At the same
time it would have drawn nearer and nearer to the
sun, until it was lost in its rays by the time they
reached Jerus, when they would seem to have lost
sight of it altogether. Having thus lost it, they
would naturally not expect to see it again until it
had drawn away from the sun on the other side, and
been detected as a morning star in the east be-
fore sunrise; they would not expect to discover it
in the daytime.

In the ordinary way, the planet Venus is, after
the two “great lights,” the brightest object in the
heavens, but temporary stars are on record that
have even exceeded Venus in brightness. The
difficulty of seeing the planet Venus in full sunshine
does not lie in her want of brightness, but in picking
up and holding steadily so minute a point of light
in the broad expanse of the gleaming sky. This
difficulty, which would be even greater in the case
of astar, would be lessened by looking down the well,
as the shaft would narrow the field of view down to
a small area, and would direct the observer’s gaze
straight to the star. There may also have been, at
the very time of observation, a temporary revival
of the brightness of the star as has been recorded
in the case of one or two objects of the same
class. The legend, whether well founded or not,
seems to have some astronomical verisimilitude and
at any rate suggests a mode in which an actual star
could have seemed to stand over the place where
the young Child lay. It would also explain what
seems to have been implied in the narrative, how
it happened that the Magi alone, and not the Jews
in general, perceived the star at its second appear-
ance.

Yet it seems safer to conclude that the narrative
has been purposely left—astronomically—too in-

complete for any astronomical con-
9. Lesson clusion to be drawn from it. One
of the Nar- verse more, and that a short one, could
rative have answered all our inquiries, could
have told us whether the star was a
conjunction of the planets, a comet, or a temporary
star; or whether it was a supernatural light like the
illar of fire in the wilderness. But that verse
as not been given. The score of additional words
which could have cleared up the matter have been
withheld, and there can be no doubt as to the reason.
The star, whatever its physical nature, was of no
importance except as a guide to the birthplace of the
infant Jesus. The reticence of the gospel narra-
tive on all oat except those directly relating
to Our Lord Himself, enforces the truth that the
Scriptures were not written to instruct us in astron-
omy, or in any of the physical sciences, but that we
might have life eternal (Jn 17 3).
E. W. Maunprr
STAR OF WORMWOOD. Sce Wormwoop.


STARS, COURSES OF. See Astronomy, I, 1.


STARS, FALLING; MORNING; WANDER-
ING. See Astronomy, I, 8; I,7; 1,9


Stars, Seven
Stephen


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2850


STARS, SEVEN. See Astronomy.


STATELY, stat/li (WIAD, kebhuddah, “weight,”
“honor,” ‘‘wealth’): ‘And sit upon a stately
[magnificent] bed” (Ezk 23 41).


STATER, sta’tér (crarhp, statér): Used only once,
Mt 17 27, where it is rendered by “piece of money”
in AV and “shekel’’ in RV. It was originally a
standard Gr weight equal to two drachmas, but
later it was used to designate the tetradrachma,
and this is probably the coin referred to in the above
passage. See Mowry.


STATURE, stat/ir (2, madh, MTA, middah,
“measure” [Nu 13 32, ete], W21pP, komah, “‘stand-
ing up” (1 S 16 7, etc]; HAukla, Aélikia, “great-
ness’): This last word means “height of the body,”
“stature,” in Lk 2 52; 19 3; Eph 4 13, but it
can mean “length of life’ equally well and has this
force in Jn 9 21.23; He 11 11. And this mean-
ing, not “‘stature” (asin AV), is fixed for Mt 6 27||
Lk 12 25, for to add some 18 inches (see Cusir)
to one’s ‘‘stature” would be a grotesque feat, while
it is the smallness of the act that is emphasized.
Hence the tr ‘‘able to extend his long path of life by
a single cubit’” (RV “measure of life’). Cf also
“creat of stature,” Bar 3 26 (edpeyeins, eumegéthés).

Burton Scotr Easton

STAVES, stavz (0°12, baddtm): Ten or eleven
Heb words are used in the OT to describe various
staffs, bars, and wooden rods used by the Hebrews
(ef Starr; Rov; Scuprer). One word only is
used to describe the staves or wooden poles used
for carrying the holy furniture of the tabernacle
from placeto place. That word is badh (pl. baddim),
which occurs 28 t in Ex and Nu and 5 tin K and
Ch (cf also Job 17 16; Hos 116). The only pas-
sage in which these staves are mentioned by another
name is 1 Ch 15 15, ewhere the staves used for
carrying the ark from its captivity into Jerus are
called motak. The reason for this probably is that
the original baddim had been lost during the long
absence of the sacred chest from its home in the
tabernacle.

In the wilderness wanderings, arrangements were
made that four items of the holy furniture of the
portable tabernacle should be carried on the
shoulders of Levites, suspended on these staves.
These were the golden altar of incense, the golden
table for shewbread, the brazen altar of sacrifice,
and the ark of the covenant (Ex 35 12-16).

In the case of the large altar of sacrifice, which
was in reality a hollow wooden chest covered with
brass (bronze) plates (see ALTaR), four rings were
attached to the brass grating which rose midway
in the chest, and through these rings the staves
passed. The staves were of acacia wood and were
covered with brass plating. In the case of the
three golden utensils of the sanctuary, the staves
were of acacia wood, covered with gold plates.

The last mention of any of these staves is in 1 K
8 7-9, where it is stated of the ark, in the holy of ho-
lies in Solomon’s Temple, that the ends of its staves
were seen by anyone standing in the adjoining
holy place, before (i.e. east of) the oracle. Priests
only might view them there, the curtain being with-
drawn. The writer of 1 K 8 adds that the staves
were thus visible when he wrote, an iter of evidence
worthy of note as to the date of the document.

W. SHaw Cauprecotr

STAY, sta: Is derived from two distinct forms.
From one derivation it has the meaning ‘‘to stand”
and so “to continue in one place’ (Gen 8 10;
Lev 13 23.28, etc), ‘‘to forbear to act” (Ruth 1 13),
“to rest,” “to be trustful” (AV, ERV Isa 10 20;


see below). Transitively it means “to cause to
stay,” “to hinder” (Dnl 4 35, etc), and ‘“‘stay’’
as a noun means “cessation of progress” (Lev 13
5.37), “sojourn.”” From the second derivation the
vb. means “to support”? (Ex 17 12; 1 K 22 35,
Cant 2 5), while the noun means ‘‘a support”
(1K 1019; Isa 31, etc), ARV has judged
obsolete ‘stay on” in the sense “trust in,”’ and for
“stay” has substituted “lean” in Isa 10 20 and
“rely” in 30 12; 311; 50 10, although “stay
themselves upon” (=“‘support themselves by’’) has
been kept in 48 2. Otherwise RV has made few
alterations. But such as have been made (‘‘tarry
ye” for “stay yourselves” in Isa 29 9 and ARV “‘re-
strain” for “stay” in Job 37 4) could have been
carried farther with advantage.
Burton Scorr Haston

STEAD, sted, STEADS, stedz (00M, tahath,
“same place’; AS stede, “place’’): Occurs only in
1 Ch 6 22, “They dwelt in their stead [place] until
the captivity.”


STEALING,
MENTS.


-STEDFASTNESS, sted’fast-nes: (1) c7repéwua,
steréoma, “‘firmness’’: ‘The stedfastness of your
faith in Christ’? (Col 2 5). Some take this fig-
uratively, in a military sense, of a “solid front” (see
Thayer, Gr-Eng. Lex of NT, s.v.). (2) oreprypés,
sterigmés, “stability” (2 Pet 3 17; cf1 Cor 16 58).


STEEL, stél: RV substitutes “‘brass” for “‘steel’’
in 2 $ 22 35; Job 20 24; Ps 1834; Jer 15 12, and
“steel” for “‘torches” in Nah 2 3. See Brass.


STEPHANAS, stef’a-nas (Ztehavds, Stephands):
The name occurs only in 1 Cor 1 16; 16 15-18.
Stephanas was a Christian of Corinth; his household
is mentioned in 1 Cor 16 15 as the first family
won to Christ in Achaia, and in 1 Cor 1 16 as
among the few personally baptized by Paul at
Corinth. The “house of Stephanas,”’ apparently
of independent means, had ‘‘set themselves to minis-
ter unto the saints’ (1 Cor 16 15), i.e. to do Chris-
tian service. Possibly this service consisted in
putting their house at the disposal of the Christians
at Corinth for worshipping, or in rendering especial
assistance in establishing intercommunication be-
tween the Corinthian church and the apostle, or
the other churches. An instanceof such service was
the commission of 8. at Ephesus referred to in 1 Cor
16 17.18. At the occasion of some disorders in
the Corinthian church 8., with Fortunatus and
Achaicus in the deputation, brought a letter of
the Corinthians to Paul. Our present 1 Cor is
the reply to this letter, and thus, in all probability,
the three men mentioned above were the bearers of
this ep. With fine courtesy Paul expresses his
appreciation for this service in 1 Cor 16 18, refer-
ring to it as a cherished opportunity of fellowship
with his beloved Corinthians through these repre-
sentatives. It is in consideration of such Christian
service that Paul enjoins upon the Corinthians to
show the house of 8. that respect and deference due
to Christian leaders by willingly submitting to their
direction. 8. D. Press


sté’ling. See Crimss; PuNIsH-


STEPHEN, sté’v’n (Zrépavos, Siéphanos, “crown”
[Acts 6 5—8 12)):


1. His Personal Antecedents
. His Character and Activity
. His Teaching
. His Arraignment before the Sanhedrin
. His Defence before the Sanhedrin
Ch Personal Defence
2) Defence of His Teaching
6. Martyrdom of Stephen
LITERATURE


Ob ooh


2851


Known best as the proto-martyr of the Christian
church, introducing the heroic period of persecu-
tions.
apologist for Christianity, since it was this that
brought on his death as a, martyr (c 36 or 37 AD).

As his name and his relations in the church at
Jerus seem to imply (Acts 6 3 ff), he was a Hellen-

ist, i.e. a Greek-speaking Jew. Thushe
1. Personal belonged to that class of Jews usually
Antecedents residing outside of Pal who, though

distinguished from the orthodox Pales-
tinian Jew by a broader outlook on life due to a
more liberal education, were Jews none the less,
the original Jewish element predominating in their
character, and who might be true Israelites indeed,
as Stephen was. Of his conversion to Christianity
we know nothing, though there is a tradition that
he was among the Seventy. As Stephen by his life
and work marks a period of transition in the develop-
ment of the early Christian church, so his name is
connected with an important new departure within
the organization of the church itself, viz. the insti-
tution of the office of the Seven (Acts 6 I ff), who
were intrusted with the administration of the work
of relief in the church at Jerus—the foundation of
the diaconate (Iren., Haer., i.26; Cyprian, Epist.,
iii.3). Of the seven men, all Hellenists, elected to
this office at the occasion of a grievance of the
Hellenistic Christians in the Jerus church against
the Heb Christians, to the effect that in the dis-
tribution of alms their widows were being dis-
criminated against, Stephen, who heads the list,
is by far the most distinguished.

Stephen more than met the requirements of the
office to which he was elected (Acts 6 3); the record

characterizes him as “a man full of


2. Char- faith and of the Holy Spirit” (Acts 6 5),
acterand i.e. of an enthusiastic faith and of a
Activity deep spirituality, and his activity was


not restricted to the functions of his
office; in fact while nothing is said of the manner
in which he fulfilled the duties of his office, though
without doubt he fulfilled them faithfully, the
record makes it very clear that the importance of
Stephen lay in his activity as a preacher, a witness
for Christ; it is this activity which has given him
the place he holds in history (Acts 22 20). In
itself that is not surprising, for in the early Christian
church every Christian was at once a witness for
Christ, and lay-preaching was common. The
Seven from the first were occupied with essentially
spiritual work, as also the later diaconate was en-
gaged in something far different from mere charity
organization. But Stephen was esp. qualified_for
this high work, having been endued by the Holy
Spirit with apostolical gifts, not only that of preach-
ing, but also that of working miracles (Acts 6 8).
In his freer views of Jewish law and customs, due to
his deeper conception and better understanding of
the essence of Christianity, he even excelled the
apostles. A ;
He burst the bonds of Judaism, by which the
other apostles were still bound, by teaching that
the temple and the Law of Moses were
3. Teaching evanescent and that Christianity was
destined to supersede Judaism (Acts
6 14). These freer views of Stephen, though pos-
sibly attributable to his Hellenic culture, were
certainly not of Hellenistic origin, for just their
promulgation is what brought him into controversy
with the Hellenistic synagogues of Jerus. Though
the Hellenist dispensed himself from keeping all
of the Pharisaic additions to the Law, he always
regarded the Law of Moses and the temple at
Jerus as highly as the Palestinian Jew. Even
Philo characterizes the Law of Moses in distinction
from the laws of other nations, as stedfast, immov-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


He deserves as well to be called the first great .


Stars, Seven
Stephen


able and unchangeable, placing it on a level with
the laws of Nature. The true source of Stephen’s
freer views of the Mosaic Law and the temple was
Christ’s own teachings, Stephen showing a wonder-
fully ripened understanding of them, paralleled only
by that of Paul some time later. Christ’s words
regarding the temple (Jn 4 20-24; Mk 13 2) not
only led Stephen to see that the true worship of God
was not confined to the temple, but opened his eyes
as to the purely formal character of this worship in
that day, which, far from being true worship, had
become a mere ceremonialism (Mk 7 6), and in the
words of Christ (Jn 2 19) he saw an intimation of
the new temple which was to take the place of the
old. Thus also his conception of the transitory
nature of the Mosaic Law may be traced to
Christ’s teaching as to the Sabbath, the laws
of purifying, the fulfilment of the Law and Jew-
ish customs of the day (Mt 5 20) and of a better
righteousness than that of the Pharisees and scribes
(Mt 9 16). As Christ had been drawn into con-
troversy with Pharisees and scribes on account
of these freer views, and as His word about the
temple was used to frame the accusation against
Him in His trial, so also in the ease of Stephen.
He did not hesitaté to preach his views, choosing
the Hellenistic synagogues for this purpose, and
soon became engaged in controversies there. But,
as the record says, his opponents “‘were not able to
withstand the wisdom,”’ i.e. better understanding,
convincing knowledge, ‘‘and the Spirit,” ie. the
deep earnestness and spirituality, “by which he
spake” so convincingly (Acts 6 10; Mt 10 19.20).
Seeing themselves beaten, they took recourse to
the ignoble method of declaring him a blasphemer
and a heretic, by using the same foul means that
the enemies of Jesus had resorted to, by suborning
false witnesses to the plot, by stirring up the people
against him, by appealing to their Jewish prejudices
and to the scribes and elders, members of the San-
hedrin, and thus eventually brought about his
arraignment.

The accusation which they brought against him,
through the introduction of false witnesses, included

a twofold charge, one against his
4. Arraign- person, a charge of blasphemous words
ment before against Moses which would make him
the San- also a blasphemer of God, and one
hedrin against his teaching, charging him

with revolutionary and radical state-
ments concerning the temple and the Law (cf Mk
14 58; 13 2; 15 29).

“Customs of Moses’’ (Acts 6 14) were the institn-
tions that distinguished the Jews and that were de-
rived from Moses. By his reference to ‘‘this place’’
and ‘‘these customs’’ Stephen was understood to imply
the destruction, of the temple and the change of the
Law, Christianity thus aiming not only at the over-
throw of the Jews’ religion but the very termination of
their national existence.

The charge against Stephen’s person was a base-
less accusation. There was no blasphemy on the
part of Stephen, save by perversion of his words.
The charge against his teaching was both false and
true. It was false as an implied insinuation that
he impugned the Divine origin and character of the
temple and the Mosaic Law, but it was true as far
as he conceived both to be only of a temporary
nature and serving a merely provisional purpose,
which, as we have seen, constituted the peculiarity
of his teaching. As in the trial of Christ, the judge,
Pontius Pilate, read his true verdict, “I find no
guilt in him,” written on His countenance and whole
bearing, thus here the record tells us that the judges
of Stephen, “All that sat in the council .. . . saw
his face as it had been the face of an angel’ (Acts
6 15; 2 Cor 3 18); as if in refutation of the
charge made against him, Stephen receives the


Stephen
Steward


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2852


same mark of Divine favor which had been granted
to Moses, Itis a significant fact that Stephen was
not arraigned before the Sanhedrin as_ being
a Nazarene, thongh at bottom it was the real
cause of his arraignment. Thus also his defence
before the Sanhedrin, though the name of Jesus was
not mentioned until the very last, was in reality a
grand apology for Christ. ;

While the assembly was overawed by the evi-
dence of singular innocence and holiness written

; upon the countenance of Stephen
5. Defence (Acts 6 15), the question of the high
before the priest “‘Are these things so?”’ broke in
Sanhedrin upon the silence. It drew forth

: from Stephen that masterful pleading
which, so sublime in form and content and bare
of all artificiality, belongs to the highest type
of oratory, characterized by its deep, earnest, and
genuine spirituality, the kind of oratory of which
the great speeches of our own martyred Lincoln
were models. It is not so much _a plea in self-
defence as a grand apology for the cause which
Stephen represents.

Beginning by_mentioning ‘‘the God of glory"’ and
ending with a vision of that glory, itself, the speech is a
wonderful apotheosis of the humble cause of the Nazarene,
the enthusiastic tribute of its first great martyr delivered
in the face of death. The contents of his speech are a
recital of the most marked phases of Jewish history in
the past, but as read from the point of view of its out-
workings in the present—old facts interpreted by a spirit-
filed disciple of Christ. I+ is in reality a philosophy of
Israel’s history and religion, and in so far it was a novum.
Thus the new feature that it furnishes is its philosophy
of this history which might be termed the Christian
Bhilosopes of Jewish history. In appealing to their
reason he calls up picture after picture from Abraham to
Moses; the speech exhibits vividly the continuity and the
progress of the Divine revelation which culminated in
Jesus of Nazareth, thesame thought as that expressed by
Christin Mt 5 17 of the principal agreement between the
OT and the NT revelation.

The emotional appeal lies in the reverential and feeling
manner in which he handles the history sacred to them
all. The strong appeal to the will is made by holding up
the figure of Moses’ type of the Law, in its vital signifi-
cance, in such @ way as passionately to apply it to the
tundamental relation of Divine plan and human conduct.
Thus the aim of Stephen was to peint out to his hearers
the true meaning of Jewish history and Jewish Law
in reference to the present, i.e. in such a way that they
might better understand and judge the present and
adjust their conduct to it accordingly. Their knowledge
of Jewish history and Jewish religion as he would convey
it to them would compel them to clear him of the accusa~
tion against him as blasphemer and false teacher.


In accordance with the accusation against him,
his defence was a twofold one: personal defence
and defence of his teaching.

(1) Personal defence.—The charge of blasphemy
against God and contempt of the Law is implicitly
repudiated by the tenor of the whole speech. The
courteous and at once endearing terms in Stephen’s
address (Acts 7 2) to the council, and the terms
“our fathers” and “our race” in vs 2.19 by which
he closely associates himself with his hearers, his
declaration of the Divine majesty of Jeh with which
the speech opens (ver 2), of the providential leading
of the patriarchs (vs 8.10), his recognition of the
OT institutions as Divinely deceat (ver 8), his
reference to the Divine sanction of the Law and its
condemnation of those who had not kept it (ver
53), at the close of his speech, show clearly his
reverence, not only for the past history of the Jewish
raee, but as well for its Sacred Writings and all of its
religious institutions. It makes evident beyond
doubt how ungrounded the accusation of blasphemy
against him was. Not to impiety or frivolity in
Stephen, but to some other cause, must be due there-
fore the difference between him and his opponents.
What it is Stephen himself shows unmistakenly in
the second part of his defence.

(2) Defence of his teaching —The fundamental
differences between Stephen and his opponents, as is


evident from the whole tone and drift and purpose
of his speech, lay in that he judged OT history from
the prophetical pomt of view, to which Jesus had
also allied Himself, while his opponents represented
the legalistic pomt of view, so characteristic of the
Jewish thought of that day. The significance of
this difference is borne out by the fact upon which
Stephen’s refutation hinges, viz. the fact, proved
by the history of the past, that the development of
the Divine revelation and the development of the
Jewish nation, so far from combining, move in
divergent lines, due to a disposition of obstinate
disobedience on the part of their fathers, and that
therefore not he but they were disobedient to the
Divine revelation. Thus in a masterful way Ste-
phen converts the charge of Antinomianism and
anti-Mosaism brought against him into a counter-
charge of disobedience to the Divine revelation,
of which his hearers stood guilty in the present as
their fathers had in the past. In this sense the
speech of Stephen is a grand apology for the Chris-
tian cause which he represented, inasmuch as it
shows clearly that the new religion was only the
Divinely ordered development of the old, and not
in opposition to it.

The main arguments of the speech may be summed up
as follows: (a) God's self-manifestation to Israel in
revealing His covenant and His will, so far from being
bound to one sanctuary and conveyed to one single person
(Moses), began long before Moses and long before there
was atemple. Thus it was gradual, and as it had begun
before Moses it was not completed by him, as is evident
from his own words, ‘‘A prophet shall God raise up unto
en om among your brethren, like unto me” (Acts 7

(b) “The Jews to whom these revelations were granted,
So far from being thankful at all stages of their history,
had been slow to believe and understand them because
they ‘‘ would not be obedient’ (vs 39.57). They resisted
the purpose of God by obstinately and stiff-neckedly
opposing those through whom God worked. Thug
their fathers had turned away from Moses at the very
moment when he was receiving God's greatest revelation,
and, instead of obeying the “‘living oracles'’ (ver 38) he
gave them, turned _to idol-worship for which God pun-
ished them by the Bab captlvity (vs 39-48). They had
killed the prophets who had protested against the dead
ritualism of the temple-worship aud raised their voice
in behalf of a true spiritual worship as that of the taber-
nacle had been (vs 44—-50.52). Thiy disposition of dis-
obedience so characteristic of the race in its whole
history, because, in spite of the Divine revelation
received, they remained unregenerate (ver 51), reached
its culmination in that awful crime of betrayal and
murder committed by the present generation upon the
“ Righteous One"' whose coming the prophets had pre-
dicted—-the rejection of Jesus of Nazareth, by which the
Jews aoomed not only, ehele patlonal eres, pu also

eir temple-wors an e reign of the Law t
destruction (7 52-614), e eae
__ Though the name of Jesus was not uttered by Stephen
in his speech and does not occur until in his dying prayer,
his hearers could not fail to notice the hidden reference
to Him throughout the entire speech and to draw
parallels intended by Stephen: As Joseph and Moses,
types of the Messiah, had been rejected, scorned and ill-
treated (Acts 7 9.27.39), before being raised to be ruler
and deliverer, so Jesus had also been repulsed by them.


The climax of his speech is reached in vs 51-53,
when Stephen, breaking off the line of argument,
suddenly in direct address turns upon his hearers,
and, the accused becoming the accuser, charges
them openly with the sin of resisting the Holy Spirit,
with the murder of the prophets and the Righteous
One, and with continual disobedience to the Law.
These words which mark the climax, though prob-
ably not the close of the speech, pointed the moral
in terms of the most cutting rebuke, and were at
once prophetical as to the effect the speech would
have upon his hearers and for him.

Such arguing and directness as Stephen’s could
have but one result. Prejudiced and enraged as
they were, the unanswerable arguments of Stephen,
based on their own Scriptures, made them mad
with fury, and doubtless through their demonstra~
tions they stopped the speech. But Stephen,


2853


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Stephen
Steward


transported with enthusiasm and inspiration, was
vouchsafed a vision of the “glory of God,” which

he had mentioned in the beginning of
6. Martyr- his speech (7 2), and of Jesus, whose
dom of cause he had so gallantly defended
Stephen (ver 55). Stephen standing there, his

gaze piercing into heaven, while time
and human limitations seemed effaced for him,
marks one of the most historic moments in the
history of Israel, as his words constitute the most
memorable testimony ever uttered in behalf of
Christ: ‘Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the
Son of man’—the only place where this title is
uttered by any other person than Jesus—‘“‘standing
on the right hand of God”’ (ver 56). Now the audi-
ence could restrain its rage no longer, and the catas-
trophe followed immediately. Contrary to Rom
law and order they took Stephen, and without await-
ing sentence against him, amid a tumultuous scene
stoned him to death, the punishment prescribed
in Mosaic Law for a blasphemer (Dt 17 7; Lev
24 14-16). This recourse to lynch law may have
been connived at by the Rom authorities, since
the act was without political significance. It is
noteworthy, however, that the Jewish legal forms
were observed, as if to give to the violence the
appearance of legality. Accordingly, Stephen was
taken outside the city (Lev 24 14; ef Lk 4 29);
the witnesses threw the first stone at him (cf Dt
17 7) after taking off their upper garments and
laying them at the feet of a ‘‘young man named
Saul” (Acts 7 58)—afterward Paul, now about 30
years old—who evidently had charge of the whole
proceedings. :

Stephen died as he had lived, a faithful witness
to his Master whom he acknowledged as such amid
the rain of stones hurled at him, loudly calling upon
His name, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit” (Acts
7 59; cf Lk 23 46), and whose spirit he sep itee
so nobly when, with a final effort, bending his knees,
he “cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin
to their charge” (Acts 7 60; cf Lk 23 34). “And
when he had said this, he fell asleep” (7 60; cf
1 Cor 15).

The impression made by Stephen’s death was
even greater than that made by his life. Though
it marks the beginning of the first great persecu-
tion of Christians, the death of the first Christian
martyr resulted in the greatest acquisition Chris-
tianity has probably ever made, the conversion
of Saul of Tarsus. The vision of the risen and
exalted Jesus vouchsafed to the dying Stephen pre-
sented Christianity to Saul of Tarsus in a new light,
tending to remove what had been its greatest
stumbling-block to him in the Crucified One. This
revelation coupled with the splendid personality
of Stephen, the testimony of his righteous life and
the noble bravery of his sublime death, and above
all his dying prayer, fell upon the honest soul of
Saul with an irresistible force and inevitably
brought on the Damascus event, as Augustine
clearly recognized: ‘Si Stephanus non_ orasset,
ecclesia Paulum non habuisset.” Judged by his
teaching, Stephen may be called the forerunner of
Paul. He was one of the first to conceive of the fact
that Christianity represented a new order of things
and as such would inevitably supersede the old order.
Thus his teachings forecast that greatest contro-
versy of the first Christian century, the controversy
between Judaism and Christianity, which reached
its culmination-point in the Council of Jerus, re-
sulting in the independence of the Christian church
from the fetters of Judaistic legalism.


Lrrerature.—R. J. Knowling, ‘‘ Acts” in Bxpositor’s
Gr Test., II (1900); Feine, PRE*, XIX (1907); Pahncke
in Studien u. Krit. (1912), I.

S. D. Press


STEWARD, sti’ad (MIB > DN, ‘ish ‘al
bayith [Gen 43 16.19; 441; 1K 16 9], "Z28n,
-  ha-melgar [Dnl 1 11], J20T, ha-sdkhén

[Isa 22 15]): In AV the word “steward”
is found in Gen 16 2; 1 Ch 28 1, in
addition to the above. ARV renders
Gen 15 2 as “possessor,” and 1 Ch 28 1 “rulers.”
The phrase ben-meshek in Gen 15 2 is best rendered
“son of acquisition,’’ hence ‘‘heir.'’ But this is disputed.
Skinner in the ICC on Gen regards the text as hopelessly
corrupt, and offers no solution of the difficulty. “In the
other passages, the phrase "ish ‘al bayith is convententiy
trd “steward,” though lit. it is ‘man over the house.”
The word ha-melgar in Dnl 1 11 is trdin AV as @ proper
noun. This is certainly a mistake. The margin gives
"the steward,’’ and this is foliowed in RV.
rendering perhaps wouid be ‘overseer,’ as this man
seemed to have the superintendence of the training and
feeding of the young men uutil they were fitted to
enter the king’s service. He was thus rather a steward
of persons than of property (see Muuzar). InIsa 22 15
Shebna is described in the text as "‘ treasurer,’’ but in the
margin as ‘‘steward,’’ and seems to combine the ideas in
both the words "' treasurer’' and ‘‘steward.’’ Shebna was
thus one of the highest officials, having charge of the city’s
funds, and of administering them for the city’s benefit.


Though the word for “steward” occurs but once in
that sense, the idea is one familiar to the OT.
Eliezer of Damascus was Abraham’s slave and
trustedsteward. Heseemsto have had the oversight
of all his affairs and wasintrusted with the important
duty of getting a wife for Isaac. He apparently had
charge over the family of his master as well as his
property. Whether Isaac had such a steward or
not is nowhere stated, but it is practically certain
that he had. Jacob seems to have been Laban’s
steward for a time, as he apparently had full charge
of the flocks and herds of his master. Joseph was
practically Potiphar’s steward, and when he became
Pharaoh’s chief minister, he himself had a steward
over his own house (Gen 39 4.5; 441.4). The
king Elah in his brief reign of two years had a
steward in charge of his household (1 K 16 9).
The same was doubtless true of all the kings, and it
may be safely inferred that every household of
distinction or of sufficient wealth had a steward
in charge. The functions of this officer seem at
times to have included the care of the children or
minors, as well as of the property. Sometimes he
was a slave, sometimes a freedman.

érlrporos, epttropos, olxovbyos, oikonémos.
two terms d


2. In the
NT


1. OT
Usage


better


These
enote similar positions. The exact differ-

ence cannot be clearly defined, as
- they are sometimes almost synony-

mous. The two are found together

in Gal 4 2. Some scholars say they
are used synonymously, others that the first
word is a more general term including the latter.
Lightfoot and Ellicott think that the former refers
rather to the guardianship of persons, the child’s legal
representative, while the latter word refers to the
head servant appointed to manage the household or
property (cf 2 Macc 11 1; 13 2). There would,
however, not be any such hard-and-fast line
between their respective duties; these might vary
with every master, or might be combined in one
individual.

(1) In the Gospels —The idea seems to have been
perfectly familiar to the people in Christ’s day.
Every household of distinction seems to have bad a
steward in charge, Herod’s steward was named
Chuzas, and his wife, Joanna, followed and minis-
tered to Jesus (Lk 8 3). The word epitropos used
here is held by some scholars to imply that he had
charge of the education of Herod’s children. This
is very_probable but not certain. In the parable
of the Laborers in the Vineyard, it is the steward
who pays the laborers at the close of the day (Mt
20 8). The parable of the Unjust Steward best
illustrates the practice. This steward was a


Stewpan
Stomach


freeman, had full charge of his master’s affairs
and could use them to his own advantage if he chose,
was fully accountable to his master and had to
render an account when called upon. If unfaithful
he was usually discharged at once (Lk 16 1-13).
The parables of the Minae or Pounds (Lk 19 12-27),
the Talents (Mt 25 14-30), and the Wicked
Husbandmen (Mt 21 33-46) teach similar truths.
In His warning to His disciples Jesus seems to
imply that they were to act as stewards in His
absence (Lk 12 42). According to this passage
a steward’s task was to manage all the affairs of
his master, attend to receipts and expenditures,
and portion out to each one of the household what
should come to him. The disciples were left thus in
charge of His gospel and were to use this gift to
the best advantage in behalf of others until His
return. In Jn 2 8 the term “ruler’’ is given in the
margin as “steward.” The one referred to here
was really director of the feast rather than steward,
though in a sense charged with the responsihility
of conducting it. Many stewards were no douht
slaves, as is implied in Mt 24 45, while others
were freedmen (Lk 16 1-21).

(2) In the Epistles—The application of this
term is largely confined to the ministry of the gospel.
Paul and his fellow-laborers regarded themselves
as stewards of the mysteries of God (1 Cor 4 1.2).
The idea is that he take scrupulous care of that
which was intrusted to him, and give it out to
others faithfully and as directed by his master
Jesus Christ. A bishop or overseer is to he as
God’s steward (Tit 1 7). Peter considered him-
self and all other Christians as “stewards of the
manifold grace of God” (1 Pet 4 10). The preva-
lence of the custom of having guardians and stewards
over children in their minority is shown in Gal 4 2.
The difference in meaning of the two words used
here is stated above. In Rom 16 23 Erastus is
called the oikonomos of the city. This is best tr4
“treasurer.” Erastus was thus an influential mem-
ber of the community of Corinth and evidently a
faithful Christian. James Josisag REEVE


STEWPAN, stii’pan (Lev if 35 m).


STIFF-NECKED, stif’nekt ((3Y MWP, kesheh
‘oreph, lit. “hard of neck”): As it is figuratively
used, both in the OT and inthe NT, the word means
“stubborn,” ‘“‘untractable,” “not to be led.” The
derivation of the idea was entirely familiar to the
Jews, with whom the ox was the most useful and
common of domestie animals. It was esp. used for
such agricultural purposes as harrowing and plowing
(Jgs 14 18; 1 Cor 9 9).

The plow was usually drawn by two oxen. As
the plowman required but one hand to guide the
plow, he carried in the other an “‘ox-goad.” This
was a light pole, shod with an iron spike. With this
he would prick the oxen upon the hind legs to in-
crease their speed, and upon the neck to turn, or to
keep a straight course when deviating. If an ox
was hard to control or stubborn, it was “‘hard of
neck,” or stiff-necked. Hence the figure was used
in the Scriptures to express the stubborn, untract-
able spirit of a people not responsive to the guiding
of their God (Ex 32 9; 333; Dt 96; 2 Ch 36 13;
Jer 17 23, etc). Seealso the NT where cxAnporpdxn-
dos, sklérotrdchélos, is so tr4 (Acts 7 51), “Ye stiff-
necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do
always resist the Holy Spirit.” Cf Bar 2 30.33.

ARTHUR WaLwyn Evans

STILL, stil: “To be still” is ‘“‘to keep silence”
(Ps 4 4, etc) and so ‘‘to be quiet”? (Ps 107 29, etc)
or “inactive’ in any way (Jgs 18 9; 1 K 22 3;
Zec 1 11, etc). So “be still’ in Ps 46 10 means
“desist from your war” (cf RVm “‘let be’). The


See Pan.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2854


“still small voice’ of 1 K 19 12 (RVm “sound of
gentle stillness’’) is due to taking the Heb d*mamah
in its literal force of “silent,” but the word here
means “whisper’—‘a whispering, little voice.”
This familiar passage, however, has made ‘‘still
voice” good Eng., and the combination is used in Job
416byRVm. InPs23 2 thetr“‘still waters” takes
“waters of rest” (so lit. for MMII, mnithah;
cf RVm) to mean “waters with little motion.”
But the meaning is either ‘‘wells by which the flocks
rest”’ or “wells that give refreshing water.” As an
advb. “still” is perhaps more emphatic than in mod-
ern Eng.; ef “power to keep still the kingdom,”
2 Ch 22 9 AV (RV “‘to hold the kingdom’’).
. _Burron Scorr Easton

STING, sting (WIE, parash, “to cut into”;
kévtpov, kéntron, “a goad,” “spur’’): A sharp,
pointed organ or instrument for inflicting wounds by
puncture; sting of an adder, Prov 23 32; of scor-
pions, Rev 9 10. In the free quotation of 1 Cor
15 55 from Hos 13 14, death is personified as a
deadly animal, like a scorpion or serpent, which
inflicts destruction by means of sin as its kentron.
It should also be remembered that in Acts 26 14
the same Gr word is used with reference to an instru-
ment for exciting fear, rather than death. Both
figures are pertinent; for death is powerless, except
through sin, and, also, when sin is vanquished, the
fear of death (He 2 15) is gone. H. E. Jacozs


STIR, star, STIR UP: Used transitively and
intransitively to indicate inner, concentrated move-
ment; translates a number of Heb and Gr vbs.,
each of which has its different shade of meaning.
Thus e.g.in Ps 39 2, we have ‘akhar, ‘to be troubled,”
“excited”; in Cant 2 7, ‘ur, “to awake,” “disturb”
(by the festal dances and songs). In 2 Tim 1 6, it
stands for Gr anazdpuréé, used of the resuscitation
of a flame; in 2 Pet 1 13; 3.1, Gr diegetra, “to
awaken from sleep or stupor’; in Acts 21 27, Gr
sugché6, “to commingle,” vividly portraying the con-
fusion and tumult that resulted; in Acts 13 50, Gr
parotrins, “to urge on’; Acts 17 13, Gr saledo, “to
shake to and fro.”


STOCK, stok: In EV is used for:

(1) The stem of a tree, whether alive (Job 14 8;
Isa 40 24) or cut down (Isa 44 19; Wisd 14 21).
In Jer 2 27; 3 9; Hos 4 12, where the Heb has
simply 7%, ‘é¢, “wood,” either meaning is possible
(tree-worship? idolatry?). In Jer 10 8 the text
is doubtful.

(2) A family (Lev 25 47; 1 Esd 5 37; Tob
6 13; 1 Mace 12 21; 2 Macc 110; Acts 13
26; Phil 3 5).

(3) Elsewhere (Job 13 27, etc) the word refers
to an instrument of punishment. See Punisu-
MENTS.


STOICS, std’iks (Zrwikot, Staikot):
- Origin and Propagation
. Metaphysics and Religion
. Sensationalist Epistemology
. Ethical Teaching
. Relation to Christianity
LitERATURE
The name was derived from the Stod Potktlz,
the painted porch at Athens, where the founders of
ai the school first lectured. This school
1. Origin of Gr philosophy was founded at
and Propa- Athens ec 294 BC by Zeno (c 336-264
gation BC), a native of Citium, a Gr colony
: _in_ Cyprus. But. the Sem race pre-
dominated in Cyprus, and it has been conjectured
that Zeno was of Sem rather than Hellenic origin.
His Gr critics taunted him with being a Phoenician.
It has therefore been suggested that the distinctive
moral tone of the system was Sem and not Hellenic,


ALONE


2855


Further color is given to this view by the fact that:


Zeno’s immediate successors at the head of the
school also hailed from Asia Minor, Cleanthes
(331-232 BC) being a native of Assos, and Chrysip-
pus (280-206 BC) of Soli in Cilicia. Several other
adherents of the system hailed from Asia Minor,
and it flourished in several Asiatic cities, such as
Tarsus and Sidon. In the 2d cent. BC the doctrine
was brought to Rome by Panaetius of Rhodes (c
189-109 BC), and in the course of the two succeed-
ing centuries it spread widely among the upper
classes of Rom society. It reckoned among its
adherents a Scipio and a Cato, Seneca and Marcus
Aurelius, as well as the freedman Epictetus. The
most adequate account of the teaching of the Gr
Stoics has been preserved in the writings of Cicero,
who, however, was a sympathetic critic, rather than
an adherent of the school. The system acquired
its most lasting influence by its adoption as the
formative factor in the jurisprudence of imperial
Rome, and Rom law in its turn contributed to the
formation of Christian doctrine and ethics.

The main principles of Stoicism were promul-
gated by Zeno and Cleanthes, and Chrysippus

formulated them into a systematic
2. Meta- doctrine which became a standard of
physics and orthodoxy for the school, and which
Religion permitted but little freedom of specu-

lation for its subsequent teachers.
Whatever may have been the Sem affinities of mind
of Zeno and his followers, they derived the formal
principles of their system from Gr antecedents.
The ethical precept, “Follow Nature,” they learnt
from the Socratic school of Antisthenes, the Cynics.
But they followed the earlier philosopher Heraclitus
in defining the law of Nature as reason (iégos),
which was at once the principle of intelligence in
man, and the Divine reason immanent in the world.
This doctrine they again combined with the preva-
lent Gr hylozoism, and therefore their metaphysics
inclined to be a materialistic pantheism. On the
one side, Nature is the organization of material
atoms by the operation of its own uniform and neces-
sary laws. On the other side, it is a living, rational
being, subduing all its parts to work out a rational
purpose inherent in the whole. As such it may be
called Providence or God.

While the Stoics rejected the forms and rites of popular
religion, they defended belief in God and inculcated
piety and reverence toward Him. Their pantheism
provided a basis for Gr pelea also alongside of their
monism, for where all the world is God, each part of it is
Divine, and may be worshipped. Another consequence
of their pantheism was their attitude to evil, which they
held to be only apparently or relatively evil, but really
good in the harmony of the whole. Therefore they bore
evil with courage and cheerfulness, because they believed
that ‘‘all things worked together for good’’ absolutely.

The materialistic trend of their metaphysics also comes
out in their epistemology, which was sensationalist.


The human mind at its birth was a tabula
Its first ideas were derived from


rasa,
3. Sensa- sensations, the impressions made by the
tionalist external world upon the soul, which they
Episte- also conceived as a material body, thoug.
} made of finer atoms than the external
mology body. Out of these sense-impressions the


mind built up its intuitions or preconcep-
tions, and its notions, which constituted its store of ideas.
It is not clear how far they attributed originative power
to the mind as contributing some factor to the organiza-
tion of knowledge, which was not derived from experience.
The Stoic system is never consistently materialistic, nor
consistently idealistic. Most of its terms are used in a
dual sense, material and spiritual.


But its ethical teaching shows that the main
trend of the system was spiritualistic. For its
crown and climax was the ethics. The

4. Ethical
Teaching its own sake. They speculated about
ultimate problems only for the prac-
tical purpose of discovering a rule of life and con-
duct. And in their ethics, the great commandment,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Stoics did not pursue knowledge for |


Stewpan
Stomach


“Follow Nature,” is interpreted in a distinctly
idealistic sense. It means, “Follow reason,” as
reason inheres both in man and in the universe as
a whole. It is submission to Providence or the
rational order of the universe, and the fulfilment of
man’s own rational nature. The life according to
Nature is man’s supreme good. How actual
Nature could be the ideal good that man ought to
seek, or how man was free to pursue an ideal, while
he was bound in a system of necessity, were funda-
mental paradoxes of the system which the Stoics
never solved. They summed up their moral teach-
ing in the ideal of the sage or the wise man. His
chief characteristic is ataraxy, a calm passionless
mastery of all emotions, and independence of all
circumstances. He therefore lives a consistent,
harmonious life, in conformity with the perfect order
of the universe. He discovers this order by knowl-
edge or wisdom. But the Stoics also defined this
ideal as a system of particular duties, such as
purity in one’s self, love toward all men, and rever-
ence toward God. In Stoic ethics, Gr philosophy
reached the climax of its moral teaching. Nowhere
else outside Christianity do we find so exalted a
rule of conduct for the individual, so humane, hope-
ful and comprehensive an ideal for society.

en “certain. ... of the Epicurean and
Stoic philosophers encountered” Paul at Athens, and
when, after the apostle had spoken
on Mars’ Hill, ‘some mocked; but
others said, We will bear thee concern-
ing this yet again” (Acts 17 18.32), it is
no improbable inference that the Epi-
cureans mocked, while the Stoics desired to hear
more. For they would find much in the apostle’s
teaching that harmonized with their own views.
Paul’s quotation from the classics in his Athe-
nian speech was from the Stoic poet, Aratus of
Soli in Cilicia: “For we are also his offspring.”
His doctrine of creation, of Divine immanence, of
the spirituality and fatherhood of God, would be
familiar and acceptable to them. His preaching
of Christ would not have been unwelcome to them,
who were seeking for the ideal wise man. Paul’s
moral teaching as it appears in his Epp. reveals some
resemblance to Stoic ethics. It is possible that Paul
had learnt much from the Stoic school at Tarsus.
It is certain that subsequent Christian thought
owed much to Stoicism. Its doctrine of the imma-
nent Logos was combined with Philo’s conception
of the transcendent Logos, to form the Logos doc-
trine through which the Gr Fathers construed the
person of Christ. And Stoic ethics was taken
over almost bodily by the Christian church.
See EprcurEans; PHILOSOPHY.


Lireratrore.—The chief extant sources are the
writings of Cicero, De Finibus, De Natura Deorum, etc;
Seneca, Plutarch, M. Antoninus Aurelius, Epictetus,
Diogenes Laertius, Sextus Empiricus and Stobaeus.
Modern works: H. von Arnim, Stotcorum veterum_frag-
menta; Geller, Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics; R. D.
Hicks, Stote and Epicurean; L. Davidson, The Stoic
Creed; FE. V. Arnold, Roman Stoictsm, which contains
a full bibliography and deals with the relation of
Stoicism to Christianity; on the latter point_see also
Lightfoot, Phil, Excursus II, *’St. Paul and Seneca”;
histories of philosophy by Rogers, Windelband, Ueber-
weg, and E. Caird.

T. Rees


STOMACH, stum’uk (orépaxos, stémachos):
In man and most vertebrates, a membranous
sac-like portion of the alimentary canal, in which the
earlier stages of digestion take place and in which
food is prepared to yield its nourishment (1 Tim


5. Relation
to Chris-
tianity


Used figuratively of pride, “A proud look and
high stomach” (Ps 101 7, Prayer-book Version),
and courage, ‘Stirring up her womanish thoughts
with a manly stomach” (2 Macc 7 21 AV, RV
“with manly passion’”’).


Stomacher
Stones, Precious


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2856


STOMACHER, stum’uk-ér: Used to translate
Sn , pthighil (Isa 3 24 AV), where the mean-
ing is uncertain. The Eng. word denotes that part
of a woman’s dress which covered the breast and
the pit of the stomach. It was usually much orna-
mented.


STONE, stén, STONES, stinz: :
(1) Chiefly JAN, ’ebhen, and dos, lithos; but
also, occurring rarely, JUN, ’eshekh (Lev 21 20);
“AX, cur (Job 22 24), usually “rock”;
1. Hebrew “WY, ror (2 8 17 13);  wérpos,
and Greek pétros (Jn 1 42); ¥ndos, pséphos (Rev
Words 217). For bps) , sela‘, usually “cliff,”


“crag,” “rock,” AV, in Ps 187 9;

141 6, has “stone,’’ but RV “rock.” For

AV “stones,” Wi, heres (Job 41 30); RV has
“potsherds.”’ See SELA.

The word is used of great stones (Gen 29 2);

of small stones (1 8 17 40); of stones set up as

memorials (1S 7 12, ‘“Eben-ezer,”

2. Literal ‘‘stone of help’’); of precious stones

Usage (Ex 35 9, etc); of hailstones (Josh


10 11).
Of hardness: ‘I will take the stony heart out
of their flesh” (Ezk 1119); of one smitten:
‘TNahal’s] heart died within him, and
3. Figura- became as a stone” (1 § 25 37); of
tive Usage weight: ‘‘A stone is heavy, and the
sand weighty” (Prov 27 3); of dumb-
ness: ‘Woe unto him that saith to the wood, Awake;
to the dumb stone, Arise!’ (Hab 2 19); of Jerus:
“T will make Jerus a burdensome stone for all the
peoples” (Zec 12 3); of the comer-stone as a
figure of high position:
“‘The stone which the builders rejected
Is become the head of the corner’’ (Ps 118 22).


See Furnt; Rock.

(2) Used also anatomically of the testicles (Lev
21 20; Dt 23 1; Job 4017, TB, pahadh, RV
‘thighs’’). ALFRED Ety Day


STONE-SQUARERS, ston’skw4r-érz: AV in
1K 5 18; RV “the Gebalites” (q.v.).


STONES, PRECIOUS:


Ancient and Modern Names

Change of Signification of Names

Three Important Lists of Stones
Interpretation of Greek Names Used by St. John
Interpretation of Hehrew Names

Greek and Latin Equivalents of Hebrew Names
. Inconsistencies of Text or Translation

. Vulgate and LXX

. Hebrew Texts of LXX and EV

. Equivalence of Hehrew and Greek Names

. Interpretation of Greek Names Used hy LXX
12. List of Names with Biblical References


Great difficulty is met with in any attempt to
translate the Gr and Heb names mentioned in the
Bible into names that would be used
1. Ancient for the same minerals in a particular
and country at the present day. It is
Modern only within the last century, through
Names the development of the sciences of
chemistry and crystallography, that
it has become possible to define mineral species
with any considerable approach to precision. In
ancient times various minerals were regarded as
belonging to a single kind, and indicated by a single
name, that are now distributed into different kinds
and mentioned under different names.

For example, 2,000 years ago the Gr term duthrax was
used to Slenity various hard, transparent, red stones
that are now known to differ much from one another
in chemical composition, and are therefore assigned to


different species and given different names; among them
are oriental ruby (red corundum), balas ruby (red spinel),


iad
PSoenoapeNn


almandine and pyrope (red garnets); a stone designated
anthrax by the ancient Greeks might thus helong to any
one of a number of various ‘kinds to the assemblage of
which no name is now given, and the word anthrax has no
simple equivalent in a modern language.

Confusion is introduced in another way. The
Eng. names of most of the precious stones men-


tioned in the Bible are adaptations of


2. Change Gr names through the Lat; for, in-
of Signifi- stance, the Eng. word “topaz” is a
cation of modification of the Lat word topazius,
Names itself merely a Lat form of the Gr


word topdzion. It would at first sight
appear that the Gr word topazion must be tr? into
Eng. by the word “topaz”; but, strangely, although
the words are virtually identical, the stones indi-
cated by the words are quite different. The to-
pazion of the ancient Greeks was a green stone
yielding to the action of a file and said to be brought
from an island in the Red Sea, whereas the topaz
of the present day is not a green stone, does not
yield to the action of a file, and has not been brought
from an island in the Red Sea. The fopazion of
the ancient Greeks is really the peridot, not the
topaz, of modern mineralogy; topazion and topaz
are different kinds of stone. For the interpretation
of the Bible it is thus necessary to ascertain, if
possible, the kind of stone to which a Gr or Heb
name was applied at the time when the word was
written.
Most of the names of the precious stones men-
tioned in the Bible are contained in the Heb de-
scription of the breastplate of the


3. Three _ high priest and the Gr description of
Important the foundations of the New Jerusalem.
Lists of The ornaments assigned to the king of
Stones Tyre (Ezk 28 13) included only stones


that had been used in the breastplate; .
indeed, in the LXX, they are the same twelve, men-
tioned in precisely the same order.

The stones of the breastplate according to our
Heb text (Ex 28 17-21) were:


No. 1 No. 2 No. 3
Ist row........ Dos MIQE np7a
‘odhem pitedhah bdreketh
Qd TOW... eee 7p) “BD com
nophekh sappir yahdlom
3d row........ py ‘ay TAOS
leshem shebho "ahlamah
4th row........ won paw mw
tarshish shéham yashepheh


The foundations of the New Jerusalem are (Rev
21 19.20):


1 faspis 2 sdppheiros 3. chaikédén
4 smdragdos 5 sardénux sdrdion

7 ~~ chrusélithos 8  dbérulios 9 topdzion
10. chruséprasos 11 hudkinthos 12 améthustos


Only 4 of the latter stones are mentioned elsewhere in
the NT, also in the Book of Rev, namely: iaspis (4 3;
a ae smaragdos (4 3), sardion (4 3) and huakinthos

For the interpretation of the Gr names used by
St. John, much help is given by Pliny’s great work

on Natural History, published 77 AD,
4. Interpre- for it records what was known about


tation of precious stones at the very time when
Greek St. John himself was living. The Gr
Names names of stones and their Lat verbal
_ Used by equivalents had presumably the same
St. John _ signification for both these writers; it


_ is thus possible, in some cases at least,
to ascertain what name is now assigned to a stone
mentioned in the NT if the name and description


2857


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Stomacher


Stones, Precious


are recorded in the treatise of Pliny; the results are
given in the alphabetical list below. All twelve
stones, except chalkédodn, are mentioned by Pliny;
the few important stones described by him, but not
mentioned by St. John as foundations, are crystal-
lum and adamas, both of them colorless; onyx, re-
markable rather for structure than color; electrum
(amber), a soft material; carbunculus, fiery red;
callaina, pale green, probably turquoise; cyanus,
dark blue; and opalus (opal), ranked in Pliny’s time
immediately after smaragdus in value. <Achates
(agate) is omitted, but was no longer precious.
In the interpretation of the Heb names of the
stones of the breastplate there is much greater
difficulty, for no Heb lit. other than
5. Interpre- the OT has been preserved, and little


tation of help is afforded by the contexts of
Hebrew other verses in which some of the Heb
Names names of precious stones occur. If


we could assume that the LXX and
Vulg VSS of the description of the breastplate were
made from Heb texts absolutely identical in respect
of the names of the stones with those used for the
preparation of the EV, and that the VSS were
correctly made, the Gr equivalents of the Heb terms
for the time of the LXX translators (about 280 BC)
and their-Lat equivalents for the time of St. Jerome
(about 400 AD) would be directly determinable by
collation of the Heb original with the Gr and Lat tr*.
It must be remembered, however, that a Heb
writer, in describing the arrangement of a row of
stones, began with that on his right and mentioned
them in the order right to left, while a western
writer begins with the stone on his left and men-
tions them in the reverse order. Hence, in trans-
lating a Heb statement of arrangement into a west-
ern language, one may either translate literally
word by word, thus adopting the Heb direction of
reading, or, more completely, may adopt the western
direction for the order intherow. As either method
may have been adopted by the LXX translators,
it follows that ’ddhem and bareketh, the first and last
stones of the 1st row according to our Heb text,
may respectively be equivalent either to sardion
and smaragdos, or, conversely, to smaragdos and
sardion; and similarly for the other rows. The
number of the middle stone of any row is the. same
whichever direction of reading is adopted. ’Odhem
being red, and sardion and smaragdos respectively
red and green (see below), ’édhem must be equiv-
alent to the former, not the latter, and the LXX
translators must have adopted the Heb direction
of reading the rows. A :
Other sets of possible equivalents are derivable
by collation of the Bib. description with each of the
two descriptions given by Jos (Ant,


6. Greek _ III, vii, 5; BU, V, v,7). The possible
and Latin Grand Lat equivalents of Heb names
Equivalents are thus as follows:
No. 1 No. 2 No. 3
lstrow Heb ’édhem pitedhah bareketh
LXX sdrdion topdzion smdragdos
Vulg sardius topazius smaragdus
Ant sardénux topdzion smdragdos
BJ sdrdion topdzion amdragdos
2drow Heb_ néphekh sappir yahdlom
LXX dnthrax adppheiros taspis
Vulg carbunculus sapphirus jaspis —
Ant dnthrax taspis sdppheiros
BJ anthrax taspis sdppheiros
8drow Heh_ leskem shebho "ahlamah
L ligiurion achdtés améthustos
Vulg ligurius achates amethystus
Ant ligtérion améthustos achdtés
BI achdtés améthustos ligtirion
4th row Heb iarshish shéham yashephéh
LXX chrusélithos bérillion ontichion
Vulg chrysolithus onychinus berylius
Ant chrusélithos onichion bérdllion
BJ ontichion béridllion chrusélithos


It may be remarked, as regards the 1st stone of the
1st row, that in the tlme of Jos the stone sardonuz could
be signified also by the more general term sardion; and,
as regards the 1st stone of the 2d row, that anthrax and
carbo being respectively Gr and Lat for ‘‘glowing coal,’’
anthrar and carbunculus, diminutive of carbo, were used
as synonyms for ccrtain red stones.


From the inconsistencies of the above table of
possible equivalents it may be inferred that either
(1) essentially different tr? were given
7. Incon- _in several cases for the same Heb word,
sistencies or (2) the Heb texts used in the prep-
aration of the LXX and Vulg VSS
were, in respect of the precious stones, different from
each other and from that used in the preparation
of EV, or (3) the breastplate differed at different
epochs, or (4) one or other, or both, of the descrip-
tions by Jos are incorrect. Conceivably differences
may have arisen in all the above-mentioned ways.


(1) Inconsistency of LX X translators.—That the LXX
translators were uncertain as to the correct tr of the Heb
names used for the precious stones into the Gr names
used in their time, and that they trd the Heb name of a
stone in more than one way may bc shown as follows.
In the Heb text corresponding to EV the word shoham,
designating the 2d stone of the 4th row of the hreast-
plate, occurs also in several verses where there is no
mention of other stones, and ‘where there is thus no risk
of accidental interchange, such as may easily occur when
technical terms, more esp. if unintelligible to the tran-
scriber, are near to one another in the text. Now, for our
VSS shéham has been systematically trd ‘‘onyx,"’ and for
the Vulg the Heb word having the same position in the text
has been systematically trad by a Lat synonym of onyx,
namely, fapis onychinus (except in Job 28 16, where lapis
sardonychus is the rendering). Hence it is probable that
the word in uhoee paruiculee verses was shoham in the Heh
original of the Vulg, and therefore also of the Heb original
of the LXX. Yet in the LXX the Heb word is tr4 séom
(i Ch 29 2, indicating that the transiator, not knowing
the Gr word for shoham, gave merely its Gr translitera-
tion), a8 well as smaragdos (Ex 28 9; 35 27; 39 6 or
L 36.13), prdsinos (Gen 2 12), sardion (Ex 25 7;
85.9 or LXX 35 8), énux Job 28 16). 4

These differences suggest that there were different
LXX translators, even for different chapters of the same
hook, and that little care was taken by them to be con-
sistent with one another in the tr of technical terms.

(2) Differences of Hebrew texts.—That the Heb texts
used for the LXX, Vulg and EV were not identical in all
the verses in which there is mention of precious stones is
esp. clear from an analysis of the respective descriptions
of the ornaments of the king of Tyre (Ezk 28 13). In the
LXX 12 stones are mentioned; as already stated, they
have precisely the same names and are mentioned in
precisely the same order as the stones of the breastplate
described in that version, the only difference being that
gold and silver are inserted in the middle of the list.
On the other hand, in Vulg and EV descriptions of the
ormaments, only 9 of the 12 stones of the breastplate
are mentioned; they are not in the same order as the
corresponding stones in the breastplate as described in
those VSS, silver is not mentioned at all, while gold is

laced, not in the middle, but at the end of the list.
her, the order of mention of the stones in EV differs
from that of mention in Vulg.


(3) Changes in the breastplate—That the breast-~
plate in use in the time of the LXX translators
(about 280 BC) may have been different from the
one described in the Book of Ex is manifest if we
have regard to the history of the Jewish nation;
for Jerus was captured by Shishak, king of Egypt,
about 973 BC, by Nebuchadnezzar, king of Baby-
lon, about 586 BC, and by Ptolemy Soter, king of
Egypt, about 320 BC. The original breastplate
may have been part of the spoil on one or other of
these occasions, and have then disappeared forever.

Again, between the times of the LX X translators
and Jos, Jerus was more than once in the hands of
its enemies; in 198 BC the city was captured by
Antiochus the Great; in 170 BC it was stormed,
and its temple plundered, by Antiochus Epiphanes;
in 54 BC the temple was desecrated by Crassus.
The breastplate familiar to Jos (for he was long a
priest in the temple of Jerus) may thus not have
been identical with that in use when the LXX
version was made.

And if the signification of the Heb names of the
stones had not been carefully passed down from one


Stones, Precious


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2858


generation to another while the breastplate was
no longer in existence (for instance, during the Bab
captivity), or if stones like those of the original
breastplate were not available when a new breast-
plate was being made, there would inevitably be
differences in the breastplate at different times.

The probability of this hypothesis of one or more
replacements of the breastplate is still further in-
creased if we have regard to the large stones that
were set In gold buttons and fastened to the shoulder-
pieces of the ephod, the vestment to which the
breastplate itself was attached (Ex 28 9; 39 6 or
LXX 36 13). According to the LXX, the material
was smaragdos (and therefore green); according to
Jos it was sardonur (and therefore red with a layer
of white). Though the LXX translators may never
have had opportunities of looking closely at the
stones, they might be expected to know the color
of the material; Jos must have seen them often.
But the complete difference of colors of smaragdos
and sardonux suggests that the difference of the
names is due, not to a LXX mistranslation of the
Heb name shéham, but to an actual difference of
the material; it may have been smaragdos (and
green) at the time when the LXX tr was made, and
yet sardonux (and red with a layer of white) in the
time of Jos.

(4) Descriptions given by Jos.—That in respect
of the breastplate it is unsafe to collate the Heb
texts of the various VSS with that of Jos may be
demonstrated as follows. The 2d stone of the 2d
row, termed sappir in our Heb text, is termed sap-
pheiros in the LXX and sapphirus in the Vulg.
Wherever else sappir occurs m our Heb text, sap-
pheires occurs in the corresponding place in the LX-X
and sapphirus in the Vulg; it may thus be inferred
that in respect of the word sappir our Heb text
and the Heb texts used for the LXX and Vulg VSS
were in complete accord with one another. Also,
it is certain that the Lat word sapphirus was de-
rived from the Gr word sappheiros, and that either
the latter had its origin in the Heb word sappir or
that both words had the same source. There is no
reason to think that from the time of the LXX
translators to that of St. Jerome the word sappheires
was ever used to signify any other than one kind
of stone or that the kind was ever called iaspis.
But in both the descriptions given by Jos the middle
stone of the 2d row is given as iaspis, not as sap-
pheiros, which he makes the last stone of the row.
Hence, for the middle stone of the 2d row, the Heb
texts were concordant in giving the name sapp?r,
but they fundamentally differed from that of Jos
whose two descriptions agree in giving the name
laspis; it is not a difference of mere nomenclature
or tr, but of the kind of stone set in a definite part
of the breastplate. This being the case, collation
of the Heb, LXX and Vulg descriptions of the
breastplate with those given by Jos cannot be
relied on to give a true Gr or a true Lat equivalent
for the Heb name of any ofthestones. | )

It may be added that the two descriptions given
by Jos differ from each other only as regards the
order of the stones in the last two rows; in the 3d
row, the order is precisely reversed; in the 4th
row the order is chrusolithos, onuchion, bérullion for
Ant, and onuchion, bérullion, chrusolithos for BJ.
Ant was written at greater leisure than BJ, and
was not completed till 18 years later; Jos had thus
more time for the consultation of old MSS. Speak-
ing generally, it is more accurate than his earlier
treatise as regards the history of those times of which
he had no direct knowledge; its description of the
breastplate is more precise as regards the arrange-
ment of the stones, and is therefore the one to which
the greater weight must be given. It differs from
the LXX only through the interchange of the 2d


and 3d stones in the 2d, 3d and 4th rows; and pos-
sibly Jos gave the order from his memory either of

the LXX or of the actual breastplate.
The only difference between the descriptions given in
LXX and Vulg is that the last two stones, namely bérul-
lion (beryllus) and onuchion (anychinus),


are interchanged.
Sa yeeue As already pointed out, the Heb texts of


the LXX and EV must have differed com-
pletely as regards the descriptions of the
ornaments of the king of Tyre; it is thus not at all cer-
tain that they were in complete accord as regards the
descriptions of the breastplate. In fact,
it is generally accepted that the Heb word


9. Hebrew jashephzh and the Gr word iaspis are
Texts of virtually identical, and that they were
LXX and used to signify the same_kind of stone.
EV Hence it follows that the Heb text of EV

is not identical with the Heb texts of the


LXX and Vulg VSS in respect of the stones
in the 2d and 4th rows; if our Heb text is correct as
regards ydshephéh, that stone was the last stone in the
last row; if the Heb texts of the LXX and Vulg VSS
were correct, yashephéh, which had for its Gr equivalent
taspis, must have been the last stone in the 2d row;
further, onuchion (LXX) and beryllus (Vulg) must be
equivalent, not to yashephéh, but to some other stones
of the breastplate. 5

Taking these matters into consideration, the following
have considerable claims to be regarded as equivalents:


‘adhe He
2 ‘odhem sardion
10. Equiva- pitedhah topazion
lence of bareketh smaragdos
Hebrew naphekh anthrax
sappir sappheiras
and Greek  jeshem ligurion
Names shebho achatés
‘ahlamah amethustas
yashephéh iaspis


The remaining three stones, tarshish, shéham and
yahdlém, are thus equivalent to chruselithes, onuchion
and bdérullion, but it is uncertain which Gr name corre-
sponds to any of those Heb names.

For the interpretation of the Gr names of stones
mentioned in the LXX (and thus of the Heb names

in the original text), the work of Theo-


11. Inter- phrastus, a contemporary of the LXX
pretation  translators,isveryuseful. That author
of Greek mentions, besides kristallos and mar-
Names garités which occur elsewhere than in


the description of the breastplate, nine
of the LXX names of the breastplate stones, namely:
achatés, amethustos (as améthuson), anthrax, taspis,
ligurion (as lugktrion), onuckion, sapphetros, sar-
dion, smaragdos. The three stones mentioned in
the LXX but not by Theophrastus are bérullion,
chrusolithos and topazion. As he mentions only
four stones that are not referred to in LXX,
namely chrusékolla, hualaeidés, kuands and émphaz,
it follows that the LXX translators at Alexandria
introduced every important name that was then
in use at Athens for a precious stone.

_In the following alphabetical list references are
given to all the verses in which each name of a pre-
cious stone occurs, and for each use of a tr’ name
the corresponding word in the original text.

Achatés (axarns, achdtés): probably LXX tr of
shbho (Ex 28 19; 39 12). Itis not mentioned in

Apoc or the NT.
12. Names Adamant (see also special art.): in
with Biblical Ezk 3 9; Zec 7 12, EV tr of Heb
References sha@mir.

Agate: in Ex 28 19; 39 12, EV tr
of Heb sh*bho; in Isa 64 12; Ezk 27 16, AV tr of
Heb kadhkodh.

’Ahlamah, TWOONN: in Ex 28 19; 39 12: 3d
stone, 3d row, of the breastplate. LXX translates
are aes Vulg translates amethystus; EV “ame-

yst.

The LXX rendering am i
as Correct, but the iste Beet Rice eR et
formerly (1857-80) Keeper of Minerals in the British
Museum, gave reasons for regarding the ’aklamah of
breastplate times as possibly, an onyx in which white
parce alternated with waxy-yellow to reddish-yellow


Amber: in Ezk 1 4.27; 82, AV, ERV and


2859


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Stones, Precious


ARVm tr of Heb hashmal; in Ex 28 19, RVm
tr of Heb leshem.

Amethustos (&pé0vores, améthustos): in Rev 21
20: the 12th foundation of the New Jerusalem; Vulg
translates amethystus; EV ‘“‘amethyst.’’ Four vari-
eties of amethystus were recognized by Pliny as pre-
cious; all of them were transparent, and of purple
tint or of tints derived from purple. According to
LXX, amethustos was the 3d stone, 3d row, of the
breastplate, and the stone occupying this position is
given in our Heb text as ’ahldmah. Amethustos is
mentioned under the name amethuson by Theophras-
tus; he describes it as a transparent stone resembling
wine in color and as used by the gem engravers of
his day. Amethystus and amethuson were doubt-
less identical with the amethyst of the present day,
a purple variety of quartz (silica). Beads and
other ornaments of amethyst found in old Egyp
tombs show that the stone was regarded as precious
in very ancient times.

Amethyst: in Ex 28 19; 39 12, EV tr of Heb
’ahlamah; in Rev 21 20, EV tr of Gr amethustos.

Anthrax (avOpat, dnthrax): in Tob 13 17; Ecclus
32 5, EV translates ‘“carbuncle.’’ According to
LXX, anthrax was also a stone of the breastplate,
1st stone, 2d row, but there is uncertainty as to the
Heb text of the LXX in respect of this word. The
anthrax of Theophrastus included different kinds
of hard, red stone used by the gemengravers. Itis
the carbunculus of Pliny’s time, and probably in-
cluded the oriental ruby (corundum, alumina), the
balas ruby (spinel, aluminate of magnesium), the
almandine (a kind of garnet, alumino-silicate of
iron) and pyrope (another kind of garnet, alumino-
silicate of magnesium) of the present day.

Bareketh, Mp3D: in Ex 28 17; 39 10; Ezk 28
13: 8d stone, 1st row, of breastplate. LXX proba-
bly translates smaragdos, but there is uncertainty as
to the Heb text of the LXX in respect of this word:
EV translates “carbuncle”; RVm translates ‘‘em-
erald.”’ The rendering smaragdos may be correct,
but no emeralds of very early age have been found in
Egypt. From the similarity of the words bareketh
and barak (“lightning”), it has been suggested that
possibly the breastplate stone was not green but of
bluish-red color, in which case it may have been an
almandine (garnet). EV has interchanged the
names given by LXX to the 3d stone of the Ist row
(smaragdos, “emerald’’) and the Ist stone of the 2d
row (anthraz, ‘‘carbuncle’’).

Bdellium (see also special art.): in Gen 2 12;
Nu 11 7, EV tr of Heb bedholah.

Bedhélah, maa: LXX translates anthrax in Gen
212, and krustallos in Nu 117; Vulg and EV
translate bdellium. Some commentators, rejecting
both the LXX tr’, interpret the material to be
pearl, others to be the gum of an Arabian tree.

Bérullos (Bapvddos, bérullos): in Tob 138 17; Rev
21 20: the 8th foundation of the New Jerusalem.
Vulg translates beryllus; EV translates “beryl.”
According to LXX, bérullion was a stone of* the
breastplate, the 2d stone, 4th row; owing to uncer-
tainty as to their Heb text, there is doubt as to the
Heb word tr? bérullion. Bérullos is not mentioned
by Theophrastus, who may have regarded it as
included in the smaragdos of his day.

In the time of Pliny 8 varieties were recognized; he
says that beryllus was already thought by some to be
“of the same nature as the smaragdus, or at least closely
analogous. India produces them, and they are rarely to
be found elsewhere. The lapidaries cut all beryls of a
hexagonal form because the color which is deadened by
a dull uniformity of surface is heightened by the reflec-
tions resulting from the angles. If they are cut in any
other way, these stones have no brilliancy, whatever.
The most esteemed beryls are those which in color re-


semble the pure green of the sea. Some are of opinion
that beryls are naturally angular.”


This description suggests the identity of the sea-
green beryllus of Pliny’s time with the sea-green
beryl (alumino-silicate of beryllium) of the present


ay.

Beryl: in Ex 28 20; 39 13; Cant 5 14; Ezk
116; 109; 2813; Dnl 106, EV tr of Heb
tarshish; in Gen 2 12; Ex 25 7 m; 28 9.20; 35
27m; 1 Ch 29 2m; Job 28 16m, RVm tr of Heb
shéham; in Tob 13 17; Rev 21 20, EV tr of Gr
bérullos.

Carbuncle: in Ex 28 17; 39 10; Ezk 28 13, EV
tr of Heb bareketh; in Ex 28 18 m; 39 11; Ezk 27
16; 28 13, RVm tr of Heb néphekh; in Isa 64 12,
EV tr of Heb ’ekdah; Tob 13 17; Ecclus 32 5,
EV tr of Gr anthraz.

Chalcedony: in Ex 28 20, RVm tr of Heb tar-
shish; in Rev 21 19, EV tr of Gr chalkédon.

Chalkédon (xadnndév, chalkédén): in Rev 21 19:
the 3d foundation of the New Jerusalem. Vulg
translates calcedonius; EV translates “chalcedony.”
Though the name Chalcedon (Lat form) occurs in
Pliny, it is not as the name of a stone but as that
of a free town then standing on the southern side
of the Bosphorus, probably close to the site on
which Scutari now stands. Chalcedon had once
been noted for its copper mines; but the latter,
when Pliny wrote, had been so far exhausted that
they were no longer worked.

Pliny refers to a kind of smaragdus (a green stone) as
having been found near Chalcedon, but adds that the
stones were of very small size and value. They were
‘brittle, and of a color far from distinctly pronounced;
they resembled in their tints the feathers that are seen
in the tail of the peacock or on the neck of the pigeon.
More or less brilliant, too, according to the angle at
which they were viewed, they presented an appearance
like that of veins and scales.’’ In another place he refers
to a stone from Chalcedon or Calchedon (another read-
ing) as being an iaspis of turbid hue. It is possible that
at Patmos or Ephesus, at one of which St. John was
living when he wrote the Book of Rev, the word chalka-
dén was used to specify the particular kind of smaragdus
or taspis that had been found near the town of that
name. It is uncertain what name would be given to
such a stone in the present day, but the signification
now attached to the name "chalcedony" (crypto-
epee silica) cannot be traced farther back than the

cent.


Chrusolithos (xpvoéd.Bos, chrusdlithos): in Rev
21 20: the 7th foundation of the New Jerusalem.
Vulg translates chrysolithus; AV translates ‘‘chryso-
lyte’; RV translates “chrysolite.”’ According to
LXX chrusolithos was one of the stones of the
breastplate (Ist stone, 4th row), but there is un-
certainty as to the Heb text of the LXX in respect
of this word; the name is not mentioned by Theo-
phrastus. The chrysolithus of Pliny was a ‘‘trans-
parent stone with a refulgence like that of gold.”
Those were most valued which “when placed by
the side of gold, impart to it a sort of whitish
hue, and so give it the appearance of silver.”

It may perhaps have included the yellow sapphire
(alumina), the yellow quartz (citrine, silica) and the
yellow jargoon (zircon, silicate of zirconlum) of the
present day. The term ‘‘chrysolite’’ Is now applied to
a different mineral, namely, to a yellow variety of
olivine (silicate of magnesium and iron), a species that
includes the green precious stone peridot as another of
its varieties.


Chrusoprasos (xpvoémpacos, chruséprasos): in
Rev 21 20: the 10th foundation of the New
Jerusalem. Vulg and AV translate chrysoprasus;
RV translates ‘‘chrysoprase.” The chrysoprasus
was regarded by some naturalists of the time of
Pliny as a variety of beryllus. The 1st variety
of beryllus and the most esteemed was, as stated
above, of a pure sea-green color; the 2d was
paler, and approached a golden tint; the 3d, allied
to the 2d in brilliancy but more pallid, was the
chrysoprasus. The latter was thought by other
naturalists to belong to an independent genus of
stone. In another place Pliny describes the color


Stones, Precious


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2860


as like that of the leek, but as varying in tint be-
tween the fopazion of his day (our peridot) and gold.
The stone may have been a yellowish-green plasma
(chalcedony, crypto-crystalline silica) or, as suggested
by King, pale chrysobery] (aluminate of beryllium);
itis not the chrysoprase of the present day, which
is an apple-green chalcedony (colored by nickel).

Chrysolite, chrysolyte: “‘chrysolite’ in Ezk 28
13, AVm tr of Heb tarshish; Rev 21 20, RV tr of
Gr chrusolithos; ‘“chrysolyte’ in Rev 21 20, AV
tr of Gr chrusolithos.

Chrysoprase, chrysoprasus: ‘“chrysoprase” in
Ezk 27 16, AVm tr of Heb kadhkodh; Rev 21 20,
RV tr of Gr chrusoprasos; “chrysoprasus” in Rev
21 20, AV tr of Gr chrusoprasos.

Coral, red coral (see special art.): ‘coral’ in
Job 28 18; Ezk 27 16, EV tr of Heb ra’math;
Lam 4 7, RVm tr of Heb p'ntnim; ‘red coral’’ in
Job 28 18, RVm tr of Heb p*ninim.

Crystal (see special art.): in Job 28 17, AV tr of
Heb zkhukhith; Ezk 1 22, AV tr of Heb kerah;
in Job 28 18, RV trof Heb gabhish; in Rev 4 6; 22
1, EV tr of Gr krustallos; in Rev 21 11, EV tr of
Gr krustallizd (‘‘to shine like crystal’).

Diamond: in Jer 17 1, EV tr of Heb shdmir;
in Ex 28 18; 39 11; Ezk 28 13, EV tr of Heb
yahdlom.

’Ekdah, TIPN: in Isa 64 12: LXX translates
krustallos; Vulg periphrases as lapides sculpti
(“engraved stones”); EV translates ‘“carbuncles.”’
From the similarity to MIP, kadhah, “to burn,”
it is interpreted as meaning fiery or sparkling,
whence comes the rendering ‘‘carbuncles.”’

Electrum (see special art.): Ezk 1 4, RVm tr
of Heb hashmal, “amber.”

Emerald: in Ex 28 18; 3911; Ezk 27 16;
28 18, EV tr of Heb ndphekh; in Ex 28 17; 39
10, RVm tr of Heb bdreketh; in Tob 13 16; Jth
10 21; Ecclus 32 6; Rev 21 19, EV tr of Gr
smaragdos; in Rev 21 19, EV tr of Gr adj. smardg-


dinos. :

Gabhish, 0°23: in Job 28 18: LXX transliter-
ates gabis; AV translates “pearls”; RV translates
“crystal.” From the similarity to D232, gabhash,
“ice,” the rendering ‘“‘crystal” is suggested.

Hashmal, SOOT: in Exk 1 4.27; 8 2: LXX
translates élektron; Vulg and RVm translate elec-
trum; AV, ERV and ARVm translate ‘amber’;
ARV translates “glowing metal.” The éektron
of the time of the LXX and Theophrastus was
the amber of the present day; in the time of
Pliny amber was an object of luxury ranked next
to crystal, and the term elcctrum was then applied,
not only to amber, but also to a metallic alloy of
gold and silver. :

Huakinthos (¢dan.v0os, hudkinthos): in Rev
9 17; 21 20: the 11th foundation of the New
Jerusalem. Vulg translates hyacinthus; AV trans-
lates ‘‘jacinth’; RV translates “jacinth’” (Rev
21 20) and “hyacinth” (Rev 9 17); RVm trans-
lates “sapphire’ (Rev 21 20). Pliny describes the
hyacinthus as being very different from amethys-
tus, “though partaking of a color that closely
borders upon it” and as being of. a more diluted
violet, It may have been the pale blue sapphire
(alumina) of the present day; the modern hyacinth,
or jacinth, is a quite different stone, a brownish to
reddish zircon (silicate of zirconium).

Hyacinth, jacinth (see also special art. on Hy-
ACINTH): “hyacinth” in Rev 9 17, RV tr of Gr
huakinthos; ‘jacinth’ in Ex 28 19; 39 12, RV
tr of Heb leshem; in Rev 9 17; 21 20, AV tr of
Gr huakinthos. :

Iaspis (tarms faspis): in Rev 4 3; 21 11.18f:
the 1st foundation of the New Jerusalem. Vulg


translates jaspis; EV translates “‘jasper.’’ Ac-
cording to LXX iaspis was the 3d stone, 2d row,
of the breastplate, but there is uncertainty as to
the Heb text of the LXX in respect of this
word; LXX translates also kadhkodh as taspis
(Isa 54 12). Pliny describes iaspis as being gen-
erally green and often transparent; he recognizes
as many as 14 varieties.

He adds that ‘‘many countrles produce this stone:
that of India is like smaragdus in color; that of Cyprus
is hard and of a full sea-green; and that of Persia 1s sky-
hlue. Similar to the last is the Caspian taspis. On
the banks of the river Thermodon the iaspis is of an
azure color; in Phrygia itis purple; and in Cappadocia
of an azure-purple, somber and not refulgent. The
pest kind is that which has a shade of purple, the next
best being the rose-colored, and the next the stone with
the green color of the smaragdus,"’ etc.


The term “jasper” is now restricted to opaque
stones; the green transparent kind of taspis may
have been identical with the green chalcedony
(erypto-crystalline silica) called plasma at the
present day.

Jasper: in Ex 28 20; 39 13; Ezk 28 13, EV
tr of Heb ydsh¢phéh; in Rev 4 3; 21 11.18.19,
EV tr of Gr iaspis.

Kadhkodh, “27D: in Isa 64 12; Ezk 27 16:
LXX translates iaspis (Isa 54 12) and transliter-
ates chorchor (Ezk 27 16); Vulg translates jaspis
(Isa 54 12) and transliterates chodchod (Ezk 27 16);
AV translates “agate’; AVm translates ‘“chryso-
prase” (Hzk 27 16); RV translates “ruby.” There
is little to indicate the probable meaning of the
word.

Kerah, T7: in Ezk 1 22: LXX translates
krustallos; Vulg translates crystallum; EV trans-
lates “‘crystal’; RVm translates ‘‘ice.”’ The trans-
lations are suggested by the similarity to the Heb
kerah, Mp, “ice.”

Krustallos (kptoraAdos, kristallos): in Rev 4 6;
22 1: Vulg translates crystallum; EV translates
“erystal.’’ The crystallum of Pliny was the rock-
crystal (clear quartz) of the present day. Among
the localities cited for crystallum by Pliny are ‘‘the
crags of the Alps, so difficult of access that it is
usually found necessary to be suspended by ropes
in order to extract it.”

Lapis lazuli: in Rev 21 19, RVm tr of Gr sap-
pheiros. :

Leshem, DW2: in Ex 28 19; 39 12: Ist stone, 3d
row, of the breastplate. XX probably translates
ligurion, but there is uncertainty as to their Heb
text; Vulg probably translates ligurius; AV trans-
lates “ligure’; RV translates -‘“‘jacinth’; RVm
translates “amber.”

The ligurion of LXX is probably identical with the
lugkurion of Theophrastus; this wasa yellow to yellowlsh-
red stone used hy seal engravers, and was transparent
and difficult to polish. Tho yellow ligurion may be the
yellow jargoon of the present day (zircon, silicate of
zirconium), a stone much used by the ancient Gr and
Rom engravers; but as the jargoon has not heen found
among ancient Eeyp work, it has been suggested that the
ligurion of the breastplate may have been a yellow
quartz (citrine) or agate. The yellowish-red ligurion
may have been one of the stones to which the name
‘Jacinth” (also a zircon) is now applied. Professor
Maskelyne, rejecting the LXX tr, suggests that the
leshem was identical with the neshem of the Egyptians,
namely the green feldspar now called amazon stone; as
an alternative rendering to this he suggests yellow jasper.
The tr "amber’’ (RVm) js not likely to be correct, for
that material would have heen too soft for use as a stone


of the areas its properties do not accord with
those assigned by Theophrastus to the lugkurion.


Ligure: in Ex 38 19; 39 12, AV tr of Heb
leshem.

Ligurion Qtytpiov, ligérion): in LXX Ex 28
19; 39 12, LXX tr of Heb leshem: 1st stone, 3d
row, of breastplate.

Margarites (hapyaptrys, margarités): in Mt 7 6;


2861


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Stones, Precious


13 45.46; 1 Tim29; Rev 18 12.16; 21 21:
Vulg translates margarita; EV translates ‘“‘pearl.”
The margarités is mentioned by Theophrastus as
being one of the peeious stones, but not pellucid,
as produced in a kind of oyster and in the pinna,
and as brought from the Indies and the shores of
certain islands in the Red Sea. Hence it was
identical with the pearl of the present day. —

Nophekh, FDI: in Ex 28 18; 8911; Ezk 27
16; 28 13: 1st stone, 2d row, of the breastplate.
There is uncertainty as to the Heb text used by the
LXX, but probably ndphekh is translated anthrax
(except in Ezk 27 16, where the text differs); Vulg
probably translates carbunculus; EV translates

‘emerald’; RVm translates ‘‘carbuncle.” EV
interchanges the names given by the LXX to the
3d stone, lst row (smaragdos, “emerald’’) and the
Ist stone, 2d row (anthrax, “carbuncle’’). Professor
Maskelyne suggests that the ndphekh of thé breast-
plete may have been the mophak or mafka of the
i yp hieroglyphics, the turquoise of the present
ay.

’Odhem, DFR: in Ex 28 17; 39 10; Ezk 28 13:
1st stone, 1st row, of the breastplate. LXX prob-
ably translates sardion* Vulg probably translates
sardius; EV translates ‘“‘sardius’; EVm translates
“ruby.” The Heb word is related to ’adham, DIS,
“to be red,” and signifies a reddish stone; it may
have been sard (a name given not only to red, but
also to pale reddish-yellow or brown, translucent
chalcedony), but was more probably carnelian, a
red stone closely allied to sard, and much used by
the ancient Egyptians and Assyrians.

Onuchion, onuz (avbxiov, omichion, dv, énuz):
“onux,’”’ LXX tr of Heb shdham (Job 28 16);
onuchion, perhaps LXX tr of shdham in the de-
scriptions of the ornaments of the king of Tyre
(Eizk 28 13) and the stones of the breastplate
(being there made 3d stone, 4th row, in Ex 28 20;
39 13), but there is uncertainty as to the Heb text
of the LXX; Vulg translates onyx, lapis onychinus,
lapis sardonychus. The onuchion of Theophrastus
was a hard, translucent stone used by the seal
engravers; it consisted of white and dusky layers
in alternation. The onyx of Rom times was an
opaque stone of white and black layers, like the
onyx of the present day.

Onyx: in Gen 2 12; Ex 25 7; 28 9.20; 35 9.
27; 89 6.13; 1 Ch 29 2; Job 28 16; Ezk 28 13,
EV tr of Heb shoham.

Pearl: in Job 28 18, AV tr of Heb gabhish;
in Job 28 18, RVm tr of Heb p’ninim; in Mt 7 6;
138 45f; 1 Tim 29; Rev 18 12.16; 21 20.21,
EV tr of Gr margarités.

Perinim, DD: in Job 28 18; Prov 3 15;
8 11; 20 15; 31 10; Lam 4 7: LXX (from which
Prov 20 15 is missing) periphrases the word or had
a different Heb text; Vulg translates ebur antiquum
(“old ivory”) in Lam 4 7, but elsewhere peri-
phrases the word or had a different Heb text; EV
translates “rubies”; RVm translates “red coral,”
or “pearls,’”’ except for Lam 4 7, where the tr is
“corals.” The word is similar to an Arab. word
meaning “branches” and may signify red coral, which
has been highly esteemed since very ancient times;
a description of kordillion is given by Theophrastus.
Pliny says that in his day the reddest and most
branched was most valued.

Pifedhah, VOD: in Ex 28 17; 39 10; Job 28 19;
Ezk 28 13: 2d stone, Ist row, of the breastplate.
LXX translates topazton in Job 28 19 and probably
also in the other verses; Vulg translates topazius;
EV translates “topaz.” The topazion of ancient
times appears to have been scarcely known before
the Ptolemaic period, and Professor Maskelyne
suggested that the Heb word may possibly be


allied to bijada, which in Pers and Arab. signifies
“garnet.”

Ramoth: in Job 28 18, AVm tr of Heb ra’math.

Ra’moth, NVA: in Job 28 18; Ezk 27 16:
LXX translates metédra (Job 28 18) and ramoth
(Ezk 27 16); Vulg periphrases the passages; EV
translates ‘‘coral”; AVm translates “ramoth” (only
in Job 28 18). There is little to indicate the
meaning of the Heb word.

Ruby: in Job 28 18; Prov 3 15; 8 11; 20 15;
31 10; Lam 4 7, EV tr of Heb pninim; in Isa
64 12; Ezk 27 16, RV tr of Heb kadhkodh; in Ex
28 17; 39 10; Ezk 28 13, AVm tr of Heb ’adhem.

Sappheiros (cdmdepos, séppheiros): in Tob 13
16; Rev 21 19: the 2d foundation of the New Jeru-
salem. Vulg translates sapphirus; EV translates
“sapphire’; RVm translates “lapis lazuli” (but
only in Rev 2119). According to LXX, sappheiros
was the 2d stone, 3d row, of the breastplate, but
there is uncertainty as to the Heb text. Pliny
describes sapphirus as ‘“refulgent with spots like
gold. It is also of an azure color, though some-
times, but rarely, it is purple; the best kind being
that which comes from Media. In no case, how-
ever, is this stone transparent.’’ ‘These character-
istics correspond to the lapis lazuli (sulphato-silicate
of sodium and aluminium), not to the sapphire
(alumina) of thé present day.

Sappir, "BD: in Ex 24 10; 28 18; 39 11; Job
28 6.16; Cant 5 14; Isa 54 11; Lam 4 7; Ezk 1
26; 101; 28 13: 2d stone, 2d row, of the breast-
plate. LXX translates sappheiros; Vulg translates
sapphirus and (Ex 24 10) lapis sapphirinus; EV
translates “sapphire.” The Heb word is universally
accepted as equivalent to the Gr sappheiros; that
name was used, not for the stone now known as
sapphire, but for that now known as lapis lazuli, a
substance which was regarded by the ancient Egyp-
tians as a precious stone.

Sardine (stone), sardius: “sardine” (stone) in
Rev 4 3, AV tr of Gr sdrdinon, an error of text for
sardion; “‘sardius’ in Rev 4 3, RV tr of Gr sar-
dion; in Rev 21 20, EV tr of Gr sardion; in Ex
28 17; 39 10; Ezk 28 13, EV tr of Heb ’ddhem.

Sardion (cdpiov, sdrdion): in Rev 4 3; 21 20:
the 6th foundation of the New Jerusalem. Accord-
ing to LXX, sardion was the ist stone, 1st row,
of the breastplate. Vulg translates sardius; AV
translates “‘sardine’”’ (stone) (Rev 4 3) and “‘sar-
dius” (Rev 21 20); RV translates “‘sardius.” The
sarda of Pliny’s time was much used by the seal
engravers. There were three Indian varieties, all
of them transparent, one of them red in color;
there was then no precious stone in more common
use; those of honey-color were less valued. It
probably included both the sard and the carnelian
of the present day (crypto-crystalline silica).

Sapphire: in Ex 24 10; 28 18; 39 11; Job 28
6.16; Cant 6 14; Isa 6411; Lam 47; Ezk1
26; 10 1; 28 13, EV tr of Heb sappir; in Tob 13
16; Rev 21 19, EV tr of Gr sappheiros; in Rev 21
20, RVm tr of Gr huakinthos.

Sardonux (vapSévut, sardénuz): in Rev 21 20:
the 5th foundation of the New Jerusalem. Vulg
and EV translate sardonyz. According to Pliny,
the name sardonyx was at first given to an Indian
(red) sarda with a layer of white in it, both being
transparent.


«,


Pliny says that later three colors were considered
essential, but that they might be repeated indefinitely,
The Arabian sardonyz was ‘“‘characterized by several
different colors, black or azure for the base and ver-
milion surrounded with a line of rich white for the upper
part, not without a certain glimpse of purple as the white
passes into the red."


The sardonuz of St. John’s time is included in the
sardonyx of the present day.


Stones, Precious
Stout, Stoutness


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2862


Sardonyx: in Rev 21 20, EV tr of Gr sardonuz;
Ex 28 18; 39 11, RVm tr of Heb yahdlom.

Shamir, WOW: in Jer 171; Ezk 3 9; Zee 7
12; LXX omits Jer 17 1, and in the other two
verses either periphrases the word or had a different
text; Vulg translates (unguis) adamantinus in Jer
17 1, and adamas in the other two verses; EV
translates ‘‘diamond” (Jer 17 1) and “adamant”
(Ezk 3 9; Zec 7 12). Shamir was a hard material”
used for engraving precious stones; in the days of
Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Zechariah, splinters of both
diamond and corundum (white sapphire or adamant
stone) were probably available for the purpose.
Both diamond and adamant are Eng. modifications
of the Lat adamas; the form “diamond” has been
restricted for some centuries to the more precious
of the above stones.

Shebhé, IAW: in Ex 28 19; 39 12: the 2d stone,
3d row, of the breastplate. Both LXX and Vulg
probably translate achaiés, but their Heb texts
are uncertain; EV translates ‘‘agate.”” The name
achaiés was given in ancient times to certain stones
having banded structures, the agates of the present
day. In the time of Theophrastus achatés was sold
at a great price, but by the time of Pliny had
ceased to bea precious stone. Professor Maskelyne
suggests that the sh°bhd of the breastplate may
have signified the ‘stone of Sheba” or “Seba,” a
district in Southern Arabia, and have been the
Arabian onyx.

Shoham, DW: in Gen 2 12; Ex 257; 28 9.
20; 359.27; 396.13; 1 Ch 29 2; Job 28 16;
Ezk 28 13: the 2d stone, 4th row, of the breast-
plate. LXX translates prdsinos, i.e. ‘eek-green
stone” (Gen 2 12), sardion (Ex 25 7; 35 9),
smaragdos (Ex 28 9; 35 27), bérullion, probably
through interchange of words in the Heb text
(Ex 28 20; 39 13), soom (1 Ch 29 2), onux (Job
28 16) and perhaps onuchion (Ezk 28 13); Vulg
translates onyx (Ezk 28 13), lapis sardonychus
(Job 28 16) and lapis onychinus elsewhere; EV
translates “onyx”; RVm translates ‘‘beryl’’ (except
in Ezk 28 13). Professor Maskelyne and Professor
Sayce, accepting green as the color of shdham, have
expressed the opinion that the stone known by that
name in very early times was the stone called ’siamu
by the Assyrians, and therefore the green turquoise;
Professor Maskelyne gives ‘‘amazon stone’ as an
alternative rendering of the word. Bérullion is
given by LXX as the 2d stone, onuchion as the
3d stone, of the 4th row; sardion as the Ist stone,
smaragdos as the 3d stone, of the 1st row; but their
Heb text is uncertain.

Smaragdinos, smaragdos (rpapéySivos, smardg-
dinos): in Rev 4 8: Vulg translates smaragdinus;
EV translates “emerald.” Smaragdos (cudpayios,
smdragdos) in Tob 13 16; Jth 10 21; Ecclus 32 5;
Rev 21 19: Vulg translates smaragdus; EV trans-
lates ‘‘emerald.’ According to LXX, smaragdes
was the 3d stone, 1st row, of the breastplate, but
their Heb text is uncertain. The smaragdos of
Theophrastus was a small, scarce, presumably
green, stone used by the gem engravers. In Pliny’s
time the genus smaragdus comprised no fewer than
12 kinds; one of them was the emerald of the pres-
ent day, and probably the smaragdos of Theo-
phrastus. ae

Tarshish, DUT: in Ex 28 20; 39 13; Cant
5 14; Ezk 1 16; 10 9; 28 13; Dnl 10 6: the 1st
stone, 4th row, of the breastplate. LXX translates
tharsis (Cant 6 14; Ezk 116; Dnl 10 6), an-
thrax (Ezk 10 9); in the remaining verses there is
uncertainty as to the order of the Heb words in the
several texts. The most likely LXX equivalent
of tarshish is either chrusolithos or béruilion; Vulg


translates hyacinthus (Cant 6 14), mare (“‘sea’’)
(Ezk 1 16), chrysolithus (Ezk 10 9; Dnl 10 6).
LXX gives anthrax as the 1st stone, 2d row,
chrusolithos as the 1st stone, 4th row, bérullion_as
the 2d stone, 4th row, of the breastplate; EV
translates “beryl’’; AVm translates ‘‘chrysolite” (in
Ezk 28 13 only); RVm translates ‘“chaleedony”
(Ex 28 20; 39 13), “topaz” (Cant 6 14) and
“stone of Tarshish” (Ezk 10 9). Professor Maske-
lyne suggests that the stone may have been citrine
(quartz), if yellow as suggested by chrusolithos, and
green jasper, if green as suggested by bérullion.

Topaz: in Ex 28 17; 39 10; Job 28 19; Ezk 28
13, EV tr of Heb pitedhah; in Rev 21 20, EV tr of
Gr topazion; in Cant 5 14, RVm tr of Heb tarshish.

Topazion (romdtvov, topdzion): in Rev 21 20:
the 9th foundation of the New Jerusalem. Accord-
ing to LXX fopazion was the 2d stone, Ist row, of
the breastplate. Vulg translates topazius; EV
translates “topaz.”’

The topazion of Pliny’s time was ‘‘held in very high
estimation for its green tints; when it was first dis-
covered it was preferred to every other kind of precious
stone.”” It was said to be brought from an island in the
Red Sea, off the coast of Arabia. It was the only stone
of high value that yielded _to the action of the file. To-
pazion is not mentioned by Theophrastus. Pliny’s
account corresponds to the peridot of the present day
(silicate of magnesium and iron), not to our topaz
(fluosilicate of aluminium).

Yahdlom, nada: in Ex 28 18; 39 11; Ezk
28 13: the 3d stone, 2d row, of the breastplate.
Owing to the uncertainty as to the order of the
words in the Heb text of the LXX, there is uncer-
tainty as to the Gr equivalent of yahdlaém; probably
it is one of the words chrusolithos, bérullion, onu-
chion, given by the LXX as the names of the stones
of the 4th row. EV translates “diamond”; this is
certainly wrong, for the stone had a name engraved
on it and the method of engraving a diamond was
not invented till 2,000 or 3,000 years after the
breastplate was made; nor were diamonds, if known
at all, then known so large as to be comparable in
respect of size, with the other stones of the breast-
plate. RVm translates “sardonyx” (in Ex only).
Professor Maskelyne suggests that the Heb yahd-
lém and the Gr hualos may be kindred words and
that yahdlom may have been a bluish glass (con-
sidered valuable in very early times), or blue chal-
cedony, or perhaps even, beryl.

Yash*phéh, T]WI: in Ex 28 20; 39 13; Ezk
28 13: the 8d stone, 4th row, of the breastplate.
LXX probably translates iaspis, though taspis is
placed by LXX as the 3d stone, 2d row; Vulg proba-
bly translates jaspis; EV translates “Jasper.” The
equivalence of the Heb yash*phéh and the Gr itaspis
is generally accepted.

Zkhakhith, MPT: in Job 28 17: LXX trans-
lates hualos, a name given at first to any trans-
parent stone, but in later times only to glass; Vulg
translates vitrum; AV translates “crystal”; RV
translates “glass.” Zkhikhith is related to a Heb
word meaning “‘to be pure,’’ whence the renderings
crystal and glass. Lazarus FLETCHER


STONING, stin’ing. See PunisHmM=nts.


STOOL, stool (IAN, ’obhnayim): It is not
clear what the character and purpose of this stool
were (LXX has noreferencetoit). It seemsto have
been a chair of a peculiar sort upon which a woman
reclined in parturition (Ex 1 16). The Heb word
is in the dual number and primarily means “two
stones.” The only other place where it occurs is
Jer 18 3, where it is rendered ‘wheels’ (LXX
éxt r&v NOwv, epi ton lithén, “on the stones”).
In2 K 4 10, the word tr? in AV as “stool” (N@3,


2863


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Stones, Precious
Stout, Stoutness


kiss@’) is in RV more correctly tr ‘‘seat.’’ See also
BIRTH-STOOL; SEAT. Jesse L. Cotron


STORAX, st6’raks. See Portar; Stacts.


STORE-CITIES, stor’cit-iz (VIIDO , miskenadth):
RV Ex 1 11 (of Prrnom and Raamsss [q.v.]) for
AV “treasure cities’ (cf 1K 919; 2 Ch 8 4.6;
16 4, etc). Depots of provisions and magazines
of arms.


STOREHOUSES, stor’houz-iz, -ez: The follow-
ing chief changes in the use of this word (repre-
senting various Heb words) in RV to be noted are:
In Dé 28 8, RV has “barns” (dsamim); in 1 Ch
27 25, “treasures” (’d¢drath); in Neh 12 25, for
‘thresholds’ has ‘storehouses’ (dsuppim), so,
for “Asuppim” in 1 Ch 26 15.17 (‘house of
Asuppim,” “toward Asuppim’”) has ‘‘store-house”’ ;
in Lk 12 24, for “storehouse” has ‘‘store-chamber’
(tameton). In other passages AV “storehouse”
is retained (Gen 41 56; 2 Ch 32 28, misknéth;
Ps 38 7, ’dcarath; Jer 50 26, ma’dbhusim).


STORIES, st6’riz: For AV “stories” (ma‘éléth) in
Am 9 6, RV reads “chambers” (in heavens); in Gen
6 16 (ark); Ezk 42 3.6 (temple), the word is sup-
plied. RV in the latter verse reads in the text “‘the
third story’ (m as in AV). In 1K 6 5.10, RV
has “stories” (yGci', yacu*'; see TEMPLE), and in
Ezk 41 6 supplies “stories.”


STORK, stérk (POO, hdsidhah; variously


rendered in LXX: Lev 11 19, épwSsds, erddids;
Dt 14 18, wedexdv, pelekin; Job 89 13, dord4,


Stork.


hasidd [transliteration of Heb]; Zec 6 9, ero,
épops; Lat Ciconia alba): A large wading bird of
the family Ardeidae, related to crane, ibis, heron
andbittern. Thestork on wing isa bird of exquisite
beauty. The primary, secondary and a few of the
tertiary wing feathers are black, the remainder, also
the head, neck, and back and under parts white,
the bill and legs red. When a perching white bird
suddenly unfolds these wonderful wings, having
at times a sweep of 7 ft., and sails away, it makes


a very imposing picture. Zechariah in a vision saw
a woman having the wings of a stork; Zee 5 9,
“Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold,
there came forth two women, and the wind was in
their wings; now they had wings like the wings of
a stork; and they lifted up the ephah between
earth and heaven.” These birds winter in Africa.
In their spring migration many pairs pause in Pal,
others cross the Mediterranean and spread over
the housetops, ruins and suitable building-places
of Europe as far north as Holland and England.
Always and everywhere the bird has been more or
less protected on account of its fidelity to a chosen
location, its fearlessness of man and the tender love
between mated pairs and for its young.

The stork first appears among the birds of abomi-
nation, and it is peculiar that the crane does not, for
they are closely related. But the crane eats moles,
mice, lizards and smaller animals it can capture,
also frogs and fish. To this same diet the stork
adds carrion and other offensive matter, and the
laws of Moses, as a rule, are formulated with good
reason. Yet at one time, storks must have been
eaten, for Pliny quoted Cornelius Nepos, who died
in the days of Augustus Caesar, as saying that ‘in
his time storks were holden for a better dish at
board than cranes.” Pliny adds: “Yet see, how
in our age now, no man will touch a stork if it be
set before him on the board, but everyone is ready
to reach into the crane and no dish is more in re-
quest.”?” He also wrote that it was a capital crime in
Thessaly to kill storks, because of their work in
slaying serpents. This may have been the begin-
ning of the present laws protecting the bird, rein-
forced by the steady growth of respect_ and love
for its tender, gentle disposition. The Heb word
hdsidhah, from which the stork took its name,
means ‘‘kindness.”’

There is a smaller stork having a black neck
and back, that homes in Pal, but only in small
numbers as compared with the white. These birds
flock and live in forests around the borders of
waste and desert places, and build in trees. The
young of both species remain a long time in the nest
and are tenderly cared for, so much so indeed that
from their performances and love of building on
housetops arose the popular tradition that the stork
delivers newly born children to homes. The birds
first appear in Lev 11 19 and Dt 14 18. Jeremiah
poliea hat thestork was migratory; see8 7: “Yea,
the stork in the heavens knoweth her appointed
times; and the turtle-dove and the swallow and the
crane observe the time of their coming; but my
people know not the law of Jeh.” The Psalmist
referred to their nesting in the cedars of Lebanon,
for in Pal these birds could not build on housetops,
which were flat, devoid of chimneys and much used
by ue people as we use a veranda today; see Ps

04 17:


“Where the birds make their nests:
As for the stork, the fir-trees are her house.”’


Gene StratTton-PorTeR
STORY, std’ri. See Commentary.

STORY TELLING. See Gamas, I, 4.

STORY WRITER, std’ri-rit-ér: In the sense of


chronicler or historian occurs in 1 Esd 2 17 (m
“recorder’’) and 2 25.


STOUT, stout, STOUTNESS, stout’nes: In
modern Eng. the word signifies strength, firmness,
corpulence, etc, but in EV (Ps 76 5; isa 10 12;
46 12; Dni 7 20; Mal 8 13, with “stoutness’’
in Isa 9 9) it always means “bold” or “proud”
and invariably in-a bad sense; cf the Ger. stoiz,
with which “‘stout”’ is allied.


Straight
Stranger


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2864


STRAIGHT, strat, STRAIGHTWAY, strat’wa:
“Straight” and ‘strait’? are two entirely different
words that have no connection with each other in
Eng., the former being derived from the Anglo-
Saxon, while the latter has come back from the Lat
through the Romance. At some point still farther
back, however, the two words may have had some
common original with the general meaning “to
stretch.” But in straight the stretched object is a
cord from which all curvature is removed, while in
strait a solid is thought of, which is drawn out and
made narrow, used figuratively in Job 20 22; 36
16; Mt 7 13f; Phil 1 23. Before Eng. spelling had
reached a relatively settled stage the spelling of the
two words was interchanged occasionally, but in
even Elizabethan times this could happen only
through ignorance. In EV the forms are kept
distinct with great care. ‘Straight,’ then, appears
only in the sense “not crooked,” in the OT most
commonly for some form of "WW", ydashar, “be
smooth” (2 Ch 32 30, ete). In the Apoc and NT
the word is not very common, beimg used for
dp6és, orthés (Bar 6 27; He 12 13); ed6us, euthis
(Jth 18 20; Mk13 and |\’s), with the vbs.
dvopObw, anorthédd (Lk 18 13), and ev@ivw, euthind
(Jn 1 23; He 12 12 RVm), “to make straight,”
and etévédpouéw, euthudroméd, “to make a straight
course” (Acts 16 11; 21 1). For straightway in
EV overwhelmingly the most common word is
eObs, euthis, or edééws, euthéds. AV varies the
tr of this advb. by using either “straightway” or
‘immediately’ without distinction, but RV (with
a very few exceptions, e.g., Mt 24 29) has adhered
to “straightway.”’ The other occurrences in the
Bible (1 5S 9 13; 28 20, etc) represent no special
word. Bourton Scotr Easton

STRAIGHT STREET, strat strét. See Damas-
cus.


STRAIN, stran (8wAltw, diulizd, ‘to strain off,”
“to filter’): Mt 23 24, ‘““Yeblind guides, that stram
out the gnat, and swallow the camel!” The imagery
is that of a drinking-vessel full of liquid, from which
tiny impurities are carefully removed while immense
masses of other impure matter (Lev 11 4) are over-
looked (cf Mt 7 3f). The first ed of AV read the
same as RV, but in the later edd a misprint con-
verted “strain out” into “strain at,” an error that
has never been corrected.


STRAIT, strat, STRAITEN, strat’n, STRAITLY,
strat’li: The word “strait” and its compounds are
used in EV in the literal sense of “narrow” (car,
2K61; Isa 49 20; miicaék, Job 37 10; acai,
Ezk 42 6) and in the figurative sense of ‘‘strict’’
(shdbha‘, Ex 13 19; sdghar, Josh 61; ¢drar,
“to be distressed,’ 2 S 24 14||; yaar, Job 20 22:
mécar, Lam 1 3). In Apoc the vb. “straitened”’
occurs in Sus ver 22, In the NT we have stends
(Mt 7 13f|, RV “narrow”; polts, ‘much’; so
RV Mk 3 12; 5 43; sunéchd, “to urge,” “hold
together,” Lk 12 50; Phil 1 23). It occurs in its
superlative form in Acts 26 5, ‘After the straitest
[akribéstatos, “most exact,’’ “scrupulous’’] sect of
our religion,” i.e. “the most precise and rigorous
in interpreting the Mosaic Law, and in observing
the more minute precepts of the Law and of tra-
dition” (Thayer, Lex., s.v.; cf Acts 22 3). See
also StRaicHtT, STRAIGHTWAY. M. O. Evans


STRAKES, straks: An older form for “streaks”
(so ARV) in AV, ERV Gen 30 37 (piclah, “peeled
spot”); Lev 14 37 (shtka‘draréth, “hollow places’’).
For “strake,’ Tob 11 11; AV Acts 27 17, see
STRIKE.


STRANGE, strinj, FIRE ("71 WN, ’ésh zdrah,
“alien fire’): These words are mentioned in con-
nection with the fatal sin committed by the two
oldest sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihnu, in “offer-
ing strange fire before Jeh,”’ on the occasion of the
formal consecration of the Aaronitic priesthood
(Lev 10 1.2). The fact is mentioned again in
Nu 34; 2661. The greatest calamity of all
befell them in that they were cut off childless,
which for every true Israelite was the darkest fate
imaginable. This fact is mentioned twice (Nu
8 4 and 1 Ch 24 2). The power which cut off
the lives of Nadab and Abihu (Lev 10 1.2) is the
same as that which shortly before had consumed
the consecratory burnt offering (Lev 9 24). What
was its true character, whether, as Rosenmiiller
and Dachsel surmise, it was a lightning stroke or
some other supernatural agency, is not worth while
debating. It is enough for us to know that ‘‘there
came forth fire from before Jeh and devoured them.”
Yet this latter word is not to be taken literally, since
they were carried out for burial in their own linen
garments (Lev 10 5). They were therefore merely
killed, not incinerated. What was their sin? The
words “strange fire’ have been explained either as
common fire, which they placed in their censers, or
as unholy incense, which they put thereon (Ex
39 38). But the text plainly points to the former.
The sacred fire, once kindled on the altar, was never
to be permitted to go out (Lev 6 12f). When
later the temple was dedicated Jeh again lighted
the fire on the altar from heaven, as in the case of
the dedication of the tabernacle. As, however,
the injunction to take fire for the censers of the
incense offering only from the coals of the altar
is not found’ before (Lev 16 12), Rosenmiiller’s
observation would seem to be very much to the
point: “Quamquam enim in iis quae praecedunt,
non extat hoc interdictum, tamen est verisimile
Mosem vetasse Aaroni et filiis eius ne ignem alienum
altari imponerent.” (‘For although his injunction .
does not hold in regard to the preceding cases,
yet it is very probable that Moses had forbidden
Aaron and his sons to place strange fire upon the
altar.”) A verbal injunction of Moses must have
preceded the fatal mistake. But the text leads us
to believe there was more than a mistake here.
Some find here the sin of drunkenness, from the en-
joined abstinence from any intoxicating drink before
the priests thereafter minister before Jeh (Lev 10
9). The likeliest explanation is that, inflated with
pride on account of the exaltation of the Aaronitic
family above all Israel, they broke unbidden into
the ritual of the consecration of the tabernacle and
priesthood, eager to take part in the ceremony, and
in their haste bringing strange fire into the taber-
nacle, and thus met their death (see Oehler, OT
Theol., 126, 282). The fire burning on the altar
came from God, it might never go out, since it
represented “the unbroken course of adoration of
Jch, earricd on in sacrifice.” And this course was
interrupted by Nadab and Abihu. The fire on the
altar was a symbol of holiness, and they sought to
overlay it with unholiness. And thus it became
to them a consuming fire, because they approached
the Holy One in a profane spirit (cf Isa 33 14).

ENRY E. DoskeR

STRANGE GODS. See Gons, Strancs,


STRANGE WIFE: “Strange” as contrasted with
“an Israelite.” Such wives are spoken of in AV
Ezr 10 2.11 (ERV “strange women,’ ARV
“foreign women”; see STRANGER AND SOJOURNER}
in the || 1 Esd 8 68—9 37, AV uses “strange
wives” and “strange women” indifferently, and RV
here follows AV) as ‘‘wives of the people of the
land,” in taking whom the men of Israel are said


2865


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Straight
Stranger


to have ‘‘trespassed against their God.’’ Accord-
ingly such wives were ‘“‘put away.”


STRANGE WOMAN: The Heb I, 2ér, tr’
“stranger,” meant primarily one ‘“‘who turns aside,”’
le. to visit another country; then a ‘“sojourner,”
“stranger.” The “strange woman” of Prov 2 16
is a technical term for “harlot”; cf Jgs 11 1.2,
where ‘‘son of a strange [RV ‘“another’’] woman”
(ver 2, ’ahér) is parallel to “the son of a harlot”
(ver 1). See Strance Wire.


STRANGER, stranj’ér, AND SOJOURNER (IN
THE OT):


I. THE gér


3. Historical Circumstances

Il. THe téshabh

III. THe _nokhri on ben nékhar

1. Marriage

2. Exclusion of Some Races from the Assembly
IV. Tue zér

Four different Heb words must be considered
separately: (1) "4, gér, ARV “‘sojourner’’ or
“stranger”; (2) AWK, toshabh, ARV “sojourner”’;
(8) "132, nokhri, 32 Ja, ben nékhar, ARV “for-
eigner’’; (4) (1, 2ar, ARV “stranger.”

I. The gér.—-This word with its kindred vb. is
applied with slightly varying meanings to anyone
who resides in a country or a town of which he
is not a full native land-owning citizen; e.g., the
word is used of the patriarchs in Pal, the Israelites
in Egypt, the Levites dwelling among the Israelites
(Dt 18 6; Jgs 17 7, etc), the Ephraimite in Gibeah
(Jgs 19 16). It is also particularly used of free
aliens residing among the Israelites, and it is with
the position of such that this article deals. This
position is absolutely unparalleled in early legal
systems (A. H. Post, Grundriss der ethnologischen
Jurisprudenz, I, 448, n. 3), which are usually far
from favorable to strangers.

(1) Principles The dominant principles of the
legislation are most succinctly given in two pas-
sages: He “‘loveth the gér_in giving
him food and raiment” (Dt 10 18);
“And if a gér sojourn with thee [variant
“you’’] in your land, ye shall not do
him wrong. The ger that sojourneth with you shall
be unto you as the home-born among you, and thou
shalt love him as thyself; for ye were gértm in the
land of Egypt” (Lev 19 33 f). This treatment of
the stranger is based partly on historic recollection,
partly on the duty of the Israelite to his God. Be-
cause the gér would be at a natural disadvantage
through his alienage, he becomes one of the favorites
of a legislation that gives special protection to the
weak and helpless.

(2) Rules.—In nationality the freeman followed
his father, so that the son of a gér and an Israelitess
was himself a gér (Lev 24 10-22). Special care
was to be taken to do him no judicial wrong (Dt
116; 2417; 2719). In what may roughly be
called criminal law it was enacted that the same
rules should apply to gértm as to natives (Lev 18
26, which is due to the conception that certain
abominations defile a land; 20 2, where the motive
is also religious; 24 10-22; sce SBL, 84ff; Nu
36 15). A free Israelite who became his slave was
subject to redemption by a relative at any time on
payment of the fair price (Lev 26 47 ff). This
passage and Dt 28 43 contemplate the possibility of
a stranger’s becoming wealthy, but by far the greater
number of the legal provisions regard him as prob-
ably poor. Thus provision is made for him to
participate in tithes (Dt 14 29; 26 12), gleanings


1. Legal
Provisions


of various sorts and forgotten sheaves (Lev 19
10; 23 22; Dt 24 19.20.21), and poor hired serv-
ants were not to be oppressed (Dt 24 14).

Nearly all the main holy days apply to the gér.
He was to rest on the Sabbath (Ex 20 10; 23 12, etc),

to rejoice on Weeks and Tabernacles
2.-Relation (Dt 16), to observe the Day of Atone-
to Sacrifice ment (Lev 16 29), to have no leaven
and Ritual on the Festival of Unleavened Bread

(Ex 12 19). But he could not keep
the Passover unless he underwent circumcision
(12 48). He could not eat blood at any rate during
the wilderness period (Lev 17 10-12), and for that
period, but not thereafter, he was probihited from
eating that which died of itself (Lev 17 15; Dt
14 21) under pain of being unclean until the even.
He could offer sacrifices (Lev 17 8f; 22 18; Nu
165 14f), and was subject to the same rules as a
native for unwitting sins (16 22-31), and for puri-
fication for uncleanness by reason of contact with a
dead body (Nu 19 10-13).

The historical circumstances were such as to
render the position of the resident alien important

: from the first. A ‘mixed multitude”
8. Histori- went up with the Israelites from Egypt,
cal Circum~ and after the conquest we find Israel-
stances ites and the races of Pal living side

by side throughout the country. We
repeatedly read of resident aliens in the historical
books, e.g. Uriah the Hittite. According to 2 Ch
2 17f (Heb 16 f) there was a very large number of
such in the days of Solomon, but the figure may be
excessive. These seem to have been the remnant
of the conquered tribes (1 K 9 20f). Ezekiel
in bis vision assigned to gértm landed inheritance
among the Israelites (47 22f). Hospitality to the
gér was of course a religious duty and the host would
go to any lengths to protect his guest (Gen 19;
Jgs 19 24).

Il. The téshabh.—Of the tashabh we know very
little. It is possible that the word is practically
synonymous with gér, but perhaps it 1s used of
less permanent sojourning. Thus in Lev 22 10 it
appears to cover anybody residing with a priest.
A téshabh could not eat the Passover or the “holy”
things of a priest (Ex 12 45; Lev 22 10). His
children could be purchased as perpetual slaves,
and the law of the Jubilee did not apply to them
as to Israclites (Lev 25 45). He is expressly men-
tioned in the law of homicide (Nu 35 15), but
otherwise we have no information as to his legal
position. Probably it was similar to that of the


gér.

Hl. The nokhri.—The nokhri or ben nékhar was
a foreigner. The word is far wider than those
considered above. It covers everything of alien or
foreign character regardless of the place of resi-
dence. By circumcision a foreign slave could enter
into the covenant with Abraham. Foreigners were
of course excluded from the Passover (Ex 12 43),
but could offer sacrifices to Israel’s God at the
religious capital (Lev 22 25). The Israelite could
exact interest of them (Dt 23 20) and the payment
of debts in cases where an Israelitish debtor was
protected by the release of Dt 16 (ver 3). Moses
forbade the appointment of a foreigner as a ruler
(Dt 17 15, ina law which according to MT relates
to a “king,” but in the preferable text of LXX
to a ruler generally). Later the worship of God
by foreigners from a distance was_ contemplated
and encouraged (1 K 8 41-43; Isa 2 2f; 56 3.6f;
etc), while the case of Naaman shows that a for-
eigner might worship Him abroad (2 K 5 17).
A resident foreigner was of course a gér. The dis-
tinction between these three words is perhaps best
seen in Ex 12 43.4548f. In the first of these
verses we have ben nékhdr, used to cover “alien”


Stranger
Stumbling-block


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2866


generally; in the last the gér is contemplated as
likely to undergo a complete naturalization; while
in ver 45 the toshabh is regarded as certain to be
outside the religious society.
In the earlier period marriages with foreigners
are common, though disliked (eg. Gen 24 3;
27 467; Nu 121; Jgs 14 3, etc).
1. Marriage The Law provides for some unions of
this kind (Dt 21 10 ff; cf Nu 31 18),
but later Judaism became more stringent. Moses
required the high priest to marry a virgin of his
own people (Lev 21 14); Ezekiel limited all de-
scendants of Zadok to wives of the house of Israel
(44 22); Ezra and Nehemiah carried on a vigorous
polemic against the intermarriage of any Jew with
foreign women (Ezr 10; Neh 13 23-31).
_ Dt further takes up a hostile attitude to Ammon-
ites and Moabites, excluding them from the assembly
of the Lord even to the tenth genera-


2. Exclu- tion, while the children of the third gen-
sion from eration of Edomites and Egyptians
Assembly could enter it (23 3-8 [Heb 4-9]).


From 1 K 9 20.21.24; 1 Ch 22 2 we

learn of the existence of foreign quarters in Israel.
IV. The zar.—The remaining word zadr means
“stranger” and takes its coloring from the context.
It may mean “stranger in blood,” e.g. non-Aaronite
(Nu 16 40 [Heb 17 5)}), or non-Levite (e.g. 1 51),
or a non-member of some other defined family
(Dt 25 5). In opposition to priest it means “lay”
(Lev 22 10-13), and when the contrast is with
holy, it denotes “profane” (Ex 30 9). See For-
EIGNER; GENTILE; ProseLyTn; CHERETHITES;

PELETHITES; MarriaGE; COMMERCE.

‘ Harotp M. Wiener
STRANGER AND SOJOURNER (IN THE APOC
AND NT): The technical meaning attaching to
the Heb terms is not present in the Gr words tr?
“stranger” and ‘‘sojourner,’ and the distinctions
made by EV are partly only to give uniformity
in the tr. For “stranger” the usual Gr word is
tévos, xénos, meaning primarily “‘gnest’”? and so
appearing in the combination “hatred toward
guests’ In Wisd 19 13 (siootevia, misoxenia).
Xenos is the most common word for “stranger”
in the NT (Mt 26 35, etc), but it seems not to be
used by itself with this force in the Apoc. Almost
equally common in the NT is dAhérpwos, alldirios,
“belonging to another’ (Mt 17 25.26; Jn 105
[bis]), and this is the usual word in the Apoc (Sir 8
18; 1 Mace 1 38, etc), but for some inexplicable
reason RV _ occasionally translates by ‘alien”
(contrast, e.g. 1 Mace 1 38; 27). Cf the corre-
sponding vb. dradhorpibw, apallotridd (Eph 2 12;
418; Col 1 21). With the definite meaning of
“foreigner” are dAdoyer}s, allogenés, “of another
nation,” RV ‘stranger’ (1 Esd 8 88; 1 Macc 3
45 [AV “alien”’]; Lk 17 18 [RVm “alien’’}), and
édrdbgvdos, alléphulos, “of another tribe,’ RV
“stranger” (Bar 6 5; 1 Mace 4 12, etc) or “of
another nation” (Acts 10 28). For “to sojourn”
the commonest form is Tapoxéw, parotkéo, “to
dwell beside,” RV always “to sojourn” (Jth 5 7;
Sir 41 19; Lk 24 18 [AV “to be a stranger”);
He 11 9). Thecorresponding noun for “sojourner”’
is tdpotxos, pdrotkos (Sir 29 26f [AV “stranger”];
Acts 7 6.26; Eph 2 19; 1 Pet 2 11), with
rapoxia, paroikia, “sojourning” (Wisd 19 10; Sir
16 8; Acts 18 17 [AV ‘dwelling as strangers’);
1 Pet 117). In addition, émdquéw, epidéméd, “‘to
be among people,” is tr4 “‘to sojourn” in Acts 2 10;
17 21, and its compound raperlinues, parepidémos,
as “sojourner” in 1 Pet 1 1 (in He 11 13; 1 Pet

2 11, “pilgrim’’). Burton Scorr Easton


STRANGLED, stran’g’ld (p2", hanak; mvucrés,
pnikiéds, from vb. mvlyw, pnigé, “to choke,” “to


smother,” “to strangle” [ef choking of swine in
the lake, Mk 5 13; the seed are choked by the
thorns, Mt 18 7; the servant takes his fellow-
servant by the throat, AV Mt 18 28]): As adj.
“strangled,” used of animals deprived of life by
choking, and so without the shedding of the blood.
Flesh thus killed was forbidden as food among the
Hebrews, because it contained the blood (Lev 17
12). Even Jewish Christians in the Jerus council
thought it best to forbid things strangled to be eaten
by gentile converts, so as not to give offence to
Jewish sentiment, and doubtless also to prevent
participation in heathen sacrificial feasts (Acts 15
20; 21 25). Enwarn Baasy PoLuaRD


STRANGLING, stran’g’ling. See PuNIsHMENTS


STRAW, sir6, STUBBLE, stub’”1: The cognates
of Heb JAM, tebhen, ‘straw,’ and WR, kash,
“stubble,” have been retained in the modern Arab.
terms tibn and kashsh. Tibn applies to the straw
which has been cut up into short pieces and more
or less split by the threshing operations. It is com-
monly nsed throughout the East as a coarse fodder
or roughage for domestic herbivorous animals (cf
Gen 24 25.32; Jgs 19 19; 1 K 4 28; Isa 11 7;
65 25). Hay and similar cured crops are practically
unknown. Barley, peas and other grain, when fed
4o animals, are mixed with the tibn. The animals
will frequently reject the tibn unless there is grain
in it. They often nose about the tibn until the
grain settles to the bottom so that they can eat the
latter without the straw. Straw left in the manger
is thrown out in the stall to form part of the bedding
(cf Isa 25 10).

Tibn is mixed with clay for plastering walls or
for making sun-dried bricks. It is also mixed with
lime and sand for plastering. The children of
Israel had their task of brickmaking made more
arduons by being required to gather stubble and
prepare it by chopping it up instead of being
given the already prepared straw of the threshing-
floors (Ex 5 7 ff).

Kashsh (lit. ‘‘dried up’’) refers to the stalks left
standing in the wheat fields or to any dried-np
stalks or stems such as are gathered for burning.
Camels and other flocks sometimes supplement their
regular meals by grazing on the stubble, otherwise
it has no use. In the Biblestubble is used to typify
worthless inflammable material (Ex 15 7; Job 13
25; 41 28.29; Ps 83 13; Isa 5 24, etc; 1 Cor 3
12, xahdun, kaldmé). :

jana , mathbén, is tr4 “straw” in Isa 25 10.

James A. PatcH

STRAWED, stréd: Past part. of “to strew,”
“scatter,” or ‘spread about,” as powder (of the golden
calf, Ex 32 20, RV ‘‘strewed’’); branches (Mt 21 8,
RV “‘spread’’); seed (Mt 25 24.26, RV “‘scatter’’).


STREAM, strem: (1) 52, nahal, EV “stream,”
as: “Behold, he smote the rock, so that waters
gushed out, and streams overflowed’ (Ps 78 20).
Often ‘‘valley,” as “the valley [AV “river’’] of
the Arnon” (Dt 2 24); or “brook,” as “the brook
[AV “river’’] of Egypt” (Josh 16 4; see Broox or
Eeyet); or “river,” as “the river Kishon” (Jgs 4
7). (2) Wi}, néhdr (Aram. WW}, n*har [Dnl 7 10];


ef Arab. &.@5, nahr, “river”): ‘He bindeth the


streams,’ AV “floods” (Job 28 11); “the River”
(Euphrates) (Ex 23 31, etc); ‘“Abanah and Phar-
par, the rivers of Damascus” (2 K 6 12). (3) 3B '
pelegh, ¥ 32, palagh, ‘to split,”’ ‘to divide,” hence
“cleft,” “channel”: “a tree planted by the streams
[AV “‘rivers’’] of water” (Ps 1 3); ‘There isa river,


2867


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Stranger
Stumbling-block


the streams whereof make glad the city of God”
(Ps 46 4); but: “The king’s heart is... . as the
watercourses” (AV ‘“‘rivers of water’) (Prov 21 1).
(4), P "DN, ’Gphik, ¥ PDN, 'aphak, “to be strong,”
hence “channel,” “valley,’’ as holding, confining
(BDB): “the streams in the South” (Ps 126 4);
elsewhere ‘“‘brook,”’ as “‘the brooks [AV “rivers’’] of
Judah” (Joel 3 18); or “channel,” as “the channel
of brooks” (Job 6 15); or “watercourses” (RVm
“ravines,” AV “rivers’) (Ezk 6 3, ete). (5)
IN), yr, from Egyp "dotr, to’, esp. of the Nile,
as: “Seven other kine came up after them out of
the river’ (Gen 41 3); RV “stream,” AV “river’’
(Ex 719; 8 5); RV “stream,” AV “brook”;
“The streams (m ‘‘canals’’] of Egypt shall be dimin-
ished and dried up” (Isa 19 6). (6) 2o0 » yabhal,
Vv ban yabhal, “to bear along’: “brooks and
streams of waters” (Isa 30 25); cf 23", yabhal,
“river,’’ “‘that spreadeth out its roots by the river”
(Jer 17 8); D35N, ’abhal, “the river Ulai” (Dnl
8 2). (7) oT, néazal, “to flow,” “to trickle’: “He
brought streams also out of the rock” (Ps 78 16).
(8) TOR, 'eshedh, ‘the slope of the valleys,” AV
“the stream of the brooks” (Nu 21 15); cf ITU,
"dshédhath, “‘the slopes” (Josh 10 40); “the slopes
Im “springs’’] of Pisgah” (Dt 3 17). (9) rorapés,
potamés, ‘‘The stream brake against that house’’ (Lk
6 48.49); elsewhere “river,” as ‘the river Jordan”
(Mk 1 5). (10) kAtSwv, khidon, “stream,” AV Wisd
19 7 (RV “surge”’). See Broox; Canat; Cuan-
NEL; River; VALE; WATERCOURSE.
ALFRED Exy Day

STREET, strét. See Crry.

STRENGTH, strength, OF ISRAEL: For “‘the
strength of the children of Israel,’’ applied to Jeh
in AV Joel 3 16, RV reads “a stronghold to the
children of Israel.”


STRIKE, strik: The vbs. “to strike’ and ‘to
stroke” (latter not in EV) have the same derivation,
and originally ‘‘strike’’ was the intrans, “stroke”
the trans form. ‘Strike,’ however, became used
in both senses (always trans in EV), while ‘‘to
stroke’ took on the meaning “to rub gently.”
But in AV this last force ull heloneed sometimes
to “strike’ and is so found in 2 K 6 11, “strike
his hand over the place’ (RV ‘‘wave’’), and per-
haps Ex 12 7.22; Tob 1111. Otherwise e)
uses of the simple ‘‘strike’’ are modern, including
“strike sail’ (Acts 27 17; here and in Tob 11 11
with an archaic preterite ‘strake,” elsewhere
“struck’”’). RV’s “They lowered the gear’ is a
more precise tr, not a modernizing of AV’s Eng.
The combination “to strike through,’’ however, is
not modern Eng., and was used by AV as meaning
either ‘“‘to pierce’ (Jgs 5 26; Job 20 24; Prov
7 23; Lam 4 9) or, as an intensive, “to strike
violently,” “to crush” (Ps 110 5), RV has at-
tempted to distinguish only in Hab 3 14, “pierce,”
m “smite.” “Striking hands” is a common cus-
tom at the conclusion of a bargain (Ad Est 14 8),
but in Job 17 3; Prov 6 1; 17 18; 22 26; RVm
11 15, the ceremony is used technically for an agree-
ment to be surety for another. Striking (RVm
“firing’) stones to produce a fire is mentioned
(2 Mace 10 3).

The past part. of “strike” is stricken (modern
Eng. “struck”) (cf Prov 23 35; Jer 5 3; Lam 4
9). So Isa 15, “Why will ye be still stricken?”
is equivalent to “‘Why should ye receive any more
blows?” (cf 16 7; 63 4.8 m). But in the phrase
“stricken in age’ (Gen 18 11, etc) “strike” has
an older meaning, “advance.”


_ Striker is found in 1 Tim 3 3; Tit 17 as a
literal tr of rAj«rns, pléktés. A hot-tempered man,
prone to physical outbursts, is meant. A stroke is
simply a “blow,” but in Dt 17 8; 21 5, “stroke”
is used technically for “assault.”
Burton Scorr Easton
BP sla stringd, INSTRUMENTS. See
usic,


STRIPES, strips.
STRIVE, striv. Sec Gamgs, II, 2.


STRONGHOLD, strong’héld. See Fortirizp
Citizs, IV, 1.


STUBBLE, stub’! (Wp, kash [Ex 6 12, etc];
Kaddpn, kaldmé [Wisd 3 7; 1 Cor 3 12]): These
Heb and Gr forms are used of the stalks of wheat,
etc, left knee-high in the field by the reapers.
Jp, tebhen (Job 21 18), is a mixture of chopped
straw and chaff produced in threshing, which is
winnowed out by the fan (cf Jer 23 28; Isa 5 24;
Mt 3 12)., When éebhen was withheld from them
the Israelites had to utilize kash for the manufacture
of their bricks (Ex 5 12).


STUDS, studz (MP2, n*kuddoth, “engraving,”
“stud”): Ornaments consisting of small silver
points which it was proposed (Cant 1 11) to affix
to the new golden “plaits’’ (RV) or “‘borders” (AV),
and which were to replace the strung beads of the
bride’s necklace.


STUFF, stuf (193, hela; oxetos, skevios): ‘“Mate-
rial” for any purpose (Ezk 12 3.4.7); or “supplies”
in a more general sense (Ex 36 7, Heb m‘la’khah;
ef AV, ERV 15 10 22; 265 13; 30 24 [ARV.
substitutes “baggage’”’]); frequently, ‘‘household
possessions” (Gen 31 37; 45 20; Ex 22 7; Josh
711; Neh 138: Jth 16 19; AV 16 11 [skeuds-
mata, RV “furniture’]; AV Lk 17 31, where
RV reads “‘goods”). ‘Mingled stuff’ is the tr of
sha‘atnéz in RV instead of “garment of divers sorts”
AV (Dt 22 11).


STUMBLING-BLOCK, stum’bling-blok, STUM-
BLING-STONE (21W2%, mikhshdl, 72W2'D , makh-
shélah; mpécKkoppa, préskomma, sKdvSadov, skdnda-
lon): These are the most important of the varied
renderings of either of two cognate Heb words, or
of two different Gr words. Sometimes the Gr word
for “‘stone” (Atos, lithos) accompanies the principal
word. Thereis no important difference in the mean-
ing of the words or of their renderings. RV generally
substitutes ‘‘stumbling” for “offence” of AV.

The literal meaning of the Heb words—an ob-
ject which causes one to stumble or fall—appears
in such passages as Lev 19 14: “Thou shalt not
... . put a stumblingblock [mikhshél] before the
blind” (cf Jer 6 21). But the expression is ordi-
narily figurative, referring to that which causes
material ruin or spiritual downfall, which were
closely connected in OT thought (Ps 119 165; Ezk
21 15). The things that lead astray are silver and
gold (Ezk 7 19); idols (Ezk 14 3; Zeph 1 3, etc).

One of the NT words, cxévdadrov, skdndalon,
lit. means the stick of a trap to which the bait is
attached, and which when touched springs the trap.
Figuratively either word refers to a thing or a per-
son that leads one to fall into error, into sin or Into
destruction: the cross of Christ (Gal 5 11; Rom 11
9); another’s liberty (1 Cor 8 9); Peter in Mt 16
23; Christ, whose life and character were so dif-
ferent from Jewish expectation (Rom 9 33). See
also OFFENCE. Georce Rice Hovey


See PUNISHMENTS.


ue THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2868


Suffering


SUA, sii‘a (Zovd, Soud; AV Sud): Name of a
family of temple-servants who went up from exile
with Zernbbabel (1 Esd 5 29)=“Sia” of Neh 7 47;
‘“Siaha” of Ezr 2 44.


SUAH, st’a (130, sah): Son of Zophah, of the
tribe of Asher (1 Ch 7 36).


SUBAI, st’ba-i, st’bi (ZvBael, Subaci): Name
of a family of temple-servants who returned with
Zerubbabel (1 Esd 5 30)=‘Shamlai” of Ezr 2 46;
“Salmai’”’ of Neh 7 48.


SUB-APOSTOLIC LITERATURE. Sce Litera-
TURE, SUB-APOSTOLIC.


SUBAS, si’bas (ZevBés, Soubds; AV Suba):
Name of a family of “the sons of the servants of
Solomon” returning with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 5 34),
wanting in the || lists of Ezr 2 57; Neh 7 59.


SUBORN, sub-érn’ (droBdAdw, hupobdlla [Acts
6 11; only here in the NT]): The word means to
introduce by collusion, to put one person in the
place of another, to employ anyone in a secret
manner and instruct such a one to act for and as
though he were another person.


SUBSTANCE, sub’stans (WD, rkhdsh; twé-
oracts, hupdstasis): Lit. that which stands under,
is in the Bible used chiefly of material goods and
possessions. In the OT it is the tr of numerous
Heb words, of which r’khash, ‘that which is gathered
together,” is one of the earliest and most significant
(Gen 125; 13 6; 15 14; 1 Ch 27 31; Ezr 8 21,
etc). In the NT “substance” appears in a few
passages as the tr of ousia, “being,” “subsistence”

(Lk 15 13), huparzis, “goods,” “property” (He
10 34), hupdrchonta, “things at hand” (Lk 8 3).
Special interest attaches to He 11 1, AV “Now faith
is the substance of things hoped for,” etc, where the
word is used in its proper etymological sense as
the tr of hupostasis, “that which stands under.”
RV changes to “assurance,” m “‘the giving substance
to,” which last seems best to bring out the idea of
faith as that which makes the things hoped for
real to the soul. The same Gr word hupostasis
is rendered “substance” in He 1 3 RV, instead of
AV “person,” with reference to Christ, “the very
image [m “‘impress”’] of his substance,” i.e. of God’s
invisible essence or being, the manifestation of God
Himself. W. L. Waker


SUBTIL, sub’til, SUBTLE, sut”l, SUBTLETY,
sut”l+ti, SUBTILTY (O27, hakham, 22}, nakhal,
MAA, mirmah; §6dos, délos): These words are
used (1) in a good sense: 28 13 3, hakham, “wise,”
“Jonadab was a very subtil [ARV “subtle’] man”
(discreet); Prov 1 4, ‘ormah, “prudence,” “to give
subtilty to the simple,” ARV and ERVm “pru-
dence’; Wisd 7 22, leptés, ‘‘thin,” said of the spirit
in Wisdom (very fine or refined); 8 8, strophé, “wind-
ing,” “subtilties of speeches”; Ecclus 39 2, “subtil
parables,” RV “the subtilties of parables”; (2) in a
bad sense: Gen 3 1, ‘arém, “crafty,” “Now the
serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field,”
ARV “subile.”

Gen 2% 35, _mirmah, ‘‘deceit,” “fraud,” ‘'Th
brother came with subtilty,’” RV ‘‘with guile’; Ps 10
95, nakhal, ‘to deceive,” AV “deal subtilly,’’ ARV
“subtly’'; Prov 7.10, nagar, ‘to watch,"’ “guard,’’ ‘‘to
be hidden or subtle of_heart,'’ RV ‘‘wily,’’ m ‘' ‘close,’
Heb ‘guarded’"'; 2 K 10 19, ‘ok*bhah, ‘‘deceit” or
“t¢reachery" (bere only); Jth 5 11, katasophiz6, ‘to
use subtlety’: Ecctus 19 25, panourgta, “cunning,”
“unscrupulousness,”’ ‘' There is an ex uisite subtilty, and
the same is unjust’; 2 Cor 11 3, “The serpent beguiled
Eve through his subtilty,”’ RV “in his craftiness”;


Mt 26 4, dolos, ‘deceit,’ ‘that they might take Jesus
by subtlety, and kill him’’; Acts 13 10, “OQ full of all
subtilty and all mischief,”” RV ‘‘all guile and all villany.
ERV has “subtilty” for “wisdom” (Prov 8 5.12),
m and ARV, “prodence”; for ‘with subtilty”
(ERV Mk 14 1, AV “by craft”’?) ARV has “with
subtlety.” W. L. WALKER


SUBURBS, sub’trbz. See City.


SUBVERT, sub-vart’ (M19, ‘awath; avatpéra,
anatrépd): Occurs 5 t: (1) in the sense of over-
turning, etc, as the tr of ‘dwath, “‘to make bent or
crooked” (Lam 3 36), “‘to subvert a man in his
cause’: of anaskeudzd, primarily, ‘to pack up
baggage’; then, “to ravage,” ete (Acts 16 24,
“subverting your souls”); of anatrepd, “to turn
upside down,” “to overturn” (Tit 1 11, “who
subvert whole houses,” RV “overthrow”); of
katastrophé, “overthrow,” “destruction” (2 Tim 2
14, “‘to the subverting of them that hear’); (2) in
the sense of perverting: ekstréphd, “to turn or twist
out,” “to turn about” (Tit 3 11, “such is sub-
verted,’ RV “perverted”). For “overthrown me”
(Job 19 6) RV has “subverted me [in my cause],”
m “overthrown me”; for ‘‘perverteth’’ (Prov 19
3), ‘‘subverteth.” W. L. WaLkER


SUCATHITES, si’kath-its (DINYW , sakhathim;
B, Zoxabte(p, Sdchathieim, A, Zenabrelp, Soka-
thieim; AV Suchathites): These are named only
once (1 Ch 2 55), a family of scribes living at
Jabez.


SUCCEED, suk-séd’, SUCCESS, suk-ses’ (WU?,
yarash, Spip, sdkhal; evnpepla, euémeria): ‘To
succeed”’ means, (1) and originally, “to follow after’;
(2) mostly in modern Eng., “to prosper”; in AV,
with one exception, the word has a qualifying adjec-
tive. (1) In the first sense it is the tr of ydrash,
“to seize” or “to take possession” (Dt 2 12;
12 29, ARV “‘dispossessest,’’ ERV ‘‘possessest’’); of
kim, “to rise up” (Dt 25 6, ‘shall succeed in the
name of his brother’); of diadéchomai (Ecclus 48 8,
“prophets to succeed after him”). (2) In the sense
of prospering, ‘‘success’’ is the tr of sdkhal, ‘‘to be
wise,” “to prosper’ (Josh 1 8, “Thou shalt have
good success,’ AVm “do wisely,” RVm ‘deal
wisely’; cf AVm Job 22 2; Ps 111 10; Prov 3 4);
“good success” occurs in Tob 7 12, euodéset té kdl-
lista; Wisd 13 19, epituchia; Ecclus 20 9, euodta,
RV “prosperity,” “There is a prosperity that a man
findeth in misfortunes; and there is a gain that
turneth to loss’; 38 13, ewddia (so 8 C—this word =
“sweet savor,” “fragrance”; cf Phil 4 18; Eph & 2;
2 Cor 2 15). Seefurther Evopra. RV “the issue
for good”; 1 Mace 4 55, euodéd; 8 23, kalés, ete.
“Success,” simply (as “prosperity,” euémeria),
2 Macc 10 28, ‘“‘a pledge of success and victory”;
“Successor” occurs (Ecclus 46 1, “Joshua... .
was the successor [diddochos| of Moses’; 2 Macc 9
23; 14 26). W. L. Watxer


SUCCOR, suk’ér, SUCCORER, suk’ér-ér (TIN,
*dzar; Bondo, boethéd, mporrans, prosidtis): Is the
tr of ‘azar, “to gird” (25 8 5, etc); of boethea,
“to come in aid of” (2 Cor 6 2, “In a day
of salvation did I succor thee’; He 2 18, ‘He is
able to succor them that are tempted’); of prostatis,
“one standing before’ (Rom 16 2, ARV “helper of
many”); of antilépsis (Ecclus 61 7, AV “I looked
for the succour of men, but there was none’); of
phugadeutérion (1 Macc 1 53, “‘flee for succor,’”” RV
“place of refuge’); of séz6 (2 44, “for succor,’ RV
“for safety’’); of sképé (2 Macc 6 9, RV “‘shelter’’);
“succors” occurs (Wisd 17 12, AV boéthéma, ‘for


2869


Sua
. Suffering


fear is nothing else but a betraying [RV ‘‘surrender’’]
of the succours which reason offereth”); ‘“succoreth”
(1 Mace 12 15, boéthed, “help from heaven that
succoureth us,” RV “to help us’). RV has “succor”
for “help” (1 Ch 18 5); ‘O thou my succor,” for
“OQ my strength” (Ps 22 19). W. L. WaLkER


SUCCOTH, suk’oth, suk’dth (DQ, sukkoth,
“booths”; Zxyval, Skénat, Dexxs0, Sokchdth, etc):
After parting with Esau, Jacob journeyed to Suc-
coth, a name which he gave to the place from the
“booths” which he erected to shelter his cattle
(Gen 33 17). It was in the territory of Gad, and
is mentioned with Beth-nimrah (Josh 13 27). In
his pursuit of Zeba and Zalmunnah, Gideon seems
to have retraced the path followed by Jacob, passing
Suceoth before Penuel (Jgs 8 5 ff). Their churlish-
ness on that occasion brought dire punishment
upon the men of Succoth. Gideon on his return
“taught them’ with thorns and briers (ver 16).
In the soil of the valley between Succoth and
Zarethan, which was suitable for the purpose,
the brass castings of the furniture for Solomon’s
Temple were made (1 K 7 46; 2 Ch 4 17).
Jerome (on Gen 33 17) says that in his day it was
a city beyond Jordan in the district of Scythopolis.
From the above data it is clear that Succoth lay on
the E. of the Jordan and N. of the Jabbok. From
Ps 60 6; 108 7, we may infer that it was close
to the Jordan valley, part of which was apparently
known by itsname. Neubauer (Géog. du Taim, 248)
gives the Talmudic name as Tar‘ala. Merrill (East
of the Jordan, 386) and others compare this with
Tell Deir ‘Alla, the name of an artificial mound
about a mile N. of the Jabbok, on the edge of the
valley, fully 4 miles E. of the Jordan. There is a
place called Saékat W. of the Jordan, about 10 miles
S.of Beisan. This hasbeen proposed by some; but
it is evident that Succoth lay E. of the river. No
trace of the name has been found here.

: W. Ewrne

SUCCOTH (M150, sukkoth; Zoxxw0, Sokchéth
[Ex 12 37; 18 20; Nu 33 5]): The first station of
the Hebrews on leaving Rameses (see Exopus).
The word means “booths.” The distance from
Eruam (q.v.) suggests that the site may have lain
in the lower part of Wady Tumeildt, but the exact
position is unknown. This region seems possibly
to have been called T-K-u by the Egyptians (see
Pituom). Brugsch and other scholars suppose this
term to have been changed to Succoth by the OT
writer, but this is very doubtful, Succoth being
a common Heb word, while T-K-u is Egyp. The
Heb s does not appear ever to be rendered by ¢
in Egyp. The capital of the Sethroitic nome was
called T-K-t (Pierret, Vocab. hiéroglyph., 697),
and this word means “bread.” If the region of
[T-K-u was near this town, it would seem to
have lain on the shore road from Edom to Zoan,
in which case it could not be the Succoth of the
Exodus. C. R. Conper


SUCCOTH-BENOTH, suk’oth, -6th-bé’noth,
-noth (FR M1D0, sukkoth benath; ‘Pexxw0Ba-
veOel, Phochchithbaineithet, A [better],


1. The ZoxxwbPevGel, Sokchdthbenithet): The
Meaning name of an idol made by the Babylo-
according nians sent into exile at Samaria by an
to the Assyr king (Shalmaneser), and men-
Hebrew tioned among the deities of the various


nationalities there assembled (2 K 17
30). In Heb, Succoth-benoth means “booths of
daughters,” and has been explained as the chambers
wherein the Babylonians placed women for prosti-
tution; or booths or tabernacles in which images
of certain goddesses were worshipped. ;


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


The parallelism, however, requires a deity, like
the Nergal of the Cutheans, the Ashima of’ the
Hamathites, etc, and not a chamber
2. Sir H. or shrine. This consideration caused
Rawlinson’s Sir H. Rawlinson to suggest an identi-
Identifica- fication of Succoth-benoth with the Bab
tion of the Zér-panitum (=Zér-banttum), whose
Name name was probably pronounced Zér-
panith, the spouse of Merodach (the
god of Babylon), as the ‘“seed-creatress.” The
difference in the first component, zér, was regarded
as due to its possible Hamitic (=Sumerian) equiva-
lent, or to a Sem mistranslation, both of which
explanations are now known to be untenable.
As the people who made Succoth-benoth were
Babylonians, we should expect here either a name
of Merodach, the god of Babylon, or


3. Is Suc- one of the deities identified with him.
coth the At present the only suggestion which
Babylonian can be made is that Benoth is for
Sakut? mi 2, ban wath, ie. ban’) mati,


“creator of the land.” Both the
Sem and the bilingual creation-stories speak of
Merodach as the creator of the world, with its
products, and the great cities of Babylonia; and
‘father Enlil,” who bore the title “lord of the
world,” bestowed the same upon Merodach at the
creation, thus identifying Merodach with himself.
Now there is a group which may be read either
Dikut, “the Judge,” or Sakut, “the Counsellor,”
and if we can read Succoth-benoth as Sakut(h)ban’
wat(h), ‘the Counsellor, creator of the land,” a
satisfactory explanation of this puzzling name will
be furnished. The terminal 7 of the Bab has been
preserved in the e, ei, of the Gr. The adoption of
such a descriptive name of Enlil-Merodach would
form a compromise between abandoning their old
objects of worship and accepting “the god of the
land” (2 K 17 26). T. G. Pincuzs


SUCHATHITES, si’kath-its.
SUD, sud: AV=RV Sva (q.v.).


SUDIAS, sii’di-as (Zev8las, Soudias): In 1 Esd
5 23, a Levitical family that returned with Zerub-
babel, called in Ezr 2 40 ‘‘Hodaviah ” and in Neh
7 43 “Hodevah” (q.v.).


SUFFERING, suf’ér-ing: A great variety of
Heb and Gr expressions, too large to be here enu-
merated, have been tr’ by “suffering” and other
forms derived from the same vb. The most
obvious meanings of the word are the following:
(1) The commonest meaning perhaps in the EV
is “to permit,” “to allow,” “to give leave to”:
‘‘Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, and
to put her away” (Mk 10 4). (2) “To experience,”
“to go through,” “to endure’: “I have suffered
many things this day in a dream because of him”
(Mt 27 19). A woman “had suffered many things
of many physicians’ (Mk 5 26). Other common
phrases are “to suffer affliction’ (1 Thess 3 4;
He 11 25, RV “share ill-treatment’), “to suffer
hardship” (2 Tim 29), “to suffer adversity”
(He 13 3 AV, RV “to be ill-treated”), “to suffer
dishonor” (AV “shame,” Acts 5 41), “to suffer
violence’ (Mt 11 12), “to suffer wrong” (Acts
7 24), “to suffer terror’ (Ps 88 15), ‘‘to suffer
shipwreck” (2 Cor 11 25), “to suffer hunger”
(Ps 34 10; Prov 19 15), ‘‘to suffer thirst’? (Job
24 11). (3) “To put up with,” “to tolerate’:
AV, “For ye suffer fools gladly [RV “ye bear with
the foolish gladly’’], seeing ye yourselves are wise”’
(2 Cor 11 19). (4) “To undergo punishment”:
“Think ye that these Galileans were sinners above
all the Galileans, because they have suffered these


See SucaTuitss.


Soncation, THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2870


Sure, Surely


things?” (Lk 13 2). (5) “To sustain loss’: “If
any man’s work shall be burned, he shall suffer
loss” (1 Cor 3 15; also Phil 8 8). (6) “To suffer
death.” Here the clearest references are to the
suffering or passion of Christ, which indeed includes
the enduring of untold hardships and affliction, all of
which culminate in His vicarious death for man (Mt
16 21; Mk 8 31; 9 12; Lk 9 22; 17 25; 22 15;
24 26.46; Acts 3 18; 17 3; 26 23; 1 Pet 3 18).

Suffering belongs to the discipline of all Christ’s
followers (Rom 8 17; 2 Cor 17; Gal 3 4; Phil
3.10; 1 Thess 2 2; 2 Thess 15; 2 Tim 2 12;
3 12; Jas 5 10; 1 Pet 2 20f; 3 14.17; 4 1.13.16;
5 10). Such suffering is called a suffering for God’s
or Christ’s sake (Jer 15 15; Acts 9 16; Phil 1 29;
2 Tim 1 12). This fellowship in suffering unites
us with the saints of God in all times (Jas 5 10),
and is indeed a fellowship with the Lord Himself
(Phil 3 10), who uses this discipline to mold us
more and more according to His character.

H. L. E. Lurrine

SUFFOCATION, suf-6-ka’shun. See Punisx-

MENTS.


SUICIDE, si’i-sid. See Crimms,


SUKKIIM, suk’i-im (O30, sukkiyim): Named
in 2 Ch 12 3 as a tribe that took part with Libyans
and Cretans in the invasion of Judaea by Shishak.
The identification is uncertain.


SULPHUR, sul’fur. See Brimsrone.


SUMMER, sum’ér (772, kayi¢; Aram. UIP,
kayit [Dn] 2 35], from PP, kig, DIP, kat, “to
cut off,’ “to pluck or gather fruit,” hence the
time of fruit, summer [2 8 16 1.2; Jer 40 10.12];
Bépos, théros [Mt 24 32; Lk 21 30]): The Heb
vb., mentioned above, occurs in Isa 18 6, “to sum-
mer,” used of the ravenous birds feeding upon car-
cases of the slain. The term “summer parlor’ in
Jgs 3 20 (cf ver 24) is lit. ‘‘upper room,’’ and is so
rendered in RV. The summer was the dry season
extending from April to October when usually no
rain falls. Hence the “drought of summer” (Ps
32 4). See Seasons. H. Porter


SUMMER-HOUSE (7 "pi 3, beth ha-kayig):
Am 3 15 notes it as pa of the judgment on
Israel that Jeh would smite ‘‘the winter-house
with the summer-house.” It belonged to the lux-
ury of the period that kings and wealthy persons
had separate residences for the cold and hot seasons.
This is the only mention of “the summer-house,”
but Eglon’s ‘‘cool upper room” (Jgs 3 20, AV
and ERV ‘summer parlour,’’ not in this case a
separate building) may be compared. See WInTER-
HOUSE.


SUN. See Astronomy, I, 2.


SUN (Figurative): Poetical conceptions for the
sun are frequently found in the Scriptures, though
the strictly figurative expressions are not common.
Undoubtedly the Jewish festivals, religious as well
as agricultural, were determined by the sun’s
movements, and this fact, together with the poetical
nature of the Hebrews and their lack of scientific
knowledge, had a tendency to multiply spiritual
and metaphorical expressions concerning the
“greater light’? of the heavens. Some of these
poetical conceptions are very beautiful, such as
the sun having a habitation (Hab $ 11), a taber-
nacle (Ps 19 4f) set for him by Jeh, out of which
he comes as a bridegroom from his chamber, rejoic-
ing asa strong man torunarace. The sun is also


given as the emblem of constancy (Ps 72 5.17), of
beauty (Cant 6 10), of the law of God (Ps 19 7),
of the purity of heavenly beings (Rev 1 16; 12 1),
and of the presence and person of God (Ps 84 11).
The ancient world given to personifying the sun did
not refrain from sun-worship, and even the Hebrew
in the time of the kings came perilously near this
idolatry (2 K 23 11). See Sun-worsHip.
C. E. Scoenk

SUN, CHARIOTS OF THE. See Horszts or

THE Sun. .


SUN GATE. Sce East Gate.


SUN, HORSES OF THE. See Horsrs or THE
Sun.


SUN-IMAGES. See Imacss.
SUNDAY, sun’d&. See Lorn’s Dar.


SUNRISING, sun’riz-ing: A frequent designa-
tion in the OT for the East (Nu 21 11; Dt 4 41.47;
Josh 1 15, etc). In Rev 7 2, RV has “‘sunrising”
for AV “east.”


SUN, SMITING, smit’ing, BY: Exposure of the
uncovered head to the heat of the sun is likely to
produce either of two conditions; the commoner is
heat exhaustion with faintness, the rarer is heat-
stroke with fever and paralysis of the heat-regulat-
ing apparatus of the nervous system. This con-
dition is described as siriasis. The two fatal in-
stances recorded were probably of the latter kind.
One, the case of the Shunammite’s son (2 K 4 19),
was apparently very acute, like some of the cases
described by Manson and Sambon. Of the other
case, that of Manasseh, Judith’s husband, we have
no particulars (Jth 8 3), except that it was like
wise brought on by exposure in the harvest field,
and occurred at the time of barley harvest, that
is, early in May. Jonah’s attack was one of heat
syncope, as he fainted from the heat (Jon 4 8).
According both to psalmist (Ps 121 6) and to prophet
(Isa 49 10), the people of God are protected from
the stroke of the sun as well as from that of the
moon. The latter was supposed to cause lunacy
(hence the name), and epilepsy, so in Mt 4 24
the word rendered “lunatic” (AV) for “epileptic”
(RV) is seléniazoménous, lit. “moon struck.” See
Moon. Aupx. MAcALIsTER


SUNSTROKE, sun’strdk. See Sun, Smirine By.


SUN-WORSHIP, sun’wir-ship: The splendor
of the sun makes it a natural object of adoration,
once the purer idea of the one true God (Rom 1 20.
21) is parted with, and in most ancient nations the
worship of the sun was an outstanding feature. It
is found in Bab and Assyr (SamaS; special seats
of sun-worship were Sippara and Larsa); in Egypt
it is a leading feature of the religion (Ra, and, under
special phases, Horus, Tum, Aten; a special seat
of sun-worship was Heliopolis, the OT On, called
in Jer 43 13 Beth-shemesh, “house of the sun”).
Other cities bore the same name: Beth-shemesh
(Josh 15 10=Ir-shemesh; 19 41, in Judah; Josh
19 22, in Issachar; 19 38, in Naphtali; see Beru-
SHEMESH). Allusions to, and warnings against,
sun-worship are frequent in the OT, as in Lev 26
30; 2 Ch 14 5; 34 4.7; Isa 17 8; 27.9; Ezk 6
4.6, in which passages for AV “images,” “‘idols,”
RV has ‘‘sun-images”’ (q.v.); Job 31 26.27 and
numerous passages show that this form of idolatry
latterly penetrated deeply into Judah—even into
its temple-worship (2 K 23 5.11, “horses... .
given to the suh” [see under Horszs or THE Sun,


2871


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Suffocation
Sure, Surely


“Chariots of the Sun’’]; and Ezk 8 16). Josiah’s
reformation took account of these abuses (2 K 23
5.11 ff; 2 Ch 34 4.7), and Ezekiel strenuously de-
nounced them (8 16 ff). James OrR


SUP, SUPPER, sup’ér. See Muats.


SUPERFLUODS, sit-pir‘flod-us, SUPERFLUITY,
si-pér-f100'i-ti (WW , sara‘; wepvorods, perissés (2 Cor
9 1), weprocela, perisseia): According to the Leviti-
cal Law, ‘‘a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a
flat nose, or anything superfluous” could not fulfil
priestly functions (Lev 21 18; 22 23). According
to Dillmann (Baentsch, BDB) the word should be
rendered ‘‘a limb too long,” but Ewald (following
the LXX) suggests “having cropped ears.” The
only instance of superfluity occurs in Jas 1 21, AV
“superfluity of naughtiness”’; according to Mayor
“overflowing ebullition of malice’ (RV “overflowing
of wickedness,” m ‘“‘malice’’); but the Gr word is
used in other connections, e.g. of “grace’’ (Rom &
17); “joy” (2 Cor 8 2). T. Lewis


SUPERSCRIPTION, si-pér-skrip’shun (ém-
yeahh, epigraphé): (1) The legend on a coin desig-
nating the person m1 whose honor or by whose
authority it is issued (Mt 22 20; Mk 12 16;
Lk 20 24). (2) The accusation on the cross of
Jesus (Mk 15 26; Lk 23 38). According to Rom
custom an inscription bearing the charge or ground
of a criminal’s condemnation was fixed to the cross
on which he was crucified. The use of such an
inscription at the crucifixion of Jesus is mentioned
by all four evangelists. The fullest description is
that of Mark, “the superscription of his accusa-
tion” (4h éreypapy ris airlas durod, hé epigraphé
tés aitias autou%) (15 26). Matthew calls it more
briefly “his accusation” (rv airlav adrob, tén aitian
auto) (27 38), while Luke styles it merely “a
superscription”’ (epigraphé) (28 38). Inthe Fourth
Gospel it is called a “‘title’ (rirdov, titlon) (Jn 19
19). The text of the superscription is given by the
four evangelists in varying terms and with various
degrees of fulness. Russet Bensamin MILLER


SUPERSTITION, sii-pér-stish’un, SUPERSTI-
TIOUS, si-pér-stish’us (Serv8apovla, deisidai-
monta, ‘fearing demons”): The Bib. use of these
words is limited to that of the former in Acts 25
19 AV, and of the latter in Acts 17 22. In the
former reference, Festus speaks of the Jews’ “super-
stition” (RV “religion’’), thus artfully dodging an
avowal of his own convictions “respecting the Heb
faith.” In Acts 17 22 AV Paul tactfully refers to
the Athenians as being ‘too superstitious’ (RV
“too religious”), thus using the term correctly from
both their and his point of view. They were truly
too “religious” with their superstitions.

Lronarp W. Dooitan

SUPH, sd0f (FO, séph; wAqclov riis épvdpas
[Gardens], plésion tés eruthrds |thaldssés|; AV Red
Sea): As the verse stands, the place where Moses
addressed the children of Israel is indicated as
“beyond the Jordan in the wilderness, in the Arabah
over against Suph” (Dt 1 1). AV, following LXX,
takes the name as a contraction of yam suph (see
Rep Sea). The abbreviation is not found else-
where. The name of the sea was not derived from
that of a city; so we need not look in that direction.
Knobel suggested Nakb es-Safé, a pass about 25
miles W.8S.W. of the Dead Sea. But it is ‘‘unsuit~
ably situated; nor does the name agree phonetically
(for (yO agrees with ¥, not with © )” (Driver,
“Dt,” ICC, 4). No identification is possible.

W. Ewine


certain point.”


SUPHAH, s00’fa (MIDNO , saphah, for WOIOA AT},
wahebh bestiphah; LXX reads rv ZodB éprSdsyice,
tén Zddb ephlégise; AV Rea Sea): Suphah is the
region in which Vaheb is situated (Nu 21 14).
It is probably identical with Suph of Dt 1 1.
Tristram (Land of Moab, 50 f) suggested identifica-
tion with Ghar es-Sdfiyeh, a small oasis E. of the
mud flats of Es-Sebkhah, S. of the Dead Sea; but
“the sibilants do not correspond, and Sdjiyeh is a
specifically Arab. term (Wetzstein in Delitzsch, Gen‘,
586, n. 2) which does not seem to be a likely explana-
tion of Suphah” (Gray, “Nu,” ICC, 285f). This,
and other questions of identification, must wait
for solution until a more thorough exploration of
the whole district has been accomplished.


W. Ewina
SUPPER, sup’ér. See Muats.


SUPPER, LORD’S. See Lorp’s Suprrr.


SUPPLY, su-pli’: Phil 4 19 for wAnpdw, pléréa;
1 Cor 1617; Phil 2 30 for dvardnpbw, anaplérdd;
2 Cor 9 12 (AV); 11 9 for rpocavardnpsw, prosana-
pléré66. All three vbs. mean “‘to fill,” the 3d con-
taining the additional connotation ‘fill up to a
Eph 4 16; Phil 1 19 for the noun
émxopryla, epichorégia, lit. ‘an additional supply.”
But no special force of ‘additional’ seems to be
contained in the passages. In 2 Cor 9 10a; Gal
3 5; Col 29; 2 Pet 1 5.11, we have émrexopyyéw,
epichorégéd, “to furnish besides,’’ i.e. fully supply;
in 2 Cor 9 10b; 1 Pet 4 11 the simple chorégéé,
“to furnish.” Burton Scott Easton


SUR, sdr (B, ’Agcotp, Assotir, A, Zodp, Soir):
Those that dwelt in Sur are mentioned along with
the inhabitants of Sidon, Tyre, Ocina, etc, as dread-
ing the approach of Holcefernes and the Assyr
army (Jth 2 28). The names run from N. to &.,
and Sur immediately follows Tyre (modern Sar),
with which, therefore, it can hardly be identified.
No probable identification has been suggested. See
also JERUSALEM.


SURE, shoor, SURELY, shoor’li: In modern
Eng. is used chiefly in the phrases “‘to be sure’
or “to make sure,’ and as a simple adjective it is
usually either archaic or exceedingly colloquial.
The adjectival use, however, is common (chiefly
for TQS, ’dman, “to confirm,” and its derivatives)
in EV, where modern Eng. would prefer ‘‘secure”’
or “certain” (1 S 2 35; Sir 40 25; Acts 13 34,
etc). ‘To be sure that” is also fairly common in
AV, and occasionally (as in Dt 12 23, “Be sure that
thou eat not the blood,” for PIT, hazak, “to be
firm’’) it has rather more emphasis than in modern
Eng. But usually the phrase is a mere periphrasis
for some word meaning “to know’ (cf RV Ex 3
19; Lk 10 11; Rom 2 2, etc). In Prov 6 3, AV
has ‘Make sure thy friend” for AM), rahabh, ‘be
boisterous,” “beset,’’ RV “importune.”’ The sense
is ‘Force him to pay his debt.”

Surely in EV is used almost always to qualify
an entire phrase, as in Gen 28 16, “Surely Jeh is
in this place.’ In modern Eng. ‘‘surely’’ used in
this way suggests that the statement is being argued
and is therefore slightly doubtful, but in Elizabethan
Eng. the purpose is to exclude all doubt (‘‘beyond
question’) With this force AV uses “surely” to
translate almost any emphatic form, and RV has
conformed to AV’s use, and such changes as have
been made by RV (Mt 26 73; Lk 4 23; Rev 22
20, etc) are merely to preserve uniformity of rendi-
tion. The most common use of ‘surely’ in this
sense is to translate a vb. when emphasized by its
own part. (absolute inf. in Heb), as ‘Thou shalt


Surety
Susanna (History)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2872


surely die’ (Gen 2 17) for “dying thou shalt die”
(cf Gen 22 17 for the Heb construction). In this
sense “‘surely’’ is sometimes varied by “of a surety”’
(Gen 156 13, ete) without the slightest difference
in meaning (cf Gen 9 5 and 26 9). In addition,
“surely” is used occasionally as a simple advb.
where modern Eng. would prefer “securely” or
“certainly” (cf Prov 10 9 and AV Lk 1 1, “surely
believed,” RV “fulfilled,” RVm “fully established’).
_ Surety, besides its use in “‘of a surety ” appears
in the OT to translate AY, ‘arabh, “to be surety,”’
and in He 7 22 for @yywos, égguos, “guarantor,”
“giverofsecurity.”’ Modern Eng. prefers “security,”
as does even AV in Acts 179. “‘Suretiship” (ARV
“suretyship’’) in Prov 1115 for YP, taka’,
“to strike [hands].” See Srrrxn; Surety.
Burton Scotr Easton

SURETY, shoor’ti: This word is used in three
different connections or groups:

(1) As a derivative of the word “sure” it means “of
a certainty” or “surely”’—In Gen 15 13 the infini-
tive absolute of the vb. is used to give emphasis
to the idea of the vb. and is rendered “‘of a surety.”
In Gen 18 13 the Heb ’omnam is tr’ “of a surety.”
In Gen 26 9 ’akh is similarly rendered, and has
the force of our “indeed.”’ In Acts 12 11 476és,
aléthés, is tr1 in AV “of a surety,” but better in
RV “of a truth.” ;

(2) In the sense of security or pledge for a person.—
This means that one person may become security
for another, that such a one will do a certain thing
at atime in the future. Judah was “surety” to his
father Jacob that Benjamin would safely return
from Egypt (Gen 43 9). He pledged his life
that the younger brother would return safely. He
tells Joseph (Gen 44 32) how he had become
surety for Benjamin, and offers to become Joseph’s
slave for the sake of his brother. Job says (Job
17 3), ‘Give now a pledge, be surety for me with
thyself; who is there that will strike hands with me?”
The striking of hands refers to the action or gesture
by which the surety or pledge was publicly mani-
fested and thus ratified. Job here beseeches God
to become surety for him, to pledge him that some
time in the future He will cause Job’s innocence to be
made known and be acknowledged by God Himself.
In Isa 38 14 Hezekiah says, ‘‘O Lord, Iam oppressed,
be thou my surety.”” He wishes God to give him
a pledge of some kind, to go security for him in
such a way that he will surely be saved out of his
sickness and distress. Jesus is called “the surety
[évyvos, égguos] of a better covenant” (He 7 22).
Jesus is the pledge or surety that through Him we
may obtain the assurance and certainty that a more
excellent covenant has been established by God, and
are assured also of the truth of the promises con-
nected with it.

(8) It is used to describe the practice of going se-
curity for another by striking hands with that person
and becoming responsible for money or any object
loaned.—The Book of Prov unhesitatingly condemns
the practice. No mention is made of it in the
Mosaic Law, as if the custom were then practically
unknown. The Book of Prov makes no distinction
between a stranger and a neighbor; the person
who does such a thing is likened unto an animal
caught in a trap. He is exhorted to sleep no more
until he has got out of the trap, or freed himself
from this obligation (Prov 6 1-5). The wisdom
of such advice has been abundantly verified by
experience. It does not necessarily preclude
certain special cases, where the practice may be
justified. The international relationships of the
Jews in the period of the monarchy, together with
the unsettled condition of the country (Neh 5 3)
and people, needed such commercial strictness.


Their trade was mostly in the hands of the Phoe-
nicians and other foreigners, and the pressure of
taxation for the payment of foreign tribute, etc,
was heavy (Neh 6 4f). Prov 11 15; 17 18 de-
clare one “void of understanding” who thus goes
security for another. Prov 20 16 seems to contain
an exclamation of contemptuous rebuke for the man
who goes security. Prov 22 26; 27 13 contain
like admonitions. See Dest; PLepes; Security;
STRIKE. JAMES JosIAn REEVE


SURNAME, sfr’nim (1)D, kandh; émxadciv,
epikalein): A word derived from the Fr., meaniug
“an additional name”; in modern Eng. always the
family name of a person. Indeed, the spelling
“surname” in AV 1 Macc 1 10; 2 2; 6 43 may
be due to a confusion with “sire’s name.” But the
custom of family names was entirely unknown
among the Hebrews. The word is used twice in
AV of the OT, viz. Isa 44 5; 45 4. The Heb
word means ‘‘to give flattering or honorary titles.”
In the former passage foreigners are so envious of
the prosperity of the Jews that they are anxious
to be surnamed by the name of Israel, i.e. to be
enrolled as members of the Jewish nation. In
the latter case Jeh gives Cyrus an honorary title,
viz. “servant of Jeh,’”’ and thus appoints him to be
His instrument in the restoration of His people.
The same word is rendered ih Job 32 21, AV ‘‘give
flattering titles.” Elihu declares his intention to
examine the situation without fear or favor. He
will not allow such high-sounding titles as “Your
Worship” or ‘“My Lord” to stand in his way. He
will not be overawed by Job’s social position. In
the NT the word is used in the case of Peter—Simon
whose surname is Peter (Acts 10 5.32; 11 13); of
Mark—John whose surname was Mark (Acts 12 12.
25; 15 37); of Judas—surnamed Iscariot (Lk 22 3);
of Barsabbas—who was surnamed Justus (Acts 1
23); and of Judas—surnamed Barsabbas (Acts 15
22). It was a widespread custom in the ancient
world to give honorary and symbolical titles. Our
Lord surnamed Simon Peter (Mk 3 16), and James
and John Boanerges (Mk 3 17). Acts 15 37 AV
has “surname” for the simple “‘call”’ (so RV).

T. Lewis

SUSA, sti’sa, sdo’sa (Ad Est 11 3).
SHAN.


SUSANCHITES, sii-san’kits (S2D}UW, shashane-
khady@’). See SHUSHANCHITES.


SUSANNA, sii-zan’a, THE HISTORY OF:


See Suu-


Name

. Canonicity and Position
Contents

Fact or Fiction?

Date

. Original Language


This novelette has, in the LXX, the bare title

“Susanna” (Zovsdyva, Sousdnna, from Heb MIU ,

shéshanndh, “lily”). So also in the

1. Name Syro-Hexapla. “In Cod. A (6) it is

designated “Opacis a, Hérasis a (Vision

I); see Ben anp tHn Dragon, I. In the Har-

klensian Syr (Ball’s W.) its title is “The Book of
Little [or the child?] Daniel.”

Sus was with the other Additions included in the Bible


Canon of the Gr, Syrian and Lat churches. Julius
Africanus (¢ 230 AD) was tha first to


POnB GN


2. Canon- dispute the right of Sus to a place in
icity and the Canon, owing to its improbable char-
Positi acter. _ Origen replied to him, strongly

‘osition maintaining its historicity (see Schtirer,


GJYV4, II, 455; HJP, 11, 3, p. 186, where
the references are given). In the LXX, Roe Hesisle
and Vulg, Sus is ch 14 of Dnl, butin © (ABQ) it opens
Dnil, proceding ch 1, a position implied in re and RV
which are based on @, formerly believed to be the true


2873


Ss
THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA SG (History)


LXX. Yet it is probable that even in ® the orlginal

place agreed with that in the true LXX (Swete’s 87);

so Roth (Kautzsch, Die Apok., 172) and Driver (Comm.

a Dnl, Cambridge Bible, xviii). See Bex anv THE
RAGON.


The story of Sus is thus told in © (Theodotion’s
version), and therefore in EV which follows it.
Susanna was the beautiful and devout

3. Contents wife of Joakim who resided in Babylon
in the early years of the exile, and

owned a fine park which was open to his fellow-
exiles (vs 1-4).
judges who, though held in high esteem, suffered
impure thoughts toward Susanna to enter their
minds. One day, meeting in the park, they divulged
to each other their lustful passion toward this
beautiful woman, and resolved together to seize the
first opportunity to waylay her in the park and to
overpower her (vs 5-15). A joint attempt was
made upon Susanna, who resisted, notwithstand-
ing threats of false accusation (vs 22-26). The
elders make a false charge, both in private and in
public, and she is accordingly condemned to death
(vs 27-41). On the way to execution she is met
by Daniel (=judge “of God’’) who has the case


reopened, and by a system of cross-examination of -


the two elders succeeds in convincing the people
that Susanna is innocent of the charge brought
against her. She is acquitted, but her accusers are
put to death.


The story told in LXX (87) is essentially the same,
though varying somewhat in details. Vs 1-4 seem to
have been prefixed for clearness by ®, for in ver_7 of
LXX Susanna is introduced for the first time: ‘These
seeing a woman of heautiful appearance called Susanna,
the wife of one of the Israelites,” etc. The original
text began therefore with ver 5, though in a slightly
different form. LXX omits ys 15-18 which tell of the
two elders concealing themselves and watching as Su-
sanna entered the park and took herbhath. There is not a
word in LXX concerning the threats of the elders to
defame Susanna in the event of her refusing what they
desired (vs 20 ff); this omission makes the LXX form
of the story obscure, suggesting that this section has fallen
out by error. Nordoes the LXX mention the crying out
of Susanna and the elders (ver 24). The trial took place
in the house, according to @ (and EV) (ver 28), but,
according to LX.X, in the synagogue (ver 28). In LXX
(ver 30) it is said that the number of Susanna’s relatives,
servants and servant-maids present at the trial was 500;
© js silent on this. LXX (ver 35) makes Susanna pray
to God before her condemnation, but © (EV, vs 42-44)
after. According to LXX the young man whom the
elders falsely said they found with Susanna escaped
unohserved because masked; ® Bays he got away
because the elders bad not strength to hold him (ver 39).
LX<X is silent about the two maids who, according to
® (ver 36), accompanied Susanna to the bath. © does
not speak of the angel who according to LXX imparted
to Daniel the wisdom he displayed (but cf ©, ver 50);
but on the other hand he adds the words ascribed to
Daniel (ver 51, EV), though he leaves out the words
imputed to him by LXX ( =even elders may lie). Lxx
omits the words of the people addressed to Daniel:
“What mean these words which thou hast spoken?
(ver 47, ©, EV). Accor to @ (ver 50) the people
entreated Daniel to act_as judge among them; LXX
omits this statement. Two questions were put to the
elders, according to LXX: ‘‘Under what kind of tree?
“Tn what part of the park?” but oniy one, according to
® (and av): “Under what kind of tree? LXX has
it that as a punishment the two elders were hurled down
the precipice; according to © they were slain (ver 62).
In the last two verses (vs 63f) LXX points the moral
of the story, but ® closes by describing the joy of Susan-
na’s relatives at the bappy iene of the trial and the in-
creased respect in whic. aniel came to_be held. For
the dependence of the VS see TexrT anp VERSIONS.


It is quite evident that the story is a fabrication
and that it came to be attached to Dnl on account
of the part played in it by Daniel
the judge. (1) The form of the
story differs in LXX, © and the various
Syr recensions, showing that it was a
floating legend, told in manifold ways. (2) No
confirmation of what is here narrated has been
discovered in written or epigraphic sources. (3)
The grounds on which Susanna was condemned are


4, Fact or
Fiction?


Two of these last were elders and -


trivial and wholly inadequate. (4) The conduct
of the judge, Daniel, is unnatural and arbitrary.
_ Though, however, the story is fictitious, it rests
in part or wholly on older sources. (1) Ewald
(Geschichte?, IV, 386) believed that it was sug-
gested by the Bab legend in which two old men are
seduced by the goddess of love (cf Koran 2 96).
(2) Brill (Das apokryphische Sus-Buch, 1877),
followed by Ball (Speaker's Apoc, II, 323-31),
Marshall and R. H. Charles, came to the following
conclusions: (a) That the first half of the story
rests on a tradition regarding two elders (Ahab and
Zedekiah) who seduced certain women by persuad-
ing them that they would thus become the mother
of the Messiah. This tradition has its origin prob-
ably in Jer 29 21-23, where it is said that Jeh
would sorely punish Ahab and Zedekiah because
they had “committed villany in Israel,’’ having -
“committed adultery with their neighbours’ wives”
(AV). We can trace the above story amid many
variations in the writings of Origen and Jerome and
in sundry rabbinical works. (6) The trial scene
is believed to have a wholly different origin. It is
said to have arisen about 100-96 BC, when Simon
ben Shetach was president of the Sanhedrin. His
son was falsely accused of a capital offence and was
condemned to death. On the way to execution the
accusers admitted that he was innocent of the crime;
yet at his own request the son is executed in order
that the father’s hands might be strengthened in the .
inauguration of new reforms in the administration
of justice. The Pharisees and Sadducees differed
as to the punishment to be meted out to false
witnesses where the death sentence was involved.
The first party advocated a stricter examination of
witnesses, and a severer penalty if their testimony
could be proved false. The Sadducee party took
up a more moderate position on both points. Sus
has been held to be a kind of tract setting forth by
example the views of the Pharisee party. If this
opinion of the origin of Sus be accepted, this tract
was written by a Palestinian Jew, a position
rendered probahle by other considerations.
If, as the Gr, Lat and Syr churches held and_ hold,
Sus forms an integral part of Dnl, the date of this last
book (see Danrex) is the date of Sus.
5. Date But there is conclusive evidence that the
three ‘‘Additions'’ circulated independ-
ently, though we have no means of fixing the date with
any certainty. Pala this piece arose during the
struggles hetween the Pharisees and Sadducees about
94-89 BC; see preceding section. In that case 90 BC
would he a suitable date. On the date of Theodotion’s
tr see Danizexr; Be, anv toe Dracon; Text anp
VERSIONS.
Our materials for judging of the language in
which the author wrote are slender, and no great
probability can at present be reached.
6. Original The following scholars argue for a
Language Gr original: Fritzsche, De Wette,
Keil, Herzfeld, Graf, Holtazmann. The
following are some of the grounds: (1) There are
several paronomasias or word-plays, as in vs 54f,
axivov, schinon [“under a mastick tree’]....
cxlee, schiset (“will cut’); vs 581, rpivov, prinon
(“under a holm tree’)... . mploa, prisat (“to
cut’). But this last word (prisai) is absent, from
the true LXX, though it occurs in © (Swete’s
text, ver 59, has kataprisé from the same root). If
the word-play in vs 58 f is due to a tr based on LXX,
the first example (vs 54f), found in LXX and 9,
is as likely to be the work of the translator of those
verses from the Heb. (2) It is said that no trace of
a Heb original has been discovered; but up to a
few years ago the same statement could have been
made of Sir.
There is a growing opinion that the author wrote
in Heb (or Aram.?); so Ball, J. T. Marshall, R. H.
Charles. (1) The writer was almost certainly a


i


past THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2874


Swine


Palestinian Jew, and he would be far more likely
to write in his own language, esp. as he seems to
have belonged to the Pharisaic party, who were
ardent nationalists (see preceding section, at end).
(2) There is a goodly number of Hebraisms, rather
more than one would expect had the writer composed
in Hellenistic Gr.

For versions and literature see Be, anp THE DRraGon;
Danze; the Oxford Apoc, ed by R. H. Charles, 638 ff.

T. Wirton Davis

SUSI, sisi, soo’si (O10, sas7): Father of Gaddi,
one of the spies, who represented the tribe of Ma-
nasseh (Nu 18 11). See Gray, HPN, 92.


SWADDLE, swod”l, SWADDLING-BAND,
swod’ling-band (vb. Son, hathal, ‘‘enwrap,”
“swaddle” [Ezk 16 4], noun MM, hdthullah,
“swaddling-band” [Job 38 9]; vb. cmapyavéa,
spargandd, “to wrap in swaddling clothes’ [Lk
2 7.12], noun ordpyava, spdrgana (pl.), ‘“swaddling
clothes’ [Wisd 7 4]. AV also has “swaddle”’
[Lam 2 22] for MDL, taphah, lit. “to extend.” But
the word means “‘to carry on the outstretched palms
of the hands” [cf DID, tippuhim, “dandled in
the hands,’ Lam 2 20], whence RV’s “to dandle’’):
“To swaddle”’ and ‘‘to swathe” are really the same
word, both forms going back to an AS form
swethel, “a bandage,” but ‘“‘swaddle” has become
the technical term for the wrapping of an infant in
the Orient or elsewhere. The oriental swaddling-
clothes consist of a square of cloth and two or more
bandages. ‘The child is laid on the cloth diagonally
and the corners are folded over the feet and body
and under the head, the bandages then being tied so
as to hold the cloth in position. This device forms
the clothing of the child until it is about a year old,
and its omission (Ezk 16 4) would be a token that
the ehild had been abandoned. The mention of
darkness as a “‘swaddling-band” at the birth of the
sea (Job 38 9) is only a poetic way of saying that
the sea, at its creation, was covered with clonds and
darkness, and to find any idea of restraint involved
is fanciful. Burton Scorr Easton


SWALLOW, swal’s (4%, derdr; otpovdés,
strouthés, in Prov and Pss, xedvbév, chelidén, in Isa;
Lat Hirundo rustica): A small long-winged bird of


Swift (Cynselus apus).


exhaustless flight, belonging to the family Hirundi-
nidae. D*rér means the bird of freedom, and as
the swallow is of tireless wing, it has been settled
upon as fitting the requirements of the text. In the
passages where ‘dghir is tr? “swallow,” there is a
mistake, that word referring to the crane. There
is also a word, sg or 9%, that means a rushing
sound, that is incorrectly tr4 “swallow,” when it
should be “swift” (Cypselus apus).


These birds are near relatives and so alike on the
wing as to be indistinguishable to any save a close
observer. Yet the Hebrews knew and made a difference.
The swallow is a trifle larger and different in color. It
remains all the year, while in numerous instances the
swift migrates and is a regular sign of returning spring.
The swallow is of long and tireless flight. The swift
is so much faster that the sound of its wings can be
heard when passing. ‘The swallow plasters a mud nest
under eaves, on towers, belfries, and close to human
habitations. The swifts are less intimate, building in
deserted places, under bridges and on rocky crevices.
The swallcws utter constantly a rather sweet low note;
the swifts chatter harsbly and incessantly at their nests.


| These differences are observable to the most careless


people. Scientists separate the birds on account of
anatomical structure also. Despite this, the birds are
confused in most of our tr*.
“Like a swallow or a crane, so did I chatter; :
I did moan as a dove; mine eyes fail with looking
upward:
O Lord, I am oppressed, be thou my surety”’
(isa 38 14).

Here ‘aghar is tr4 “swallow” and sis “crane,”
which is clearly interchanging words, as the Arab.
for “swift” is sus, the same as the Heb. The line
should read, “swift and crane.’ And another
reason for changing swallow to swift, in this pas-
sage, lies in the fact that of the two birds the swift
is the incessant and raucons chatterer, and this
was the idea in the mind of Hezekiah when he sang
his Trouble Song. Another incorrect reference is
found in Jer 8 7: “Yea, the stork in the heavens
knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle-dove
and the swallow and the crane observe the time of
their coming; but my people know not the law of
Jeh.” Few swallows migrate. Returning swifts are
one of the first signs of spring.


‘AS foe sparrow in her wandering, as the swallow in her
ying,
So the curse that is causeless alighteth not” (Prov 26 2).


This reference might apply to either, remembering
always that the swift took its name from its excep-
tional flight, it being able to cover over 80 miles an
hour. However, the swallow is credited with 800
miles in a night.
‘'Yea, the sparrow hath found her a house,
And the swallow a nest for herself, where she may
lay her young,

Even thine altars, O Jeh of hosts,

My King, and my God" (Ps 84 3).
Here is one instance, at least, where the swallow
is at home and the tr correct. The swift might
possibly have built in the temple: the swallow was
sure to be there. GENE STRATTON-PORTER


SWAN, swon (MOI , tinshemeth, “chameleon,”
“tree-toad,” ‘‘water-hen,” “owl; Ké«vos, kiuknos;
Lat cygnus; AS swan and swon): Mentioned only
in old VSS and RVm in Lev 11 18: “the swan, and
the pelican, and the gier eagle,” and in Dt 14 16
(LXX roppuplwy, porphurton=‘‘water-hen”; Vulg
ibis). In RV this is rightly changed to “the horned
owl, and the pelican, and the vulture.” A bird of
the duck family wrongly placed among the abomi-
nations in old VSS of the Bible, now changed to
horned owl.

White and gray swans spend their winter migratory
season on the waters of the Holy Land. They are
among the most ancieut birds of history; always have
been used for food; when young and tender, of fine flesh
and delicious flavor; so there is no possibility that they
were ever rightfully placed among the birds unsuitable


for food. Their feeding habits are aquatic, their food
in no way objectionable.


Gene SrTrATTon-PoRTER
SWEARING, swér’ing. See OatH; Prrsuny;
Crimes; PUNISHMENTS.


SWEAT, swet (WT, zé'dh [Gen 3 19], 973,
yeza* [Ezk 44 18]; idSpas, Addrés [2 Mace 2 26;
Lk 22 44]): “In the sweat of thy face shalt thou
eat bread” (Gen 3 19). Somewhat difficult is the


2875


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Susi
Swine


passage, which RV renders: “But the priests the
Levites, the sons of Zadok . . . . shall have linen
tires upon their heads, and shall have linen breeches
upon their loins; they shall not gird themselves
with anything that causeth sweat,” lit. “they shall
not gird themselves with sweat’? (Ezk 44 15.18).
The idea is evidently that profuse perspiration would
make their ministrations unpleasant. The rule was
of special importance in the sultry climate of Pal.

Luke, the physician, describing the agony of the
Lord in Gethsemane, says: ‘His sweat became as it
were great drops [@péu80, thrémboi} of blood falling
down upon the ground” (Lk 22 44, RV, following
N° AB, etc, notes in m: “Many ancient authorities
omit vs 43.44’). There are two difficulties of inter-
pretation in this passage, apart from the difficulty
which the physiological explanation of the phe-
nomenon presents: (1) the word (@péufos, thrémbes)
tr? “drop” means lit. “a elot of blood,” “a lump,”
“a curd,”’ and is nowhere else used in the sense of
drop. (2) It has been generally accepted that the
sweat of the brow of Jesus had become bloody in
appearance and in character, a symptom called
in ancient medicine aluarddns lipws, haimatédés
hidrés, “bloody sweat.” It must, however, be
observed that this tr would make the Gr particle
woel, hosel, superfluous, by which, not the identity
of the sweat with drops of blood, but a certain
similarity or comparison must be intended. Ch.
Th. Kuinoel, in his Lat comm. on the historical
books of the NT (Leipzig, 1809, IT, 654), has given
all known parallel instances in history and legend,
which seem to prove that under certain psycho-
logical or physiological conditions, though rarely,
haimatidés hidrés has occurred. :

Olshausen in his Comm., II, 469, thinks that the
following points of comparison might have been
in the mind of Luke: (1) the sweat may have
appeared on the forehead of Jesus in heavy drops;
(2) these may have dropped visibly to the ground,
just as drops of blood fall from a wound; (3) in
addition, possibly a reddish color may have been
noticeable, owing to an exndation of the arteries,
though the latter is not directly expressed in the
words of the evangelist. See also Dr. Stroud,
On the Physical Cause of the Death of Christ, 183;
Bynaeus, De morte Christi, II, 33.

The people of Pal in Gr-Rom times were generally
provided with handkerchiefs, used esp. to wipe off the
perspiration. The fashion was derived from Rome,
whence the name of these napkins became govidpior,
souddrion, Lat sudarium. The late legend of St. Berenice
or St. Veronica, who presented her handkerchief to the
Saviour on His way to be crucified, and who found,
when it had been returned to her by the Lord, that His
features had been imprinted upon the cloth, is a reminis-
cence of this use. These handkerchiefs were frequently
used to tie up small bundles of certain possessions, money,
etc (Lk 19 20). Asarule the dead had their faces covered
with one, or hadit tied around the head (Jn 11 44; 20 7).
In Ephesus the handkerchiefs of St. Paul were carried to
the sick, and achieved miraculous cures (Acts 19 12).

The vb. ispéw, hidréd, ‘‘to sweat,”’ is found in a rather
difficult passage of the Didache (i.6), which is introduced
as @ Quotation, the source of which, however, we do not
lmow: ‘‘Let thy alms sweat into {in ?] thy hands, until
thou knowest to whom thou givest."" The context
seems to show that we have here a free repetition of the
arguments of Sir 12 1 ff. so that the meaning would be:
ain giving charity, do not give indiscriminately or
thoughtlessly, but consider carefully so that no one who
is unworthy receive your henefaction."’ Still it is not
impossible that the text is corrupt in the passage.

H. L. E. Luerine

SWEET CANE, swét kan. See REED.


SWEET INCENSE. See Spices.


SWELL, swel ("2%, ¢dbdh): In the ordeal of
the Water of Jealousy described in Nu 6 11-31 (P),
the effect on the unfaithful wife of the drinking of
the holy water was to cause the thigh to fall away


(RV) or rot (AV) and the abdomen to “swell.”


| This ceremonial was a direct appeal to the judg-


ment of God, for there was nothing in the holy
water (taken from the laver) or the dust of the
temple which was mixed with it to produce this
effect. In the Talmudic tract Sétaéh there are
given many rabbinical opinions and particulars
as to the procedure in later times. Apparently
from the passage in Nu, the judgment speedily
followed the appeal, but according to Séah, iii.4,
it might be postponed even for four years, and
in v.1, it is said to have produced the same effect
on the adulterer as on the unfaithful wife. We
have no details as to the nature or permanency
of the swelling.

_ “Swell” as the tr of another word, bdeék, is used-
in the sense of blistering of the feet from long
tramping. Both in Dt 8 4 and Neh 9 21 it is said
that in spite of their long wilderness marches the
feet of the Israelites did not swell. This was a
token of Divine protection. See SwoLLen.

Atex, MACALISTER

SWELLING, swel’ing: The vb. “N83, gdh,
means “rise up” (Ezk 47 5, etc), so that the noun
ga’dwah (Ps 46 3) means “arising.” The ‘‘swell-
ing” of the sea that shakes the mountains is a
perfectly good tr, and “pride” (so ARVm) is heside
the mark. In Jer 12 5; 49 19 || 50 44; Zec 41 3
is found the phrase g”6n ha-yardén, ‘exaltation of
the Jordan,” which AV translates “‘pride of Jordan”
in Zec and “swelling of Jordan’ in Jer (RV has
“pride” throughout, with “swelling” in m of Jer).
What is described is a place, with a mass of vege-
tation, easily burned (Zee 11 1-3), a lair of lions
(Jer 49 19; Zee 11 3), and a particularly danger-
ous place for human beings (Jer 12 5). The luxuri-
ant thicket of the Jordan bank is evidently meant,
which could well be spoken of as ‘“Jordan’s pride”
(OHL, “majesty of the Jordan’), and “swelling”
is quite impossible.

In the NT “swelling”? is used in 2 Cor 12 20
for ¢volwois, phustosis, “puffing up,” “blatant
self-conceit,’”’ and 2 Pet 2 18 || Jude ver 16 for
brépoyxos, hupérogkos, “overgrown,” ‘solemnly
inane.” Burton Scott Easton


SWIFT. See SwaLiow.


SWIFT BEASTS (M393, kirkaréth [Isa
66 20)): AV and ERV “‘swift beasts,” ERVm and
ARV “dromedaries.” In Mic 1 13 (WD7, rekhesh)
a horse is meant, RV ‘‘swift steed.”” See CamEL;
Horse.


SWINE, swin (110, hdzir; ef Arab. 2 er
khinztr; %s, his, LXX and NT; ef Gr cts, stis,
and Lat sts; adj. teos, hieios, as subst., LXX;
xoipos, choiros, LXX and NT): In both ancient
and modern times domestic swine have been little
kept in Pal, but wild swine are well known as
inhabitants of the thickets of the Hdaleh, the Jordan
valley, the Dead Sea, and some of the mountains.
The species is Sus scrofa, the wild pig of Europe,
North Africa and Western Asia.

In the OT the swine is mentioned in Lev 11 7
and Dt 14 8 as an unclean animal: “And the swine;
because he parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted,
but cheweth not the cud, he is unclean unto you.”
In Isa 65 4 and 66 3.17 the eating of swine’s flesh
and the offering of oblations of swine’s blood are
referred to as abominations. LXX also refers to
swine in three passages where these animals are not
mentioned in the Heb and EV. In 2S 17 8 where
EV has “as a bear robbed of her whelps in the
field,” LXX adds (tr) “and as a savage boar in the
plain.” In 1 K 21 19 (LXX 20 19), where EV


Seles THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2876


Synagogue


has “im the place where dogs licked the blood of
Naboth,” LXX has ‘where the swine and the dogs
licked”; similarly in 1 K 22 38. In 1 Macc 1
47 there is reference to a decree of Antiochus order-
ing the sacrifice of swine. In 2 Macc 6 and 7 there
are accounts of the torture and death of Eleazar,
an aged scribe, and of a mother and her seven sons
for refusing to taste swine’s flesh. Swine, the
property of Gentiles, are mentioned in the account
of the Gadarene demoniac (Mt 8 30.31.32; Mk
6 11.12.13.14.16; Lk 8 32.33), and in the parable
of the Prodigal Son (Lk 15 15.16).


Figurative: We find the following figurative ref-
erences to swine:
“The boar out of the wood doth ravage it,
And the wild beasts of the fleld feed on it'"' (i.e. on the
‘‘vine out of Egypt’’) (Ps 80 13); ‘
“As a ring of gold in a swine's snout,
So is a fair woman that is without discretion"


(2 Esd 15 30); ;
“The dog turning to his own vomit again, and the
sow that had washed to wallowing in the mire”’
(2 Pet 2 22; cf Prov 26 11).
Atrrep Ery Day
SWOLLEN, swal’n (wiprpacba, pimprasthai,
only in Acts 28 6): The Melitans expected to see
Paul poisoned by the viper’s bite. RV and AV
translate it “swollen,” but the word is used by cer-
tain medical writers in the sense of inflammation;
see Nicander, Theriaca, 306; Hesiod, Theogonia,
856, expressing thereby the burning up by a
thunderbolt. Swelling accompanies the local lesion
of snake-bite and often large purpuric exudation
of blood, as well as paralysis, esp. of the lower
limbs.


SWORD, sird. See Armor, III, 5.
SYCAMINE, sik’a-min, TREE (cvxdpuvos,


sukdminos [Lk 17 6]): This is generally accepted
as the black mulberry tree (Morus nigra; N.O


Sycamine or Black Mulberry.


Urticaceae), known in Arab. as tat shdmi, “the
Damascus mulberry,” a fine tree which grows to the
height of 30 ft. It produces the dark blood-red
mulberry juice referred to in 1 Macc 6 34 (sépoy,
méron), ‘the blood of . . . . mulberries,’”” which was
shown to the elephants of the Syrians. The white


mulberry, M. alba, has white and less juicy fruit, and
it is cultivated largely for the sake of its leaves with
which the silkworms of the Lebanon are fed.

E. -W. G. MastsRMan


SYCAMORE, sik’a-mor. See Sycomore.


SYCHAR, si’kér (Zvxdp, Suchdr): Mentioned
only once, in connection with the visit of Jesus to
Jacob’s Well (Jn 4 5). He was passing through


TRC Se


Fountain at ‘Askar.


Samaria on His way to Galilee, ‘‘so he cometh to a
city of Samaria, called Sychar, near to the parcel
of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph: and
Jacob’s well was there.” Jerome thought the
name was a clerical error for Sychem (Ep. 86). In
Onom he is content to translate Eusebius, placing
Sychar E. of Neapolis. It is now generally admitted
that the text is correct. Some have held, however,
that Sychar is only another name for Shechem
(“Sychem’’). It is suggested, e.g., that it is a nick-
name applied in contempt by the Jews, being either
shikkor, ‘“drunken,”’ or sheker, “falsehood.” Others
think the form has arisen through change of m
to r in pronunciation; as 1 to rin Beliar. These
theories may safely be set aside. The evidence
that Sychar was a distinct place E. of Shechem may
be described as overwhelming. It is carefully and
perspicuously marshaled by G. A. Smith (HGHL,
367 ff), The manner in which it is mentioned
shows that it was not a specially well-known place:
“a city of Samaria called Sychar.” No one familiar
with Pal would have written ‘‘a city of Samaria
called Sychem.” It is mentioned only because of
its nearness to the well.

As to the position of the well, there is general
agreement (see Jacos’s WELL). It is on the right
of the road where it bends from the plain of Makhneh
into the pass of Shechem. Fully half a mile off,
on the edge of the plain, is the Village of ‘Askar,
on the lower slope of Ebal. A little to the W. is the


2877


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Swollen
Synagogue


traditional tomb of Joseph. This is the district
E. of Shechem usually identified with Jacob’s
“parcel of ground.” Many have sought to find
Sychar in the modern ‘Askar. There are two
difficulties. The first is the initial letter ‘ain in
themodern name. But G. A. Smith has shown that
such a change as this, although unusual, is not im-
possible. The second is the presence of the copious
spring, ‘Atn ‘Askar, which would make it unneces-
sary for the villagers to carry water from Jacob’s
Well. This cannot easily be explained away. One
could understand a special journey at times, if any
peculiar value attached to the water in the well;
but from it, evidently, the woman drew her ordinary
supplies (ver 15). This difficulty would probably
in any case be fatal to the claim of the village at
‘Ain ‘Askar to represent the ancient Sychar.
But Professor R. S. A. Macalister has shown reason
to believe that the village is not older than Arab
times (PE FS, 1907, 92 ff). He examined the mound
Telul Balata, nearly } mile 8.W. of ‘Askar, and just
W. of Joseph’stomb. There he found evidence of
occupation from thedays of the Heb monarchy down
to the time of Christ. Here there is no spring; and
it is only 3 mile distant from Jacob’s Well—nearer
therefore to the well than to ‘Askar. In other
respects the site is suitable, so that perhaps here we
may locate the Sychar of the Gospel. The name
may easily have migrated to ‘Askar when the
village fell into decay. W. Ewine


SYCHEM, si’kem (Zvxés, Suchém): In this form
the name of Shechem appears in Acts 7 16 AV, in
the report of Stephen’s speech. AV is a tran-
scription from the Gr; RV in accordance with its
practice, to give uniformity in the Eng., follows the
Heb form of the name given in the OT.


SYCOMORE, sik’é-mor, TREE (gpl, shik-
mah, Aram. N2P"D , shikema’, pl. OVAPW , shikmim;
in LXX wrongly tr? by ovndpivos, sukdminos,
“the mulberry”; see Sycamine [1 K 10 27; 1 Ch
27 28; 2Ch115; 9 27; Isa 9 10; Am 7 14];
Miapw, shikmodth [Ps 78 47]; cvmopwpala, suko-
mérata [Lk 19 4]): The sycomore-fig, Ficus syco-
morus (N.O. Urticaceae), known in Arab. as
Jummeiz, is one of the finest of the lowland trees
of Pal, and attains still greater proportions in Lower
Egypt. It is evident from 1 K 10 27; 2 Ch 1 15
that it was once abundant, and at a later period it
was so plentiful in the neighborhood of what is now
Haifa as to give the name Sykaminon to the town
which once stood near there. It is a tree which
cannot flourish in the cooler mountain heights;
it cannot stand frost (Ps 78 47). It was one of
the distinguishing marks of Lower, as contrasted
with Upper, Galilee that the sycomore could flourish
there. It is highly improbable that sycomores
could ever have flourished near Tekoa (cf Am 7 14),
but it is quite possible that the town or individual
inhabitants may have held lands in the Jordan
valley or in the Shephelah on which these trees
grew. Villages in Pal today not infrequently pos-
sess estates at considerable distances; the village of
Silwan (Siloam), for example, possesses and culti-
vates extensive fertile lands halfway to the Dead Sea.
The sycomore produces small, rounded figs, about an
inch long, which grow upon tortuous, leafless twigs
springing from the trunk or the older branches;
they are more or less tasteless. It would appear
that in ancient times some treatment was adopted,


such as piercing the apex of the fruit to hasten the
ripening. Amos was a “nipper” (oda, bala) of
sycomore figs (Am 7 14). The tree not uncom-
monly attains a height of 50 ft., with an enormous
trunk; in many parts, esp. where, as near the coast,


the tree grows out of sandy soil, the branching roots
stand out of the ground for some distance. The
timber is of fair quality and was much valued in
ancient times (1 K 10 27; 2 Ch1 15; 9 27;
Isa 9 10). Mummy cases and many of the best
preserved wooden utensils of ancient Egyp life


Sycomore (Ficus sycomorus).


are made of it. This tree must be distinguished
from the Eng. sycamore, Acer pseudo-platanus
(N.O. Spindaceae), the ‘false plane tree,” a kind of
maple. E. W. G. MastTerMan


SYENE, si-@’né. See SrvensH.


SYMEON, sim’é-on (Zvpedv, Sumedn): RV in Lk
3 30; Acts 18 1; 15 14 for AV “Simeon” (q.v.).
The persons are:

(1) An ancestor of Jesus (Lk 3 30).

(2) Symeon, called Niger, one of the prophets and
teachers in the church at Antioch (Acts 13 1).

(3) For Simon Peter, see Peter; cf Acts 15 14.
See Simeon, (4), (5), (6).


SYNAGOGUE, sin’a-gog:


Name
. Origin
Spread of Synagogues
The Building
1) The Site
2 The Structure
3) The Furniture
5. The Officials
(1) The Elders
2) The Ruler
3) The Servant (or Servants)
3) Delegate of the Congregation
5) The Interpreter
6) The Almoners
6. The Service
1) Recitation of the sh*ma'
2) Prayers
i) Reading cf the Law and the Prophets


pebp


4) The Sermon

5) The Benediction
LiTERATURE

Synagogue, Gr cuvaywy}, sunagogé, “gathering”
(Acts 13 48), ‘‘gathering-place’ (Lk 7 5), was
the name applied to the Jewish place of worship


Synagogue
Synagogue, Great


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2878


in later Judaism in and outside of Pal. Proseuché,
“a place of prayer’ (Acts -16 13), was probably
more of the nature of an inclosure,
marking off the sacred spot from the
; profane foot, than of a roofed building
like a synagogue. Sabbateton in Ant, XV, i, 6, 2,
most probably also meant synagogue. In the Mish
we find for synagogue béth ha-k¢neseth, in the Tgs and
Talm bé-khenishia’, or simply kenishia’. The oldest
Christian meetings and meeting-places were modeled
on the pattern of the synagogues, and in Christian-
Palestinian Aram. the word k*nishta’ is used for
ae ae church (cf Zahn, Tatian’s Diatessaron,

That the synagogue was, in the time of Our Lord,
one of the most important religious institutions
of the Jews is clear from the fact that
it was thought to have been instituted
_. by Moses (C'Ap, ii, 17; Philo, De Vita
Moses, 111.27; cf Tg Jer to Ex 18 20). It must
have come into being during the Bab exile. At that
time the more devout Jews, far from their native
land, having no sanctuary or altar, no doubt felt
drawn from time to time, esp. on Sabbath and feast
days, to gather round those who were specially
pious and God-fearing, in order to listen to the word
of God and engage in some kind of worship. That


1. Name


2. Origin


such meetings were not uncommon is made prob- |


able by Ezk 14 1; 201. This would furnish a
basis for the institution of the synagogue. After
the exile the synagogue remained and even devel-
oped as a counterpoise to the absolute sacerdotal-
ism of the temple, and must have been felt abso-
lutely necessary for the Jews of the Dispersion.
Though at first it was meant only for the exposi-
tion of the Law, it was natural that in the course
of time prayers and preaching should be added to
the service. Thus these meetings, which at first
were only held on Sabbaths and feast days, came
also to be held on other days, and at the same hours
with the services’ in the temple. The essential
aim, however, of the synagogue was not prayer,
but instruction in the Law for all classes of the
people. Philo calls the synagogues ‘“‘houses of
instruction, where the philosophy of the fathers
and all manner of virtues were taught” (cf Mt 4 23;
Mk 1 21; 6 2; Lk 4 15.33; 6 6; 13 10; Jn 6 59;
18 20; CAp, ii, 17).
In Pal the synagogues were scattered all over the
country, all the larger towns having one or more
(e.g. Nazareth, Mt 13 54; Capernaum,
3. Spread Mt 129). In Jerus, in spite of the
of Syna- fact that the Temple was there, there
gogues were many synagogues, and all parts
of the Diaspora were represented by
particular synagogues (Acts 6 9). Also in heathen
lands, wherever there was a certain number of Jews,
they had their own synagogue: e.g. Damascus
(Acts 9 2), Salamis (13 5), Antioch of Pisidia
(138 14), Thessalonica (17 1), Corinth (18 4),
Alexandria (Philo, Leg Ad Cai, xx), Rome (ib, xxiii).
The papyrus finds of recent years contain many
references to Jewish synagogues in Egypt, from the
time of Euergetes (247-221 BC) onward. Accord-
ing to Philo (Quod omnis probus liber sit, xii, et al.)
the Essenes had their own synagogues, and, from
’Abhoth 3 10, it seems that ‘‘the people of the land,”
ie. the masses, esp. in the country, who were far
removed from the influence of the scribes, and were
even opposed to their narrow interpretation of the
Law, had their own synagogues.
(1) The site.—There is no evidence that in Pal
the synagogues were always required to be built
upon high ground, or at least that they should over-
look all other houses (cf PEFS, July, 1878, 126),
though we read in the Talm that this was one of
the requirements (Tés M¢ghillah, ed Zunz, 4 227;


Shabbath 11a). From Acts 16 13 it does not
follow that synagogues were intentionally built
outside the city, and near water
for the sake of ceremonial washing
(cf Monatsschr. fir Gesch. und Wis-
sensch. des Judenthums, 1889, 167-70;
HJP, II, 370). :

(2) The structure —Of the style of the architecture
we have no positive records. From the description
in the Talm of the synagogue at Alexandria (Tos
Sukkah, ed Zunz, 198 20; Sukkadh 61b) one imag-
ines the synagogues to have been modeled on the
pattern of the temple or of the temple court. From
the excavations in Pal we find that in the building
the stone of the country was used. On the lintels
of the doors were different forms of ornamentation,
e.g. seven-branched candlesticks, an open flower
between two paschal lambs, or vine leaves with
bunches of grapes, or, as in Capernaum, a pot of
manna between two representations of Aaron’s
rod. The inside plan “is generally that of two
double colonnades, which seem to have formed the
body of the synagogue, the aisles E. and W. being
probably used as passages. The intercolumnar
distance is very small, never greater than 93 ft.”
(Edersheim). Because of a certain adaptation of


4. The
Building


-the corner columns at the northern end, Edersheim


supposes that a woman’s gallery was once erected
there. It doesnot appear, however, from the OT or
NT or the oldest Jewish tradition that there was
any special gallery for women. It should be noted,
ag against this conclusion, that in De Vita Contempla-
tiva, attributed by some to Philo, a certain passage
(sec. iti) seems to imply the existence of such a
gallery.

(3) The furntture—wWe only know that there was
a movable ark in which the rolls of the Law and the
Prophets were kept. It was called ’drdn ha-kodhesh,
but chiefly tabhah (Mghillah 3 1; Nedhdrim 6 5,
Ta‘dnith 2 1.2), and it stood facmg the entrance.
According to Ta‘énith 16a it was taken out and
carried in a procession on fast days. In front of the
ark, and facing the congregation, were the “chief
seats” (see Cuter Seats) for the rulers of the syna-
gogue and the learned men (Mt 23 6). From Neh
8 4und 9 4 it appears that the bémah (Jerus M¢ghil-
lah 8 1), a platform from which the Law was read,
although it is not mentioned in the NT, was of
ancient date, and in use in the time of Christ.

(1) The elders—These officials (Lk 7 3) formed
the local tribunal, and in purely Jewish localities

acted as a Committee of Management

5. The of the affairs of the synagogue (cf
Officials Berakhoth 47; Nedharim 6 5; Meghil-
lah 3 1). To them belonged, most
probably, among other things, the power to excom-
municate (cf Ezr 10 8; Lk 6 22; Jn 9 22; 12 42;
162; ‘Edhuyoth 66; Ta‘dnith 3 8; Middoth 2 2).

(2) The ruler—Gr archisundgdgos (Mk 5 35; Lk
8 41.49; 13 14; Acts 18 8.17), Heb ré’sh ha-k*neseth
(Sotah 7 7.8). Insome synagogues there were several
rulers (Mk 6 22; Acts 18 15). They were most
probably chosen from among the elders. It was the
ruler’s business to control the synagogue services, as
for instance to decide who was to be called upon to
read from the Law and the Prophets (Yéma’ 7 1) and
to preach (Acts 13 15; cf Lk 13 14); hehad to look
after the discussions, and generally to keep order.

(3) The servant (or servants)—Gr hupérétés;
Talm hazzdén (Lk 4 20; Yoma’ 71; Sotah 7 7.8).
He had to see to the lighting of the synagogue and
to keep the building clean. He it was who wielded
the scourge when punishment had to be meted out
to anyone in the synagogue (Mt 10 17; 23 34; .
Mk 13 9; Acts 22:19; cf Makkédth 16). From
Shabbath 1 3 it seems that the hazzdn was also an
elementary teacher (see Epucation).


CHORAZIN—RUIN OF JEWISH SYNAGOGUE, ONLY RUIN EXTANT


2879


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Synagogue
Synagogue, Great


(4) The delegate of the congregation.—Heb shtli+h
cibbir (Ro’sh ha-shanah 4 9; Berakhath 6 5). This
office was not permanent, but one was chosen at
each meeting by the ruler to fill it, and he conducted
the prayers. According to M¢ghillah 4 5, be who
was asked to read the Scriptures was also expected
to read the prayers. He had to be a man of good
character.

(5) The interpreter—Heb m*thirg¢man. It was
his duty to translate into Aram. the passages of the
Law and the Prophets which were read in Heb
(Meghillah 3 3; cf 1 Cor 14 28). This also was
probably not a permanent office, but was filled
at each meeting by one chosen by the ruler.

(6) The almoners—(Dem@t 3 1; Kiddishin 4 5).
Alms for the poor were collected in the synagogue
(cf Mt 6 2). According to P@’éh 8 7, the collect-
ing was to be done by at least two persons, and the
distributing by at least three.

(1) The recitation of the “shema‘.’—At least ten
persons bad to be present for regular worship (M«-

ghillah 4 3; Sanhedhrin 1 6). There
6. The were special services on Saturdays and
Service feast days. In order to keep the syna-
gogue services uniform with those of the
temple, both were held at thesame hours. The order
of service was as follows: the recitation of the shema',
ie. a confession of God’s unity, consisting of the
passages Dt 6 4-9; 11 13-21; Nu 15 37-41 (B’ra-
khoth 22; Taémidh 61). Before and after the recita-
tion of these passages “blessings” were said in con-
nection with the passages (Berakhoth 1 4), This
formed a very important part of the liturgy. It
was believed to have been ordered by Moses (cf
Ant, IV, viii, 13).

(2) Prayers ——The most important prayers were
the Shemineh ‘esréh, ‘Eighteen Eulogies,” a cycle
of eighteen prayers, also called ‘The Prayer’
(Brrakhoth 4 3; Ta'dnith 2 2). Like the shema*
they are very old.

The following is the first of the eighteen: ‘'Blessed
art Thou, the Lord our God, and the God of our fathers,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob: the great, the mighty and the terrible God,
the most high God Who showest mercy and kindness,
Who createst all things, Who rememberest the pious
deeds of the patriarchs, and wilt in love bring a redeemer
to their children’s children for Thy Name's sake; O King,
Helper, Saviour and Shield! Blessed art Thou, O Lord,
the Shield of Abraham.”


The prayers of the delegate were met with a
response of Amen from the congregation.

(3) The reading of the Law and the Prophets.—
After prayers the pdrdshah, i.e. the pericope from
the Law for that Sabbath, was read, and the inter-
preter tré verse by verse into Aram. (M*ghillah 3 3).
The whole Pent was divided into 154 pericopes, so
that in the course of 3 years it was read through
in order. After the reading of the Law came the
Haphtarah, the pericope from the Prophets for
that Sabbath, which the interpreter did not neces-
sarily translate verse by verse, but in paragraphs
of 3 verses (Mghillah, loc. cit.).

(4) The sermon.—After the reading from the Law
and the Prophets followed the sermon, which was
originally. a casuistical exposition of the Law, but
which in process of time assumed a more devotional
character. Anyone in the congregation might be
asked by the ruler to preach, or might ask the ruler
for permission to preach.

The foliowing exampie of an old (1st cent. AD) rabbinic
sermon, based on the words, ‘'He hath clothed me with
the garments of saivation’’ (Isa 61 10, a verse in the
chapter from which Jesus took His text when addressing
the synagogue of Nazareth), will serve as an illustration
of contemporary Jewish preaching:

“Seven garments the Holy One—blessed he He!—
has put on, and will put on from the time the world


was Created until the hour when He will punish the wicked
Edom (i.e. Rom empire). When He created the world,


' Edom; then He will clothe


He clothed Himseif in honor and majesty, as lt is said
(Ps 104 1): ‘Thou art clothed in honor and majesty.’
Whenever He forgave the sins of Israel, He clothed
Himself in white, for we read (Dn! 7 9): ‘His raiment
was white as snow.’ When He punishes the peoples of
the world, He puts on the garments of vengeance, as it
is said (isa 59 17): ‘He put on garments of vengeance
for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloke.’ The
sixth Feaaipe He will put on when the Messiah comes;
then He will clothe Himself in a garment of righteousness,
for it is sald (ib): ‘He put on righteousness as a breast-
plate, and an helmet of salvation upon His head.’ The
seventh garment He wlll put on when He _ punishes
imself in 'ddhém, Le. ‘red,’
for lt is said (isa 63 2): ‘Wherefore art Thou red in
Thine eprarel ?' But the garment which He will put
upon the Messlah, this will shine afar, from one end of
the earth to the other, for it is said (Isa 6] 10): ‘Asa
bridegroom decketh himself with a garland.’ And the
Israelites will partake of His light, and will say:
‘Blessed Is the hour when the Messiah shall come!
Blessed the womb out of which He shall come!
Blessed His contemporarles who are eye-witnesses!
Blessed the eye that is honored with a sight of Him!
For the opening of His lips is blessing and peace;
His speech is a moving of the spirits;
The thoughts of His heart are confidence and cheerful-
ness;
The speech of His tongue ls pardon and forgiveness;
His prayer is the sweet incense of offerings;
His petitions are holiness and purity.
O-how blessed is Israel, for whom such has been prepared!
For it is said (Ps 31 19): ‘‘How great is Thy goodness,
which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee’' "’
(Pegikta’, ed Buber).


(5) The benediction. After the sermon the bene-
diction was pronounced (by a priest), and the
congregation answered Amen (Berakhath 6 4; Sétah
7 2.3).


LireratuReE.—L. Zunz, Die gottesdienstlichen Vor-
trage der Juden, 2d ed; Herzfeld, Geschichte des Volkes
Israel, ILI, 129-37, 183-226; Hausrath, Neutestament-
liche Zeitgesch., 2d ed, 73-80; HJP, li, 357-86; GJYV4,
II, 497-544; Edersheim, Life and Times of Jesus the
Messiah, 5th ed, I, 431-50; Ocsterly and Box, ‘'The
Religion and Worship of the Synagogue,’’ Church and
Sy nagopus, IX, no. eee Seeee p. 46; a Bacher,
art. “Synagogue’’ in ; Strack, art. ‘* agogen."’
in RE, 3d ed, XIX. Meo

Pau, LEVERTOFF

SYNAGOGUE OF LIBERTINES. See Liser-


TINES.


SYNAGOGUE OF SATAN. See Satan, Syna-
GOGUE OF. :


SYNAGOGUE, THE GREAT: A college or
assembly of learned men, originating with Ezra,
to whom Jewish tradition assigns an important
share in the formation of the OT Canon, and many
legal enactments (see Canon or THE OT). One
of its latest members is said to have been Simon
the Just (ec 200 BC). The oldest notice of the Great
Synagogue is in the tract of the Mish, Pirke ’ Abhoth
(ec 200 AD); this is supplemented by an often-
quoted passage in another tract of the Mish, Babha’
Bathr@ (146), on the Canon, and by later traditions.
It tells against the reliableness of these traditions
that they are late, and are mixed up with much that
is self-evidently unhistorical, while no corrobora-
tion is found in Ezr or Neh, in the Apoc, or in
Jos. On this account, since the exhaustive dis-
cussion by Kuenen on the subject (Over de Mannen
der Groote Synagoge), most scholars have been dis-
posed to throw over the tradition altogether, regard-
ing it as a distorted remembrance of the great con-
vocation described in Neh 8-10 (so W. R. Smith,
Driver, etc; cf art. by Selbie in HDB in support
of total rejection). This probably is an excess of
skepticism. The convocation in Neh has no points
of resemblance to the kind of assembly recalled
in this tradition; and while fantastic details may
be unreal, it is difficult to believe that declarations
so circumstantial and definite have no foundation at
all in actual history. The direct connection with
Ezra may be discounted, though possibly—indeed it
is likely—somebody associated with Ezra in his un-


Synoptic
Syria


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2880


deniable labors on the Canon may have furnished
the germ from which the institution in question was
developed (see the careful discussion in C. H. H.
Wright, Ecel, 1-10, and Excursus III, “The Men
of the Great Synagogue’).

For the rabbinical quotations and further impor-
tant details, see C. Taylor’s Sayings of the Jewish
Fathers, 11f and 110f. JAMES ORR


SYNOPTIC, si-nop’tik, GOSPELS. See Gos-
PELS, SYNOPTIC.


SYNTYCHE, sin’ti-ké (Suvrixyn, Suntiché, lit.
“fortunate” [Phil 4 2]): A Christian woman in the
church at Philippi. She and Euodia, who had some
quarrel or cause of difference between them, are
mentioned by name by Paul, and are besought
separately: “J beseech Euodia, and I beseech Syn-
tyche’” (AV) to be reconciled to one another, to be
“of the same mind in the Lord.” The apostle also
entreats an unnamed Christian at Philippi, whom
he terms “‘true yokefellow,” to “help these women,
for they labored with me in the gospel.’’ What he
means is that he asks the true yokefellow to help
Euodia and Syntyche, each of whom had labored
_ with Paul.

This refers to the visit which he, in company with
Silas and Luke and Timothy, paid to Philippi (Acts
16 12 ff), and which resulted in the gospel being intro-
duced to that city and the church being formed there.
Euodia and Syntyche had heen among the first converts
and had proved helpful in carrying on the work. The
word used for ‘‘labored" signifies ‘‘they joined with me
in my struggle,’’ and probably refers to something more
than ordinary labor, for those were critical times of
danger and suffering, which the apostle and his compan-
ions and fellow-workers then encountered at Philippi.

That workers so enthusiastic and so honored
should have quarreled, was very sad. Paul,
therefore, entreats them to be reconciled. Doubt-
less his request was given heed to, esp. in view of
his promised visit to Philippi. See Evon1a; Yoxs-
FELLOW. JoHn RUTHERFURD


SYNZYGUS, sin’zi-gus (ctvtvye, sunzuge): In
Phil 4 3 it is rendered “yokefellow.”, WHm (2u-
tuye, Stinzuge), Thayer, Ler. NT, 594 (2vgtvye,
Stzuge), and others, take it as a proper name in this
passage. See YOKEFELLOW.


SYRACUSE, sir’a-kts, sir-a-kis’ (Zupéxourar,
Surdkousai; Lat Syracusae, Ital. Siracusa): Situ-
ated on the east coast of Sicily, about midway
between Catania and the southeastern extremity
of the island.

The design of the present work scarcely permits
more than 2 passing allusion to Syracuse, the most
brilliant Gr colony on the shores of the Western
Mediterranean, where Paul halted three days, on
his way from Melita to Rome (Acts 28 12). The
original ‘Corinthian colony founded in 734 BC
(Thucydides vi.3) was confined to the islet Ortygia,
which separates the Great Harbor from the sea.
Later the city spread over the promontory lying
northward of Ortygia and the harbor.

Syracuse assumed a preéminent position in the
affairs of Sicily under the rule of the tyrants
Gelon (485-478 BC; cf Herodotus vii.154-55) and
Hieron (478-467 BC). It flourished greatly after
the establishment of popular government in 466
BC (Diodorus xi.68~72). The Syracusans suc-
cessfully withstood the famous siege by the Athe-
nians in 414 BC, the narrative of which is the most
thrilling part of the work of Thucydides (vi, vii).

Dionysius took advantage of the fear inspired by
the Carthaginians to elevate himself to despotic
power in 405 BC, and he was followed, after a reign
of 38 years, by his son of thesame name. Although
democratic government was restored by Timoleon


after a period of civil dissensions in 344 BC (Plu-
tarch, Timoleon), popular rule was not of long
duration. :
The most famous of the later rulers was the wise
Hieron (275-216 BC), who was the steady ally of
the Romans. His grandson and successor Hierony-
mus deserted the alliance of Rome for that of
Carthage, which led to the celebrated siege of the
city by the Romans under Marcellus and its fall in
212 (Livy xxiv.21-33). Henceforth Syracuse was
the capital of the Rom province of Sicily. Cicero
calls it “the greatest of Greek cities and the most
beautiful of all cities’ (Cicero Verr. iv.52).
Grorce H. ALLEN
SYRIA, sir’i-a (Zvpla, Suria (Mt 4 24; Lk 2 2)):


1. Name and Its Origin
2. Other Designations
3. Physical

(1) The Maritime Plain
£33 First Mountain Belt
(3) Second Mountain Belt
(4) Great Central Valley
83 The Eastern Belt
6) Rivers
033 Nature of Soil


ay) Central Position
isto!
(1) Canaanitic Semites
(2) Sargon of Agade
ee Babylonian Supremacy
4) Hittite and Aramacan
(5) Hittites and Egyptians
(6) Amarna Period
7) Rameses IT
8) Philistines
(9) Tiglath-pileser I
(10) Aramaean States
(11) Peaceful Development
12) Shalmaneser IT
13) Tiglath-pileser [IT
14) Shalmaneser [V and Sargon
(15) Pharaoh-necoh and Nehuchadnezzar


The name does not occur in the MT nor the Pesh
of the OT, but is found in the LXX, in the Pesh
of the NT and in the Mish. In the


1. Name LXX it represents “Aram” in all its
and Its combinations, as Aram-zobah, etc.
Origin The name _ itself first appears in


Herodotus vii.63, where he says that
“Syrians” and ‘Assyrians’ were the Gr and bar-
barian designations of the same people. Otherwise
he is quite vague in his use of the term. Xenophon
is clearer when he (Anab. vii.8, 25) distinguishes
between Syria and Phoenicia. Syria is undoubtedly
an extension of the name ‘‘Suri,’”’ the ancient Bab
designation of a district in North Mesopotamia, but
later embracing regions beyond the Euphrates to
the N. and W., as far as the Taurus. Under the
Seleucidae, Syria was regarded as coextensive with
their kingdom, and the name shrank with its
dimensions. Strabo, Pliny and Ptolemy give its
boundaries as the Taurus Mountains, the Euphrates,
the Syro-Arabian desert and the Mediterranean, and
the territory within these limits is still politically
designated Syria, though popularly Pal is generally
named separately.
Homer (Iliad ii.785) and Hesiod (Theog. 304)
call the inhabitants of the district, ““Arimoi,’”’ with
which ef the cuneiform ‘‘Arimu” or


2. Other “Aramw” for Aramacans. The earliest
Designa- Assyr name was ‘“Martu,” which
tions Hommel regards as a contraction of


_ “Amartu,” the land of the ‘“Amurrw”
or Amorites. In Egyp records the country is
named “Ruten” or “Luten,’’ and divided ‘into
“Lower” and ‘Upper,’ the former denoting Pal
and the latter Syria proper.

_ (1) The maritime plain—Syria, within the boundaries
given, consists of a series of belts of low and high land


running N. and 8., parallel to the Mediterranean. The
first of these is the maritime plain. It consists of a


2881


broad strip of sand dunes covered by short grass and
low bushes, followed by a series of low undulating hills
and wide valleys which gradually rise to a
height of about 500 ft.


A This belt begins
3. Physical in North Syria with the narrow Plain of
Issus, which extends to a few miles S.


of Alexandretta, but farther 8. almost disappears, being
represented only by the broader valleys and the smaller
eae occupled by such towns as Latakia, Tripolis and

eirit. S. of the last named the maritime belt ls con-
tinuous, heing Interrupted only where the Ladder of Tyre
and Mt. Carmel descend abruptly into the sea. In the
Plain of Akka it has a breadth of 8 miles, and from Carmel
southward it again broadens out, till beyond Caesarea
it has an average of 10 miles. Within the sand dunes
the soil is a rich alluvium and readlly yields to cultiva-
tion. In ancient times it was covered with palm trees,
which, being thence introduced into Greece, were from
their place of origin named photnikes.

(2) First mountain belt.—From the maritime plain
we rise to the first mountain belt. It begins with the
Amanus, a branch of the Taurus in the N. Under that
namie it ceases with the Orontes valley, but is continued
in the Nuseiriyeh range (Mt. Cassius, 5,750 ft.), till the
Eleutherus valley is reached, and thence rising again in
Lebanon (average 5,000 ft.), Jebel Sunnin (8,780 ft.),
it continues to the Leontes or Quasmiyeh. The range
then breaks down into the rounded hills of Upper Galilee
(3,500 ft.), extends through the table-land of Western
Pal (2,500 ft.), and in the 8. of Judaea broadens out into
the arid Badiet et-Tth or Wilderness of Wandering.

(8) Second mountain belt.—Along with this may he
considered the parallel mountain range. Beginning
in the neighborhood of Riblah, the chain of Anti-Lebanon
extends southward to Hermon (9,200 ft.), and_thence
stretches out into the plateau of the Jaulan and Hauran,
where we meet with the truncated cones of extinct vol-
canoes and great sheets of basaltic lava, esp. in el-Leja
and Jebel ed-Druz. The same table-land continues south-
ward, with deep ravines piercing its sides, over Gilead,
Moab and Edom.

(4) Great central valley—Between Lebanon and Anti-
Lebanon lies the great valley of Coele-Syria. It is con-
tinued northward along the Orontes and thence stretches
away eastward to the Euphrates, while southward it
merges into the valleys of the Jordan and the Arabah.
From _ the sources of the Orontes and Leontes at Baalbek
(4,000 ft.) it falls away gently to the N.; but to the S. the
descentis rapid. In Merj ‘Ayun it has sunk to 1,800 ft.,
at Lake Huleh it is +7 ft., at the Lake of Tiberias
682 ft., and at the Dead Sea —1,292 ft., and thence it
rises again to the Gulf of Akabah. This great valley was
caused by a line of fault or fracture of the earth’s crust,
with parallel and branching faults. In ancieut times the
whole valley formed an arm of thesea, and till the Glacial
period at the end of the Tertiary (Pleistocene) Age, a lake
extended along the whole Jordan valley as far as the
Huleh. Wecan thus understand that the greet plain and
adjoining valleys consist mainly of alluvial deposits with
terraces of gravel and sand on the inclosing slopes. See
Lesanon; Natura Features; PavestINe; PHOENIcIA.


(5) The eastern belt—To the E. of the Anti-
Lebanon belt there is a narrow stretch of cultivated
land which in some places attains a breadth of
several miles, but this is always determined by
the distance to which the eastern streams from
Anti-Lebanon flow. Around Damascus the Abana
(Barada) and neighboring streams have made the
district an earthly paradise, but they soon lose
themselves in the salt marshes about 10 miles E.
of the city. Elsewhere the fruitful strip gradu-
ally falls away into the sands and rocks of the
Syrian desert, barren alike of vegetable and animal
life.

(6) Rivers —The mountain ranges determine the
course of the rivers and their length. The streams
flowing westward are naturally short and little more
than summer torrents. Those flowing to the desert
are of the same character, the only one of impor-
tance being the Abana, to which Damascus owes
its existence. Only the great central valley per-
mits the formation of larger rivers, and there we
find the Orontes and Leontes rising within a few
feet of each other beside Baalbek, and draining
Coele-Syria to the N. and &., till breaking through
the mountains they reach the sea. The Jordan is
the only other stream of any size. In ancient, as
also in modern times, the direction of these streams
determined the direction of the great trade route
from Mesopotamia to Egypt through Coele-Syria
and across Pal, as also the position of the larger


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Synoptic
Syria


towns, but, not being themselves navigable, they
did not form a means of internal communication.

(7) Nature of the soil—The variation in altitude
both above and below the sea-level is naturally
conducive to a great variety of climate, while the
nature of the disintegrating rocks and the alluvial
soil render great productivity possible. Both of
the mountain belts in their whole length consist
chiefly of cretaceous limestone, mixed with friable
limestone with basaltic intrusions and volcanic prod-
ucts. The limestone is highly porous, and during
the rainy season absorbs the moisture which forms
reservoirs and feeds the numerous springs on both
the eastern and western slopes. The rocks too are
soft and penetrable and can easily be turned into
orchard lard, a fact that explains how much that
now appears as barren wastes was productive in
ancient times as gardens and fruitful fields (Bab
Talm, Megh. 6a).

- (8) Flora.—The western valleys and the maritime

plain have the flora of the Mediterranean, but the
eastern slopes and the valleys facing the desert are
poorer. On the southern coasts and in the deeper
valleys the vegetation is tropical, and there we meet
with the date-palm, the sugar-cane and the syco-
more. Up to 1,600 ft., the products include the
carob and the pine, after which the vine, the fig and
the olive are met with amid great plantations of
dwarf oak, till after 3,000 ft. is reached, then
cypresses and cedars till the height of 6,200 it.,
after which only Alpine plants are found. The
once renowned “cedars of Lebanon” now exist
only in the Kadfsha and Baruk valleys. The walnut
and mulberry are plentiful everywhere, and wheat,
corn, barley, maize and lentils are widely culti-
vated. Pasture lands are to be found in the
valleys and plains, and even during the dry season
sheep, goats and cattle can glean sufficient pastur-
age among the low brushwood.

(9) Fauna.—The animal world is almost as varied.
The fox, jackal, hyena, bear, wolf and hog are met
nearly everywhere, and small tigers are sometimes
seen (cf 2 K 149). The eagle, vulture, partridge
and blue pigeon are plentiful, and gay birds chirp
everywhere. The fish in the Jordan and its lakes
are peculiar and interesting. There are in all 22
varieties, the largest being a kind of perch, the cora-
cinus, which is known elsewhere also in the Nile
(Jos, Ant, III, x, 8), and a peculiar old-world variety
locally named ‘Abu-mushi.

(10) Minerals—In both the eastern and the
western mountain belts there are abundant supplies
of mineral wealth. They consist chiefly of coal,
iron, bitumen, asphalt and mineral oil, but they are
mostly unworked. In the Jordan valley all the
springs below the level of the Mediterranean are
brackish, and many of them are also hot and sul-
phurous, the best known being those at Tiberias.

(11) Central position—The country, bemg in
virtue of its geographical configuration separated
into small isolated districts, naturally tended to
break up into a series of petty independent states.
Still the central position between the Mesopotamian
empires on the one hand and Egypt and Arabia on
the other made it the highway through which the -
trade of the ancient world passed, gave it an im-
portance far in excess of its size or productivity,
and made it a subject of contention whenever
East and West were ruled by different powers.

(1) Canaanitic Semites —When history begins for
us in the 3d millennium BC, Syria was already

occupied by a Sem population belong-
4. History ing to the Canaanitic wave of immi-
gration, i.e. such as spoke dialects akin
to Heb or Phoen. The Semites had been already
settled for a considerable time, for a millennium
earlier in Egypt we find Sem names for Syrian


Syria
Syriac Versions


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2882


articles of commerce, as well as Semites depicted
on the Egyp monuments.

(2) Sargon of Agade—Omitting as doubtful
references to earlier relations between Babylonia
and Syria, we may consider ourselves on solid
ground in accepting the statements of the Omen
Tablets which tell us that Sargon of Agade (2750
BC) four times visited the land of Martu and made
the peoples of one accord. His son Naram-sin,
while extending the empire in other directions,
maintained his authority here also. Commercial
relations were continued, and Babylonia claimed
at least a supremacy over Martu, and at times made
it effective.

(38) Babylonian supremacy.— Hammurabi and also
his great-grandson Ammisatana designate them-
selves in inscriptions as kings of Martu, and it is
very likely that other kings maintained the tra-
ditional limits of the empire. The long-continued
supremacy of Babylon not only made itself felt in
imposing place-names, but it made Assyrian the
language of diplomacy, even between Syria and
Egypt, as we see in the Am Tab.

(4) Hittite and Aramaean—By the middle of the
2d millennium BC we find considerable change in
the population. The Mitanni, a Hittite people,
the remains of whose language are to be found in
the still undeciphered inscriptions at Carchemish,
Marash, Aleppo and Hamath, are now masters of
North Syria. See Hirrivss.

The great discoveries of Dr. H. Winckler at Boghaz-
keui have furnished a most important contribution to
our knowledge. _ The preliminary account may be found


in OLZ, Decemher 15, 1906, and the Mitteilungen der
deutschen orient. Gesellschaft, no. 35, December, 1907.


Elsewhere the Aramaean wave has become the
predominant Sem element of population, the Ca-
‘haanitic now occupying the coast towns (Phoeni-
cians) and the Canaan of the OT.

(5) Hittites and Egyptians—At this time Baby-
lonia was subject to the Kassites, an alien race of
kings, and when they fell, about 1100 BC, they
gave place to a number of dynasties of short dura-
tion. This gave the Egyptians, freed from the
Hyksos rule, the opportunity to lay claim to Syria,
and accordingly we find the struggle to be between
the Hittites and the Egyptians. Thothmes_ 1,
about 1600 BC, overran Syria as far as the Eu-
phrates and brought the country into subjection.
Thothmes III did the same, and he has left us on
the walls of Karnak an account of his campaigns
and a list of the towns he conquered.

(6) Amarna period.—In the reign of Thothmes IV
the Hittites began to leave their mountains more
and more and to press forward into Central Syria.
The Am Tab show them to be the most serious
opponents to the Egyp authority in Syria and Pal
during the reign of Amenhotep IV (c 1380 BC), and
before Seti I came to the throne the power of the
Pharaohs had greatly diminished in Syria. Then
the Egyp sphere only reached to Carmel, while a
neutral zone extended thence to Kadesh, northward
of which all belonged to the Hittites. F

(7) Rameses II —Rameses II entered energeti-
cally into the war against Hatesar, king of the
Hittites, and fought, a ‘battle near Kadesh. He
claims a great victory, but the only result seems to
have been that his authority was further extended
into the neutral territory, and the sphere of Egyp
influence extended across Syria from the Lycus
(Dog River) to the 8. of Damascus. The arrange-
ment was confirmed by a treaty in which North
Syria was formally recognized as the Hittite sphere
of influence, and, on the part of the Assyrians who
were soon to become the heirs of the Hittite pre-
tensions, this treaty formed the basis of a claim
against Egypt. About the year 1200 BC the


Hittites, weakened by this war, were further en-
croached upon by the movements of northern
races, and the empire broke up into a number of
small separate independent states. |

(8) Philistines—Among the moving races that,
helped to weaken and break up the Hittite influence
in Syria were the Pulusati (or Purusati), a people
whose origin is not yet definitely settled. They
entered Syria from the N. and overcame all who
met them, after which they encamped within the
Egyp sphere of influence. Rameses III marched
against them, and he claims a great victory. Later,
however, we find them settled in Southeastern
Pal under the name of Philis. Their settlement at
that time is in harmony with the Am Tab in which
we find no trace of them, while in the 11th cent. BC
they are there as the inveterate foes of Israel.

(9) Tiglath-pileser _I—Assyria was now_slowly
rising into power, but it had to settle with Babylon
before it could do much in the W. Tiglath-pileser
I, however, crossed the Euphrates, defeated the
Hittite king of Carchemish, advanced to the coast
of Arvad, hunted wild bulls in Lebanon and received
gifts from the Pharaoh, who thus recognized him as
the successor of the Hittites in North Syria.

(10) Aramaean states.—When the Hittite empire
broke up, the Aramaeans in Central Syria, now
liberated, set up a number of separate Aramaean
states, which engaged in war with one another,
except when they had to combine against a common
enemy. Such states were established in Hamath, |
Hadrach, Zobah and Rehob. The exact position
of Hadrach is still unknown, but Hamath was
evidently met on its southern border by Rehob
and Zobah, the former extending along the Biga‘a
to the foot of Hermon, while the latter stretched
along the eastern slopes of Anti-Lebanon and
included Damascus, till Rezon broke away and
there set up an independent kmgdom, which soon
rose to be the leading state; 8.E. of Hermon were
the two smaller Aramaean states of Geshur and
Maacah.

(11) Peaceful development—For nearly three
centuries now, Syria and Pal were, except on rare
occasions, left in peace by both Mesopotamia
and Egypt. In the 12th cent. BC Babylonia was
wasted by the Elamite invasion, and thereafter a
prolonged war was carried on between Assyria
and Babylonia, and although a lengthened period
of peace succeeded, it was wisely used by the peace-
ful rulers of Assyria for the strengthening of their
kingdom internally. In Egypt the successors of
Rameses III were engaged against the aggressive
Theban hierarchy. During the XXIst Dynasty
the throne was usurped by the high priests of Amen,
while the XXI]d were Lybian usurpers, and the
three following dynasties Ethiopian conquerors.

(12) Shalmaneser IT.—In the 9th cent. Asshur-
nazirpal crossed the Euphrates and overran the
recently established state of Patin in the Plain of
Antioch. He besieged its capital and planted
a colony in its territory, but the arrangement was
not final, for his successor, Shalmaneser II, had


_again to invade the territory and break up the


kingdom into a number of small principalities.
Then in 854 BC he advanced into Central Syria,
but was met at Karkar by a strong confederacy
consisting of Ben-hadad of Damascus and his
Syrian allies including Ahab of Israel. He claims
a victory, but made no advance for 5 years. He
then made three unsuccessful expeditions against
Damascus, but in 842 received tribute from Tyre,
Sidon and Jehu of Israel, as recorded and depicted
on the Black Obelisk. It was not till the year 797
that Ramman-nirari, after subduing the coast of
Phoenicia, was able to reduce Mari’a of Damascus
to obedience, at which time also he seems to have


2883


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Syria i
Syriac Versions


carried his conquests through Eastern Pal as far
asEdom. The Assyr power now suffered a period of
decline, during which risings took place at Hadrach
and Damascus, and Jeroboam II of Israel was able
(2 K 14 25) to extend his boundaries northward
to the old limits.

(13) Tiglath-pileser ITI.—It thus happened that
Tiglath-pileser III (745-728) had to reconquer the
whole of Syria. He captured Arpad after two
years’ warfare (742-740). Then he divided the
territory of Hamath among his generals. At this
juncture Ahaz of Judah implored his aid against
Rezin of Damascus and Remaliah of Israel. Ahaz
was relieved, but was made subject to Assyria.
Damascus fell in 732 BC and a Great Court was held
there, which the tributary princes of Syria, in-
cluding Ahaz (2 K 16 10), attended. The Assyr
empire now possessed the whole of Syria as far as
the River of Egypt. Sibahe, however, encouraged
revolt in what, had been the Egyp sphere of influ-
ence, and insurrections took place in Phoenicia and
Samaria.

(14) Shalmaneser IV and Sargon.—After some
difficulty Shalmaneser IV compelled Tyre and
Sidon to submit and to pay tribute. Samaria,
too, was besieged, but was not taken till Sargon
came to the throne in 722. Hamath and Car-
chemish again rose, but were finally reduced in 720
and 717 respectively. Again in 711 Sargon over-
ran Pal and broke up a fresh confederacy consisting
of Egypt, Moab, Edom, Judah and the Philis. In
705 the Egyptians under Sibahe and their allies
the Philis under Hanun of Gaza were defeated at
Raphia.

The last three rulers of Assyria were in constant
difficulties with Babylonia and a great part of the
empire was also overrun by the Scythians (c 626
BC), and so nothing further was done in the W.
save the annexation of the mainland possessions of
Phoenicia.

(15) Pharaoh-necoh and Nebuchadnezzar.—In 609
when Assyria was in the death grapple with Baby-
lonia, Pharaoh-necoh took advantage of the situa-
tion, invaded Syria, and, defeating Josiah en route,
marched to Carchemish. In 605, however, he was
there completely defeated by Nebuchadnezzar, and
the whole of Syria became tributary to Babylonia.
The former Syrian states now appear as Bab prov-
inces, and revolts in Judah reduced it also to that
position in 586 BC.

Under Pers rule these provinces remained as they
were for a time, but ultimately “Ebir nari’’ or Syria
was formed into a satrapy. The Gr conquest with
the Ptolemies in Egypt and the Seleucidae in Baby-
lon brought back some of the old rivalry between
E. and W., and the same unsettled conditions.
On the advent of Rome, Syria was separated from
Babylonia and made into a province with Antioch as
its capital, and then the Sem civilization which had
continued practically untouched till the beginning
of the Christian era was brought more and more
into contact with the W. With the advent of Islam,
Syria fell into Arab hands and Damascus became
for a short time (661-750 AD) the capital of the new
empire, but the central authority was soon removed
to Babylonia. Thenceforward Syria sank to the
level of a province of the caliphate, first Abbasside
(750-1258), then Fatimite ee , and finally


Ottoman. . M. Curistie
SYRIA-MAACHAH, sir’i-a-mi’/a-ka. See Maa-
CAn; SYRIA.


SYRIAC, sir’i-ak: In Dnl 2 4, for AV “Syriack”’
RV has “Syrian,” and in m “Or, ‘in Aramaic.’”
See Aramaic LancuaGE; LANGUAGES OF THE OT.


SYRIAC VERSIONS:


Analogy of Latin Vulgate
The Designation ‘‘ Peshito” ('‘Peshitta’’)
Syriac OT
. Syriac NT
Old Syriac Texts
1) Curetonian
2) Tatian’s Diatessaron
3) Sinaitic Syriac
4) Relation to Peshlto
robable Origin of Peshito
- History of Peshito
. Other Translations
(1) The Philoxenian
(2) The Harclean t
(3) The Jerusalem Syriac
LIvERATURE


As in the account of the Lat VSS it was con-
venient to start from Jerome’s Vulg, so the Syr VSS


Sub Ob


OND


may be usefully approached from the Pesh, which
is the Syr Vulg.
Not that we have any such full and clear knowledge
of the circumstances under which the Pesh was produced
and came into circulation. Whereas the
1. Analogy authorship of the Lat Vulg has never been
of Latin in dispute, almost every assertion regard-
ing the authorship of the Pesh, and the
Vulgate time and place of its origin, is snbject to
question. The chief ground of analogy
between the Vulg and the Pesh is that_both came into
existence as the result of a revision. This, indeed, has
been strenuously denied, but since Dr. Hort in his In-
tro to Westcott and Hort’s NT in the Original Gr, fol-
lowing Griesbach and Hug at the heginning of the last
century, maintained this view, it has gained many adher-
ents. So far as the Gospels and other NT books are
concerned, there is evidence in favor of this view which
has been added to by. recent discoveries; and fresh in-
vestigation in the field of Syr scholarship has raised it
to a high degree of probability. The very designation.
‘‘Peshito,” has given rise to dispute. It has been applied
to the Syr as the version in common use, and regarded
as equivalent to the Gr «ow (koiné) and the Lat Vulg.


The word itself is a fem. form (p*shiétha@’), mean-

ing “simple,” “easy to be understood.” It seems to

have been used to distinguish the

2. The version from others which are en-

Designation cumbered with marks and signs in

‘Peshito” the nature of an apparatus criticus.

However this may be, the term as a

designation of the version has not been found in
any Syr author earlier than the 9th or 10th cent.


As regards the OT, the antiquity of the Version is
admitted on all hands. The tradition, however, that

art of it was trad from Heb into Syr for the benefit of
Hiram in the days of Solomon is a myth. That a tr
was made by a priest named Assa, or Ezra, whom the
king of Assyria sent to Samaria, to instruct the Assyr
colonists mentioned in 2 K 17, is equally legendary.
That the tr of the OT and NT was made in connection with
the visit of Thaddaeus to Abgar at Edessa belongs also
to unreliable tradition. St. Mark has even been credited
in ancient Syr tradition with translating his own Gospel
(written in Lat, according to this account) and the other
books of the NT into Syr.


But what Theodore of Mopsuestia says of the
OT is true of both: “These Scriptures were tr‘ into
the tongue of the Syrians by someone


3. Syriac indeed at some time, but who on earth
OT this was has not been made known

down to our day” (Nestle in HDB, IV,
645b). Professor Burkitt has made it probable that


the tr of the OT was the work of Jews, of whom there
was a colony in Edessa about the commencement of
the Christian era (Karly Hastern Christianity, 71 ff).
The older view was that the translators were Chris-
tians, and that the work was done late in the 1st
cent. or early in the 2d. The OT known to the
early Syrian church was substantially that of the
Palestinian Jews. It contained the same number
of books but it arranged them in a different order.
First there was the Pent, then Job, Josh, Jgs, 1 and
28, 1 and 2 K, I and 2 Ch, Pss, Prov, Eccl, Ruth,
Cant, Est, Ezr, Neb, Isa followed by the Twelve
Minor Prophets, Jer and Lam, Ezk, and lastly Dnl.
Most of the apocryphal books of the OT are found


Syriac Versions
Syrians


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2884


in the Syr, and the Book of Sir is held to have been
trd from the Heb and not from the LXX.

Of the NT, attempts at translation must have
been made very early, and among the ancient VSS
of NT Scripture the Syr in all likeli-
hood is the earliest. It was at Antioch,
the capital of Syria, that the disciples
of Christ were first. called Christians,
and it seemed natural that the first tr of the Chris-
tian Scriptures should have been made there. The
tendency of recent research, however, goes to show
that Edessa, the literary capital, was more likely
the place.

If we could accept the somewhat obscure state-
ment of Eusebius (H#, IV, xxii) that Hegesippus
‘made some quotations from the Gospel according
to the Hebrews and from the Syr Gospel,” weshould
have a reference to a Syr NT as early as 160-80 AD,
the time of that Heb Christian writer. One thing
is certain, that the earliest NT of the Syr church
lacked not only the Antilegomena—2 Pet, 2 and 3
Jn, Jude, and Rev—but the whole of the Catholic
Epp. and the Apocalypse. These were at a later
date tr? and received into the Syr Canon of the NT,
but the quotations of the early Syrian Fathers take
no notice of these NT books.

From the 5th cent., however, the Pesh containing
both OT and NT has been used in its present form
only as the national version of the Syr Scriptures.
The tr of the NT is careful, faithful and literal,
and the simplicity, directness and transparency of
the style are admired by all Syr scholars and have
earned for it the title of ‘Queen of the VSS.”

It is in the Gospels, however, that the analogy
between the Lat Vulg and the Syr Vulg can be

established by evidence. If the Pesh


4. Syriac
NT


5. Old is the result of a revision as the Vulg
Syriac was, then we may expect to find Old
Texts Syr texts answering to the Old Lat.


Such texts have actually been found.
Three such texts have been recovered, all showing
divergences from the Pesh, and believed by compe-
tent scholars to be anterior to it. These are, to
take them in the order of their recovery in modern
times, (1) the Curetonian Syr, (2) the Syr of
Tatian’s Diatessaron, and (3) the Sinaitic Syr.
They are known respectively as $°, J, $*, the Pesh
being $°.

(1) Curetonian Syriac_—The Curetonian consists
of fragments of the Gospels brought im 1842 from
the Nitrian Desert in Egypt, and now in the British
Museum. The fragments were examined by Canon
Cureton of Westminster and edited by him in 1858.
The MS from which the fragments have come
appears to belong to the 5th cent., but scholars
believe the text itself to be as old as the 2d cent. In
this recension the Gospel according to St. Matthew
has the title Hvangelion da-Mepharreshé, which will
be explained in the next section.

(2) Tatian’s “Diatiessaron.’’—The Diatessaron of
Tatian is the work which Eusebius ascribes to that
heretic, calling it that “combination and collection
of the Gospels, I know not how, to which he gave
the title Diatessaron.” It is the earliest harmony
of the Four Gospels known to us. Its existence is
amply attested in the church of Syria, but it had
disappeared for centuries, and not a single copy of
the Syr work survives.

A commentary upon it by Ephraem the Syrian,
surviving in an Armenian tr, was issued by the
Mechitarist Fathers at Venice in 1836, and after-
ward trt into Lat. Since 1876 an Arab. tr of the
Diatessaron itself has been discovered; and it has
been ascertained that the Cod. Fuldensis of the Vulg
represents the order and contents of the Diatessaron.
A tr from the Arab. can now be read in Eng. in Dr.


J. Hamlyn Hill’s The Earliest Life of Christ Ever
Compiled from the Four Gospels. P

Although no copy of the Diatessaron has survived,
the general features of Tatian’s Syr work can be
gathered from these materials. It is still a matter
of dispute whether Tatian composed his Harmony
out of a Syr version already made, or composed it
first in Gr and then tr? it into Syr. But the exist-
ence and widespread use of a Harmony, combining
in one all four Gospels, from such an early period
(172 AD), enables us to understand the title Evan-
gelion da-Mepharreshé. It means “the Gospel of
the Separated,” and points to the existence of single
Gospels, Mt, Mk, Lk, Jn, in a Syr tz, in contra-
distinction to Tatian’s Harmony. Theodoret,
bishop of Cyrrhus in the 5th cent., tells how he
found more than 200 copies of the Diatessaron held
in honor in his diocese and how he collected them,
and put them out of the way, associated as they
were with the name of a heretic, and substituted
for them the Gospels of the four evangelists in
their separate forms.

(3) The Sinaitic Syriac—In 1892 the discovery
of the 3d text, known, from the place where it was
found, as the Sin Syr, comprising the four Gospels
nearly entire, heightened the interest in the subject
and increased the available material. It is a
palimpsest, and was found in the monastery of
St. Catherine on Mt. Sinai by Mrs. Agnes 8. Lewis
and her sister Mrs. Margaret D. Gibson. The text
has been carefully examined and many scholars
regard it as representing the earliest tr into Syr,
and reaching back into the 2d cent. Like the
Curetonian, it is an example of the Evangelion da-
Mepharreshé as distinguished from the Harmony of
Tatian.

(4) Relation to Peshito—The discovery of these
texts has raised many questions which it may re-
quire further discovery and further investigation to
answer satisfactorily. It is natural to ask what is
the relation of these three texts to the Pesh. There
are still scholars, foremost of whom is G. H. Gwil-
liam, the learned editor of the Oxford Peshito
(Tetraevangelium sanctum, Clarendon Press, 1901),
who maintain the priority of the Pesh and insist
upon its claim to be the earliest, monument of Syrian
Christianity. But the progress of investigation
into Syr Christian lit. points, distinctly the other
way. From an exhaustive study of the quotations
in the earliest Syr Fathers, and, in particular, of the
works of Ephraem Syrus, Professor Burkitt con-
cludes that the Pesh did not exist in the 4th cent.
He finds that Ephraem used the Diatessaron in the
main as the source of his quotation, although “his
voluminous writings contain some clear indications
that he was aware of the existence of the separate
Gospels, and he seems occasionally to have quoted
from them” (Evangelion da-M epharreshé, 186). Such
quotations as are found in other extant remains of
Syr lit. before the 5th cent. bear a greater resem-
blance to the readings of the Curetonian and the
Sinaitic than to the readings of the Pesh. Internal
and external evidence alike point to the later and
revised character of the Pesh.

How and where and by whom was the revision
carried out? Dr. Hort, as we have seen, believed

that the “revised” character of the

6. Probable Syr Vulg was a matter of certainty,
Origin of and Dr. Westcott and he connected the
Peshito authoritative revision which resulted
‘ in the Pesh with their own theory,

now widely adopted by textual critics, of a revision
of the Gr text made at Antioch in the latter part of
the 3d cent., or early in the 4th. The recent in-
vestigations of Professor Burkitt and other scholars
have made it probable that the Pesh was the work
of Rabbala, bishop of Edessa, at the beginning of


2885


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Syriac Versions
Syrians


the 5th cent. Of this revision, as of the revision
‘which plays such an important part in the textual
theory of Westcott and Hort, direct evidence is
very scanty, in the former case altogether wanting.
Dr. Burkitt, however, is able to quote words of
Rabbila’s biographer to the effect that “by the
wisdom of God that was in him he tr4 the NT from
Gr into Syr because of its variations, exactly as it
was.” This may well be an account of the first
publication of the Syr Vulg, the Old Syr texts then
available having been brought by this revision into
greater conformity with the Gr text current at
Antioch in the beginning of the 5th cent. And
Rabbila was not content with the publication of
his revision; he gave orders to the priests and the
deacons to see that “in all the churches a copy of
the Evangelion da-Mepharreshé shall be kept and
read” (ib 161 ff, 177f). It is very remarkable that
before the time of Rabbila, who ruled over the
Syr-speaking churches from 411 to 435, there is
no trace of the Pesh, and that after his time there is
scarcely a vestige of any other text. He very likely
acted in the manner of Theodoret somewhat later,
pushing the newly made revision, which we have
reason to suppose the Pesh to have been, into
prominence, and making short work of other texts,
ef which only the Curetonian and the Sinaitic
are known to have survived to modern times.
The Pesh had from the 5th cent. onward a wide
circulation in the East, and was accepted and hon-
ored by all the numerous sects of the
7. History greatly divided Syr Christianity. It
of Peshito had a great missionary influence, and
the Armenian and Georgian VSS, as


well asthe Arab. and the Pers, owe not a little to the |:


Syr. The famous Nestorian tablet of Sing-an-fu
witnesses to the presence of the Syr Scriptures in
the heart of China in the 7th cent. It was first
brought to the West by Moses of Mindin, a noted
Syrian ecclesiastic, who sought a patron for the
work of printing it in vain in Rome and Venice,
but found one in the Imperial Chancellor at Vienna
in 1555—Albert Widmanstadt. He undertook the
printing of the NT, and the emperor bore the cost
of the special types which had to be cast for its
issue’ in Syr. Immanuel Tremellius, the con-
verted Jew whose scholarship was so valuable to
the Eng. reformers and divines, made use of it, and
in 1569 issued a Syr NT in Heb letters. In 1645
the editio princeps of the OT was prepared by
Gabriel Sionita for the Paris Polyglot, and in
1657 the whole Pesh found a place in Walton’s
London Polyglot. For long the best edition of the
Pesh was that of John Leusden and Karl Schaaf,
and it is still quoted under the symbol Syr Schaaf,
or Syr 5, The critical ed of the Gospels recently
issued by Mr. G. H. Gwilliam at the Clarendon
Press is based upon some 50 MSS. Considering the
revival of Syr scholarship, and the large company
of workers engaged in this field, we may expect
further contributions of a similar character to a
new and complete critical edition of the Pesh.

(1) The Philoxenian—Besides the Pesh there are
other tr® which may briefly be mentioned. One of

these is the Philoxenian, made by Philo-
8. Other  xenus, bishop of Mabug (485-519) on
Translations the Euphrates, from the Gr, with the

help of his Chorepiscopus Polycarp.
The Pss and portions of Isa are also found in this
version; and it is interesting as having contained the
Antilegomena—2 Pet, 2 and 3 Jn, and Jude.

(2) The Harclean.—Another is the Harclean,
which is a revision of the Philoxenian, undertaken
by Thomas of Harkel in Mesopotamia, and carried
out by him at Alexandria about 616, with the help
of Gr MSS exhibiting western readings. The OT
was undertaken at the same time by Paul of Tella.


The NT contains the whole of the books, except
Rev. It is very literal in its renderings, and is
supplied with an elaborate system of asterisks
Re ere to indicate the variants found in the


(3) The Jerusalem Syriac—Mention may also
be made of a Syr version of the NT known as the
Jerusalem or Palestinian Syr, believed to be inde-
pendent, and not derived genealogically from those
already mentioned. It exists in a Lectionary of
the Gospels in the Vatican, but two fresh MSS of
the Lectionary have been found on Mt. Sinai by
Dr. Rendel Harris and Mrs. Lewis, with fragments
of Acts and the Pauline Epp. The dialect employed
deviates considerably from the ordinary Syr, and
the Gr text underlying it has many peculiarities.
It alone of Syr MSS has the pericope adulterae.
In Mt 27 17 the robber is called Jesus Barabbas.
Gregory describes 10 MSS (Testkritik, 523 f).

LrrerRatTurE.—Nestle, Syrische Uebersetzungen, PRE!,
Syriac VSS, HDB, and Intro to the Textual Critictam of
the Gr NT, 95-106; G. H. Gwilliam, Studia Biblica, IT,
1890, III, 1891, V, 1903, and Tetraevangelium sanctum
Syriacum; Scrivener, Intro!, 6-40: Burkitt, ‘‘Early
Eastern Christianity,"' Texts and Studies, VII, 2 1-91,


Evangelion da-Mepharreshé, I, II, and ‘‘Syr VSS," EB;
Gregory, Textkritik, 479-528.


re T. Nicon
SYRIAN, sir’i-an (AV SYRIACK), LANGUAGE.
See Syrrac.


SYRIANS, sir’i-anz (DIN, ‘dram; Lépor, Suiroi;
Assyr Aramu, Arumu, Arimu):
Division of Aram
A Semitic Race
Syria and Israel
. Under Nabathaeans and Palmyrenes
. A Mixed Race, Semitic Type
Religion
The terms ‘‘Syria” and “Syrians” are used in two
senses in the Bible. In the OT they are uniformly
“Aram,” “Aramaean,” while in the NT they are used
in a wider and more indefinite sense (Mt 4 24;
Acts 15 23; 18 18; Gal 1 21), and include all the
dwellers of the land whether Aramaeans or not.
Aram was divided into several districts, com-
prising, in general, the region to the E. of the
Jordan, but extending in the N. over
1. Division most of Northern Syria, or from the
of Aram Orontes eastward, and Northern Meso-
potamia. This latter division was
called Aram-naharaim—Aram of the two rivers, i.e.
Tigris and Euphrates—and is the Nahrina of the
Egyp inscriptions. It is also called Paddan-aram
in the OT (Gen 25 20) orfield of Aram (Hos 12 12).
The most important of the divisions of Aram in OT
times was Aram-dammesek, the Syria of Damascus,
which sometimes dominated all of the other divi-
sions lying to the &., such as Rehob, Tob, Zobah,
and Maacah (28 10 8). Geshur was in this
region and should be reckoned as an Aramaean dis-
trict (2 8 15 8).
The Aramaeans were of Sem stock and closely
akin to the Hebrews. Aram is called a son of
Shem (Gen 10 22), which means a
2. ASem- descendant, for we find him after-
itic Race = ward called-a grandson of Nahor, the
brother of Abraham (Gen 22 21).
The Israelites were taught to say “A Syrian [Ara-
maean] ready to perish was my father’ (Dt 26 5),
and the kinship of the Hebrews and Aramacans was
further cemented by the marriage of Isaac with
Rebekah, the sister of Laban the Syrian, and of
Jacob with his daughters (Gen 24, 29). The
period when the Aramaeans first appeared in Syria
1s uncertain, but was probably later than 2000 BC.
When Abraham came from Haran, Damascus was
already occupied (Gen 15 2), and this may have
been the oldest settlement of the Aramaeans in


Oo RONE


Syrians
Tabernacle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2886


Syria proper, although it is not mentioned on the
monuments until long after, in the time of
Thothmes III of Egypt, about 1479 BC. The Syri-
ans were generally hostile to the Hebrews and had
wars with them from the time of David onward.
David subdued them, although they were aided
by the tribes from beyond the Euphrates (2 § 10),
but after the division of the kingdom they often
proved too strong for the northern Israelites.

In the days of Omri the Syrians of Damascus
brought them into subjection, but Ahab recovered
all the lost territory and Damascus
seems to have been subordinate for
a time (1 K 20 34). The king of
Damascus afterward regained the su-
premacy, as appears from the Assyr records, for in
the war of Shalmaneser IT with the peoples of Syria
we find them led by Ben-badad of Damascus and,
among his subject allies, Ahab, who furnished
2,000 chariots and 10,000 men. Ben-hadad suc-
ceeded in uniting most of the petty kingdoms of
Syria together in opposition to Assyria, but could
not hold them, and they fell, one after another, as
well as Damascus itself, into the hands of the great
world-power. Jeroboam II recovered the districts
that had been taken from Israel by the Syrians (2 K
14 25), but this was only a temporary success, for
Rezin extended his authority over all the East-
Jordanic region as far as Elath on the Red Sea
(2 K 16 6), and he and Pekah joined in an attack
upon Judah, but failed on account of the Assyr
advance (2 K 16 5-9). Damascus fell into the
hands of Tiglath-pileser in 732 BC, and the power
of the Syrians was completely broken.


3. Syria
and Israel


The Aramaic peoples became prominent again’


under the Nabathaeans and Palmyrenes, both of
whom were of this stock, as their
4. Under language is clearly Aramaic. The
Nabathae- former established a kingdom extend-
ans and ing from the Euphrates to the Red
Patmyrenes Sea, their capital being Petra, and
Damascus was under their control in
the reign of their king Aretas (el-Harith) (2 Cor 11
32). This kingdom was absorbed by Rome in the
reign of Trajan. The Palmyrenes did not come
into prominence until the 3d cent. AD, but became,
for a short time, the leading power in Western Asia.
In the weakness of Rome, under Gallienus, Odena-
thus and his still more distinguished wife, Zenobia,
dominated all Syria, and the latter dared to dis-
pute with Aurelian the empire of the East. With
ber fall in 272 AD the power of the Aramaecans was
extinguished and never revived.
The Syrians in the broader sense have always been
a mixed people, though of a prevailing Sem type.
The earliest layer of Sem population
5. A Mixed was the Amorite which was found in


Race of Syria when thefirst Bab empire extend-
Semitic ed its authority over the land. Later
Type appear the Canaanites, Phoenicians,


Jebusites, Hivites and other tribes,
all of which are classed together as desceudants of
Canaan in Gen 10, but their Sem character in
historic times is undoubted. The Hyksos who were
driven from Egypt to Pal and Syria were of the
same race, as would appear from the Egyp records.
The Aramacans formed the next wave of Sem stock,
but there were others, like the Hittites, who were
not Sem, and the Philis, whose race affinity is doubt-
ful. The Egyptians occupied the country for a


long period, but did not contribute much to the
population. Some of the tribes brought in by the
Assyrians may have been non-Sem, but most of
them were evidently of cognate race (2 K 17 24),
and the racial characteristics of the Syrians were
not changed. When Alexander and his successors
brought in the Gr and Macedonian elements there
was a decided change in the city population, but
little in the country districts, and although the
Greeks had a powerful influence upon the eiviliza-
tion of the country the Sem type overcame the ad-
mixture of Gr blood and prevailed in the country
as a whole. The Romans ruled the country for
centuries and established a number of military
colonies, but they did not affect the population even
as much as the Greeks. When, in the 7th cent.
AD, the Mohammedan conquest swept over Syria,
it brought in another great wave of pure Sem stock
with the numerous Arab settlers, who teuded to
obliterate any non-Sem elements that might have
existed. The effects of the influx of Europeans in
the time of the Crusades were not sufficient to
produce any marked change, and the same may
be said of all later invasions of Turks and Kurds.
The Syrians, while thus a mixed people to a large
extent, have maintained the Sem type, but they have
never, in all their history, been able to unite politi-
cally, and have always been divided, when inde-
pendent. They have been, during the greater part
of their history, under foreign domination, as they
still are, under Turkish rule.
The religion of the Syrians in ancient times was
undoubtedly similar to that of the Babylonians, as
is shown by the names of their gods.
6. Religion The Aramaeans worshipped Hadad and
Rimmon (2 K 6 18), sometimes joined
as Hadadrimmon (Zec 12 11). Baal, or Bel, Ash-
toreth, or Ishtar, were almost universally wor-
shipped, and Nebu, Agli-bol, Melakh-bol, Ati and
other deities are found in the Palmyrene inscriptions,
showing the Bab influence in their cult. This was
to be expected from the known prevalence of Bab
culture throughout Western Asia for centuries.
H. Porter
SYROPHOENICIAN, si’ro-fé-nish’an, sir’é-
(Zvpodotvcca, Surophoinissa, Bvpohorvikicca, Suro-
phoinikissa; WH has variant Stira Phoinikissa; AV
Syrophenician): The woman from the borders of
Tyre and Sidon whose daughter Jesus healed is
described as ‘‘a Greek, a Syrophoenician by race”
(Mk 7 26), and again as “a Cauaanitish woman”
(Mt 15 22). This seems to mean that she was
of Can. descent, a native of the Phoen seaboard,
Gr in religion, and probably also in speech. The
names Syria and Phoenicia are both applied to the
same region in Acts 21 2.3. Syrophoenician may
therefore denote simply an inhabitant of these
parts. According to Strabo (xvii.3), this district
was called Syrophoenicia to distinguish it from the
North African Lybophoenicia. W. Ewina


SYRTIS, sir’tis (vipris, sdirtis): RV form for
“quicksands” in Acts 27 17. These sandbanks, off
the northern coast of Africa, have from early times
been regarded as a source of danger to mariners.
Virgil refers to them (Aen. iv.40f). In Paul’s voyage,
the ship, driven by a tempestuous wind, Euraquilo,
was in peril of being cast upon them.


SYZYGUS, siz’i-gus. See Synzyaus.


2889


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tabernacle


like a “tent,” and the difficulty at once nei
itself of how, in such a structure, “‘sagging” of the
- roof was to be prevented. Mr. J. Fergusson, in his
art. “Temple” in Smith’s DB, accordingly, advanced
the other conception that the structure was essen-
tially that of a tent, with ridge-pole, sloping roof,
and other appurtenances of such an erection. He
plausihly, though not with entire success, sought
to show how this construction answered accurately
to the measurements and other requirements of the
text (e.g. the mention of ‘pins of the tabernacle,”
Ex 36 18). With slight modification this view here
commends itself as having most in its favor.

To avoid the difficulty of the ordinary view, that
the coverings, hanging down outside the frame-
work, are unseen from within, except on the roof,
it has sometimes been argued that the tapestry
covering hung down, not outside, but inside the
tabernacle (Keil, Bahr, etc). It is generally felt
that this arrangement is inadmissible. A newer
and more ingenious theory is that propounded by
A. R.S. Kennedy in his art. ‘Tabernacle’ in HDB.
It is that the “boards” constituting the framework
of the tabernacle were, not solid planks, but really
open “frames,” through which the finely wrought
covering. could be seen from within. There is
much that is fascinating in this theory, if the
initial assumption of the flat roof is granted, but
it cannot be regarded .as being yet satisfactorily
made out. Professor Kennedy argues from the
excessive weight of the solid “boards.” It might
be replied: In a purely ‘‘ideal” structure such as
he supposes this to be, what does the weight
matter? The ‘boards,’ however, need not have
been so thick or heavy as he represents.

In the minuter details of construction yet greater
diversity of opinion obtains, and imagination is
often allowed a freedom of exercise incompatible
with the sober descriptions of the text.

The attempt at reconstruction of the taber-
nacle begins naturally with the “court” (hd¢ér)

or outer inclosure in which the taber-
1. Inclosure nacle stood (see Court or Sanc-
or Court TuaRy). The description is given

in Ex 27 9-18; 38 9-20. The court
is to be conceived of as an inclosed space of 100
cubits (150 ft.) in length, and 50 cubits (75 ft.)
in breadth, its sides formed (with special arrange-
ment for the entrance) by “hangings” or curtains
(kela‘tm) of “fine twined linen,” 5 cubits (7} ft.) in
height, supported by pillars of brass (bronze)
5 cubits apart, to which the hangings were attached
by “hooks” and “fillets” of silver. It thus ccn-
sisted of two squares of 50 cubits each, in the an-
terior of which (the easterly) stood the “altar of
burnt-offering” (see AuTar), and the “laver” (see
LavER), and in the posterior (the westerly) the
tabernacle itself. From Ex 30 17-21 we learn that
the laver—a large (bronze) vessel for the ablutions
of the priests—stood between the altar and the
tabernacle (ver 18), The pillars were 60 in number,
20 being reckoned to the longer sides (N. and 8.),
and 10 each to the shorter (E. and W.). The pillars
‘were set in “sockets” or bases (’edhen) of brass
(bronze), and had “capitals” (AV and ERV “chapi-
ters”) overlaid with silver (88 17). The “fillets”
are here, as usually, regarded as silver rods con-
necting the pillars; some, however, as Ewald,
Dillmann, Kennedy, take the “fillet” to be an orna-
mental band round the base of the capital. On
the eastern side was the “gate” or entrance. This
was formed by a “screen” (mdsakh) 20 cubits
(30 ft.) in breadth, likewise of fine twined linen, but
distinguished from the other (white) hangings by
being embroidered in “‘blue, and purple, and scarlet”
(see East Gate). The hangings on either side of
the “gate” were 15 cubits in breadth. The 10


pillars of the east side are distributed—4 to the en-
trance screen, 3 on either side to the hangings.
The enumeration creates some difficulty till it is
remembered that in the reckoning round the court
no pillar is counted twice, and that the corner
pillars and those on either side of the entrance


Ground Plan, according to Keil.


A, The Dwelling-Place
a, the framework; 6, the pillars of the entrance; ¢, the holy place; d,
the table of shewbread; e, the candlestick; f, the altar of incense; g, the
yeil and pillars; hk, the Holy of Holies; i, the ark and mercy-seat.
B, The Court
k, the pillars of the court; J, the entrance curtain and pillars; m, the
altar of burnt offering; 2, the laver.


had each to do a double duty. The reckoning
is really by the 5-cubit spaces between the pillars.
Mention is made (27 19; 38 20) of the “pins”
of the court, as well as of the tabernacle, by means
of which, in the former case, the pillars were held

in place. These also were of brass (bronze).
In the inner of the two squares of the
court was reared the tabernacle—a rectangular
oblong structure, 30 cubits (45 ft.)


2. Struc- long and 10 cubits (15 ft.) broad,
ture, Di- __ divided into two parts, a holy and a
visions and most holy (26 33). Attention has to
Furniture be given here (1) to the coverings of


the tabernacle, (2) to its framework
and divisions, and (3) to its furniture.

(1) Coverings of the tabernacle (Hx 26 1-14;
36 8-19)—The wooden framework of the taber-
nacle to be afterward described had 3 coverings—
one, the immediate covering of the tabernacle or
“dwelling,” called by the same name, mishkan
(26 1.6); a second, the “tent” covering of goats’
hair; and a third, a protective covering of rams’
and seal- (or porpoise-) skins, cast over the whole.


Tabernacle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2890


(a) The covering of the tabernacle proper (26 1-6)
consisted of 10 curtains (y*r2‘dth, lit. “breadth’’)
of fine twined linen, beautifully woven with blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and with figures of cheru-
bim. The 10 curtains, each 28 cubits long and
4 cubits broad, were joined together in sets of 5 to
form 2 large curtains, which again were fastened
by 50 loops and clasps (AV “‘taches”) of gold, so as
to make a single great curtain 40 cubits (60 ft.) long,
and 28 cubits (42 ft.) broad. (6) The “tent”
covering (vs 7-13) was formed by 11 curtains of
goats’ hair, the length in this case being 30 cubits,
and the breadth 4 cubits. These were joined in
sets of 5 and 6 curtains, and as before the two divi-
sions were coupled by 50 loops and clasps (this time
of bronze), into one great curtain of 44 cubits (66
ft.) in length and 30 cubits (45 ft.) in breadth—an
excess of 4 cubits in length and 2 in breadth over
the fine tabernacle curtam. (c) Finally, for pur-
poses of protection, coverings were ordered to be
made (ver 14) for the “tent”? of rams’ skins dyed
red, and of seal- or porpoise-skins (EV “badgers’
skins’). The arrangement of the coverings is con-
sidered below.

(2) The framework of the tabernacle (Ex 26 15-
37; 36 20-38) was, as ordinarily understood,
composed of upright “boards” of acacia wood,
forming 3 sides of the oblong structure, the front
being closed by an embroidered ‘‘screen,’’ depend-
ing from 5 pillars (26 36.37; see below). These
boards, 48 in number (20 each for the north and
south sides, and 8 for the west side), were 10 cubits
(15 ft.) in height, and 12 cubits (2 ft. 3 in.) in breadth
(the thickness is not given), and were overlaid with
gold. They were set by means of “tenons” (lit.
“hands”’), or projections at the foot, 2 for each
board, in 96 silver ‘“‘sockets,” or bases (‘‘a talent
for a socket,” 38 27). In the boards were ‘‘rings’’
of gold, through which were passed 3 horizontal
“bars,” to hold the parts together—the middle bar,
apparently, on the long sides, extending from end
to end (26 28), the upper and lower bars being
divided in the center (5 bars in all on each side).
The bars, like the boards, were overlaid with gold.
Some obscurity rests on the arrangement at the
back: 6 of the boards were of the usual breadth
(= 9 cubits), but the 2 coruer boards appear to have
made up only a cubit between them (vs 22-24).
Notice has already been taken of the theory (Ken-
nedy, art. “Tabernacle,” HDB) that the so-called
“boards” were not really such, but were open
“frames,” the 2 uprights of which, joined by cross-
pieces, are the “tenons” of the text. It seems
unlikely, if this was meant, that it should not be
more distinctly explained. The inclosure thus
constructed was next divided into 2 apartments,
separated by a “veil,” which hung from 4 pillars
overlaid with gold and resting in silver sockets.
Like the tabernacle-covering, the veil was beauti-
fully woven with blue, purple, and scarlet, and with
figures of cherubim (vs 31.32; see Vern). The
cuter of these chambers, or “holy place,” was,
as usually computed, 20 cubits long by 10 broad;
the inner, or “most holy place,” was 10 cubits
square. ‘The “door of the tent” (ver 36) was formed,
as already stated, by a “‘sereen,” embroidered with
the above colors,-and depending from 5 pillars in
bronze sockets. Here also the hooks were of gold,
and the pillars and their capitals overlaid with
gold (86 38).

Preference has already been expressed for Mr. Fergus-
son's idea that the tabernacle was not flat-roofed, the
curtains being cast over it like drapery, but was tent-
like in shape, with ridge-pole, and a sloping roof, raising
the total height to 15 cubits. Passing over the ridge
pole, and descending at an angle, 14 cubits on either


side, the inner curtain would extend 5 cubits beyond
the walls of the tabernacle, making an awning of that


width N. and S., while the goats’-hair covering above it,
2 cubits wider, would hang below it a cubit on either side.
The whole would be held in position by ropes secured
by bronze tent-pins to the ground (7 19; 388 31).
The scheme has obvious advantages in that it preserves
the idea of a ‘tent,’ conforms to the principal measure-
ments, removes the difficulty of “sagging” on the (flat)
roof, and permits of the golden boards, bars and rings, on


20 CUBITS
o


10 CUBITS


Construction of Tabernacle, according to Fergusson.


the outside, and of the finely wrought tapestry, on the
inside, being seen (Professor Kennedy provides for the
latter by his ‘‘frames,"’ through which the curtain would
be visible). On the other hand, it is not to be concealed
that the construction proposed presents several serious
difficulties. The silence of the text about a ridge-pole,
supporting pillars, and other requisites of Mr. Fergusson s
scheme (his suggestion that ‘the middle bar’ of 26 28
may be the ridge-pole is quite untenable), may be got
over by assuming that these parts are taken for granted
as understood in tent-construction. But this does not
apply to other adjustments, esp. those connected with
the back and front of the tabernacle. It was seen above
that the inner covering was 40 cubits in Jength, while the
tabernacle-structure was 30 cubits. How is this excess
of 10 cubits in the tapestry-covering dealt with? Mr.
Fergusson, dividing equally, supposes a porch of 5 cubits
at the front, and a space of 5 cubits also behind, with
hypothetical pillars. The text, however, is explicit that
the veil dividing the holy from the most holy place was
hung “under the clasps'’ (26 33), i.e. on this hypothesis,
midway in the structure, or 15 cubits from either end.
Hither, then, (1) the idea must be abandoned that the
holy place was twice the length of the Holy of Holies
(20X10; it is to be observed that the text does not
state the proportions, which are inferred from those of
Solomon’s Temple), or (2) Mr. Fergusson's arrangement
must be given up, and the division of the curtain be
moved back 5 cubits, depriving him of his curtain for the
porch, and leaving 10 cubits to be disposed of in the
rear. Another difficulty is connected with the porch
itself. No clear indication of such a porch is given _in
the text, while the 5 pillars ‘‘for the screen’’ (ver 37)
are most naturally taken to be, like the latter, at the
immediate entrance of the tabernacle. Mr. Fergusson,
on the other hand, finds it necessary to separate pillars
and screen, and to place the pillars 5 cubits farther in
front. He is right, however, in saying that the 5th
pillar naturally suggests a ridge-pole; in his favor also is
the fact that the extra breadth of the overlying tent-
covering was to hang down, 2 cubits at_ the front, and
2 cubits at the back of the tabernacle (26 9.12). It is
possible that there was a special disposition of the inner
curtain—that belonging peculiarly to the ‘‘ dwelling '—
according to which its “‘clasps’’ lay above the ‘‘veil” of
the Holy of Holies (20 cubits from the entrance), and
its hinder folds closed the aperture at the rear which
otherwise would have admitted light into the secrecy
of the shrine. But constructions of this kind must ever
remain more or less conjectural.

The measurements in the above reckoning are internal.
Dr. Keunedy disputes this, but the analogy of the temple
is against his view.


_ (8) The furniture of the sanctuary is described
in Ex 25 10440 (ark, table of shewbread, candle-
stick); 30 1-10 (altar of incense); cf ch 37 for
making. In the innermost shrine, the Holy of
Holies, the sole object was the ark of the covenant,
overlaid within and without with pure gold, with
its molding and rings of gold, its staves overlaid
with gold passed through the rings, and its lid or
covering of solid gold—the propitiatory or mercy-
seat—at either end of which, of one piece with it
(25 19; 37 8), stood cherubim, with wings out-


TABERNACLE (SCHICK’S MODEL)


2891


Tabernacle


stretched over the mercy-seat and with faces turned
toward it (for details see Ark or CovmNaANT;
Mercy-Seat; Cuerupim). This was the meeting-
place of Jeh and His people ‘through Moses (26
22). The ark contained only the two tables of
stone, hence its name, ‘‘the ark of the testimony”
(25 16.22). It is not always realized how small
an object the ark was—only 23 cubits (3 ft. 9 in.)
long, 14 cubits (2 ft. 3 in.) broad, and the same
(13 cubits) high.

The furniture of the outer chamber of the taber-
nacle consisted of (a) the table of shewbread; (b)
the golden candlestick: (c) the altar of incense,
or golden altar. These were placed, the table of
shewbread on the north side (40 22), the candle-
stick on the south side (40 24), and the altar of
incense in front of the veil, in the holy place.

(a) The table of shewbread was a small table
of acacia wood, overlaid with gold, with a golden
rim round the top, gold rings at the corners of its
4 feet, staves for the rings, and a “border’’ (at
middle?) joining the legs, holding them together.
Its dimensions were 2 cubits (3 ft.) long, 1 cubit (18
in.) broad, and 14 cubits (2 ft. 3 in.) high. On it
were placed 12 cakes, renewed each week, in 2 piles
(cf Lev 24 5-9), together with dishes (for the
bread), spoons (incense cups), flagons and bowls (for
drink offerings), all of pure gold (see SHewsreap,
TABLE OF).

(b) The candlestick or lampstand was the article
on which most adornment was lavished. It was
of pure gold, and consisted of a central stem
(in 25 32-35 this specially receives the name
“candlestick”’), with 3 curved branches on either
side, all elegantly wrought with cups of almond
blossom, knops, and flowers (lilies?)—-3 of this
series to each branch and 4 to the central stem.
Upon the 6 branches and the central stem were 7
lamps from which the light issued. Connected with
the candlestick were snuffers and snuff-dishes for
the wicks—all of gold. The candlestick was formed
from a talent of pure gold (ver 38). See Canviz-
STICK.

(c) The description of the altar of incense occurs
(30 1-10) for some unexplained reason or dis-
placement out of the place where it might be ex-
pected, but this is no reason for throwing doubt
(with some) upon its existence. It was a small
altar, overlaid with gold, a cubit (18 in.) square, and
2 cubits (3 ft.) high, with 4horns. On it was burned
sweet-smelling incense. It had the usual golden
rim, golden rings, and gold-covered staves. See
ALTAR OF INCENSE.

IH. History.—We may fix 1220 BC as the
-approximate date of the introduction of the taber-

nacle. Jt was set up at Sinai on the
1. Removal Ist day of the lst month of the 2d
from Sinai year (Ex 40 2.17), i.e. 14 days before

the celebration of the Passover on the
first anniversary of the exodus (see CHRONOLOGY
or THE OT, VII, VIID). When the people re-
sumed their journey, the ark was wrapped in the
veil which had served to isolate the most holy
place (Nu 4 5). This and the two altars were
carried upon the shoulders of the children of
Kohath, a descendant of Levi, and were removed
under the personal supervision of the high priest
(Nu 3 31.82; 4 15). The rest of the dismem-
bered structure was carried in six covered wagons,
offered by the prince, each drawn by two oxen
(Nu 7). Doubtless others were provided for the
heavier materials (cf Keil). Before leaving Sinai
the brazen altar had been dedicated, and utensils
of gold and silver had been presented for use at the
services. The tabernacle had been standing at
Sinai during 50 days (Nu 10 11).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


The journey lay along the “great and terrible
wilderness” between Horeb in the heart of Arabia
and Kadesh-barnea in the Negeb of

2. Sojourn Judah; of the 40 years occupied
at Kadesh in the journey to Canaan, nearly 38
were spent at Kadesh, a fact not

always clearly recognized. The tabernacle stood


. here during 37 years (one year being occupied in


a punitive journey southward to the shore of the
Red Sea). During this whole time the ordinary
sacrifices were not offered (Am 6 25), though it is
possible that the appropriate seasons were never-
theless marked in more than merely chronological
fashion. Few incidents are recorded as to these
years, and little mention is made of the tabernacle
throughout the whole journey except that the ark
of the covenant preceded the host when on the
march (Nu 10 33-36). It is the unusual that is
recorded; the daily aspect of the tabernacle and
the part it played in the life of the people were
among the things recurrent and familiar.
When, at last, the Jordan was crossed, the first
consideration, presumably, was to find a place on
which to pitch the sacred tent, a place
3. Settle- hitherto uninhabited and free from
ment in ossible defilement by human graves.
Canaan Buch a place was found in the neigh-
borhood of Jericho, and came to be
known as Gilgal (Josh 4 19; 5 10; 9 6; 10 6.43).
Gilgal, however, was always regarded as a tempo-
rary site. The tabernacle is not directly mentioned
in connection with it. The question of a permanent
location was the occasion of mutual jealousy among
the tribes, and was at last settled by the removal
of the tabernacle to Shiloh, in the territory of
Ephraim, a place couveniently central for attend-
ance of all adult males at the three yearly festivals,
without the zone of war, and also of some strategic
importance. During the lifetime of Joshua, there-
fore, the tabernacle was removed over the 20 miles,
or less, which separated Shiloh among the hills from
Gilgal in the lowlands (Josh 18 1; 19 51). While
at Shiloh it seems to have acquired some accessories
of a more permanent kind (1S 1 9, etc), which
obtamed for it the name “temple” (1 9; 3 3).
During the period of the Judges the nation lost
the fervor of its earlier years and was in imminent
danger of apostasy. The daily serv-
4. Destruc- ices of the tabernacle were doubiless
tion of observed after a perfunctory manner,
Shiloh but they seem to have had little effect
upon the people, either to soften their
manners or raise their morals. In the early days
of Samuel war broke out afresh with the Philis.
At a council of war the unprecedented proposal was
made to fetch the ark of the covenant from Shiloh
(18 4 1ff). Accompanied by the two sons of
Eli—Hophni and Phinehas—it arrived in the camp
and was welcomed by a shout which was heard in
the hostile camp. It was no longer Jeh but the
matcrial ark that was the hope of Israel, so low had
the people fallen. Eli himself, at that time high
priest, must at least have acquiesced in this super-
stition. It ended in disaster. The ark was taken
by the Philis, its two guardians were slain, and
Israel was helpless before its enemies. Though
the Heb historians are silent about what followed,
it is certain that Shiloh itself fell into the hands
of the Philis. The very destruction of it accounts
for the silence of the historians, for it would have
been at the central sanctuary there, the center and
home of what literary culture there was in Israel
during this stormy period, that chronicles of events
would be kept. Ps 78 60 ff no doubt has reference
to this overthrow, and it is referred to in Jer 7 12.
The tabernacle itself does not seem to have been
taken by the Philis, as it is met with later at Nob.


Tabernacle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2892


For lack of a high priest of character, Samuel himself
seems now to have become the head of religious worship.
It is possible that the tabernacle may have
5. Delocali- been again removed to Gilgal, as it was
zation of there that Samuel appointed Saul to meet
. him in order to offer burnt offerings and
Worship peace offerings. The ark, however, restored
y the Philis, remained at Kiriath-jearim
(1.8 7 1.2), while courts for ceremonial, civil, and crimi-
nal administration were held, not only at Gilgal, but at
other places, as Beth-el, Mizpah and Ramah (1 8 7 15-
17), places which acquired a quasi-ecclesiastical sanctity.
This delocalization of the sanctuary was no doubt revo-
lutionary, but it is parely explained hy the fact that even
in the tahernacle there was now no ark before which to
burn incense. Of the half-dozen places bearing the name
of Ramah, this, which was Samuel’s home, was the oue
near to Hehron, where to this day the foundations of what
may have been Samuel's sacred inclosure may be seen at
the modern Rémet-el-Khdlil.
We next hear of the tabernacle at Nob, with Ahimelech,
a tool of Saul (prohably the Ahijah of 1S 14 3), as
high priest (1 S 21 1ff). This Nob was
6. Nob and 4 miles to the N. of Jerus, and was more-
Gibeon over a high place, 30 ft. higher than Zion.


It does not follow that the tabernacle

was placed at the top of the hill. Here
lt remained a few years, till after the massacre hy Saul of
all the priests at Nob save one, Abiathar (1 S 22 11 ff).
Suhsequently, postbly BY Saul himself, it was removed
to Gibeon (1 Ch 16 39; 21 29). Gibeon was 6 miles from
Jerus, and 7 from Beth-el, and may have been chosen
for its strategic advantage as well as for the fact that it
ies already inhahited by priests, and was Saul's ancestral
city.

This removal by Saul, if he was the author of it,
was recognized afterward by David as a thing done,

with which he did not think it wise
7. Restora- to interfere (cf 1 Ch 16 40). On his
tion of the capturing the fortress of Jebus (later
Ark Jerus), and building himself a “house”

there, David prepared a place for the
ark of God, and pitched a tent on Zion in imitation
of the tabernacle at Gibeon (2 S 6 17 ff; 1 Ch
16 1). He must also have provided an altar, for
we read of burnt offerings and peace offerings being
made there. Meanwhile the ark had been brought
from Kiriath-jearim, where it had lain so long;
it was restored in the presence of a concourse of
people representing the whole nation, the soldiery
and civilians delivering it to the priests (2 8 6 1 ff).
On this journey Uzzah was smitten for touching the
ark. Arrived near Jerus, the ark was carried into
the house of Obed-edom, a Levite, and remained
there for 8 months. At the end of this time it was
carried into David’s tabernacle with all fitting
solemnity and honor.

Hence it was that there were now two tabernacles,
the original one with its altar at Gibeon, and the

new one with the original ark in Jerus,
8. The Two both under the protection of the king.
Tabernacles Both,, however, were soon to be

superseded by the building of a temple.
The altar at Gibeon continued in use till the time
of Solomon. Of all the actual material of the
tabernacle, the ark alone remained unchanged in
the temple. The tabernacle itself, with its sacred
vessels, was brought up to Jerus, and was pre-
served, apparently, as a sacred relic in the temple
(1 K 8 4). Thus, after a history of more than 200
years, the tabernacle ceases to appear in history.

IV. Symbolism.—Though the tabernacle was
historically the predecessor of the later temples,
as a matter of fact, the veil was the only item actu-
ally retained throughout the series of temples.
Nevertheless it is the tabernacle rather than the
temple which has provided a substructure for much
NT teaching. All the well-known allusions of the
writer to the He, e.g. in chs 9 and 10, are to the
tabernacle, rather than to any later temple.

In general the tabernacle is the symbol of God’s
dwelling with His people (Ex 25 8; cf 1 K 8 27),
an idea in process of realization in more and more
perfect forms till it reaches its completion in the
incarnation of the Word (‘“The Word became flesh,


and dwelt [Gr ‘“‘tabernacled”] among us,” Jn 1
14; ef 2 Cor 5 1), in the church collectively (2 Cor
6 16) and in the individual believer
1. NT (1 Cor-6 19) and finally in the eternal
References glory (Rev 213 ff). In the Ep. to the
He, the locus classicus of the taber-
nacle in Christian thought, the idea is more cosmical
—the tabernacle in its holy and most holy divisions
representing the earthly and the heavenly spheres
of Christ’s activity. The OT was but a shadow
of the eternal substance, an indication of the true
ideal (He 8 5; 101). The tabernacle in which
Christ ministered was a tabernacle which the Lord
pitched, and not man (8 2). He is the high priest
of “the greater and more perfect tabernacle” (9
11). “Christ entered not into a holy place made
with hands, like in pattern to the true; but into
heaven itself, now to appear before the face of
God for us” (9 24). The symbolical significance
of the tabernacle and its worship is not, however,
confined to the Ep.tothe He. It must be admitted
that St. Paul does not give prominence to the
tabernacle symbolism, and further, that his refer-
ences are to things common to the tabernacle and
the temple. But St. Paul speaks of ‘‘the laver of
regeneration” (Tit 8 5 RVm), and of Christ, who
“gave himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice
to God, for an odor of a sweet smell’? (Eph 6 2).
The significance which the synoptic writers give to
the rending of the veil of the temple (Mt 27 51;
Mk 15 38; Lk 23 45) shows how this symbolism
entered deeply into their thought and was felt by
them to have Divine attestation in this super-
natural fact. The way into the holiest of all, as
the writer to the He says, was now made manifest,
(9 8; 10 19.20).
The suggestion which underlies all such NT references


is not only that Christ, in His human manifestation,
was hoth tahernacle and priest, altar and


2. God’s sacrifice, but also, and still more, that
Dwellin God ever has His dwelling among men,

A & veiled no douht from the unbelieving and
with Man insincere, but always manifest and acces-


sible to the faithful and devout. As we
have a great high priest who is now passed into the
heavens, there to appear in our behalf in the true taher-
nacle, so we ourselves have permission and encourage-
ment to enter into the holicst place of all on earth by the
blood of the everlasting covenant. f the hopes em-
hodied in these two planes of thought, the earthly
tabernacle was the symbol, and contained the prospect
and foretaste of the higher communion. 1t is this
which has given the tabernacle such an abiding hold on
the imagination and veneration of the Christian church in
all lands and languages.


The symbolism of the various parts of the taber-
nacle furniture is tolerably obvious, and is_con-
sidered under the different headings.
3. Symbol- The ark of the covenant with its
ism of propitiatory was the symbol of God’s
Furniture gracious meeting with His people
on the ground of atonement (cf Rom
3 25; see ARK oF THE CovENANT). The twelve
cakes of shewbread denote the twelve tribes of
Israel, and their presentation is at once an act
of gratitude for that which is the support of life,
and, symbolically, a dedication of the life thus
supported; the candlestick speaks to the calling
of Israel to be a people of light (cf Jesus in Mt 6
14-16); the rising incense symbolizes the act of
prayer (cf Rev 5 8; 8 8).

LireraTure.—See the arts. on ‘Tabernacle’ and
“Temple" in Smith's DB, HDB, EB, The Temple
BD, etc; also the comms. on Exodus (the Speaker's
Pulpit Comm., Keil's, Lange’s, etc); Bahr, Symboltk d.
Mosaischen Cultus; Keil, Archaeology, I, 98 ff {ET);
Westcott, essay on “The General Significance of the
Tabernacle,” in his Hebrews; Brown, The Tabernacle
(1899); W. S. Caldecott, The Tabernacle: Its History


and Structure. See arts. In this Encyclopaedia on the
special parts of the tabernacle; and see also TEMPLE.


Suaw Ca.pEecotTr
James ORR


2893


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tabernacle


B. In Criticism


I. Conservative anp Critican Views
II. ARGuMENTs IN SUPPORT Of THE CRITICAL THEORY
EXaminepD
1. Not Stated That the Temple Was Constructed
after the Pattern of the Tahernacle
: NO nee of the Tabernacle in Pre-Solomonic
. The Tabernacie Could Not Have Been Built as
Exodus Describes
. Biblical Account Contalns Marks of Its Unhis-
torical Character
. Preéxilic Prophets Knew Nothing of Levitical
System of Which the Tahernacle Was Said to
5 Be the Center.
' LITERATURE

1. Conservative and Critical Views.—The con-
servative view of Scripture finds (1) that the taber-
nacle was constructed by Moses in the wilderness
of Sinai; (2) that it was fashioned according to a
pattern shown to him in the Mount; (3) that it
was designed to be and was the center of sacrificial
worship for the tribes in the wilderness; and (4)
that centuries later the Solomonic Temple was con-
structed after it as a model. The critical (higher)
view of Scripture says, (1) that the tabernacle
never existed except on paper; (2) that it was a
pure creation of priestly imagination sketched after
or during the exile; (3) that it was meant to be
a@ miniature sanctuary on the model of Solomon’s
Temple; (4) that it was represented as having
been built in the wilderness for the purpose of
legitimating the newly published PC or Levitical
ritual still preserved in the middle books of the
Pent; and (5) that the description of the taber-
nacle furnished in P (Ex 25-31; 36-40; Nu 2
2.17; 6 1-4; 14 44) conflicts with that given in
E (Ex 33 7-11), both as to its character and its
location.

The principal grounds on which it is proposed
to set aside the conservative and put in its place
the critical theory are these:

il, Arguments in Support of the Criticol Theory
Examined.—(1) It is nowhere stated that Solo-
mon’s Temple was constructed after the pattern of
the Mosaic tabernacle; hence it is reasonable to
infer that the Mosaic tabernacle had no existence
when or before the Solomonic Temple was built.

' (2) No trace of the Mosaic tabernacle can be
found in the pre-Solomonic period, whence it is
clear that no such tabernacle existed.

(3) The Mosaic tabernacle could not have been
produced as Ex describes, and accordingly the
story must be relegated to the limbo of romance.

(4) The Bib. account of the Mosaic tabernacle
bears internal marks of its completely unhistorical
character.

(5) The preéxilic prophets knew nothing of the
Levitical system of which the Mosaic tabernacle was
the center, and hence the whole story must be set
down ag a sacred legend.

These assertions demand examination.

It is urged that nowhere ts it stated that Soloman’s
Temple was fashioned after the pattern af the Mosaic

tabernacle. Wellhausen thinks . (GI,


a pp Oo NM


1. First ch i, 3, p. 44) that, had it been so, the
Alleged narrators in K and Ch would have
Ground said so. ‘‘At least,’ he writes, “‘one


would have expected that in the report
concerning the building of the new sanctuary, casual
mention would have been made of the old.” And
so there was—in 1K 84 and 2Ch65. Of
course, it is contended that “the tent of meeting”’
referred to in these passages was not the Mosaic
tabernacle of Ex 28, but simply a_ provisional
shelter for the ark—though in P the Mosaic taber-
nacle bears the same designation (Ex 27 21).
Conceding, however, for the sake of argument, that
the tent of the historical books was not the Mosaic
tabernacle of Ex, and that this is nowhere spoken


of as the model on which Solomon’s Temple was
constructed, does it necessarily follow that because
the narrators in K and Ch did not expressly state
that Solomon’s Temple was built after the pattern
of the Mosaic tabernacle, therefore the Mosaic
tabernacle had no existence when the narrators
wrote? If it does, then the same logic will dem-
onstrate the non-existence of Solomon’s Temple
before the exile, because when the writer of P
was describing the Mosaic tabernacle he made no
mention whatever about its being a miniature copy
of Solomon’s Temple. A reductio ad absurdum like
this disposes of the first of the five pillars upon

which the new theory rests.
It is alleged that no trace of the Mosaic tabernacle
can be found in pre-Solomonic times. On the
principle that silence about a person,


2. Second thing or event does not prove the non-
Alleged existence of the person or thing or the
Ground non-occurrence of the event, this 2d

argument might fairly be laid aside as
irrelevant. Yet it will be more satisfactory to ask, if


the assertion be true, why no trace of the tabernacle
can be detected in the historical books in pre-
Solomonic times. The answer is, that of course it
is true, if the historical books be first “doctored,”
i.e. gone over and dressed to suit the theory, by
removing from them every passage, sentence, clause
and word that seems to indicate, presuppose or
imply the existence of the tabernacle, and such
passage, sentence, clause and word assigned to a
late R, who inserted it into the original text to give
color to his theory, and support to his fiction that
the Mosaic tabernacle and its services originated
in the wilderness. Could this theory be established
on independent grounds, i.e. by evidence derived
from other historical documents, without tampering
with the sacred narrative, something might be said
for its plausibility. But every scholar knows that
not a particle of evidence has ever been, or is likely
ever to be, adduced in its support beyond what
critics themselves manufacture in the way described.
That they do find traces of the Mosaic tabernacle
in the historical books, they unconsciously and
unintentionally allow by their efforts to explain such
traces away, which moreover they can only do by
denouncing these traces as spurious and subjecting
them to a sort of surgical operation in order to
excise them from the body of the text. But these
so-called spurious traces are either true or they are
not true. If they are true, whoever inserted them,
then they attest the existence of the tabernacle,
first at Shiloh, and afterward at Nob, later at
Gibeon, and finally at Jerus; if they are not true,
then some other things in the narrative must be
written down as imagination, as, e.g. the conquest
of the land, and its division among the tribes, the
story of the altar on the E. of Jordan, the ministry
of ee vous tl Samuel at Shiloh, and of Ahimelech
at Nob.

(1) The Mosaic tabernacle at Shiloh—That the
structure at Shiloh (1 8 1 3.9.19.24; 2 11.12; 3 3)
was the Mosaic tabernacle everything recorded
about it shows. It contained the ark of God,
called also the ark of the covenant of God and
the ark of the covenant of Jeh, or more fully the
ark of the covenant of Jeh of Hosts, names, esp.
the last, which for the ark associated with the taber-
nacle were not unknown in the period of the
wandering. It had likewise a priesthood and a
sacrificial worship of three parts—offering sacrifice
(in the forecourt), burning incense (in the holy
place), and wearing an ephod (in the Holy of Holies)
—which at least bore a close resemblance to the
cultus of the tabernacle, and in point of fact claimed
to have been handed down from Aaron. Then
Elkanah’s pious custom of going up yearly from


Tabernacle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2894


Ramathaim-zophim to Shiloh to worship and to
sacrifice unto Jeh of Hosts suggests that in his day
Shiloh was regarded as the central high place and
that the law of the three yearly feasts (Ix 23 14;
Lev 23 1-18; Dt 16 16) was not unknown, though
perhaps only partially observed; while the state-
ment about ‘the women who did service at the
door of the tent of meeting” as clearly points back
to the similar female institution in connection with
the tabernacle (Ex 38 8). To these considerations
it is objected (a) that the Shiloh sanctuary was not
the Mosaic tabernacle, which was a portable tent,
but a solid structure with posts and doors, and
(b) that even if it was not a solid structure but a
tent, it could be left at any moment without the
ark, in which case it could not have been the Mosaic
tabernacle of which the ark was an “inseparable
companion”; while (c) if it was the ancient “‘dwell-
ing” of Jeh, it could not have been made the
dormitory of Samuel. But (a) while it need not
be denied that the Shiloh sanctuary possessed
posts and doors—Jer 7 12 seems to admit that it
was a structure which might be laid in ruins—
yet this does not warrant the conclusion that the
Mosaic tabernacle had no existence in Shiloh.
It is surely not impossible or even improbable that,
when the tabernacle had obtained a permanent
location at Shiloh, and that for nearly 400 years
(cf above under A, III, 1, 8 and see CaronoLoay
or THe OT, VII, VIII), during the course of
these centuries a porch with posts and doors
may have been erected before the curtain that
formed the entrance to the holy place, or that
strong buildings may have been put up around
it as houses for the priests and Levites, as treasure-
chambers, and such like—thus causing it to pre
sent the appearance of a palace or house with
the tabernacle proper in its interior. Then (b) as
to the impossibility of the ark being taken from the
tabernacle, as was done when it was captured by
the Philis, there is no doubt that there were occa-
sions when it was not only legitimate, but expressly
commanded to separate the ark from the taber-
nacle, though the war with the Philis was not one.
In Nu 10 33, it is distinctly stated that the
ark, by itself, went before the people when they
marched through the wilderness; and there is
ground for thinking that during the Benjamite
war the ark was with Divine sanction temporarily
removed from Shiloh to Beth-el (Jgs 20 26.27)
and, when the campaign closed, brought back again
to Shiloh (21 12). (c) As for the notion that
the Shiloh sanctuary could not have been the
Mosaic tabernacle because Samuel is said to have
slept in it beside the ark of God, it should be
enough to reply that the narrative does not say
or imply that Samuel had converted either the
holy place or the most holy into a private bed-
chamber, but merely that he lay down to sleep
‘in the temple of the Lord where the ark of God
was,” doubtless “in the court where cells were
built for the priests and Levites to live in when
serving at the sanctuary” (Keil). But even if it
did mean that the youthful Samuel actually slept in
the Holy of Holies, one fails to see how an abuse
like that may not have occurred in a time so
degenerate as that of Eli, or how, if it did, it would
necessarily prove that the Shiloh shrine was not the
Mosaic tabernacle.

(2) The Mosaic tabernacle at Nob.—That the sanctuary
at Nob (1 S 21 1-6) was the Mosaic tabernacle may
be inferred from the following circumstances: (a) that it
had a high priest with 85 ordinary priests, a priest’s
ephod, and a table of shewbread; (}) that the eating of
che shewbread was conditioned by the same law of
ceremonial purity as prevailed in connection with the
Mosaic tabernacle (Lev 15 18); and (c) that the Urim


was employed there by the priest to ascertain the Divine
will—all of which circumstances pertained to the Mosaic


and to no other institution known among the
Hebrews. If the statement (1 Ch 13 3) that the ark
was not inquired at in the days of Saul calls for explana-
tion, that explanation is obviously this, that during Saul’s
reign the ark was dissociated from the tahernacle,
being lodged in the house of Abinadab at Kiriath-jearim,
and was accordingly in large measure forgotten. The
statement (1 $ 14 18) that Saul in his war with the
Philis commanded Ahijah, Eli's great-grandson, who was
“the priest of the Lord in Shiloh, wearing an ephod
(ver 3) to fetch up the ark—if ver 18 should not rather
be read according to the LXX, “ Bring hither the ephod
—can only signify that on this particular occasion it was
fetched from Kiriath-jearim at the end of 20 years and
afterward returned thither. This, however, is not a likely
supposition; and for the LXX reading it can be said -
that the phrase ‘Bring hither’ was never used in con-
nection with the ark: that the ark was never employed
for ascertaining the Divine will, hut the ephod was; and
that the Heb text in ver 18 seems corrupt, the last clause
reading “for the ark of God was at that day and the sons
of Israel,’’ which is not extremely intelligible.


(3) The Mosaic tabernacle at Gibeon—The
last mention of the Mosaic tabernacle occurs in
connection with the building of Solomon’s Temple
(1 K 8 4; 2 Ch 1 3; 5 3), when it is stated that
the ark of the covenant and the tent of meeting,
and all the holy vessels that were in the tent were
solemnly fetched up into the house which Solomon
had built. That what is here called the taber-
nacle of the congregation; or the tent of meeting,
was not the Mosaic tabernacle has been main-
tained on the following grounds: (a) that had it
been so, David, when he fetched up the ark from
Obed-edom’s house, would not have pitched for it
a, tent in the city of David, but would have lodged
it in Gibeon; (b) that had the Gibeon shrine been
the Mosaic tabernacle it would not have been
called as it is in K, “a great high place’; (c) that
had the Gibeon shrine been the Mosaic tabernacle,
Solomon would not have required to cast new
vessels for his Temple, as he is reported to have
done; and (d) that had the Gibeon shrine been the


| tahernacle


Mosaic tabernacle the brazen altar would not have
been left behind at Gibeon but would also have
been conveyed to Mt. Moriah.

But (a) if it was foolish and wrong for David not
to lodge the ark in Gibeon, that would not make
it certain that the Mosaic tabernacle was not at
Gibeon. That it was either foolish or wrong, how-
ever, is not clear. David may have reckoned that
if the house of Obed-edom had derived special bless-
ing from the presence of the ark in it for three
months, possibly it would be for the benefit of his
(David’s) house and kingdom to have the ark
permanently in his capital. And in addition,
David may have remembered that God had deter-
mined to choose out a place for His ark, and in
answer to prayer David may have been directed
to fetch the ark to Jerus. As good a supposition
this, at any rate, as that of the critics.

(b) That the Gibeon shrine should have been
styled “the great high place” (1 K 8 4) is hardly
astonishing, when one calls to mind that it was the
central sanctuary, as being the seat of the Mosaic
tabernacle with its brazen altar. And may not the
designation “high place,’ or bamah, have been
affixed to it just because, through want of its altar,
it had dwindled down into a mere shadow of the
true sanctuary and become similar to the other
“high places” or bamdth?

(c) The casting of new vessels for Solomon’s
Temple needs no other explanation than this, that
the new house was at least twice as spacious as
the old, and that in any case it was fitting that
the new house should have new furniture.

(d) That the brazen altar would not have
been left behind at Gibeon when the Mosaic
tabernacle was removed, may be met by the demand
for proof that it was actually left behind. That it
was left behind is a pure conjecture. That it was


transplanted to Jerus and along with the other


2895


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tabernacle


tabernacle utensils laid up in a side chamber of
the temple is as likely an assumption as any other

(see 1 K 8 4).
It is maintained that the Mosaic tabernacle could
not have been produced as Ex describes: (1) that the
time was too short, (2) that the


3. Third Israelites were too little qualified,
Alleged and (3) that the materials at their
Ground disposal were too scanty for the


construction of so splendid a building
as the Mosaic tabernacle. But (1) does any intelli-
gent person believe that 9 months was too short a
time for 600,000 able-bodied men, to say nothing
of their women and children, to build a wooden house
30 cubits long, 10 high and 10 broad, with not as
many articles in it as a well-to-do artisan’s kitchen
oftentimescontains? (2) Is it at all likely that they
were so ill-qualified for the work as the objection
asserts? The notion that the Israelites were a horde
of savages or simply a tribe of wandering nomads
does not accord with fact. They had been bond-
men, it is true, in the land of Ham; but they and
their fathers had lived there for 400 years; and it is
simply incredible, as even Knobel puts it, ‘‘that
they should not have learnt something of the
mechanical arts.’ One would rather be disposed
to hold that they must have had among them at
the date of the Exodus a considerable number of
skilled artisans. At least, archaeology has shown
that if the escaped bondmen knew nothing of the
arts and sciences, it was not because their quon-
dam masters had not been able to instruct them.
The monuments offer silent witness that every art
required by the manufacturers existed at the
moment in Egypt, as e.g. the arts of metal-working,
wood-carving, leather-making, weaving and spin-
ning. And surely no one will contend that the
magnificent works of art, the temples and tombs,
. palaces and pyramids, that are the world’s wonder
today, were the production always and exclusively
of native Egyp, and never of Heb thought and
labor! Nor (3) is the reasoning good, that what-
ever the Israelites might have been able to do in
Egypt where abundant materials lay to hand, they
were little likely to excel in handicrafts of any
sort in a wilderness where such materials were
wanting. Even Knobel could reply to this, that
as the Israelites when they escaped from Egypt
were not a horde of savages, so neither were they
a tribe of beggars; that they had not entered on their
expedition in the wilderness without preparation,
or without taking with them their most valuable
articles; that the quantities of gold, silver and
precious stones employed in the building of the
tabernacle were but trifles in comparison with
other quantities of the same that have been found
im possession of ancient oriental peoples; that a
large portion of what was contributed had prob-
ably been obtained by despoiling the Egyptians
before escaping from their toils and plundering
the Amalekites whom they soon after defeated
at Rephidim, and who, in all likelihood, at least if
one may judge from the subsequent example of
the Midianites, had come to the field of war be-
decked with jewels and gold; and that the acacia
wood, the linen, the blue, the purple and the scarlet,
with the goats’, rams’, and seal-skins might all
have been found and prepared in the wilderness
(cf Kurtz, Geschichte des alten Bundes, II, § 58).
In short, so decisively has this argument, derived
from the supposed deficiency of culture and re-
sources on the part of the Israelites, been disposed
of by writers of by no means too conservative pro-
clivities, that one feels surprised to find it called
up again by Benzinger in ZB to do duty m support
of the unhistorical character of the tabernacle
narrative in Ex.


_ The Bib. account of the Mosaic tabernacle, it
is further contended, bears internal marks of its
completely unhistorical character, as e.g.


4. Fourth (1) that it represents the tabernacle
Alleged as having been constructed on a
Ground model which had been supernaturally


shown to Moses; (2) that it habitually
speaks of the south, north, and west sides of the
tabernacle although no preceding order had been
issued that the tent should be so placed; (3) that
the brazen altar is described as made of timber
overlaid with brass, upon which a huge fire con-
stantly burned; (4) that, the tabernacle is depicted,
not as a, mere provisional shelter for the ark upon the
march, but “as the only legitimate sanctuary for
the church of the twelve tribes before Solomon’;
and (5) that the description of the tabernacle
furnished in P (Ex 25-31; 36-40; Nu 2 2.17;
6 1-4; 14 44) conflicts with that given in E (Ex
33 7-11), both as to its character and its location.

But (1) why should the story of the tabernacle
be a fiction, because Moses is reported to have made
it according to a pattern showed to him in the
Mount (Ex 25 40 [Heb 8 5])? No person says
that the Temple of Solomon was a fiction, because
David claimed that the pattern of it given to Solo-
mon had been communicated to him (David) by
Divine inspiration (1 Ch 28 19). Every critic also
knows that Ezekiel wrote the book that goes by
his name. Yet Ezekiel asserts that the temple
described by him was beheld by him in a vision.
Unless therefore the supernatural is ruled out. of
history altogether, it is open to reply that God
could just as easily have revealed to Moses the
pattern of the tabernacle as He afterward exhibited
to Ezekiel the model of his temple. And even if’
God showed nothing to either one prophet or the
other, the fact that Moses says he saw the pattern
of the tabernacle no more proves that he did not
write the account of it, than Ezekiel’s stating that
he beheld the model of his temple attests that
Ezekiel never penned the description of it. The
same argument that proves Moses did not write
about the tabernacle also proves that Ezekiel could
not have written about the vision-temple. Should
it be urged that as Ezekiel’s temple was purely
visionary so also was Moses’ tabernacle, the argu-
ment comes with small consistency and less force
from those who say that Ezekiel’s vision-temple was
the model of a real temple that should afterward be
built; since if Ezekiel’s vision-temple was (or should
have been, according to the critics) converted into
a material sanctuary, no valid reason can be adduced
why Moses’ vision-tabernacle should not also have
been translated into an actual building.

(2) How the fact that the tahernacle had three sides,
south, north and west, shows it could not have heen
fashioned by Moses, is one of those mysteries which it
takes a critical mind to understand. One naturally pre-
sumes that the tahernacle must have heen located some-
where and oriented somehow; and, if it had four sides, it
would assuredly suit as well to set them toward the four
quarters of heaven asin any otherway. Butin so depict-
ing the tabernacle, say the critics, the fiction writers who
invented the story were actuated by a deep-laid design
to make the Mosaic tabernacle look like the Temple of
Solomon. Quite a harmless design, if it was really enter-
tained! But the Books of K and Ch will be searched in
vain for any indication that the Temple foundations were
set to the four quarters of heaven. It is true that the
12 oxen who supported the molten sea in Solomon's
Temple were so placed—4 looking to the N., 4 to the S.,
4 to the E., and 4 to the W. (1 K 7 25); but this
does not necessarily warrant the inference that the sides
of the Temple were so placed. Hence on the well-known
principle of modern criticism, that when a thing is not
mentioned by a writer the thing does not exist, seeing
that nothing is recorded about how the temple was placed,
ought it not to he concluded that the whole story about
the Temple is a myth?


(3) As to the absurdity of representing a large
fire as constantly burning upon a wooden altar


Tabernacle


INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2896


overlaid with a thin plate of brass, this would
certainly have been all that the critics say—a
fatal objection to receiving the story of the taber-
nacle as true. But if the story was invented,
surely the inventor might have given Moses and
his two skilled artisans, Bezalel and Oholiab, some
credit for common sense, and not have made them
do, or propose to do, anything so stupid as to
try ‘to keep a large fire burning upon an altar of
wood. This certainly they did not do. An
examination of Ex 27 1-8; 38 1-7 makes it
clear that the altar proper upon which “the strong
fire’ burned was the earth or stone-filled (Ex 20
24 f) hollow which the wooden and brass frame
inclosed.

(4) The fourth note of fancy—what Wellhausen
calls “the chief matter’—that the tabernacle
was designed for a central sanctuary to the church
of the Twelve Tribes before the days of Solomon,
but never really served in this capacity—is partly
true and partly untrue. That it was meant to be
a central sanctuary, until Jeh should select for
Himself a place of permanent habitation, which
He did in the days of Solomon, is exactly the
impression a candid reader derives from Ex, and
it is gratifying to learn from so competent a critic
as Wellhausen that this impression is correct. But
that it really never served as a central sanctuary,
it is impossible to admit, after having traced its
existence from the days of Joshua onward to those
of Solomon. That occasionally altars were erected
and sacrifices offered at other places than the
tabernacle—as by Gideon at Ophrah (Jgs 6 24-27)
and by Samuel at Ramah (1 8 7 17)—is no proof
that the tabernacle was not the central sanctuary.
If it is, then by parity of reasoning the altar in
Mt. Ebal (Dt 27 5) should prove that Jerus was
not intended as a central sanctuary. But, if along-
side of the Temple in Jeru8, an altar in Ebal could
be commanded, then also alongside of the tabernacle
it might be legitimate to erect an altar and offer
sacrifice for special needs. And exactly this is
what was done. While the tabernacle was ap-
pointed for a central sanctuary the earlier legisla-
tion was not revoked: ‘‘An altar of earth thou shalt
make unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy
burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep,
and thine oxen: in every place where I record my
name I will come unto thee and I will bless thee” (Ex
20 24). It was still legitimate to offer sacrifice
in any spot where Jeh was pleased to manifest
Himself to His people. And even though it
had not been, the existence of local shrines along-
side of the tabernacle would no more warrant the
conclusion that the tabernacle was never built than
the failure of the Christian church to keep the
Golden Rule would certify that the Sermon on the
Mount was never preached.

(5) With regard to the supposed want of harmony
between the two descriptions of the tabernacle in P and
E, much depends on whether the structures referred to in
these documents were the same or different. (a) If dif-
ferent, ie. if the tent in E (Ex 33 7-11) was Moses’ tent
(Kurtz, Keil, Kalisch, Ewald and others), or a preliminary
tent erected by Moses (Havernick, Lange, Kennedy, and
ALI, 1], above), or possessed by the people from their fore-
fathers (von Gerlach, Benzinger in FB), no reason can he
found why the two descriptions should not have varied
as to hoth the character of the tent and its location. The
tent in E, which according to the supposition was purely
provisional, a temporary sanctuary, may well have been
a simple structure and pitched outside the camp while
the tent in P could just as easily have heen an elaborate
fabric with an ark, a priesthood and a complex sacrificial
ritual and located in the midst of the camp. In this
case no ground can arise for suggesting that they were
contradictory of one another, or_that P’s tent was a
fiction, a paper-tahernacle, while E’s tent was a reality
and the only tabernacle that ever existed in Israel. But
(b) if on the other hand the tent in E was the same as the


tent in P (Calvin, Mead in Lange, Konig, Herdmans,
Vateton and others), then the question may arise whether


or not any contradiction existed hetween, them, and, if
such contradiction did exist, whether this justifies the
inference that P’s tent was unhistorical, ic. never took
shape except in the writer's imagination. _

That the tent in E was not P’s Mosaic tabernacle
has been argued on the following grounds: (a) that the
Mosaic tabernacle (assuming it to have been a reality
and not a fiction) was not yet made; so that E's tent
must have been either the tent of Moses or a provisional
tent; (b) that nothing is said about a body of priests and
Levites with an ark and a sacrificial ritual in connection
with E’s tent, but only of a non-Levitical attendant
Joshua, and (c) that it was situated outside the camp,
whereas P’s tabernacle is always represented as in the
midst of the camp. A

The first of these grounds largely disappears when
Ex 33 7isread asin RV: ‘' Now Moses used to take the
tent and to pitch it without the camp.’ The _verhs,
heing in the imperfect, point to Moses’ practice (Driver,
Intro and Heb Tenses; ef Ewald, Syntax, 348), which
again may refer either to the past or to the future, either
to what Moses was in the habit of doing with his own or
the preliminary tent, or what_he was to do with the tent
about to be constructed. Which interpretation is the
right one must be determined by the prior question which
tent is intended. Against the idea of E’s tent being
Moses’ private domicile stands the difficulty of seeing
why it was not called Ais tent instead of the tent, and why
Moses should he represented as never going into it
except to hold communion with Jeh, If it was a pro-
visional tent, struck up by Moses, why was no mention
of its construction made? And if it was a sort of
national heirloom come down from the forefathers of
Israel, why does the narrative contain not the slightest
intimation of any such thing? i

On the other hand if E’s tent was the same as P’s, the
narrative does not require to be hroken up; and Ex
38 7-11 quite naturally falls into its place as an explana-
tion of how the promises of vs 3 and 5 were carried out
(see infra).

The second supposed proof that E’s tent was not
P’s but an earlier one, viz. that P’s had a hody of priests
and Levites, an ark and a complex ritual, while E’s had
only Joshua as attendant and made no mention of ark,
priests or sacrifices, loses force, unless it can be shown
that there was ahsolute necessity that in this paragraph
a full description of the tabernacle should be given.
But obviously no such necessity existed, the object of
the writer having been as above explained. Driver,
after Wellhausen (GJ, 387), conjectures that in E's origi-
nal document Ex 33 7-11 may have been preceded ‘' by
an account of the construction of the Tent of Meeting -
and of the ark,’ and that ‘‘ when the narrative was com-
bined with that of P this part of it (beiug superfluous
by the side of chs 25-85) was probably omitted.”
As this however is only a conjecture, it is of no more
(prohably of less) value than the opinion that chs 25-85
including 83 7-11 proceeded from the same pen. The
important contrihution to the interpretation of ths
passage is that the absence from the paragraph relating
to E's tent of the ark, priests and sacrifices is no valid
proof that E's tent was not the Mosaic tahernacle.

The third argument against their identity is their
different location—E's outside and P's inside the camp.
But it may be argued (a) that_the trin RV distinctly
relieves this difficulty. For if Moses used to take and
pitch the tabernacle outside the camp, the natural impli-
cation is that the tabernacle was often, perhaps usually,
inside the camp, as in P, and only from time to time
pitched outside the camp, when Jeh was displeased with
the people (Eerdmans, Valeton). Or (2) that ‘outside
the camp”’ may signify away, at an equal distance from
all the four camps (“over against the tent of meeting”
—in AV “far off,” after Josh 3 4—were the various
tribes with their standards, i.e. the four camps, to be
pitched; Nu 2 2); so that the tabernacle might easily
be in the midst of all the camps and yet ‘outside’ and
“far off" from each camp separately, thus requiring
every individual who sought the Lord to go out from his
camp unto the tabernacle. Nu 11 26-30 may perhaps
shed light upon the question. There it is stated that
“there remained two men in the camp [who] had not gone
out with Moses unto the Tent,"’ and that Moses and the
elders after leaving the tent, ‘gat [them] into the camp.”
Either the tent at this time was in the center of the
square, around which the four camps were stationed, or
it was outside. If it was outside, then the first of the
foregoing explanations will hold good; if it was inside
the camp, then the second suggestion must be adopted,
viz. that while the camps were round ahout the taber-
nacle, the tahernacle was outside each camp. ‘ Al-
though the tabernacle stood in the midst of the camp,
yet it was practically separated from the tents of the
tribes by an open space and by the encampment of the
Levites” (Pulpit Comm., in loc.; ef Keil, in loc.). When
one calls to mind that the tabernacle was separated from
each side of the square prohably, as in Josh 3 4, by
2,000 cubits (at 19-25 in. each =ahout } of a mile), one
has small difficulty in understanding how the tabernacle
could be hoth outside the several camps and inside them
all; how the two promises in Ex 33 (AV)—"'I will not go
up in the midst of thee’’ (ver 3) and ‘I will come up into


2897


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tabernacle


the midst of thee" (ver 5)—might be fulfilled; how Moses
and the elders could go out from the camp (i.e. their
several camps) to the tabernacle and after leaving the
tabernacle return to the camp (i.e. their several a
and how no Insuperable difficulty in the shape of an inso.
uble contradiction exists between E’s account and P’s.


That the preéxilic prophets knew nothing about the
Levitical system of which the tabernacle was the
center is regarded as perhaps the


6. Fifth strongest proof that the tabernacle
Alleged had no existence in the wilderness and
Ground indeed never existed at all except on


paper. The assertion about the igno-
rance of the preéxilic prophets as to the sacrificial
system of the PC has been so often made that it
has come to be a “commonplace” and “stock-
phrase’ of modern criticism. In particular,
Amos in the 8th cent. BC (6 25.26) and Jeremiah
in the 7th cent. BC (7 21-23) are quoted as having
publicly taught that no such sacrificial ritual as
the tabernacle implied had been promulgated in
the wilderness. But, if these prophets were aware
that the Levitical Law had not bea given by Moses,
one would like to know, (1) how this interpretation
of their language had been so long in being dis-
covered; (2) how the critics themselves are not
unanimous in accepting this interpretation—which
they are not; (3) how Amos could represent Jeh
as saying “‘I hate, I despise your feasts, and I will
take no delight in your solemn assemblies. Yea,
though ye offer me your burnt-offerings and
meal-offerings, I will not accept them; neither will
I regard the peace-offerings of your fat beasts”
(6 21.22), if Jeh had never accepted and never
enjoined them; (4) how Jeremiah could have been
a party to putting forward Dt as a work of Moses if
he knew that Jeh had never commanded sacrifices
to be offered, which Dt does; and (5) how Jeremiah
could have blamed Judah for committing spiritual
adultery if Jeh had never ordered the people to
offer sacrifice.

In reply to (1) it will scarcely do to answer that all
previous interpreters of Am and Jer had failed to
read the prophets’ words as they stand (Am 6 25.
26; Jer 7 22), because the question would then
arise why the middle books of the Pent should not
also be read as they stand, as e.g. when they say,
“The Lord spake unto Moses,” and again ‘“These
[the legislative contents of the middle books] are
the commandments, which Jeh commanded Moses
for the children of Israel in mount Sinai” (Lev 27
34). As for (2) it is conveniently forgotten that
Bohlen (Intro to Gen, I, 277) admitted that some of
the Pent “might possibly have originated in the
time of Moses,” and when quoting Jer 7 22 never
dreamt of putting forward an explanation different
from the orthodox rendering of the same, and cer-
tainly did not cite it as a proof that the Law had
no existence prior to the exile; that De Wette in
his Hinleitung (261, 262, 8th ed) stated that “the
holy laws and institutions of the theocratic people
had for their author Moses, who in giving them stood
under Divine guidance”; that Knobel (Die Bucher
Ex und Lev, xxii) explicitly declared that Moses
must be regarded not only as the liberator and
founder of his people, but also the originator of the
peculiar Israelitish constitution and lawgiving, at
least in its fundamental elements; that Ewald (Die
Propheten, II, 123) regarded Jer 7 22 as making
no announcement about the origin of the sacrificial
cultus; and that Bleek (Intro to the OT) forgot to
read the modern critical interpretation into the
words of Amos and Jeremiah for the simple reason
that to have done so would have stultified his well-
known view that many of the laws of the middle
books of the Pent are of Mosaic origin. Nor is the
difficulty (3) removed by holding that, if prior to
the days of Amos Jeh did accept the burnt offerings


and meal offerings of Israel, these were not sacri-
fices that had been appointed in the wilderness,
because Jeh Himself appears to intimate (Am 5
25.26) that no such sacrifices or offerings had been
made during the whole 40 years’ wandering. Had
this been the case, it is not easy to see why the post-
exilic authors of the PC should have asserted the
contrary, should have represented sacrifices as
having been offered in the wilderness, as they have
done (see Nu 16, 18). The obvious import of
Jeh’s language is either that the sacrificial worship
which He had commanded had been largely neg-
lected by the people, or that it had been so heartless
and formal that it was no true worship at all—
their real worship being given to their idols—and
that as certainly as the idolaters in the wilderness
were excluded from Canaan, so the idolaters in
Amos’ day, unless they repented, would be carried
away into exile. As to (4) Jeremiah’s action in
putting forward or helping to put forward Dt as a
work of Moses when he knew that it represented
Jeh as having commanded sacrifices to be offered
both in the wilderness and in Canaan (Dt 12 6.11.
13), and must have been aware as well that JE
had represented Jeh as commanding sacrifice at
Sinai (Ex 20 24.25), no explanation can be of-
fered that will clear the prophet from the charge
of duplicity and insincerity, or prevent his classi-
fication with the very men who were a grief of mind
to him and against whom a large part of his life
was spent in contending, viz. the prophets that
prophesied lies in the name of God. Nor does
it mend matters to suggest (Cheyne) that when
Jeremiah perceived that Dt, though floated into
pabhoy under high patronage, did not take hold,

e changed his mind, because in the first place if
Jeremiah did so, he should, like an honest man,
have washed his hands clear of Dt, which he did not;
and in the second place, because had he done so he
could not have been ‘‘the iron pillar and brazen
wall” which Jeh had intended him to be and indeed
had promised to make him against the princes,
priests and people of the land (1 18). And, still
further, (5) it passes comprehension how, if Jeh
never commanded His people to offer sacrifice to
Him, Jeremiah could have represented Jeh as en-
joining him to Deere a curse upon the inhab-
itants of Jerus because they transgressed the words
of Jeh’s covenant, which He had made with their
fathers in the day when He brought them out of the
land of Egypt, by running after other gods to serve
them, setting up altars and burning incense unto
Baal and even working lewdness in Jeh’s house
(Jer 11 1-15), It is urged in answer to this, that
the offence complained of was not that the men of
Judah did not offer sacrifices to Jeh, but that they
offered them to Baal and polluted His temple with
heathen rites—that what Jeh demanded from His
worshippers was not the offering of sacrifice, but
obedience to the moral law conjoined with absti-
nencefrom idolatry. Butinthat case, what was the
use of a temple at all? And why should Jeh speak
of it as ‘‘mine house,” if sacrifices were not required
to be offered in it (cf on this Kittel, The Scientific
Study of the OT, 218)? Why idolatrous sacrifices
were denounced was not merely because they were
wrong in themselves, but also because they had
supplanted the true sacrificial worship of Jeh.
As already stated, it is not easy to perceive how
Jeremiah could have said that Jeh had never com-
manded sacrifices to be offered to Him, when he
(Jeremiah) must have known that the Book of the
Covenant in JE (Ex 20 24.25) represented Jeh
as expressly enjoining them. Had Jeremiah not
read the Book of the Covenant with sufficient care?
This ig hardly likely in so earnest a prophet. Or
will it be lawtul to suggest that Jeremiah knew the


Tab. of Testimony Tim INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 2808


Table of Nations


Book of the Covenant to be a fiction and the assump-
tion of Divine authority for its enactments to be
merely a rhetorical device? In this case his words
might be true; only one cannot help regretting
that he did not distinctly state that in his judgment
the Book of the Covenant was a fraud.

It may now be added in confirmation of the preceding,
that the various references to a tabernacle in the NT
appeat at least to imply that in the lst Christian cent.
the historicity of the Mosaic tabernacle was generally
accepted. These references are Peter’s exclamation on
the Mount of Transfiguration (Mt 17 4; Mk 9 5;
Lk 9 33); Stephen's statement in the council (Acts 7
44); the affirmations in He (chs 8, 9); and the voice
which John heard out of heaven (Rev 21 3). It may
be admitted that taken separately or unitedly these
utterances do not amount to a conclusive demonstration
that the tabernacle actually existed in the wilderness;
but read in the light of OT aeclarations that such a
tabernacle did exist, they have the force of a confirmation.
If the language of Peter and that of John may fairly
enough be regarded as figurative, even then their symbol-
ism suggests, as its basis, what Stephen and the writer to
the He affirm to have been a fact, viz. that their ‘‘fathers
had the tabernacle... .in the wilderness,”’ and that, under
the first covenant, ‘‘there was a tabernacle prepared."


Literature.—l, critical: De Wette, Bettrdge; von
Bohlen, Genesis; Georg, Jiidische Feste; Reuss, Geschichte
der heiligen_ Schriften des AT; Graf, de Templo
Silonensi; Kuenen, The Religion of Israel; Well-
hausen, Prolegoamena zur Geschichte Israels; HDB
and FB, arts. ‘Tabernacle.’ II, conservative: Breden-
kamp, Gesetz und Propheten; Kurtz, Geschichte des
alten Bundes; WHavernick, Hinleitung; Hengstenberg,
Egypt and the Books of Moses; Riehm, Handwérterbuch,
and Herzog, RE (ed 1; ed 3 is ‘‘critical’’), arts. ‘‘ Stifts-
hiitte'’; Baxter, Sanctuary and Sacrifice; Bissell, The
Pentateuch: Its Origin and Structure; Orr, The Problem
of the OT; Whitelaw, OT Critics.

T. WaiTeLaw

TABERNACLE OF TESTIMONY (WITNESS)
(Nu 915; 2 Ch 24 6, RV ‘“‘the tent of the testi-


mony’). See TABERNACLE.


TABERNACLES, FEAST OF. See Frasts anp
Fasrts, I, A, 3.


TABITHA, tab/i-tha (TaPedd, Tabeithd). See
Dorcas.


TABLE: ‘‘Table” is derived from the Lat tabula,
meaning primarily “a board,” but with a great
variety of other significances, of which ‘“writing-
tablet” is the most important for the Bib. use of
“table.” So in Eng. “table” meant at first ‘any
surface” and, in particular, ‘a surface for writing,”
and further specialization was needed before “‘table”’
became the name of the familiar article of furniture
(“object with a horizontal surface’), a meaning not
possessed by tabula in Lat. After this specializa-
tion “table” in the sense of ‘a surface for writing”
was replaced in later Eng. by the diminutive form
“tablet.” But “surface for writing” was still a
common meaning of “table,” and in this sense it
represents mid, lah (Ex 24 12, etc), a word of
uncertain origin, TAdé, pléx, “something flat” (2
Cor 3 3; He 9 4), SéAros, délios, “a writing tablet”
(1 Mace 8 22; 14 18.27.48), or mevaxldior, pinakt-
dion, ‘‘writing tablet” (Lk 1 63—a rather unusual
word). ARV has kept the word in the familiar
combination “tables of stone’ (Ex 24 12, ete),
but elsewhere (Prov 3 3; 7 3; Isa 30 8; Jer 17
1; Hab 2 2; Lk 1 63) has replaced “table” by
“tablet,”’ a change made by ERV only in Isa 30 8;
Lk 1 63. See Taser. ae

The table as an article of furniture is ]77U,
shulhan, in the Heb and tpdérefa, trdpeza, in the Gr.
The only exceptions are Cant 1 12, 10%), mésabh,
“something round,” perhaps a “round table,” per-
haps a “cushion,” perhaps a “festal procession,”
and Mk 7 4, AV «dlvn, kliné, “couch” (so RV),
while Jn 13 28 and Jn 12 2, AV “at the table,”
and Tob 7 8, AV “on the table,” represent only
the general sense of the original. Of the two regu-


lar words, shulhén is properly “a piece of hide,”
and so “a leather mat,” placed on the ground at
meal time, but the word came to mean any “table,”
however elaborate (e.g. Ex 25 23-30). Trapeza
means “having four feet.”

2 K 4 10 seems to indicate that a table was a
necessary article in even the simpler rooms. Curi-
ously enough, however, apart from the table of
shewbread there is no reference in the Bible to the
form or construction of tables, but the simpler
tables in Pal of the present day are very much lower
than ours. The modern “tables of the money
changers” (Mk 1115 and |’s) aré small square
trays on stands, and they doubtless had the same
form in NT times. See SHewBReAD, TABLE OF;
MoNneEyY-CHANGERS.

To eat at a king’s table (2 S 9 7, etc) is naturally
to enjoy a position of great honor, and the privilege
is made by Christ typical of the highest reward
(Lk 22 30). Usually “to eat at one’s table” is
meant quite literally, but in 1 K 18 19; Neh 5 17
(ef 1 K 10 5) it probably means “be fed at one’s
expense.” On the other hand, the misery of eating
the leavings of a table (Jgs 17; Mk 7 28; Lk 16
21) needs no comment. The phrase “table of the
Lord [Jeh]” in Mal 1 7.12 AV (cf Ezk 41 22; 44 16
—Ezk 39 20 is quite different) means “‘the table
(altar] set before the Lord,” but the same phrase
in 1 Cor 10 21 is used in a different sense and the
origin of its use by St. Paul is obscure. Doubtless
the language, if not the meaning, of Mal had _ its
influence and may very well have been suggested to
St. Paul as he wrote 1 Cor 10 18. On the other
hand, light may be thrown on the passage by such
a papyrus fragment as “‘Chareimon invites you to
dine at the table [Akliné] of the lord Serapis,” a
formal invitation to an idol-banquet (1 Cor 8 10;
Pap. Oxyr. i.110; ef iii.523). This would explain
St. Paul’s ‘‘table of demons’”—a phrase familiar to
the Corinthians—and he wrote ‘‘table_of the Lord”
to correspond (cf, however, Pirke ’Abhdth, 111.4).
“Table at which the Lord is Host,” at any rate, is
the meaning of the phrase. On the whole passage
see the comms., esp. that of Lietzmann (fullest
references). Probably Lk 22 30 has no bearing on
1 Cor 10 21. The meaning of Ps 69 22 (quoted
in Rom 11 9), “Let their table before them become
a snare,” is very obscure (“let them be attacked
while deadened in revelings” ?), and perhaps was
left intentionally vague.

Burron Scorr Easton

TABLE OF NATIONS:

The Table and Its Object

What It Includes and Excludes

Order of the Three Races

Extent of Each

Sons of Japheth

Sons and Descendants of Ham

Further Descendants of Ham

. Sons of Shem

. Further Descendants of Shem

. Value of Table and Its Historical Notes
Further Arguments for Early Date of Table

This is the expression frequently used to indicate

‘the generations of the sons of Noah” contained in

Gen 10. These occupy the whole
1. The chapter, and are supplemented by the
Table and first 9 verses of ch 11, which explain
Its Object how it came about that there were so

many languages in the world as known
to the Hebrews. The remainder of ch 11 traces the
descent of Abram, and repeats a portion of the
information contained in ch 10 on that account only.
The whole is seemingly intended to lead up to the
patriarch’s birth.

Noah and his family being the only persons left
alive after the Flood, the Table naturally begins
with them, and it is from his three sons, Shem, Ham
and Japheth, that the inhabitants of the earth,


PODONS oe wr


ind


2899


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tab. cf Testimony
Table of Nations


as known to the Hebrews, were descended. All
others—the Mongolians of the Far East and Japan,
the American Indians, both North


2. What It and South, the natives of Australia
Includes and New Zealand—were naturally
and omitted from the list. It may, of
Excludes course, be argued that all the nations


not regarded as descended from Shem
and Japheth might be included among the de-
scendants of Ham; but apart from the fact that this
would give to Ham far more than his due share of
the human race, it would class the Egyptians and
Canaanites with the Mongolians, Indians, etc, which
seems improbable. ‘The Table of Nations,” in
fact, excludes the races of which the Sem East was in
ignorance, and which could not, therefore, be given
according to their lands, tongues, families, and
nations (Gen 10 5.20.31).
Notwithstanding that the sons of Noah are here (ver 1)
and elsewhere mentioned in the order Shem, Ham and
Japheth (5 32; 6 10), and Ham was
3. Order of apparently the youngest (see Ham), the


Table hegins (ver 2) with Japheth, enu-
the Three merates then the descendants of Ham
Races ver 6), and finishes with those of Shem


ver 21). This order in all prohability
indicates the importance of each race in the eyes of the
Hebrews, who as Semites were naturally interested most
in the descendants of Shem with whom the list ends.
This enahled the compiler to continue the enumeration of
Shem’s descendants in 11 12 immediately after the verses
dealing with the huilding of the Tower of Babel and the
Confusion of Tongues.
The numbers of the descendants of each son of Noah,
however, prohahly hear witness to the compiler’s knowl-
edge, rather than their individual] impor-
4, Extent of tance in his eyes. Thus the more remote
i and less known race of Japheth is credited
Each with 14 descendants only (7 sons and 7
grandsons), while Ham has no less than 29
descendants (4 sons, 23 grandsons, and 2 great-grand-
sons). and Shem the same (5 sons, 5 grandsons, 1 great-
grandson, and 20 remoter descendants to the 6th genera-
tion). Many of the descendants of Shem and Ham,
however, are just as cbscure as the descendants of Ja-
pheth. How far the relationship to the individual sons
of Noah is to he taken literally is uncertain. The earlier
names are undoubtedly those of nations, while afterward
we have, possibly, merely tribes, and in ch 11 the list
develops into a genealogical list of individuals.


It is difficult to trace a clear system in the enu-
meration of the names in the Table. In the
immediate descendants of Japheth (10
5. Sons of 2), Gomer, Magog, Tubal and Mesech,
Japheth we have the principal nations of Asia
Minor, but Madai stands for the
Medes on the extreme E., and Javan (the Jonians)
for the Greeks (? and Romans) on the extreme
W. (unless the Greeks of Asia Minor were meant).
Gomer’s descendants apparently located themselves
northward of this tract, while the sons of Javan
extended themselves along the Mediterranean coast-
lands westward, Tarshish standing, apparently, for
Spain, Kittim being the Cyprians, and Rodanim the
Rhoditans.
Coming to the immediate descendants of Ham
(10 6), the writer begins with those on the S. and
then goes northward in the following
6. Sons and order: Cush or Ethiopia, Mizraim or


Descend- Egypt, Phut (better Put, RV) by the
ants of Red Sea, and lastly Canaan—the Holy
Ham Land—afterward occupied by the Is-


raelites. The sons of Cush, which fol-
low (10 7), are apparently nationalities of the
Arabian coast, where Egyp influence was predomi-
nant. These, with the sons of Raamah, embrace
the interior of Africa as known to the Hebrews,
and the Arabian tract as far as Canaan, its ex-
treme northern boundary. The reference to Baby-
lonia (Nimrod) may be regarded as following not
unnaturally here, and prominence is given to
the district on account of its importance and
romantic history from exceedingly early times.
Nevertheless, this portion (10 8-12) reads like an


interpolation, as it not only records the foundation
of the cities of Babylonia, but those of Assyria as
well—the country mentioned lower down (ver 22)

among the children of Shem.
The text then goes back to the W. again, and
enumerates the sons of Mizraim or Egypt (10 13),
mostly located on the southeastern


7. Further and eastern shores of the Mediter-
Descend- ranean. These include the ‘Libyans
ants of in the narrowest sense’ (Lehabim),
Ham two districts regarded as Egyp (Naph-


tuhim and Pathrusim), the Casluhim
from whom came the Philistines, and the Caphtorim,
probably not the Cappadocians of the Tgs, but the
island of Crete, ‘“‘because such a large island ought
not to be wanting” (Dillmann). The more impor-
tant settlements in the Canaanitish sphere of influ-
ence are referred to as the sons of Canaan (10 15)—
Sidon, Heth (the Hittites), the Jebusites (who were
in occupation of Jerus when the Israelites took it),
the Amorites (whom Abraham found in Canaan),
and others. Among the sons of Canaan are, like-
wise, the Girgashites, the Arkites and Sinites near
Lebanon, the Arvadites of the coast, and the Hama-
thites, in whose capital, Hamath, many hieroglyphic
inscriptions regarded as records of the Hittites or
people of Heth have been found. It is possibly
to this occupation of more or less outlying positions
that the ‘spreading abroad” of the families of the
Canaanites (10 18) refers. In 10 19 the writer has
been careful to indicate ‘the border of the Canaan-
ites,” that being of importance in view of the his-
torical narrative which was to follow; and here he
was evidently on familiar ground.
In his final section—the nations descended from
Shem (10 21)—the compiler again begins with
the farthest situated—the Elamites—


8. Sons of after which we have Asshur (Assyria),
Shem to the N.W.; Arpachshad (? the Chal-

daeans), to the W.; Lud (Lydia), N.W.
of Assyria; and Aram (the Aramaean states), 8.


of Lud and W. of Assyria. The tribes or states
mentioned as the sons of Aram (Uz, Hul, Gether
and Mash), however, do not give the names with
which we are familiar in the OT (Aram Naharaim,
Aram Zobah, etc), and have evidently to be sought
in different positions, indicating that they represent
an earlier stage of their migrations. With regard
to their positions, it has been suggested that Uz lay
in the neighborhood of the Hauran and Damascus;
Hul near the Sea of Galilee; and that Mash stands
for Mons Masius. This last, however, may have

been the land of Ma’, W. of Babylonia.
Only one son is attributed to Arpachshad, namely,
Shelah (sh@lah, shelah, 10 24), unidentified as a
nationality. This name should, how-


9. Further ever, indicate some part of Babylonia,
Descend- esp. if his son, Eber, was the ancestor
ants of of the Hebrews, who were apparently
Shem migrants from Ur (Mugheir) (see


ABRAHAM; UR oF THE CHALDEES).
Though Peleg, ‘‘in whose days the land was divided,”
may not have been an important link in the chain,
the explanatory phrase needs notice. It may
refer to the period when the fertilizing watercourses
of Babylonia—the “rivers of Babylon” (Ps 187 1)—
were first constructed (one of their names was pelegh),
or to the time when Babylonia was divided into a
number of small states, though this latter seems to
be less likely. Alternative renderings for Selah,
Eber and Peleg are “sending forth’ (Bohlen),
“crossing”? (the Euphrates), and “separation”
(of the Joktanites) (Bohlen), respectively.
The Bah geographical fragment 80-6-17, 504 has a
group explained as Pulukku, perbaps a modificd form of


Peleg, followed hy (Pulukku) Sa ébirti, ‘‘Pulukku cf
the cressing,’’ the last word being from the same rcct as


Tablet
Tabor, Mount


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2900


Eber. This probably indicates a city on one side of the
river (? Euphrates), at a fordable point, and a later
foundation bearing the same name on the other side.

Reu, Serng, and Nahor, however, are regarded
generally as place-names, and Terah as a personal
name (the father of Abram, Nahor and Haran).
‘From this point onward the text (11 27) becomes
the history of the Israelitish nation, beginning with
these patriarchs.

Arguments for its early date—There is hardly


any doubt that we have in this ethnographical

section of Gen one of the most valuable
10. Value records of its kind. Concerning the
of Table criticisms upon it which have been
and Its made, such things are unavoidable,
Historical and must be regarded as quite legiti-
Notes mate, in view of the importance of the


subject. The interpolated _ sections
concerning Nimrod and the Tower of Babel are such
as would be expected in a record in which the com-
piler aimed at giving all the information which he
could, and which he thought desirable for the com-
plete understanding of his record. It may be re-
garded as possible that this information was given
in view of the connection of Abraham with Baby-
lonia. In his time there were probably larger
cities than Babylon, and this would suggest that
the buildmg of the Bab capital may have been
arrested. At the time of the captivity on the other
hand, Babylon was the largest capital in the then
known world, and the reference to its early abandon-
ment would then have conveyed no lesson—
seeing the extent of.the city, the reader realized
that if was only a short setback from which it had
aoe and its effects had long since ceased to be
elt.
Limits of its information.—For the early date
of the Table also speaks the limited geographi-
cal knowledge displayed. Sargon of
11. Further Agadé warred both on the E. and
Arguments the W. of Babylonia, but he seems to


for Early have made no expeditions to the N.,
Date of and certainly did not_touch either
Table Egypt or Ethiopia. This suggests


not only that the information available
was later than his time, but also that it was obtained
from merchants, travelers, envoys and ambassadors.
The scantiness of the information about the North
of Europe and Asia, and the absence of any reference
to the Middle or the Far East, imply that com-
munications were easiest on the W., the limit of
trade in that direction being apparently Spain. If
it could be proved that the Phoenicians came as
far westward as Britain for their tin, that might
fix the latest date of the compilation of the Table,
as it must have been written before it became
known that their ships went so far; but in that
case, the date of their earliest journeys thither would
need to be fixed. Noteworthy is the absence of
any reference to the Iranians (Aryan Persians) on
the E. These, however, may have been included
with the Medes (Madai), or one of the unidentified
names of the descendants of Japheth in Gen 10 2.3.
See SuHem; Ham; Japuers, and the other special
articles in this Encyclopaedia; also, for a great
mass of information and theories by many scholars
and specialists, Dillmann, Kurzgefasstes exegetisches
Handbuch zum AT, “Die Genesis,” Leipzig, 1882;
W. Max Miller, Asten und Europa, Leipzig, 1893;
and F. Hommel, Grundriss der Geographie und
Geschichte des alten Orients, Munich, 1904.
: T. G. Pincnes
TABLET, tab’let: A rigid flat sheet (plate, pad
or slab) used to receive writing. Stone, clay, wood
and perhaps bronze, gold and lead tablets, at least,
are mentioned in the Bible. In the Old Eng. sense


of “locket” the word is incorrectly used in AV also |


of what RV translates as “armlets,” m ‘necklaces”
(Ex 35 22; Nu 81 50) and “perfume boxes” (Isa
3 20).

The technical Heb word for tablet, O7>, lath,
is generally tr? in both AV and RV as “table.”
This is used for stone, wood or metal plates or tab-
lets with or without writing. In Isa (30 8) where
RV translates “tablet,” it is contrasted with the
“roll” and probably means the wood or waxed tablet.
In Hab (2 2, ARV “tablet,” AV and ERV “table’’)
it perhaps refers to a metal tablet to be erected on a
wall, but more likely it refers to the wooden tablet.
It is also used in Prov (3 3; 7 3, ARV “tablet,”
AV and ERV “table’’) and in Jer (17 1) figuratively
of the writing upon the tablets of the heart, the word
being rendered in LX X by the same word (pléx) used
by St. Paul (2 Cor 3 3, “tables” in AV and RV)
in the same figure. In other cases (Ex 24 12, etc)
it is used of’ the tablets of stone containing the
Decalogue.

The word yobs, gillayon (Isa 8 1), which is
tr? in RV “tablet” and in AV “roll,” is elsewhere
(3 23) tr4 “mirror,” and is thought to mean a blank
polished surface for writing, particularly because
in later use it means the blank margin of aroll. But
see Rou.

The clay tablet is referred to in Ezk (4 1, EV
“tile”), and its use there for a map of the city has
been strikingly illustrated in modern excavation by
a tablet map discovered at Nippur (Hilprecht, Ex-
plorations, 518). Jeremiah (82 14, RV “deeds,”
AV “evidences”) may also refer to clay tablets,
but not surely, since roll deeds were also kept in
earthen jars. Job (19 24) is thought by some to
refer to the writing on leaden tablets, such as were
in very common use in antiquity and in the Middle
Ages for the writing of charms and esp. curses,
but more hold that inscriptions filled with lead are
meant here. The plate of pure gold (Ex 28 36;
Lev 8 9), engraved like the gravings of a signet,
which was on Aaron’s miter, may also be properly
described as a tablet, recalling the silver treaty be-
tween the Hittites and Egyptians and the gold plate
on which Queen Helena of Adiabene (Y6mda 37a;
Jew Enc, V1, 334) had engraved a passage from the
Pent (Nu 5 19-22). Bronze tablets (6éAros, déltos)
are several times referred to in 1 Macc (8 22; 14
18.27.48).

“TDaleth’? (daleth or deleth), the Sem (Phoen)
original from which the generic Gr word for tablet
(deltos) is derived (Gardthausen, p. 124, n. 1), is
perhaps not found strictly in this meaning in the
OT. The word is used, however, of two kinds of
written documents and in such a way as to suggest
that one is the original of, and the other derived
from, the “daleth”-tablet. In Dt 6 9 and 11 20
it is enjoined that the laws of Jeh shall be written
upon the gates of the houses, and in each case the
“daleths” or doors are meant, since the door-posts
are also mentioned, and in 1 S 21 13, where David
“scrabbles,”’ it is expressly said to be upon the
“doors” (‘“‘daleths”) of the gate. This practice
of writing upon house doors and city gates corre-
sponds to the modern posting of notices on church
doors and scoring of tallies on a door by the rural
innkeeper; and the name seems to have passed from
this great door tablet to the portable tablet. On the
other hand Jeremiah (86 23) uses ‘“‘daleths” (EV
“leaves’’) for the columns of a roll, obviously trans-
ferring the term from the panel form of the folding
tablets.

Tlwaxts, pinakis, or rivaxtécov, pinakidion, is found
in Ezk 9 2.11 in the version of Symmachus in
place of the ‘“‘writer’s inkhorn,” and pinakidion, in
Lk 1 63, of the (wooden) tablet on which Zacharias
wrote the name of John. Puzton is used several


2901


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tablet
Tabor, Mount


times by LXX as the tr for lath, and once (Cant
5 14) for ivory tablets. Sanis is used as the tr of
“daleth” or lieth 2 or 3t in LXX and still oftener in
the other VSS. The commonest Gr term both in
the NT (2 Cor 3 3; He 9 4) and in the Gr OT
is rAdé, pléx, oftenest used of the tables of stone.
This, like pldtos, which is also used for lah in
LXX, is not recognized in the modern textbooks
(Thompson, Gardthausen, Birt).

, Lirsrarure.—Gardthausen, Griechische Palaeog., Leip-
zig, I (1911), 123-32; ef pp. 24-45. See also literature
under WRriTINo.

_ E. C. Ricuarpson
TABOR, ta’bér, ta’bér (VAM, tabhor; B, Oaxxerd,
Thachcheid, A, OaBdp, Thabér): One of the towns
in the territory of Zebulun, given to the Merarite
Levites (1 Ch 6 77). The i list in Josh 21 24 f
contains no name like this. There is no indication
of its position. Some have thonght that it may
correspond to Daberath in the territory of Issachar
(ver 28), now represented by Debariyeh on the
western slope of Mt. Tabor; others that it may be
the mountain itself; and yet others that it may be a
city on the mountain, which probably was occupied
from very early times. There is a Tabor mentioned
as on the border of Issachar (Josh 19 22); but that
is almost certainly the mountain. It has been
suggested that Tabor in 1 Ch 6 17 may be a con-
traction of Chisloth-tabor (Josh 19 12), the modern
Iksal, 3 miles W. of the mountain. No certainty

is possible. W. Ewinea


TABOR, MOUNT (“h2M, tabhor, “2M 77,
har tabhir; 8pos OaBdp, dros Thabér, +6 ’IraBiprov,
t6 Itabiirion): This mountain seems to be named as
on the border of Issachar (Josh 19 22). It is
possibly identical with the mountain to which
Zebulun and Issachar were to call the peoples (Dt
33 19). Standing on the boundary between the
tribes, they would claim equal rights in the sanctuary
onthe top. The passage seems to indicate that it
was a place of pilgrimage. The worshippers, bring-
ing with them the “abundance of the sea’”’ and the
“treasures of the sand,’’ would be a source of
profit to the local authorities. The mountain
can be no other than Jebel ef-Tar, an isolated and
shapely height, rising at the northeast corner of the
Plain of Esdraelon, about 5 miles W. of Nazareth.
The mountain hag retained its sacred character,
and is still a place of pilgrimage, only the rites being
changed. The present writer has mingled with
great interest among the crowds that assemble
there from all parts at the Feast of the Trans-
figuration. :

It was on the summit and slopes of this mountain
that Deborah and Barak gathered their forces; and
hence they swept down to battle with Sisera in
the great plain (Jgs 4 6.12.14). Here probably
the brothers of Gideon were murdered by Zeba
and Zalmunna (8 18). Moore (“Jgs,” ICC, ad
loc.) thinks the scene of the slaughter must have
been much farther 8. He does not see what the
brothers of Gideon were doing so far N. of their
home in Abiezer. There is, however, no reason
for placing Ophrah so far to the 8. as he does; and
in any case the men were probably captured and
taken to Tabor as prisoners. Jos (Ant, VII, ii, 3)
says it was in one of Solomon’s administrative dis-
tricts (ef 1 K 4 17). Such a prominent and com-
manding position must always have invited forti-
fication. In the time of Antiochus the Great, 218
BC, we find a fortress here, which that king took
by stratagem, Atabyrion by name (Polyb. v. 70, 6).
It was recovered by the Jews, and was held by them
under Jannaeus, 105-70 BC (Ant, XIII, xv, 4).
The place fell to the Romans at the conquest under
Pompey; and not far from the mountain Alexander,


son of Aristobulus II, suffered defeat at the hands of
Gabinius, proconsul of Syria, 53 BC (Ant, XIV,
iv, 3; BJ, J, viii, 7). Jos, who commanded in
Galilee at the outbreak of the Jewish war, recog-
nized the importance of the position, and built a
wall round the summit. After the disaster to
Jewish arms at Jotapata, where Jos himself was
taken prisoner, many fugitives took refuge here.
Placidus the Rom general did not attempt an
assault upon the fortress. Its defenders were by a
feint drawn into the plain, where they were defeated,
and the city surrendered.


A tradition which can be traced to the 4th cent. AD
places the scene of the Transfiguration on this mountain.
Allusion has heen made ahove to the sacred character
of the place. ‘To this, and to the striking appearance of
the mountain, the rise of the tradition may have heen due.
Passing centuries have seen @ succession of churches
and monasteries erected on the mountain. The scene of
the Transfiguration was laid at the southeastern end of
the summit, and here a church was huilt, prohably by
Tancred. Hard by was also shown the place where
Melchizedek met Abraham returning from the pursuit
of Chedorlaomer. The mountain shared to the full
the vicissitudes of the country's stormy history. In 1113
AD the Arahs from Damascus plundered the monasteries
and murdered the monks. An unsuccessful attack was
made by Saladin in 1183, hut 4 years later, after the rout
of the Crusaders at Hattin, he devastated the place.
Twenty-five years after that it was fortified by el-Melek
el-‘Adel, brother of Saladin, and the Crusaders failed in
an attempt to take it in 1217. In 1218, however, the
Saracens threw down the defences. Sultan Bibars in
1263 ordered the destruction of the Church of the Trans-
figuration, and for a time the mountain was deserted.
The Feast of the Transfiguration, however, continued
to he celehrated hy the monks from Nazareth. During
the last quarter of the 19th cent. much huilding was done
hy the Lat and Gr churches, who have now large and
substantial monasteries and churches. They have also
excavated the ruins of many of the old ecclesiastical
buildings. The remains now to be seen present features
of every period, from Jewish times to our own.


Mt. Tabor rises to a height of 1,848 ft. above the
sea, and forms the most striking feature of the
landscape. Seen from the 8. it presents the shape
of a hemisphére; from the W. that of a sugar loaf.
Its rounded top and steep sides are covered with
thick brushwood. It is about half a century
since the oak forest disappeared; but solitary


Mt. Tabor.


survivors here and there show what the trees must
have been. A low neck connects the mountain
with the uplands to the N. It is cut off from
Jebel ed-Duhy on the 8. by a fertile vale, which
breaks down into Wddy el-Bireh, and thence to the
Jordan. A zigzag path on the N.W. leads to the
top, whence most interesting and comprehensive
views are obtained. Southward, over Little Her-
mon, with Endor and Nain on its side, and Shunem
at its western base, we catch a glimpse of Mt.
Gilboa. Away across the plain the eye runs along
the hills on the northern boundary of Samaria,
past Taanach and Megiddo to Carmel by the sea,


Tabor, Oak of
Take


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2902


and the oak forest that runs northward from the
gorge of the Kishon. A little to the N. of W.,
5 miles of broken upland, we can see the higher
houses of Nazareth gleaming white in the sun.
Eastward lies the hollow of the Jordan, and beyond
it the wall of Gilead and the steep cliffs E. of the
Sea of Galilee, broken by glens and watercourses,
and esp. by the great chasm of the Yarmak. The
mountains of Zebulun and Naphtali seem to cul-
minate in the shining mass of Great Hermon, rising
far in the northern sky. Standing here one realizes
how aptly the two mountains may be associated in
the Psalmist’s thought, although Hermon be mighty
and Tabor bumble (Ps 89 12). Tabor is referred
to by Jeremiah (46 18), and Hosea alludes to
oy ensnaring worship practised on the mountain
5 1).

The present writer spent some weeks on Mt.
Tabor, and as the result of careful observation and
consideration concluded that the scene of the Trans-
figuration cannot be laid here. The place wonld
appear to have been occupied at that time; and the
remoteness and quiet which Jesus evidently sought
could hardly have been found here. See Trans-
FIGURATION, MouNT OF. W. Ewine


TABOR, OAK (AV PLAIN) OF (1am yo,
élon tabhor; 4 Spits OaBdp, hé drits Thabér): A
place mentioned only in Samnel’s directions to Saul
after his anointing (1 S 10 3). It lay between the
city where the two met and Gibeah whither Saul
was returning. Ewald and Thenius thought it
might be identical with the palm tree of Deborah,
but there is nothing to support this conjecture.
Others have thought we might read ‘‘oak of Deb-
orah,”’ as signifying the place where Rachel’s nurse
was buried (Gen 35 8). The truth is that nothing
whatever is now known of the site.


' W. Ewine
TABRET, tab’ret, TIMBREL, tim’brel. See
Music, ITI, 3, (1).


TABRIMMON, tab-rim’on, tab'ri-mon (JT2730 ,
tabhrimmon, ‘“Rimmon is good’; B, TaPepepa,
Taberemd, A, TaBevpanpa, Tabenraémd): The son
of Hezion and father of Ben-Hapap (q.v.) (1 K 16
18, AV “Tabrimon’’).


TACHES, tach’iz. See Cuasps.


TACHMONITE, tak’mé-nit. See Tancuemo-
NITE.


TACKLING, tak’ling. See Surps anp Boars,
II, 2, (2).


TADMOR, tad’mor, tad’mor (WOT, tadhmor):
A city built by Solomon in the wilderness (2 Ch 8
4), the Rom Palmyra. Tadmor is the native name
and is found on inscriptions. It occurs also in the
Keré of 1 K 9 18, where the Kethibh or conso-
nants read “Tamar” (cf Ezk 47 19; 48 28). Itis
famous in Arabian as well as in Heb lit., and enters
Rom history in connection with Zenobia and
Longinus. The inscriptions, which belong for the
most part to the latter period (266-73 AD), have
been published by Dawkins and Wood and also by
M. Waddington and the Duc de Luynes. Popular
works on the subject are An Account of Palmyra
and Zenobia by W. Wright, and The Last Days and
Fall of Palmyra by W. Ware. See Tamar.

THomas Hunter Weir

TAHAN, ta’han, TAHANITES, ta’han-its (JOD,
tahan, "271, tahdni): The name of two Ephraim-
ites who lived toward the end of the exodus of the
Israelites (c 1415 BC).


(1) The head of one of the families of the tribe of
Ephraim (Nu 26 35).

(2) The son of Telah and father of Ladan, also
of the tribe of Ephraim (1 Ch 7 25 f).


TAHAPANES, ta-hap’a-néz (OEM, takpan-
hés). See TAHPANHES.


TAHASH, ta’hash (WOM, tahash; Téxos, Téchos;
AV Thahash): A son of Nahor by his concubine


Reumah (Gen 22 24). The word UTM means a
kind of leather or skin, and perhaps the animal
yielding it, probably the “dugong’ (cf Brown,
Briggs, and Driver). Tahash has been identified
by Winckler with Tihis (Egypt), located on the
Orontes, N. of Kadesh.


TAHATH, ta’hath (MM, tahath, “below”): A
wilderness station of the Israelites (Nu 33 26.27),
between Makheloth and Terah. See WaNnprRinGs
oF ISRAEL.


TAHATH:

(1) A Kohathite Levite (1 Ch 6 24).

(2) The name is mentioned twice among the sons
of Ephraim (1 Ch 7 20); two families may be
meant, or perhaps the name has been accidentally
repeated.


TAHCHEMONITE, ta-ké’mé-nit, ti’ké-mon-it
(ADMIN , tahkemon2): Name of a family to which
Jashobeam, the chief captain in David’s army,
belonged (2 S 238 8; 1 Ch 11 11). In 1 Ch it is
“Hachmonite.”


TAHPANHES, ta’pan-héz, té-pan’héz (usually
in the OT OMEN, tahpanhés; LXX Tadvads,
Taphnds; Coptic, Taphnes): The various spellings
of the Heb text are fairly well indicated in AV by
Tahapanes (Jer 2 16); Tahpanhes (Jer 43 7-9;
441; 46 14); Tehaphnehes (Ezk 30 18), while
an Egyp queen (XXIst Dynasty) is named Tah-
penes (1 K 11 19.20). T. was a city on the eastern
frontier of Lower Egypt, represented today by
Tell Defenneh, a desert mound lying some 20 miles
S.W. from Pelusium (Bib. ‘‘Sin’”’) and a little N. of
the modern Al-Kantarah (‘the bridge’), marking
the old caravan route from Egypt to Pal, Mesopo-
tamia and Assyria. Its Egyp name is unknown,
but it was called Aagval, Daphnai, by the Greeks,
and by the modern Arabs Def’neh. The site is
now desolate, but it was a fertile district when
watered by the Pelusiac branch of the Nile (cf Isa
19 6.7). T. was so powerful that Jeremiah can
say that it, with Memphis, has “broken the crown”
of Israel’s head (2 16), and Ezekiel can speak of its
“daughters” (colonies or suburban towns), and
names it with Heliopolis and Bubastis when the
“yokes [LXX “sceptres”] of Egypt” shall be
broken by Jeh (30 18). In a later passage Jere-
miah describes the flight of the Jews from their
ruined capital to T. after the death of Gedaliah
(43 1-7) and prophesies that Nebuchadnezzar
shall invade Egypt and punish it, establishing his
throne upon the brick pavement (AV kiln”)
which is at the entry of Pharaoh’s royal palace at
T. (43 8-11). Hecalls T. as a witness to the desola-
tion of the cities of Judah (44 1), but prophesies
an equal destruction of T, and other Egyp cities
(probably occupied by fugitive Jews) when Nebu-
chadnezzar shall smite them (46 14).

This invasion of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar was for a
long time strenuously denied (e.g. as late as 1889 by
Kuenen, Historisch-critisch Onderzoek, 265-318); but


since the discovery and publication (1878) of fragments of
Nebuchadnezzar’s annals in which he affirms his invasion


2903


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tabor, Oak of
Take


of Egypt in his 37th year (568-567 BC), most scholars
have agreed that the predictions of Jeremiah (43 9-13;
44 30) uttered shortly after 586 BC and of Ezekiel
(29 19) uttered in 570 BC were fulfilled, ‘‘at least in
their genera] sense’ (Driver, Authority and Archaeology,
116). ‘Three cuneiform dascen ions of Nebuchadnezzar
were found by Arabs probably on or near this site.
The excavation of T.in 1886 by W. M. Flinders Petrie
made it ‘‘highly probable that the large oblong platform
of brickwork close to the palace fort built at this spot by
Psammetichus I, c 664 BC, and now called Kasr Bint el-
Yehudi, ‘the castle of the Jew’s daughter,’ is identical
with the quadrangle ‘which is at the entry of Pharaoh's
house in T.' in which Jeremiah was commanded to bury
the stones as a token that Nebuchadnezzar would spread
his pavilion over them when he led his army into Egypt"
(lb,117). Jos explicitly mentions that Nebuchadnezzar,
when he captured T., carried off a Jewish contingent from
that city (Ant, IX, vii). Dr. Petrie found that while
a small fort had existed here since the Rameside era (cf
Herod. ii.17), yet the town was practically founded by
Psammetichus I, continued prepa oue for a century or
more, but dwindled to a small village iu Ptolemaic times.
Many sealings of wine jars stamped with the cartouches
of Psammetichus I_and Amosis were found in situ. T.
being the nearest Egyp town to Pal, Jeremiah and the
other Jewish refugees would naturally flee there (43 7).
It is not at all unlikely that_Nebuchadnezzar's invasion
of Egypt was partly due to Egypt’s favorable reception
of these refugees.

The pottery found at T. “shows on the whole
more evidence of Greeks than Egyptians in the
place... .. Esp. between 607-587 BC a constant
imtercourse with the Gr settlers must have been
going on and a wider intercourse than even a Gr
colony in Pal would have produced. .... The whole
circumstances were such as to give the best possible
opportunity for the permeation of Gr words and Gr
ideas among the upper classes of the Jewish exiles’
(Petrie, Nebesheh and Defenneh, 1888, 50). This
was, however, only one of many places where the
Greeks and Hebrews met freely in this century
(see e.g. Duruy, Hist of Greece, If, 126-80; Cobern,
Daniel, 301-7). A large foreign traffic is shown at
T. in which no doubt the Jews took part. Dis-
coveries from the 6th cent. BC included some very
finely painted pottery, “full of archaic spirit and

- beauty,” many amulets and much rich jewelry and
bronze and iron weapons, a piece of scale armor,
thousands of arrow heads, and three seals of a Syrian
type. One of the few inscriptions prays the blessing
of Neit upon ‘‘all beautiful souls.” There was also
dug up a vast number of minute weights evidently
used for weighing precious metals, showing that the
manufacture of jewelry was carried on here on a
large scale. One of the most pathetic and sugges-
tive “finds” from this century, which witnessed the
Bab captivity, consisted of certain curious figures
of captives, carved in limestone, with their legs bent
backward from their knees and their ankles and
elbows bound together (Petrie, op. cit., chs ix—xii).

CampEN M. CoBEern

TAHPENES, ta’pe-néz, té-pé’néz (O"RNN,
tahp’nés; LXX Qexepleliva, Thekemleléna): Queen
of Egypt, the sister of Hadad’s wife and the foster-
mother of his son Genubath (1 K 11 19f). See
PHARAOH.


TAHREA, ti’ré-a, ta-ré’a (VIN, tahré"): Son
of Micah, a descendant of Gibeon (1 Ch 9 41;
in 8 85 “Tarea’’).


TAHTIM-HODSHI, t4-tim-hod’shi.
DESH ON ORONTES.


TAIL, tal (FPN, ‘alyah; 22, zanabh; odpé,
ourd): The broad tail of the Syrian sheep, wrongly
rendered “rump” (q.v.) in AV, is mentioned as one
of the portions of sacrifice which was burned _on
the altar as a sweet savor to God (Ex 29 22). The
2d Heb word is used of the tails of serpents (Ex 4 4)
of foxes, which Samson tied together in his cruel
sport, in order to destroy the cornfields of the
Philis by means of attached firebrands (Jgs 16 4,


See Ka-


etc). The following seems to be an allusion to this
incident: “Fear not, neither let thy heart be faint,
because of these two tails of smoking firebrands, for
the fierce anger of Rezin and Syria, and of the son of
Remaliah” (Isa 7 4).

Figurative: ‘‘Tail’’=inferiority, as opposed to
“head” =superiority, leadership. ‘Jeh will make
thee the head, and not the tail; and thou shalt
be above only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if
thou shalt hearken unto the commandments of
Jeh” (Dt 28 13; cf also ver 44).

In the NT we find oura used of the apocalyptic
animals, scorpions, horses, and the dragon (Rev
9 10.19; 12 4). H. L. E. Lugsrine


TAKE, tak: Most of the very numerous examples
of this word are still in good use and only a few
eall for special attention. “To take’ in the sense
of “capture’’ is still common, but when a person or
living animal is in point, modern Eng. usually
adds “prisoner” or ‘captive.’ EV not infre-
quently has this addition (Gen 14 14, etc), but more
commonly ‘take’ is used without it (Josh 10 39;
Job 6 138; Sir 23 21; Jn 7 30, etc). An ocea-
sional obscurity is thus caused, as in Gen 27 3,
“take me venison” for ‘hunt venison for me.”
“To take advice’ (2 Ch 26 17; AV Jgs 19 30,
RV “counsel”’) is “to reflect,’ not “to consult
others’ (cf 1 K 12 28; but contrast 2 K 6 8,
etc). ‘To take knowledge of” is ‘to learn thor-
oughly,” ‘investigate’ (1 8 23 23, etc), as is “to
take notice of” (2S 3 36). ‘To take an oath of”
(Gen 60 25, ete) is “to exact an oath of.” “To
be taken with a disease’ in AV Mt 4 24; Lk 4 38
is ‘to suffer with’ (RV “be holden with’’), but in
1 Mace 9 55; 2 Macc 9 21 (AV and RV), the con-
text gives the force “‘be attacked by,” as in modern
Eng. Cf AV Lk 8 37 (RV “holden”); Mic 4 9 (RV
“take hold of’). “Take” occurs in the sense ‘‘over-
take’ in AV Gen 19 19 (RV “‘overtake’’); Sir 36 26.
“Take away” has sometimes a more forcible sig-
nificance than in modern Eng., as in AV Lev 6 2,
“a, thing taken away by violence” (RV “robbery’’);
Dnl 11 12, AV “He hath taken away the multitude,”
where the meaning is “‘swept away” (ef RVm ‘‘car-
ried away’; RV “shall be lifted up’’ is inappropri-
ate here). So in “lest he take thee away with his
stroke’ (AV Job 36 18), “take away’? means
simply “slay.” (The text here is intensely obscure,
and RV has followed a different interpretation.)
So “to be taken away’? may mean simply “‘to die,”
as in Ezk 3836; Wisd 14 15; Sir 169; 19 3;
Mk 2 20, although in 1 Cor 5 2 it means “to be
expelled.” ‘To take away judgment” or “right”
(Job 27 2; 34.5; Acts 8 33) is “to refuse it,’”’ but
in Zeph 3 15 EV means “the sentence against thee
is canceled” (Heb text dubious). Neh 5 2 AV has
“take up’’ for “get” (so RV), perhaps with the con-
notation “on credit.’’ ‘Take up” is also used fre-
quently for “utter solemnly” (Nu 23 7; Isa 14 4,
etc), a use due to the Heb “lift up,” “exalt” (ND3,
nasa’). For “take up” in the sense of “‘lift’’
(physically), cf Isa 40 15; Acts 7 43; AV 21 15.
“Take care’ in Tob & 20; 1 Cor 99 AV (RV
“to care’) means “be anxious about,” “have in
mind.” And the very obscure “scurrility in the
matter of giving and taking” (Sir 41 19) is ex-
plained by the Heb to mean “refusing the gift for
which thou art besought.’ The following phrases
are archaic, but hardly need explanation: ‘Take
indignation” (Neh 4 1); “take wrong” (1 Cor 6
7); “take up in the lips” (Ezk 36 3; AV Ps 16
4, “take... . into my lips,’ RV “take ....
upon my lips’); and in AV “take to record” (Acts
20 26, RV “testify unto”); “take shame” (Mic
26 AV). Burton Scorr Easton


Tale
Talmud


TALE, tal (J2M, tokhen, MIDNA, mithkoneth,
HO, mispar; Mos, léros): In AV of the OT
(with one exception, Ps 90 9) “‘tale’”’ (in the sing.)
means number. “Tell” often has the same mean-
ing, e.g. “I may tell [i.e. reckon] all my bones”
(Ps 22 17). When Moses requested permission
to go three days’ journey into the wilderness to
sacrifice to Jeh, Pharaoh replied by demanding
the full “tale” of bricks from the Israelites although
they were compelled to provide themselves with
straw (Ex 5 8.18; seealsol S 18 27; 1 Ch 9 28).
In Ps 90 9, “‘as a tale that is told” is a doubtful
rendering (see GamEs). The LXX and Vulg render
“as a spider’s web.” The literal and perhaps
accurate tr is “as a sigh” (Driver, in the Parallel
Psalter, gives “‘as a murmur’). The word used
in this ps means “‘to whisper,” or ‘‘speak sotto voce,’
as a devout believer repeats to himself the words of
a favorite hymn or passage (Ps 1 2).

The disciples considered the account given by
the women in regard to the resurrection as ‘‘idle
tales” (AV, RV “idle talk’), lit. “nonsensical talk”
(Lk 24 11).

In talebearer the word has another meaning, viz.
“slanderous talk or gossip.’”? The word occurs 5 t in
Prov (11 13; 18 8 AV; 20 19; 26 20.22 AV) and
once in Lev (19 16). The word used in Lev and
also in Prov 20 19 means a person who gads about
from house to house hawking malicious gossip (cf
1 Tim 5 18). From the same root comes the Heb
word for “merchant.” In Ezk 22 9 for AV ‘men
that carry tales’? RV gives “slanderous men,” as
Docg (1 8 2% 9.22); Ziba (2 8 16 3; 19 27); and
a certain maid-servant (2 S 17 17). See SLanpER.

T. Lewis

TALENT, tal’ent (125, kikkar;  édavrov,
télanton): A weight composed of 60 manehs (EV
“pounds”) equal to about 120 pounds troy and 96
pounds avoirdupois, or 672,500 grams, of the
Phoen standard. See Wricurs aND MEASURES.
When used in the monetary sense the talent might
be either of silver or gold, and the value varied ac-
cording to the standard, but is probably to be
taken on the Phoen, which would give about
£410, or $2,050, for the silver talent and £6,150, or
$30,750, for the gold. See Monny.

Figurative: ‘Talent,’ like “pound,” is used
metaphorically in the NT for mental and spiritual
attainments or gifts (Mt 26 15-28).

H. Porrer

TALITHA CUMI, ta-lé’tha kd0’mé (rad8a Kod,
talithé koumi): Derived from the Aram. (8720
“Ap, talyctha’ kimi, “damsel, arise’), which in
the NT MSSis transliterated variously (WH, Tadeéa
xobu, Taleithd kom, otherwise Tad04 kod, Talitha
kotimi). We have no data for determining how far
Jesus employed the Aram. language, but Mark (5
41) notes its use in this tender incident, and there is
strong probability that Aram. was used normally, if
not exclusively, by Christ. There is, however, no
ground for attributing any magical significance to
the use of the Aram. words in connection with this
miracle.


TALMAI, tal’mi, tal’ma-i ("O9M, talmay):

(1) A clan, possibly of Aramaean origin, gener-
ally reputed to be of gigantic height; resident in
Hebron at the time of the Heb conquest and driven
thence by Caleb (Nu 13 22; Josh 15 14; Jgs 1 10).

(2) A son of Ammihur (or Ammihud), king of
Geshur, a smal] Aramaean kingdom, and a contem-
porary of David, to whom he gave his daughter
Maacah in marriage. When Absalom fled from
David after the assassmation of Amnon he took
refuge with Talmai at Geshur (2 8 3 3; 18 37;
1 Ch 3 2).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2904


TALMON, tal’mon aren, talmin): One of
the porters in connection with the temple-service
(1 Ch 9 17; Ezr 2 42; Neh 7 45; 11 19; 12 28).


TALMUD, tal’mud (T72°T, talmidh):
I. PreviminaRy REMARKS AND VERBAL EXPLANA-
TIONS
II. Importance or THE TALMuD
Il. Tue Trapitionan Law UNTIL THE COMPOSITION
or THE MISHNA 7
IV. Division aNp Conrents oF THE MisHNA (AND
THE TALMUD)
1. Zra‘im, Seeds"
2. Mo‘édh, ‘‘Feasts”’
3. Ndshim, ‘“Women"
4. Nezikin, ‘Damages’
5. Kédhashim, “Sacred Things’’
6. Teharoth, ‘Clean Things"’
V. Tue Pauestinian TaLtmup
VI. Tse Basryionian TauMuD
VII. Tue Non-canonicau Lirrte TREATISES AND THE
TOsEPHTA’
1. Treatises after the 4th sédher
2. Seven Little Treatises *
LiTERATURE


The present writer is, for brevity’s sake, under neces-
sity to refer to his Hinleitung in den Talmud, 4th ed,
Leipzig, 1908. It is quoted here as Intro.

There are very few books which are mentioned
so often and yet are so little known as the Talmud.
It is perhaps true that nobody can now be found,
who, as did the Capuchin monk Henricus Seynen-
sis, thinks that “Talmud” is the name of a rabbi.
Yet a great deal of ignorance on this subject still
prevailsin many circles. Many are afraid to inform
themselves, as this may be too difficult or too
tedious; others (the anti-Semites) do not want
correct information to be spread on this subject,
because this would interfere seriously with their
use of the Talm as a means for their agitation against
the Jews.

I. Preliminary Remarks and Verbal Explana-
tions.—(1) 13W2, Mishnah, “the oral doctrine
and the study of it’’ (from shanah, “‘to repeat,” ‘‘to
learn,” ‘‘to teach’’), esp. (a) the whole of the oral -
law which had come into existence up to the end of
the 2d cent. AD; (b) the whole of the teaching of
one of the rabbis living during the first two cen-
turies AD (fann@’, pl. tanna’im); (c) a single tenet;
(d) a collection of such tenets; (e) above all, the col-
lection made by Rabbi Jehidah (or Judah) ha-Nas?’.

(2) NY23, Gemara’, “the matter that is learned”
(from g*mar, ‘‘to accomplish,’’ “‘to learn’), denotes
since the 9th cent. the collection of the discussions
of the Amoraim, i.e. of the rabbis teaching from
about 200 to 500 AD.

(3) 02m, Talmidh, ‘the studying’ or “the
teaching,’’ was in older times used for the discussions
of the Amoraim; now it means the Mish with the
discussions thereupon.

(4) m2, Halakhah (from hélakh, ‘to go”):
(a) the life as far as it is ruled by the Law; (6) a
statutory precept.

(5) V9, Haggadhah (from higgidh, “to tell’),
the non-halakhiec exegesis.

I. Importance of the Talmud.—Commonly the
Talm is declared to be the Jewish code of Law.
But this is not the case, even for the traditional or
“orthodox” Jews. Really the Talm is the source
whence the Jewish Law is to be derived. Who-
soever wants to show what the Jewish Law says
about a certain case (point, question) has to com-
pare at first the Shulhan ‘arakh with its comm.,
then the other codices (Maimonides, Alphasi, etc)
and the Responsa, and finally the Talmudic discus-
sions; but he is not allowed to give a decisive sen-
tence on the authority of the Talm alone (see Intro,
116, 117; David Hoffmann, Der Schulchan-Aruch,
2d ed, Berlin, 1894, 38, 39). On the other hand, no
decision is valid if it is against the yield of the Tal-


2905


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tale
Talmud


mudic discussion. The liberal (Reformed) Jews
say that the Talm, though it is interesting and, as
a Jewish work of antiquity, ever venerable, has in
itself no authority for faith and life.

For both Christians and Jews the Talm is of
value for the followmg reasons: (1) on account of
the language, Heb being used in many parts of the
T (esp. in Haggadic pieces), Palestinian Aram.
in the Palestinian Talm, Eastern Aram. in the
Bab Talm (cf “Literature,” [7], below). The Talm
also contains words of Bab and Pers origin; (2) for
folklore, history, geography, natural and medical
science, jurisprudence, archaeology and the under-
standing of the OT (see “Literature,’’ [6], be-
low, and /ntro, 159-75). For Christians esp. the
Talm contains very much which may help the
understanding of the NT (see “Literature,” [12],
below).

Hf, The Traditional Law antil the Composition
of the Mishna.—The Law found in the Torah of
Moses was the only written law which the Jews
possessed after their return from the Bab exile.
This law was neither complete nor sufficient for all
times. On account of the ever-changing conditions
of life new ordinances became necessary. Who
made these we do not know. An authority to do
this must have existed; but the claim made by
many that after the days of Ezra there existed a
college of 120 men called the ‘‘Great Synagogue”
cannot be proved. Entirely untenable also is the
claim of the traditionally orthodox Jews, that ever
since the days of Moses there had heen in existence,
side hy side with the written Law, also an oral Law,
with all necessary explanations and supplements to
the written Law.

What was added to the Pentateuchal Torah was
for a long time handed down orally, as can be
plainly seen from Jos and Philo. The increase of
such material made it necessary to arrange it. An
arrangement according to subject-matter can be
traced back to the 1st cent. AD; very old, perhaps
even older, is also the formal adjustment of this
material to the Pentateuchal Law, the form of
Exegesis (Midr). Cf /ntro, 19-21. :

A comprehensive collection of traditional laws
was made by Rabbi Akiba c 110-35 AD, if not by
an earlier scholar. His work formed the basis of
that of Rabbi M@’ir, and this again was the basis
of the ed of the Mish by Rabbi Jehidah ha-Nasi’.
Jn this Mish, the Mish par excellence, the anony-
mous portions generally, although not always, re-
produce the views of Rabbi Mé’ir. See Tipertas.

The predecessorsof Rabbi (as R. Jehidah ha-Nast’,
the “prince” or the “saint,’’ is usually called), as
far as we know, did not put into written form their
collections; indeed it has been denied by many, esp.
by German and French rabbis of the Middle Ages,
that Rabbi put into written form the Mish which he
edited, Probably the fact of the matter is that
the traditional Law was not allowed to be used in
written form for the purposes of instruction and in
decisions on matters of the Law, but that written
collections of a private character, collections of
notes, to use a modern term, existed already at an
early period (see Intro, 10 ff).

IV. Division and Contents of the Mishna (and
the Talmud).—The Mish (as also the Talm) is
divided into six ‘“‘orders” (sdhdérim) or chief parts,
the names of which indicate their chief contents,
viz. Zra‘im, Agriculture; Mo'édh, Feasts; Nashim,
Women; N*zikin, Civil and Criminal Law; Ké-
dhashim, Sacrifices; T*héroth, Unclean Things and
Their Purification.

The ‘‘orders’’ are divided into tracts (messekheth, pl.
massikhtoth), now 63, and these again into chapters


ek, pl. perdkim), and these again into paragraphs
ee OA It is customary to cite the Mish accord-


ing to tract, beg and paragraph, e.g. Sanh. (Sanhedh-
rin) x.1. The Bab Talm is cited according to tract
and page, e.g. (Bab) Shabbath 300; in citing the Pales-
tinian Talm the number of the chapter is also usually
given, e.g. (Pal) Shabbath vi.8d (in most of the edd of the
Palestinian Talm each page has two columns, the sheet
accordingly has four).

(1) Berakhéth, '‘Benedictions’': ‘Hear, O Israel’’
(Dt 6 4, shema'); the 18 benedictions, grace at meals,

and other prayers.


. Leva’: (2) Pé'ah, “Corner” of the field (Lev
reve ta 19 9f: Dt 24 19 ff).
ceeds (3) Dém@i, “ Doubtful” fruits (corn,


etc) of which it is uncertain whether the

duty for the priests and, in the fixed years, the 2d tithe
have been paid.

(4) Kil'ayim, '' Heterogeneous,”’ two kinds, forbidden
mixtures (Lev 19 19; Dt 22 9 ff).

(5) Shebhi'ith, ‘Seventh Year,”’ Sabbatical year (Ex
23-11; Lev 25 11%); Shemittah (Dt 15 1 ff).

(6) Terimath, ‘' Heave Offerings’ for the priests (Nu
18-8 ft; Dt 18 4). 2 aes

(7) Ma'dséroth or Ma'dsér ri’shén, “ First Tithe” (Nu
18 21 ff).

(8) Ma‘dsér shéni, ‘Second Tithe’”’ (Dt 14 22 ff).

(9) Hallah, (offering of a part of the) ''Dough” (Nu
18 IG lah, “F ki f fi

‘Orlah, “ Foreskin” of fruit trees during thi

first three years (Lev_19 23). uae

(11) Bikkarim, “ First-Fruits’” (Dt 26 1ff; Bx 23


9).
(1) Shabbath (Ex 20 10; 23 12; Dt § 14).

(2) ‘Braibhin,  Mixtures,”’ i.e. ideal combination of

localities with the purpose of facilitating

2. Mo'éedh, bie tee ance of the Bee pe

i esahim, **Passover’’ (Ex 12; Le
“Feasts” 9959; "Nu'88 16; Dt 16 1)}ch 9,
(a) reealt the Statics yan oo Ei 10 ff).

ekalim, ‘'Shekels’”’ for the Temple (cf Neh
33: Ex 30 127). ae 19
(5) Yama’, “The Day” of Atonement (Lev 16).
(6) Sukkah, *'Booth,” Feast of Tabernacles (Lev 23
34 ff; Nu 29 12ff; Dt 16 13 ff).

_ (7) Bécah, "Egg" (first word of the treatise) or Yém
fobh, ‘Feast,’” on the difference between the Sabbath
and festivals (cf Ex 12 es

(8) Rash ha-shanah, ''New Year,”
month Tishri (Lev 23 24f; Nu 99 1 ff)

(9) Ta'énith, ** Fasting.”

cay Meghillah, '‘The Roll” of Esther, Purim (Est


(11) Ma'édh katén, ‘ Minor Feast,” or Mashkin, “They
irrigate”’ (first word of the treatise), the days between the


first day and the last day of the feast of
likewise of Tabernacles. Y spa da


st day of the


(12) Héghighah, ‘' Feast Offering,” statutes relating to
the three feasts of pilgrimage (Passover, Weeks, Taber-
Stree rte a6 182 nO

ebhamath, ‘' Sisters-in-Law’’ erhaps better,
ME a rhea marriage; Dt 958 a; of Ruth 4


5; Mt 22
3 Kethabhoth, ‘'Marriage Deeds.”
3. Nashim (3) Nedharim, “ Vows,” and their annul-
“ow, » ment (Nu 30).
omen Nasty eared ll on 6).
ittin, “Letters of Di of
4 3) BRD scapeted Woman” Wa $110).
étah, ‘The Suspecte oman’? (Nu 5 1 3
3} Kiddishia, '' Betrothals.”” : ee
(1) (2) and (3) Babha’ kamma', Babha’ meci'é’, Babha’
bathra’, ** The First Gate,” ‘'The Second Gate,”’ "The Last
Gate,”” were in ancient times only one
4. Neztkin, res Pore Waueas a Peace and
* juries an e responsibility;
“Damages” (c) right of possession a ene
{4) and (5) Sanhedhrin, ‘‘Court of Jus-
tice,” and Makkoth, ‘'Stripes’’ (Dt 25 1ff; cf 1 Cor
11 24). In ancient times only one treatise; criminal
law and criminal proceedings.
(6) Shebha'ath, ‘Oaths’ (Lev 5 1 ff).
(7) ‘Edhuyath, ‘‘ Attestations” of later teachers as to
the opinions of former authorities.
(8) 'Abhadhah zarah, “Idolatry,” commerce and inter-
course with idolaters.
(9) ’Abhoth, (sayings of the) ‘Fathers’; sayings of the


Tanndim. _
(10) Hérayath, (erroneous) ‘ Declsions,” and the sin
offering to be brought in such a case (Lev 4 13 ff).
on) Aebhanees, ee. Lev 1 ff).
endhoth, ‘Mea erings’’ (Lev 2 5.11 ff;
7; Nu 5 15 ff, etc). s


= (3) Hullin, ‘‘Common Things,” things
5. Keodha Non-sacred; slaughtering of animals and
shim, Gee: fos aay me a
“Sacred ek oréth, ‘'The Firstborn’” (Ex
Things” 1s 2.121; Lev 27 26432; Nu 8 6ff,


tc).
t (5) ‘drakhin, “Estimates,” ‘‘Valua-
Home net persons and things dedicated to God (Lev


Talmud
Tamar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2906


(6) Temirah, ‘‘Substitution’’ of a common (non-
sacred) thing for a sacred one (cf Lev 27 10.33).

(7) Kertthoth, ‘‘Excisions,"" the punishment of being
cut off from Israel (Gen 17 14;

(8) Me‘ilak,


rifice’’ (Ex 29 38 ff; Nu 38 3 ff).

(10) Middoth, *‘Measurements"' of the Temple.

(11) Kinnim, ' Nests,” the offering of two turtle-
doves or two young pigeons (Ley 1 14 ff; 5 1 ff; 128).

This title is used euphemistically for ‘unclean
things’”’:

1) Kélim, ae (Lev 6 20f; 11 32; Nu 19


c
14 ff; 31 20f
(2) 'Oholoth, ‘Tents, the impurity
6. Tehardth, Originating with a corpse or a part of it
j (ef Nu 19 14).


“Clean arlene
3) Négha'im, ‘‘ Leprosy” (Lev 18, 14).
Things”’ (3) Parah, ‘Red Feeer *y its se
used for the purpose of purification (Nu

19 2ff). See Herren, Rep.


(5) [haréth, ‘‘Clean Things,’’ euphemistically for


defilements. .

(Gy Mikwa'éth, “* Diving-Baths” (Lev 15 12; Nu 81
33; Lev 14 8; 15 5 ff; cf Mk 7 4).

(7) Niddah, ‘‘The Menstruous" (Lev 15 19 ff; 12).

(8) Makhshirin, ‘‘Preparers,'’ or Mashkin, ‘‘ Fluids”
(first word of the treatise). Seven liquids (wine, honey,
oil, milk, dew, blood, water) which tend to cause corn,
etc, to become defiled (cf Lev 11 34.37 f).

(9) Zabhim, ‘‘Persons Having an Issue,’ flux (Lev


tio) Teohal yom, ‘‘A Person Who Has Taken the
Ritual Bath during the Day,’’ and is unclean until sun-
set (Lev 15 5; 22 6f).

(11) Yddheyim, ‘‘Hands,” the ritual impurity of
oe and their purification (ef Mt 15 2.20; Mk 7

(12) ‘Ukein, “Stalks,” the conveyance of ritual im-
purity by means of the stalks and huis of plants.

V. The Palestinian Talmud.—Another name,
Talmidh Yerishalmi (“Jerus Talm”), is also old, but
not accurate. The Palestinian Talm gives the dis-
cussions of the Palestinian Amoraim, teaching from
the 3d cent. AD until the beginning of the 5th, esp.
in the schools or academies of Tiberias, Caesarea
andSepphoris. Theedd and the Leyden MS (in the
other MSS there are but few treatises) contain only
the four s¢dhdrim i-iv and a part of Niddah. We
do not know whether the other treatises had at any
time a Palestinian Gemara. ‘The Mish on which
the Palestinian Talm rests” is said to be found in
the MS Add. 470.1 of the University Library, Cam-
bridge, England (ed W. H. Lowe, 1883). The
treatises ‘Hdhuydth and ’Abhoth have no Gemara
in the Palestinian Talm or in the Bab.

Some of the most famous Palestinian Amoraim may
be mentioned here (cf Intro, 99 ff): 1st generation:
Hanina bar Hama, Jannai, Jonathan, Osha‘ya, the
Hagegadist Joshua ben Levi; 2d generation: Johanan
har Nappahd, Simeon ben Lakish; 3d_ generation:
Samuel bar Nahman, Levi, Eliezer hen Pedath, Abhahu,
Zetira (i); 4th’ generation: Jeremiah, Aha’, Abin (i),
Judah, Hina; 5th generation: Jonah, Phinehas, Bere-
chiah, Jose bar Ahin, Mani (ii), Tanhuma’.

VI. The Babylonian Talmad.—The Bab Talm
is later and more voluminous than the Palestinian
Talm, and is a higher authority for the Jews. In
the first sédher only Berakhoth has a Gemara;
Shekalim in the 2d sédher has in the MSS and in
the edd the Palestinian Gemara; Middoth and Kin-
nim in the 5th sédher have no Bab Gemara. The
greatest Jewish academies in Babylonia were mm
Nehardea, Sura, Pumbeditha and Mahuza.


VII. The Non-canonical Little Treatises and
the Tésephta’.—In the cdd of the Bab Talm after


the 4th sédher we find some treatises which, as
they are not without some interest, we shall not
pass over in silence, though they do
1. Treatises not belong to the Talm itself (cf Iniro,
after the 69 ff). _
4th sédher (1) ’Abhath deRabbt Nathan, an ex-
pansion of the treatise ’Abhdth, ed 8.
Schechter, Vienna, 1887. hee
(2) Sdphtrim, ed Joel Miller, Leipzig, 1878.
(3) *Ebhel Rabbathi, “Mourning,” or, euaphemisti-
cally, Semahoth, “Joys.”
(4) Kallah, ‘‘Bride.”’
(5) Derekh ’erec, “Way of the World,” i.e. De-
portment; Rabba’ and Zuta’, ‘Large’ and ‘‘Small.”
Septem Labri Talmudici parvi Hierolymitani, ed
R. Kirchheim, Frankfurt a, Main, 1851: $épher


Torah, Meziizah, Tphillin, Cigith,
2. Seven ‘Abhadhim, Kuthim (Samaritans),
Little Gérim (Proselytes).
Treatises The Tosephia’, a work parallel to


Rabbi’s Mish, is said to represent the
views of R. Nehemiah, disciple of R. Akiba, ed M.S.
Zuckermandel, Posewalk, 1880. Zuckermandel
tries to show that the Tasephta’ contains the remains
of the old Palestinian Mish, and that the work
commonly called Mish is the product of a new
revision in Babylonia (ef his Tosephia, Mischna und
Boraitha in ihrem Verhdlinis zu einander, 2 vols,
Frankfurt a. Main, 1908, 1909).


Lireraturne.—(1) Intros: Hermann L. Strack, Fin-
leitung in d. Talm, 4th ed, Leipzig, 1908, in which other
hooks on this suhject are mentioned, pp. 139-44.

(2) Manuscripts (Intro, 72-76): There are MSS of the
whole Mish in Parma, in Budapest, and in Cambridge,
England (the latter is published by W. H. Lowe, 1883).
The only codex of the Palestinian Talm is in Leyden;
Louis Ginsherg, Yerushalmi Fragments from the Genizah,
vol I, text with various readings from the editio princeps,
New York, 1909 (372 pp., 4to). _The only codex of the
Bah Talm was published whole in 1912 hy the present
writer: Talmud Bab codicis Heb Monacensis 95 photo-
typice depictum, Leyden (1140 plates royal folio). On
the MSS in the Vatican see S. Ochser, ZDMG, 1909,
365-93 .626, 822 f.

(3) Editions (Intro, 76-81): (a) Mish, edtito princeps,
Naples, 1492, folio, with the comm. of Moses Maimonides;
Riva di Trento, 1559, folio, contains also the comm. of
Ohadiah di Bertinoro. The new ed printed in Wilna
contains a great number of comms. (2 Palestinian
Talm, editio princeps, Venice, 1523 f, folio; Cracow, 1609,
folio. Of anew ed hegun hy A.M. Luncz, Jerus, 1908 ff,
two hooks, Bérakhath and Pé'’ah, are already published.
Another new criticaled, with Ger. tr and notes, was hegun
in 1912 by G. Beer and O. Holtzmann (Die _Mischna,
Giessen). Cfalso B. Ratner, Ahabath Cijjon Wirushala-
yim, Varianten und_Ergdnzungen des Jerus Talmuds,
Wilna, 1901 ff. (c) Bah Talm, editio princeps, Venice,
1520-23. The ed, Bale, 1578-81, is badly disfigured hy
the censorship of Marcus Marinus, Amsterdam, 1644-
48, Berlin 1862-66. Cf R. Rabbinowicz, Variae Lec-
tiones in Mish et in Talm Babylonicum, Munich, 1868—
86, Przemysi, 1897 (the s*dhdrim 3, 6 and 5 in part
are missing). 5

(4) Translations: HB. Bischoff, Krit. Geschichte d. Tal-
muditbersetzungen, Frankfurt a. Main, 1899. (a) Mish,
Lat: Guil. Surenhusius, Amsterdam, 1698-1703 (con-
tains also a tr of Maimonides and Obadiah di Bertinoro);
Ger.: J. J. Rahe, Onolzhach, 1760 ff; A. Sammter, D.
Hoffmann and others, Berlin, 1887 ff (Mot yet complete);
Eng.: De Sola and Raphall, 18 Treatises from the Mish,
London, 1843; Jos. Barclay, The Talm, a Tr of 18 Trea-
tises, London, 1878 (but 7 treatises also in De Sola and
Raphall; Fiehig, Ausgewdhlte Mischnatractate, Tiihin-

en, 1905 ff (annotated Ger. tr). (6b) Palestinian Talm,

at: 20 treatises in B. Ugolini, Thesaurus antiquitatum
sacrarum, vols XVII-XXX, Venice, 1755 ff. French:
M. Schwab, Paris, 1878-89 (in 1890 op ater a@ 2d ed of
vol I). (c) Bab Talm, Ger.: L. Goldschmidt, Berlin
(Leipzig), 1897 ff; gives also the text of the lst Venetian
ed and some variant readings (s‘dhdrim 1, 2, and 4 are
complete); A. Wtinsche, Der Bab Talm in seinen haggadi-
schen Bestandteilen ‘ibersetzt, Leipzig, 1886-89. Eng.:
M. L. Rodkinson, New Ed of the Bab Talm.... Tra
into Eng.. New York, 1896ff Gs rather an abridgment
[unreliable]).

(5) Comms. (Intro, 146-51): (a) Mish: Moses Mai-
monides (1135-1204), Obadiah di Bertinoro (d. 1510),
Yom-Tobh Lipmann Heller (1579-1654), Israel Lip-
schiitz. (6) Bab Talm: Rashi or Solomon Yichaki (d.
1105); The Tésdphéth (see L. Zunz, Zur Geschichte und
Literatur, Berlin, 1845, 29-60); Menahem bcn Solomon


2907


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Talmud
Tamar


or M@'iri (1249-1306); Solomon Luria (d. 1573), com-
monly called Maharshal; Bezaleel Ashkenazi (16th cent.),
author of the Shittah M¢kubbegeth; Samuel Edels (1559—
1631) or Maharsha'; Meir Lublin (d. 1616); Elijah
Wilna (d.1797); Akiba Eger (d. 1837).

(6) Single treatises (cf Intro, 151-55): (a) Mish: The
present writer is publishing: Awsgewdhlte Misnatraktate,
nach Handschriften und alten Drucken (Text vokalisiert,
Vokabular), ‘tibersetzt und mit Berticksichtigung des
Neuen Testaments erldutert, Leipzig (J. C. Hinrichs);
Yoma’, 3d ed, 1912, ‘Abhodhah Zarah, 2d ed, 1909, Pirké
*Abhoth, 4th ed, 1914, Shabbath, 2d ed, 1914, Sanhedhrin,
Makkéth, 1910, P*sahim, 1911, Berakhoth, 1914. This
series is to he continued (H. Laihle, e.g., is writing Nedha-
rim); Ch. Taylor, Sayings of the Jewish Fathers, in Heb
and Eng., 2d ed, Cambridge, 1897; W. A. L. Elmslie,
The Mish on Idolatry, with Tr, Cambridge, 1911. (b)
Gemara, Berakhoth, Ger.: E. M. Pinner, Berlin, 1842, fol;
Pe’ah (Palestinian Talm), Ger.: J. J. Rahe, Ansbach,
1781; Sukkah, Lat: F.B. Dachs, Utrecht, 1726,4to; Ro'sh
ha-shanah, Ger.: M. Rawicz, Frankfurt a. Main, 1886;
Ta'énith, Ger.: Straschun, Halle, 1883; Hdghighah, Eng.:
A. W. Streane, Cambridge, 1891; K¢thubhoth, Ger.: M.
Rawicz, 1891; Séteh, Lat: J. Chr. Wagenseil, Altdorf,
1674-78; Babha’ M¢ci'a’, Ger.: A. Sammter, Berlin, 1876,
fol; Sanhedhrin, Lat: Ugolini, Thesaurus, vol XXV, Ger.:
M. Rawicz, 1892; ‘dbhodhah Zarah, Ger.: F. Chr. Ewald,
Niirnberg, 1856; Z*bhahin and M¢nahéth, Lat: Ugolini,
Thesaurus, vol XIX; Hullin, Ger.: M. Rawicz, Offenburg,
1908; Tamidh, Lat: Ugolini, Thesaurus, vol XIX.

(7) Helps for the Grammatical Understanding (Intro,
155-58): (a) Mish: M. H. Segal, ‘‘Misnaic Hebrew,”
JQR, 1908, 647-737; K. Albrecht, Grammatik des Neu-
hebrdischen_(Sprache der Mishna), Munich, 1913; (b)
Talmud: . Levy, Neuhebr. und chald. Wérterbuch,
Leipzig, 1876-89, M. Jastrow, Dictionary of the... .
Talmud Bab and Yerushalmi, New York, 1886-1903;
We Bacher, Die Terminclogie der jitd. Traditionsliteratur,
Leipzig, 1905; G. Dalman, Grammatik des jidisch-
paldstin. Aramdisch, 2d ed, Leipzig, 1905; C. Levias,
Grammar of the Aramaic Idiom Contained in the Bab
Talmud, Cincinnati, 1900; Max L. Margolis, Grammar
of the Aram. Language of the Bab Talm with a Chrestom-
athy, Munich, 1909.

(8) The Haggadah (Intro, 159-62): The Haggadic ele-
ments of the Palestinian _Talm are collected by Samuel
Jaffe in Y*phéh Mar'eh, Constantinople, 1587, etc, those
of the Bah by Jacob ibn Hahih in '‘#n Ya'ékabh, Saloniki,
ahout 1516, etc; W. Bacher, Die Agada der Tannaiten,
2 vols, Strasshurg, 1884, 1890 (1st vol, 2d ed, 1903); Die
A. der babylon. Amorder, 1878; Die A. der paldstinensi-
schen Amorder, 1892-99, 3 vols; P. T. Hershon, A Tal-
mudie Miscellany or 1001 Extracts, London, 1880; Treas-
ures of the Talm, London, 1882.

(9) Theology (Intro, 162-65): F, Weher, Jidische
Theologie, 2d ed, Leipzig, 1897; J. Klausner, Die mes-
sianischen Vorstellungen des jiid. Volkes im Zeitalter der
Tannaiten, Berlin, 1904; KR. T. Herford, Christianity
in Talmud and Midrash, London, 1903: H. L. Strack,
Jesus, die Héretiker und die Christen nach den dltesten
jid. Angaben (texts, tr, comm.), Leipzig, 1910; L.

lau, Das altjidische Zauberwesen, Budapest, 1898; M.
Lazarus, Die Ethik des Judentums, 2 vols, Frankfurt a.
Main, 1898, 1911.

(10) The Talm and the OT (Intro, 1671): G. Aicher, Das
AT in der Mischna, Freiburg i. Baden, 1906; V. Aptowit-
zer, Das Schriftwort in der rabbin. Literatur, 4 parts, Wien,
1906-11 (to he continued; various readings in the quota-
tions); P Hershon, Gen, with a Talmudical Comm.,
London, 1883.

(11) The Talm and the NT (Intro, 165-67): Joh.
Lightfoot, Horae hebraicae et talmudicae, ed Leusden,
2 vols, fol T, Franeker, 1699; Chr. Schéttgen, Horae
hebraicae et talmudicae in universum Novum Test., 2 vols,
4to, Dresden, 1733; Franz Delitzsch, ‘‘Horae hehraicae
et talmudicae,” in Zeitschrift fur die gesammte luther.
Theologie u. Kirche, 1876-78; Aug. Wiinsche, Neze
Beitrdge zur Erlduterung der Evangelien aus Talm und
Midr, Goettingen, 1878; Th. Robinson, The Evangelists
and the Mish, London, 1859; W. H. Bennett, The Mish
as Illustrating the Gospels, Cambridge, 1884; Erich
Bischoff, Jesus und die Rabbinen, Jesu Bergpredigt und
“Himmelreich” in ihrer Unabhdngigkeit vom Rabbinismus,
Leipzig, 1905. R:

(12) Jurisprudence (Intro, 169-71): J. L. Saalschiitz,
Das Mosaische Recht, 2d ed, Berlin, 1853; Jos. Kohler,
“Darstellung des talmudischen Rechts,”’ in Zeitschrift
ftir vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft, 1908, 161-264; Z
Frankel, Der gerichtliche Beweis nach mosaisch-talmud.
Rechte, Berlin, 1846; P. B. Benny, The Criminal Code
of the Jews, London, 1880; S. Mendelsohn, The Criminal
Jurisprudence of the Ancient Hebrews, Baltimore, 1891;
H. B. Fassel, Das mosaisch-rabbinische Civilrecht, Gross-
Kanischa, 2 vols, 1852-54; Das mos.-rabb. Gerichtsver-
fahren in civilrechtl. Sachen, 1859; M. Mielziner, The
Jewish Law of Marriage and Divorce, Cincinnati, 1884;
D. W. Amram, The Jewish Law of Divorce, Philadelphia,
1896; M. Rapaport, Der Talmud und sein Recht, Berlin,
1912


(13) History (Intro, 1711): J. Dereuhourg, Histoire
dela Palestine depuis Cyrus jusqu'a Adrien, Paris, 1867;


L. Herzfeld, Handelsgeschichte der_Juden des Altertums,
2d ed, Braunschweig, 1894; A. Biichler, The Political
and the Social Leaders of the Jewish Community of Sep-
phoris, London, 1909; S. Funk, Die Juden in Babylonien
200-600, 2 vols, Berlin, 1902, 1908.

(14) Medical Science (Intro, 173): Jul. Preuss, Bi-
blisch-talmudische Medizin, Berlin, 1911 (735 BP.) L.
Kotelmann, Die Ophthalmologie bei den alten Hebréern,


Hamburg, 1910 (436 pp
(15) Archaeology: Sam. Krauss, Talmudische Archdo-


logie, 3 vols, Leipzig, 1910-12.
Hermann L. Strack
TALSAS, tal’sas (A, Zaddéas, Saléas, B, Zdad-
Bas, Zdlthas; RV ‘‘Saloas’’): In 1 Esd 9 22 AV=
“Elasha”’ of Ezr 10 22.


TAMAH, ti’ma.


TAMAR, ta’mar (VOT, tamar, “palm”; B,
Onpap, Thémdr, A, Oapdp, Thamdr [so B in Gen]):

(1) The wife of Er, the eldest son of Judah
(Gen 38 6 ff). On her husband’s death under
the displeasure of Jeh, his brother Onan ought to
have performed the husband’s part, but he evaded
his duty in this respect, and likewise perished.
Shelah, the next brother, was promised to her, but
not given. This led Tamar to the extraordinary
course narrated in Gen 38 13 ff, on which see
JupaH. By her father-in-law she hecame the
mother of Perez and Zerah (AV ‘Pharez and
Zarab’’). Judah, who at first condemned her to be
burned (ver 24), was compelled to vindicate her
(vs 25.26). Through Perez she became an ances-
tress of Jesus (Gaudp, Thamdr, Mt 1 3).

(2) A daughter of David and sister of Ahsalom
(28 18 1ff). Her beauty inflamed her half-
brother Amnon with passion, and by stratagem
he forcibly violated her. This brought upon


See TEMag.


Amnon the terrible revenge of Absalom. See
ABSALOM; AMNON.

(3) A daughter of Absalom (2 8 14 27). See
Maacag. James ORR


TAMAR ("9K tamar, “palm tree’; Oatpav,
Thaimén):

(1) This name occurs in Ezekiel’s ideal delimita-
tion of the territory to be occupied by Israel (47
19; 48 28). The Dead Sea is the eastern border;
and the southern boundary runs from Tamar as
far as the waters of Meriboth-kadesh to the Brook
of Egypt and the Great Sea. The place therefore
lay somewhere to the 8.W. of the Dead Sea. ‘“Ha-
zazon-tamar (the same is En-gedi)’”’ (2 Ch 20 2) is
of course out of the question, being much too far
totheN. Onom mentions Asasonthamar, with which
Thamara was identified. This place was a village
with fortress and Rom garrison, a day’s journey
from Mampsis on the way from Hebron to Elath.
It is the Thamaro mentioned by Ptolemy (v.16, 8),
as a military station on the road from Hebron to
Petra. It is named also in the Peutinger Tables.
Neither Mampsis nor Thamaro has been identified.

(2) Among the towns “built” or fortified by
Solomon, named in 1 K 9 18, is Tamar (RV fol-
lowing K*thibh), or Tadmor (AV following Keré;
ef 2 Ch 8 4). Gezer, Beth-horon and Baalath,
named along with it, are all in Southern Pal,
while Tamar is described as in the wilderness in the
land, pointing to the Negeb or to the Wilderness of
Judah. It was probably intended to protect the
road for trade from Ezion-geber to Jerus. We may
with some confidence identify it with (1) above.
It is interesting to note that the Chronicler (2 Ch
8 4) takes it out of connection with the other cities
(ver 5), and brings its building into relation with
Solomon’s conquest of Hamath-zobah. Clearly in
his mind it denoted the great and beautiful city of
Palmyra, which has so long been known as ‘“‘Tad-
mor in the Wilderness.” W. Ewine


Tamarisk
Taralah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2908


TAMARISK, tam’a-risk: (1) DWN, ’ashel (Gen
21 33, AV “grove,” m “tree”; 1 § 22 6, AV “tree,”
m “grove’; 18 31.13, AV “tree’). The RV
tr is due to the similanty of ’éshel to the Arab.
'athl, “the tamarisk.” (2) WY, ‘ar‘ar (Jer 17
6 m [cf 48 6], EV “heath” [q.v.]). The tamarisk
(Tamarix, with various species in Pal, chiefly
T. Syriaca) is a very characteristic tree of Pal, esp.
in the Maritime Pla, near the sea itself, and in
the Jordan valley. Eight species are described.
They are characterized by their brittle, feathery
branches and by their tiny scale-like leaves. Some
varieties flourish not infrequently in salty soil
unsuited to any ordinary vegetation.

E. W. G. Masterman

TAMMUZ, tam’uz, tam’mdooz (TIAN, tammiz;
Oappott, Thammotz): :

(1) The name of a Phoen deity, the Adonis of
the Greeks. He was originally a Sumerian or Bab
sun-god, called Dumuzu, the husband of Ishtar,
who corresponds to Aphrodite of the Greeks. The
worship of these deities was introduced into Syria
in very early times under the designation of Tammuz
and Astarte, and appears among the Greeks in the
myth of Adonis and Aphrodite, who are identified
with Osiris and Isis of the Egyp pantheon, showing
how widespread the cult became. The Bab myth
represents Dumuzu, or Tammuz, as a beautiful
shepherd slain by a wild boar, the symbol of winter.
Ishtar long mourned for him and descended into
the underworld to deliver him from the embrace
of death (Frazer, Adonis, Attis and Osiris). This
mourning for Tammuz was celebrated in Babylonia
by women on the 2d day of the 4th month, which
thus acquired the name of Tammuz (see CALENDAR).
This custom of weeping for Tammuz is referred to
in the Bible m the only passage where the name
occurs (Ezk 8 14). The chief seat of the cult in
Syria was Gebal (modern Gebail, Gr Bublos) in
Phoenicia, to the 8. of which the river Adonis
(Nahr Ibrahim) has its mouth, and its source is the
magnificent fountain of Apheca (modern ‘Afka),
where was the celebrated temple of Venus or Aphro-
dite, the ruins of which still exist. The women of
Gebal used to repair to this temple in midsummer
to celebrate the death of Adonis or Tammuz, and
there arose in connection with this celebration
those licentious rites which rendered the cult so
infamous that it was suppressed by Constantine
the Great.

The name Adonis, by which this deity was known
to the Greeks, is none other than the Phoen 711%,
*Adhén, which is the same in Heb. His death is
supposed to typify the long, dry summer of Syria
and Pal, when vegetation perishes, and his return to
life the rainy season when the parched earth is
revivified and is covered with Inxuriant vegetation,
or his death symbolizes the cold, rough wimter,
the boar of the myth, and his return the verdant
spring.

Considering the disgraceful and licentious rites
_with which the cult was eclebrated, it is no wonder
that Ezekiel should have taken the vision of the
women weeping for Tammuz in the temple as one of
the greatest abomimations that could defile the Holy
House. See ADOoNIs.

(2) The fourth month of the Jewish year, cor-
responding to July. The name is derived from that
of a Syrian god, identified with Adonis (Ezk 8 14).
See above, and CaLENDAR. PorRTER


TANACH, ta/nak (F27%, ta'nakh, F22N,
ta’dnakh). See TAANAcH.


TANHUMETH, tan-hi’meth (MONI, tanhu-
meth): One of those who were left in Judah by


Nebuchadnezzar under the governorship of Ged-
aliah (2 K 25 238; Jer 40 8).

TANIS, ta/nis (Téves, Tdnis [Jth 1 10 ]). See
ZOAN.


TANNER, tan’ér (Bupoets, burseis, from Bipea,
bursa, ‘‘a hide”): The only references to a tanner are
in Acts 9 48; 10 6.32. The Jews looked upon
tanning as an undesirable occupation and well they


Dipping Skins in Vats of Sumach.


might, for at best it was accompanied with un-
pleasant odors and unattractive sights, if not even
ceremonially unclean. We can imagine that Simon
the tanner found among the disciples of Jesus a
fellowship which had been denied him before.
Peter made the way still easier for Simon by choos-
ing his house as his abode while staying in Joppa.
Simon’s house was by the seashore, as is true of the
tanneries along the Syrian coast today, so that the
foul-smelling liquors from the vats can be drawn
off with the least nuisance, and so that the salt
water may be easily accessible for washing the skins
during the tanning process. These tanneries are
very unpretentious affairs, usually consisting of one
or two small rooms and a courtyard. Within are
the vats made either of stone masonry, plastered
within and without, or cut out of the solid rock.
The sheep or goat skins are smeared on the flesh
side with a paste of slaked lime and then folded up
and allowed to stand until the hair loosens. The
hair and fleshy matter are removed, the skins are
plumped in lime, bated in a concoction first of dog
dung and afterward in one of fermenting bran, in
much the same way as in a modern tannery. The
bated skins are tanned in sumach (Arab. ary ras
summdak), which is the common tanning material
in Syria and Pal. After drying, the leather is
blackened on one side by rubbing on a solution
made by boiling vinegar with old nails or pieces of
copper, and the skin is finally given a dressing of
olive oil. In the more modern tanneries dégras is
being imported for the currying processes. For
dyeing the rams’ skins red (Ex 265 ff) they rub on a
solution of kermes (similar to cochineal; see DyzE-
ING), dry, oil, and polish with a smooth stone.
Pine bark is sometimes used for tanning in Leba-
non. According to Wilkinson (Ancient Egypt, II,
186), the Arabs use the juice of a desert plant for
dehairing and tanning skins. The skins for pouches
are either tawed, i.e. tanned with a mineral salt like
alum, or treated like parchment (see PARCHMENT).
About Hebron oak branches, chopped into small
chips, are used for tanning the leather bottles or
water skins. In this case the hair is not removed.
The tanning is accomplished, after removing the
fleshy matter, by filling the skin with oak chips and
water, tying up all openings in the skins, and allow-
ing them to lie in the open on their “backs,” with
“legs” upright, for weeks. The field near Hebron


2909


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tamarisk
Taralah


where they arrange the bulging skins in orderly
rows during the tanning process presents a weird
sight. These are the bottles referred to in AV
(RV “skins’”’) (Josh 9 4.13; Hos 75; Mt 9 17;
Mk 2 22; Lk 6 37).

Leather was probably used more extensively than
any records show. We know that the Egyptians
used leather for ornamental work. They under-
stood the art of making stamped leather. The
sculptures give us an idea of the methods used for
making the leather into sandals, trimmings for
chariots, coverings of chairs, decorations for harps,
sarcophagi, etc. There are two Bib. references to
leather, where leathern girdles are mentioned (2 K
18; Mt 3 4). See also Crarvs, II, 17.

James A. Patcu


N.W. of the territory of Judah. Tristram sug-
ested identification with ‘Artaf, about 14 miles
-E. of Zorah. G. A. Smith places it in Wédy el-

‘Afranj, possibly identifying it with Tuffah, fully

4 miles W. of Hebron. This position, however, is

not in the Shephelah. The place probably repre-

sents “Beth-tappuah” of Josh 15 53. No quite
satisfactory identification has yet been suggested.
3) A place on the border between Ephraim and

Manasseh (Josh 16 8). ‘The land of Tappuah,”

ie. the land adjoining the town, belonged to Manas-

seh, but the town itself belonged to Ephraim (17 8).

En-tappuah was prekeels a neighboring spring.

Tappuah was to the S. of Michmethath, and the

border ran from here westward to the brook Kanah.

Some would place it at Khirbet ‘Atif, about 11 miles


Dressing Hipes 1n 4 Syrian TANNERY.


TAPESTRY, tap’es-tri (O™I2, marbhaddim,
from “A, rabhadh, “to spread’): “Carpets of
tapestry” are mentioned in Prov 7 16; 31 22.
We have no means of knowing just what form of
weaving is here referred to. See WEAVING.


TAPHATH, ta’fath (DP, faphath): Daughter
of Solomon and wife of Ben-abinadab (1 K 4 11).


TAPHON, ta’fon.


TAPPUAH, tap’ii-a, ta-pi’a (IMB, tappich,
“apple”’):

(1) A royal city of the Canaanites, the king of
which was slain by Joshua (12 17). It is named
between Beth-el and Hepher, and may possibly be
identical with the city named in Josh 16 8; see
(3) below. There is nothing to guide us to a

ecision.

(2) (Omitted by LXX.) A city in the Shephelah
of Judah (Josh 16 34). It is named between En-
gannim and Enam in a group of cities that lay in the


See TEPHon.


N.E. of Nablus. More probably it should be sought
to the 8S.W. of the plain of Makhneh (Michmethath).
It may be identical with Tephon, which, along with
Timnath, Pharathon, and other cities, Bacchides
fortified ‘‘with high walls and gates and bars”
(1 Macc 9 50). No identification is possible.
W. Ewina

TAPPUAH (O80, tapputh; B, Oarots, Thapots,
A, @addot, Thaphphoti, Luc., PeOpov0, Phethrowith):
A “son” of Hebron (1 Ch 2 43).


TARAH, tia’ra, tar’a (Nu 33 27f AV).
TERA,


See


TARALAH, tar’ald (MONA, tar'dlah; B,
Oapefra, Thareéla, A, Oapadd, Tharald): A town in
the territory of Benjamin named between Irpeel
and Zelah (Josh 18 27). Onom (s.v. “Therama’’)
simply says it was in the tribe of Benjamin. In
the times of Eusebius and Jerome, therefore, the
site was already lost, and has not since been re-
covered.


Tarea
Targum


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2910


TAREA, ta’ré-a, ta-ré’a (DIN, ta’dré", a
copyist’s mistake [1 Ch 8 35] for YJOM, tahdre,
“the shrewd one,” in 1 Ch 9 41; B, Oepée, Therée,
A, Qapée, Tharée, Luc., @apda, Tharda; in 1 Ch
9 41, B, Oapax, Thardch, A, @apé, Thard, Luc.,
@apaa, Tharda; see Taurma): A descendant of
ou ee in a genealogy of Benjamin (1 Ch

41).


TARES, tarz (ifdwa, zizdnia [Mt 13 25 ff],
m “darnel”): Zizania is eqnivalent to Arab,
zuwan, the name given to several varieties of darnel
of which Lolium itemulentum, the “bearded darnel,”’


Bearded Darnel (Lolium temulentum).


is the one most resembling wheat, and has been
supposed to be degenerated wheat. On the
near approach of harvest it is carefully weeded out
from among the wheat by the women and children.
Zuwan is commonly used as chickens’ food; it is
not poisonous to human beings unless infected
with the mold ergot.


TARGET, tar’get. See Marx.


TARGUM, tar’gum (DUAN, targiim):


Meaning and Etymology of the Term
. Origin of the Targums
. Language of the Targums
Mode in Which the Targums Were Given
. Date of the Targums
. Characteristics of the Different Targums
(1) Onkelos—the Man
Characteristics of His Targum
(2) Jonathan ben Uzziel—the Man
Characteristics of His Targum—Earlier Prophets;
Later Prophets
(3) Hig ionra phe. Psalms, Job and Proverbs
(a) The Méghilloth
(b) Chronicles
(4) The Non-official Targums—-Jonathan hen Uzziel
and the Pentateuch
7. Use of the Targums
LITERATURE


The Targums were explanations of the Heb
Scriptures m Chaldaic (Western Aram.) for the
benefit of those Jews who had partially or com-
pletely ceased to understand the sacred tongue.


POP 09 toe


By Gesenius the word m*thurgdm, which occurs in
Ezr 4 7, is interpreted as derived from ragham, “to
pile up stones,” “to throw,” hence “to

i. Meaning stone,” and then “‘to translate,” though


and Ety- no example is given. Jastrow derives
mology of it from the Assyr r-g-m, “to speak
the Term aloud,” an etymology which suits the


origin of the Tgs. It is unfortunate
that he gives no reference to any Assyr docnment.

The word turgamanu is found, e.g., in the Am Tab
(Berlin ed, 21, 1. 25, Knudtzon, 154), with the meaning
“interpreter.’’ It may, none the less, be of Aram. origin.
See Mase-Avnolt. Concise Dict. Assyr Language, 1191f,
and the references there given.

The word is used as the Aram. interpretation of
shiggayon (Ps 7 1), a term the precise force of which
is yet unfixed. From this rdgham comes m*turgh*-
man, “an interpreter,’ and our modern ‘‘dragoman.”
Whatever the original meaning of the root, the
word came to mean “to translate,” “to explain.”

At the time when Nebuchadnezzar carried the
inhabitants of Jerus and Judah captive to the

banks of the Tigris and the Euphrates,


2. Origin the language of everyday life in Assyria
of the and Babylonia had ceased to be that
Targums which has come down to us m the


cuneiform inscriptions, and had become
Aram., the lingua franca of Southwestern Asia.
It was the language of diplomacy, of business and
of social intercourse, and had long been so. Dwell-
ing in the midst of those who used Aram. alone, the
Jews soon adopted it for every occasion save
worship. In the family they might retain their
mother tongue for a time, but this would yield at
length to continuons pressure from without. In Pal
a similar process had been going on in the absence
of the captives. Intruders from various neighbor-
ing peoples had pressed in to oceupy the blanks left
by the removal of the Jewish captives to Babylon.
Although it is not recorded, it is not impossible that
following the example of the Assyrians, Nebuchad-
nezzar may have sent into Judaea compulsory colo-
nists from other parts of hisempire. The language
common to all these, in addition to their native
dialect, was Aramaic. The Jewish inhabitants that
had been left in the land would, like their rela-
tives in Babylonia, have become accustomed to the
use of Aram., to the exclusion, more or less com-
plete, of Hebrew. Another process had begun among
the captives. Away from the site of their destroyed
temple, the exiles did not, like those in Upper
Egypt, erect another temple in which to offer sacri-
fices. Their worship began to consist in the study
of the Law in common, in chanting of the Psalms
and united prayers. This study of the Law implied
that it should be understood. Though some form
of synagogue worship was known in the times pre-
ceding the captivity under the direction probably
of the prophets (2 K 4 23), it must have become
weak and ineffective. With the arrival of Ezra
there was a revival of the study of the Law, and
with that the necessity for the imterpretation of it
in language which the people could understand.
From the facts above narrated, this language was
of necessity Aramaic. There were, however, forces
at work to modify the language. A
3. Lan- tr is liable to be assimilated so far, to
guage of the the language from which it is made.
Targums Thus there is a difference, subtle but
observable, between the Eng. of our
AV of the Bible and that of Shakespeare, Bacon, or
even Hooker. Or, to take an example more cognate,
if less accessible to the general reader, the difference
may be seen if one compares the Syr of the NT Pesh
with that of the Pesh of the OT. The Aram. of the
Tgs is Western Aram., but it is Western Aram.
tinctured with Hebrew. The fact that the returned


2911


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tarea
Targum


captives originally had spoken Heb would doubt-
less have its effect on their Aramaic. German
in Jewish lips becomes Yiddish. One very marked
feature is the presence of yath, the sign of the accusa-
tive translating the Heb ’@h, whereas in ordinary
Aram., Eastern and Western, this is unused, except
as supporting the oblique case of pronouns. Fur-
ther, the intensive construction of infinitive with
finite sense, so frequent in Heb, though little used in
ordinary Aram., appears in the Tgs wherever it
occurs in the Heb text. As a negative character-
istic there is to be noted the comparative rarity
with which the emphatic repetition of the personal
pronoun, so frequent in ordinary Aram., occurs in
the Targumic.
The account given in Neh (8 8) of the reading of
the Law to the people not only mentions that Ezra’s
helpers read ‘distinctly’ (m*phérdsh)
4. Mode in but “gave the sense’ (sim sekhel) “and
Which the caused them to understand the read-
Targums _ing,” AV (wayyabhina ba-mikra@’). This
Were Given threefold process implies more than
merely distinct enunciation. If this
passage is compared with Ezr 4 18 it would seem
that, m*phérash ought to mean “interpreted.” The
most natural explanation is that alongside of the
readers of the Law there were interpreters, m*tur-
gh*manim, who repeated in Aram. what had been
read in Heb. What interval separated this public
reading of the Law from the reading of the Law as
a portion of synagogue worship we have no means
of knowing. The probability is that in no long time
the practice of reading the Law with an Aram.
interpretation was common in all Jewish synagogues.
Elaborate rules are laid down in the Talm for this
interpretation; how far these were those actually
used we cannot be absolutely certain. They at
least represent the ideal to which after-generations
imagined the originators of the practice aspired.
The Law was read by the reader verse by verse, and
each verse was followed by a recitation by the
méturgh'man of the Aram. version. Three verses
of the prophetic books were read before the Aram.
was recited. The Talmudists were particular
that the reader should keep his eye on the roll from
which he read, and that the m*turgh*man should
always recite his version without looking at any
writing, so that a distinction should be kept between
the sacred word and the version. At first the Tg
was not committed to writing, but was handed
down by tradition from m*turgh’man to m‘turgh*man.
That of the Law became, however, as stereotyped
as if it had been written. So to some extent was
it with the Prophets and also the Psalms. The
Tes of the rest of the Kethdbhim seem to have
been written from the beginning and read in pri-
vate. .
We have assumed that the action of Ezra nar-
rated in Neh 8 8 implied not only the reading of
the Law, but also the interpretation of


5. Date its language—its tr in fact from Heb
of the to Aram., and that, further, this prac-
Targums _ tice was ere long followed in all the


synagogues in Judaea. This view is
maintained by Friedmann (Onkelos u. Akylas, 1896)
and was that assumed to be correct by the Talm.
Dr. Dalman assures his readers that this is a mis-
take, but without assigning any reasons for his
assertion. Dr. Dalman is a very great authority,
but authority is not science, so we venture to
maintain the older opinion. The fact is undeniable
that, during the Pers domination all over South-
western Asia, Aram. was the lingua franca, so much
so that we see by the Assouan and Elephantine
papyri the Jewish garrison at Assouan in Egypt
wrote to their co-religionists in Judaea, and to the
Pers governors, in Aramaic. Moreover, there is no


trace that they used any other tongue for marriage
contracts or deeds of sale.


We may assume that in Judaea the language commonly
used in the 5th cent. BC was Aramaic. We may neglect
then the position of Mr. Stenning (H#ne Brit [11th ed],
XXVI, 418b) that ‘“‘probabiy as eariy as_ the 2d cent.
BC the people had adopted Aramaic."’ By that time
Aram. was giving piace to Greek. His reason for rejecting
the position above maintained is that the dates assigned
by criticism to certain prophetic writings conflict with
it—a mode of reasoning that seems to derive facts from
theories, not theories from facts.


The fact that the necessity for tr into Aram.
existed in the Pers period implies the existence of
the m°*turgh’man and the targum. It is more
difficult to know when these Tgs were committed
to writing. Itis probable that the same movement,
which led Jehidah ha-Nasi’ to commit to writing
the decisions of the rabbis which form the Mish,
would lead to writing down the Tgs—that is to say
late in the 2d cent. of our era. Aram. was dis-
appearing in Pal and the traditional renderings
would be liable to be forgotten. Talmudic stories
as to dates at which the various Tgs were written
down are absolutely valueless.

The Tgs that require most to be considered are
the official Tgs, those that are given in the rabbinic

Bibles in columns parallel with the


6. Char- columns of Hebrew. In addition, there
acteristics isfor the Law the Targum Y*rishalmi,
of the another recension of which is called
Different Targum Yonathan ben Uzziel. The
Targums Book of Est has two Tgs. Besides


these, Tgs of doubtful value have been
written by private individuals. Certain books
have no official Tgs: Dnl, Ezr, Neh and Ch. The
reason for this is supposed to be that in both Dnl
and Ezr there are portions written in Aramaic. Neh
and Ch were regarded as forming one book with
Ezr. A late Tg on Ch has been found and published
separately. Some of the apocryphal additions to
Est appear in a late Tg to that book. The official
Tgs of the Law and the Prophets approach more
nearly the character of tr*, though even in them
verses are at times explained rather than tr¢. The
others are paraphrastic to a greater or less degree.
(1) Onkelos—This is the name given to the
official Tg of the Pent. The legend is that it was
written by one Onkelos, a proselyte son of Kalony-
mus cr Kalonikus, sister’s son of Titus. He was
associated with the second Gamaliel and is repre-
sented as being even more minutely punctilious in
his piety than his friend. The legend goes on to say
that, when he became a proselyte, his uncle sent
company after company of soldiers to arrest him,
but be converted them, one after another. It is
at the same time extremely doubtful whether there
ever was such @ person, a view that is confirmed
by the fact that legends almost identical are related
of Aquila, the translator of the Heb Scriptures
into Gide The names are similar, and it may be
are identical. While there may have been a per-
son so named, the admission of this does not imply
that he had any connection with the Tg of the Pent
named after htm. Another explanation is that as
the Gr version of Aquila was much praised by the
Jews for its fastidious accuracy, and this Tg of
the Law was credited with equally careful accuracy,
so all that is meant is that it was regarded as a
version which as accurately represented in Aram. the
Heb of the Law as did Aquila’s Greek. The proba-
bility is that whoever it was who committed the Tg
to writing did little or no actual translating. It
might not be the work of one unassisted author;
the reference to the guidance Onkelos is alleged to
have received from the rabbis Eliezer and Joshua
suggests this. Owing to the fact that the Law was
read through in the course of a year in Bab (once in


Targum


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2912


three years in Pal) and every portion interpreted
verse by verse in Aram., as it was read, the very words
of the traditional rendering would be remembered.
This gives the language of the Tg an antique flavor
which may be seen when it is compared with that of
the Palestinian lectionary discovered by Mrs. Gibson
and Mrs. Lewis. Esp. is this observed when the
renderings of the same passage are put in comparison,
Both in vocabulary and grammar there isa difference;
thus mar occurs for shallét, and yath as the sign of
the accusative has disappeared in the lectionary.
An analogy may be seen iu the antique flavor of the
language of our Eng. Bible, even in RV. If any
credence were to be given to the traditional account
of the alleged authors, the date of this Tg would be
the end of the Ist cent. AD. But we have seen that
it has been named Aquila and that the title means
“a3 accurate as Aquila.” He, however, lived in the
beginning of the 2d cent. His Gr version must have
already gained a reputation before the Aram. Tg
appeared. We cannot therefore date the actual
committing of this Tg to writing earlier than late in
the 2d cent., not improbably, as suggested above,
contemporary with the writmg down of the Mish
by Jehtdah ha-Nasi’.


The characteristics of this Tg are In general close
adherence to the original, sometimes even to the extent
of doing violence to the genius of the language into which
it has been tr4. One prominent example of this is the
presence of yath as the sign of the accusative; and there
is also the intensive construction of infinitive with finite
tense. There is a tendency to insert something he-
tween God and His worshipper, as ‘'mim®ra' Jeh” instead
of simply ‘‘Jeh."’ Where anthropomorphisms occur,
an exact tr is not attempted, but the sense is represented
in an abstract way, as in Gen 11 5, where instead of
“The Lord (YH WH] came down” there is ''The Lord
[yiya’] was revealed." tthe same time there is not_a
total avoidance of paraphrase. In Gen 47 the Tg
renders, ‘‘If thou doest thy work well, is it not remitted
unto thee? if thoy doest not thy work well, thy sin is
reserved unto the day of judgment when it will be
required of thee if thou do not Teen but if thou repent
it shall be remitted to_thee.’”’ It will be observed that
the last clause of the Heb is omitted. So in Gen 3 22,
instead of ‘‘Man has become as one of us,’' Onkelos
writes ‘‘Man has become alone in the world by himself
to know good and evil.” more singular instance
occurs in Gen 27 13, where Rebekah answers Jacob,
**Upon me he thy curse, my son'’; in the Tg it is, ‘‘ Unto
me it hath been said in prophecy, there shall be no curse
upon thee my son.'’ Sometimes there is a mere explan-
atory expansion, as in Ex 3 1, where instead of “the
mount of God,’’ Onkelos has ‘'the mountain on which
the glory of the Lord was revealed.'’ In the mysterious
passage, Ex 4 24-26, later Jewish usage is brought in to
make an easy sense: ‘And it was on the way in the inn
[house of rest] that the angel of the Lord met him and
sought to slay him. And Zipporah took a flint knife and
cut off the foreskin of her son and came near before him
and said ‘In the blood of this circumcision is the bride-
groom given hack to us,' and when therefore be had
desisted she said, ‘Had it not been for the hlood of this
circumcision the bridegroom would have been condemned
to die.''' Here hathdn (‘‘bridegroom’') is used_according
to later custom of the child to be circumcised. Sometimes
reasons of propriety come in, as when the sin of Onan
ls described ‘corrupting his way on the earth." It is,
however, in the poetical passages that the writer gives
loose rein to paraphrase. As an example the blessing
of Judah in Jacob's blessing of his sons may be given:
“Judah, thou art praise and not shame; thee thy brethren
shall praise. Thy hands shall he strong upon thine
enemies, those that hate thee shall be scattered; they
shall be turned back before thee; the sons of thy father
shall come before thee with salutations. [Thy] rule shall
be in the beginning, and in the end the kingdom shall he
increased from the house of Judah, because from the
judgment of death, my son, thy soul hast thou removed.
He shall rest, he shall abide in strength, as a lion and as
a lioness there is nothing may tronble him. The ruler
shall not depart from the house of Judah nor the scribe
trom his son's sons for ever till the Messiah come whose
1s the kingdom and whom the heathen shall obey. Israel
shall trade in his cities, the people shall build his temple,
the saints shall be going about to him and sball be doers
of the Law through his instruction. His raiment shall
he goodly crimson; his clothing covering him, of wool
dyed bright with colours. His mountalns shall be red

th his vineyards, his hills shall flow down with wine,
and his valleys shall be white with corn and with flocks


of sheep.”’
Committed to writing in Pal, the Tg of Onkelos


was sent to Babylon to get the imprimatur of the
famous rabbis residing there. There are said
to be traces in the language of a revision by the
Bab teachers, but as this lies in the prevalence of
certain words that are regarded as more naturally
belonging to Eastern than Western Aram., it is too
restrictedly technical to be discussed here. The
result of the Bab sanction was the reception of this
Tg as the official interpretation of the books of the
Law. It seems probable that the mistake which
led to its being attributed to Onkelos was made
in Babylon where Aquila’s Gr version was not
known save by vague reputation.

(2) The Tg of Jonathan ben Uzziel on the Proph-
ets—This Jonathan, to whom the Tg on the
Prophets is attributed, is declared to be one of the
most distinguished pupils of Hillel. The prophetic
section of the Bible according to the Jews contains,
besides what we ordinarily reckon prophetic books,
also all the earlier historical books except Ruth,
which is placed among the Hagiographa. During
the persecution of the Jews by Epiphanes, when the
Law was forbidden to be read in the synagogue,
portions of the Prophets were read instead. ‘There
was no attempt to read the whole of the Prophets
thus, but very considerable portions were used
in worship. This necessitated the presence of the
méturgh’man. If one might believe the Talmudic
traditions, Jonathan’s Tg was committed to writing
before that of Onkelos. Jonathan is regarded
as the contemporary of the first Gamaliel, whereas
Onkelos is the friend of Akiba, the contemporary of
Hadrian. The tradition is that when he published
his Tg of the Prophets, all Pal was shaken, and a
voice from heaven was heard demanding, ‘‘Who is
this whe revealeth my secrets to the sons of men?”
As an example of the vagueness of Talmudic
chronology, it may be mentioned that Jonathan was
said to have made his Tg under the guidance of
Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi. He is said to
have desired to write a Tg of the K*thubhim, but’
was forbidden by a voice from heaven. The Tg
of Job was said to have been already written, but
was buried by Gamaliel. It is said to have been
exhumed and that the present Tg on that book is
from Jonathan’s hand. The tomb of Jonathan ben
Uzziel is shown on the face of a hill to the N. of
Safed, Palestine.

In the former Prophets—the_ historical books—the
style does not differ much from that of Onkelos. Occa-
sionally there are readings followed which are not in the
MT, as Josh 8 12, where the Tg has '‘the west side of
Ai" instead of asin the MT, ‘the west side of the city.”
Sometimes two readings are combined, as in 8 16, where
the MT has ‘‘all the people which were in the city,”
the Tg adds “in Ai.’ Again, the Tg translates proper
names, as, in Josh 7 5, “‘Shebarim” (sh*bhdrim) is
rendered ‘‘till they were scattered.’ Such are the
variations to be seen in the narrative portion of the T;
of the earlier Prophets. When, however, a poetic
piece occurs, the writer at times gives rein to his imagina-
tion. Sometimes one verse is exceedingly paraphrastic
and the next an accurate rendering without any addi-
tion. In the song of Deborah (Jgs 5) the 1st verse
has only a little of paraphrase: “Thon sang praises
Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on account of
the lifting up and deliverance which had heen wrought
In that day, saying . . . .'' The verse which follows is
yoy paraphrastic; instead of the 7 words of the verse
in the MT the Tg has 55. It is too long to quote in full,
but it begins, ‘Because the house of Israel_ rebelled
against His Law, the Gentiles came up upon them and
disturbed their assemblies, and because they refused
to obcy the Law, their enemies prevailed against them
and drove them from the borders of the land of Israel,"
and so on, Sisera and all his host being introduced.
Ver 3 reads thus, ‘Hear O kings who are with him,
with Sisera for war, who obey the officers of Jabin the
king of Canaan; with your might and your valour ye
shall not prevail nor go up against Israel, said I Deborah


in prophecy before the Lord. I will sing praise and
bless hefore Jeh the God of Israel.” oriiee oa


The later prophets are more paraphrastic as a
whole than the earlier, as having more passages


2913


with poetic metaphors in them—a fact that is made
plain to anyone by the greater space occupied in
the rabbinic Bibles by the Tgs of the Prophets. A
marked example of this tendency to amplify is to be
found in Jer 10 11: “Thus shall ye say unto them,
The gods that have not made the heavens and the
earth, these shall perish from the earth, and from
under the heavens.” As this verse is in Aram. it
might have been thought that it would have been
transferred to the Tg unchanged, but the Targumist
has made of the 10 words of the original text 57.
Sometimes these expansions may be much shorter
than the above example, but are illuminative,
showing the views held by the Jewish teachers.
In Isa 29 1, “Ho Ariel, Ariel, the city where David
encamped!” the Tg has “Woe to the altar, the
altar which David built in the city in which he
dwelt.”’ In this rendering we see the Jewish
opinion that ‘Ariel,’ which means “lion of God,”
in this connection stood for the “altar” which David
erected in Jerus. It seems unlikely that this whole
Tg ‘was the work of one writer, but the style gives
little indication of difference. The paraphrase of
the synagogal haphtarath being traditional, the style
of the person who committed it to writing had little
scope. The language represents naturally an older
stage of development than we find in the cou-
temporary Christian lectionaries. As only portions
of the Prophets were used in synagogue worship,
only those portions would have a traditional render-
ing; but these fixed the style. In the RV of the
Apoc the 70 verses which had been missing from 2
Esd 7 are tr’ in the style adopted by the trans-
lators under King James. It is impossible to fix
the date at which the Tg of any of the ea oo
books was written down. It is probable that it
was little if at all after that of Onkelos. The com-
pletion of the paraphrases of the prophetic writings,
of which only portions were used in the synagogue,
seems to imply that there were readers of the Aram.
for whose benefit those Tgs were made.

(3) The Tgs of the third division of the Heb
sacred writings, the K*thibhim (the Hagiographa),
are ascribed to Joseph Caecus, but this is merely a
name. There is no official Tg of any of the Hagi-
ographa, and several of them, Dnl, Neh and Ezz, as
above noted, haveno Tgatall. Those of the longer
books of this class, Pss, Prov and Job, are very
much closer to the text than are the Tgs of the
Mghilldth. In the Pss, the paraphrase is explana-
tory rather than simply expansive. Thus in Ps
991, “ye sons of the mighty” is rendered “ye
companies of angels, yesons of the mighty.” Ps 23
is further from the text, but it also is exegetic;
instead of “Jeh is my shepherd, I shall not want,”
the Tg reads, ‘‘The Lord nourished His people in the
wilderness so that they lacked nothing.” So the
last clause of the last verse of this ps 1s, “I shall
indeed dwell in the house of the holiness of the Lord
for the length of days.” Another example of
exegesis is Ps 46 4, in which the “river whose
streams make glad the city of our God” is explained
as “‘the nations as rivers making glad the city of
Jeh.”? Much the same may be said of Job, so
examples need not be given. :

The Tg of Prov has been very much influenced by
the Pesh; it may be regarded as a Jewish recension
of it. Those of the five M¢ghilloth, as they _are
called, Song of Songs, Ruth, Lam, Eccl, and Est,
are excessively paraphrastic. If one compare the
space occupied by the text of Cant and Prov, it will
be found that the former occupies about one-sixth
of the latter; if the Tgs of the two books are com-
pared in Lagarde’s text, the Cant _is two-thirds of
Prov. So Lam occupies in the MT less than_a
quarter the space which Prov occupies; but the Tg
of Lam is two-fifths the size of the Tg of Prov.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Targum


Ruth has not suffered such a dilatation; in the text
it is a fifth, in the Tg a fourth, the size of Prov.
The expansion mainly occurs in the first verse in
which ten different famines are described. Eccl
in the MT uses about three-eighths of the space
occupied by Prov. This is increased to five-sixths
in the Tg. There are two Tgs of Est, the first
about five-sixths the size of Prov, the second,
nearly double. The textis under one-half. Wesub-
join the Tg of Lam 1 1 from Mr. Greenup’s tr:
Jeremiah the prophet and high priest said: ‘How
ig it decreed against Jerus and against her Reople
that they should be condemned to exile and that
lamentation should be made for them? How?
Just as Adam and Eve were condemned who were
ejected from the garden of Eden and over whom the
Lord of the universe lamented. How? God the
judge answers and speaks thus: ‘Because of the
multitude of the sins which were in the midst of her,
therefore she will dwell alone as the man in whose
flesh is the plague of leprosy dwells alone! And the
city that was full of crowds and many people hath
been deserted by them and become like a widow.
And she that was exalted among the peoples and
powerful among the provinces, to whom they paid
tribute, hath been scattered abroad so as to be op-
pressed and to give tribute to them after this.’”
‘This gives a sufficient example of the extent to which
expansion can go. Ver 1 of Est in the first Tg
informs us that the cessation of the work of building
the Temple was due to the advice of Vashti, and
that she was the daughter of Evil-merodach, the
son of Nebuchadnezzar, and a number of equally
accurate pieces of information. Yet more extrava-
gant is the 2d Tg; it begins by asserting that there
are ten great monarchs of whom Achhashverosh
waa the 6th, the Gr and Rom were the 7th and the
8th, Messiah the king the 9th, and the Almighty
Himself the 10th. It evidently has no connection
with the first Tg. The Tg of Ch, although late,
is modeled on the Tgs of Jonathan ben Uzziel. In
cases where the narrative of Ch runs parallel with
that of S the resemblance is very great, even to
verbal identity at times. The differences some-
times are worthy of note, as where in 1 Ch 21 2,
instead of “Dan” the Tg has ““Pameas” (Paneas),
which affords an evidence of the lateness of this
Tg. In the rabbinic Bible, Ch appear, as do Ezr,
Neh and Dol, without a parallel Tg.

(4) There is a Tg on the Pent attributed to Jonathan
ben Uzziel which is very paraphrastic. Fragments of
another closely related ‘Tg have been preserved, known
as the Jerus Tg. In fact the two may really be regarded
as different recensions of the same ae It is supposed
that some MS was denominated simply ‘'the targum of
J," which, really being the initial Te presenting “ Jerusa-
lem,’”’ was taken as representing ‘‘Jonathan.” At the
end of each of the books of the Pent it is stated that this
Tg is the ‘“‘targum Y¢rishalmi."" Of the two the Y¢ri-
shalmi is the longer. Both assert that five signs accom-
panied Jacob in his stay in Haran: the time was short-
ened; the distance was shortened; the four stones for his
pillow hecame one; his strength was increased so that
with his own arm he moved the stone covering the well
which it took all the shepherds to move; the water
gushed from the well all the days he dwelt in Haran.
But the narrative of hen Uzziel is expanded to nearly
twice the length in the Y*rishalmi. ‘This Tg may be re-
garded as to some extent semi-official.

As the Tgs appear to have been committed to
writing after the MT was fixed, textual differences

are few and unimportant. Kohn


7. Use mentions that in a few cases Onkelos
of the agrees with the Sam against the MT;
Targums they are, however, few, and possibly


may be explained by differences of
idiom, though from the slavish way in which
Onkelos follows the Heb text this is improbable.
The Pal Tg agrees with the Sam and the VSS in
adding “Let us go into the field” in Gen 4 8. The
main benefit received from the Tgs is the knowledge


Tarpelites
Tarsus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2914


of the views of the Jewish rabbis as to the mean-
ing of certaiu passages. Thus in Gen 49 10 there
is no doubt in the mind of the Targumist that
“Shiloh” refers to the Messiah. Some other cases
have been noted above. The frequency with which
the word of the Lord (mimera’ yya’) is used in
Onkelos as equivalent to Y H WH, as Gen 8 8,
“They heard the voice of the word of the Lord God,”
mimera dheytyd ’Hlohim, requires to be noted
from its bearing on Christian theology. There is
a peculiar usage in Gen 151: YHWH says
to Abraham, ‘Fear not, Abram, my word [mi%m*ra’]
shall help thee.’ Pharaoh is represented as using
this periphrasis: ‘The word of the Lord [mim¢ra’
y*ya@’| be for your help when I send away you and
your little ones’ (Ex 10 10). A striking use of
this phrase is to be found in Dt 33 27, where in-
stead of ‘Underneath are the everlasting arms,”
we have “By His word the world was made.”
This is at once seen to resemble the usage of Philo
and the apostle John. As the Tgs had not been
committed to writing during the hfetime of either
of these writers, it might be maintained that the
Targumists had been influenced by Philo. This,
however, does not follow necessarily, as both apostle
and philosopher would have heard the Tg of the Law
recited Sabbath after Sabbath from their boyhood,
and the phrase mim*r@ y*ya’ would remain in their
memory. The Tgs of the pseudo-Jonathan and
that of Jerus have a yet more frequent use of the
term. Edersheim has counted 176 occurrences
of the phrase in Onkelos and 321 in that of the
pseudo-Jonathan and in the fragments of the
Yerishalmi 99. This is made the more striking by
the fact that it rarely occurs in the rest of Scripture.
In Am 1 2, instead of ‘‘Jeh . will utter his
voice from Jerus,’’ we have ‘From Jerus will He
lift up His word” (mémerth). The usual equivalent
for the prophet’s formula ‘‘the word of the Lord” is
pithjam YHWH. An example of the usage
before us may be found in Ps 66 4.10: “In the
righteousness of the judgment of God will I praise
his word” (mém‘rih). There was thus a preparation
for the Christian doctrine of the Trinity imbedded
in the most venerated Tg, that of the Law.


Literature.—The text of the_ official Tgs is to be
found in every rabbinic Bible. Berliner bas published
a careful, vocalized edition of Onkelos. The Prophets
and the Hagiographa have been edited by Lagarde, but
unvocalized. For the language Petermann’s grammar
in the Porta Linguarum Orientalium is useful. Levy's
Chalddisches Wérterbuch is very good. Jastrow's Diet.
of the Targumim is invaluable. Brextorf’s Lezricon
Talmudicum supplies information not easily available
elsewhere. The Tgs on the Pent have been tr by Ether-
jdge. There is an extensive lit. on this subject in Ger-
man. In Eng. the different Bible Dicts. may be con-
sulted, esp. McClintock, DB, HDB, HB, etc. The art. in
Enc Brit is worthy of study, as also naturally that in
the Jew Enc.

J. E. H. TuHomson


TARPELITES, tar’pelits (N"2B70, farp‘laye’
[Ezr 4 9]): Various theories have been advanced
as to the identity of the Tarpelites. Rawlinson
suggested the Tuplai, which name appears in the
inscriptions as equivalent to the Gr TiBapyvol,
Tibarénoi, a tribe on the coast of Pontus. Hitzig
located them in Tripolis in Northern Phoenicia.
The latest theory emends the text to NMODD,
tiphs*raya@’, “tablet-writers” (from the Assyr dup
sarru); ef Schrader, COT, on Jer 61 27.


TARSHISH, tar'shish (W"WN, tarshish):

(1) Eponym of a Benjamite family (1 Ch 7 10);
B, ‘Payeroal, Rhamessai, A and Luc., Oapecls,
Tharsets.

(2) One of the “seven princes” at the court of
Ahasuerus (Est 1 14 MT).

(3) The Heb name of a precious stone (Ezk 10
9m, EV “beryl”; Ex 28 20; 39 13; Ezk 1 16;


'
28 18; Cant 5 14; Dnl 10 6).


See Stongs, Pre-
cous.


TARSHISH, NAVY (SHIPS) OF. See Suips
anv Boats, II, 1, (2).


TARSUS, tar’sus (Tapoés, Tarsés, ethnic Tapocis,
Tarsets):
1. Situation
2. Foundation Legends
8. Tarsus under Oriental Power
4. Tarsus under Greek Sway
5. Tarsus in the Roman Empire
6. The University :
7. The Tarsian Constitution
8. Paul of Tarsus
9. Later History
LirvERATURE

The chief city of Cilicia, the southeastern portion
of Asia Minor. It lay on both banks of the river

Cydnus, in the midst of a fertile
1. Situation alluvial plain, some 10 miles from the
seacoast. About 6 miles below the

city the river broadened out into a considerable
lake called Rhegma (Strabo xiv.672), which afforded
a safe anchorage and was in great part fringed with
quays and dockyards. The river itself, which
flowed southward from the Taurus Mountains with
a clear and swift stream, was navigable to light craft,
and Cleopatra, when she visited Antony at Tarsus
in 38 BC, was able to sail in her richly decorated
barge into the very heart of the city (Plut. Ant. 26).
The silting-up of the river’s mouth seems to have
resulted in frequent floods, against which the
emperor Justinian (527-65 AD) attempted to pro-
vide by cutting a new channel, starting a short
distance N. of the city, to divert the surplus water
into a watercourse which lay to the E. of Tarsus.
Gradually, however, the original bed was allowed to
become choked, and now the Cydnus flows wholly
through Justinian’s channel and passes to the E. of
the modern town. Two miles N. of Tarsus the
plain gives way to low, undulating hills, which
extend to the foothills of Taurus, the great mountain
chain lying some 30 miles N. of the city, which
divides Cilicia from Lycaonia and Cappadocia.
The actual frontier-line seems to have varied at
different periods, but the natural boundary lies
at the Cilician Gates, a narrow gorge which Tarsian
enterprise and engineering skill had widened so as to
make it a wagon road, the chief highway of com-
munication and trade between Cilicia and the
interior of Asia Minor and one of the most decisive
factorsin Anatolian history. Eastward from Tarsus
ran an important road crossing the Sarus at Adana
and the Pyramus at Mopsuestia; there it divided,
one branch running southeastward by way of Issus
to Antioch on the Orontes, while another turned
slightly northward to Castabala, and thence ran
due E. to the passage of the Euphrates at Zeugma.
Thus the fertility of its soil, the safety and con-
venience of its harbor and the command of the
main line of communication between Anatolia
and Syria or Mesopotamia combined to promote .
the greatness of Tarsus, though its position was
neither a healthful or a strong one and the town had
no acropolis.

Of the foundation of the city various traditions were


current in antiquity, and it is impossible to arrive at
any certain conclusion, for such foundation


2. Founda- legends often reflected the sympathies
tion and wishes of a city’s later population

rather than the historic facts of its origin.
Legends At Anchiale, 2bout 12 miles S.E. of Tarsus,


was &@ monument commonly known as the

tomb of Sardanapaius, king of Assyria, bearing an in-
scription ‘In Assyr ietters" stating that that monarch
built Anchiale and Tarsus iu a singie day” (Strabo xiv.
672; Arrian Anab. fi.5). The statement of Alexander
Polyhistor, preserved by Eusebius (Chron. 1, p. 27, &
Schoeue), that Sennacherlb, king of Nineveh (705-681
BC), founded the city, also ascribes to it an Assyr origin.


2915


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tarpelites
Tarsus


On the other hand, the Greeks had their ewn traditions,
claiming Tarsus as a Gr or semi-Gr feundatien. Straho
says that it owed its rise to the Argives whe wlth Tri-
ptolemus wandered in search of Io (xiv.673), while others
spoke of Heracles or Perseus as the founder. It must
be admitted that these tales, taken by themselves, give
us little aid.


_ Ramsay believes that Tarsus existed from time
immemorial as a native Cilician settlement, to
which was added, at some early date


3. Tarsus unknown to us, a body of [onians,
under which migrated from the western coast
Oriental of Asia Minor under the auspices and
Power direction of the oracle of Clarian Apollo


near Colophon. The earliest historical
record of the town is found on the Black Obelisk
of Shalmaneser, about 850 BC, where it figures
among the places captured by that king. It is
thus proved that Tarsus already existed at that
remote date. For many centuries it remained an
oriental rather than a Hellenic city, and its his-
tory is almost a blank. After the fall of the
Assyr empire, Cilicia may have regained its in-
dependence, at least paul but it subsequently
became a province of the Pers empire, paying to
the Great King an annual tribute of 360 white
horses and 500 talents of silver (Herod. iii.90) and
contributing considerable fleets, when required, to
the Pers navy. From time to time we hear of rulers
named Syennesis, who appear to have been vassal
princes in a greater or less degree of dependence
upon the oriental empires. Two clear glimpses of
the city are afforded us, thanks to the passage
through it of Hellenic troops engaged upon eastern
expeditions. Xenophon (Anab. 1.2, 21 ff) tells how,
in 401 BC, Cyrus the Younger entered Cilicia on
his famous march against his brother Artaxerxes,
and how some of his Gr mercenaries plundered
Tarsus, which is described as a great and prosperous
city, in which was the palace of King Syennesis.
The king made an agreement with Cyrus, who,
after a delay of 20 days, caused by the refusal of
his troops to march farther, set out from Tarsus
for the Euphrates. Again, in 333 BC, Alexander
the Great passed through the Cilician Gates on
his way to Issus, where he met and routed the Pers
army under Darius III. Arsames, the satrap of
Cilicia, failed to post a sufficient force at the pass,
the garrison fled without resistance and Alexander
thus entered the province without striking a blow.
The Persians thereupon set fire to Tarsus, but the
timely arrival of the Macedonian advance guard
under Parmenio saved the city from destruction.
A bath in the cold waters of the Cydnus which
Alexander took while heated with his rapid ad-
vance brought on a fever which all but cost
‘bim his life (Arrian Anab. ii4; Q. Curtius Hist.
Alea. iii.4f). For two centuries Tarsus had been the
capital of a Pers satrapy, subject to oriental rather
than to Hellenic influence, though there was
probably a Hellenic element in its population,
and its trade brought it into touch with the
Greeks. The Cilician coins struck at Tarsus con-
firm this view. Down to Alexander’s conquest,
they ordinarily bear Aram. legends, and many of
them show the effigy of Baal Tarz, the Lord of
Tarsus; yet these coins are clearly influenced by
Gr types and workmanship.
Alexander’s overthrow of the Pers power brought
about a strong Hellenie reaction in Southeastern


Asia Minor and must have strength-


4, Tarsus ened the Gr element in Tarsus, but
under more than a century and a half were
Greek to elapse before the city attained that
Sway civic autonomy which was the ideal


and the boast of the Gr pélis. After
Alexander’s death in 323 BC his vast empire was
soon dismembered by the rivalries and wars of his


powerful generals. Cilicia ultimately fell under the
rule of the Seleucid kings of Syria, whose capital
was Antioch on the Orontes. Though Greeks, they
inherited certain features of the old Pers policy and
methods of rule; Cilicia was probably governed
by a satrap, and there was no development within


dVO


25


&
S299


es
So,


i<-] 3
SSP 00 557%,


Coin of Tarsus.


it of free city life. Early in the 2d cent., however,
came a change. Antiochus III, defeated by the
Romans in the battle of Magnesia (190 BC), was
forced to evacuate most of his possessions in Asia
Minor. Cilicia thus became a frontier province
and gained greatly in importance. The outcome
was the reorganization of Tarsus as an autonomous
city with a coinage of its own, which took place
under Antiochus IV Epiphanes (175-164), probably
in 171 BC. It is at this time that Tarsus is first
mentioned in the Bible, unless we are to accept the
disputed identification with TarsHisH (q.v.)._ In
2 Mace 4 30f we read that, about 171 BC,
‘Gt came to pass that they of Tarsus and Mallus
made insurrection, because they were to be given as
a present to Antiochis, the king’s concubine. The
king therefore came to Cilicia in all haste to settle
matters.” That this settlement took the form of
a compromise and the grant to Tarsus of at least
a municipal independence we may infer from the
fact that Tarsus struck its own coins from this
reign onward. At first they bear the name of
Antioch on the Cydnus, but from the death of
Antiochus this new appellation falls into disuse and
the old name reasserts itself, But it is almost
certain that, in accordance with Seleucid policy, this
reorganization was accompanied by the enlarge-
ment of the citizen body, the new citizens in this
case consisting probably of Jews and Argive Greeks.
From this time Tarsus is a city of Hellenic consti-
tution, and its coins no longer bear Aram. but Gr
legends. Yet it must be remembered that there
was still a large, perhaps a preponderating, native
and oriental element in the population, while the
coin types in many cases point to the continued

popularity of non-Hellenic cults.
About 104 BC part of Cilicia became a Rom
province, and after the Mithridatic Wars, during
which Tarsus fell temporarily into the


5. Tarsus hands of Tigranes of Armenia, Pompey
in the the Great reorganized the eastern
Roman portion of the Rom Empire (64-63
Empire BC), and Tarsus became the capital of


a new and enlarged province, admin-
istered by Rom governors who usually held office
for a single year. Thus we find Cicero in command
of Cilicia from the summer of 51 BC to the summer
of the following year, and though he expressly
mentions Tarsus only rarely in his extant letters
of this period (e.g. Ad Alt. v.20.3; Ad Fam. ii.17.1),
yet there is reason to believe that he resided there
during part of his year of office. Julius Caesar
passed through the city in 47 BC on his march from
Egypt to Pontus, and was enthusiastically received.
In his honor the name Tarsus was changed to
Juliopolis, but this proved no more lasting than
Antioch on the Cydnus had been. Cassius tempo-


Tarsus
Tattler


rarily overawed it and imposed on it a, crushing fine,
but, after the overthrow of the republican cause
at Philippi and the assignment of the East to An-
tony’s administration, Tarsus received the position
of an independent and duty-free ‘state (civitas
libera et immunis) and became for some time
Antony’s place of residence. This privileged
status was confirmed by Augustus after the victory
of Actium had made him sole master of the Rom
Empire (31 BC). It did not by itself bestow Rom
citizenship on the Tarsians, but doubtless there
were many natives of the city to whom Pompey,
Caesar, Antony and Augustus granted that honor
for themselves and, as a consequence, for their
descendants.
It is under the rule of Augustus that our knowl-
edge of Tarsus first becomes fairly full and precise.
Strabo, writing about 19 AD, tells us
6. The (xiv.673 ff) of the enthusiasm of its
University inhabitants for learning, and esp.
for philosophy. In this respect, he
says, Tarsus surpasses Athens and Alexandria
and every other university town. It was character-
ized by the fact that the student body was composed
almost entirely of natives, who, after finishing
their course, usually went abroad to complete their
education and in most cases did not return home,
whereas in most universities the students were to a
large extent foreigners, and the natives showed no
great love of learning. Alexandria, however, formed
an exception, attracting a large number of foreign
students and also sending out many of its younger
citizens to other centers. In fact, adds Strabo,
Rome is full of Tarsians and Alexandrians. Among
the famous men who learned or taught at Tarsus,
we hear of the Stoics Antipater, Archedemus,
Nestor, Athenodorus surnamed Cordylion, the
friend and companion of the younger Marcus Cato,
and his more famous namesake (called Cananites
after the village of his birth), who was the tutor
and confidant of Augustus, and who subsequently
reformed the Tarsian constitution. Other philoso-
phers of Tarsus were Nestor, a representative of
the Academy, and tutor of Marcellus, Augustus’
nephew and destined successor, and of Tiberius,
Plutiades and Diogenes; the latter was also famous
as ab improvisatore, and indeed the Tarsians in
general were famed for their ease and fluency in
impromptu speaking. Artemidorus and Diodorus
the grammarians and Dionysides the tragie poet,
a member of the group of seven writers known as
“the Pleiad,’’ complete Strabo’s list of eminent
Tarsians. A less attractive view of the lifein Tarsus
is given by Philostratus in his biography of Apollo-
nius of Tyana, who went there to study in the early
part of Tiberius’ reign (14-37 AD). So disgusted
was he by the insolence of the citizens, their love
of pleasure and their extravagance in dress, that
he shook the dust of Tarsus off his feet and went
to Aegae to pursue his studies in a more congenial
atmosphere (Vit. Apollon. i.7). But Strabo’s testi-
mony is that of a contemporary and an accurate
historian and must outweigh that of Philostratus,
whose work is largely tinged with romance and
belongs to the early years of the 3d cent. AD.
Strabo also tells us something of an important
constitutional reform carried out in Tarsus under
the Emperor Augustus, probably about
7. The 15-10 BC. Athenodorus Cananites,
Tarsian the Stoic, returned to his city as an
Constitution old man, after some 30 years spent at
Rome, armed with authority from the
emperor to reform abuses in its civic life. He found
the constitution a democracy, swayed and preyed
upon by a corrupt clique headed by a certain
Boethus, “bad poet and bad citizen,” who owed
his position partly to his ready and persuasive


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2916


tongue, partly to the favor of Antony, whom he had
pleased by a poem composed to celebrate the
victory of Philippi. Athenodorus sought at first
to mend matters by argument and persuasion, but,
finding Boethus and his party obdurate, he at
length exercised his extraordinary powers, banished
the offenders and remodeled the constitution, prob-
ably in a timocratic mold, restricting the full
citizenship to those possessed of a considerable
property qualification. On his death, his place as
head of the state was taken for a while by the
academic philosopher Nestor (Strabo xiv.674 f).
Next to Strabo’s account our most valuable source
of information regarding Tarsus is to be found in
the two orations of Dio Chrysostom addressed to
the Tarsians about 110 AD (Orat. xxxil, xxxlv;
see Jour. Hell. Studies, XXIV, 58 ff). Though ad-
mitting that the city was an Argive colony, he
emphasized its non-Hellenic character, and, while
criticizing much in its institutions and manners,
found but a single feature to commend, the strict-
ness with which the Tarsian women were veiled
whenever they appeared in public.
Such was Tarsus, in which Paul was born (Acts
22 3) and of which he was a citizen (Acts 9 11;
21 39). Its ancient traditions and
8. Paul of its present greatness explain and
Tarsus justify the pride with which he claimed
to be “a citizen of no mean city”
(Acts 21 39). It is probable that his forefathers
had been among the Jews settled at Tarsus by
Antiochus Epiphanes, who, without sacrificing
nationality or religion, became citizens of a com-
munity organized after the Gr model. On what
occasion and for what service Rom civitas had
been conferred on one of Paul’s ancestors we cannot
say; this only we know, that before his birth
his father had possessed the coveted privilege (Acts
22 28). It is a fascinating, but an elusive, quest
to trace in Paul’s life and writings the influence of
his Tarsian ancestry, birth and early life. Jerome,
it is true, claims that many Pauline words and
phrases were characteristic of Cilicia, and some
modern scholars profess to find traces, in the apostle’s
rhetoric and in his attitude toward pagan religion
and secular learning, of Tarsian influence. But
such speculations are likely to be misleading, and it
is perhaps best to admit that, save in the trade
learned by Paul, which was characteristic of his
birthplace, we cannot with any precision gauge the
effects of his early surroundings. At the same time
it is certain that the character of his native city, its
strong oriental element, its Gr constitution and
speech, its position in the Rom Empire, its devotion
to learning, must have made an impression upon one
who, uniting Jewish nationality with membership
of a Gr state and Rom citizenship, was to be the
great interpreter to the Graeco-Rom world of a
religion which sprang from the soil of Judaism.
How long Paul remained at Tarsus before beginning
his studies in Jerus we cannot say. His own
declaration that he was “born in Tarsus of Cilicia,
but brought up in this city” (Acts 22 3) seems to
show that his training at Jerus began at an early
age, and is inconsistent with the supposition that
he was one of those Tarsian students who, after
studying at their native university, completed their
education abroad. During his first visit to Jerus
after his conversion, plots were formed against his
life, and he was induced to return to Tarsus (Acts
9 30), where, according to Ramsay’s chronology,
he remained for some 8 years. Thither Barnabas
went to seek him when he felt the nced of a helper in
dealing with the new problems involved in the


rowth of the Antiochene church and the admission .


into it of Gentiles in considerable numbers (Acts
11 25). Tarsus is not again mentioned in the NT,


2917


but Paul doubtless revisited it on his second mis-
sionary journey, when he ‘‘went through Syria and


Cilicia” (Acts 15 41), and traveled thence by way
of the Cilician Gates into Lycaonia, and again at
the beginning of his third journey when, after
some time spent at Antioch, “he departed, and went
through the region of Galatia, and Phrygia, in
order” (Acts 18 23).

This is not the place to discuss in detaii the later history


of Tarsus, many passages of which are obscure and dlffi-
cult. It remained a focus of imperial loy-


9. Later alty, as is indicated by the names Hadriane,
a Commodiane, Severiane and others, which
Hist
IStory appear, isolated or conjoined, upon its


coins, together with the title of metropolls
and such epithets as ‘‘first,” ‘greatest,’ ‘‘fairest.”’
Indeed It was chiefiy in the matter of such distinctions
that it carried on a keen, and sometimes bitter, rivalry,
first with Mallus and Adana, its neighbors in the western
lain, and later with Anazarbus, the chief town of
astern Cilicia. But Tarsus remained the capital of the
district, which during the Ist cent. of the empire was
united with Syria in a single imperial province, and when
Cilicla was made & separate province Tarsus, as a matter
of course, became its metropolis and the center of the
provincial Caesar-worship, and, at_a later date, the
capital of ‘the three eparchiae,”’ Cilicia, Isaurla and
Lycaonia. Toward the close of the 4th cent. Cilicia was
divided into two,and Tarsus became the capltal of Cilicia
Primaonly. Soon after the middle of the 7th cent. it was
captured by the Arabs, and for the next three centuries
was occupied by them as their northwestern capital and
base of operations against the Anatolian plateau and the
Byzantine empire. In 965 it was recaptured, together
with the rest of Cilicia, by the emperor Nicephorus Phocas,
but toward the close of the following century it fell into
the hands of the Turks and afterward of the Crusaders.
It was subsequently ruled by Armenian princes as part
of the kingdom of Lesser Armenia, and then by the
Memluk sultans of Egypt, from whom it was finally
wrested by the Ottoman Turks early in the 16th cent.
The modern town, which still bears the ancient name in
the slightly modified form Tersodvs, has a very mixed
population, numbering about 25,000, and considerable
trade, but suffers from its ealthful situation and
the proximity of large marshy tracts. Few traces of its
ancient greatness survive, the most considerable of them
belng the vast substructure of a Graeco-Rom temple,
known locally as the tomb of Sardanapalus (R. Koldewey
in C. Robert, Aus der Anomta, 178 ff).
LiteraturE.—The best account of Tarsus will be
found in W. M. Ramsay, The Cities of St. Paul (London,
1907), 85-244; the same writer's arts. on ‘Cilicia,
Tarsus and the Great Taurus Pass’’ in the Geographical
Journal, 1903, 357 ff, and on ‘'Tarsus’’ in HDB should also
be consulted, as well as H. Béhlig, Die Geisteskultur von
Tarsos im augusteischen Zeitalter (GOttingen, 1913). For
inscriptions see LeBas-Waddington, Voyage archéologique,
III, nos. 1476 ff; Inscr. Graec. ad res Rom. pertinentes,
III, 876 ff. For coins, B. V. Head, Historia Numorum?,
729 ff; G. F. Hill, British Museum Catalogue of Coins:
Lycaonia, Isauria and Cilicia, Ixxvi ff, 162 ff


M. N. Top
TARTAK, tar’tak (PIA, tartak): In 2 K 17
31 mentioned as the name of an idol of the Avvites,
one of the peoples sent by Shalmaneser to the cities
of Samaria. It is otherwise unknown.


TARTAN, tar’tan Gm, tartan): For a long
time the word was interpreted as a proper name,
but the Assyr inscriptions have shown it to be the
title of a high official, From the eponym lists
it would seem that it was the title of the highest
official next to the king, which in a military empire
like Assyria would be the “commander-in-chief.”
The Assyr form of the name is tartanu or turtanu.
In both OT passages the reference is to a military
officer. In Isa 20 1 it is used of the officer sent
by Sargon, king of Assyria, against Ashdod; ac-
cording to 2 K 18 17, Sennacherib sent Tartan
and Razsaris (q.v.) and RaBsHakEH (q.v.) with
a great host against Jerus. The names of the two
officials are not known. F. C. EIseven


TASKMASTER, task’mas-tér (00 int) , Sar mas,
“chief of the burden” or “levy” [Ex 1 11]; 22,
naghés, ‘‘distress,’’ “‘driver,’”’ “oppressor,” “raiser
of taxes,” “taskmaster” [Ex 3 7; 5 6.10.13.14)):
Officials of this class seem to have been officially


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tarsus
Tattler


appointed by Pharaoh for the purpose of oppressing
the Israelites and subduing their spirits, lest they
seek complete independence or organize a rebellion
against the government (Ex 1 11). The condition
of the Israelites at this time became one of complete
vassalage or slavery, probably owing to the fact
that the Hyksos were driven out and a new dynasty
was established, which knew nothing of Joseph and
his people. Frank E. Hirscu


TASSEL, tas”1 (M¥"% , cigith): This word occurs
only in Nu 15 38 (RVm), which reads “tassels
in the corners” for “fringes in the borders of their
garments” (AV).

It is probable that the dress of the Palestinian
peasant has undergone little change in the centuries
since the occupation of the land by the Hebrews.
His outer garment, worn for protection against
cold and rain, is the simlah of Ex 22 26, now known
as ’abdyah by the Arabs. It is a square cloak, with
unsewn spaces for armholes, and is composed of
either three or four widths of woven stuff. The
outer strips of the stuff, folded back and sewn
at the upper edges, form shoulder-straps. It was
to such a garment as this that the injunctions
of Nu 16 37-41 and of Dt 22 12 applied. See
FRINGES. W. Saaw Caupecorr


TASTE, tast (Heb OY, fa‘'am, ‘‘the sense of
taste,” “perception,” from BYD, fa'am, “to taste,”
“to perceive’; Aram. BYQ, t‘ém, “flavor,” “taste”
[of a thing]; Heb JT, hekh, “palate,” “roof of the
mouth” =“taste’; yetopat, geiomai; noun yetors,
geusis; im 2 Macc 7 1 the vb. is ébdaropa., ephdp-
tomat):

(1) Literal: (a) Gustation, to try by the tongue:
“The taste [ta‘am] of it [manna] was like wafers
made with honey” (Ex 16 31); ‘Doth not the ear
try words, even as the palate [hekh] tasteth [fa‘am]
its food?” Job 12 11); ‘Belshazzar, while he tasted
lit. “at the taste of,” &‘ém] the wine, commanded
to bring the golden and silver vessels which Nebu-
chadnezzar his father had taken out of the temple
which was in Jerus; that the king and his lords,
his wives and his concubines, might drink there-
from’ (Dn! 5 2). (b) “To sample,” “to eat but a
small morsel’: “I did certainly taste [fa‘am] a
little honey with the end of the rod that was in my
hand; and, lo, I must die” (1 8 14 43).

(2) Figurative: “To experience,” ‘‘to perceive”:
“Oh taste and see that Jeh is good” (Ps 34 8;
ef 1 Pet 2 3); “How sweet are thy words unto
my taste!” (m “palate,” hékh) (Ps 119 103); ‘That
by the grace of God he should taste of death for
every man” (He 2 9); “For as touching those who
were once enlightened and tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Spirit,
and tasted the good word of God, and the powers
of the age to come . 2? (6 4.5).

H. L. E. Luerine

TATTENAI, tat’eni CIRM, tattnay, various
forms in LXX; AV Tatnai, tat’ni, tat’nd-I): A Pers
governor, who was the successor of Rehum in Sama-
ria and some other provinces belonging to Judah,
bordering on Samaria. He governed the provinces
during the reign of Darius Hystaspis and Zerubbabel
(Ezr 6 3.6; 6 6.13). He was friendly to the Jews,
and when he heard adverse reports from Jerus he
suspended judgment till he had investigated the
matter on the ground, and then reported to the Pers


government in a very moderate manner. In 1 Esd
6 3.7.27; 7 1 he is called “Sisinnes.”
8. L. UmBacw


TATTLER, tat’lér: Only in 1 Tim 5 13 for
@dvapos, phiiaros. A “‘silly talker,” rather than
a “revealer of secrets,” is meant.


Tav
Tax, Taxing


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2918


TAV, tiv. See Taw.


TAVERNS, tav’érnz, THREE:


Three Taverns (Lat Tres Tabernae, Gr trans-
literates treis tabérnat; Cicero Ad Alt. 1.18; ii.12,
13) was a station on the Appian Road at the 33d
milestone (303 Eng. miles from Rome), according
to the Itineraries of the Rom Empire (Itin. Ani.
vii; Tab. Peut.; Geogr. Rav. iv.34), a converging
point of traffic at the crossing of a road from Antium
to Norba. ‘Tripontium, 6 miles down the Appian
Road in the direction of Appii Forum, was reckoned
as the point where the highway entered the region
of the Pontine marshes, the most notable natural
feature of this part of Italy.

Parties of the Christian brethren in Rome went
out to greet the apostle Paul when news was
brought that he had arrived at Puteoli, one group
proceeding as far as Appii Forum, while another
awaited his coming at Three Taverns (Acts 28
15). Grorce H. ALLEN


TAW, tau (FM, t, 1, th): The 22d letter of the Heb
alphabet; transliterated in this Encyclopaedia with
the daghesh as t, and as th without. It came also to
be used for the number 400. For name, etc, see
ALPHABET; see also ForeHEap; Marx.


TAX, taks, TAXING, taks’ing:


I. INTRODUCTION
1. General Considerations
2. Limits of the Discussion

Il, Taxes 1n JsRAEL UNDER SELF-GOVERNMENT

1. In the Earliest Period

2. Under the Theocracy; in the Period of the Judges

3. Under the Kings

Taxes IN ISRAEL UNDER CONQUERORS

1. Under the Assyrians and Babylonians

2. Under the Persians

3. Under the Ptolemies and Seleucid Kings

4. Under the Romans

L. Introduction.—Taxation, in the sense of regu-

lar, graduated imposts levied by authority upon
wealth, whether in the form of flocks

1. General and herds, tilled lands or accumulated

Consider- _ treasure, isa comparatively late product

ations of social evolution. The beginnings of
this trouble-breeding institution are,

of course, very ancient. If in the beginning all

wealth was common wealth, all property vested in

the family or tribe, making any kind of levies un-

necessary, with the rise of individualism, the pro-

rata setting aside, for common uses, of certain pos-

sessions held as private property by individuals,

which is the essence of taxation, is inevitable.

With the advent of more advanced civilization, by

which is meant fixed residence, systematic use and

cultivation of defined and limited territory, estab-

lished political organization centering in rulers of

one kind or another, regular taxation must neces-

sarily have begun. ‘Throughout history the burden

of taxation has kept pace with the elaboration of

the machinery of government; kings, courts, cere-

monials, legislative and judicial administration,

wars, diplomacy—all these institutions spell ex-

pense and, consequently, taxation. In a very real

gense, the history of taxation is the history of civili-

zation.

In followmg the history of taxation in the Bible,

two lines of development are to be noted: Israel’s
internal history when left to herself,

2. Limits and her experiences as tributary to

of the successive conquerors. These two

Discussion lines of experience form the main
divisions of this article. We shall con-

fine ourselves so far as possible to the civil aspects

of the subject, leaving for others those interesting

problems of taxation connected with the origin and


Il.


development of the priestly legislation. See
Tira, ete.

IL. Taxes in Israel under Self- Government.—In
the first glimpses of the ancestors of the Heb
people given us in the Bible, no such institution
as taxation appears.


Like all primitive communities, the nomadic Hebrews
had no regular system of taxation nor use for any. Vol-
untary presents were given by the less to


1. In the the more powerful in return for protection
Earli or other advantages. These are really

arliest ominous words, for even as late as the
Period United Kingdom, when, of a certainty, the


‘voluntary element had long since gone ont,
the royal income was spoken of, with perhaps uncon-
scious Irony, as ‘presents’ (1 8 10 27; 1 K 4 21;
10 25). One great taproot of the whole after-develop-
ment of systematic taxation is to be found in this primi-
tive custom of giving presents (Gen 82 13-21; 33 10;
43 11). The transition is so fatally easy from presents
voluntarily given to those which are expected and finally
to those which are demanded (2 K 16 8; cf17 4, where
AV has ‘“‘presents"’).


The first evidence of what corresponds to com-
pulsory taxation discoverable in the Bible is in
connection with the conquered Canaanites who
were compelled to serve under tribute, that is, to
render forced labor (Josh 16 10; 1718; Jgs 1
98-35). In the early custom of making presents
to the powerful and in the exactions laid upon con-
quered peoples, with the necessary public expense
of community life as the natural basis, we have the
main sources of what grew to be institutional tax-
ation.

The only fixed impost under the theocracy which
has a semi-civil character was the so-called ‘“atone-

ment money” (Ex 80 11-16), really a


2. Under _poll-tax amounting to a half-shekel
the Theoc- for each enrolled male member of the
racy and community above 20 years of age.
Judges The proceeds of this tax were to be


used for the service of the Tent of
Meeting (see TABERNACLE). It seems to have
been levied by the authorities and accepted by the
people whenever faithfulness to the ordinances of
Jeh was the order of the day (2 Ch 24 4-14; Neh
10 32; note here the emphasis laid upon the offer-
ing as voluntary, and the variation in amount from
one-half to one-third shekel). In later times this
tax was devoted to the service of the temple, and
was paid by Jews at a distance during the Disper-
sion. Jos speaks of the large amounts accruing to
the temple-treasury from this source (Ani, XIV,
vii, 2). It was still collected as the distinctive
temple-tax levied upon the citizen as such (Mt 17
24). It is interesting to note that Jesus paid it
under protest and with one of the most distinctive
of His miracles, on the ground of His being the
founder and head of a new temple, and hence not
subject_ to the impost which was the badge of
citizenship in the old order.

The period of the Judges was too disorganized and
chaotic to exhibit many of the characteristics of a settled
mode of procedure. As far as we know the only source
of public moneys was the giving of presents. If the
action of Gideon (Jgs 8 24) is to be taken as indicating
the ordinary policy of the period, the judges rcceived
nothing more than a share of the spoil taken in battle.
The account emphasizes, evidently with purpose, the


fact that Gideon proffers a request (ver 24), and that the
people respond freely and gladly.


As was to be expected, taxation assumes far
greater prominence the moment we cross the thresh-
old of the kingdom. 1 8S 8 10-18 is

8. Under equally significant for our purpose
the Kings whether it was, as appears on the face
: of the narrative, the actual words of
warning uttered by Samuel in view of the well-
known attitude of kings in general, or a later recen-
sion from the viewpoint of experience. In either
case, the passage gives us a fairly exhaustive list
of royal prerogatives. Aside from various forms


2919


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tav
Tax, Taxing


of public and private service, the king would take
(note the word) the best of the vineyards, etc,
together with a tenth of the seed and of the flocks.
The underlying principle, suggested by Samuel’s
summary and fully exemplified in the actions of
Israel’s kings, is that the king would take what he
needed for his public and private needs from the
strength and substance of his people. Constitu-
tional laws regulating the expenditure of public
funds and the amount of exactions from the people
in taxation seem never to have been contemplated
in these early monarchies. The king took what he
could get; the people gave what they could not
hold back. The long battle for constitutional
rights has centered from the beginning about the
matter of taxation.

In 19 10 27 (cf 2 Ch 17 5) the case cited of worth-
less fellows who brought Saul no present clearly shows
that fealty to the new king was expressed in the giving
of presents. The refusal to make these so-called presents
was an act of coustructlive treason, so interpreted by the
writer, who mentions Saul’s silence in the premises as
something notahle. It is evident that the word ‘pres-
ent'’ has become euphemistic. In 1S 17 25 exemp-


tion from taxatlon |s_ specifically mentioned, together
with wealth and marriage into the royal family, as one


element in the reward to he obtained for ridding Israel .


of the menace of Goliath.

In David's time an unhroken series of victories in
war so enriched the public treasury (see 2 8 8 2.7.8)
that we hear little of complaints of excessive taxation.
If Davld’s census was for fiscal purposes (24 2), we can
understand why he was so severely dealt with for it, but
the matter is still ohscure. David's habit of dedicating
spoll to Jeh (8 10-12) kept the sacred treasury well


supplied. Solomon undoubted} inherited David's
scale of public expense (1 Ch 27 25-31) and added to
jt through his well-developed love of luxury and power.


At the same time the cessation of war made the develop-
ment of internal resources for carrying on-his ambitious
schemes Imperative. The boundaries of his kingdom
are specified (1 K 4 21 [Heb § 1]) together with the
amount of his income (1 K 10 14.28; cf 2 K 8 4).
It is also stated that other kingdoms paid tribute to
him. His system of fiscal administration was very
thoroughly organized. He put the whole country under
twelve officers (to specify one feature) whose business
jt was to provide, by months, provisions for the court
(i K 4 7-19). Under Solomon also, for the first time,
so far as we know, Israclites were compelled to render
forced Jahor (1 K § 13-17). By the end of his reign
the burden of taxation had become so severe that in the
public address made to Rehohoam the people demanded
@ lightening of the ‘grievous service’ of Solomon as
the condition of their fealty to his successor. Reho-
boam's foolish answer of defiance precipitated the sepa-
ratlon of the tribes which proved in the end so dis-
astrous. During the period of prophetic activity which
follows, one recurring specification in the denunciations
uttered by the prophets against the kings was the ex-
cessive burden of taxation imposed upon the people.
Amos speaks of ‘‘exactions of wheat taken from the
poor” (§ 11; cf 2 6-8). In 7 1 he incidentally refers
toa custom which has grown up of rendering to the king
the first mowings of grass. Isaiah speaks of eating up
the vineyards and taking the spoil of the poor (3 14).
Micah, with even greater severity, denounces rulers ‘‘ who
eat the flesh of my people’’ (8 1-4). These citations
are sufficient to show that all through the later monarchy
the Israelites suffered more or less from official rapacity
and injustice.


HW. Israel under Conquerors.—During the reign


of Menahem, who succeeded Jeroboam ITI as king
of Israel, the Assyr invasion under


1. Assyria Tiglath-pileser III (Bib. ‘“Pul,”’ 2 K
and 15 19) began. The one act of Mena-
Babylonia hem (aside from his general sinfulness)


which is specified in 2 K 16 17-22,
the remainder of his unedifying career being left to
the Chronicles of the kings of Israel, is that he
bought off the Assyr conqueror by a tribute of a
thousand talents which he obtained by mulcting
men of wealth in his kingdom to the extent of fifty
talents each. A little later, Ahaz of Judah sent a
present to the same ruler. He took the novel
method of robbing the temple-treasury and adding
the sum thus gained to the accumulations at hand
in the royal treasury. Both these kings were some-
what original in their methods. Hoshea of Israel,
a contemporary of Ahaz, was reduced to tribute;


later, upon his neglect to pay, he was put in prison
(2 K 17 4). A little later still, Jehoahaz, the son
of Josiah, was deposed by Pharaoh-necoh, who
placed a tribute upon the land of a hundred talents
of silver and one of gold (2 K 23 31-33). Je
hoiakim, the puppet king, raised this tribute by a
special tax upon the people (vs 34.35). This latter
passage is especially intcresting because it seems to
indicate (vs 35f) a graduated system of taxation
supposedly honored more often in the breach than
in the observance. This same unfortunate Je-
hoiakim came under the heavy hand of Nebuchad-
nezzar (2 K 24 1-7). This latter ruler seems not
to have levied a special tribute, at least it is not
mentioned; but reimbursed himself for the expenses
of conquest by carrying away to Babylon the ves-
sels of the temple (2 Ch 36 7).

In Ezr 4 13, a part of a letter addressed to Ar-

taxerxes by officials ‘west of the river’ (see whole

passage vs 7-24) who were hostile to
2. Under the Jews, it is charged that in the
the Persians event of rebuilding the city the in-

habitants would not pay “tribute,
custom, or toll.’ These three words, which are
evidently combined in a formula and indicate three
distinct classes of taxes, are interesting as being
characteristic of the Pers period.

The three words are: (1) FU, midd&h =" tribute”
(Ezr 4 13.20; cf Neh § 4, where the expression is
‘‘king’s tribute”); (2) 153, b¢l6 =according to Gesenius
s.v.: "tax on articles consumed” or ‘excise’ (HDB “im-
post") (Ezr 4 13.20; 7 24}; (3) ial , hdlakh =" road-
toll’ or ‘‘custom tax’ (Ezr 4 13.20; 7% 24). These
Assyr words are to be contrasted with the words used
elsewhere: (1) O74, mes =‘forced lahor” (1 K § 13
[Heb § 27]; cf ut sup. Josh 16 10; 17,13; Jgs 1 28.
30.33.35; Dt 20 11; Est 10 1); (2) Nu, massa’ =
“burden” (2 Ch 17 11); (8) OD72, mekhes =" measure,”
used of tribute exacted for Jeh, faken from people, cattle,
and spoil, ete (Nu 81 25-31). From this enumeration
and comparison it will be seen that the Heb had no gen-
eral word corresponding to the Eng. word ‘‘tax."’

To return to the situation in the Pers period, it
is evident that the Pers rulers exacted practically
the same classified tributes, direct and indirect, that
are found elsewhere. It is recorded that Artaxerxes,
in response to the letter of his officers in Pal (Ezr
4 21), stopped the work of the rebuilding of Jerus
in anticipation of the refusal of the Jewish leaders
to pay taxes. The work was resumed in the 2d
year of Darius under the protection of a royal decree
which gave to the Jewish authorities a sufficient
amount from the “tribute beyond the river” to finish
without delay.

Artaxerxes, in addition to his generous gifts,
exempted the priests and temple-servants from all
taxation (Ezr 7 24). In the days of Nehemiah a
serious condition arose. The king’s tribute was so
heavy that the Jewish common people were com-
pelled to borrow money upon mortgages, and in so
doing fell into the hands of usurers of their own
people, by whom they were so impoverished as to
be compelled to sell their sons and daughters into
slavery (Neb 6 1-13). In addition to the royal
tribute, they were forced to support the governors
who were entitled to bread, wine and forty shekels
of silver annually (vs 14.15). In the prayer of-
fered on the fast day (Neh 9) it was asserted that
their burdens of taxation were so heavy that they
were servants in their own land (vs 36.37).

The Ptolemies, who practically controlled Pal
from 301 to 218 BC, do not appear to have becn
excessive in their demands for tribute (twenty
talents for Jews [Ant, XII, iv, 1] seems no great
amount), but the custom which they introduced,
or at least established, of farming the taxes to the
highest bidder, introduced a principle which pre-


Tax, Taxing
Teach, Teaching


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2920


vailed through all the subsequent history and was | center in a general way about the term “publican.”


the cause of much popular suffering and discontent.
The story of Joseph, the Jewish tax-


3. Under collector (Ant, XII, iv, 1-5), who was
the Ptole- for 23 years farmer-general of taxes
miesand for Pal under Ptolemy Euergetes,
Seleucid and the cause of ‘‘a long train of
Kings disasters,’”’ is peculiarly significant for


the student of the NT.

The conquest of Pal by Antiochus the Great

(202 BC) brought a certain amount of relief to the
“storm-tossed’’ (Jos) Jews of Pal, as of old the
buffer state between contending powers. Accord-
ing to Jos (Ant, XII, iii, 3), Antiochus gave the
Jews generous gifts in money, remitted their taxes
for three years, and permanently reduced them one-
third (see Kent’s discussion of the credibility of
these statements, Historical Series for Bible Stu-
dents, Bab, Pers, Gr Periods, 296).
_ That the Seleucid kings were particularly severe
in their exactions is clearly shown in the letter of
Demetrius to the Jews, whose favor he was seeking
in rivalry with Alexander Balas of Smyrna, the pre-
tender to the Seleucid throne (see 1 Mace 10 26-
30; 11 34.35; 13 39; cf 11 28). :

In this quoted letter Demetrius promises the followlng
exemptions: from (1) ‘‘tributes'’’ (¢6po, phéroi =“ poli-
taxes"); (2) tax on salt; (3) crown taxes (ordpava,
stéphanot =“‘crowns of gold’ or their equivalents):
{4) the tribute of one-third of the seed; (5) another of
one-half of the frult of the trees (10 29.30). This seems
almost incredibly severe, but evideuce is not lacking of
its probability (Lange's Comm. Apoc, ed 1901, 525).
With Seleucus IV (187-176 BC) the Jews felt for the
first time, indlrectly but powerfully, the pressure of
Rome. This disreputable ruler had to pay tribute to
Rome as well as to find means whereby to gratify his
own passion for luxury, aud was Ue Ve acd rapa-
clous in the treatment of his subjects (2 Macc 3).


During the early part of the Herodian epoch,
taxes were paid to the king and collected by offi-
cers appointed by him. This method
4. Under which worked fairly well, at least
the Romans under Herod the Great, had passed
away before any books of the NT were
written. After the deposition of Archelaus (6 AD),
at the request of the Jews themselves, Judaea was
incorporated into the Rom empire and put under
procurators who were in charge of all financial ad-
ministration, although the tetrarchs still collected
the internal taxes. This fact conditions all that
is to be said about ‘‘tribute” and ‘“‘publicans” in
connection with the NT. It is to be noted first
of all (a fact that is often overlooked by the
student) that in the imperial era the direct taxes
were not farmed ont, but collected by regular im-
perial officers in the regular routine of official duty.
The customs or tolls levied upon exports and im-
ports, and upon goods in the hands of merchants
paasing through the country, were sold to the highest
bidders, who were called ‘‘publicans.”’

With this distinctlon clearly In mind we may dlismlss
the subject of genera] taxation with the following
remarks: First, that the taxes in Judaea went to the
imperial treasury (Mt 22 17; Mk 12 14; Lk 20 22);
second, that these taxes were very heavy. These two
facts explaln why the question of paying tribute to
Caesar, which Our Lord was obliged to meet, was so
burning an issue. It touched at ouce religious aud
financial interest—a powerful combination. In 7 AD,
immediately after the appointment of Coponius as proc-
urator, Quirinius (see Quirinius, NT Chronology, ote
was sent to Judaea to take a census (aroypady, apographé
for the purpose of a poll-tax (xjvaos, kénsos, épos,
phéros, OF émnepadacov, epikephdlaion [Mt 22 17; Mk 12
13.14; Lk 20 20ff]). This census was the occasiou for
the bloody uprising of Judas of Gamala (or Galilee)
(Acts 6 37; cf Ant, XVIII,i, 1, 6). As @ matter of
historical fact this same census was the occasion of
the final destruction of the Jewish commonweaith, for
the flerce antagonism to Rome which was aroused at that
time never died out until lt was extinguished in blood,


We are now free to discuss those matters which


According to Stapfer (PTC, 215) this term
(redévys, telénés) is commonly used to cover several
grades of minor officials engaged in the customs
service. The word was extended in meaning from
the publicanus, properly so called, the farmer-
general of a province, to his subordinate local offi-
cials. The publicans of the NT “examined the
goods and collected tolls on roads and bridges”
(Stapfer, op. cit., 216; ef Mt 99). These tolls
(Lat portoria; Gr ré\n, télé) were collected in Pal
at Caesarea, Capernaum and Jericho (Jos, BJ, IL,
xiv, 4). Those collected at Capernaum went into
the treasury of Herod Antipas. At Jericho there
was a chief publican (dpx:redvys, architelénés), but
most of the publicans mentioned in the NT were
probably subordinate to men higher in authority.

Sufficient cause for the unpopularity of pubhcans
in NT times is not far to seek. Hatred of paying
duties seems to be ingrained in human nature.
Customs officials are always unpopular. The
method is necessarily inquisitorial. The man who
opens one’s boxes and bundles to appraise the value
of what one has, is at best a tolerated evil. In
Judaea, under the Rom system, all circumstances
combined to make the publican the object of bitter
hatred. He represented and exercised in immediate
contact, at a sore spot with individuals, the hated
power of Rome. The tax itself was looked upon as
an inherent religious wrong, as well as civil impo-
sition, and by many the payment of it was consid-
ered a sinful act of disloyalty to God. The tax-
gatherer, if a Jew, was a renegade in the eyes of his
patriotic fellows. He paid a fixed sum for the taxes,
and received for himself what he could over and
above that-amount. The ancient and widespread
curse of arbitrariness was in the system. The
tariff rates were vague and indefinite (see Schiirer,
HJP, I, ii, 67f). The collector was thus always
under the suspicion of being an extortioner and
probably was in most instances. The name was
apt to realize itself. The usual combination in a
publican of petty tyrant, renegade and extortioner,
made by circumstances almost inevitable, was not
conducive to popularity. In the score of instances
in the NT where publicans are mentioned, their
common status, their place in the thought and
action of Jesus, their new hope in the gospel are
clearly set forth. The instances in which Our
Lord speaks of them are especially illuminating:
(1) He uses them on the basis of the popular esti-
mate which the disciples undoubtedly shared, to
point in genial irony a reproach addressed to His
hearers for their low standard of love and forgive-
ness (Mt 6 46.47). (2) He uses the term in the
current combination in giving directions about
excommunicating a persistently unrepentant mem-
ber of the church (Mt 18 17). (8) He uses the
term in the popular sense in describing the current
condemnation of His attitude of social fellowship
with them, and constructively accepts the title of
“friend of publicans and sinners’ (Mt 11 19; Lk
7 34). (4) Most significant of all, Jesus uses the
publican, as He did the Samaritan, in a parable in
which the despised outcast_shows to advantage in
an attitude acceptable to God (Lk 18 9 ff).

This parable isreinforced by the statement, made more
than once by Our Lord, that the readiness to repent
shown by the publicans aud other outcasts usually found
with them was more promising of salvation than the
spiritual pride shown by some who were satisfied with
themselves (Lk 3 12; cf 7 29; Mt 21 31.32; Lk 15 1).
The choice of Levi as a disciple (Mt 10 3, etc) and the
conversion of Zaccbacus (Lk 19 8f), of whom Jesus
speaks so beautifully as a son of Abraham (ver 9), justi-
fied the characteristic attitude which Our Lord adopted
toward this despised class, about equally guilty and
unfortunate. _He did not condone their faults or crimes;


neither did He acccpt the popular verdict that pro-
nounced them unfit for companionship with the good


2921


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tax, Taxing
Teach, Teaching


and without hope in the world. According to the


teaching and accordant action of Jesus, no man_or
woman is without hope until the messenger of hope has
been definitely rejected.

It is fitting, if somewhat dramatic, that a study of
taxation—that historic root of bitterness periodi-
cally springing up through the ages—should end
in contemplation of Him who spoke to an outcast
and guilty tax-collector (Lk 19 10) the wonderful
words: “The Son of man came to seek and to save
that which was lost.”?” Louis Marrapws Swrert


TEACH, téch, TEACHER, téch’ér, TEACHING,
téch’ing:


I. OT Trrms 5. Exposition
1. Discipline 6. Authority
2. Law 7. Care|
3. Discernment 8. Supervision
4. Wisdom IfI. OT History
5. Knowledge 1. In the Home
6. Illumination 2. In Public
7. Vision IV. Extra-BiBvuicau
8. Inspiration TEACHING
9. Nourishment Vv. NT_History
II. NT Terms 1. Christ's Life
1. Instruction 2. Apostolic Labors
2. Acqulsition 3. General Consider-
3. Presentation atlons


4. Eiucidation


Arich variety of words is employed in the Bible to
describe the teaching process. The terms do not so
much indicate an office and an official as a function
and a service, although both ideas are often ex~-
pressed or implied.

L OT Terms.—"2>, lamadh, “to beat’: A
very common word for “to teach”; it may have

meant “to beat with a rod,” “to chas-
1. Dis- tise,”’ and may have originally referred
cipline to the striking and goading of beasts
by which they were curbed and trained.
By a noble evolution the term came to describe the
process of disciplining and training men in war,
religion and life (Isa 2 3; Hos 10 11; Mic 4 2).
As teaching is hoth a condition and an accompani-
ment of disciplining, the word often means simply
“to teach,” “to inform’ (2 Ch 17 7; Ps 71 17;
Prov 6 18). The glory of teaching was its har-
mony with the will of God, its source in God’s
authority, and its purpose to secure spiritual
obedience (Dt 4 5.14; 31 12.13). .

m7), yarah, “to cast”: The teaching idea from

which the law was derived is expressed hy a vb.

which means “‘to throw,” ‘to cast as
2. Law an arrow or lot.” It is also used of

thrusting the hand forth to point out
or show clearly (Gen 46 28; Ex 16 25). The
original idea is easily changed into an educational
conception, since the teacher puts forth new ideas
and facts as a sower casts seed into the ground.
But the process of teaching was not considered
external and mechanical but internal and vital
(Ex 36 34.35; 2 Ch 6 27): The nominal form is
the usual word for law, human and Divine, general
and specific (Dt 4 8; Ps 19 8; Prov 1 8). The
following are suggestive phrases: “the book of the
law” (Dt 28 61; 2 K 22 8); “the hook of the law
of Moses” (Josh 8 31; 2 K 14 6); “the hook of
the law of God” (Josh 24 26); “the hook of the
law of Jeh” (2 Ch 17 9). Thus even in the days
of Joshua there was in the possession of the religious
teachers a book of the Law of the Lord as given by
Moses. This recorded revelation and legislation
continued to be the Divine norm and_ultimate
authority for priest, king and people (2 Ch 23 11;
Neh 8 1-38). ¢

13, bin, ‘to separate”: The word meaning “to
separate,” “to distinguish,” is often used in a
causative sense to signify “to teach.” The idea
of teaching was not an aggregation of facts
bodily transferred like merchandise. Real learning


followed genuine teaching. This word suggests
a sound psychological basis for a good pedagogy.
The function of teaching might he
3. Discern- exercised with reference to the solu-
ment tion of difficult problems, the inter-
pretation of God’s will, or the manner


oe godly life (Dnl 8 16.26; Neh 8 7-9; Ps 119


Soy , sdkhal, “to be wise’: The vb. from which
the various nominal forms for “wisdom” are
derived means “to look at,” “to
4. Wisdom hehold,” “to view,’’ and in the causa-
j tive stem descrihes the process by
which one is enabled to see for himself what had
never hefore entered his physical or intellectual
field of consciousness. The noun indicates a wise
person or sage whose mission is to instruct others
m the ways of the Lord (Prov 16 23; 21 11; and
often in the Wisdom literature). In Dnl 12 3
we read: “They that are wise [m “the teachers’’]
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament.”
4 21), yadha', “to see” (cf oi8a, ofda): This vb.
lit. means “‘to see’”’ and consequently “‘to perceive,”
“to know,” “to come to know,” and
5. Knowl- “cause to know or teach.” It de-
edge scribes the act of knowing as both
: progressive and completed. The caus-
ative conception signifies achievement in the sphere
of instruction. It is used of the interpretation and
application by Moses of the principles of the law
of God (Ex 18 16.20), of the elucidation of life’s
problems by the sages (Prov 9 9; 22 19), and of
constant Providential guidance in the way of life
(Ps 16 11). :
“Wit, za@har, “to shine’: This verbal root sig-
nifies “‘to shine,” and when applied to the intellec-
tual sphere indicates the function of
6. Illumi- teaching to he one of illumination.
nation Ignorance is darkness, knowledge is
light. Moses was to teach the people
statutes and laws, or to enlighten them on the
principles and precepts of God’s revelation (Ex 18
20). The service rendered hy the teachers—priests,
Levites and fathers—sent forth hy Jehoshaphat,
was one of illumination in the twofold sense of
instruction and admonition (2 Ch 19 8-10).

MR, 7a’ah, “to see’: The literal meaning of
this vh. is ‘‘to see,” and the nominal form is the
ancient name for prophet or authori-
tative teacher who was expected to
have a clear vision of spiritual realities,
the will of God, the need of man and the way of life
(1899; 1 Ch 9 22; 2 Ch 16 7f; Isa 30 10).

NI}, nabha’, “to boil up”: The most significant
word for “prophet” is derived from the vb. which

j means “‘to hoil up or forth like a foun-
8. Inspi- tain,” and consequently to pour
ration forth words under the impelling power
of the Spirit of God. The Hebrews
used the passive forms of the vb. hecause they
considered the thoughts and words of the prophets
due not to personal ability but to Divine influence.
The utterances of the prophets were characterized
by instruction, admonition, persuasion and predic-
tion (Dt 18 15-22; Ezk 33 1-20).

4, raé'‘ah, “to feed a flock”: The name ‘‘shep-
herd,” so precious in both the OT and the NT,

comes from a vb. meaning ‘‘to feed,”
9. Nourish- hence to protect and care for out of a
ment sense of devotion, ownership and

responsibility. It is employed with
reference to civil rulers in their positions of trust
(28 6 2; Jer 23 2); with reference to teachers
of virtue and wisdom (Prov 10 21; Eccl 12 11);
and preéminently with reference to God ag the
great Shepherd of His chosen people (Ps 23 1;


7. Vision


fonds Teaching TWH INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2922


Hos 4 16). Ezk 34 presents an arraignment of the
unfaithful shepherds or civil rulers; Ps 23 reveals
Jeh as the Shepherd of true believers, and Jn 10
shows how religious teachers are shepherds under
Jesus the Good Shepherd.

H. NT Terms.—Further light is thrown upon
religious teaching in Bible times by a brief view of
the leading educational terms found in the NT.

dddoxnw, diddskd, “to teach’: The usual word
for ‘‘teach” in the NT signifies either to hold a dis-

course with others in order to instruct
1. Instruc- them, or to deliver a didactic dis-
tion course where there may not be direct

personal and verbal participation.
In the former sense it describes the interlocutory
method, the interplay of the ideas and words be-
tween pupils and teachers, and in the latter use it
refers to the more formal monologues designed esp.
to give information (Mt 4 23; chs 5-7; 13 36f;
Jn 6 59; 1 Cor 417; 1 Tim 2 12). A teacher is
one who performs the function or fills the office of
instruction. Ability and fitness for the work are
required (Rom 2 20; He 6 12). The title refers to
Jewish teachers (Jn 1 38), to John the Baptist (Lk
3 12), to Jesus (Jn 3 2; 8 4, and often), to Panl
(1 Tim 2 7; 2 Tim 1 11), and to instructors in the
early church (Acts 18 1; Rom 12 7; 1 Cor 12 28).
Teaching, like preaching, was an integral part of
the work of an apostle (Mt 28 19; Mk 16 15;
Eph 4 1).

pavodvw, manthdnd, “to learn’: The central
thought of teaching is causing one to learn. Teach-
ing and learning are not scholastic
but dynamic, and imply personal
relationship and activity in the ac-
quisition of knowledge (Mt 11 29;
28 19; Acts 14 21). There were three concentric
circles of disciples in the time of Our Lord: learners,
pupils, superficial followers, the multitude (Jn
6 66); the body of believers who accepted Jesus
as their Master (Mt 10 42); and the Twelve Dis-
ciples whom Jesus also called apostles (Mt 10 2).

rapaTlonu, paratithémi, “to place beside’: The
presentative idea involved in the teaching process

is intimately associated with the prin-
3. Presen- ciple of adaptation. When it isstated
tation that Christ put forth parables unto the

people, the sacred writer employs the
figure of placing alongside of, or near one, hence
before him in an accessible position. The food or
teaching should be sound, or hygienic, and adapted
to the capacity and development of the recipient
(Mt 13 24; Mk 8 6; Acts 16 34; 1 Cor 10 27;
2 Tim 4 3; He & 12-14). :

dtepunvetw, dierméneté, ‘to interpret’: In the

walk to Emmaus, Christ explained to the per-
plexed disciples the OT Scriptures
in reference to Himself. The work
of interpreter is to make truth clear
and to effect the edification of the
hearer (Lk 24 27; 1 Cor 12 30; 14 5.13.27).
éxrlOnue, ektithémi, “to place out’: The vb.
lit. means “to set or place out,” and signifies to
bring out the latent and secret ideas
of a literary passage or a system of
thought and life. Thus Peter inter-
preted his vision, Aquila and Priscilla
unfolded truth to Apollos, and Paul expounded
the gospel in Rome (Acts 11 4; 18 26; 28 23).
True teaching is an educational exposition.
xpopyrns, prophéiés, “one who speaks for”: A
prophet was a man who spoke forth a message from
God to the people. He might deal
6. Author- with past failures and achievements,
ity present privileges and responsibilities,
or future doom and glory. He received
his message and authority from od (Dt 18 15-22;


2. Acqui-
sition


4, Eluci-
dation


6. Expo-
sition


Isa 6). The word refers to OT teachers (Mt 6 12),
to John the Baptist (Mt 21 26), to Jesus the Mes-
siah (Acts 3 25), and to special speakers in the Apos-
tolic age (Mt 10 41; Acts 13 1; 1 Cor 14 29.37).
rouwhy, poimén, “a shepherd’: The word for
“shepherd” signifies one who tends a flock, and by
analogy a person who gives mental and
7. Care spiritual nourishment, and guards and
supports those under his care (Mt 9
36; Jn 10 2.16; 1 Pet 2 25; Eph 4 11), Love is
a fundamental prerequisite to the exercise of the
shepherding function (Jn 21 15-18). The duties
are to be discharged with great diligence and in
humble recognition of the gifts and appointment of
the Holy Spirit (Acts 20 28). i
érioxomos, episkopos, ‘an overseer’: The bishop
or overseer was to feed and protect the blood-
bought church of God (Acts 20 28).
Among the various qualifications of
the religious overseers was an aptitude
for teaching (1 Tim 8 2; Tit 19). The
Lord is preéminently shepherd and bishop (1 Pet
2 25).

HI. OT History.—In the Jewish home the teach-

ing of the law of the Lord was primarily incumbent

upon the parents. The teaching was
1. Inthe to be diligent, the conversation reli-
Home gious, and the atmosphere wholesome
(Dt 6 7-9).

Provision was also made for public instruction in

the law of God (Dt 31 12.13). This is a compact

summary of early Heb teaching in
2. In Public regard to the extent of patronage, the

substance of instruction, and the
purpose of the process. Samuel the judge and
prophet recognized that his duty was fundamentally
to pray to God for his people and to teach the
nation “the good and the right way” (1 8 12 23).
The glory and prosperity of Judah under Jehosha-
phat were due in large measure to the emphasis he
aid upon religious instruction as the basis of na-
tional character and stability. His peripatetic
Bible school faculty consisted of five princes, nine
Levites and two priests who effected a moral and
religious transformation, for “they taught in Judah,
having the book of the law of Jeh with them’
(2 Ch 17 7-9), The most striking illustration
we have of public religious instruction in the OT
is found in Neh 8. Ezra the priest and scribe was
superintendent, and had an ample corps of teachers
to instruct the multitude of men, women and
children eager to hear. Prayer created a devotional
atmosphere. The reading was distinct, the inter-
pretation correct and intelligible. There was real
teaching because the people were made to under-
stand and obey the law. In Neh 9 and 10 we
have recorded the spiritual, ceremonial, social and
civic effects of ancient religious instruction.

IV. Extra-Biblical History.—The captivity gave a
mighty impuise to teaching. In far-away Babylon the
Jews, deprived of the privilege and inspiration of the
temple, established the synagogue as an institutional
center of worship and instruction. During the latter
part of the inter-Bib. period, religious teaching was
carried on In the synagogue and attendance was com-
pulsory, education in the Law being considered the funda-
mental element_of national security (Deutsch, Literary
Remains, 23; Edersheim, Life and Times of Jesus the
Messiah, I, 230). The Bible text alone was taught
those from 5 to 10 years of age, the first lessons heing
taken from Lev (Taylor, Sayings of the Jewish Fathers,
111). From 10 to 15 _years of age the pupil was taught
the suhstance of the Mish or unwritten tradition, and
accorded the privilege of entering into the discussions
of the Mish, which constitute the Gemara (Edershelm
oF cit., I, 232). Selections of Scriptures like the sh¢ma!
(Dt 6 4-9) were made for study, and lesson helps were
adapted to the capacity of the pupils (Ginsburg, art.
“Education” in Cyc. of Bib. Lit.). The significance of
the teaching idea among the Jews is indicated by numer-


ous expressions for school (art. ‘‘Education,” Cye.
Bib. Lit.) and the prevalence of the synagogues, to


8. Super-


vision


2923


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Tesch, Teaching


+


being perbaps 480 iu Jerus in the time of Christ (Hor.
Hebd. 1,78). The pupil was not expected to he a passive
hearer but an active participant (Ad., vi.6; Taylor,
Sayings of the Jewish Fathers, 115f). Great emphasis
was laid upon audible repetition and exact memory, yet
the teacher was cata if the pupil failed to uuder-
stand the prescribed lesson (Hamburger, RE, II, 672,
674). The pupil was regarded as the child of his teacher
peanheahect 19), which is a familiar ideainthe NT. The
aithful teacher was considered destined to occupy a high
seat among the ancients (Dnl 12 3). The scribes were
secretaries or copyists of the sacred Law, and would thus
acquire at least an accurate verbal knowledge of its
contents. Quite naturally they would become religious
coenaere (Neb 8 4). Hence also their prominence in the


Litaerators.—Art. ‘‘Torah,” Jew Ene (cf arts. ‘‘Tal-
mud’ and ‘‘Education’’); Trumbull, Yale Lectures on the
Sunday-School, 3-40; Hamburger, RE.

_ V. NT History.—In the NT we find that Jesus
is preéminently the teacher, though He was also

; aboard and healer (Mt 4 23). His
1. Christ’s Sermon on the Mount was match-


Life less teaching. He opened His mouth
and “taught” (Mt 5 2). The titles
“teacher,” master,” “rabbi” all indicate the most


prominent function of His active ministry. Even at
the age of 12 years He revealed His wisdom and
affinity in the midst of the rabbis or Jewish teachers
of the Law in the temple (Lk 2 41f). In the
power of the Spirit He taught so that all recognized
His authority (Lk 4 14.15; Mt 7 29). He ex-
plained to the disciples in private what He taught
the people in public (Mt 13 36). His principles
and methods of teaching constitute the standard by
which all true pedagogy is measured, and the ideal
toward which all subsequent teachers have toiled
with only partial success (Mt 7 28.29; Jn 1 49;
3 2; 6 46). In the Commission as recorded in
Mt 28 18.19.20 we have the work of Christianity
presented in educational terms. We find the
supreme authority (ver 18), the comprehensive
content—the evangelistic, the ceremonial, the
educational, the practical (vs 19 and 20a), and
the inspiring promise (ver 200).
The emphasis laid upon teaching in the Apostolic
age Js a natural consequence of the need of the
people and the commands of Jesus.
2. Apostolic The practice of the apostles is quite
Labors uniform. They preached or pro-
claimed, but they also expounded.
In Jerus the converts continued in the apostles’
teaching (Acts 2 42); and daily in the temple and
in the homes of the people the teaching was cor-
related with preaching (Acts 5 42). In Antioch,
the center of foreign missionary operations, Paul,
Silas, Barnabas and many others taught the word
of the Lord (Acts 15 35). In Thessalonica, Paul
and Silas for three weeks reasoned with the people
out of the Scriptures, opening up the sacred secrets
and proving to all candid minds that Jesus was the
Messiah (Acts 17 1-3). In Beroea, instruction in
the synagogue was followed by private study, and
as a result many believed in the Lord (Acts 17 10-
15). In Athens, Paul discussed and explained the
things of the kingdom of God, both in the synagogue
3 t a week and in the market daily (Acts 17 16 f).
In Corinth, Paul having been denied the use of the
synagogue taught the word of the Lord for a year
and a half in the house of Justus, and thus laid the
foundation for a great church (Acts 18 1-11).
In Ephesus, Paul taught for 2 years in the school of
Tyrannus, disputing and persuading the people
concerning the kingdom of God (Acts 19 8-10). In
Rome, Paul expounded the word, testified to its
truth, and persuaded men to accept the gospel
(Acts 28 23). His method of work in Rome under
trying limitations is described as cordially receiving
the people and preaching the kingdom of God, and
‘teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus
Christ” (Acts 28 30.31).


The office of teacher is fundamentally related
to the creation of a missionary atmosphere (Acts
13 1). Religious teaching is necessary
3. General to the development of Christian
Considera- character and the highest efficiency in
tions service (1 Cor 12 4-11.28.29; Eph 4
11.12). The qualification of the pastor
is vitally connected with the teaching function of the
church. He is to hold the truth, or to be orthodox
(Tit 1 9), to apply the truth, or to be practical (Tit
1 9), to study the truth, or to be informed (1 Tim 4
13.15), to teach the truth, or to be equipped or able
and tactful (2 Tim 2 2; 1 Tim 3 2), to live the
truth, or to be faithful in all things (2 Tim 2 2;
1 Tim 4 16). The teaching function of Chris-
tianity in the 2d cent. became strictly official, there-
by losing much of its elasticity. A popular manual
for the guidance of religious teachers was styled
the “Teaching of the Twelve’ (see Drpacue).
The writings of the Apostolic Fathers give valuable
information in regard to the exercise of the gifts of
teaching in the early centuries (Did., xiii.2; xv.1, 2;
Barn 18; Ign. Eph 31). See Catecaist; Epuca-
TION; SrigiruaL GIFTs. Byron H. DEMEntr


TEAR BOTTLE. See next article.


TEARS, térz (7'0", dim‘ah; Séupva, dékrua):
In the instances recorded in Scripture weeping is
more frequently associated with mental distress
than with physical pain. Eastern peoples show
none of the restraint of emotion in lamentation
which is characteristic of modern Occidentals, and
there are many records of this manifestation of woe,
even among men accustomed to hardships and
warfare, such as David and his soldiers. The flow
of tears is the evidence of sorrow in prospect
of approaching death in Ps 39 12; 2 K 20 5; Isa
38 5, and of the suffering consequent on oppression
(Eccl 4 1), or defeat in battle (Isa 16 9), or hope-
less remorse, as with Esau (He 12 17, probably
referring to Gen 27 34). The Psalmist describes
his condition of distress metaphorically as feeding
on the bread of tears and having tears to drink
(Ps 80 5; 42 3). Tears in the figurative sense of
anxiety for the future are referred to in Ps 126 5;
Mk 9 24 AV, and the tears accompanying penitence
in Lk 7 38 (44 RVm). Jeremiah is sometimes
called the “weeping prophet’’ on account of his
expressive hyperbole im Jer 9 1.18 (see also 14 7;
31 16; Lam 1 2; 2 11.18 and ten other passages).
Conversely the deliverance from grief or anxiety is
described as the wipmg away of tears (Ps 116 8;
Isa 25 8; Rev 7 17; 21 4).

The expression in Ps 66 8 in which the Psalmist
desires that God should remember his wanderings
and his tears has given rise to a curious mistake.
There is a paronomasia in the passage as he pleads
that God should record his wanderings (Heb nédh)
and that his tears should be put into God’s né’dh
(receptacle or bottle). Né’dh lit. means a leathern
or skin bottle, as is evident from Ps 119 83 and
Josh 9 4-13. The request is obviously figurative,
as there is no evidence that there was even a sym-
bolical collection of tears into a bottle in any Sem
funeral ritual, and there is no foundation whatever
for the modern identification of the long, narrow
perfume_jars so frequently found in late Jewish
and Gr-Jewish graves, as “lachrymatories’”’ or tear
bottles. See Borr.e. Avex. Maca.isTer


TEAT, tat (TW, shadh [Isa 32 12], 13, dadh [Ezk
23 3.21)): In all these passages the RV has re-
placed the word by “‘breast”’ or ‘‘bosom,” both of
which occasionally stand in poetical parallelism.
The above passages in Ezk are to be understood
figuratively of the inclination of Israel to connive


Tebah
Tell el-Amarna


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2924


at, and take part in, the idolatry of their neighbors.
To “smite upon the breasts’ (Isa 32 12, where
the AV translates wrongly ‘lament for the teats’’)
means ‘‘to mourn and grieve in the ostentatious
way of oriental women.” See Pap.


TEBAH, té’ba (M20, febhah): A son of Nahor,
the brother of Abraham (Gen 22 24).


TEBALIAH, teb-a-li’a, te-bal’ya (WED, te
bhalyaha, “Yahweh hath dipped,” i.e. “purified”; B,
TaBral, Tablai, A, TaBeXlas, Tabelias, Luc., Taper,
Tabeél): A Merarite gatekeeper (1 Ch 26 11). The
name should perhaps read WUD, tobhiyaha, ‘“Yah-


weh is good” (possibly from W210, misread “bau
WW, &bhalyahu). See Tosrsan.


TEBETH, te-beth’, té’beth (MAU, t2bheth): The
tenth month of the Jewish year, corresponding to
January (Est 2 16). See CaLmnpar.


TEHAPHNEHES, téhaf’néhéz.
HES.


TEHINNAH, té-hin’a (ITM, tehinnah, “suppli-
cation’; B, Oausdv, Thaimdn, A, Oava, Thand,
Luc., Oeevva, Theennd): ‘‘The father of the city
Nahash” (1 Ch 4 12). The verse seems to refer
to some post-exilic Jewish settlement, but is utterly
obscure.


TEIL, tél, TREE: AV Isa 6 13=RV TrEresintu
(q.v.).


TEKEL, té’kel (OPM, hel). See Mnne, Mene,
TEKeL, UPHARSIN.


TEKOA, tékd’a (IPM, rks, or MPIPN,
ko'ah; Oexde, Thekde; AV Tekoah; one of David's
mighty men, “Ira the son of Ikkesh,”
1. Scripture is called a Tekoite, té-ko’It (PIP,
References ikd'7; 2 S 23 26; 1 Ch 11 28; 27 9);
. _ the “woman of Tekoa” (2 8S 14 2] isin
Heb MOPIPIN, eko%th; in Neh 35 mention is
made of certain Tekoites, t&koits [D°VIPM,
’k6‘tm], who repaired part of the walls of
Jerus): From here came the “wise woman”
brought by Joab to try and make a reconciliation
between David and Absalom (2 8 14 2f); it was
one of the cities fortified by Rehoboam (2 Ch 11 6;
Jos, Ant, VII, ix, 1). The wilderness of Tekoa is
mentioned (2 Ch 20 20) as the extreme edge of
the inhabited area; here Jehoshaphat took counsel
before advancing into the wilderness of Judaea
to confront the Ammonites and Moabites. In Jer
6 1, weread, “Blowthe trumpet in Tekoa and raise
a signal in Beth-haccherim’’—because of the enemy
advancing from the N. Amos (1 1), one of the
“herdsmen of Tekoa,” was born here.

In Josh 15 59 (addition to verse in LXX only)
Tekoa occurs at the beginning of the list of 11 addi-
tional cities of Judah—a list which includes Beth-
lehem, Ain Kairem and Bettir—which are omitted
in the Hebrew. A Tekoa is mentioned as a son of
Ashhur (1 Ch 2 24; 4 5). :

Jonathan Maccabaeus and his brother Simon fled
from the vengeance of Bacchides “into the wilder-
ness of Thecoe [RV ‘‘Tekoah”] and pitched their
tents [RV ‘‘encamped’’] by the water of the pool
Asphar” (1 Mace 9 33). pale

Jos calls Tekoa a village in his day (Vita, 75),
as does Jerome who describes it as 12 miles from
Jerus and visible from Bethlehem; he says the
tomb of the prophet Amos was there (Comm. on
Jeremiah, V1, 1). “There was,” he says, “‘no village


See TaHpAN-


beyond Tekoa in the direction of the wilderness.”
The good quality of its oil and honey is praised
by other writers. In the 6th cent. a
monastery, Laura Nova, was founded
there by St. Saba. In the crusading
times Tekoa was visited by pious
pilgrims wishing to see the tomb of Amos, and some
of the Christian inhabitants assisted the Crusaders
in the first siege of Jerus. In 1138 the place was
pillaged by a party of Turks from the E. of the Jor-
dan, and since that time the site appears to have
lain desolate and ruined, although even in the 14th
cent. the tomb of Amos was still shown.

The site is without doubt the Kh. Tekii‘a, a
very extensive rnin, covering 4 or 5 acres, about

6 miles S. of Bethlehem and 10 miles
3. The from Jerns, near the Frank Mountain
Site Teka and on the road to ‘Ain Jidy. The

remains on the surface are chiefly of
large cnt stone and are all, apparently, mediaeval.
Fragments of pillars and bases of good hard lime-
stone occur on the top of the hill, and there is an
octagonal font of rose-red limestone; it is clear that
the church once stood there. There are many tombs
and cisterns in the neighborhood of a much earlier
period. A spring is said‘ to exist somewhere on the
site, but if so it is buried out of sight. There is a
reference in the “Life of Saladin’ (Bahaoddenus),
to the “river of Tekoa,” from which Richard Coeur
de Lion and his army drank, 3 miles from Jerus:
this may refer to the ‘Arzb extension of the “‘low-
level aqueduct” which passes through a long tunnel
under the Sahl Tekii‘a and may have been thought
by some to rise there.

The open fields around Teké'‘a are attractive and
well suited for olive trees (which have now dis-
appeared), and there are extensive grazing-lands.
The neighborhood, even the “wilderness” to the E.,
is full of the flocks of wandering Bedouin. From the
site, Bethlehem, the Mount of Olives and Nebi
Samuel (Mizpah) are all visible; to the N.E. is a
peep of the Jordan valley near Jericho and of the
mountains of Gilead, but most of the eastern out-
look is cut off by rising ground (PEF, Ill, 314,
368, Sh XXI). E. W. G. MastermMan


TEL-ABIB, tel-a’bib (2°2N Of}, tél ’abhibh; Vulg
ad acervum novarum frugum): As written in Heb,
Tel-abib means “hill of barley-ears”
1. The and is mentioned in Ezk 3 15 as the
Name and place to which the prophet went,
Its Meaning and where he found Jewish captives
“that dwelt by the river Chebar.”
That Tel-abib is written, as Fried. Delitzsch sug-
gests, for Til Abubi, ‘Mound of the Flood” (which
may have been a not uncommon village-name
in Babylonia) is uncertain. Moreover, if the cap-
tives themselves were the authors of the name, it
is more likely to have been in the Heb language.
LXX, which has metédros, “passing on high,”
referring to the manner in which the prophet
reached Tel-abib, must have had a different Heb
reading.
Tf the Chebar be the nér Kabari, as suggested by
Hilprecht, Tel-abib must have been situated some-
where in the neighborhood of Niffer,


2. Later
History


2. The the city identified with the Calneh of
Position Gen 10 10. The tablet mentioning the
of the river Kabaru refers to grain (barley?) .
Settlement seemingly sent by boat from Niffer in


: Nisan of the 21st year of Artaxerxes I.
Being a navigable waterway, this was probably a
good trading-center.

Literature.—See Hilprecht and Clay, Business Docu-


ments of Murashd Sons (‘‘Pennsylvania Exp.,"' Vol LX,
28); Clay, Light on the OT from Babel, 405.


T. G. PIncHES


2925


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tebah
Tell el-Amarna


TEL-HARSHA, tel-har’sha (RWII7DM, il-har-
sha’): In Ezr 2 59; Neh 7 61 (AV im latter, ‘“Tel-
haresha,” tel-ha-ré’sha, -har’é-sha), a Bab town or
village from which Jews who could not show their
lineage returned with Zerubbabel. The site is un-
known. In 1 Esd 6 36 it is called ‘“Thelersas.”’


TELAH, té/la (MOM, telah; B, Oddccs, Thdlees,
A, @Grc, Thdéle, Luc., Oda, Thdla): An Ephraimite
(1 Ch 7 25). .


TELAIM, +é-1a’im (oroon, ha-tla’im, “the
young lambs”; év TadydAows, en Galgdiois): The
place where Saul ‘‘summoned the people, and


numbered them’ (1 8 15 4) before his attack on ,


Agag, king of the Amalekites. Some authorities
read “Telam” for ‘“Havilah” in ver 7 and_ also
find this name in 1 § 27 8 instead of D219,
méodlam. In LXX and Jos (Ant, VI, vii, 2) Gilgal
occurs instead of Telaim, on what ground is
not known. Probably Telaim is identical with
TELEM (q.v.), though the former may have been
the name of a Bedouin tribe inhabiting the latter
district. Cf Dhallém Arabs now found 8. of Tell
el-Milh. E. W. G. MastermMan


TELASSAR, té-las’ar Cipsbr, tela’ssar [2 K
19 12}, “WOT, élassdr [Isa 37 12]; A, Oudraccdp,
Thalassdr, B, Qaer0év, Thaesthén;
1. The Vulg Thelassar, Thalassar): This city,
Name and which is referred to by Sennacherib’s
Its Meaning messengers to Hezekiah, is stated by
them to have been inhabited by the
“children of Eden.” It had been captured by the
Assyr king’s forefathers, from whose hands its gods
had been unable to save it. Notwithstanding the
vocalization, the name is generally rendered ‘Hill of
Asshur,” the chief god of the Assyrians, but “Hill
of Assar,” or Asari (a name of the Bab Merodach),
would probably be better. ;
As Telassar was inhabited by the “children of
Eden,” and is mentioned with Gozan, Haran, and
Rezeph, in Western Mesopotamia, it


2. Sugges- has been suggested that it lay in Bit-
tions as to Adini, ‘the House of Adinu,” or Beth-
the Geo- eden, in the same direction, between
graphical the Euphrates and the Belikh. A place
Position named Til-A3Suri, however, is twice


mentioned by Tiglath-pileser IV (Ann.,
176; Slab-Inscr., II, 23), and from these passages it
would seem to have lam near enough to the Assyr
border to be annexed. The king states that he
made there holy sacrifices to Merodach, whose seat
it was. It was mhabited by Babylonians (whose
home was the Edinu or “plain”; see Enmnn). Esar-
haddon, Sennacherib’s son, who likewise conquered
the place, writes the name Til-ASurri, and states
that the people of Mibranu called it Pitanu. Its
inhabitants, he says, were people of Barnaku. If
this be Bié Burnaki in Elam, extending from the
boundary of Ragu (see RosH), which was ravaged
by Sennacherib (Bab Chron., III, 10 ff), Til-A&surt
probably lay near the western border of Elam.
Should this identification be the true one, the
Heb form é¢lassa@r would seem to be more correct
than the Assyr T'il-AS8uri (-ASurri), which latter
may have been due to the popular idea that the
second element was the name of the national god
A&’ur. See Fr. Delitazsch, Wo lag das Paradies?
264. T. G. Pincaes


TELEM, té/lem (050, felem; Té&dcp, Télem):
A city in the Negeb “toward the border of Edom,”
belonging to Judah (Josh 16 24). In LXX of 28
3 12 Abner is said to send messengers to David at
Thelam (OaAdu, Thailém); this would seem to be


the same place and also to be identical with the
Telaim and Telam of Saul (see TEnuarm). It is
probably the same as the Talmia of the Talm
(Neubauer, Géog. du Talm, 121). The site has not
been recovered.


TELEM (02%, iclem; LXX B, Tédnp, Télem,
A, T&Anp, Téllém): One of three “porters” who had
married foreign wives (Ezr 10 24), his name appear-
ing as ‘‘Tolbanes” in 1 Esd 9 25; perhaps the same
as TaLMoN (q.V.).


TELL. See Tae.
TELL EL-AMARNA, tel-el-a-mir’na, TABLETS:


I. Inrropuction
ame
2. Discovery
3. Physical Character
TI. ErrorarnicaL Vauvun
1. Pecnliar Cuneiform Script
2. Method of Writing Proper Names
III. Purrorosica, VaLuEn
1, Knowledge of Amorite, Hittite and Mitannian
Tongues
2. Eeresicuce of Canaanite Names to the Present
ime
3. Verification of Biblical Statements concerning
“the Language of Canaan"
IV. GecorarnaicaL VaLus
1. Political and Ethnological Lines and Locations
2. Verificatlon of Biblical and Egyptian Geo-
graphical Notices
3. Confirmation of General Evidential Value of
Ancient Geographical Notes of Bible Lands
V. Historicat VALUE
1. Revolutionary Change of Opinion concerning
Canaanite Civilization in Patriarchal Times
2. Anomalous Historical Situation Revealed by
Use of Cuneiform Script
3. Extensive Diplomatic Correspondence of the


Age
4. Unsolved Problem of the Habiri
LitBRATURE


A collection of about 350 inscribed clay tablets
from Egypt, but written in the cuneiform writing,
being part of the royal archives of Amenophis ITI
and Amenophis IV, kings of the XVILIth Egyp
Dynasty about 1480 to 1460 BC. Some of the
tablets are broken and there is a little uncertainty
concerning the exact number of separate letters.
81 are in the British Museum=BM; 160 in the
New Babylonian and Assyrian Museum, Berlin=
B; 60 in the Cairo Museum=C; 20 at Oxford=O;
the remainder, 20 or more, are in other museums
or in private collections.

I. Introduction.— The name, Tell el-Amarna,
“the hill Amarna,” is the modern name of ancient
ruins about midway between Mem-
phis and Luxor in Egypt. The ruins
mark the site of the ancient city Khut
Aten, which Amenophis IV built in order to escape
the predominant influence of the old religion of
Egypt represented by the priesthood at Thebes,
and to establish a new cult, the worship of Aten,
the sun’s disk.

In 1887 a peasant woman, digging in the ruins of
Tell el-Amarna for the dust of ancient buildings

with which to fertilize her garden,
2. Dis- found tablets, a portion of the royal
covery archives. She filled her basket with
tablets and went home. How many
she had already pulverized and grown into leeks
and cucumbers and melons will never be known.
This time someone’s curiosity was aroused, and a
native dealer secured the tablets. Knowledge of
the “find” reached Rev. Chauncey Murch, D.D.,
an American missionary stationed at Luxor, who,
suspecting the importance of the tablets, called the
attention of cuneiform scholars to them. Then
began a short but intense and bitter contest between
representatives of various museums on the one
hand, eager for scientific material, and native deal-


1. Name


Tell el-Amarna


ers, on the other hand, rapacious at the prospect of
the fabulous price the curious tablets might bring.
The contest resulted in the destruction of some of
the tablets by ignorant natives and the final dis-
tribution of the remainder and of the broken frag-
ments, as noted at the beginning of this art. (see
also Budge, Hist of Egypt, 1V, 186). After the dis-
covery of the tablets the site of the ancient city was
excavated by Professor Petrie in 1891-92 (Tell
el-Amarna; cf also Baedeker, Egypt).

The physical _ character of the tablets is worthy of


some notice. They are clay tablets. Nearly all are
brick tablets, i.e. rectangular, flat tablets


8. Physical varying in size from 2 X2} in. to 3} x9
Character in., inscribed on both sides and sometimes
upon the edges. One tablet is of a convex


form (B 1601). The clay used in the tab-
lets also varies much. The tablets of the royal corre-
spondence from Babylonia and one tablet from Mitanni
(B 153) are of fine Bab clay. The Syrian and Pales-
tinian correspondence is in one or two instances of clay
which was probably imported from Babylonia for cor-
respondence, but for the most part these tablets are upon
the clay of the country and they show decided differences
among themselves in color and texture: in some instances
the clay is sandy and decidedly inferior. A number of
tablets have red points, a kind of puuctuation for mark-
ing the separation into words, probably inserted by the
BEYD translator of the letters at the court of the Pharaoh.
These poiuts were for the purpose of assisting in the
reading. They do now assist the reading very much.
Some tablets also show the hieroglyphic marks which
the Egyp scribe put on them when filing them among
the archives. The writing also is varied. Some of the
tablets from Pal (B 328, 330, 331) are crudely writteu.
Others of the letters, as in the royal correspondence from
Babylonia, are beautifully written. These latter (B
149-52) seem to have been written in a totally different
way from the others; those from Western Asia appear
to have been written with the stylus held as we com-
monly hold a pen, but the royal letters from Babylonia
were written by turuing the point of the stylus to the
left and the other end to the right over the second joint
of the first finger.


The results of the discovery of the Am Tab have
been far-reaching, and there are indications of still
other benefits which may yet accrue from them.
The discovery of them shares with the discovery of
the CH the distinction of the first place among Bib.
discoveries of the past half-century.

il. Epigraphical| Value.—The peculiar use of
the cuneiform method of writing in these tablets

in order to adapt it to the require-
1. Peculiar ments of a strange land having a native
Cuneiform tongue, and the demands made upon it
Script for the representation of proper names

of a foreign tongue, have already
furnished the basis for the opinion that the same
cuneiform method of writing was employed origi-
nally in other documents, esp. some portions of the
Bible and much material for Egyp governmental
reports. It is not improbable that by means of
such data furnished by the tablets definite clues
may be obtained to the method of writing, and by
that also approximately the time of the compo-
sition, of the literary sources that were drawn upon
in the composition of the Pent, and even of the
Pent itself (cf esp. Naville, Archaeology of the Bible).

Most of the letters were probably written by
Egyp officers or, more frequently, by scribes in the
employ of native appointees of the
Egyp government. The writing of so
many proper names by these scribes
in the cuneiform script has thrown a
flood of light upon the spelling of Canaanite names
by Egyp scribes in the hieroglyphic inscriptions of
Egypt. It is evident now that certainly some,
perhaps most, of these scribes worked from cunei-
form lists (Miller, Egyptological Researches, 1906,
40). As the system of representation of Palestinian
names by Egyp scribes becomes thus better under-
stood, the identification of more and more of the
places in Pal named in the Egyp inscriptions be-
comes possible. Every such identification makes


2. Proper
Names


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2926


more nearly perfect the identification of Bib. places,
the first and most important item in historical
evidence. 3 ‘
HL Philological Value.—No other literary dis-
covery, indeed, not all the others together, have
afforded so much light upon philologi-
1. Amorite, cal problems in patriarchal Pal as the
Hittite and Am Tab. Something is now really
Mitannian definitely known of “the language of
Tongues Canaan,” the speech of the people of
patriarchal days in Pal. The remark-
able persistence of old Canaanite words and names
and forms of speech of these tablets down to the
present time makes it plain that the peasant speech
of today is the lineal descendant of that of Abra-


“ham’s day. The letters are in the Bab tongue


modified by contact with the speech of the conntry,
a kind of early Aram. (Conder, The Tell Amarna
Tablets, X; Dhorme, ‘‘La langue de Canaan,” Revue
Biblique, Juillet, 1918, 369). There are also fre-
quent Canaanite words inserted as glosses to explain

the Bab words (Dhorme, op. cit.).
The facts evinced by the persistence of the early
Canaanite speech (cf 1, above) down through allthe
centuries to the peasant speech of Pal


2. Persist- of today furnishes a verification of the


ence of Bib. reference to the “language of
Canaanite Canaan” (Isa 19 18). That peasant
Names speech is, as it manifestly has always

been since patriarchal times, a Sem
tongue. Now, even so adventurous a work as a


grammar of the ancient Canaanite language has been
attempted, based almost entirely upon the material
furnished by the Am Tab (Dhorme, op. cit.), in
which the speech of Pal in patriarchal days is de-
scribed as “ancient Canaanite or Hebrew.”
Some more specific knowledge is also supplied by
the Am Tab concerning the Amorite language
through the many Amorite names and
8. Verifica- the occasional explanations given in
tion of Amorite words (cf esp. the 50 letters
Biblical of Ribadda), and some knowledge of
Statements Hittite (Letter of Tarkhundara; Con-
der, The Tell Amarna Tablets, 225 f),
concerning the Mitannian tongue (B 153, 190, 191,
233). One other tablet (B 342) is in an unknown
tongue.
IV. Geographical Value.—There was a very
wide international horizon in the days of the cor-
respondence contained in the Am Tab,
1. Interna- a horizon that inclosed Egypt, Baby-
tional lonia, Canaan, Mitanni and the land
Horizon of the Hittites; but the more definite
geographical information supplied by
the tablets is limited almost entirely to the great
Syrian and Canaanite coast land. There is differ-
ence of opinion concerning the identification of a
few of the places mentioned, but about 90 have
been identified with reasonable certainty.
It is possible now to trace the course of the mili-
tary operations mentioned in the Am Tab with
De almost as much satisfaction as the
2. Biblical course of a modern military campaign,
Verification and there is much verification also of
, Bib. and Egyp geographical notices.
The identification of such a large number of
places and the ability thus given to trace the course
of historical movements in that remote


3. Geo- age are a remarkable testimony to the
graphical _ historical value of ancient records of
Confirma- that part of the world, for accuracy
tion concerning place is of first importance


in historica] records.

V. Historical Value.—The Am Tab furnish an
amount of historical material about equal in bulk
to one-half of the Pent. While much of this bears
more particularly upon general history of the an-


2927


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Tell el-Amarna


cient Orient, there is scarcely any part of it which
does not directly or indirectly supply information
which parallels some phase of Bib. history. It is
not certain that any individual mentioned in the
Bible is mentioned in these tablets, yet it is possible,
many think it well established, that many of the
persons and events of the conquest period are men-
tioned (cf 4 [1], below). There is also much that
reflects the civilization of times still imperfectly
understood, reveals historical events hitherto un-
known, or but little known, and gives many side-
lights upon the movements of nations and peoples
of whom there is something said in the Bible.

A revolutionary change of opinion concerning the
civilization of patriarchal Pal has taken place. It

was formerly the view of all classes of
1. Canaan- scholars, from the most conservative,
ite Civili- on the one hand, to the most radical,
zation on the other, that there was a very

crude state of civilization in Pal in the
patriarchal age, and this entirely independent of,
and indeed prior to, any demand made by the evo-
lutionary theory of Israel’s history. Abraham was
pictured as a pioneer from a land of culture to a dis-
tant dark place in the world, and his descendants
down to the descent into Egypt were thought to
have battled with semi-barbarous conditions, and
to have returned to conquer such a land and bring
civilization into it. All this opinion is now changed,
primarily by the information contained in the Am
Tab and secondarily by incidental hints from
Egyp and Bab inscriptions now seen to support the
high stage of civilization revealed in the Am Tab
(see ARCHAEOLOGY AND Criticism). The tablets
make mention of “ ‘capital cities,’ ‘provincial cities,’
‘fortresses,’ ‘towns,’ and ‘villages’ with ‘camps’ and
Hazors (or inclosures); while irrigation of gardens
is also noticed, and the papyrus grown at Gebal, as
well as copper, tin, gold, silver, agate, money (not,
of course, coins) and precious objects of many kinds,
mulberries, olives, corn, ships and chariots” (Con-
der, op. cit., 4).

The account of a bride’s marriage portion from Mitan-
ni reveals conditions farther north: ‘‘ Two horses, and a
chariot plated with gold and silver, and adorned with
precious stones. ‘The harness of the horses was adorned
in like manner. Two camel litters appear to be next
noticed, and apparently variegated garments worked
with gold, and embroidered zones and shawls. These
are followed by lists of precious stones, and a horse's
saddle adorned with gold eagles. A necklace of solid


gold and gems, a bracelet of iron gilt, an anklet of solid
gold, and other gold objects follow; and apparently


cloths, and silver objects, and vases of copper or bronze.
An object of jade or jaeper and leaves of gold. ..., .
Five gems of ‘stone of the great light’ (prohably dia-
monds) follow, with ornaments for the head and feet, and
a@ number of bronze objects and harness for chariots’’
(ib, 188-89). The record of Thothmes III concerning
booty brought from Pal fully confirms this representa-
tion of the tablets (Birch, Records of the Past, Ist ser.,
Il, 35-52; ef Sayce, Archaeology of the Cuneiform In-
acriptions, 156-57).

The Bab inscriptions show that Abraham was a
part of an emigration movement from the homeland
to a frontier province, having the same laws and
much of the same culture (Lyon, American Ori-
ental Society Journal, XXV, 254; Barton, American
Philosophical Proceedings, LII, no. 209, April, 1913,
197; Kyle, Deciding Voice of the Monuments in Bib.
Criticism, ch xv). The Egyp sculptured pictures
make clear that the civilization of Pal in patriarchal
times was fully equal to that of Egypt (cf Petrie,
Deshasheh, pl. IV). :

That these things of elegance and skill are not
merely the trappings of “barbaric splendor’ is
manifest from the revelation which the Am Tab
make of ethnic movements and of influences at
work from the great nations on either side of Canaan,
making it impossible that the land could have been,
at that period, other than a place of advanced civi-


lization. Nearly all the tablets furnish most un-
equivocal evidence that Egypt had imperial rule
over the land through a provincial government
which was at the time falling into decay, while the
cuneiform method of writing used in the tablets by
such a variety of persons, in such high and low
estate, implying thus long-established literary cul-
ture and a general diffusion of the knowledge of a
most difficult system of writing, makes it clear that
the civilization of Babylonia had been well estab-
lished before the political power of Egypt came
to displace that of Babylonia.
_ The displacement of Bab political power in Pal
just mentioned (1, above) points at once to a
most remarkable historical situation
2. Anoma- revealed by the Am Tab, i.e. official


lous His- | Egyp correspondence between the out-
torical lying province of Canaan and the im-
Situation —_ perial government at home, carried on,


_not in the langnage and script of
Egypt, but in the script of Babylonia and in a lan-
guage that is a modified Babylonian. This marks
one step in the great, age-long conflict between the
East and the West, between Babylonia and Egypt,
with Canaan asthefootball of empires. Itreveals—
what the Bab inscriptions confirm—the long-pre-
ceding occupation of Canaan by Babylonia, con-
tinuing down to the beginning of patriarchal times,
which had so given Canaan a Bab stamp that the
subsequent political occupation of the land by
Egypt under Thothmes III had not yet been able to
efface the old stamp or give a new impression.
The extensive diplomatic correspondence between
nations so widely separated as Egypt on the W., and
. Babylonia on the E., Mitanni on the N.,
3. Diplo- and the Hittite country_on the N.W., is
matic also shown by the Am Tab. In addition
re d to the large number of letters hetween
orrespond- Canaan and Egypt, there are quite a num-
ence ber of these royal tablets: letters from Ka-
dashman Bell, or Kallima-Sin (BM 29784),
aud Burna-burias of Babylonia (B 149-52), Assur-uballidh
of Assyria and Dusratta of Mitanni (B 150, 191-92, 233),
etc. There seems at first sight a little pettiness ahout
this international correspondence that is almost childish,
since so much of it is occupied with the marriage of
princesses and the payment of dowers, and the exchange
of international gifts and privileges (Budge, Hist of
Egypt, IV, 189-90). But one might he surprised at the
amount of such things in the private correspondence of
kings of the present day, if access to it conld he gained.
The grasping selfishness also revealed in these tahlets
by the constant cry for gold is, after all, hut a less diplo-
matic and more frank expression of the commercial hag-
gling hetween nations of today for advantages and con-
cessions.
The subject of greatest historical interest in Bib.
matters presented by the Am Tab is the great, un-
solved problem of the Habiri. Un-
4. Problem solved it is, for while every writer on
of the the subject has a very decided opinion
Habiri of his own, all must admit that a prob-
‘ lem is not solved upon which there is
such wide and radical difference of opinion among
capable scholars, and that not running along easy
lines of cleavage, but dividing indiscriminately all
classes of scholars. )
(1) One view very early advanced and _ still
strongly held by some (Conder, op. cit., 138-44) is
that Habiri_is to be read ‘Abiri, and means the
Hebrews. It is pointed out that the letters refer-
ring to these people are from Central and Southern
Pal, that the [abiri had some relation with Mt.
Seir, that they are represented as contemporaneous
with Japhia king of Gezer, Jabin king of Hazor, and
probably Adonizedek king of Jerus, contemporaries
of Joshua, and that certain incidental movements of
Israel and of the people of Pal mentioned in the
Bible are also mentioned or assumed in the tablets
(Conder, op. cit., 139-51). In reply to these argu-
ments for the identification of the Habiri with the
Hebrews under Joshua, it may be noted that,


Tell el-Amarna
Tempest


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2928


although the letters which speak of the Habiri are
all from Central or Southern Pal, they belong to
very nearly the same time as the very numerous
letters concerning the extensive wars in the N.
The distinct separation of the one set of letters from
the other is rather arbitrary and so creates an ap-
pearance which has little or no existence in fact.
Probably these southern letters refer to the same
disturbances spreading from the N. toward the &.,
which is fatal to the theory that the Habiri are the
Hebrews under Joshua, for these latter came in
from the 8.E. The reference to Seir is obscure and
seems rather to locate that place in the direction of
Carmel (Conder, op. cit., 145). The mention of
Japhia king of Gezer, and Jabin king of Hazor, does
not signify much, for these names may be titles, or
there may have been many kings, in sequence, of
the same name. Concerning Adonizedek, it is difhi-
cult to believe that this reading of the name of the
king of Jerus would ever have been thonght of, ex-
cept for the desire to identify the Zabiri with the
Hebrews under Joshua. This name Adonizedek is
only made out, with much uncertainty, by the un-
usual method of translating the king’s name instead
of transliterating it. If the name was Adonizedek,
why did not the scribe write it so, instead of trans-
lating it for the Pharaoh into an entirely different
name because of its meaning? The seeming cor-
respondences between the letters and the account
of the conquest in the Bible lose much of their sig-
nificance when the greater probabilities raised in the
names and the course of the wars are taken away.

(2) Against the view that the Habiri were the
Hebrews of the Bible may be cited not only these
discrepancies in the evidence presented for that view
(cf [1], above), but also the very strong evidence
from Egypt that the Exodus took place in the Ram-
esside dynasties, thus not earlier than the XIXth
Dynasty and probably under Merenptah, the suc-
cessor of Rameses II. The name Rameses for one
of the store cities could hardly have occurred before
the Ramesside kings. The positive declaration of
Rameses II: “I built Pithom,” against which there
is no evidence whatever, and the coincidence be-
tween the Israel tablet of Merenptah (Petrie, Six
Temples at Thebes, 28, pls. XIII-XIV) and the Bib.
record of the Exodus, which makes the 5th year
under Merenptah to be the 5th year of Moses’
leadership (see Moss), make it very difficult, in-
deed seemingly impossible, to accept the Habiri
as the Hebrews of the conquest.

(3) Another view concerning the Habiri, strongly
urged by some (Sayce, The Higher Criticism and the
Verdict of the Monumenis, 175 ff), is that they are
Habiri, not ‘Abiri, and that the name means ‘‘con-
federates,” and was not a personal or tribal name
at all. The certainty that there was, just a little
before this time, an alliance in conspiracy among
the Amorites and others, as revealed in the tablets
for the region farther north, gives much color to this
view. This opinion also relieves the chronological
difficulties which beset the view that the Habiri
were the Bib. Hebrews (ef [2], above), but it is con-
tended that this reading does violence to the text.

(4) Another most ingenious view is advanced by
Jeremias (The OT in the Light of the Ancient East,
341), that the name is Habiri, that “the name
answers to the sounds of ‘Hebrews,’ and that the
names are identical,’ but that this name in the Am
Tab is not a proper name at all, but a descriptive
word, as when we read of ‘Abraham the Hebrew,”
ie. the “stranger” or “immigrant.” Thns Habiri
would be “Hebrews,” i.e. “strangers” or “immi-
grants’ (see Hzperites; Huprew), but the later
question of the identification of these with the
Hebrews of the Bible is still an open question.

(5) It may be that the final solution of the prob-


lem presented by the Habiri will be found in the
direction indicated by combining the view that
sees in them only “strangers” with the view that
sees them to be “confederates.” There were un-
doubtedly “confederates” in conspiracy against
Egypt in the time of the Am Tab. The govern-
ment of Egypt did not come successfully to the
relief of the beleaguered province, but weakly
yielded. During the time between the writing of
the tablets and the days of Merenptah and the
building of Pithom no great strong government
from either Egypt or Babylonia or the N. was estab-
lished in Pal. At the time of the conquest there
is constant reference made to “the Hittites and the
Amorites and the Perizzites,” etc. Why are they
so constantly mentioned as a group, unless they
were in some sense “confederates”? It is not im-
possible, indeed it is probable, that these Hittites
and Amorites and Perizzites, etc, Palestinian
tribes having some kind of loose confederacy in the
days of the conquest, represent the last state of
the “confederates,” the conspirators, who began
operations in the Amorite war against the imperial
Egyp government recorded in the Am Tab, and,
in the correspondence from the S., were called in
those days Habiri, i.e. ‘strangers’ or “immigrants.”
For the final decision on the problem of the Habirt
and the full elucidation of many things in the Am
Tab we must await further study of the tablets by
expert cuneiform scholars, and esp. further dis-
covery in contemporary history.

The Jerus letters of the southern correspondence
present something of much importance which does
not bear at all upon the problem of the Habiri.
The frequently recurring title of the king of Jerus,
“T+ was not my father, it was not my mother, who
established me in this position” (Budge, Hist of
Egypt, IV, 231-35), seems to throw light upon the
strange description given of MrncHizEnEK (q.v.),
the king of Jerus in the days of Abraham. The
meaning here clearly is that the crown was not
hereditary, but went by appointment, the Pharaoh
of Egypt having the appointing power. Thus the
king as such had no ancestor and no descendant,
thus furnishing the peculiar characteristics made
use of to describe the character of the Messiah’s
priesthood in the Ep. to the He (7 3).


Lirerators.—Conder, The Tell Amarna_ Tablets;
Knudtzon, Die Hl-Amarna-Tafeln, in Heinrich’s Var-
derasiatische Bibliathek, II; Petrie, Tell el Amarna Tab-
lets; idem, Syria and Egypt from the Tell el Amarna
nee jem Hist os Egypt; Jeremias, The OT in the

ight af the Ancient Hast.

M. G. Kyrie


TEL-MELAH, tel-mé/la (M2975, tél-melah,
“hill of salt’): A Bab town mentioned in Ezr 2
59; Neh 7 61 with Tel-harsha and Cherub (see
TEL-HARSHA). It possibly lay on the low salt
tract near the Pers Gulf. In 1 Esd 5 36 it is called
“Thermeleth.”


TEMA, t@’ma (N°, téma’, “south country”;
Oa.pav, Thaimdn): The name of a son of Ishmael
(Gen 26 15; 1 Ch 1 30), of the tribe descended
from him (Jer 25 23), and of the place where
they dwelt (Job 6 19; Isa 21 14). This last was
a locality in Arabia which probably corresponds to
the modern Teimd’ (or Taymda’ [see Doughty,
Arabia Deseria, I, 285]), an oasis which lies about
200 miles N. of el-Medina, and some 40 miles S. of
Dimat el-Jandal (Dumah), now known as el-Jauf.
It is on the ancient caravan road connectin
the Pers Gulf with the Gulf of Akaba; an
doubtless the people took a share m the carrying
trade (Job 6 19). The wells of the oasis still attract
the wanderers from the parched wastes (Isa 21 14).
Doughty (loc. cit.) describes the ruins of the old city
wall, some 3 miles in circuit. An Aram. stele recently


2929


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Tell el-Amarna


Tempest


discovered, belonging to the 6th cent. BC, shows
the influence of Assyr art. The place is mentioned
in the cuneiform inscriptions (Schrader, KAT, 149).
. Ewine
' TEMAHG, té’ma (MAD), temah; AB, Oéua, Théma,
Luc., Gepad, Themad; Neh 7 55, B, “Hpad, Hé-
math, A, Ofpa, Théma, Luc., Qepad, Themad; AV
Thamah): The family name of a company of
Nethinim (Ezr 2 53).


TEMAN, té’man (JO%, t@mdn, “on the right,”
ie. “south”; Oawpav, Thaimdn): The name of a
district and town in the land of Edom, named after
Teman the grandson of Esau, the son of his first-
born, Eliphaz (Gen 36 11; 1 Ch 1 36). A duke
Teman is named among the chiefs or clans of Edom
(Gen 36 42; 1 Ch 1 53). He does not however
appear first, in the place of the firstborn. Husham
of the land of the Temanites was one of the ancient
kings of Edom (Gen 36 34; 1 Ch 1 45). From
Ob ver 9 we gather that Teman was in the land of
Esau (Edom). In Am 1 12 it is named along with
Bozrah, the capitalof Edom. In Ezk 26 13 desola-
tion is denounced upon Edom: ‘From Teman even
unto Dedan shall they fall by the sword.” Dedan
being in the S., Teman must be sought in the N.
Onom knows a district in the Gebalene region called
Theman, and also a town with the same name,
occupied by a Rom garrison, 15 miles from Petra.
Unfortunately no indication of direction is given.
No trace of the name has yet been found. It may
have been on the road from Elath to Bozrah.

The inhabitants of Teman seem to have been
famous for their wisdom (Jer 49 7; Ob vs 8f).
Eliphaz the Temanite was chief of the comforters
of Job (2 11, ete). The manner in which the city
is mentioned by the prophets, now by itself, and
again as standing for Edom, shows how important
it must have been in their time. Ewine


TEMENI, tem’éni, témé-ni (JON, témeni,
Baer, WAT, timent; BA, Qaypav, Thaimdn, Luc.,
@orpavel, Thaimanet): The word “2A°M means a
southerner, ie. of Southern Judah; cf Terman
(patronymic "JA, témani), the name of Edom
(Gen 36 11, etc), the “son” of Ashhur (1 Ch 4 6).


TEMPER, tem’pér: The word is used in AV to
render different Heb words. In Ezk 46 14 for
“temper” (00%, rdsas) RV substitutes “moisten.”
In Cant (5 2) a noun from the same stem means
“dewdrops.” In Ex 29 2 AV we read “cakes un-
leavened, tempered [o2, balal, lit. “mixed”] with
oil,’ RV “mingled.” The word denotes “rough-
and-ready mixing.” In the recipe for the making
of incense given in Ex (30 35) occur the words
“tempered together,” mn, malah (lit. “salted”;
hence RV “seasoned with salt”). The word occurs
in two interesting connections in Wisd 16 7 (RV
“knead”) and 16 21. In 1 Cor 12 24 it occurs in
EV as a rendering of the Gr word svyxepdvvume, sug-
kerdnnumi, which meant to ‘‘mix together.” Paul
is arguing in favor of the unity of the church and of
coéperation on the part of individual members, and
uses as an illustration the human body which con-
sists of various organs with various functions. It
is God, argues the apostle, who has ‘‘tempered,”
“eompounded” or “blended,” the body. Each
member has its place and function and must contrib-
ute to the welfare of the whole frame. The same
Gr word occurs in He 4 2. The author urges the
necessity of faith in regard to the gospel. The un-
believing Israelites had derived no benefit from
their hearing of the gospel because their hearing of
it was not “mixed” with faith. Lewis


TEMPERANCE, tem’pér-ans (éyxpdrea, egkrd-
teia), TEMPERATE, tem’pér-dt (éyxparfs, eg-
kratés, vypadv0s, néphdlios, cappav, séphron):
ARV departs from AV and ERV by translating
egkrateia “self-control” (Acts 24 25; Gal 5 23;
2 Pet 1 6; 1 Cor 9 25), following ERVm in sev-
eral of these passages. This meaning is in ac-
cordance with classical usage, Plato applying it
to “mastery” not only of self, but of any object
denoted by a genitive following. LXX applies it
to the possession “of strongholds’ (2 Macc 8 30;
10 15), “of a position” (10 17), “of the city” (13
13), ‘of wisdom” (Sir 6 27). The reflexive mean-
ing of “‘self-mastery,” “self-restraint,” is equally
well established in the classics and LXX. Thus, in
the verbal form, it is found in Gen 43 31, for the
self-restraint exercised by Joseph in the presence
of his brethren, when they appeared baron him
as suppliants, andin 1§ 13 12, where Saul professes
that he “forced”? himself to do what was contrary
to his desire. For patristic use of the term, see
illustrations in Suicer’s Thesaurus Ecclesiasticus, I,
1000 ff. Clement of Alexandria: “Not abstaining
from all things, but using continently such things
as one has judged should be used”; “such things
as do not seem beyond right reason.” Basil:
“To avoid excess on both sides, so as neither by
luxury to be confused, nor, by becoming sickly, to
be disabled from doing what has been commanded.”
Chrysostom (on 1 Tim 1 8) applies it to “one
mastering passion of tongue, hand and unbridled
eyes.” Ellicott and Eadie (on Gal 5 23) quote
Diogenes Laertius to the effect that the word refers
to ‘control over the stronger passions.” In 1 Cor
9 25, Paul illustrates it by the training of an athlete,
whose regimen is not only described in the Ars
Poetica of Horace (412 ff), and in Epictetus (quoted
in Alford on this passage), but can be learned of the
many devotees and admirers of similar pursuits
today.

The principle involved is that of the concentra-
tion of all man’s powers and capabilities upon the
one end of doing God’s will, in and through whatever
calling God appoints, and the renunciation of every-
thing either wholly or to whatever degree necessary,
however innocent or useful it may be in its proper
place, that interferes with one’s highest efficiency in
this calling (1-Cor 10 31). Not limited to absti-
nence, it is rather the power and decision to abstain
with reference to some fixed end, and the use of the
impulses of physical, as servants for the moral, life.
It does not refer to any one class of objects that
meets us, but to all; to what concerns speech and
judgment, as well as to what appeals to sense. It
is properly an inner spiritual virtue, working into the
outward life, incapable of being counterfeited or
replaced by any abstinence limited to that which
is external (Augsburg Confession, Arts. XXVI,
XXVIII). When its absence, however, is referred
to as sin, the negative is generally more prominent
than the positive side of temperance. The refer-
ence in Acts 24 25 is to chastity, andin 1 Cor 7 9,
as the context shows, to the inner side of chastity.
In 1 Tim 3 2.11; Tit 2 2, the word néphalios has
its original meaning as the opposite to ‘“‘drunken”
(see Sopniety; Drink, Srronc). See also the
treatises on ethics by Luthardt (both the Com-
pendium and the History), Martensen, Koestlin
and Hiring on temperance, asceticism, continence.

H. E. Jacoss

TEMPEST, tem’pest (VIVO, sarah, or TID,
sarah, “a whirlwind,” DT, zerem, “overflowing
rain’; xewpov, cheimdn, OvedAda, thiella): Heavy
storms of wind and rain are common in Pal and the
Mediterranean. The storms particularly men-
tioned in the Bible are: (1) the 40 days’ rain of


Temple


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2930


the great flood of Noah (Gen 7 4); (2) hail and
rain as a plague in Egypt (Ex 9 18); (3) the great
rain after the drought and the contest of Elijah on
Carmel (1 K 18 45); (4) the tempest on the sea
in the story of Jonah (1 4); (5) the storm on the
Lake of Galilee when Jesus was awakened to calm
the waves (Mt 8 24; Mk 4 37; Lk 8 23); (6)
the storm causing the shipwreck of Paul at Melita
(Acts 27 18). Frequent references are found to
God’s power over storm and use of the tempest in
His anger: “He maketh the storm a calm” (Ps
107 29); He sends the ‘‘tempest of hail, a destroy-
ing storm” (Isa 28 2). See also Job 9 17; 21 18;
Isa 30 30. Jeh overwhelms His enemies as with a
storm: ‘She shall be visited of Jeh of hosts with
thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with
whirlwind and tempest” (Isa 29 6). Jeh isa “refuge
from the storm” (lsa 25 4; 4 6).
2 Atrrep H. Jory

TEMPLE, tem’p’l (22%, hekhal, “palace”;
sometimes, as in 1 K 6 3.5, etc; Ezk 41 1 15 ff,
used for “the holy place’ only; M2, bayith,
“house,” thus always in RV; tepév, hierdn, vaés,
naés):

A. Structure anp History
I. SOLOMON’S TEMPLE


I. InrropuctToRY
1. David's Project
2. Plans and Preparations
3. Character of the Building
4, Site of the Temple
5. Phoenician Assistance
Il. Tus Tempuie Boritpine
1. In General :
2. Dimensions, Divisions and Adornments
3. The Side-Chambers
4. The Porch and Pillars
III. Courts, Gates AND Roya. BuiLpines
1. The Inner Court
ey Walls
2) Gates
2. The Great Court
3. The Royal Buildings
IV. Fuewnitvre or THe TEMPLE
1. The Sanctnary
(1) The d°bhir
(2) The hékhat
2. The Court (Inner)
(1) The Altar
3 The Molten (Bronze) Sea
(3) The Lavers and Their Bases
Vv. History or THE TEMPLE
1. Building and Dedication
2. Repeated Plunderings, etc
3. Attempts at Reform
4, Final Overthrow


Il. EZEKIEL’6 PROPHETIC SKETCH


I. IntrRopucrory

1. Relation to History of Temple
2. The Conception Unique and Ideal
3. Its Symmetrical Measurements

IJ. Puan or tae TEMPLE
1. The Outer Court
2. The Inner Court
3. The Temple Building and Adjuncts


TIt.. THE TEMPLE OF ZERUBBABEL
I. Inrropuctory
1. The Decree of Cyrus
2. Founding of the Temple
3. Opposition and Completion of the Work
II. Tus Tempe Straouctuas
1. The House
2. Its Divisions and Furniture
3. Its Courts, Altar, etc
4. Later Fortunes


Iv. THE TEMPLE OF HEROD


I. Inrropucrory
1. Initiation of the Work
2. Its Grandeur
8. Authorities
4. Measurements
Ii. Tue Tempxe anv Irs Courts
1. Temple Area—Court of Gentiles
2. Inner Sanctuary Inclosure
(1) Wall, hél, sorégh, Gates
ey Court of the Women
3) Inner Courts: Court of Israel; Court of the
Priests
(4) The Altar, etc


3. The Temple Building
(1) House and Porch
(2) Hékhal and d°bhir
(3) The Side-Chambers
III. NT Associations or Henop’s TEMPLE
1. Earlier Incidents
2. Jesus in the Temple
3. The Passion-Week
4. Apostolic Church
5. The Temple in Christian Thought
LireRaTURE


A. STRUCTURE AND History
I, SOLOMON’S TEMPLE


I. Introductory.—The tabernacle having lasted
from the exodus till the commencement of the
monarchy, it appeared to David to be
1. David’s no longer fitting that the ark of God
Project should dwell within curtains (it was
then in a tent David had made for it
on Zion: 2 8 6 17), while he himself dwelt in a
cedar-lined house. The unsettled and unorgan-
ized state of the nation, which had hitherto necessi-
tated a portable structure, had now given place to
an established kingdom. The dwelling of Jeh
should therefore be henceforth a permanent build-
ing, situated at the center of the nation’s life, and
“exceeding magnificent” (1 Ch 22 5), as befitted
the glory of Jeh, and the prospects of the state.
David, however, while honored for his purpose,
was not permitted, because he had been a man of
war (2S 7; 1 Ch 22 8; ef 1 K 6 3),
2. Plans to execute the work, and the building
and Prepa~ of the house was reserved for his son,
rations Solomon. According to the Chronicler,
David busied himself in making exten-
sive and costly preparations of wood, stone, gold,
silver, etc, for the future sanctuary and its vessels,
even leaving behind him full and minute plang of
the whole scheme of the building and its contents,
divinely communicated (1 Ch 22 2ff; 28 11 ff;
29). The general fact of lengthened preparation,
and even of designs, for a structure which so deeply
occupied his thoughts, is extremely probable (cf
1 K 7 51).
The general outline of the structure was based on
that of the tabernacle (on the modern critical
reversal of this relation, see under B,


3. Charac- below). The dimensions are in the
ter of the main twice those of the tabernacle,
Building though it will be seen below that there


are important exceptions to this rule,
on which the critics found so much. The old ques-
tion (see TaBERNACLE) as to the shape of the
building—flat or gable-roofed—here again arises.
Not a few modern writers (Fergusson, Schick,
Caldecott, etc), with some older, favor the tent-
like shape, with sloping roof. It does not follow,
however, even if this form is, with these writers,
admitted for the tabernacle—a “tent”—that it is
applicable, or likely, for a stone “house,” and the
measurements of the Temple, and mention of a
“ceiling” (1 K 6 15), point in the opposite direc-
tion. It must still be granted that, with the scanty
data at command, all reconstructions of the Solo-
monic Temple leave much to be filled in from con-
jecture. Rev. Joseph Hammond has justly said:
“Tt is certain that, were a true restoration of the
Temple ever to be placed in our hands, we should
find that it differed widely from all attempted
‘restorations’ of the edifice, based on the scanty and
imperfect notices of our historian and Ezk” (Comm.
on 1 K 6, “Pulpit Comm.”).
The site of the Temple was on the eastern of the
two hills on whieh Jerus was built—that known in
: Scripture as Mt. Moriah (2 Ch 3 1)
4. Site of or Mt. Zion (the traditional view which
the Temple ear nee on the western hill, on
e other side of the Tyropcon,
though defended by some, seems ineeautles see


SOLOMON'S TEMPLE (SCHICK'S MODEL)


2931


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Temple


“Zion,” in HDB; “Jerusalem,” in DB, etc). The
place is more precisely defined as that where
Araunah (Ornan) had his threshing-floor, and David
built his altar after the plague (1 Ch 21 22; 2 Ch
31). This spot, in turn, is now all but universally
held to be marked by the sacred rock, es-sakhra
(within what is called the Haram area on the eastern
summit; see JERUSALEM), above which the “Dome
of the Rock,’ or so-called ‘Mosque of Omar,”
now stands. Here, according to traditional belief,
was reared the altar of burnt offering, and to the W.
of it was built the Temple. This location is indeed
challenged by Fergusson, W. R. Smith, and others,
who transfer the Temple-site to the southwestern
angle of the Haram area, but the great majority
of scholars take the above view. To prepare a
suitable surface for the Temple and connected
buildings (the area may have been some 600 ft.
E. to W., and 300 to 400 ft. N. to 8.), the summit
of the hill had to be leveled, and its lower parts
heightened by immense substructures (Jos, Ant,
VIII, iii, 9; XV, xi, 3; BJ, V, v, 1), the remains of
which modern excavations have brought to light
(cf Warren’s Underground Jerus; G. A. Smith’s
Jerus, etc).
For aid in his undertaking, Solomon invited the
coéperation of Hiram, king of Tyre, who willingly
lent his assistance, as he had before
5. Phoeni- helped David, granting Solomon per-
cian Assist- mission to send his servants to cut
ance down timber in Lebanon, aiding in
transport, and in the quarrying and
hewing of stones, and sending a skilful Tyrian artist,
another Hiram, to superintend the designing and
graving of objects made of the precious metals,
etc. For this assistance Solomon made a suitable
recompense (1 K 5; 2 Ch 2). Excavations seem
to show that a large part of the limestone of which
the temple was built came from quarries in the
immediate neighborhood of Jerus (Warren, Under-
ground Jerus, 60). The stones were cut, hewn
and polished at the places whence they were taken,
so that “there was neither hammer nor axe nor
any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in
building” (1 K 5 17.18; 6 7). Opinions differ as
to the style of architecture of the building. It was
probably unique, but Phoen art also must have left
its impress upon it (see ARCHITECTURE).
Il. The Temple Building.—1n contrast with the
tabernacle, which was a portable “‘tent,’”’ con-
sisting of a framework of acacia wood,
1. In with rich coverings hung over it, and
General standing in a “court”’ inclosed by
curtains (see TABERNACLE), the
Temple was a substantial “house” built of stone
(probably the hard white limestone of the district),
with chambers in three stories, half the height of
the building (1 K 6 5.6), round the sides and back,
and, in front, a stately porch (1 K 6 3), before
which stood two lofty bronze pillars—Jachin and
Boaz (1 K 7 21; 2 Ch 8 4.15~-17). Within, the
house was lined with cedar, overlaid with gold,
graven with figures of cherubim, palms, and open
flowers (1 K 6 15.18.21.22.29), and a partition of
cedar or stone divided the interior into two apart-
ments—one the holy place (the hékhal), the other
the most holy place, or ‘oracle’ (d*bhir) (1 K 6
16-18). The floor was of stone, covered with fir
(or cypress), likewise overlaid with gold (1 K 6
15.30). The platform on which the whole building
stood was probably raised above the level of the
court in front, and the building may have been
approached by steps. Details are not given. The
more particular description follows. :
The Temple, like the tabernacle, stood facing
E,, environel by “courts” (“inner” and ‘‘greater’’),
which are dealt with below. Internally, the di-


mensions of the structure were, in length and width,
double those of the tabernacle, viz. length 60

cubits, width 20 cubits. The height,
2. Dimen- howéver, was 30 cubits, thrice that of
sions, Di- the tabernacle (1 K 6 2; ef vs 18.20).
visions and The precise length of the cubit is un-
Adornments certain (see Cunir); here, as in the

art. TABERNACLE, it is taken as ap-
proximately 18 inches. In internal measurement,
therefore, the Temple was approximately 90 ft. long,
30 ft. broad, and 45 ft. high. This allows nothing


Plan of Solomon's Temple.


for the thickness of the partition between the two
chambers. For the external measurement, the
thickness of the walls and the width of the surround-
ing chambers and their walls require to be added.
It cannot positively be affirmed that the dimensions
of the Temple, including the porch, coincided pre-
cisely with those of Ezekiel’s temple (cf Keil on
1 6 9.10); still, the proportions must have
closely approximated, and may have been in agree-
ment.

The walls of the building, as stated, were lined
within with cedar; the holy place was ceiled with
fir or cypress (2 Ch 3 5; the “oracle” perhaps
with cedar); the flooring likewise was of fir (1 K 6
15). All wasoverlaid with gold, and walls and doors
(see below) were adorned with pravings: of cheru-
bim, palm trees, and open flowers (1 6 19-35;
2 Ch 3 6 adds “‘precious stones’). Of the two
chambers into which the house was divided, the
outermost (or hékhal) was 40 cubits (60 ft.) long,
and 20 cubits (30 ft.) wide (ver 17); the inner-
most (or d¢bhir) was 20 cubits in length, breadth and
height—a cube (ver 20). As-the height of the
Temple internally was 30 cubits, it is obvious that
above the most holy place there was a vacant space
20 cubits long and 10 high. This apparently was
utilized as a chamber or chambers for storage or
other purposes. It has been held by some (Kurtz,
Fergusson, etc) that the ceiling along the entire
Temple was at the height of 20 cubits, with cham-
bers above (cf the allusion to ‘upper chambers”
in 1 Ch 28 11; 2 Ch 8 9); this, however, seems
unwarranted (cf Bahr on 1 K 6 14-19; the ‘upper
chambers” were “overlaid with gold,” 2 Ch 3 9,
which points to something nobler in character).
The inner chamber was a place of “thick dark-
ness” (1 K 8 12).

The thickness of the Temple walls is not given,
but the analogy of Ezekiel’s temple (Ezk 41) and
what is told of the side-chambers render it
probable that the thickness was not less than 6
cubits ( ft.). Around the Temple, on its two


Temple


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2932


sides and at the back, were built chambers (¢¢la‘ath,
lit. “ribs’”’”), the construction of which is summarily
described. They were built in three
3. The stories, each story 5 cubits in height
Side- (allowance must also be made for floor-
Chambers ing and roofing), the lowest being 5
cubits in breadth, the next 6 cubits,
and the highest 7 cubits. This is explained by the
fact that the chambers were not to be built into the
wall of the Temple, but were to rest on ledges or
rebatements in the wall, each rebate a cubit in
breadth, so that the wall became thinner, and the
chambers broader, by a cubit, each stage in the
ascent (1 K 6 5-10). The door admitting into
these chambers was apparently in the middle of the
right side of the house, and winding stairs led up to
the second and third stories (ver 8). It isnot stated
how many chambers there were; Jos (Ant, VIII,
iii, 2) gives the number as 30, which is the number
in Ezekiel’s temple (Ezk 41 6). The outer wall of
the chambers, which in Ezk is 5 cubits thick (41 9),
may have been the same here, though some make it
less. It is a question whether the rebatements were
in the Temple wall only, or were divided between it
and the outer wall; the former seems the more prob-
able opinion, as nothing is said of rebatements in
the outer wall. Above the chambers on either side
were “windows of fixed lattice-work” (ver 4), ie.
openings which could not be closed (‘‘windows
broad within and narrow without’). The pur-
poses for which the chambers were constructed
are not mentioned. They may have been used
partly for storage, partly for the accommodation
of those engaged in the service of the Temple
(ef 1 Ch 9 27).
A conspicuous feature of the Temple was the
porch in front of the building, with its twin pillars,
Jachin and Boaz. Of the porch itself


4, The a very brief description is given. It
Porch and isstated to have been 20 cubits broad—
Pillars the width of the house—and 10 cubits:


deep (1 K 6 3). Its height is not
given in 1 K, but itissaidin 2 Ch 3 4 to have been
120 cubits, or approximately 180 ft. Some accept
this enormous height (Ewald, Stanley, etc), but
the majority more reasonably infer that there has
been a corruption of the number. It may have
been the same height as the Temple—30 cubits. It
was apparently open in front, and, from what is
said of its being “overlaid within with pure gold”
(2 Ch 8 4), it may be concluded that it shared in
the splendor of the main building, and had archi-
tectural features of its own which are not recorded.
Some find here, in the wings, treasury chambers,
and above, ‘‘upper chambers,” but such restorations
are wholly conjectural. It is otherwise with the
monumental brass (bronze) pillars—Jachin and
Boaz—of which a tolerably full description is pre-
served (1 K 7 15-22; 2 Ch 3 15-17; 4 11-18;
ef Jer 62 20-23), still, however, leaving many
points doubtful. The pillars which stood in front
of the porch, detached from it, were hollow bronze
castings, each 18 cubits (27 ft.) in height (35 cubits
in 2 Ch 3 15 is an error), and 12 cubits (18 ft.)
in circumference, and were surmounted by capitals
5 cubits (74 ft.) high, richly ornamented on their
lower, bowl-shaped (1 K 7 20.41.42) parts, with
two rows of pomegranates, inclosing festoons of
chain-work, and, in their upper parts, rising to the
height of 4 cubits (6 ft.) in graceful lily-work (see
JACHIN AND Boaz).

It was seen that the holy place (hékhal) was
divided from the most holy (d¢bhir) by a partition,
probably of cedar wood, though some think of a
stone wall, one or even two cubits thick. In this
partition were folding doors, made of olive wood,
with their lintels 4 cubits wide (1 K 6 31; some


interpret differently, and understand the upper
part of the doorway to be a pentagon). The doors,
like the walls, had carvings of cherubim, palm
trees, and flowers, and the whole was gold-plated
(ver 32). Behind the partition hung the sanc-
tuary veil (2 Ch 3 14). At. the entrance of the
Temple, similarly, were folding doors, with their
lintels 5 cubits in width, only this time the posts
only were of olive, while the doors, divided into two
leaves, were of fir (or cypress) wood (1 K 6 33-
35). The carving and gold-plating were as on the
inner doors, and all the doors had hinges of gold
(1 K 7 50). ae

If, Courts, Gates and Royal Buildings.—The
Temple was inclosed in “courts’—an “inner”
(1 K 6 36; 7 12; 2 Ch 4 9, “court of the priests”;


Great Court including Royal Buildings.


1. Great Court. 2. The ‘‘Other'’ or Middle Court. 38, The Inner (or Temple)
Court. 4. House of Lebanon. 5. Porch of Pillars. 6, Throne Porch.
7. Royal Palace. 8. Harem. 9. Temple, 10. Altar.


Jer 36 10, “the upper court”; Ezk 8 3.16; 10 3),
and an outer or ‘greater court” (1 K 7 9.12; 2 Ch
4 9)—regarding the situation, dimensions and
relations of which, alike to one another and to the
royal buildings described in 1 K 7, the scanty
notices in the history leave room for great diversity
of opinion (see Court oF THE SANCTUARY).

The “inner court” (hdcér ha-p’nimith) is repeat-
edly referred to (see above). Its dimensions are not

given, but they may be presumed
1. The to be twice those of the tabernacle
Inner Court court, viz. 200 cubits (800 ft.) in

length and 100 cubits (150 ft.) in
breadth. The name in Jer 36 10, “the upper
court,” indicates that it was on a higher level than
the “great court,” and as the Temple was probably
on a platform higher still, the whole would present
a striking terraced aspect.

(1) The wails of the court were built of three rows
of hewn stone, with a coping of cedar beams (1 K
6 36). Their height is not stated; it is doubtful
if it would admit of the colonnades which some
have supposed; but “chambers” are mentioned
(Jer 85 4; 36 10—if, indeed, all belong to the


2933


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Temple


“inner” court), which imply a substantial structure.
It was distinctively ‘‘the priests’ court” (2 Ch 4 9);
probably, in part, was reserved for them; to a
certain degree, however, the laity had evidently
free access into it (Jer 36 10; 38 14; Ezk 8 16,
etc). The mention of ‘‘the new court” (2 Ch 20
5, time of Jehoshaphat), and of ‘the two courts of
the house of Jeh” (2 K 21 5; 2 Ch 88 5, time
of Manasseh), suggests subsequent enlargement
and division.

(2) Though gates are not mentioned in the
narratives of the construction, later allusions show
that there were several, though not all were of the
time of Solomon. The principal entrance would,
of course, be that toward the E. (see East Gate).
In Jer 26 10 there is allusion to “the entry of the
new gate of Jeh’s house.” This doubtless was “the
upper gate” built by Jotham (2 K 15 35) and may
reasonably be identified with the ‘gate that looketh
toward the N.” and the ‘gate of the altar” (i.e.
through which the sacrifices were brought) in Ezk
8 3.5, and with “‘the upper gate of Benjamin” in Jer
20 3. Mention is also made of a “gate of the guard”
which descended to the king’s house (2 K 11 19;
see below). Jeremiah speaks of a ‘third entry that
is in the house of Jeh” (38 14), and of “three keepers
of the threshold” (52 24), but it is not clear which
court is intended.

The outer or ‘‘great court” of the Temple (hdgér
ha-gdhélah) opens up more difficult problems.

Some regard this court as extending


2. The to the E. in front of the “inner court”’;
Great others, as Keil, think of it as a great
Court inclosure surrounding the ‘‘inner court”


and stretching perhaps 150 cubits E.
of the latter (cf his Bib. Archaeology, I, 170-71).
These writers remove the court from all connection
with the royal buildings of 1 K 7, and distinguish
it from “the great court of 7 9.12.” A quite differ-
ent construction is that advocated by Stade and
Benzinger, and adopted by most recent authorities
(ef arts. on “Temple” in HDB, IV, in EB, IV, in
one-vol HDB, in DB [Dalman]; G. A. Smith, Jerus,
lI, 59 ff, etc). The great court, on this view, not
only surrounds the Temple, with its (inner) court,
but, extending to the S., incloses the whole com-
plex of the royal buildings of 1 K 7. This has
the advantage of bringing together the references
to the ‘great court” in 1 K 7 9.12 and the other
references to the outer court. The court, thus
conceived, must have been very large. The ex-
tensive part occupied by the royal buildings being
on a lower level than the ‘inner court,” entrance
to it is thought to have been by “the gate of the
guard unto the king’s house” mentioned in 2 K
11 19. Its wall, like that of the inner court, was
built in three courses of hewn stone, and one course
of cedar (1 K 7 12). Its gates overlaid with brass
(2 Ch 4 9,i.e., “bronze”’) show that the masonry
must have been both high and substantial. On the
“other court” of 1 K 7 8, see next paragraph.
The group of buildings which, on the theory now


stated, were inclosed by the southern part of the great
court, are those described in 1 K 7 1-12.


3. The They were of hewn stone and cedar wood
Royal (vs 9-11), and embraced: (1) The king’s

oy: ; house, or royal palace (ver 8), in close con-
Buildings  tiguity with the Temple-court (2 K 11


19). (2) Behind this to the W., the house
of Pharaoh’s daughter (ver 9)—the apartments of the
women. Both of these were inclosed In a ‘‘court’’ of
their own, styled in ver 8 ‘the other court,” and in 2 K
20 4 m “the middle court." (3) 8. of this stood the
throne-room, and porch or hall of judgment, paneled in
cedar ‘from floor to floor,’ i.e. from floor to ceiling (ver 7).
The throne, we read later (1 K 10 18-20), was of ivory,
overlaid with gold, and on either slde of the throne, as
well as of the six steps that led up to it, were lions, The
hall served as an audience chamber, and for the adminis-
tration of justice. (4) Yet farther 8. stood the porch or
hall of pillars, 50 cubits (75 ft.) long and 30 cubits (45 ft.)


broad, with a sub-porch of its own (ver 6). It is best
regarded as a place of promenade and vestibule to the
hall of judgment. (5) Lastly, there was the imposing
and elaborate building known as ‘‘ the house of the forest
of Lebanon" (ys 2) which appears to have received
this name from its multitude of cedar pillars. Thescanty
hiuts as to its internal arrangements have baffled the
Ingenuity of the commentators. The house was 100 cubits
(150 ft.) in length, 50 cubits (75 ft.) in breadth, and 30
cubits (45 ft.) in height. Going round the sides and
back there were apparently four rows of pillars (LX X has
three rows), on which, supported by cedar beams, rested
three tiers or stories of side-chambers (lit. ‘'ribs,’’ as in

5; cf RVm). In ver 3 it is disputed whether the
number ‘forty and five; fifteen in a row'’ (as the Heb
may be read) refers to the pillars or to the chambers; if to
the former, the LX X reading of *' three rows”’ is prefer-
able. The windows of the tiers faced each other on the
Qpporie sides (vs 4.5). But the whole construction is
obscure and doubtful. The spacious house was used
partly asan armory; here Solomon put his 300 shields of

caten gold (10 17}.


IV. Furniture of the Temple.—We treat here,
first, of the sanctuary in its two divisions, then of
the (inner) court.

(1) The “dbhir.”—In the most holy place, or
dbhir, of the sanctuary stood, as before, the old

Mosaic ark of the covenant, with its
1. The two golden cherubim above the mercy-
Sanctuary seat (see ARK OF THE COVENANT;
TapernacLte). Now, however, the
symbolic element was increased by the ark being
placed between two other figures of cherubim,
made of olive wood, overlaid with gold, 10 cubits
(15 ft.) high, their wings, each 5 cubits (73 ft.)
long, outstretched so that they reached from wall
to wall of the oracle (20 cubits), the inner wings
meeting in the center (1 K 6 23-28; 2 Ch 3 10-
13). See CHERuBIM.

(2) The “hekhal.”—In the holy place, or hekhal,
the changes were greater. (a) Before the oracle,
mentioned as belonging to it (1 K 6 22), stood
the altar of incense, covered with cedar, and over-
laid with gold (1 K 6 20.22; 7 48; 2 Ch 4 19;
see AuTaR oF INcENsE). It is an arbitrary pro-
cedure of criticism to attempt to identify this altar
with the table of shewbread. (6) Instead of one
golden candlestick, as in the tabernacle, there were
now 10, 5 placed on one side and 5 on the other, in
front of the oracle. All, with their utensils, were
of pure gold (1 K 7 49; 2 Ch 4 7). (c) Likewise,
for one table of shewbread, there were now 10, 5
on one side, 5 on the other, also with their utensils
made of gold (1 K 7 48, where, however, only one
table is mentioned; 2 Ch 4 8, ‘100 basins of gold’).
As these objects, only enlarged in number and
dimensions, are fashioned after the model of those
of the tabernacle, further particulars regarding them
are not given here.

(1) The altar—The most prominent object in
the Temple-court was the altar of burnt offering,

or brazen altar (see BRazeN ALTAR).


2. The The site of the altar, as already seen,
Court was the rock es sakhraé, where Araunah
(Inner) had his threshing-floor. The notion


of some moderns that the rock itself
was the altar, and that the brazen (bronze) altar
was introduced later, is devoid of plausibility. An
altar is always something reared or built (ef 2 S 24
18.25). The dimensions of the altar, which are
not mentioned in 1 K, are given in 2 Ch 4 1 as 20
cubits (80 ft.) long, 20 cubits (30 ft.) broad, and
10 enbits (15 ft.) high. As utensils connected with
it—an incidental confirmation of its historicity—
are pots, shovels, basins and fleshhooks (1 K 7 40.
45; 2 Ch 4 11.16). It will be observed that the
assumed halving proportions of the tabernacle are
here quite departed from (cf Ex 27 1).

(2) The molten (bronze) sea—A new feature in
the sanctuary court—taking the place of the
‘Javer” in the tabernacle—was the “molten sea,”
the name being given to it for its great size. It was


Temple


an immense basin of bronze, 5 cubits (73 ft.) high,
10 cubits (15 ft.) in diameter at the brim, and 30
cubits (45 ft.) in circumference, resting on 12 bronze
oxen, and placed between the altar and the Temple-
porch, toward the S. (1 K 7 23-26.39; 2 Ch 4
2-5.10). The bronze was a handbreadth in thick-
ness. The brim was shaped like the flower of a
lily, and encompassing the basin were ornamental
knops. Its capacity is given as 2,000 baths (1 K
7 26; by error in 2 Ch 4 5, 3,000 baths). The
oxen on which it rested faced the four cardinal
points—three looking each way. The “sea,” like
the laver, doubtless supplied the water for the wash-
ing of the priests’ hands and feet (cf Ex 30 18;
38 8). The view of certain scholars (Kosters,
Gunkel, etc) that the “sea” is connected with Bab
mythical ideas of the great deep is quite fanciful;
no hint appears of such significance in any part of
the narrative. The same applies to the lavers in
the next paragraph.

(8) The lavers and their bases —The tabernacle
laver had its place taken by the “‘sea” just described,
but the Temple was also provided with 10 lavers or
basins, set on “bases” of elaborate design and mov-
ing upon wheels—the whole made of bronze (1 K
7 27-37). Their use seems to have been for the
washing of sacrifices (2 Ch 4 6), for which pur-
pose they were placed, 5 on the north side, and 5 on
the south side, of the Temple-court. The bases
were 4 cubits (6 ft.) long, 4 cubits broad, and 3
cubits (4% ft.) high. These bases were of the
nature of square paneled boxes, their sides being
ornamented with figures of lions, oxen and cherubim,
with wreathed work beneath. They had four feet,
to which wheels were attached. The basin rested on


a rounded pedestal, a cubit high, with an opening .


14 cubits in diameter to receive the laver (1 K 7
31). Mythological ideas, as just said, are here out
of place.
V. History of the Temple.—The Temple was
founded in the 4th year of Solomon’s reign (1 K 6
1), and occupied 7} years in building
1. Building (6 38); the royal buildings occupied
and Dedi- 13 years (7 1)—20 years in all (the
cation two periods, however, may in part syn-
chronize). On the completion of the
Temple, the ark was brought up, in the presence of a
vast assemblage, from Zion, and, with innumerable
sacrifices and thanksgiving, was solemnly deposited
in the Holy of Holies (1 K 8 1-21; 2 Ch 5; 6
1-11). The Temple itself was then dedicated by
Solomon in the noble prayer recorded in 1 K 8 22-
61; 2 Ch 6 12-42, followed by lavish sacrifices,
and a 14 days’ feast. At its inauguration the
house was filled with the “glory” of Jeh (1 K 8 10.
11; 2 Ch 6 13.14).
The religious declension of the later days of
Solomon (1 K 11 1-8) brought in its train dis-
asters for the nation and the Temple.
2. Repeated On Solomon’s death the kingdom was
Plunderings disrupted, and the Temple ceased to
be the one national sanctuary. It
had its rivals in the calf-shrines set up by Jeroboam
at Beth-el and Dan (1 K 12 25-83). In the 5th
year of Rehoboam an expedition was made against
Judah by Shishak, king of Egypt, who, coming
to Jerus, carried away the treasures of the Temple,
together with those of the king’s house, including
the 300 shields of gold which Solomon had made
(1 K 14 25-28; 2 Ch 12 2-9). Rehoboam’s wife,
Maacah, was an idolatress, and during the reign of
Abijam, her son, introduced many abominations
into the worship of the Temple (1 K 16 2.12.13).
Asa cleared these away, but himself further depleted
the Temple and royal treasuries by sending all
that was left of their silver and gold to Ben-hadad,
king of Syria, to buy his help against Baasha, king


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2934


of Israel (1 K 15 18.19). Again the Temple
was foully desecrated by Athaliah (2 Ch 24 7),
necessitating the repairs of Jehoash (2 K 12 4 ff;
2 Ch 24 4ff); and a new plundering took place
in the reign of Ahaziah, when Jehoash of Israel
carried off all the gold and silver in the Temple and
palace (2 K 14 14). Uzziah was smitten with
leprosy for presuming to enter the holy place to
offer incense (2 Ch 26 16-20). Jehoshaphat, earlier,
is thought to have enlarged the court (2 Ch 20 5),
and Jotham built a new gate (2 K 15 35; 2 Ch
27 3). The ungodly Ahaz went farther than any
of hig predecessors in sacrilege, for, besides robbing
the Temple and palace of their treasures to secure
the aid of the king of Assyria (2 K 16 8), he re-
moved the brazen altar from its time-honored site,
and set up a heathen altar in its place, removing
likewise the bases and ornaments of the lavers, and
the oxen from under the brazen (bronze) sea (2 K
16 10-17).
An earnest attempt at reform of religion was made
by Hezekiah (2 K 18 1-6; 2 Ch 29 31), but even
he was driven to take all the gold and
3. Attempts silver in the Temple and king’s house
at Reform to meet the tribute imposed on him by
Sennacherib, stripping from the doors
and pillars the gold with which he himself had over-
laid them (2 K 18 14-16; 2 Ch 32 31). Things
became worse than ever under Manasseh, who reared
idolatrous altars in the Temple-courts, made an
Asherah, introduced the worship of the host of
heaven, had horses dedicated to the sun in the
Temple-court, and connived at the worst pollutions
of heathenism in the sanctuary (2 K 21 3-7;
23 7.11). Then came the more energetic reforms
of the reign of Josiah, when, during the repairs of
the Temple, the discovery was made of the Book of
the Law, which led to a new covenant with Jeh, a
suppression of the high places, and the thorough
cleansing-out of abuses from the Temple (2 K 22;
23 1-25; 2 Ch 34; 35). Still, the heart of the
people was not changed, and, as seen in the history,
and in the pages of the Prophets, after Josiah’s
death, the old evils were soon back in full force (cf
e.g. Ezk 8 7-18).
The end, however, was now at hand. Nebuchad-
nezzar made Jehoiakim his tributary; then, on
his rebelling, came, in the reign of
4, Final Jehoiachin, took Jerus, carried off
Overthrow the treasures of the Temple and palace,
with the gold of the Temple vessels
(part had already been taken on his first approach,
2 Ch 36 7), and led into captivity the king, his
household and the chief part of the population (2
K 24 1-17). Eleven years later (586 BC), after
a siege of 18 months, consequent on Zedekiah’s
rebellion (2 IX 26 1), the Bab army completed the
destruction of Jerus and the Temple. Only a few
lesser utensils of value, and the brazen (bronze)
pillars, bases and sea remained; these were now
taken away, the larger objects being broken up
(2 K 26 13-16). The Temple itself, with its
connected buildings, and the houses in Jerus gener-
ally, were set on fire (ver 9). The ark doubtless
perished in the conflagration, and is no more heard of.
The residue of the population—all but the poorest—
were carried away captive (vs 11.12; see Cap-
tivity). Thus ended the first Temple, after about
400 years of chequered existence.


Il. EZEKIEL’S PROPHETIC SKETCH


I. Introductory.—Wellhausen has said that chs
40-48 of Ezk “are the most important in his book,
and have been, not incorrectly, called the key to
the OT” (Prolegomena, ET, 167). He means that
Ezekiel’s legislation represents the first draft, or
sketch, of a priestly code, and that subsequently,


2935


on its basis, men of the priestly school formulated
the PC as we have it. Without accepting this view,
dealt with elsewhere, it is to be ad-
1. Relation mitted that Ezekiel’s sketch of a re-
to History stored temple in chs 40-43 has impor-
of Temple tant bearings on the history of the
Temple, alike in the fact that it presup-
poses and sheds back light upon the structure and ar-
rangements of the first Temple (Solomon’s), and that
in important respects it forecasts the plans of the
second (Zerubbabel’s) and of Herad’s temples.
_ While, however, there is this historical relation,
it is to be observed that Ezekiel’s temple-sketch is
unique, presenting features not found
2. Concep- in any of the actually built temples.
tion Unique The temple is, in truth, an ideal con-
andIdeal struction never intended to be literally
realized by returned exiles, or any other
body of people. Visionary in origin, the ideas em-
bodied, and not the actual construction, are the main
things to the prophet’s mind. It gives Ezekiel’s
conception of what a perfectly restored temple and
the service of Jeh would be under conditions which
could scarcely be thought of as ever likely literally
to arise. A literal construction, one may say,
was impossible. The site of the temple is not the
old Zion, but “a very high mountain” (40 2),
occupying indeed the place of Zion, but entirely
altered in elevation, configuration and general
character. The temple is part of a scheme of a
transformed land, partitioned im parallel tracts
among the restored 12 tribes (47 183—48 7.23-29),
with a large area in the center, likewise stretching
across the whole country, hallowed to Jeh and
His service (48 8-22). Supernatural features, as
that. of the flowing stream from the temple in ch
47, abound. It is unreasonable to suppose that the
prophet looked for such changes—some of them
quite obviously symbolical—as actually impending.
The visionary character of the temple has the
effect of securing that its measurements are perfectly
symmetrical. The cubit used is de-
3. Its Sym- fined as “a cubit and a handbreadth”


metrical (40 5), the contrast being with one or
Measure- more smaller cubits (see CusiT). In
ments the diversity of opinion as to the precise


length of the cubit, it may be assumed
here that it was the same sacred cubit employed
in the tabernacle and first Temple, and may be
treated, as before, as approximately equivalent
to 18 inches.

I. Plan of the Temple.—Despite obscurities and
corruption in the text of Ezk, the main outlines
of the ideal temple can be made out without
much difficulty (for details the comms. must be
consulted; Davidson’s “Ezekiel” in the
Cambridge Bible series may be recommended;
cf also Keil; a very lucid description is given in
Skinner’s “Book of Ezk,”’ in the Expositor’s Bible,
406-13; for a different view, see Caldecott, The
Second Temple in Jerus).

The temple was inclosed in two courts—an outer and


an inner—quite different, however, in character and
arrangement from those of the first


1. Outer Temple. The outer court, as shown by
. the separate measurements (cf Keil on
Court 40 27), was a large square of 500 cubits

(750 ft.), bounded by a wall 6 cubits
(9 ft.) thick and 6 cubits high (40 5). The wall
was pierced in the middle of its north, east and
south sides by massive gateways, extending into the
court to a distance of 50 cubits (75 ft.), with a width


of 25 cubits (37} ft.). On either side of the passage in
these gateways were three guardrooms, each 6 cubits
square (ver 7 m), and each gateway terminated in 4
“porch,” 8 cubits (12 ft.) long (ver 9), and apparently
(thus LXX, ver 14; the Heb text seems corrupt), 20
cubits across. ‘The ascent to the gateways was by seven
steps (ver 6; ef vs 22.26), showing that the level of the
court was to this extent higher than the ground outside.
Round the court, on the three sides named—its edge


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


—,


Temple


in line with the ends of the gateways—was a ‘pavement,’
on which were built, agalnst the wall, chambers, 30 In
number (vs 17.18). At the four corners were inclosures
‘ee cubits by 30) where the sacrifices were cooked
ef 46 21-24)—a fact which suggests that the cells were
mainly for purposes of feasting. (The ‘‘arches’’ ['élam-
mim] of vs 16.21, etc [RVm “colonnade"’], if distin-


-guished from the ‘‘porch” ['uldm]—A. B. Davidson and


others identify them—are still parts of the gateway—
vs 21, etc.)


a ese as are te Hebi by


<cibti


Ezekiel’s Temple Plan.


The inner court was a square of 100 cubits (150 ft.),
situated caer uy. in the center of the larger court (40 47).
t, too, was surrounded by @ wall, and had


2. Inner gateways, with guardrooms, etc, similar
% to those of the outer court, saving that
Court the gateways projected outward (50


cubits), not inward. The gates of outer
and inner courts were opposite to each other on the N.,
E., and S., a hundred cubits apart (vs 19.23.27; the whole
space, therefore, from wall to wall was 50 and 100 and
50 =200 cubits). The ascent to the gates in this case
was by eight steps (ver 37), indicating another rise in
level for the inner court. ‘here were two chambers at
the sides of the north and south gates respectively, one
for Levites, the other for priests (vs 44-46; cfm); at
the gates also (perhaps only at the north gate) were
stone tables for slaughtering (vs 39-43). In the center
of this inner court was the great altar of burnt offering
(43 14-17)—a structure 18 cubits (27 ft.) square at the
base, and rising in four stages (1, 2, 4, and 4 cubits high
respectively, vs 14.15), till it formed a square of 12 cubits
ie ft.) at the top or hearth, with four horns at the corners
ys 15.16). Steps led up to it on the E. (ver 17). See
ALTAR OF BURNT OFFERING.
The inner court was extended westward by a second
square of 100 cubits, within which, on a platform elevated
another 6 cubits (9 ft.), stood the temple


3. Temple roper and its connected buildings (41 8).
Building his platform or basement is shown by the
measurements to be 60 cubits broad (N.
and and 8.) and 105 cubits long (E. and W.)—
Adjuncts 5 cubits projecting into the eastern square.
The ascent to the temple-porch was by 10


steps (40 49; LXX, RVm). The temple itself was a
building consisting, like Solomon's, of three parts—a porch
at the entrance, 20 cubits (30 ft.) broad by 12 cubits
(18 ft.) deep (so most, following LXX, as required by the
other measurements); the holy place or hékhal, 40
cubits (60 ft.) long by 20 cubits (30 ft.) broad; and the
most holy place, 20 cubits by 20 (40 48.49; 41 1-4);
the measurements areinternal. At the sides of the porch
stood two pillars (40 49), corresponding to the Jachin
and Boaz of the older Temple. ‘The holy and the most


Temple


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2936


holy places were scparated by a partition 2 cubits in
thickness (41 3; so most interpret). The most holy
place was empty; of the furniture of the holy place men-
tion is made only of an altar of wood (ver 22; see ALTAR
A, III, 7; B, ITI, 3). Walls and doors were ornamented
with chernbim and palm trees ‘vs 18.25). The wall of
the temple building was 6 cubits (9 it.) in thickness (41
5), and_on the north, south, and west sides, as in Solo-
mon's Temple, there were side-chambers in three stories,
30 in number (41 6; in each story ?), with an outer wall
5 cubits (74 ft.) in thickness (ver 9). These chambers
were, on the basement, 4 cubits broad; in the 2d and
3d stories, owing, as in the older Temple, to rebatements
in the wall, perhaps 5 and 6 cubits broad respectively
(vs 6.7; in Solomon's Temple the side-chambers were
5, 6, and 7 cubits, 1 K 6 6). These dimensions give
a total external breadth to the house of 50 cubits (with
a length of 100 cubits), leaving 5 cubits on either side
and in the front as a passage round the edge of the plat-
form on which the building stood (described as ‘‘that
which was left’) (vs 9.11). The western end, as far
as the outer wail, was occupied, the whole breadth of the
inner court, by a large building (ver 12); all but a pas-
sage of 20 cubits (30 ft.) between it and the temple,
belonging to what is termed ‘'the separate place”’
(gizrah, vS 12.13, etc). The temple-platform being
only 60 cubits broad, there remained a space of 20 cubits
(30 ft.) on the north and south sides, running the entire
length of the platform; this, continued round the back,
formed the gizrah, or ‘separate place’’ just named.
Beyond the gizrdh for 50 cubits (75 ft.) were other
chambers, apparently in two rows, the inner 100 cubits,
the outer 50 cubits, long, with a walk of 10 cubits between
(42 1-14; the passage, however, is obscure; some,
as Keil, place the ‘‘walk’’ outside the chambers).
These chambers were assigned to the priests for the eat-
ing of ‘the most holy things’’ (ver 13). See GaLuery.


Such, in general, was the sanctuary of the
prophet’s vision, the outer and inner courts of
which, and, crowning all, the temple itself, rising
in successive terraces, presented to his inner eye
an imposing spectacle which, in labored description,
he seeks to enable his readers likewise to visualize.


III. THE TEMPLE OF ZERUBBABEL


I. Introductory.—Forty-eight years after Nebu-
chadnezzar’s destruction of the first Temple, the
Bab empire came to an end (538 BC),


1. The and Persia became dominant under
Decree of Cyrus. In the year following, Cyrus
Cyrus made a decree sanctioning the return


of the Jews, and ordering the rebuild-
ing of the Temple at Jerus (2 Ch 36 23; Ezr 1
1-4). He not only caused the sacred vessels of the
old Temple to be restored, but levied a tax upon his
western provinces to provide materials for the build-
ing, besides what was offered willingly (Ezr 1 6-11;
6 3 ff). The rclatively small number of exiles
who chose to return for this work (40,000) were
led by Sheshbazzar, “the prince of Judah” (Ezr 1
11), whom some identify with Zerubbabel, likewise
named “governor of Judah” (Hag 11). With
these, if they were distinct, was associated Joshua
the high priest Gin Ear and Neh called ‘“Jeshua”).
The first work of Joshua and Zerubbabel was the
building of the altar on its old site in the 7th month
of the return (Ezr 3 3 ff). Masons
2. Founding and carpenters were engaged for the
of the building of the house, and the Phoeni-
Temple cians were requisitioned for cedar
wood from Lebanon (ver 7). In the
2d year the foundations of the temple were laid
with dignified ceremonial, amid rejoicing, and the
weeping of the older men, who remembered the
former house (vs 8-13). 4
The work soon met with opposition from the
mixed population of Samaria, whose offer to join
it had been refused; hostile representa-
3. Opposi- tions, which proved successful, were
tion and made to the Pers king; from which
Completion causes the Baildine was suspended
of the Work about 15 years, till the 2d year of
Darius Hystaspis (520 BC; Hzr 4).
On the other hand, the prophets Haggai and Zecha-
riah stimulated the flagging zeal of the builders, and,
new permission being obtained, the work was re-


sumed, and proceeded so rapidly that in 516 BC
the temple was completed, and was dedicated with
joy (Ezr 5, 6). ;

IL The Temple Structure.—Few details are
available regarding this temple of Zerubbabel. It
stood on the ancient site, and may
have been influenced in parts of its
plan by the descriptions of the temple
m Ezk. The inferiority to the first
Temple, alluded to in Ezr 3 12 and Hag 2 3, plainly
cannot refer to its size, for its dimensions as spec-
ified in the decree of Cyrus, viz. 60 cubits in
height, and 60 cubits in breadth (Hzr 6 3; there
is no warrant for confining the 60 cubits of height
to the porch only; cf Jos, Ant, XI, i), exceed
considerably those of the Temple of Solomon (side-
chambers are no doubt included in the breadth).
The greater glory of the former Temple can only
refer to adornment, and to the presence in it of
objects wanting in the second. The Mish declares
that the second temple lacked five things present in
the first—the ark, the sacred fire, the sh*khinah, the
Holy Spirit, and the Urim and Thummim (Yoma’,
xxi.2).

The temple was divided, like its predecessor,
into a boly and a most holy place, doubtless in

similar proportions. In 1 Macc 1 22
2. Its Di- mention is made of the “veil” between
visions and the two places. The most holy place,
Furniture as just said, was empty, save for a
stone on which the high priest, on the
great Day of Atonement, placed his censer (Yoma’,
y.2). The holy place had its old furniture, but on
the simpler scale of the tabernacle—a golden altar
of incense, a single table of shewbread, one 7-
branched candlestick. These were taken away
by Antiochus Epiphanes (1 Macc 1 21.22). At
the cleansing of the sanctuary after its profanation
by this prince, they were renewed by Judas Macca-
baeus (1 Macc 4 41 ff). Judas pulled down also
ee desecrated altar, and built a new one (vs
44 ff).


i. The
House


The second temple had twe courts—an outer and
an inner (1 Macc 4 38.48; 9 54: Jos, Ant, XIV, xvi, 2)
—planned_apparently on_the model of


3. Its those in Ezk. A. R. S. Kennedy infers
Courts from the measurements in the Haram

U that ‘‘the area of the great court of the
Altar, etc


second ue before it was enlarged by
Herod on the S. and E., followed that of
Ezekiel's outer court—that is, it measured 500 cubits
each way with the sacred rock precisely in the center”
(Expos T, XX,182). The altar on this old sakhra site
—the first thing of all to be ‘‘set on its base’’*(Ezr 3 3)
—is shown by 1 Macc 4 47 and a passage quoted by Jos
from Hecataeus (CAp, IJ, xxii) to have been built of
unhewn stones. Hecataeus gives its dimensions as a
square of 20 cubits and 10 cubits in height. There seems
to have been free access to this inner court till the time
of Alexander Jannaeus (104-78 BC), who, pelted by the
crowd as he sacrificed, fenced off the part of the court in
front of the altar, so that no layman could come farther
(Jos, Ant, XIII, xiii, 5). The courts were colonnaded
(Ant, XI, iv, 7; XIV, xvi, 2), and, with the house, had
numerous chambers (cf Neh 12 44; 13 4 ff, etc).

A brief contemporary description of this Temple and
its worship is given in Aristeas, 83-104. This writer's
interest, however, was absorbed chiefly by the devices for
carrying away the sacrificial blood and by the technique
of the officiating priests.


The vicissitudes of this temple in its later history
are vividly recorded in 1 Mace and in Jos. In
Ecclus 50 is given a glimpse of a cer-

4. Later tain Simon, son of Onias, who repaired
Fortunes the temple, and a striking picture is
_ , furnished of the magnificence of the
worship in his time. The desecration and_pil-
laging of the sanctuary by Antiochus, and its
cleansing and restoration under Judas are alluded
to above (see Hasmoneans; Maccapeans). At
length Judaea became an integral part of the Rom
empire. In 63 BC Pompey, having taken the
temple-hill, entered the most holy place, but kept


2937


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Temple


his hands off the temple-treasures (Ant, XIV, iv,
4), Some years later Crassus carried away every-
thing of value he could find (Ant, XIV, vii, 1).
The people revolted, but Rome remained victorious.
This brings us to the time of Herod, who was nomi-
nated king of Judaea by Rome in 39 BC, but did not
attain actual power until two years later.


Iv. THE TEMPLE OF HEROD
I. Introductory.—Herod became king de facto
by the capture of Jerus in 37 BC. Some years
later he built the fortress Antonia
1. Initiation to the N. of the temple (before 31 BC).
of the Work Midway in his reign, assigning a
religious motive for his purpose, he
formed the project of rebuilding the temple itself
on a grander scale (Jos gives conflicting dates;
in Ant, XV, xi, 1, he says “in his 18th year”; in BJ,
I, xxi, 1, he names his 15th year; the latter date,
as Schiirer suggests [G/V4, I, 369], may refer
tothe extensive preparations). Toallay the distrust
of his subjects, he undertook that the materials for
the new buildmg should be collected before the old
was taken down; he likewise trained 1,000 priests
to be masons and carpenters for work upon the
sanctuary; 10,000 skilled workmen altogether were
employed upon the task. The building was com-
menced in 20-19 BC. ‘The naos, or temple proper,
was finished in a year and a half, but it took 8 years
to complete the courts and cloisters. The total
erection occupied a much longer time (cf Jn 2 20,
“Forty and six years,” etc); indeed the work was
not entirely completed till 64 AD—6 years before
its destruction by the Romans.
Built of white marble, covered with heavy plates
of gold in front and rising high above its marble-
cloistered courts—themselves a succes-
2. Its sion of terraces—the temple, compared
Grandeur by Jos to a snow-covered mountain
(BJ, V, v, 6), was a conspicuous and
dazzling object from every side. The general struc-
ture is succinctly described by G. A. Smith: “‘Herod’s
temple consisted of a house divided like its prede-
cessor into the Holy of Holies, and the Holy Place;
a porch; an immediate fore-court with an altar of
burnt offering; a Court of Israel; in front of this
a Court of Women; and round the whole of the
preceding, a Court of the Gentiles” (Jerus, II, 502).
On the “four courts,” cf Jos, CAp, II, vui.
The original authorities on Herod's temple are chiefly


the descriptions in Jos (Ant, XV, xi, 3.5; BJ, V, v, etc),
and the tractate Middoth in the Mish.


‘ The data in these authorities, however,
e Authori do not always agree. The most helpful
ties modern descriptions, with plans, will be


found, with PR tee in Geta, Lane
Bib. Archaeology, I, 187 ff; in Fergusson, Temples o.
the Jews; in the arts. ‘‘Temple" in HDB (T. Witton
Davies) and £B (G. H. Box); in the important series
of papers by A. R. 8S. Kennedy in Ezpos T (vol xX),
“Some Problems of Herod's Temple’ (cf his art.
“Temple” in one-vol DB); in Sanday’s Sacred Sites
of the Gospels (Waterhouse); latterly in G. A. Smith,
Jerus, 11, 499f%. | i f
Differences of opinion continue as to the sacred cnbit.
. R. 8. Kennedy thinks the cubit.can be definitely
fixed at 17.6 in. (Ezpos T, XX, 24 ff);
4, Meas- _G- A; Smith reckons it at 20.67 in. (Jerus,
x I, 504); T. Witton Davies estimates
urements jt ’at ahout 18 in. (HDB, IV, 713), etc.
W. 8. Caldecott takes the cubit of Jos
and the Middath to be 1} ft. It will suffice in this
sketch to treat the cubit, as before, as approximately
equivalent to 18 in.


Il. The Temple and its Courts.—Jos states that
the area of Herod’s temple was double that of its
predecessor (BJ, I, xxi, 1). The


1. Temple Mish (Mid., ii.2) gives the area as 500
Area— cubits (roughly 750 ft.); Jos (Ant,
Court of XV, xi, 3) gives it as a stadium (about
Gentiles 600 Gr ft.); but neither measure 1s


quite exact. It is generally agreed
that on its east, west and south sides Herod’s


area corresponded pretty nearly with the limits of
the present Haram area (see JERUSALEM), but that
it did not extend as far N. as the latter (Kennedy
states the difference at about 26 as compared with
35 acres, and makes the whole perimeter to be about
1,420 yards, ut supra, 66). The shape was an
irregular oblong, broader at the N. than at the
S. The whole was surrounded by a strong wall,
with several gates, the number and _ position of
some of which are still matters of dispute. Jos
mentions four gates on the W. (Ant, XV, x1, 5),
the principal of which, named in Mid.,i3, “the gate
of Kiponos,” was connected by a bridge across the
Tyropceon with the city (where now is Wilson’s
Arch). The same authority speaks of two gates on
the These are identified with the ‘“‘Huldah”
(mole) gates of the Mish—the present Double and
Triple Gates—which, opening low down in the wall,
slope up in tunnel fashion into the interior of the
court. The Mish puts a gate also on the north and
oneon theeastside. The latter may berepresented
by the modern Golden Gate—a Byzantine structure,
now built up. This great court—known later as
the “Court of the Gentiles,” because open to every-
one—was adorned with splendid porticos or clois-
ters. The colonnade on the south side—known as
the Royal Porch—was specially magnificent. It
consisted of four rows of monolithic marble columns
~—162 in all—with Corinthian capitals, forming three
aisles, of which the middle was broader and double
the height of the other two. The roofing was of
carved cedar. The north, west, and east sides had
only double colonnades. ‘That on the east side was
the ‘‘Solomon’s Porch” of the NT (Jn 10 23; Acts
3 11; 6 19). Therewere also chambers for officials,
and perhaps a place of meeting for the Sanhedrin
(béth din) (Jos places this elsewhere). In the wide
spaces of this court took place the buying and sell-
ing described in the Gospels (Mt 21 12 and |\’s;

Jn 2 13 ff).
(1) Wall, “hel,” “sdrégh,” gates—In the upper
or northerly part of this large area, on a much
higher level, bounded likewise by a


2. Inner wall, was a second or inner inclosure—
Sanctuary the “sanctuary” in the stricter sense
Inclosure (Jos, BJ, V, v, 2)—comprising the


court of the women, the court of Israel
and the priests’ court, with the temple itself (Jos,
Ant, XV, xi, 5). The surrounding wall, according
to Jos (BJ, V, v, 2), was 40 cubits high on the out-
side, and 25 on the inside—a difference of 15 cubits;
its thickness was 5 cubits. Since, however, the
inner courts were considerably higher than the
court of the women, the difference in height may
have been some cubits less in the latter than in the
former (cf the different measurements in Kennedy,
ut supra, 182), a fact, which may explain the difficulty
felt as to the number of the steps in the ascent
(see below). Round the wall without, at least on
three sides (some except the W.), at a height of 12
(Mid.) or 14 (Jos) steps, was an embankment or
terrace, known as the Adi (fortification), 10 cubits
broad (Mid. says 6 cubits high), and inclosing the
whole was a low balustrade or stone parapet (Jos
says 3 cubits high) called the sdrégh, to which were
attached at intervals tablets with notices in Gr
and Lat, prohibiting entry to foreigners on pain of
death (see Partition, WALL OF). From within the
gdrégh ascent was made to the level of the hal by
the steps aforesaid, and five steps more led up to the
gates (the reckoning is probably to the lower level
of the women’s court). Nine gates, with two-storied
gatehouses “like towers” (Jos, BJ, V, v, 3), are men-
tioned, four on the N., four on the 8., and one on the
E.—the last probably to be identified, though this
is still disputed (Waterhouse, etc), with the “Gate
of Nicanor” (Mid.), or “Corinthian Gate’’ (Jos),


Temple


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2938


which is undoubtedly “the Beautiful Gate” of
Acts 3 2.10 (see for identification, Kennedy, ut
supra, 270). This principal gate received its names
from being the gift of a wealthy Alexandrian Jew,
Nicanor, and from its being made of Corinthian
brass. It was of great size—50 cubits high and 40
cubits wide—and was richly adorned, its brass glit-
tering like gold (Mid., ii.3). See Brautirrut Gats.
The other gates were covered with gold and silver
(Jos, BJ, V, v, 3).

(2) Court of the women.—The eastern gate,
approached from the outside by 12 steps (Mid.,
u.3; Maimonides), admitted into the court of the
women, so called because it was accessible to women
aswellastomen. Above its single colonnades were
galleries reserved for the use of women. Its di-
mensions are given in the Mish as 135 cubits square
(Mid., ii.5), but this need not be precise. Atits four
corners were large roofless rooms for storage and
other purposes. Near the pillars of the colonnades
were 13 trumpet-shaped boxes for receiving the
money-offerings of the people (cf the incident of the
widow’s mite, Mk 12 41 ff; Lk 21 1ff); forwhich
reason, and because this court seems to have been
the place of deposit of the temple-treasures gen-
erally, it bore the name “‘treasury” (gazophuldkion,
Jn 8 20). See TRrasury.

(8) The inner court—¥rom the women’s court,
the ascent was made by 15 semicircular steps (Mid.
ii.5; on these steps the Levites chanted, an
beneath them their instruments were kept) to the
inner court, comprising, at different levels, the court
of Israel and the court of the priests. Here, again,
at the entrance, was a lofty, richly ornamented
gate, which some, as said, prefer to regard as the
Gate of Nicanor or Beautiful Gate. Probably,
however, the view above taken, which places this
gate at the outer entrance, is correct. The Mish
gives the total dimensions of the inner court as 187
cubits long (E. to W.) and 135 cubits wide (Mida.,
ii.6; v.1). Originally the court was one, but dis-
turbances in the time of Alexander Jannaeus
(104-78 BC) led, as formerly told, to the greater
part being railed off for the exclusive use of the
priests (Jos, Ant, XIII, xiii, 5). In the Mish the
name “court of the priests” is used in a restricted
sense to denote the space—11 cubits—between the
altar and ‘‘the court of Israel” (see the detailed
measurements in Mid., v.1). The latter—‘‘the
court of Israel””—2} cubits lower than “the court of
the priests,” and separated from it by a pointed
fence, was likewise a narrow strip of only 11 cubits
(Mid., ii.6; v.1). Jos, with more probability, car-
ries the 11 cubits of the “court of Israel’ round
the whole of the temple-court (BJ, V, vi). Water-
house (Sacred Sites, 112) thinks 11 cubits too small
for a court of male Israelites, and supposes a much
larger inclosure, but without warrant in the authori-
ties (cf Kennedy, ut supra, 183; G. A. Smith,
Jerus, II, 508 ff). :

(4) The aliar, etc——In the priests’ court the
principal object was the great altar of burnt offering,
situated on the old site—the sakhra—immediately
in front of the porch of the temple (at 22 cubits
distance—the space “between the temple and the
altar” of Mt 23 35). The altar, according to the
Mish (Mid., iii.1), was 32 cubits square, and, like
Ezekiel’s, rose in stages, each diminishing by a
cubit: one of 1 cubit in height, three of 5 cubits,
which, with deduction of another cubit for the
priests to walk on, left a square of 24 cubits at the top.
It had four horns. Jos, on the other hand, gives 50
cubits for the length and breadth, and 15 cubits
for the height of the altar (BJ, V, v, 6)—his reckon-
ing perhaps including a platform (a cubit high?)
from which the height is taken (see Atrar). The
altar was built of unhewn stones, and had on the


8. a sloping ascent of like material, 82 cubits in
length and 16 in width. Between temple and
altar, toward the S., stood the “laver” for the priests.
In the court, on the north side, were rings, hooks,
and tables, for the slaughtering, flaying and sus-
pending of the sacrificial victims. é
(1) House and porch—Yet another flight of 12
steps, occupying most of the space between the
temple-porch and the altar, led up to


3. The the platform (6 cubits high) on which
Temple stood the temple itself. This mag-
Building nificent structure, built, as said before,


of blocks of white marble, richly orna-
mented with gold on front and sides, exceeded in
dimensions and splendor all previous temples.


a]


Front Elevation of Temple.


The numbers in the Mish and in Jos are in parts
discrepant, but the general proportions can readily
be made out. The building with its platform rose
to the height of 100 cubits (150 ft.; the 120 cubits
in Jos, Ant, XV, xi, 3, isa mistake), and was 60
cubits (90 ft.) wide. It was fronted by a porch of
like height, but with wings extending 20 cubits (80
ft.) on each side of the temple, making the total
breadth of the vestibule 100 cubits (150 ft.) also.
The depth of the porch was 10 or 11 cubits; prob-
ably at the wings 20 cubits (Jos). The entrance,
without doors, was 70 cubits high and 25 cubits
wide (Mid. makes 40 cubits high and 20 wide).
Above it Herad placed a golden eagle, which the
Jews afterward pulled -down (Ani, XVII, vi, 3).
The porch was adorned with gold.

(2) “Hékhal” and “debhir.”—Internally, the
temple was divided, as before, into a holy place
(hékhal) and a most holy (debhir)—the former
measuring, as in Solomon’s Temple, 40 cubits
(60 ft.) in length, and 20 cubits (80 ft.) in breadth;
the height, however, was double that of the older
Temple—60 cubits (90 ft.; thus Keil, etc, follow-
ing Jos, BJ, V, v, 5). Mid., iv.6, makes the height
only 40 cubits; A. R. 8. Kennedy and G. A. Smith
make the d*bhir a cube—20 cubits in height only.
In the space that remained above the holy places,
upper rooms (40 cubits) were erected. The holy
place was separated from the holiest by a partition
one cubit in thickness, before which hung an em-
broidered curtain or “veil’”—that which was rent
at the death of Jesus (Mt 27 51 and ||'s; Mid., iv.7,
makes two veils, with a space of a cubit between
them). The Holy of Holics was empty; only a
stone stood, as in the temple of Zerubbabel, on
which the high priest placed his censer on the Day


2939


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Temple


of Atonement (Mish, Yéma’, v.2). In the holy
place were the altar of incense, the table of shew-
bread (N.), and the seven-branched golden candle-
stick (S.). Representations of the two latter areseen
in the carvings on the Arch of Titus (see Sumw-
BREAD, TABLE OF; CANDLESTICK, GOLDEN). The
spacious entrance to the holy place had folding
doors, before which hung a richly variegated Bab
curtain. Above the entrance was a golden vine
with clusters as large as a man (Jos, Ant, XV, xi,
8; BJ, V, v, 4).

(3) The side-chambers—The walls of the temple
appear to have been 5 cubits thick, and against
these; on the N., W., and S., were built, as in Solo-
mon’s Temple, side-chambers in three stories, 60
cubits in height, and 10 cubits in width (the figures,
however, are uncertain), which, with the outer
walls, made the entire breadth of the house 60 or
70 cubits. Mid., iv.3, gives the number of the
chambers as 38 in all. The roof, which Keil speaks
of as “sloping” (Bib. Archaeology, I, 199), had
gilded spikes to keep off the birds. A balustrade
surrounded it 3 cubits high. Windows are not
mentioned, but there would doubtless be openings
for light into the holy place from above the side-
chambers.

Ill. NT Associations of Herod’s Temple.—
Herod’s temple figures so prominently in NT history
that it is not necessary to do more
than refer to some of the events of
which it was the scene. It was here,
before the incense altar, that the

aged Zacharias had the vision which assured him
that he should not die childless (Lk 1 11 ff). Here,
in the women’s court, or treasury, on the presenta-
tion by Mary, the infant Jesus was greeted by
Simeon and Anna (Lk 2 27ff), In His 12th
year the boy Jesus amazed the temple rabbis by
His understanding and answers (Lk 2 46 ff).
The chronological sequence of the Fourth Gospel
depends very much upon the visits of Jesus to the
temple at the great festivals (see
2. Jesusin Jesus Curisr). At the first of these
the Temple occurred the cleansing of the temple-
court—the court of the Gentiles—from
the dealers that profaned it (Jn 2 13 ff), an inci-
dent repeated at the close of the ministry (Mt 21
12 ff and ||’s). When the Jews, on the first occasion,
demanded a sign, Jesus spoke of the temple of His
body as being destroyed and raised up in three
days (Jn 2 19), eliciting their retort, “Forty and
six years was this temple in building,” ete (ver 20).
This may date the occurrence about 27 AD. At the
second cleansing He not only drove out the buyers
and sellers, but would not allow anyone to carry
anything through this part of the temple (Mk 11
15-17). In Jn His zeal flamed out because it was
His Father’s house; in Mk, because it was a house
of prayer for all nations (cf Isa 56 7). With this
non-exclusiveness agrees the word of Jesus to the
woman of Samaria: “The hour cometh, when
-neither in this mountain [in Samaria], nor in Jerus,
shall ye worship the Father” (Jn 4 21). During the
two years following His first visit, Jesus repeatedly,
at festival times, walked in the temple-courts, and
taught and disputed with the Jews. We find Him
in Jn 5 at ‘‘a feast” (Passover or Purim?); in
Jn 7, 8, at “the feast of tabernacles,’”’ where the
femple-police were sent to apprehend Him (7 32.
45 ff), and where He taught “in the treasury”
(8 20); inJn 10 22 ff, at “the feast of the dedica-
tion” in winter, walking in “Solomon’s Porch.”
Hig teaching on these occasions often started from
some familiar temple scene—the libations of water
carried by the priests to be poured upon the altar
(Jn 7 37 ff), the proselytes (Greeks even) in the
great portico (Jn 12 20 ff), etc. Of course Jesus,


1. Earlier
Incidents


not being of the priestly order, never entered the
sanctuary; His teaching took place in the several
courts open to laymen, generally in the “‘treasury”
(see Jn 8 20),
The first days of the closing week of the life of
Jesus—the week commencing with the Triumphal
Entry—were spent largely in the


3. The temple. Here Hespoke many parables
Passion- (Mt 21, 22 and |\’s); here He delivered
Week His tremendous arraignment of the


Pharisees (Mt 23 and ||’s); here, as He
“sat down over against the treasury,” He beheld
the people casting in their gifts, and praised the
poor widow who cast in her two mites above all
who cast in of their abundance (Mk 12 41 ff and
|’s). It was on the evening of His last day in the
temple that His disciples drew His attention to “the
goodly stones and offerings” (gifts for adornment)
of the building (Lk 21 5 and Ts) and heard from
His lips the astonishing announcement that the days
were coming—even in that generation—in which
there should not he left one stone upon another
(ver 6 and ||’s)._ The prediction was fulfilled to the
letter in the destruction of the temple by the
Romans in 70 AD.
Seven weeks after the crucifixion the Pentecost
of Acts 2 was observed. The only place that fulfils
the topographical conditions of the
4. Apostolic great gatherings is Solomon’s Porch.
Church The healing of the lame man (Acts
3 1 ff) took place at the “door... .
called Beautiful” of the temple, and the multitude
after the healing ran together into “Solomon’s
Porch” or portico (ver 11). Where also were the
words of Lk 24 53, they ‘were continually in the
temple, blessing God,” and after Pentecost (Acts
2 46), “day by day, continuing stedfastly .... in
the temple,” etc, so likely to be fulfilled? For long
the apostles continued the methods of their Master
in daily teaching in the temple (Acts 4 1ff). Many
years later, when Paul visited Jerus for the last time,
he was put in danger of his life from the myriads of
Jewish converts ‘all zealous for the law” (Acts 21
20), who accused him of profaning the temple by
bringing Greeks into its precincts, i.e. within the
sorégh (vs 28-30). But Christianity had now begun
to look farther afield than the temple. Stephen,
and after him Saul, who became Paul, preached
that “the Most High dwelleth not in houses made
with hands” (Acts 7 48; 17 24), though Paul
himself attended the temple for ceremonial and
other purposes (Acts 21 26). k
From the time that the temple ceased to exist,
the Talm took its place in Jewish estimation; but
it is in Christianity rather than in


5. The Judaism that the temple has a per-
Temple in petual existence. The writers
Christian makeno distinction between onetemple
Thought and another. Itis the idearather than


the building which is perpetuated in
Christian teaching. The interweaving of temple
associations with Christian thought and life runs
through the whole NT. Jesus Himself supplied
the germ for this development in the word He spoke
concerning the temple of His body (Jn 2 19.21).
Paul, notwithstanding all he had suffered from Jews
and Jewish Christians, remained saturated with
Jewish ideas and modes of thought. In one of his
earliest Epp. he recognizes the ‘“Jerus that is above”
as “the mother of us all” (Gal 4 26 AV). In an-
other, the “man of sin” is sitting “in the temple
of God’ (2 Thess 24). The collective church
(1 Cor 3 16.17), but also the individual believer
(1 Cor 6 19), is a temple. One notable passage
shows how deep was the impression made upon
Paul’s mind by the incident connected with Troph-
imus the Ephesian (Acts 21 29). That “middle


Temple


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2940


wall of partition” which so nearly proved fatal to
him then was no longer to be looked for in the Chris-
tian church (Eph 2 14), which was ‘‘a holy temple”
in the Lord (ver 21). It is naturally in the Ep. to
the He that we have the fullest. exposition of ideas
connected with the temple, although here the form
of allusion is to the tabernacle rather than the temple
(see TABERNACLE; cf Westcott on Hebrews, 233 ff).
The sanctuary and all it included were but represen-
tations of heavenly things. Finally, in Rev, the
vision is that of the heavenly temple itself (11 19).
But the church—professing Christendom?—is a
temple measured by God’s command (11 1.2 ff).
The climax is reached in 21 22-23: ‘“Isaw notemple
therein [i.e. in the holy city]: for the Lord God the
Almighty, and the Lamb, are the temple thereof

. andthe lamp thereof is the Lamb.” Special
ordinances are altogether superseded.


LirERATURE.—In general on the temples see Keil,
Bib. Archaeology, I, in which the older lit. is mentioned;
Fergusson, Temples of the Jews; Comms. on K, Ch, Ezr,
Neh, and Ezk; arts. in the dicts. and encs (DB, HDB,
EB); G. A. Smith, Jerus and similar works. On Solo-
mon'‘s Temple, cf Benzinger, Heb. Archdologie. On Eze-
kiel’s temple, see Skinner's ‘‘ Book of Ezk"' in Ezpositor’s
Bible. On Zerubhahel's temple, cf W. Shaw Caldecott,
The Second Temple in Jerus. The original authorities on
Herod's temple are chiefly Jos, Ant, XV,xi, and BJ, V,v;
and the Mish, Afiddéth, ii (this section of the AMiddoth,
from Barclay’s Talm, may he seen in App. I of Fergus-
son's work ahove named). The Ger. lit. is very fully
given in Schirer, HJP, I, 1, 438 ff (GJV4, I, 392 f).
See also the arts. of A. R. S. Kennedy in Expos T, XX,
referred to above, and P. Waterhouse, in Sanday, Sacred
Sites of the Gospels, 106 ff. On symbolism, cf Westcott,
Hebrews, 233 ff. See also arts. in this Encyclopaedia on
parts, furniture, and utensils of the temple, under their
several headings.

W. Saaw CatpecotT


James ORR
B. In Criticism


I. ALLtecen Want or Harmony BETWEEN EARLIER
(K) anv Later (Cu) VERSIONS OF TEMPLE BUILDING
1. Second Version Not a Facsimile of First
2. The Two Versions Differ as to the Builder
3. The Earlier Version Silent about Things Re-
corded in Later Version
II. Deraitep Oxssecrions
Account ne
1. Reason for Interdicting David's Purpose to
Build a Temple
2. Impossibility of David in His Old Age Collecting
Materials Enumerated by the Chronicler
8. Supernaturally Received Pattern of the Temple
4.


AGAINST CHRONICLER’S


Said to Have Been Given by David to Solomon
. pueeed Organization of the Temple-Service hy
avi
5. Assertion by Solomon That the Temple Would
Be Used as a Central Sanctuary


LIrERATURE
B. In Criticism


Modern criticism does not challenge the existence
of a Solomonic Temple on Mt. Moriah, as it does
that of a Mosaic tabernacle in the wilderness.
Only it maintains that historic value belongs exclu-
sively to the narrative in K, while the statements in
Ch are pure ornamentation or ecclesiastical trim-
ming dating from post-exilictimes. All that is true
about the Temple, says criticism, is (1) that David
originally, i.e. on coming to the throne of all Israel,
contemplated erecting such a structure upon Arau-
nah’s threshing-floor, Due was prohibited from doing
so by Nathan, who at first approved of his design
but was afterward directed by Jeh to stay the king’s
hand, and to inform the king that the work of build-
ing a house for Jeh to dwell in was not to
be his (the king’s) task and privilege but his
sou’s, and that as a solatium for his disappoint-
ment Jeh would build him a house, by establishing
the throne of his kingdom forever (2 8 7 4-17);
(2) that after David’s death Solomon called to mind
the pious purpose of his father of which he had
been informed and the express promise of Jeh that
David’s successor on the throne should execute
that purpose, and accordingly resolved to “build a
house for the name of Jeh his God” (1 K 5 3-5); and


(8) that 73 years were employed in the work of con-
struction, after which the finished Temple was dedi-
cated in the presence of the congregation of Israel,
with their princes, priests and Levites, in a specch
which rehearsed the fact that David had intended
to build the house but was prevented, and with a
prayer which once more connected the Temple
with the pious intention of David (1 K 8 18-20).

All the rest is simply embellishment (Wellhauscn,
GT, 181-92; art. “Temple” in HB): (1) that David’s
purpose to build the Temple was interdicted because
he had been a man of war and had shed blood (1 Ch
28 3), which in Wellhausen’s judgment should rather
have been a qualification for the business; (2) that
David in his old and feeble age made elaborate prep-
arations for the construction of the house he was
not to see—which, again writes Wellhausen, was
like “making the bread so far ready that his son
only required to shove it into the oven’; (8) that
David gave to his son Solomon the pattern of the
house in all its details as the Lord had caused him
to understand in writing (‘black upon white,” as
Wellhausen expresses it) by His (the Lord’s) hand
upon him—which was different from the way in
which Moses received instruction about the taber-
nacle, viz. by a pattern shown to him in the Mount,
and carried in his recollection; (4) that David before
his death arranged all the musical service for the
Temple, invented musical instruments, appointed
all the officers to be associated with the Temple
pricsts, Levites, porters and singers, distributing
them in classes and assigning them their duties by
lot (1 Ch 23 2-26; 2 Ch 8 12-16)—exactly as these
things were afterward arranged in the second or
post-exilic temple and were now carried back to
David as the legislation of the PC was assigned to
Moses; and (5) that David’s son Solomon assures
Hiram (RV ‘“Huram’’) that the Temple will be used
as a central sanctuary “to burn before him [Jeh]
incense of sweet spices, and for the continual show-
bread, and for the burnt-offerings morning and even-
ing, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and
on the set feasts of Jeh our God” (2 Ch 2 8 ff), ie.
for Divine service, which, according to criticism,
was of post-exilic origin.

The questions that now fall to be considered are:
(1) whether the statements of the Chronicler are
inconsistent with those in the Books of S and K;
and (2) if not, whether they are in themselves such
as to be incredible.

I. As to the Want of Harmony between the
Earlier and Later Versions of the Temple Build-

ing.—It does not seem reasonable to


1. The hold that this hasbeen established. The
Versions circumstance that the second account
Not the is not a facsimile of the first does not
Same warrant the conclusion that the first


alone is fact and the second fiction. It
is quite conceivable that both might betrue. David.
might have had it in his mind, as the first account
states and the second acknowledges, to build a house
for Jeh, and yet not have been able to carry his
purpose into effect, and have been obliged to hand
over its execution to his son. David, moreover,
might have been hindered by Jeh (through His
prophet Nathan) from building the Temple for
more reasons than one—because the proposal was
premature, God having it in His mind to build a
house for David, i.e. to establish his dynasty, before
requiring a permanent habitation for Himself:
and also because the time was unpropitious, David
having still much to do in the subjugation of his
country’s enemies; and because it was more fitting
that a temple for the God of Peace should not be
erected by one who had been a man of war from
his youth. The first of these reasons is stated in
§, the second and third are recorded in Ch.


2941


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Temple


The earlier version does not say that David
built the house, but that his son was to do it, and
this the later version does not contra-
2. Supposed dict; the later version docs not claim
Contra- that the idea originated with Solomon,
diction but ascribes it to David, precisely as
the earlicr version does. In this there
is no disharmony, but rather underlying harmony.
Both versions assert that David purposed and that
Solomon performed, in which surely there is perfect
agreement.
The silence of the earlier version abont the things


recorded in the later version, such as the preparation
of material and the organization of the


8. Omis- Temple-service, does not prove that
sions in these things were not known to the author
Earli of the earlier version, or had not taken

arer place when he wrote. No_ writer is
Versions obliged to cram into his pages all he knows,


but only to insert as much of his informa-
tlon as will subserve his aim in writing. Nor does his
omission to set down in his narrative this or that par-
ticular fact or incident amount to a demonstration that
the unrecorded fact or incident had not then occurred
or was not within his cognizance. Least of all is it
expected that a writer of civil history shall fill his pages
with details that are purely or chiefly ecclesiastical.
In short, if the omission from K of David's preparations
and arrangements for the Temple testifles that no
such preparations or arrangements were made, the
omission from Ch of David's sin with Bath-sheba and of
Nathan’s parable of the Ewe Lamb should certify that
either these things never happened or they were not
known after the exile. It is usnal ‘to say they were
purposely left out because it was the Chronicler’s inten-
tion to encircle David with a nimhbus of glory (Well-
hausen), but this is simply critical hypothesis, the truth
of which is disputed. On critical principles either these
incidents in David's life were not true or the Chronicler
was not aware of them. But the Chronicler had as one
main source for his composition ‘‘the earlier historical
books from Gen to K" Geese tet and ‘‘the tradition
of the older source only has historical value’ (Well-
hausen).


Il. Detailed Objections against the Chronicler’s
Account.—Examining now in detail the above~-
stated objections, we readily see that they are
by no means so formidable as at first_sight, they
look, and certainly do not prove the Chronicler’s
account to be incredible.

That David’s purpose to build a temple should
have been interdicted becanse he had been a man

of war and had shed blood appears


1. Inter- to Wellhausen to be a watermark of
diction of | non-historicity. Benzinger in EB (art.
David “Temple”) goes beyond this and says:


“There is no historical probability that
David had thoughts of building a temple.” But if
David never thought of building a temple, then
not only was the Chronicler mistaken in making
Solomon say (2 Ch 6 7) that it was in the heart of
his father so to do, but he was chargeable with
something worse in making the Lord say to David,
“Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house for
my name, thou didst well in that it was in thy
heart” (2 Ch 6 8), unless he was absolutely certain
that the statement was true—which it was not if
Benzinger may be relied on.

Nor is it merely the Chronicler whose character for
intelligence and piety suffers, if David never thought
of building a temple; the reputation of the author or
authors of 8 and K must also go, since they hoth declare
that David did entertain the purpose which Benzinger
denies (2 8 7% 2; 1_K § 3); and an impartial reasoner
will hesitate before he sacrifices the good name even of
two unknown ancient writers at the ipse dizit of any
modern scholar.

We may therefore limit our remarks to Well-
hauscn’s objection and reply that the reason assigned
by Ch for prohibiting David from carrying out his
purpose, viz. that he had been a man of war, might
have been an argument for permitting him to do so,
or at least for his seeking to do so, had his object
been to erect 2 monument to his own glory or a thank
offering to God for the victories he had won; but
not if the Temple was designed to be a habitation


wherein God might dwell among His pcople to re-
ceive their worship and bless them with His grace.
Strange as it may seem (Winer) that David should
have been debarred from carrying out his purpose
for the reason assigned, yet there was reason in
the interdict, for not only was it fitting that peace-
ful works should be carried out by peaceful hands
(Merz in PRE), but David’s vocation was not
temple-building but empire-building (to use a
modern phrase); and many campaigns lay before
him ere the leisure cauld be found or the land could
be ready for the execution of his sacred design.
That David in his old and feeble age could not
possibly have collected all the materials enumerated
__ by 1 Ch 29 might possibly have been
2. Quantity true, had David been an impecunious
of Materials chieftain and had he only in the last
years of his life commenced to amass
treasure. But David was a powerful and wealthy .
eastern potentate and a valiant warrior besides, who
had conqnered numerous tribes, Philis, Moabites,
Syrians, Edomites and Ammonites, and had acquired.
from his victories large spoil, which from an early
stage in his carcer he had been accustomed to dedi-
cate to the Lord (28 811). Hence it is little better
than trifling to put forward as an inherent mark of
incredibility the statement that David in his old
age could not have made extensive and costly prep-
arations for the building of the Temple—all the
more that according to the narrative he was assisted
by “‘the princes of the fathers’ houses, and the princes
of the tribes of Israel, and the captains of thousands
and of hundreds, with the rulers over the king’s
work,” and “the people” generally, who all ‘offered
willingly for the service of the house of God.”

_ No doubt the value in sterling money of these prepara-
tions is enormous—the gold and silver alone heing vari-
ously reckoned at 8 (Keil), 16 (Bertheau), 81 (Michaelis),
450 (Kautzsch), 1,400 (Rawlinson) millions of pounds—
and might reasonahly suggest either that the text has
become corrupt, or the numbers were originally used
loosely to express the idea of an extraordinary amount, or
were of set ‘purpose exaggerated. The first of these
explanations is adopted by Rawlinson; the second hy
Bertheau; the third by Wellhausen, who sees in the
whole section (1 Ch 22-29) ‘‘a frightful example of
the statistical phantasy of the Jews, which_delights
itself in immense sums of gold upon paper.'' But even
conceding that in each of these explanations a measure
of truth may lie, it does not seem justifiable to wipe
out as unhistorical and imaginary the main statement
of the Chronicler, that David's preparations were
both extensive and costly, all the less that 1 K 10 14.15
bears witness to the extraordinary wealth of Solomon,
whose income is stated to have heen 666 talents of gold,
or ahout 3 millions sterling, a year, besides that he had
of the merchantmen, and of the traffic of the spice
merchants, and of all the kings of Arabia and of the
governors of the country. If David's annual income was
anything like this, and if he had command of all the treas-
ures accumulated in previous years, it does not look so
impossible as criticism would make out that David
could have prepared for the future Temple as the
Chronicler reports.

That David gave to Solomon the pattern of the
Temple in a writing which had been prepared by
him under direct supernatural guid-
8. Plan of ance can be objected to only by those
the Temple who deny the possibility of such Divine
communications being made by God
to man. If criticism admits. as lt sometimes does,
the possibility of both revelation and imspiration,
the objection under consideration must fall to the
ground. That the method of making David
acquainted with the pattern of the Temple was not
in all respects the same as that adopted for showing
Moses the model of the tabernacle, only proves that
the resources of infinite wisdom are not usually
exhausted by one effort, and that God is not neces-
sarily tied down to one particular way of uttering
His thoughts.
But criticism mostly rejects the idea of the super-
natural and accordingly dismisses this statement


Temple
Temptation of C.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2942


about the God-given pattern as altogether fanciful
—-pointing (1) to the fact that similar temples
already existed among the Canaanites, as e.g. at
Shechem (Jgs 9 46) and at Gaza (Jgs 16 29),
which showed there was no special need for a
Divinely prepared plan; and (2) to the circumstance
that Solomon fetched Hiram, a Tyrian worker in
brass, to assist in the erection of the Temple, which
again, it is urged, renders probable the conclusion
that at least Phoen ideas entered into its structure
(Duncker, Benzinger). Suppose, however, it were
true that the Temple was fashioned on a Phoen,
Can. or Egyp model, that would not disprove the
statement that David was guided by Divine inspira-
tion in drawing up the outline of the building.
That David’s organization of the Temple-service,


both as to officers and instruments, as to ritual and
music, corresponded exactly (or nearly so)


4. The with what afterward existed in the second
Temple- temple can hardly be adduced as a proof
Serie of non-historicity, except on the supposi-


tion that Ch Genel transformed the
old history into church history by ascrib-
ing to David ‘‘the holy music and the arrangement of the
Temple personals '’ which belonged to the Dos ane age,
precisely as the anthor or authors of the PC, which dated
from the same age (according to criticism), attributed
this to Moses (Wellhausen, GI, 187)—in other words, by
stating what was not trne in either case, by pepuescnains
that as having happened which had not happened.
Whether this was originally intended to deceive and was
a wilful fraud, as some hold, and whether it was legiti-
mate then “to do evil that good might come,'' to per-
suade men that David organized the musical service
which was performed in the second temple in order to
secure for it popular acceptance, it may be left to each
reader to determine; it must always be wrong to ascribe
doubtful practices to good men lke the authors of the
PC and of Ch unless one is absolutely sure that they
were guilty of such practices. Undoubtedly the fair and
reasonable thing is to hold that the Chronicler wrote the
truth until it is proved that he did not; and for his
statement it_may be claimed that at least it has this
In its favor, that in the earlier sources David is distinctly
stated to have been a musician (1 S 16 23), to have
composed a song, Ps 18 (2 S 22 1), and to have been
designated ‘‘ the sweet psalmist of Israel.’’. No doubt on
the critical hypothesis this might explain why the thought
occurred to the Chronicler to credit David with the
organization of the Temple-service; but without the
critical hypothesis it equally accounts for the interest
David took in preparing ‘‘the music and the personals"
tor the Temple which his son was to build. ‘‘The
tradition that David intended to build a temple and that
he reorganized public worship, not forgetting the musical
side thereof (cf 2 S 6 5 with Am 6 5),"" says Kittel
(The Sctentifie Study of the OT, 136, ET), ‘is not al-
together without foundation.’”’


That the Temple-service was carried out in
accordance with the regulations of the PC does not
prove that the Ch account is unre-


5. The liable, unless it is certain that the post-
Temple a _exilic PC was an entirely new ritual
Central which had never existed before, which
Sanctuary some modern critics do not admit.


But, if it was merely, as some thain-
tain, a codification of a cultus that existed before,
then no sufficient reason exists for holding that Solo-
mon’s Temple was designed to be a private chapel
for the king (Benzinger), erected partly out of
piety but partly also out of love of splendor and
statecraft (Reuss), rather than a central sanctuary
for the people. A study of Solomon’s letter to
Hiram (2 Ch 2 4) shows that the Temple was
intended for the concentration of the nation’s sacri-
ficial worship which had up till then been fre-
quently offered at local shrines, though originally
meant for celebration at the Mosaic tabernacle—
for the burning of sweet incense (Ex 30 1), the
offering day by day continually of the burnt
offering (Ex 29 39). And though, it is admitted,
the letter to Hiram as reported in 1 K makes no
mention of this intention, yet it is clear from 1 K
8 62-65, that Solomon, after dedicating the Temple
by prayer, used it for this purpose. Wherefore,
if Ch simply transferred to the consecration of the
Temple a ritual that had no existence till after the


exile, the author of K did the same, which again
would destroy Wellhausen’s admission that his-
torical validity attaches to the earlier source. A
much more likely supposition is that the ritual
reported by both historians was not that of a PC
manufactured for the second temple, but that which
had been published by Moses for the tabernacle, in
place of which it had come. That local shrines for
many years existed alongside of the Temple only
proves that Solomon’s original idea was not per
fectly carried out either by himself or his people.
Lirzrature.—The Comms. of Bertheaun and Keil on
Ch; Reuss, Geschichte der heiligen Schriften des Alten Testa-


ments; arts. on '‘Temple''in Sch-Herz; Riehm, Hand-
wérterbuch; HDB; EB; Wellhausen, Prolegomena zur Ge-


schichte Israels.
T. WarreLaw

TEMPLE KEEPERS (SERVANTS): After the
conquest of Midian, ‘“Moses took one drawn out of
every fifty, both of man and of beast, and gave them
unto the Levites, that kept the charge of the taber-
nacle of Jeh” (Nu $1 47; cf ver 30). Similarly,
after the deception of Joshua by the Gibeonites,
“Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and
drawers of water for the congregation, and for the
altar of Jeh, unto this day” (Josh 9 27). The
object of these notices, evidently, is to explain how
a non-Israelitish class of sanctuary servants had
taken their origin. Their existence at the time of
Ezekiel, however, is the object of one of the latter’s
severest, denunciations: ‘Ye have brought in for-
eigners, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised
in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to profaneit.....
And ye have not kept the charge of my holy things;
but ye have set keepers of my charge in my sanctu-
ary for yourselves” (Ezk 44 7f). In place of these
servants or ‘keepers’ Ezekiel directs that such
Levites are to be employed as have been degraded
from priestly privileges for participating in idola-
trous worship. On them shall devolve all the various
duties of the temple except the actual offering of
sacrifices, which is reserved for “the priests the
Levites, the sons of Zadok” (44 10-15). For theuse
of this deposed class, “the priests, the keepers of
the charge of the house,” is reserved a special room
in the inner court of the temple (40 44f). See,
further, NETHINIM. Burron Scorr Easton


TEMPLES, tem’p’lz ("p, rakkah, “thinness,”
“upper cheeks”): The original signifies the thinnest
part of the skull (Jgs 4 21.22; & 26). In Cant 4
3; 6 7, the bride’s cheeks are likened to pome-
granates because of the rich coloring of a slice of
this fruit.


TEMPLES, ROBBERS OF (tepédcvdot, hierd-
sulot; AV “robbers of churches,’ Acts 19 37):
To explain this as ‘sacrilegious persons” is irrecon-
cilable with the contrast m Rom 2 22. In Dt 7
25, the Jews were commanded entirely to destroy the
gold and silver idols, ornaments of the heathen
temples. The sin reproved is that of making that a
matter of gain which, without regard to its value,
they should have destroyed. “Dost thou, who
regardest the mere touch of an idol as a horrible
defilement, presume to rob their temples?” There
is abundant evidence to show that this crime was
not unusual. When the town-clerk of Ephesus
declares the companions of Paul innocent of such
charge, his words imply that the fact that they were
Jews rendered them liable to such suspicion. So
Jos goes out of his way (Ant, IV, viii, 10) to deny
that Jews ever committed the crime.

H. E. Jacozs

TEMPT, temt, TEMPTATION, tem-ta’shun
(M02, ndséh, “to prove,” “try,” “tempt,” me'2,
magsah, “a trial,” “temptation”; wepdte, peirdzd,


2943


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Temple
Temptation of C.


0 66 ?


“to try,’ “prove,’’? mepacpés, peirasmds, “a, trial,’
‘“proof’’?): The words have a sinister connotation in
present-day usage which has not always attached
to them. Originally the words were of neutral
content, with the sense of ‘putting to the proof,”
the testing of character or quality. Thus God is
“tempted” by Israel’s distrust of Him, as if the
people were actually challenging Him to show His
perfections (Ex 17 2; Ps 78 18; Acts 15 10; He
3 9, and often); Abraham is “tempted,’’ being
called upon to offer up Isaac (Gen 22 1); and
Jesus is “tempted” to a spectacular Messiahship
(Mt 4 and || passages [see TEMPTATION oF CuRIsT]).
No evil is implied in the subject of these tempta-
tions. Temptation therefore in the Scripture sense
has possibilities of holiness as well as of sin. For
as all experience witnesses, it is one thing to be
tempted, another thing to fall. To be tempted—
one may rejoice in that (Jas 1 2), since in tempta-
tion, by conquering it, one may achieve a higher
and nobler manhood.
““Why comes temptation but for man to meet
And master and make crouch beneath his foot,
And so be pedestalled in triumph?”

Holiness in its best estate is possible only under
conditions which make it necessary to meet, resist
and triumph over temptation. Thus Jesus Him-
self became our Great High Priest in that, being
tempted in all points like as we are, He uever once
yielded, but fought and triumphed (He 4 15).

One must not deceive one’s self, however, in
thinking that, because by the grace of God one may
have profit of virtue through temptation as an in-
strument, all temptation is equally innocent and
virtuous. It is noticeable in the case of Jesus that
His temptation was under the direction of the Spirit
(Mk 1 12); He Himself did not seek it, nor did He
fear it. ‘Temptations encountered in this way, the
way of dnty, the way of the Spirit, alone constitute
the true challenge of saintship (Jas 1 12); but it is
the mark of an ignoble nature to be perpetually the
center of vicious fancies and tempers which are not
of God but of the devil (Jas 1 13-15).| One may
not escape entirely such buffetings of faith, but by
any sound nature they are easily disposed of. Not
so easily disposed of are the trials (temptations) to
faith through adversity, affliction, trouble (Lk 22
28; Acts 20 19; Jas 12; 1 Pet 1 6); and yet
there is no lack of evidence to the consoling fact
that God does not suffer His own to be tempted
above what they are able to bear (1 Cor 10 13)
and that for every crisis His grace will be sufficient
(2 Cor 12 8.9). CHaries M. Stuart


TEMPTATION OF CHRIST: The sources for
this event are Mk 1 12.13; Mt 4 1-11; Lk 4 1-
13; cf He 218; 4 15.16, and see


1. The Getusemane. Mk is probably a con-
Sources densation; Mt and Lk have the same

source, probably the discourses of
Jesus. Mt is usually regarded as nearest the


original, and its order is here followed.
The Temptation is put immediately after the
Baptism by all the synoptists, and this is psycho-
logically necessary, as we shall see.


2. Time The place was the wilderness; it was
and Place “up” from the Jordan valley (Mt),

and was on the way back to Galilee
(Lk). The traditional site, Mt. Quarantana, 1s


robably a good guess.
‘ At Ths baptism, Jesus received from heaven the
final confirmation of His thought that He was the


Messiah. It was the greatest con-
3. Signifi- ception which ever entered_a human
cance mind and left it sane. Under the


irresistible influence of the Spirit,
He turned aside to seek out in silence and alone the


principles which should govern Him in His Messianic
work. This was absolutely necessary to any wise
prosecution of it. Without the slightest precedent
Jesus must determine what a Messiah would do,
how He would act. Radical critics agree that, if
such a period of meditation and conflict were not
recorded, it would have to be assumed. By this
conflict, Jesus came to that clearness and decision
which characterized His ministry throughout. It is
easy to see how this determination of guiding
principles involved the severest temptation, and it
Is noteworthy that all the temptation is repre-
sented as coming from without, and none from
within. Here too He must take His stand with
reference to all the current ideas about the Messiah
and His work.

Jesus alone can be the original reporter. To this
Holtzmann and J. Weiss agree. The report was

given for the sake of the disciples, for
4. The the principles wrought out in this
Reporter conflict are the guiding principles in
the whole work of the kingdom of
God on earth.

(1) Fasting—Jesus was so intensely absorbed
that He forgot to eat. There was nothing ascetic
or ritualistic about it, and so this is
no example for ascetic fasting for us.
It is doubtful whether the text demands
absolute abstinence from food; rather,
long periods of fasting, and insufficient food when He
had it. At the end of the forty days, He woke to
the realization that He was a starving man.

(2) The first temptation is not a temptation to
doubt His Messiahship, nor is the second either.
‘Tf thou art the Son of God,” i.e. “the Messiah,”
means, simply, “since thou art the Son of God”
(see Burton, Moods and Tenses, secs. 244, 245;
Robertson, Short Grammar, 161). There was not
the slightest doubt on this‘ point in Jesus’ mind
after the baptism, and Satan knew it. There is
no temptation to prove Himself the Messiah,
nor any hint of such a thing in Jesus’ replies. The
very point of it all is, How are you going to act,
since you are Messiah? (Mt 4 3 || Lk 4 3).

The temptation has these elements: (a) The per-
fectly innocent craving for food is imperious in the
starving man. (b) Why should He not satisfy
His hunger, since He is the Son of God and has the
power? Jesus replies from Dt 8 3, that God can
and will provide Him bread in His own way and
in His own time. He is not referring to spiritual
food, which is not in question either here or in Dt
(see Broadus’ just and severe remark here). He
does not understand how God will provide, but He
will wait and trust. Divinely assured of Messiah-
ship, He knows that God will not let, Him perish.
Here emerges the principle of His ministry; He
will never use His supernatural power to help
Himself. Objections based on Lk 4 30 and Jn 10
39 are worthless, as nothing miraculous is there
implied. The walking on the water was to help
the apostles’ faith. But why would it have been
wrong to have used His supernatural power for
Himself? Because by so doing He would have
refused to share the human lot, and virtually have
denied His incarnation. If He is to save others,
Himself He cannot save (Mt 27 42). In passing,
it is well to notice that ‘the temptations all turn
on the conflict which arises, when one, who is con-
scious of supernatural power, feels that there are
oceasions, when it would not be right to exercise
it.’ So the miraculous is here most deeply im-
bedded in the first. principles of Messianic action.

(3) The second temptation —The pinnacle of the
temple was probably the southeast corner of the
roof of the Royal Cloister, 326 ft. above the bottom
of the Kidron valley. The proposition was not to


5. Expo-
sition


Temptation of C.
Ten Com’andm’ts


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2944


leap from this height into the crowd below in the
temple courts, as is usually said, for (a) there is
no hint of the people in the narrative; (6) Jesus’
reply does not fit such an idea; it meets another
temptation entirely; (c) this explanation confuses
the narrative, making the second temptation a
short road to glory like the third; (d) it seems a
fantastic temptation, when it is seriously visualized.
Rather Satan bids Jesus leap into the abyss outside
the temple. Why then the temple at all, and not
some mountain precipice? asks Meyer. Because
it was the sheerest depth well known to the Jews,
who had all shuddered as they had looked down
into it (Mt 4 5-7 || Lk 4 5-8).

The first temptation proved Jesus a man of faith,
and the second is addressed to Him as such, asking Him
to prove His faith by putting God's promise to the test.
It is the temptation to fanaticism, which has been the
destruction of many a useful servant of God. Jesus
refuses to yield, for yielding would have been sin. It
would have been (a) wicked presumption, as though
God must yield to every unreasonable whim of the man
of faith, and so would have been areal ‘‘tempting’’ of
God; (6) it would have denled His incarnation In prin-
ciple, like the first temptatlon; (c) such fanaticism would
have destroyed His ministry. So the principle was
evolved: Jesus will not, of self-will, run into dangers,
but will avoid them except in the clear path of duty.
He will be no fanatic, running before the Spirlt, but
wiil be led by Him in ae of holy sanity and heavenly
wisdom. Jesus waited on God.


(4) The third temptation—The former tests
have proved Jesus a man of faith and of common
sense. Surely such a man will take the short and
easy road to that universal dominion which right-
fully belongs to the Messiah. Satan offers it, as
the prince of this world. The lure here is the desire
for power, in itself a right instinct, and the natural
and proper wish to avoid difficulty and pain. That
the final object is to set up a universal kingdom of
God in righteousness adda to the subtlety of the
temptation. But as a condition Satan demands
that Jesus shall worship him. This must be sym-
bolically interpreted. Buch worship as is offered
God cannot be meant, for every pious soul would
shrink from that in horror, and for Jesus it could
constitute no temptation at all. Rather a com-
promise with Satan must be meant—such a com-
promise as would essentially be a submission to
him. Recalling the views of the times and the
course of Jesus’ ministry, we can think this com-
promise nothing else than the adoption by Jesus
of the program of political Measiahship, with its
worldly means of war, intrigue,etc. Jesusrepudiates
the offer. He sees in it only evil, for (a) war, esp.
ageressive war, is to His mind a vast crime against
love, (b) it changes the basis of His kingdom from
the spiritual to the external, (c) the means would
defeat the end, and involve Him in disaster. He
will serve God only, and God is served in righteous-
ness. Only means which God approves can be used
(Mt 4 8-11 || Lk 4 9-13). Here then is the third
great principle of the kingdom: Only moral and
spiritual means to moral and spiritual ends. He
turns away from worldly methods to the slow
and difficult way of truth-preaching, which can
end only with the cross. Jesus must have come
from His temptation with the conviction that His
ministry meant a life-and-death struggie with all
the forces of darkness.

‘As we should expect of Jesus, He throws the story
of the inner conflict of His soul into story form.

So only could it be understood by all


6. The classes of men in all ages. It was a
Character real atruggle, but pictorially, sym-
of the bolically described. This seems to be
Narrative proved by various elements in the


story, viz. the devil can hardly be
conceived as literally taking Jesus from place to
place. There is no mountain from which all the


kingdoms of the world can be seen. This view of

the matter relieves all the difficulties. '
The difficulty is that there can be no drawing
toward an object unless the object seems desirable.
But the very fact that a sinful object


7. How seems desirable is itself sin. How then
Could a can a sinless person really be tempted
Sinless at all? Possibly an analysis of each
Christ be temptation will furnish the answer.
Tempted? In each case the appeal was a real


appeal to a perfectly innocent natural
instinct or appetite. In the first: temptation, it
was to hunger; in the second, to faith; in the third,
to power as a means of establishing righteousness.
In each case, Jesus felt the tug and pull of the
natural instinct; how insistent is the demand of
hunger, for instance! Yet, when He perceived
that the satisfaction of these desires was sinful
under the conditions, He immediately refused their
clamorous appeal. It was a glorious moral victory.
Tt was not that He was metaphysically not able to
sin, but that He was so pure that He was able not
tosin. He did not prove in the wilderness that He
could not be tempted, but that He could overcome
the tempter. If it is then said that Jesus, never
having sinned, can have no real sympathy with
sinners, the answer is twofold: (1) Not he who falls
at the first assault feels the full force of temptation,
but he who, like Jesus, resists it through long years
to the end. (2) Only the victor can help the van-
quished; only he, who has felt the most dreadful
assaults and yet has stood firm, can give the
help needed by the fallen.


Lirzraturz.—Broadus on Mt, in loc.; Rhees, Life of
Jesus of Nazareth, secs. 91-96; Sanday, Outlines of the
Life of Christ, sec. 13; Holtzmann, Hand-Commentar, I,
671; J. Weiss, Die Schriften des NT,1, 2271; Weiss, Life
of Christ, I, 387-54; Dods, art. ‘* Temptation,” in DCG;
Garvie, Expos T, X (1898-99).

F. L. ANDERSON


TEN (WY, ‘eser; 8a, déka). See NumBer.
TEN COMMANDMENTS, THE:


I. Tas Ten ComMAnpDMENTS AN IsrazLitisaH Cop
II. Tus Promvuieation oF TRE DecaLootE
TII Anatysis or tax DecaLooun wits Brier Exe~
oETIcAL NotzEs
1. How Numbered
2. How Grouped
3. Original Form
4, Brief Exegetical Notes
IV. Jesus anp THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
Literature

In the OT the Decalogue is uniformly referred to
as “the ten words” (Ex 34 28m; Dt 4 13m; 10
4m), or simply as “the words” spoken by Jeh
(Ex 20 1; 34 27; Dt 6 22; 10 2), or as “the
words of the covenant” (Ex 34 28). In the NT
they are called “commandments” (Mt 19 17; Eph
6 2), as with us in most Christian lands.

I. The Ten Commandments an Israelitish Code.—
The ‘ten words” were spoken by Jch to the people
whom He had but recently delivered from Egyp
bondage, and then led out into the wilderness, that
He might teach them His laws. It was to Israel
that the Decalogue was primarily addressed, and
not to all mankind. Thus the reason assigned for
keeping the 5th commandment applies to the people
who were on their way to the Jand which had been
given to Abraham and his descendants (Ex 20 12);
and the 4th commandment is enforced by reference
to the servitude in Egypt (Dt 5 15). It is possible,
then, that even in the Ten Commandments there
are elements peculiar to the Mosaic system and
which Our Lord and His apostles may not make
a part of faith and duty for Christians. See Sap-
BATH.

Of the ‘ten words,” seven were perhaps binding
on the consciences of enlightened men prior to the
days of Moses: murder, adultery, theft and false


2945


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Temptation of C.
Ten Com’andm’ts


witness were already treated as crimes among the
Babylonians and the Egyptians; and intelligent
men knew that it was wrong to dishonor God by
improper use of His name, or to show lack of respect
to parents, or to covet the property of another.
No doubt the sharp, ringing words in which these
evils are forbidden in the Ten Commandments gave
to Israel a clearer apprehension of the sins referred
to than they had ever had before; and the manner
in which they were grouped by the Divine speaker
brought into bold relief the chief elements of the
moral law. But the first two prohibitions were
novelties in the religious life of the world; for men
worshipped many gods, and bowed down to images
of every conceivable kind. The 2d commandment
was too high even for Israel to grasp at that early
day; a few weeks later the people were dancing
about the golden calf at the foot of Sinai. The
observance of the Sabbath was probably unknown
to other nations, though it may have been already
known in the family of Abraham.

Il, The Promulgation of the Decalogue.—The
“ten words” were spoken by Jeh Himself from the
top of the mount under circumstances the most
awe-inspiring. In the early morning there were
thunders and lightnings and a thick cloud upon the
mount, and the voice of a trumpet exceeding loud.
It is no wonder that the people trembled as they
faced the smoking and quaking mount, and listened
to the high demands of a holy God. Their request
that all future revelations should be made through
Moses as the prophet mediator was quite natural.
The promulgation of the Ten Commandments
stands out as the most notable event in all the
wilderness sojourn of Israel. There was no greater
day in history before the coming of the Son of God
into the world.

After a sojourn of 40 days in the mount, Moses
came down with “the two tables of the testimony
tables of stone, written with the finger of God.’
At the foot of the mount, when Moses saw the golden
calf and the dancing throng about it, he cast the
tables out of his hands and broke them in pieces
(Ex 31 18; 32 15-20). Throngh the intercession
of Moses, the wrath of Jeh was averted from Israel;
and Jeh invited Moses to ascend the mount with
two new tablets, on which He would write the words
that were on the first tables, which were broken.
Moses was commanded to write the special precepts

iven by God during this interview; but the Ten
Canmandinents were written on the stone tablets
by Jeh Himself (Ex 34 1-4.27-29; Dt 10 1-5).
These precious tablets were later deposited in the
ark of the covenant (Ex 40 20). Thus in every
way possible the Ten Commandments are exalted
as the most precious and directly Divine of all the
precepts of the Mosaic revelation.

I. Analysis of the Decalogue with Brief Exegeticol


Notes.—That there were ‘‘ten words"’ is expressly stated
(Ex 34 28; Dt 413; 10 4); but just
1. Hi how to delimit them one from another is
se OW a task which has not been found easy.
Numbered Fora full discussion of the various theories,
see Dillmann, H£zodus, 201-5, to whom

we are indebted for much that is here set forth.

(1) Jos is the first witness for the division now common
among Protestants (except Lutherans), viz. (a) foreign
gods, (b) images, (c) name of God, (d) Sabbath, (e)
parents, (f) murder, (g) adultery, ye £0 false wit-
ness, (j) coveting. efore him, Philo made the same
arrangement, except that he followed the LXX In putting
adultery before murder. This mode of counting was
current with many of the church Fathers, and is now in
uso in the Greek Catholic church and with most Prot-

ts.
at Augustine combined foreign gods and images
(Ex 20 2-6) into one commandment, and following
the order of Dt 5 21 (Heb 18) made the 9th command-
ment a prohibition of the coveting of a neighbor's wife,
while the 10th prohibits the coveting of his house and
other roperty. Roman Catholics and Cutherans
accept Rueustine’s mode of reckoning, except that they
follow the order in Ex 20 17, so that the 9th command-


ment forbids the coveting of a ncizhbor's houso, while
the 10th includes his wife and all other property.

(3) A third mode of counting is that adopted by the
Jews in the early Christian centuries, which becarns uni-
versal among them in the Middle Ages and so down to the
present time. According to this scheme, the opening
statement in Ex 20 2 is the ‘‘first word,’ Ex 20 3-6
the second (combining foreign gods with images), while
the following eight commandments are as in the com-
mon Protestant arrangement.

The division of the prohibition of coven ne into two
commandments is fatal to the Augustinian scheme; and
the reckoning of the initial statement in Ex 20 2 as one
of the ‘‘ten words" seems equally. fatal to the modern
Jewish method of counting. he prohibition of images,
which is introduced by the solemn formula, ‘ Thou shalt
not," is surely a different “ word '' from the command to
worship no god other than Jeh. Moreover, if nine of
the ‘ten words'’ are commandments, it would seem
reasonable to make the remaining ‘‘word’’ a command-
ment, if this can be done without violence to the subject-
matter. See Eerdmans, Expos, July, 1909, 21 ff.

,,,4L) The Jews, from Philo to the present, divide the
ten words" into two groups of five each. As there were
two tables, it would be natural to suppose


3. How that five commandments were recorded
G a on each tablet, though the fact that the
roupe tablets had writing on both their sides


(Ex 82 15) would seem to weaken the
force of the argument for an equal division. _Moreover,
the first pentad, in the present text of Ex and Dt, is more
than four times as long as the second.

(2) Augustine supposed that there were three com-
mandments on the first table and seven on the second.
According to his method of numbering the command-
ments, this would put the command to honor parents
at the head of the second table, as in the third method
of Frouping the ten words. 5

(3) Calvin and many moderns assign four command-
ments to the first table and six to the second. This has
the advantage of assigning all duties to God to the first
table and all duties to men to the second. It also accords
with Our Lord's reduction of the commandments to twa
(Mt 22 34-40).

A comparison of the text of the Decalogue in Dt
6 with that in Ex 20 reveals a goodly number of

differences, esp. in the reasons assigned
8. Original for the observance of the 4th and 5th
Form commandments, and in the text of the

10th commandment. A natural ex-
planation of these differences is the fact that Dt
employs the free-and-easy style of public discourse.
The Ten Commandments are substantially the same
in the two passages.

From the days of Ewald to the present, some of
the leading OT scholars have held that originally
all the commandments were brief and without the
addition of any special reasons for their observance.
According to this hypothesis, the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th,
and the 10th commandments were probably as
follows: ‘Thou shalt not make unto thee any
graven image”; ‘“Thou shalt not take the name of
Jeh thy God in vain’; ‘Remember the Sabbath
day to keep it holy”; ‘Honor thy father and thy
mother’; ‘Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s
house.” This early critical theory would account
for the differences in the two recensions by sup-
posing that the motives for keeping the 2d, 3d, 4th,
and 5th commandments, as well as the expansion
of the 10th, were additions made through the in-
fluence of the prophetic teaching. If accompanied
by a full recognition of the Divine origin of the ten
words in the Mosaic era, this hypothesis might be
acceptable to a thorough believer in revelation.
Before acquiescing in the more radical theories of
some recent scholars, such a believer will demand
more cogent arguments than the critics have been
able to bring forward. Thus when we are told that
the Decalogue contains prohibitions that could not
have been incorporated into a code before the days
of Manasseh, we demand better proofs than the
failure of Israel to live up to the. high demands of
the 2d and the 10th commandments, or a certain
theory of the evolution of the history that may
commend itself to the mind of naturalistic critics.
Jeh was at work in the early history of Israel; and
the great prophets of the 8th cent., far from creating


Ten Com’andm’ts Tih INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


ent


2946


ethical monotheism, were reformers sent to demand
that Israel should embody in daily life the teachings
of the Torah.

Goethe advanced the view that Ex 34 10-28
originally contained a second decalogue.


Wellhausen (CH, 3311) reconstructs this so-called
decalogue as follows:

1) Thou shalt worship no other god (ver 14).

3) Thou shalt.make thee no molten gods (ver 17).
( 3 Te feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep
ver a).

(4) Every firstling is mine feet 19a).

(5) Thou shalt observe the feast of weeks (ver 22a).

( @), oa the feast of ingathering at the year’s end
ver ec).

(7) Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with
leavened bread (ver 25a).

(8) The tat of my feast shall not remain all night until
the morning (23 186; cf 34 25d).

(9) The best of the first-fruits of thy ground shalt
thou bring to the house of Jeh thy God (ver 26a).

( es eos shalt not seethe a kid in its mother’s milk

er a

Va ddis agrees with Wellhausen that even this simpler
decalogue must be put long after the time of Moses
(EB, 1051).

Now, it is evident that the narrative in Ex 34
27 f, in its present form, means to affirm that Moses
was commanded to write the precepts contained
in the section immediately preceding. The Ten
Commandments, as the foundation of the covenant,
were written by Jeh Himself on the two tablets of
stone (31 18; 32 15f; 34 28). It is only by free
critical handling of the narrative that it can be made
to appear that. Moses wrote on the two tables the
supposed decalogue of 34 14-26. Moreover, the
law of the Sabbath (34 21), which is certamly
appropriate amid the ritual ordinances of Ex 34,
must be omitted altogether, in order to reduce the
precepts to ten; also the command in ver 23 has
to be deleted. It is interesting to observe that the
prohibition of molten gods (34 17), even according
to radical critics, is found in the earliest body of
Israelitish laws. There is no sufficient reason for
denying that the 2d commandment was promul-
gated in the days of Moses. Jeh’s requirements
have always been in advance of the practice of His
people. ee :
(1) The 1st. commandment prohibits the worship
of any god other than Jeh. If it be said that this

precept inculcates monolatry and not


4. Brief monotheism, the reply is ready to
Exegetical hand that a consistent worship of only
Notes one God is, for a people surrounded


by idolaters, the best possible approach
to the conclusion that there is only one true God.
The organs of revelation, whatever may have been
the notions and practices of the mass of the Israel-
itish people, always speak in words that harmonize
with a strict monotheism.

(2) The 2d commandment forbids the use of
images in worship; even an image of Jeh is not to
be tolerated (cf Ex 32 5). Jeh’s mercy is greater
than His wrath; while the iniquity of the fathers
descends to the third and the fourth generation for
those who hate Jeh, His mercy overflows to thou-
sands who love Him. It is doubtful whether the
rendering ‘showing mercy to the thousandth gen-
eration’ (Ex 20 6) can be successfully defended.

(3) Jeh’s name is sacred, as standing for His per-
son; therefore it must be employed in no vain or
false way. The commandment, no doubt, includes
more than false swearing. Cursing, blasphemy and
every profane use of Jeh’s name are forbidden.

(4) As the lst commandment inculcates the unity
of God and the 2d His spirituality, so also the 3d
commandment guards His name against irreverent
use and the 4th sets apart the seventh day as pecul-
iarly His day, reserved fora Sabbath. Ex 20 [1
emphasizes the religious aspect of the Sabbath,
while Dt 6 14 lays stress on its humane aspect, and


Dt 6 15 links it with the deliverance from bondage
in Egypt. :

(5) The transition from duties to God to duties
to men is made naturally in the 5th commandment,
which inculcates reverence for parents, to whom
their children should look up with gratitude, as all
men should toward the Divine Father.

(6) Human life is so precious and sacred that no
man should dare to take it away by violence.

(7) The family life is safeguarded by the 7th
commandment. : :

(8) The 8th commandment forbids theft im all
itsforms. It recognizes the right of personal owner-
ship of property.

(9) The 9th commandment safeguards honor and
good name among men. Slander, defamation, false
testimony in court and kindred sins are included.

(10) The 10th commandment is the most search-
ing of them all, for it forbids the inward longing,
the covetous desire for what belongs to another.
The presence of such a deeply spiritual command
among the “ten words” shows that we have before
us no mere code of laws defining crimes, but a
body of ethical and spiritual precepts for the moral
education of the people of Jeh.

IV. Jesus and the Ten Commandments.— Our
Lord, in the interview with therich young ruler, gave
a recapitulation of the commandments treating of
duties to men (Mk 10 19; Mt 19 18f; Lk 18 20).
He quotes the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th command-
ments. The minor variations in the reports in the
three Synoptic Gospels remind the student of the
similar variations in Ex 20 and Dt 5. Already in
the Sermon on the Mount Jesus had quoted the 6th
and 7th commandments, and then had gone on to
show that anger is incipient murder, and that lust
is adultery in the heart (Mt 5 27-32). He takes
the words of the Decalogue and extends them into
the realm of thought and feeling. He may have
had in mind the 3d commandment in His sharp
prohibition of the Jewish habit of swearing by va-
rious things (Mt 6 33-37). Astothe Sabbath, His
teaching and example tended to lighten the onerous
restrictions of the rabbis (Mk 2 23-28). Duty to
parents He elevated above all supposed claims of
vows and offerings (Mt 15 4-6). In further ex-
tension of the 8th commandment, Jesus said, ‘‘Do
not defraud” (Mk 10 19); and in treating of the
ethics of speech, Jesus not only condemns false
witness, but also includes railing, blasphemy, and
even an idle word (Mt 16 19; 12 31.36f). In Hig
affirmation that God is spirit (Jn 4 24), Jesus made
the manufacture of images nothing but folly. All
hig ethical teaching might be said to be founded
on the 10th commandment, which tracks sin to its
lair in the mind and soul of man.

Our Lord embraced the whole range of human
obligation in two, or at most three, commands:
(1) “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind”;
(2) “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself” (Mt
22 37-40; cf Dt 6 5; Lev 19 18). With love
such as is here described in the heart, man cannot
trespass against God or his fellow-men. At the
close of His ministry, on the night of the betrayal,
Jesus gave to His followers a third commandment,
not different from the two on which the whole
Law hangs, but an extension of the second great
commandment upward into a higher realm of self-
sacrifice (Jn 13 34f; 16 121.17; cf Eph 6 2; Gal
6 10; 1 Jn 3 14-18). “Thou shalt love” is the
first word and the last in the teaching of Our Lord.
His teaching is positive rather than negative, and
so simple that a child can understand it. For the
Christian, the Decalogue is no longer the highest
summary of human duty. He must ever read it
with sincere respect as one of the great monuments


a


| gtrain of wind and weather.


2947


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA perc omt andaits


of the love of God in the moral and religious educa-
tion of mankind; but it has given place to the higher
teaching of the Son of God, all that was permanently
valuable in the Ten Commandments having been
taken up into the teaching of Our Lord and His
apostles.


Lirzrature.—Oehler, OT Theology, 1, 267 ff; Dill-
mann, Ex-Lev, 200-219; Kuenen, Origin and Composi-
lion of the Hexateuch, 244; Wellhausen, CH, 331f;
Rothstein, Das Bundesbuch; Baenstch, Das Bundesbuch;
Meissner, Der Dekalog; river, “Dt,'' ICC; Addis,
Documents of the Hexateuch, I, 136 ft: R. W. Dale, The
Ten Commandments; G. D. Boardman University Lec-
tures on the Ten Commandments (Philadelphia, 1889).


., JOHN RicHaRo SAMPEY
TEN STRINGS (VWY, ‘asér). See Mvaie, I,
I, (2), (ce).


TENDER, ten'dér: The usual (11 out of 16 t). tr
of 71, rakh, “soft,” “delicate,” with the noun 1,
rokh, in Dt 28 56 and the vb. J2%, rakhakh, in
2 K 22 19 || 2 Ch 34 27. Attention need be
called only to the following cases: In Gen 29 17,
“Leah’s eyes were tender,” a physical defect is
described (‘“‘weak-eyed”’; see BLINDNEss). ‘“Tender-
hearted” in 2 Ch 137 means “faint-hearted,”
while in 2 K 22 19 || 2 Ch 34 27 (“because thy
heart was tender’), it means “penitent.” Contrast
the modern use in Eph 4 32.

Throughout Pss (10 t) and Prov (12 10), but not
elsewhere (AV has “tender love” in Dnl 1 9,
RV ‘“compassion”), EV translates DTI, rahd-
mim, “bowels,” by ‘tender mercies,” and this tr has
been carried into the NT as “tender mercy” (RVm
“heart of mercy”) for the corresponding Gr phrase
spldgchna eléous (“bowels of mercy”) in Lk 1
78; cf ‘‘tenderhearted” for edsplagchnos (“right
boweled”) in Eph 4 32, based upon the idea of
psychology widely spread among Sem people, which
considers the ‘‘bowels’’ (kerebh) as the seat of all
tender emotions of kindness and mercy. See
Bowets. AV also has “of tender mercy” in Jas
5 11 without justification in the Gr (oiktirmin, RV
“merciful’’).

Other special phrases: ‘‘tender grape’”’ in AV, Cant 2
13.15; 7 12, for “T99 » s°madhar. The meaning of the


word is not quite certain, but RV’s ‘‘blossom” (except
7 12m) is probably right. ‘‘ Tender Brass" 2,38
23 4; Prov or 25; RV Dt 32 2 (AV ‘tender herb”);
Job 38 27 (AV “tender herb"); Isa 15 6; 66 14 for


NU, deshe’,“grass” (Aram. NIV, dethe’, Dnl 4 15.23).


The context in these passages and the meaning of the
cognates of deshe’ in other Sem languages make this tr
probable, but RV’s usage is not consistent (ef Gen 1
11.12; Job 6 5; Ps 23 2, etc). Isa 53 2 has ‘‘tender


plant" for D3", yénék, ‘a sapling,"’ while Job 14 7 has
“tender branch” for the allied word mp yoneketh,
waa, Fender Sah FOE AF Sh, nal
hapalés, ‘‘soft."" The running sap of springtime softens
the branches that were stiff during the winter.

The vb. “‘tender” occurs in 2 Macc 42, AV
‘The had] tendered his own nation,” in the modern
sense of “tend.” The tr is a paraphrase of the
noun Kkydendv, kédemén, ‘a protector,” RV “the
guardian of his fellow-countrymen.”

Burton Scorr Easton

TENON, ten’un (1, yadh): This word, occurring
in Ex 26 and 36, is used in the account of the
tabernacle to describe the “hand” or yadh by which
its 48 boards were kept in place. Each board
had two tenons which were mortised into it (Ex 36
22m). These tenons would be made of harder
wood than the acacia, so as better to stand the
, When in use the
tenons were sunk into the ‘‘sockets’” (q.v.), and
allowed of a speedy reérection of the tabernacle at
its every remove. : .

Sockets are also mentioned as in use for the stand-


ards of the tabernacle court (Ex 27 10 ff), but there
is no mention of tenons. It may be that the base
of each standard was let into its socket, without
the use of any tenon. This would give it sufficient
stability, as the height of each standard was but
5 cubits (73 ft.) (Ex 27 18).

For Professor A. R. 8. Kennedy’s different the-
ory of “tenons,” see TABERNACLE, and his own
art. on the “Tabernacle” in HDB, IV.

‘ W. Suaw Catnrcotr

TENT, tent (OTN, 'dhel; oxnvh, skéné; ’ohel is
a derivative of DON , Ghal, “to be clear,” “to shine”;
hence ’dhel, “to be conspicuous from a distance”):
In the great stretches of uncultivated lands in the
interior of Syria or Arabia, which probably have
much the same aspect today as in Abraham’s time,
it 1s an easy matter to espy ah encampment of
roving Bedouin, “a nation.... that dwelleth
without_care.... that have neither gates nor
bars” (Jer 49 31). The peaks of their black (cf
Cant 1 5) goats’ hair tents stand out in contrast
against the lighter colors of the soil.

_ There seems to be little doubt about the antiq-
ulty of the Arab tent, and one can rightly believe
that the dwelling-places of Abraham, Sarah, Jacob,
and their descendants were made on the same pat-
tern and of the same materials (Gen 4 20; 9 27;
12 8; 13 3; 18 6; 31 25.33; Ps 78 55; He 11 9,
etc). Long after the children of Israel had given up
their tents for houses they continued to worship in
tents (28 7 1-6; 2 Ch 13.4) (for the use of
tents in connection with religious observances see
TABERNACLE).

The Arab tents (called bait sha'r, “house of hair’ )
are made of strips of black goats’ hair cloth, sewed
together into one large piece (see Goats’ Hair;
Weavina). Poles are placed under this covering
at intervals to hold it from the ground, and it is
stretched over these poles by ropes of goats’ hair
or hemp (cf Job 4 21; Isa 64 2; Jer 10 20), fast-
ened to bard-wood pins driven into the ground (Isa
64 2; Jgs 4 21; 6 26). A large wooden mallet
for driving the pegs is part of the regular camp
equipment (Jgs 4 21; 6 26). The sides (curtains) of
the tent (Isa 54 2) are made of strips of goats’ hair
cloth, or from mats woven from split cane or rushes
(see illustration, p. 2948). Where more than one
family occupies the same tent or the animals are
provided with shelter under the same roof (cf 2 Ch
14 15), curtains of the same materials mentioned
above form the dividing walls. A corner of the mat-
ting where two ends meet is turned back to form the
door of the tent (Gen 18 1). In the summer time
the walls are mostly removed. New tents are not
water-proof, and the condition of the interior after
a heavy rain is not far from squalid. The tent
material becomes matted by use, esp. if wool has
been woven into the fabric, and is then a better
protection against the rain. It is the women’s duty
to pitch the tents.

The poorer Arabs have no mats to cover the
ground under their tents. Straw mats, goats’ hair
or woolen rugs (cf Jgs 4 18), more or less elaborate
as the taste and means of the family allow, are the
usual coverings for the tent floor. The food sup-
plies are usually kept in goats’ hair bags, the liquids,
as oil or milk products, in skins. One or two tinned
copper cooking-vessels, a shallow tray of the same
material, a coffee set consisting of roasting pan,
mortar and pestle, boiling-pot and cups, make up
the usual camp furniture. The more thrifty include
bedding in their equipment, but this increases the
difficulties of moving, since it might require more
than the one animal, sometimes only a donkey, which
carries all the earthly belongings of the family. A
sheikh or chief has several tents, one for himself and


Tenth


2948


Tertullus


guests, separate ones for his wives and female serv-
ants, and still others for his animals (cf Gen 31 33).

Other Heb words tr? “tent” are forms of 371,
hanah (Nu 13 19; 18 17 538; 2K 716; 2 Ch
312; Zec 14 15); 30, sukkah (28 11 11; 22
12); MDW, mishkenath (Cant 1 8).

Figurative: ‘Neither shall the Arabian pitch
tent there” typified utter desolation (Isa 18 20).
“Enlarge the place of thy tent . . . . stretch forth
the curtams .... lengthen thy cords....
strengthen thy stakes’ prophesied an increase in
numbers and prosperity of God’s people (Isa 54
2; cf 33 20; Lk 16 9; 2 Cor 5 4). Tent cords
plucked up denoted death (Job 4 21). Jer 10 20


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Paul dwelt, with Aquila and Priscilla, and worked
with them at tent-making (cf Acts 20 34). See
also Crarts, 11, 18.


TEPHON, téfon (h Tebo, he Tephé): In
1 Macc 9 50,a city of Judaea fortified by Bacchides,
probably the “Beth-tappuah”’ of Josh 15 53, jnear
Hebron. Jos (Ani, XI, i, 3) calls it ‘“Tochoa.


TERAH, ta’ra (TN), terah; LXX Odppa, Thdrra,
or [with NT] @dpa, Thdra; on the name see esp.
HDB, s.v.): The son of Nahor and father of Abra-
ham, Nahor and Haran (Gen 11 24f). At Abra-
ham’s birth Terah was 70 years old (11 26), and
aiter Abraham’s marriage, Terah, Abraham, Sarah


-


ARAB TENT. ‘
1, Tent. 2%. Curtain of goats’ hair. 2a. Curtain of split reed. 2b. Curtain of rushes. 3. Tent rug. 4. Warp of loom (see Weravine). 5. Reinforcing of


narrow goats’ hair strip to hold rope, similar rcinforcing nndcr pole. 6. Tent rope.


are bags of flour, etc.)


is a picture of a destroyed household as applied
to Judah. Hezekiah in his sickness bewails that
his dwelling (life) had been carried away as easily
as a shepherd’s tent is plucked up (isa 38 12).
Isaiah compared the heavens to a tent spread out
(Isa 40 22). “They shall pitch their tents against
her’ i.e. they shall make war (Jer 6 8).
James A. Parco
TENTH. Sce Tiree.


TENTH DEAL, dél (JWI, JWI, “issdrdn):
The tenth part of an ephah, and so rendered in RV
(Nu 28, 29). It was used in connection with the
sacrifices for measuring flour.


TENT-MAKER, tent’mak-ér (cxnvoroids, ské-
nopoiés): Mentioned only once (Acts 18 3).
Paul’s native province of Cilicia was noted for its
goats’ hair cloth which was exported under the
name of cilictum and was used largely for tent-
making. We are told in the passage mentioned that


7. One of the seams showing manner of sewing. (Behind 2a


and Lot emigrated from Ur of the Chaldees on the
road into the land of Canaan, but stopped in Haran
(11 31). When Abraham was 75 years old he and
his nephew resumed their journey, leaving Terah in
Haran, where 60 years later he died (11 32). St.
Stephen, however, states (Acts 7 4) that Terah was
dead when Abraham left, Haran, an impression that
is easily ee from Gen 11-12 if the dates are not
computed. As there is no reason to suppose that
St. Stephen was granted inspiration that would pre-
serve him from such a purely formal error, the con-
tradiction is of no significance and attempts at
“reconciliation” are needless. In particular, the
attempt of Blass (Stud. uw. Krit., 1896, 460 ff) to
alter the text of Acts is quite without foundation.
For further discussion see esp. Knowling, Expos Gr
Test., ad loc. It is worth noting that Philo makes
the same error (Migr. Abr. 177 [§32]), perhaps indi-
cating some special Jewish tradition of NT times.
In Josh 24 2 Terah is said to have been an idolater.
In Jub 12 this is softened into explaining that


2949


through fear of his life Terah was forced to yield
outward conformity to the idolatrous worship of


his neighbors. On the other hand certain Jewish
legends (eg. Br. Rab. 17) represent Terah as
actually a maker of idols. Otherwise in the Bible
Terah is mentioned only by name in 1 Ch 1 26;
Lk 3 34, Burron Scorr Easton


CTERAH (B, Tépaé, Tdérath, A, Odpa0, Thdrath): A
wilderness camp of the Israelites between Tahath


and Mithkah (Nu 83 27.28). See WANDERINGS OF
ISRAEL.


TERAPHIM, ter’a-fim. See AstroLocy; Drvina-
TION; ImMacEs.


TEREBINTH, ter’é-binth: (1) 28, ’a#ah (Isa
6 13, AV ‘teil tree’; Hos 4 13, AV “‘elms’’);
in Gen 36 4 (AV “oak”); Jgs 611.19; 96
(AV “plain”); 2 § 18 9.10.14; 1 K 18 14; 1 Ch
10 12; Isa 1 30; Ezk 6 13, trd “oak,” and in m
“terebinth”’; “vale of Elah,”’ m “the terebinth” in
18 17 2.19; 219. (2) DoN, elim (Isa 1 29,
. “oaks,” m “terebinths’’). (3) mdx, ‘allah (Josh
24 26, EV “oak,” but LXX repéBivéos, terébinthos).
(4) THON, aon, “oak [m “terebinth”] of Zaanannim”
(Josh 19 33; Jgs 4 11); “oak ([RVm ‘“‘terebinth,”
AV “plain’”’] of Tabor” (1 S 10 3); also Gen 12 6;
18 18; 14 13; 1S 10 3; Dt 11 30; Jgs 6 19 all
tr? “oak” or “oaks,” with m ‘‘terebinth” or ‘‘tere-
binths.”” (5) In Gen 14 6 LXX has repéBivd0s, teré-
binthos, as the tr of the el of El-paran. (6) In
Ecclus 24 16 repéu(B)ev60s, terém(b)inthos, AV “‘tur-
pentine tree,” RV “terebinth.”

It is clear that the translators are uncertain which
tr is correct, and it would seem not improbable that
then there was no clear distinction between oak and
terebinth in the minds of the OT writers; yet the
two are very different trees to any but the most
superficial observation.

The terebinth— Pistacia terebinthus (N.O. Ana~
cardiaceae), Arab. Butm—ig a tree allied to the
P. vera, which produces the pistachio nut, and to
the familiar ‘“‘pepper tree’”’ (Schinus moile) so exten-
sively cultivated in modern Pal. Like the latter the
terebinth has red berries, like small immature grapes.
The leaves are pinnate, four to six pairs, and the
change color and fall in autumn, leaving the trun
bare (cf Isa 1 30). The terebinth is liable to be in-
fected by many showy galls, some varieties looking
like pieces of red coral. In Pal, this tree assumes
noble proportions, esp. in situations when, from its
association with some sacred tomb, it is allowed
to flourish undisturbed. Itis in such situations not
infrequently as much as 40 ft. high and spreads
its branches, with their thick, dark-green foliage,
over a wide area (cf 2 S 18 97.14; Ecclus 24 16).
Dwarfed trees occur among the brushwood all over
the land. aye ;

From this tree a kind of turpentine is. obtained,
hence the alternative name “turpentine tree’’
(Ecclus 24 16 AV, RV “‘terebinth”).

: _ E. W. G. MasTerMan

TERESH, té’resh (WIA, teresh [Est 2 21; 6 2];
BA X& omit, 8 m, @dpas, Thdras, and @dppas, Thar-
ras): A chamberlain of King Ahasuerus. Oppert
compares the name with Tiri-dates, the name of the
governor of Persepolis in the time of Alexander.
Another explanation identifies it with the Pers word
turg, “firm”; Scheft links it with the Pers tarsha,
“desire.”


TERRACE, ter’is (M309, m*sillah): Solomon
ig said, in 2 Ch 9 11, to have made of the algum
trees brought him from Ophir “terraces,” or raised


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tenth
Tertullus


walks, for the house of Jeh. In the || 1 K 10 12,
the word used is rendered ‘‘pillars,’’ m “‘‘a railing’;
Heb ‘a prop.’”’


TERRIBLE, ter’i-b'l, TERROR, ter’ér (WT),
yare’, “to be feared,” “reverenced,” YY, ‘aric,
“powerful,” “tyrannical,” O'%, ’aydm, “awe-
inspiring,” MTA, hitttth, “terror,” TDS , ballahah,
“a, worn-out or wasted thing,’ MAN ,’amah, “fright” ;
oPepds, phoberds, “dreadful,” péBos, phdbos, ‘fear’’):
The above terms, and many others which are
employed, denote whatever, by horrible aspect,
or by greatness, power, or cruelty, affrights men
(Dt 119; 26 8; Dnl 2 31). God is terrible by
reason of His awful greatness, His infinite power,
His inscrutable dealmgs, His perfect holiness, His
covenant faithfulness, His strict justice and fearful
judgments (Ex 34 10; Dt 7 21; Neh 9 32; Job
6 4; 37 22; Ps 65 5; 88 15f; Joel 2 11; Zeph
2 11; He 12 21). The term is also applied to the
enemies of God and of His people (Isa 18 11; 25
3 ff; 49 25; Dnl 7 7; 1 Pet 3 14). “The terror
IRV “fear’’] of the Lord” (2 Cor 5 11) denotes the
reverence or fear inspired by the thought that
Christ is judge (ver 10). Evans


TERTIUS, tdr’shi-us (Téprios, Tértios): The
amanuensis of Paul who wrote at his dictation the
Ep. to the Rom. In the midst of Paul’s greetings
to the Christians in Rome he interpolated his own,
“I Tertius, who write the epistle, salute you in the
Lord” (Rom 16 22). “It is as a Christian, not
in virtue of any other relation he has to the Romans,
that Tertius salutes them” (Denney). Some iden-
tify him with Silas, owing to the fact that shdlish
is the Heb for “third [officer],” as tertius is the Lat.
Others think he was a Rom Christian residing in
Corinth. This is, however, merely conjecture.
Paul seems to have dictated his letters to an amanu-
ensis, adding by his own hand merely the concluding
sentences as “the token in every epistle’”’ (2 Thess
317; Col 418; 1 Cor 16 21). How far this
may have influenced the style of his letters is dis-
cussed in Sanday-Headlam, Romans, Intro, Ix.

S. F. Hunter

TERTULLUS, ter-tul’us, tér-(Téprvddos, Tértullos,
diminutive of Lat tertius, “third’’): An orator
who descended with Ananias the high priest and
elders from Jerus to Caesarea to accuse Paul before
Felix the Rom governor (Acts 24 1). Tertullus
was a hired pleader whose services were necessary
that the case for the Jews might be stated in proper
form. Although he bore a Rom name, he was not
necessarily a Roman; Rom names were common
both among Greeks and Jews, and most orators
were at this time of eastern extraction. Nor is it
definitely to be concluded from the manner of his
speech (Acts 24 2-8) that he was a Jew; it has
always been customary for lawyers to identify them-
selves in their pleading with their clients. His
speech before Felix is marked by considerable
ingenuity. It begins with an adulation of the
governorship of Felix that was little in accord
with history (see Frxrx); and the subsequent
argument is an example of how a strong case may
apparently be made out by the skilful manipulation
of half-truths. Thus the riot at Jerus was ascribed
to the sedition-mongering of Paul, who thereby
proved himself an enemy of Rom rule and Jewish
religion, both of which Felix was pledged to uphold.
Again, the arrest of Paul was not an act of mob
violence, but was legally carried out by the high
priests and elders in the interests of peace; and
but for the unwarranted interference of Lysias (see
Lysias), they would have dealt with the prisoner
in their own courts and thus have avoided tres-


Testament
Textand MSS (NT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2950


passing on the time of Felix. They were, however,
perfectly willing to submit the whole case to his
jurisdiction. It is interesting to compare this
speech of Tertullus with the true account, as given
in Acts 21 27-35, and also with the letter of
Lysias (Acts 23 26-30). C. M. Kerr


TESTAMENT, tes’ta-ment: The word dadjen,
diathéké, almost invariably rendered ‘‘covenant,”’ was
rendered in AV ‘‘testament” in He 9 16.17, in the
sense of a will to dispose of property after the maker’s
death. It is not casy to find justification for the re-
tention of this tr in RV, “esp. in a book which is so
impregnated with the language of the LXX as the
Ep. to the He” (Hatch). See Covenant in Tax NT.


TESTAMENT, NEW, CANON OF THE. See
Canon or THE New TESTAMENT.


TESTAMENT, NEW, TEXT AND MANU-
scmens OF THE. See Text ann MSS oF THE


TESTAMENT OF ISAAC. See Apocanyptic
Literature, IV, 3.


TESTAMENT, OLD, CANON OF THE. Sce
Canon OF THE Oup TESTAMENT.


TESTAMENT, OLD, TEXT OF THE.  Sce
TExT OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.
TESTAMENTS, BETWEEN THE. See Br-


TWEEN THE TESTAMENTS.


TESTAMENTS OF THE TWELVE PA-
TRIARCHS. See Arocatyptic Lireratore, IV, 1.


TESTIMONY, tes’ti-mé-ni, ARK OF THE (Ex
25 21f). See ARK oF THE COVENANT.


TETA, té’ta. See Avera.


TETH, teth (0): The 9th letter of the Heb
alphabet: transliterated in this Encyclopaedia as
t(Qntenset). It came also to be used for the number
9; and with waw for 15, with zayin for 16 (i.e. 94+6
and 9+7) to avoid forming regular series with the
abbreviation for Jeh. For name, etc, see ALPHABET.


TETRARCH, té'trark, tet’rirk (tetpdpxyns,
tetrdrchés): As the name indicates it signifies a

rince, who governs one-fourth of a domain or
Taedon. The Greeks first used the word. Thus
Philip of Macedon divided Thessaly into four
“tetrarchies.” Later on the Romans adopted the
term and applied it to any ruler of a small princi-
pality. It is not synonymous with “ethnarch,”
at least the Romans made a distinction between
Herod “tetrarch” of Galilee, Philip “tetrarch” of
Trachonitis, Lysanias “tetrarch” of Abilene, and
Archelius “ethnarch” of Judaea (BJ, II, vi, 3;
Ant, XVII, xi, 4). The title was often conferred
on Herodian princes by the Romans, and sometimes
it was used courteously as a synonym for king (Mt
14 9; Mk6 14). In the same way a “tetrarchy”
was sometimes called a kingdom.

: Henry FE. Dosker

TETTER, tet’ér (pa, bohak; 4Ados, dlphos):
The term “freckled spot” in AV is thus rendered in
RV. The eruption referred to in Lev 13 39 isa pale
white spot on the skin. This is described by Gor-
raeus a8 an eruption arising from a diseased state
of the system without roughness of skin, scales or
ulceration. Jt did not render the sufferer unclean,
although it is difficult of cure. The disease is com-
monly known by its Lat name vitiligo. Pliny rec-


ommended the use of capers and lupins to remove
it. See FREcKLED Spot; LEPROSY.


TEXT AND MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NEW
TESTAMENT:
I. Sources or EvipENCE FOR THE TEXT oF THE NT
1. Autographs of the NT Writers
Papyrus Fragments of the Greek NT
. Greek Copies or MSS of the NT Text
. List of MSS of the Greek NT
3 Uncials
2) Minuscules
5. Vernacular Versions
6. Patristic Quotations
7. Lectionaries and Service-Books
II. Necessity or SIFTING AND ORITICIZING THH
EVIDENCE
III. Mernops or Criticat PRocEDURE
IV. History or THE PROcESS
LivrERATURE
The literary evidence to the text of the NT is
vastly more abundant than that to any other series
of writings of like compass in the entire range of
ancient letters. Of the sacred books of the Heb
Bible there is no known copy antedating the 10th
cent. AD. Of Homer there is no complete copy
earlier than the 13th cent. Of Herodotus there is
no MS earlier than the 10th cent. Of Vergil but
one copy is earlier than the 4th cent., and but a
fragment of all Cicero’s writings is even as old as.
this. Of the NT, however, we have two splendid
MSS of the 4th cent., at least ten of the 5th, twenty-
five of the 6th and in all a total of more than four
thousand copies in whole or in part of the Gr NT.
To these copies of the text itself may be added the
very important and even more ancient evidence of the
VSS of the NT in the Lat, Syr, and Egyp tongues,
and the quotations and clear references to the NT
readings found in the works of the early Church
Fathers, as well as the inscriptions and monumental
data in Syria, Asia Minor, Africa, Italy, and Greece,
dating from the very age of the apostles and their
immediate successors: It thus appears that the
documents of the Christian faith are both so many
and so widely scattered that these very facts more
than any others have embarrassed the final deter-
mination of the text. Now, however, the science of
textual criticism has so far advanced and the
textual problems of the Gr Testament have been so
well traversed that one may read the Christian
writings with an assurance approximating certainty.
Professor Eberhard Nestle speaks of the Gr text
of the NT issued by Westeott and Hort as the
‘nearest in its approach to the goal.’’ Professor
Alexander Souter’s student’s edition of the Revisers’
Gr NT, Oxford, 1910, no doubt attams even a
higher watermark. It is the purpose of the present
article to trace, as far as it can be done in a clear
and untechnical manner, the process of connection
between the original writings and this, one of the
latest of the editions of the Gr NT.
I. Sources of Evidence for the Text of the
NT.—Until very recent times it has not been cus-
tomary to take up with any degree of
1. The confidence, if at all, the subject of NT
Autographs autographs, but since the researches
ofthe NT im particular of Dalman, Deissmann,
Writers Moulton (W.F.) and Milligan (George),
the task is not only appropriate but
incumbent upon the careful student. The whole
tendency of recent investigation is to give less
place to the oral tradition of Christ’s life and teach-
ing and to press back the date of the writing of
the Synoptic Gospels into the period falling be-
tween Pentecost and the destruction of Jerus. Sir
William M. Ramsay goes so far as to claim that
“antecedent probability founded on the general
character of personal and contemporary Greek of
Gr-Asiatic society’ would indicate “that the first
Christian account of the circumstances connected


woke


2951


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Testament
Text and MSS (NT)


with the death of Jesus must be presumed to have
been written in the year when Jesus died’ (Letters
to the Seven Churches, 7). W.M. Flinders Petrie
argues to the same end and says: “Some generally
accepted Gospels must have been in eirculation
before 60 AD. The mass of briefer records and
Logia which the habits and culture of that age
would produce must have been welded together
within 10 or 20 years by the external necessities”’
(The Growth of the Gospels, 7).


sometimes with a sentence or two at the end. The
method of personal research was pursued, as
well as compilation of diverse data including folk-
lore and genealogies, together with the grouping
of cognate matters in artistic forms and abundant
quotation in writings held in high esteem by the
readers, as in the First and Third Gospels and the
Book of Acts. The presentation copy of one’s
works must have been written with unusual pains
m case of their dedication to a patrician patron, as


RAICY BHOACE EIEN
IOYAAOYAAML ber
NAXMICTHCICN TOF:
AP EM UCN TOyYAKG

. BOYCE YCCTAMN

»TOYMEN OCCT:

- HOIMANY PONAKG
MOYTON ITER ,.
TOTCH POUAH CARE.
KAACCACTOYCMAL}-
HISPIRCDCEN I
PCONION XPONON
OYDAINOMENGY
OVE PORIKALL IGM
PACK LOY CCIECRH
OKMCMELMC NING
peyaocnys COOCACTAR
AMP OAKPI BUCH E
TTVOVHICAT OORT
ACOVPHN CAIIALL
ANTEMOIOI LeeLee
i DEADCONTI POG
AYN CopAy yup

HACAKOYCAN I EC
IOYKRACI AC UDC
VOPCYOLICANI KAI
IROYOARCH HH PON
AON CEYEIIANALO
APL POI Fy ey
EOD CECAOUD NOC IA
OLCTIANCDOYTIN
JOMMANONTROH
VOCACIONAC OPA:
COONPICALIDCAPAL SE
MEPRAHNGPpoapa
IWAMICAOOFRIF ECO

WUNOUKIARHAG HE
TODIADAIONME 1A
MAYDACTIELCMII Epo:
KY TOYKAINICCOF:

PE CH POC CISYN pent,

— RYICDISALAN OTS Ay
ICCVOYCOHICAY PY

SOV CON DE POCHIE ET

IAN AY UT ODACO Po

CNP COW MIS ADAT KAS:

TOMCR AY TN ARLICAI

“PREPS COCR IEG


The autographs of the NT writers have long been


IWAPOWAAT Bi ay,
ISAMAVASTOCT IBA
AHINATAKAN CORY
ANCKUIPE ANC
VHINGAY EOOb xa)


-PAN :
AN AKOOPIIC 8 Rr
AGA ODN IA Cyan
PEAVEY Panic:
WAPIBALONAS fot
qpeH PACT aC hep
BEICHIAPAA KEG) *
PE MATONISO Laird
VSREPAARS Oya
EYP COEICAIT yne]e-
KAN COIEIKG 1EuDE
ANCHIICDCOI MEK
ACHP HPODATEG
ZLETENTIOLICAIOR
NOYAIIOAE CORNY
OACTI Cfockn ey
AAKKC POLICALON
IKATHEINMIL Epa
ROLOYNY KT OCIOs
AN CXC Dp HCENE]
CAMYIIIONISALD
CKICWDC HC Lewy
VEICUEPODAOY ENA
JIA POOOPELOP HOF
HOKYAIAIOYI
PIOyACFORT Pac


“OOS ALICE VE OYRIKA


+ ACCORION YN MOY
JOUCHPODAHCIAG?
OMEN EHICKONY
HIQUODN MAICDE
COYMWOHACES 4
IAIN IOC HAKCA
NETAENHANTAC


fy VOYCHAIAAC TOY:


CH KLIOACCMEKAL
CNUIXACHIOICO SOF
AY TH CATLONIE FR -
ISALIK AL OD TE PUDICA
‘TALON XPONQNON
PEIN PIE RCDCCNSTTA
PALODN MAL UN:
TOTECIIN PCpent


Lk to ‘‘most excellent Theophilus.”


Te ae eR eat ce
Mioy lov ee ie
TOYAC LORE TG ©
CLIRICN PAPI AG |
KOYCOLPISAAYOM::
ICATONYP MOC Proms -
PAXPLABRAM OYCAGA
TEINNAAT VICI ag
CHV KRITOGCAE NTI Ap
INAHOMNAIOU LOY
KKCICIN
VFOREY PHICAN LOC
AGCIOYHPODAG YS
AGYATVEROCHY
SPAIN DALSAILORAY
PODTCDCIISPON AI
PAV TN COACH CONG
FEPOEICTIAPAAAR
POH AIALON ISAT
M PAAYTOYISAL) Ue
POYOYVEICT HENT EDS
JEON PIKACING Ap
ELH TOY NM ECC HA
SY XEN IOYLICAFL
ORECECPOICHIALC
AAKE POLIAIALOWN:
ASADELINM PARRY IOD-
ISAICECHEAOC NEI
UREN TELA
AKOYCACAGOLIAP
KEAAROCKACING EL
THICIOYAALACAN 1
TOY POCRY 1OYt ep.
Noverpe IKMOEICHE
Alte AOC HIN PEP MA
PICOUICAC I ECINAS
ANC RCDPHICONE!
PAP ICPLETIICHAAL
AAIACGINAICAUCD
IAT CORLICCNCIC
HOAINACIOMErN
NAZAPE FORICOC
HANDIPODONT OP Ho


© ALATOI pope


»OVINAZCOPAIO’


nay PSAIOVICT PAL:
ZONA TAICUEMCEPOE
Pr CIREINAICTIAPAFC!


FAS PDE E Nar ge Pe
RAI HC HONE +
COORICHL Ee pEae t
VHOIOYACKCAL TD:
P40 (ANCE ECHL E«
US Ha AP ba A CET”
JON OYRcoNe |
ne FOCIAP EUS ING yoda
DICATATIOMOY  .
Stponprs Lory,
NOOB yg ep eoaet! '
Oe Gane HO Pha:
CVOMMAC REC PH
+ DAON Iyer ae
» HEOIGCTUANL AgHy f!
_ BOYCAT Uy”
ORY POCA Cia
OMT COE CRE TCH bs
AY MAAYILOTAHO
] PED rlixaArat Ny
APCD AEEL TEAC
MATINTPRINIC SI
poteeQestss HAVE}
TEAC PONDEIEERE? F
POYAIS PERC ATE +
ALAP POR
POPCOKCHIOPE BO
PORPPOOCRY PORTE
CPOCOKY MAT AT
um ACAI WYAE BE
TECOAT PLE PERU
POCTIOYIOPpAANL:
INAICKNWE DELO E!
CNTWDILOPAAN EH
HHOUWAM CIE SOF
NOT OY RM CHO?
FACAM APL EACAY
- $RON
TEACDON ACT IOARCH
TOON PAP ICALT:
iKICRAAUYISALL
€P KOMEN OYE
ITV ERITTIC HAY
CUO PRY TOC
HEH PAATAG TART.
VIVE Kyo chey
Mini byrinale
epee DS OveHey


For specula-


Fio. 1. -FacsimiuE


lost, but the discovery during the last few years
of contemporary documents enables us to form fairly
clear notions as to their general literary character
and condition. In the first place papyrus was prob-
ably the material employed by all the NT writers,
even the original Gospel of Mt and the general Ep.
of Jas, the only books written within Pal, not being
excepted, for the reason that they were not origi-
nally written with a view to their liturgical use, in
which case vellum might possibly have been em-
ployed. Again the evidence of the writings them-
selves witnesses to the various literary processes
followed during the Ist cent. Dictation was largely
followed by St. Paul, the names of at least four of
his secretaries, Tertius, Sosthenes, Timothy, and
Sylvanus, being given, while the master himself, as in
many of the Egyp papyri, appended hisownsignature,


oF Cop. Srnarticvs.


tion as to the probable dimensions of the original
papyrus rolls of NT books, one will find Professor
J. Rendel Harris and Sir F. G. Kenyon extremely
suggestive, and from opposite viewpoints; cf
Kenyon, Handbook of the Textual Criticism of the
NT; Harris, NT Autographs.

Comparatively few papyrus fragments of the NT"
are now known to be extant, and no complete
book of the NT has as yet been found, though the
successes in the field of contemporary Gr writings
inspire confidence that ere long the rubbish heaps of
Egypt will reward the diligent explorer. Of the
LXX (Gr OT) somewhat more has come to light
than the NT, while the papyrus copies and frag-
ments of Homer are almost daily inereasing.


The list below is condensed from that of Sir Frederick
G. Kenyon's Handbook of the Textual Criticism of the


Textand MSS(NT) THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2952


NT, 2d ed, 1912, 41 ff, using Dr. Gregory’s method
of notation.
3p? Mt 1 1-9.12.14-20. 3d cent. Found _at Oxyrhyn-
chus in 1896, now in the University of Pennsylvania.
ee pe ioe eee pager PAP EEUE. ik
n in ron € verso, WI
2. Papyrus Lk 7 18 ff in Sahidic on the recto.


Fragments 5th or 6th cent. In book form, at
of the the Museo Archeologico, Florence.
Greek NT Bs Lk 7 36-43; 10 38-42. 6th cent. In


book form. In the Rainer Collection,


‘Vienna.
B* Lk 1 74-80; 5 3-8.30—6 4. 4th cent. In_book
form. Found in Egypt joined to a MS of Philo;
now in the Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris.
Jn 1 23-31.33-41; 20 11-17.19-25. 3d cent. An
outer sheet of a single-quire book. Found at
Oxyrhynchus and now in the British Museum.


é Jn 11 45. University of Strassburg.
7 Lk 4 1.2. Archaeological Museum at Kieff.
a@ Acts 4 31-37; § 2-9; 6 1-6.8-15. 4th cent. In
tho Berlin Museum.
33° 1 Jn 4 11-13.15-17. 4th or 5th cent. In book


form. Found at Oxyrhynchus; now in Harvard
University Library.

Rom 1 1-7. 4th cent. Found at Oxyrhynchus;
now in Harvard University Library.

1 Cor 1 17-20; 6 13-18; 7 3.4.10-14. 5th cent.
In the Imperial Library at St. Petersburg.

He 1 1. 3d or 4th cent. In the Amherst Library.
He 2 14—5 5; _10 8—11 18; 11 28—12 17. 3d
or 4th cent. Found at Oxyrhynchus; now in
the British Museum.

1 Cor 1 25-27; 2 3-8; 3 8-10.20. 5th cent. In
book form; at St. Catherine’s Monastery, Mt.


Sinai.
1 Cor 7 18—8 4; Phil 3 9-17; 4 2-8. 4th cent.
Found at Oxyrhynchus.


prt Rom 12 3-8. 6th or 7th cent. Ryland’s Library,
Manchester.

yp Tit 111-15; 2 3-8. 3d cent. Ryland’s Library,
Manchester.
He § 12-19. 4thcent. Found at Oxyrhynchus.


18
Bo Rev 14-7. 3d or 4th cent. Found at Oxyrhyn-

chus.

Gr copies or MSS of the NT text have hitherto
been and probably will continue to be the chief
source of data in this great field. For
determining the existence of the text
Copies or in its most ancient form the auto-
MSS of the graphs are of supreme value. For
NT Text determining the content or extent of

the text the VSS are of highest worth.
For estimating the meaning and at the same time for
gaining additional data, both as to existence and
extent of usage of the NT, the quotations of its
text by the Church Fathers, whether _as apologists,
preachers, or historians, in Assyria, Greece, Africa,
Italy or Gaul, are of exceeding importance. But for
determining the readings of the text itself the Gr
MSS or copies of the original autographs are still
the principal evidence of criticism. About 4,000
MSS, in whole or in part, of the Gr NT are now
known. These MSS furnish abundant evidence for
determining the reading of practically the entire
NT, while for the Gospels and most important
Epp. the evidence is unprecedented for quantity
and for clearness. They are usually divided into
two classes: Uncial, or large hand, and Minuscule,
or small hand, often called Cursive. The term
“cursive’ is not satisfactory, since it does not
coérdinate with the term ‘‘uncial,” nor are so-called
cursive features such as ligatures and oval forms con-
fined to minuscule MSS. The uncials comprise about
140 copies extending from the 4th to the 10th cents.
The minuscules include the remaining MSS and fall
between the 9th cent. and the invention of printing.
Herewith is given a brief description of a few of the
chief MSS, both uncial and minuscule, of the NT.

(1) Uncials —&. Cod. Sinaiticus found by Tisch-
endorf at St. Catherine’s Monastery on Mt. Sinai

and now in tbe Imperial Library at
4. Listof St. Petersburg; 4th cent. This is the
MSS of the only uncial which contains the NT
Greek NT entire. It alsohasthe Ep. of Barnabas
and part of the Shepherd of Hermas
and possibly originally the Didache. The marks of


3. Greek


many correctors are found in the text. It is written
on 147! leaves of very thin vellum in four narrow col-
umns of 48 lines each. The pages measure 15X13}
in., and the leaves are arranged in quaternions of four
sheets. The open sheet exposing eight columns re-
sembles greatly an open papyrus roll. There is but
rudimentary punctuation and no use of accent or
initial letters, but the Eusebian section numbers are
found on the margin of the Gospels. Fig. 1 is from
the photographic facsimile of 8, published by the
Oxford University Pressin 1911.

A. Cod. Alexandrinus, so named since it was sup-
posed to have come from Alexandria, being the gift
of Cyril Lucar, at one time Patriarch of that Prov-
ince, though later of Constantinople, to Charles I,
through the English ambassador at the Turkish
court in 1627, and in 1757 presented to the Royal
Library and now in the British Museum. It doubt-
less belongs to the 5th cent., and contained the
entire NT, lacking now only portions of Mt, Jn,
and 1 Cor, as well as the two Epp. of Clement of
Rome and the Ps Sol. It is written on thin vellum
in two columns of 41 lines to the page, which is 123 X
103 in.; employs frequent initial capitals, and is
divided into paragraphs, but has no marginal signs
except in the Gospels. Several different hands
are discovered in the present, state of the MS.

Cod. Vaticanus, since 1481, at least, the chief
treasure of the Vatican Library, and_universally
esteemed to be the oldest and best MS of the Gr
NT; 4th cent. Written on very fine vellum, the
leaves nearly square in shape, 1010 in., with three
narrow columns of 40-44 lines per column and five
sheets making the quire. A part of the Ep. to the
He and the Pastorals, Philem and Rev are lack-
ing. It is without accents, breathings or punctua-
tion, though corrected and retraced by later hands.
In the Gospels the divisions are of an earlier date
than in Cod. &. The theory of Tischendorf that
Codd. & and B were im part prepared by the same
hand and that they were both among the 50 MSS
made under the direction of Eusebius at Caesarea
in 331 for use in the emperor Constantine’s new
capital, is not now generally accepted.

Cod. Ephraemi Rescriptus. This is the
great palimpsest (twice written) MS of the uncial
group, and originally contained the whole NT.
Now, however, a part—approximatey half—of
every book is lacking, and 2 Thess and 2 Jn are
entirely gone. It belongs to the 5th cent., is
written on good vellum 9X12} in. to the page of
41 lines, and of one column in the original text,
though the superimposed writings of St. Ephraem
are in two. Enlarged initials and the Eusebian
marginal sections are used and several hands have
corrected the MS. See Fig. 2. Brought to Italy
from the East in the 16th cent., it came to France
with Catherine de’ Medici and is now in the Biblio-
théque Nationale, Paris.

D. Cod. Bezae. This is the early known MS
which Theodore Beza obtained in 1562 from the
monastery of St. Irenaeus at Lyons and which he
gave in 1581 to the University of Cambridge, where
it now is. It is a Gr-Lat text, the Gr holding the
chief place on the left-hand page, measuring 8x10
in., and dates probably from the end of the 5th
cent. Both Gr and Lat are written in large uncials
and divided into short clauses, corresponding line
for line. The hands of no less than nine correctors
have been traced, and the critical questions arising
from the character of the readings are among the
most interesting in the whole range of Bib. criticism
and are still unsettled. It contains only the Gospels
and Acts with a fragment of 3 Jn.

Cod. Washingtoniensis. The United States
has now in the National Library (Smithsonian)
at the capital one of the foremost uncial MSS of the


absent eaporere o Re
“ERB OF VIORIART ERA DKINAOYREROLOP GLO.
a OCRATACKEYACH TNA DMOMD OY. gi ae
LGPL. Be AIS sie ad THIEP HRA: BAIR.


BTR Ley & Fo li be Lik KET TPT: 2


Boycvay “TOR FTACH. gh. BS, ASIA peseHee
At AITS fOpPa Spe Lie 3s RL YARRA BHT
: fies GF DITIA MT TARICE AREY Eee


praieray yy OTUEONSS PEE AL
: EB art OBRUAIENTATIEOHE UD art


Shae GEALTA LA HB.OZAA AMyaie

Mies PePALsO100X0P POCKAS s

eerIeLENs TOA EF MER YAMEMEL,
all Ra isa PBI LOANELE


Jegh “inde seamelaer
cacahBirartanrreces FrasGa par, % 9.


SECTION OF CODEX WASHINGTONIENSIS (MARK i:1-7)


2953


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Text and MESCNE)


Gr NT. It is a complete codex of the Gospels, in
a slightly sloping but very ancient hand, written
upon good vellum, in one column of 30 lines to the
page, and 6X9 in. in size. By all the tests ordi-


Mr. C. L, Freer of Detroit, who obtained the MS
in Egypt in 1906, and is edited by Professor H. A.
Sanders for the ‘University of Michigan Press, 1911.
See accompanying page insert.


(


GRATO RTA RES STi be BIRT ‘eapnin gens dne


Fe eate tebe


i Le TTs)


SPOS CHE


ui 2 aa
EO “wt BS
QCA CEE CANS
11 eR Saas Fa Rel ede


OT RIV GI CP4
SANE TART


POR


neve


eros tl


Au oe
’ Br hie
ee WME fo asl


ES uns
ont


rgrqa yt


ue All pats ie


i ere are ‘wy


“Tare ) ee pre hy
py At TY RUTIOT UN
Hirsi Rane ean RARE


ag


Tig GPT ALLEN PY,


en ee rF ie ;
- ip TY) Se iu
B peerern” ome ct A FRR ARAL 73 Ne @ x.
en . Ade eerieyrasen:
: q! om righ (PRA ee Ue t KOPIN I ia ( OVEpPoRntk
pi err aces w.
Saren te ie Be dhe 9 PETE Or «1 44%


hte petniec PPuC OHS Wy yu x48.
ore Ate Se Yh, SAT
s ng: ws ant aS
ess aR. mS. acne ! .
on i Na!


manonie
backs Se aanur Liye
CET ICTR CR LS


oa i t
HAR ue veer seers


o% yt


R rule MA, ANS. A
cer ahato PLAY Se


Ave opecrt on,” PEN


OAL


Beg cater pers. ee ee
eo DER A AAP ANE


QUI Tina


i Ruut Btu ey a


iy


ae
peter &
ede AY


p ri" 4 . : @ is
id SAO CVI as *Y:
Reese ekg ope matinee -


iO henge OU


ah wanpieeps uaF iatieh
ites ARRON RRR ph ARIE
inerteweiten aoe


sO RE ’


‘<<


[odE is. PERRO OGE A


is Peal


yest Ss cF
pate


ay 8 ge


ec des


i pyre eae oes may


narily given, it belongs to the period of the earliest
codices, possibly of the 4th cent. Like Cod. D, it
has the order of the Gospels: Mt, Jn, Lk, Mk, and
contains an apocryphal interpolation within the
longer ending of Mk for which no other Gr authority
is known, though it is probably referred to by St.
Jerome. It has been published in facsimile by


Fic. 2.—Facstmiue or Cop. ErpuranMmi REscriptus.


(2) Minuscules—Out of the thousands of minus-
cule MSS now known only the four used by Erasmus,
together with one now found in the United States,
will be enumerated.

1. This is an 11th-cent. codex at Basel. It
must have been copied from a good uncial, as its
text often agrees with Codd. 8 and B.


Textand MSS (NT)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2954


1. Of the 12th cent., and now at Mayhingen,
Bavaria. This is the only MS Erasmus had for
Rev in his editio princeps, and being defective at the
end, 22 16-21, he supplied the Gr text by retrans-
lating from the Lat; ef TR and AV. Generally
speaking, this MS is of high quality.

2. This is a 15th-cent. MS at Basel, and was that
on which Erasmus most depended for his 1st ed,
1516. It reflects a good quality of text.

297, Some have assigned this MS to the 12th
cent., though it was probably later. It is at Basel,
and was the principal text used by Erasmus in the
Acts and Epp.

667. As illustrating a good type of minuscule
of the Gospels, see Fig. 3, taken from Evangelistaria
667, which came from an island of the Sea of Mar-
mora; purchased in Constantinople by Dr. Albert
L. Long in 1892 and now in the Drew Semi-
nary Library at Madison, N.J.

Vernacular VSS, or translations of the Scrip-
tures into the tongues of western Christendom,

were, some of them, made as early
5. Vernacu- as the 2d cent., and thus antedate
lar Versions by several generations our best-

known Greek text. It is con-
sidered by many as providential that the Bible
was early tr4 into different tongues, so that its
corruption to any large extent became almost
if not altogether an impossibility, since the VSS
of necessity belonged to parts of the church
widely removed from one another and with
very diverse doctrinal and institutional tenden-
cies. The testimony of tr® to the exact form
of words used either in an autograph or a Gr
copy of an author is at best not beyond dis-
pute, but as evidence for the presence or
absence of whole sections or clauses of the
original, their standing is of prime importance.
Such extreme literalness frequently prevails
that the vernacular idiom is entirely set aside
and the order and construction of words in the
original sources are slavishly followed and even
transliterated, so that their bearing on many
questions at issue is direct and convincing.
Although the Gr NT has now been tr4 into all
the principal tongues of the earth, compara-
tive criticism is confined to those VSS made
during the first eight centuries.

Patristic quotations afford a unique basis of
evidence for determining readings of the NT.

So able and energetic were the
6. Patristic Church Fathers of the early centu-
Quotations ries that it is entirely probable that

the whole text of the Gr NT could be
recovered, from this source alone, if the writings of
apologists, homilists and commentators were care-
fully collated. It is also true that the earliest
heretics as well as the defenders of the faith
recognized the importance of accurately determin-
ing the original text, so that their remains also
comprise no mean source for critical research.
It is evident that the value of patristic quota-
tions will vary according to such factors as the
reliability of the reading, as quoted, the personal
equation or habit of accuracy or looseness of the
particular writer, and the purity or corruption of
the text he employs. One of the marked advan-
tages of this sort of evidence arises from the fact
that it affords additional ground for localizing and
dating the various classes of texts found both in
original copies and in VSS. For general study the
more prominent Church Fathers of the 2d, 3d and
4th cents. are sufficient, though profitable investi-
gation may be made of a much wider period. By
the beginning of the 5th cent., however, the type of
text quoted almost universally was closely akin to
that now known as the TR.


Lectionaries and_ service-books of the early
Christian period afford a source of considerable ©
value in determining the general type


7. Lection- of texts, together with the order and
aries and _ contents and distribution of the several
Service- books of the Canon. As the lection-
Books ary systems both of the eastern and


western churches reach back to post-
apostolic times and all are marked by great verbal
conservatism, they present data of real worth for
determining certain problems of textual criticism.
From the very nature of the case, being compiled
for a liturgical use, the readings are often introduced
and ended by set formulas, but these are easily
separated from the text itself, which generally fol-
lows copy faithfully. Even the systems of chapter
headings and divisions furnish clues for classifying


cS ¢ a
paren are oral 1


ip oer


Fic. 3.—Facsimile Minuscule Manuscript.


and comparing texts, for there is high probability
that texts with the same chapter divisions come
from the same country. Probably the earliest
system of chapter divisions is preserved in Cod.
Vat., coming down to us from Alexandria probably
by way of Caesarea. That it antedates the codex
in which it appears is seen from the fact that the
Pauline Epp. are numbered as comprising a con-
tinuous book with a break between Gal and Eph
and the dislocated section numbers attached to
He which follows 2 Thess here, though the numbers
indicate its earlier position after Gal. Another
system of chapter divisions, at least as old as the
5th cent., found in Cod. Alex., cuts the text into
much larger sections, known as Cephalia Majora.
In all cases the enumeration begins with the 2d
section, the 1st being considered introductory.
Bishop Eusebius developed a system of text division
of the Gospels based upon an earlier method attrib-
uted to Ammonius, adding a series of tables or
Canons. The first table contained sections giving
events common to all four evangelists, and its number
was written beneath the section number on the
margin in each Gospel, so that their parallels could
readily be found. The 2d, 3d and 4th Canons con-


2955


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Textand MSS(NT)


taiu lists of sections in which three of the Gospels
have passages in common (the combination Mk,
Lk, Jn, does not occur). The 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th
and 9th contain lists in which two combine (the
combination Mk, Jn, does not occur). Canon 10
contains those peculiar to some one of the Gospels.


Il. Necessity of Sifting and Criticizing the Evi-
dence.—Criticism from its very nature concerns
itself entirely with the problems suggested by the
errors of various kinds which it brings to light. In
the writings of the NT the resources of textual
evidence are so vast, exceeding, as we have seen,
those of any other ancient literature, sacred or
secular, that the area of actual error is relatively

uite appreciable, though it must be remembered
that this very abundance of textual variety ulti-
mately makes for the integrity and doctrinal unity
of the teaching of the NT books. Conjectural
emendation which has played so large a part in the
restoration of other writings has but slight place in
the textual criticism of the NT, whose materials
are so abundant that the difficulty is rather to select
right renderings than to invent them. We have
catalogued the principal sources of right readings,
but on the most casnal investigation of them dis-
cover large numbers of wrong readings mingled with
the true, and must proceed to consider the sources
of error or various readings, as they are called, of
which approximately some 200,000 are known to
exist in the various MSS, VSS, patristic citations
aud other data for the text.


“Not,” as Dr. Warfield says, ‘that there are 200,000
places in the NT where various readings occur, but that
there are nearly 200,000 readings all told, and in many
cases the documents so differ among themselves that
many various readings are counted on a single word, for
each document is compared in turn with one standard
and the number of its divergences ascertained, then these
sums are themselves added together and the result given
as the number of actually observed variations.”” Dr.
Ezra Abbott was eccustomed to remark that ‘‘about
nineteen-twentieths of the variations have so little sup-
port that, although there are various readings, no one
would think of them as rival readings, and nineteen-
twentieths of the remainder are of so little importance
that their adoption or rejection would cause no appreci-
able difference in the sense of the Passages in which they
occur.”” Dr. Hort’s view was that “upon ahout one
word in eight, various readings exist supported by suf-
ficient. evidence to bid us pause and look at it; about
one word in sixty has various readings upon it supported
by such evidence as to render our decision nice and
dificult, but that so many variations are trivial that
only about one word in every thousand has upon It
substantial variation supported by such evidence as to
call out the efforts of the critic in deciding between the
readings.” The oft-repeated dictum of Bentley is still
valid that ‘‘the real text of the sacred writings is com-
petently exact, nor is one article of faith or moral pre-
cept either perverted or lost, choose as awkwardly as
you will, choose the worst by design, out of the whole
jump of readings.” Despite all this, the true scholar
must be furnished rightly to discriminate in the matter
of diverse readings.


From the very nature of the case it is probable
that errors should be frequent in the NT; indeed,
even printed works are not free from them, as is
seen in the most carefully edited editions of the
Eng. Bible, but in MSS the difficulty is increased in
direct proportion to the number of various copies
still extant. There are two classes of errors giving
rise to various readings, unconscious or uninten-


tional and conscious or intentional.


Of the first class, that of unconscious errors, there are
five sorts: : ;

(1) Errors of the eye, where the sight of the copyist
confuses letters or endings that are similar, writing


eg. € tor C; O tor O; Ator A or A; TI tor Tl;


TTAN tor TIAN; M for AA. Here should be named


euton, which arises when two successive lines in
Hen jn the same word or syllable and the eye
catches the second line instead of the first and the copyist
omits the intervening words as in Cod. C of Jn 6 39.
(2) Errors of the pen.—Here is classed all that body
of variation due to the miswriting by the penman of


what is correctly enough iu his mind but through careless-
ness he fails rightly to transfer to the new copy. Trans-
positon of similar letters has evidently occurred in
road. E, M, and H of Mk 14 65, also in H,L, of Acts


, (3) Errors of speech.—Here are included those varia-
tions which have sprung from the habitual forms of speech
to which the scribe in the particular case was accustomed
and which he therefore was inclined to write. Under
this head comes ‘‘Itacism,‘’ arising from the confusion
of vowels and diphthongs, esp. in dictation. Thus is
constantly written «. and vice versa; a for e; » and
«for comand oforv; ofor wand efory. It is observed
that in Cod. & we have scrihal preference for: alone, while
in B e Is preferred.

(4) Errors of memory.—These are explained as having
arisen from the ’’copyist holding a clause or sequence
of letters in his somewhat treacherous memory between
the glance at the MS to be copied and his writing down
what he saw there." Here are classed the numerous
petty changes in the order of words and the substitution
of synonyms, as elrev for éy, é« tor amd, and vice versa.

_ (3) Errors of judgment.—Under this class Dr. Warfield
cites ‘‘many misreadings of ahbreviations, as also the
adoption of marginal glosses into the text by which much
of the most striking corruption which has entered the
text has heen produced.”’ otable instances of this type
of error are found in Jn § 1-4, explaining how it hap-
Be that the waters of Bethesda were healing; and in
n


53—8 12, the passage concerning the adulteress, and
the last twelve verses of Mk.
_ Turning to the second class, that of conscious or inten-
tional errors, we may tabulate:

(1) Linguistic or rhetorical corrections, no doubt often
made in entire good faith under the impression that an
error had previously crept into the text and needed
correcting. Thus second aorist terminations in @ are
changed ta o and tha like.

(2) Historical correcttons.—Under this head is placed
all that group of changes similar to the case in Mk 1 2,
where the phrase ‘Isaiah the prophet"' is changed into
‘the prophets.”

(3) Harmonistic corrections—These are quite frequent
In the Gospels, e.g. the attempted assimilation of the
Lord‘s Prayer in Lk to the fuller form in Mt, and quite
possibly the addition of the words ‘‘ of sin” to the phrase
in Jn 8 34, ‘‘Every one that doeth sin is a slave.” A
certain group of harmonistic corruptions where scribes
allow the memory, perhaps unconsciously, to affect the
writing may rightly be classed under (4) above.

(4) Doctrinal corrections—Of these it is difficult to
assert any unquestioned cases unless it be the celehrated
Trinitarian passage (AV 1 Jn 5 7.82) or the several

assages in which fasting is conpled with prayer, as in

t 17 21; Mk 9 29; Acts 10 30; 1 Cor 7 5

(5) Liturgical corrections.—These are very common,
esp. in the lectionaries, as in the beginning of lessons,
and are even found in early uncials, e.g. Lk 8 31; 10 23,
etc.


Hl. Methods of Critical Procedure.—Here as
in other human disciplines necessity is the mother
of invention, and the principles of critical pro-
cedure rest almost entirely on the data connected
with the errors and discrepancies which have con-
sciously or unconsciously crept into the text. The
dictum of Dr. George Salmon that ‘God has at no
time given His church a text absolutely free from
ambiguity’ is true warrant for a free and continued
inquiry into this attractive field of study. The
process of textual criticism has gradually evolved
certain rules based upon judgments formed after
patiently classifying and taking into account all the
documentary evidence available, both internal and
external.

(1) An older reading is preferable to one later,
since it is presumed to be nearer the original.
However, mere age is no sure proof of purity, as it
is now clear that very many of the corruptions of
the text became current at an early date, so that
in some cases it is found that later copies really
represent a more ancient reading.

(2) A more difficult reading, if well supported, is
preferable to one that is easier, since it is the tend-
ency of copyists to substitute an easy, well-known
and smooth reading for one that is harsh, unusual
and ungrammatical. This was commonly done with
the best of intentions, the scribe supposing he was
rendering a real service to truth.

(3) A shorter is preferable to a longer reading,
since here again the common tendency of scribes is
toward additions and insertions rather than omis-


Textand MSS (NT)
Text of the OT


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2956


sions. Hence arose, in the first place, the marginal
glosses and insertions between the lines which later
transcribers incorporated into the text. Although
this rule has been widely accepted, it must be applied
with discrimination, a longer reading being in some
cases clearly more in harmony with the style of the
original, or the shorter having arisen from a case
of homoecteleuton.

(4) A reading is preferable, other things being
equal, from which the origin of all alternative read-
ings can most clearly be derived. This principle
is at once of the utmost importance and at the same
time demands the most careful application. It
is a sharp two-edged sword, dangerous alike to
the user and to his opponents.

(5) A reading is preferable, says Scrivener, ‘which
best suits the peculiar style, manner and habits of
thought of an author, it being the tendency of
copyists to overlook the idiosyncrasies of the writer.
Yet habit or the love of critical correction may some-
times lead the scribe to change the text to his
author’s more usual style as well as to depart from
it through inadvertence, so that we may securely
apply the rule only where the external evidence
is not unequally balanced.”

(6) A reading is preferable which reflects no
doctrinal bias, whether orthodox ou the one side or
heretical on the other. This principle is so ohvious
that it is accepted on all sides, but in practice wide
divergence arises, owing to the doctrinal bias of the
critic himself.

These are the main Canons of internal evidence.
On the side of external evidence may be summarized
what has already been implied:

(1) A more ancient reading is usually one that
is supported hy the most ancient MSS.

(2) A reading which has the undoubted support
of the earliest MSS, VSS and patristic writers is
unquestionably original. a

(3) A disagreement of early authorities usually
indicates the existence of corruption prior to them all.

(4) Mereuumerical preponderance of witnesses (to
a reading) of auy one class, locality or time, is of
comparative insignificance.

(5) Great significance must be granted to the
testimony of witnesses from localities or times
widely apart, and it can only-he satisfactorily met
by a balancing agreement of witnesses also from
different times and localities.

These rules, though they are all excellent and
each has been employed hy different critics with
good results, are now somewhat displaced, or rather
supplemented, by the application of a principle
very widely used, though not discovered, by West-
cott and Hort known as the principle of the
genealogy of MSS. The inspection of a very broad
range of witnesses to the NT text has led to their
classification into groups and families according
to their prevailing errors, it being obvious that the
greater the community of errors the closer the
relationship of witnesses. Although some of the
terms used by WH, as well as their content,
have given rise to well-placed criticism, yet their
grouping of MSS _is so self-convincing that it bids
fair, with but slight modification, to hold, as it has
thus far done, first place in the field. Sir Frederick
G. Kenyon has so admirably stated the method that
the gist of his account. will be given, largely using
his identical words (Handbook to the Tezxitual
Criticism of the NT, 2d ed, London, 1912). As in
all scientific criticism, four steps are followed by
WH: (a) The individual readings and the authori-
ties for them are studied; (6) an estimate is formed
of the character of the several authorities; (c) an


effort is made to group these authorities as de--


scendants of a common ancestor, and (d) the indi-
vidual readings are again taken up and the first


provisional estimate of their comparative proba-
bility revised in the light of the knowledge gained
as to the value and interrelation of the several
authorities.

Applying these methods, four groups of texts
emerge from the mass of early witnesses: (a) The
Antiochian or Syrian, the most popular of all and
at the hase of the Greek 7’R-and the English AV;
in the Gospels the great uncials A and C support
it as well as N, = and ®, most of the later uncials
and almost all minuscules, the Pesh-Syr_version
and the bulk of the Church Fathers from Chrysos-
tom; (6) the Neutral, a term giving rise to criticism
on all sides and by some displaced by the term
Egyptian; this group is small but of high antiquity,
including NBLTZ,A and C, save in the Gospels,
the Coptic VSS (esp. the Bohairic) and some of
the minuscules, notably 33 and_81; (c) the Alex-
andrian, closely akin to the Neutral group, not
found wholly in any one MS but traceable in such
MSS as NCLX, 33, and the Bohairic version, when
they differ from the other members headed by B;
(d) the Western, another term considered ambigu-
ous, since it includes some important MSS and
Fathers very ancient and very Eastern; here belong
DD? E?F*G? among the unclals, 28, 235, 383, 565,
614, 700, and 876 among the minuscules, the Old
Syr and Old Lat and sometimes the Sahidic VSS.

Of these groups by far the most superior is the
Neutral, though WH have made it so exclusively
to coincide with Cod. B that they appear at times
to have broken one of the great commandments of a
philologist, as quoted by Dr. Nestle from a German
professor, ‘Thou shalt worship no codices.” Now,
the only serious dispute centers on the apparent
slight which this system may have put upon the
so-called Western type of text in group four. The
variants of this family are extensive and important
and appear due to an extremely free handling of the
text at some early date when scribes felt themselves
at liberty to vary the language of the sacred hooks
and even to insert additional passages of consider-
able length.

Although this type of text is of very early origin
and though prevalent in the East was very early
carried to the West, and being widely kuown there
has heen called Western, yet, because of the liberties
above referred to, its critical value is not high, save
in the one field of omissions. In Egypt, however,
and esp. Alexandria, just as in the case of the OT,
the text of the NT was critically considered and
conserved, and doubtless the family called Neutral,
as well as the so-called Alexandrian, springs up here
and through close association with Caesarea becomes
prevalent in Pal and is destined to prevail every-
where. The WH contention that the Antiochian
text arose as a formal attempt at repeated revision
of the original text in Antioch is not so convincing,
but for want of a better theory still holds its place.
Their objections, however, to its characteristic
readings are well taken and everywhere accepted,
even von Soden practically agreeing here, though
naming it the koiné text. It is also interesting to
find that von Soden’s Hesychian text so closely
parallels the Neutral-Alexandrian above, and his
Jerusalem family the Western. And thus we arrive
at the present consensus of opiniou as to the genea-
logical source of the text of the NT.

IV. History of the Process.—Abundant evi-
dence exists and is constantly growing to show that
critical opinion and methodswereknown atleast from
the very days of the formation of the NT Canon,
but in such a sketch as the present the history can
only be traced in modern times. The era of printing
necessarily marks a new epoch here. Among avail-
able MSS choice must be made and a standard set,
and in view of the material at hand it is remarkable


2957


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Text and MSS (NT)
Text of the OT


how ably the work was done. It began in Spain
under Cardinal Ximenes of Toledo, who printed at
Alcala (Complutum) in 1514 the NT volume of his
great Polyglot, though it was not actually issued
until 1522. Meanwhile the great Erasmus, under
patronage of Froben the printer of Basel, had been
preparing a Gr NT, and it was published early in
1516 in a single volume and at low cost, and had
reached its 3d ed by 1522. His 4th ed in 1537
contains Erasmus’ definitive text, and, besides
using Cardinal Ximenes’, had the advantage of
minuscule MSS already named. The next impor-
tant step was taken by Robert Estienne (Stephanus),
whose 3d ed, “Regia,” a folio published in Paris in
1550, was a distinct advance, and, though based
directly upon the work of Ximenes and Erasmus,
had marginal] readings from 15 new MSS, one of
which was Cod. Bezae (D). The learned Theodore
Beza himself worked with Stephanus’ son Henri,
and brought out no less than nine editions of the
NT, but no great critical advance was made in them.
The same may be said of the seven Elzevir editions
brought out at Leyden and Amsterdam between
1624 and 1678, the second, that of 1633, in the
preface of which occurs the phrase, “’Textum ergo
habes nune ab omnibus receptum,’” becoming the
continental standard, as the 1550 edition of Stepha-
nus has for England. Thus we arrive at the TR,
and the period of preparation is closed.

The second period, or that of discovery and
research, was ushered in by the great London Poly-
glot of 1657, edited by Brian Walton (later Bishop
of Chester) with collations by Archbishop Ussher
of 15 fresh MSS, including Cod. A and Cod. 59.
But Dr. John Mill of Oxford was the Erasmus of
this period, and in 1707 after 30 years of labor
brought out the Gr TR with fresh collations of 78
MSS, many VSS and quotations from_the early
Fathers. His MSS included ABDEK, 28, 33,
59, 69, 71, the Peshito, Old Lat and Vulg, and his
Prolegomena set a new standard for textual criti-
cism. This apparatus was rightly appreciated by
Richard Bentley of Cambridge and a revised text
of the Gr and of the Vulg NT was projected along
lines which have prevailed to this day. The work
and wide correspondence of Bentley had stirred
up continental scholars, and J. A. Bengel published
in 1734 at Tubingen a Gr NT with the first Pe:
gestion as to genealogical classification of MSS.
J. J. Wetstein of Basel and Amsterdam, though a
very great collector of data and the author of the
system of MS notation which has continued ever
since, made little critical advance. J. 8. Semler,
taking Wetstein’s material, began rightly to inter-
pret it, and his pupil J. J. Griesbach carried the
work still farther, clearly distinguishing for the
first time a Western, an Alexandrian and a Constan-
tinopolitan recension. ;

With Carl Lachmann began the last epoch in
NT criticism which has succeeded in going behind
the 7’R and establishing an authentic text based on
the most ancient sources. He applied the critical
methods with which he was familiar in editing the
classics, and with the help of P. Buttmann produced
an edition in 1842-50 which led the way directly
toward the goal; but they were limited in ma-
terials and Tischendorf soon furnished these.
Constantin Tischendorf, both as collector and editor,
is the foremost man thus far in the field, His
8th ed, 1872, of the Gr NT, together with his Pro-
legomena, completed and published, 1884-1894, by
C. RB. Gregory, set a new standard. Dr. Gregory's
German edition of the Prolegomena, 1900-1909,
supplemented by his Die griechischen H andschriften
des NT, 1908, marks the further advance of the
master through his master pupil. Meanwhile.
§. P. Tregelles was doing almost as prodigious and


valuable a work in England, and was thus preparing
for the final advances at Cambridge. ae
Scrivener also ranks high and did extremely valu-
able, though somewhat conservative, work in the
same direction. In 1881 ‘“‘the greatest edition ever
published,” according to Professor Souter, was
brought out in England coincident with the RV of
the Eng. NT, This, together with the introduc-
tion, which the same writer characterizes as “an
achievement never surpassed in the scholarship of
any country,” was the joint product of B. F.
Westcott and F. J. A. Hort, friends and co-workers
for many years in the University of Cambridge.
Thus with the end of the 19th cent. the history of
the process may be said to close, though both
process and progress still advance with ever-
increasing triumph.

Von Soden’s ed of the NT appeared during the
summer of 1913 and is of first importance. It
differs from all others in the extreme weight laid on
Tatian’s Diatessaron as the source of the bulk of the
errors in the Gospels. This theory is not likely to
command the assent of scholars and the text (which
does not differ greatly from Tischendorf’s) is con-
sequently of doubtful value. Nevertheless, for
fulness of material, clearness of arrangement, and
beauty of printing, von Soden’s ed must inevitably
supersede all others, even where the text is dissented
from. Dr. Gregory promises a new ed at some day
not too far in the future which, in turn, will proba-
bly supersede von Soden’s.

Lirenatune.—C. R. Gregory, Prolegomena to Tischen-
dorf's NT, Leipzig, 1884-94, Texthritik des NT, Leipzig,
1900-1909, Die griechischen Handschriften des NT,
Leipzig, 1908, Hinleitung tn das NT, Leipzig, 1909,
Vorschldge fir eine kritische Ausgabe des griechischen NT,
Leipzig, 1911; F. G. Kenyon, Palaeography of Gr Papyri,
Oxford, 1899, Handbook to the Textual Criticism of the
NT, London’, 1912; K. Lake, The Text of the NT, 4th
ed, London, 1910; G. Milligan, Selections from the Gr
Papyri, Cambridge, 1910, The NT Documents, 1913; Eb.
Nestle, Einfihrung in das NT, G6ttingen’, 1909; F. H.
A. Scrivener, Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the
NT, 4th ed, London, 1894; Souter, Text and Canon of
the NT, 1913; E. M. Thompson, Handbook of Gr and Lat
Palaeography, 2d ed, London, 1894; H. von Soden, Die
Schriften _des NT, I. Teil, Untersuchungen, Berlin, 1902—
10; 1, Teil, 1913; B. F. Westcott, and F. J. A. Hort,
The NT in Gr with Introduction, Cambridge and London,
1896; Th. Zahn, Intro to the NT, ET, Edinburgh, 1910.

CuHarRLes FREMONT SITTERLY

TEXT OF THE OLD TESTAMENT:


I. Eanuizrst Fonm or Writino In [sHaEn
1. Invention of Alphabet
2, The Cuneiform
8. References to Writing in the OT
4. Inserlptions after Settlement in Canaan
5. Orthography of the Period
II. Tus Two Hesnew Scuriprs
1. The Old Hebrew Alphabet
2. Aramaean Alphabets
3. The New Hebrew Script
4, New Hebrew Inscriptions
5. Summary
Ill. Tne Cranoe or Scuipt
1. Various Theories
. The Change in the Law
. In the Other Books
. Evidence of the LXX
. Evidence of the Text Itself
6. Conclusion
IV. PReEsenvaTION OF THE TEXT
1. Internal Conditions
2. External Circumstances
3. The LXX Version
V. Tue Text In tee Ist Centuny AD
1. Word Separation
2. Other Breaks in the Text
3. Final Forms of Letters
4. Their Origin
Be Conclusion
7
8
9


oun coho


. The Vowel-Letters
. Anomalous Forms
. The Dotted Words
. Their Antiquity
10. The Invertcd nins
11. Large and Small Letters
12. Suspended Letters and Divided waw
13. Abbreviations
14. Conctusion


Text of the OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2958


VI. AuteRation or PrincipaL DocuMENTS
. Jehovah and Baal
. Euphemistic Expressions
Tikkin sopherim
CRIBAL ERRORS 1N THE TEXT
. Misunderstanding
. Errors of the Eye
- Errors of the Ear
. Errors of Memory
. Errors of Carelessness and Ignorance
IsTORY OF THE TEXT
Changes Made in Reading
. Preservation of Text
Division into Verses
. Sections of the Law
. Sections of the Prophets
. Poetical Passages
. Division into Books
IX. Vocarization or tHe Text
1. Antiquity of the Points
2. Probable Date of Invention
3. Various Systems and Recensions
X. Tue Parestinian System
1. The Consonants
2. The Vowels
3. The Accents
4. Anomalous Pointings
XI. Tuer Masorag
1. Meaning of the Term
2. The Keré and Kethibh
3. Other Features
MSS anp Prinrep TExts
1. Manuscripts
2. Early Printed Texts
3. Later Editions
4. Chapters and Verses
LiveRaTURE
I. Earliest Form of Writing in Israel.—The art
of writing is not referred to in the Book of Gen,
even where we might expect a reference to it, e.g.
in Gen 23, nor anywhere in the OT before the
time of Moses (cf, however, Gen 38 18.25; 41 44,
which speak of “sealing”? devices, and see SEAL;
WRITING). . ve
About the year 1500 BC alphabetic writing was
practised by the Phoenicians, but in Pal the
syllabic Bab cuneiform was in use (see
1. Invention ALPHABET). The Israelites probably
of Alphabet did not employ any form of writing in
their nomadic state, and when they
entered Canaan the only script they seem ever to
have used was the Phoen. This is not disproved by
the discovery there of two cuneiform contracts of
the 7th cent., as these probably belonged to stran-
gers. There is only one alphabet in the world, which
has taken many forms to suit the languages for
which it was employed. This original alphabet was
the invention of the Semites, for it has letters
peculiar to the Semitic languages, and probably of
the Phoenicians (so Lucan, Pharsalia 11.220; cf
Herod. v.58), who evolved it from the Egyp hiero-
glyphics. _ :
Of the lit. of Canaan before the Israelites entered
it the remains consist of a number of cuneiform
tablets found since 1892 at Lachish,
2. The Gezer, Taanach and Megiddo, but
Cuneiform esp. of the famous Am Tab, discovered
in Egypt in 1887. Although this non-
alphabetic script was in use in Canaan when the
Israelites entered it, they do not seem to have
adopted it. : ge ;
The earliest reference to writing in the OT is
Ex 17 14. The next is Ex 24 7, mentioning the
Book of the Covenant (Ex 20-28).


VII.


Powe Mwhoe


VITI.


NO orp Cobo renter


XII.


3. Refer- The Book of the Wars of Jeh is named
ences to in Nu 21 14. Other early references
Writing in areJgs 5 14m; 8 14m. Bythetime
the OT of the monarchy the king and nobles


could write (28 1114; 8 17), but
not the common people, until the time of Amos
and Hosea, when writing sccms to have been
common.

The Phoen script prevailed in Pal after the con-
quest as well as in the countries bordering on it.
This is shown by the inscriptions which have been
discovered. The chief of these are: the Baal


Lebanon inscription found in Cyprus (beginning of
the 9th cent.); the MS of about the year 896 of the
ordinary chronology; a Heb agricul-
tural calendar of the 8th cent.; fifteen
lion-weights from Nineveh of about
the year 700; the Siloam Inscription
of the time of Hezekiah; about a score
of seals; and, in 1911, a large number
of ostraca of the time of Ahab.
In this oldest writing the vowels are rarely
expressed, not even final vowels being indicated.
The only mark besides the letters is a
5. Orthog- point separating the words. There
raphy of the are no spccial forms for final letters.


4. Inscrip-
tions after
Settlement
in Canaan


Period Words are often divided at the ends
of lines. The writing is from right
to left. The characters of the Siloam Inscription


and the ostraca show some attempt at elegant
writing. nae
IL The Two Hebrew _Scripts.—Two_ distinct
scripts were used by the Hebrews, an earlier and a
later. The Old Heb alphabet con-
1. The tained 22 letters, all consonants. The
Old Hebrew order of these letters is known from
Alphabet that of the Gr, taken in order of their
numerical values, and later by the
alphabetic pss, etc, and by the figure called ’at-bash
(see SHesHacH). In the acrostic passages, how-
ever, the order is not always the same; this may
be due to corruption of the text. In the alpha-
bet, letters standing together bear similar names.
These are ancient, being the same in Gr as in Sem.
They were probably given from some fancied
resemblance which the Phoenicians saw in the origi-
nal Egyp sign to some object.
The development of the Phoen alphabet called
Aram. begins about the 7th cent. BC. It is found
inscribed as dockets on the cuneiform


2. Ara- clay tablets of Nineveh, as the Phoen
maean letters were upon the lion-weights;
Alphabets on coins of the Pers satraps to the


time of Alexander; on Egyp inscrip-
tions and papyri; and on the Palmyrene inscrip-
tions. The features of this script are the following:
The loops of the letters béth, daleth, téth, koph and
résh, which are closed in the Phoen and Old Heb,
are open, the bars of the letters hé, waw, zayin,
héth and téw are lost, and the tails of kaph, lamedh,
mém, pé and ¢cddhé, which are vertical in the old
Aram., begin in the Egyp Aram. to curve toward
the left; words are divided, except in Palmyrene,
by a space instead of a point; vowel-letters are
freely used; and the use of ligatures involves a dis-
tinction of initial, medial and final forms. There
are of course no vowel-marks.
After the Jews returned from the exile, the Aram.
language was the lingua franca of the Seleucid
empire, displacing Assyr, Old Heb and
3. The Phoen. The Phoen script also had
New He- given place to the Aram. in Mesopo-
brew Seript tamia, Syria and Egypt. In Syria it
divided into two branches, a northern
which grew into Syriac, and a southern, or Jew-
ioe which the New Heb character was pro-
uced.
What is believed to be the oldest inscription in
the modern Heb character is that in a cave at
‘Arak al-‘Amir near Heshbon, which
4. New was used as a place of retreat in the
Hebrew In- year 176 BC (Ant, XII, iv, 11; CTH,
scriptions no. 1). Others are: four boundary
stones found at Gezer; the inscriptions
over the “Tomb of St. James,” really of the Beni
Hezir (1 Ch 24 15; Neh 10 20); that of Kefr
Birim, assigned to the year 300 AD (CIA, no. 17),
in which the transition to the New Heb script may
be said to be accomplished; and others have been


2959


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Text of the OT


found all over the Rom empire and beyond. See
ARCHAEOLOGY.
The inscriptions show that the familiar Heb char-
acter is a branch of the Aramaic. In the 3d cent.
BC the latter script was in general
5. Summary use in those countries where Assyr-
Bab, Old Heb and Phoen had been
used before. The Jews, however, continued to
employ the Old Heb for religious purposes esp.,
and the Samaritans still retain a form of it in
their Bible (the Pent).
Il, The Change of Script.—It is now almost
universally agreed that the script in which the
T was written was at some time changed from
the Phoenician to the Aramaic. But in the
past many opinions have been held on the &
subject.
Rabbi Eleazar of Modin (d. 1385 AD), from
the mention of the hooks (waws) in Ex 27 10
and from Est 8 9, denied any
1. Various change at all. Rabbi Jehuda
Theories (d. ¢ 210) maintained that the
é Law was given in the New Heb,
which was later changed to the Old as a punish-
ment, and then back to the New, on the people
repenting in the time of Ezra. Texts bearing on
the matter are 2 K 5 7; 18 26; Isa 8 1, from
which various deductions have been drawn. There
may have been two scripts in use at the same time,
as in Egypt (Herod. ii.36).
In regard to the change in the Law, the oldest
authority, Eleazar ben Jacob (latter part of the lst
cent. AD), declared that a Prophet
2. Change at the time of the Return commanded
in the Law to write the Torah in the new or
square character. Next Rabbi Jose (a
century later) states (after Ezr 4 7) that Ezra intro-
duced a new script and language. But the locus
classicus is a passage in the Talm (Sanhedhrin 210):
“Originally the Law was given to Israel in the Heb
character and in the Holy Tongue; it was given
again to them in the days of Ezra in the Assyr
characters and in the Aram, tongue. Israel chose
for herself the Assyr character and the Holy Tongue,
and left the Heb character and the Aram. tongue to
the hedhyétoth.”’ Here Heb=Old Hebrew; Assyr=
the new square character, and hedhydtoth is the Gr
idiétai=the Heb ‘am ha-Gre¢, the illiterate multi-
tude. From the 2d cent. on (but not before), the
Talmudic tradition is unanimous in ascribing the
change of script in the Law to Ezra. The testi-
mony of Jos points to the Law at least being in the
square character in his day (Ant, XII, ii, 1, 4).
The Sam Pent was almost certainly drawn up in the
time of Nehemiah (cf 13 28; also Ant, XI, vii, 2),
and points to the Old Heb being then in use. So
Rabbi Hasda (d. 309) refers the word hedhyototh
above to the Samaritans. On the other hand, the
Sam Pent may have been the original Law, common
to both Israel and Judah. In any case it 1s written
in a form of the Old Heb character. :
In regard to the other books, the old script was
used after Ezra’s time. Est 8 9 and Dnl 5 8ff
must refer to the unfamiliar Old Heb.
3. Other So Mt 5 18 implies the New, but only
Books


in the Law.

The Gr tr known as the LXX was
made in Alexandria, and is hardly evidence for Pal.
The Law was probably tr? under Ptolemy II (284-—

247 BC), and the other books by the
4. Evidence end of the 2d cent. BC (cf Ecclus,
of LXX Prologue). The variations of the LXX
from the MT point to an early form of
the square character as being in use; but the Jews
of Egypt had used Aram. for some centuries before


that. :
The variations between parallel passages in the


MT itself, such as Josh 21 and 1 Ch 6; 2 S 23 and
1 Ch 11, etc, show that the letters most frequently
confused are d and r, which are similar in both
the Old and New Heb; 6 and d, which are more
alike in the Old; w and y and several others, which
are more alike in the New. Such errors evidently


"7,
qPynevibroubonvils widisipagozinenpipy > olhw im


tvayoanaaAhonnin


yn nun, murebabn Ti
uty bia jin Ww
Sun wy
nay *~ WanHn * Vy Aah


New Hebrew Inscriptions.


1. From cave near Heshbon, reads: "Arabiah—the first letter is still in the old charac~


2, 2a. Boundary stones of Gezer, read: Thm Gzr, limit of Gezer—begin-


ning of Christian era, 6, Tomb of the Beni Hézir, reads: This (is the grave) of
Eleazar, Hanniah, Judah. .
Eleazar, sons of Hanniah... .
reads: Peace he unto this place and upon all the places of Israel. Joseh the
Levite, son of Levi, nade this lintel: may blessing come upon his works.


. . Johonan, sons of Joseph... . (Jo}seph and
sons of Hezir. 17. Inscription of Kefr Birim,


arose from the use of the square character, and
they arose subsequent to the LXX, for they are
not, except rarely, found in it. The
5. Evidence square character is, then, later than
of the Text the LXX.
Ttself The square character was ascribed
to Ezra as the last person who could
have made so great a change, the text after his
time being considered sacred. This is disproved
by the fact of the coins of the Macca
6. Conclu- bees and of Bar Cochba being in the
sion old character. The Talm permits
Jews resident outside Pal to possess
copies of the Law in Coptic, Median, Heb, etc.
Here Heb can only mean the Old Heb script.
IV. Preservation of the Text.—Judaism has
always been a book religion: it stands or falls with
the OT, esp. with the Pent. Although
1. Internal no MS of the Heb OT is older than the
Conditions 10th cent. AD, save for one minute
papyrus, we know, from citations, tr’,
etc, that the consonantal text of the OT was in
the Ist cent. AD practically what it is today. The
Jews transliterated as well as tr‘ their Bible. All
the most important tr*—the LXX, Aquila, Theodo-
tion, Symmachus—were made by Jews and aimed
at a more literal rendering of the Heb—that of
Aquila being hardly Gr. _The Syr (Peshitta) seems
to be also by Jews or Jewish Christians. Great
care was taken of the text itself, and the slightest
variant readings of MSS were noted. One MS
belonging to Rabbi Meir (2d cent.) is said to have
omitted the references to ‘‘Admah and Zeboiim” in
Dt 29 23 and to Bethlehem in Gen 48 7, and to
have had other lesser variations, some of which
were found also in the MS which, among other treas-
ures, decked the triumph of Vespasian (BJ, VII,
v, 7).
j Religious persecution makes for the purity of the
Scriptures by reducing the number of copies and
increasing the care bestowed on those
9. External saved. The chief moments in which
Cirecum- the existence of the Jewish Scriptures
stances was threatened were the destruction
of Jerus and the Temple under Nebu-
chadnezzar in 587 BC, in which the Book of Jashar
and that of the Wars of the Lord may have been
lost; the persecution under Antiochus Epiphanes,
during which the possession of the sacred books
was a capital offence (1 Mace 1 56.57; Ant, XII, v),
in which the sources used by the Chronicler may
have perished; and the capture of Jerus by Titus


Text of the OF THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2960


in70 AD. By this time, however, the Law at least
was known by heart. Jos says Titus made him
a gift of the sacred books (Vita, 75). It is also
said that at one time only three copies of the Law
were left, and that a text was obtained by taking the
readings of two against one. However that may
be, it is a fact that there are no variant readings in
the MT, such as there are in the NT.

The only ancient version which can come into
competition with the MT is the LXX, and that on

two grounds. First, the MSS of the
3. The LXX LXX are of the 4th cent. AD, those of
Version the MT of the 10th. Secondly, the

LXX tr was made before a uniform
Heb text, such as our MT, existed. The quotations
in the NT are mainly from the LXX. Only in the
Book of Jer, however, are the variations striking,
and there they do not greatly affect the sense of
individual passages. The Gr has also the Apoc.
The LXX is an invaluable aid to restoring the Heb
where the latter is corrupt.

V. The Text in the Ist Century AD.—The MT
of the 1st Christian cent. consisted solely of con-
sonanis of an early form of the square character.
There was no division into chapters or, probably,
verses, but words were separated by an interstice,
as well as indicated by the final letters. The four
vowel-letters were used most freely in the later
books. A few words were marked by the scribes
with dots placed over them.

The Sam Pent still employs the point found on
the M § to separate words. This point was prob-

ably dropped when the books came to
1. Word be written in the square character.
Separation Wrong division of words was not un-
common.

Tradition mentions 15 Nriere noted on the margin
of the Heb Bible (Gen 30 11, etc) in which two words
are written as one. One word is written as two in Jgs
16 25; 1891, etc. Other passages in which tradition
and text differ as to the word-division are 2 S § 2; Ezk
42 9; Job 38 12; Ezr 412. The LXX frequently groups
the letters differently from the MT, e.g. (see the comms.)
Hos 11 2; 1 Ch 17 10; Ps 73 4; 1067.

The verse-division was not shown in the prose hooks.
The present division is peduently wrong and the LXX

different from the Heb: e.g. Gen 49 19.
2. Other 20; Ps 426.7; Jer 9.5.6; Ps 90 2.3.


* Neither was there any division into chap-
abd a ters, or even books. ‘Hence the number of
e1e


the pss is doubtful. The Gr counts

Pss 9 and 10 as one, and also Pss 114 and
115, at the same time splitting Pss 116 and 147 each into
two. The Syr follows the Gr with regard to Pss 114
and 147. Some MSS make one ps of 42 and 43. In
Acts 13 33, Cod. Bezae, Ps 2 appears as Ps 1.


Final forms of letters are a result of the employ-
ment of ligatures. In the Old Heb they do not
occur, nor apparently in the text used


3. Final bythe LXX. Ligatures begin to make
Forms of their appearance in Egyp, Aram. and
Letters Palmyrene. Final forms for the letters


, Mm, 2, P, ¢, were accepted by the
1st cent., and all other final forms were apparently
rejected. :

The first rabbi to mention the final forms is
Mathiah ben Harash (a pupil of Rabbi Eleazar


who died in 117 AD), who refers
4. Their them to Moses. They are often re-
Origin ferred to in the Talm and by Jerome.


The Sam Chronicle (11th cent.) refers
them to Ezra. In point of fact, they are not so
old as the LXX tr, as is proved by its varia-
tions in such passages as 1 § 11; 20 40; Ps 16
3; 44 5; Jer 16 19; 23 14.23.33; Hos 6 5; Nah
1 12; Zec 11 11; Eeclus 3 7. From the fact that
the final forms make up the Heb expression
for “from thy watchers,” their invention was _re-
ferred in the 3d cent. to the prophets (cf Isa 52 8;
Hab 2 1).


After the adoption of the square character,
therefore, the only breaks in the text of prose
books were the spaces left between
the words. Before the Ist cent.
there was much uncertainty as to
the grouping of the letters into words.
After that the word-division was retained in the
copies, even when it was not read (as in 2 S 6 2,
etc). At first the final form would occur at the
end of the ligature, not necessarily at the end
of the word. Remains of this will be found in
1 Ch 27 12; Isa 9 6; Neh 2 13; Job 38 1; 40 6.
When the ligatures were discarded, these forms
were used to mark the ends of words. The
wonder is that there are not more, or even an
initial, medial and final form for every letter, as in
Arab, and Syriac.

The four letters, ’, h, w, y, seem to have been used to


represent vowel sounds from the first. They are found
in the MSS, but naturally less freely on


5. Conclu-
sion


6. Vowel- stone inscriptions than in books.
‘ later the text the more freely they occur,
Letters. though they are commoner in the Sam


Pent than in the MT. The copies used hy
the LXX had fewer of them than the 7'R, as is proved by
their trs of Am 9 12; Ezk 82 29; Hos 12 12, and other
passages, The four letters occur on Jewish coins of the
2d cent. BC and AD.

In the 1st and 2d cents. the vowel-letters were retained
in the text, even when not read (Hos 4 6; Mic 3 2, etc).

In the Pent, Dt 32.13 seems to be the
7. Anoma- ‘sole instance. The Pent is peculiar also

Be in that in it the 3d person sing., masc., of
lous Forms the Bersonal pronoun is used for the fem.,
which occurs only 11 t; Gen 2 12; 14 2;
cf Isa 30 83; 1K 17 15; Job $1 11. This phenome-
non prohably arises from the stage in the growth of the
script when _waw_and yédh were identical in form; cf
Ps 73 16; Eccl 5 8. Frequently the 1st person sing.
perf. of the vb. is written defectively (Ps 1 G K
18 20; cf Isa 36 5); similarly the / of na‘dérah (Dt 22).
All this shows there was no attempt to correct the text.
It was left as it was found.

When a scribe had miscopied a word he sometimes
placed dots over it, without striking it out. There are

15 passages ‘o marked in the OT, and the


word nakidh, ‘‘pointed,’’ is generally
8. Dotted laced in the margin. ‘The word may also
Words e read ndkadh, “speckled” (Gen 30 32),


or nikkadh, ‘‘punctuation.”” It is also
possthie that these points may denote that the word is
doubtful. They occur in the following places: Gen 16


5: 18 9; 19 338; 33 4; 37.12; Nu 8 89; 9 10; 21 30;
99 15; “Dt 29 28 (29); Ps 27 13; 2819 20; Isa
44 9: Ezk 41 20; 46 22. For conjectures as to the


meanings of the points in each passage, the reader must
be referred to the commentaries.

These points are found even on synagogue rolls which
have, with one exception, no other marks upon them,


beyond the bare consonants and vovwel-

9. Their letters, Only those in the Pent and Pss
So aNE oe are mentioned in the Talm or Midrashim,

Antiquity and only one, Nu 910, in the Mish


before the end of the 2d cent., hy which
timeits meaning had heen lost. The lower limit, there-
fore, for their origin is the end of the Ist cent. AD.
They have been, like most things not previously annexed
by Moses, assigned to Ezra; hut the LX X shows no sign
of them. They, therefore, probably were inserted atthe
end of the Ist cent. BC, orin the 1lstcent. AD. As four
only occur in the Prophets and one in the Hagiographa,
most care was evidently expended on the Collation of
the Law. Blau thinks the reference originally extended
to the whole verse or even farther, and became restricted
to one or more letters. .
In Nu 10, vs 35 and 36 are inclosed within two inverted
nains as if with brackets. In Ps 107 inverted nang
ppoue. stand. Beton VS 23-28 tt 40, with
is a note in the foot margin. ese niins
10. Inverted were origiually dots (Siphr@ on Nu)
and stand for nékadh, indicating that the
verses so marked are in their wrong place
(LXX Nu 10 34-36).
Large letters were used as our capitals at the beginnings


nuns


of hooks, etc. Thus there should be a capital nin at
the beginning of the second part of Isa.
11. Large But they serve other purposes also. The
and Small large waw in Lev 11 42 is the middle letter
of the Torah; so in the Israelites’ Credo
Letters (Dt 6 4). Other places are Dt 32 4.6;
Ex 34 7.14; Lev 11 30; 13 33; Isa


56 10, and often. Buxtorf’s Tiberias gives 31 large
and 32 smal) letters, Examples of the latter will he
found in Gen 2 4; 23 2; Lev 11; Joh 7 5,ete. The
explanations glven are fanciful.


2961


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Text of the OT


There are four letters suspended above the line in the
MT. They will be found in Jes 18 30; Job 38 13.15;
s 80 14 (413). he last probably indi-


12. Sus- cates the middle letter of the Psalter.
pended aos Peres ee See bein pu
Letters and 20° Moses. ‘The two in Job are doubtful.


ett A In Nu 25 12 will he found a wéw cut in
Divided wawtwo, perhaps to indicate that the covenant
, was in abeyance for a time.
Abbreviations are found on early Jewlsh inscriptions
and on colns, Thus the letter shin stands for shandh =


13. Abbre-
viations
hate" =LXX 30.7,
2}: and the yédhk of the Heb="'O Jeh.”’ In Jgs 19 18 the
eb “house of Jeh" =LXX ‘my house”’; so Jer 6 11; 25
37. A curlous example will he found Jer 3 19. ‘The
great corruption found in the numbers in the OT is
robably due to letters or ciphers heing employed.
For wrong numbers cf 2S 10 18; 24 13; 1 K 4°36
with || passages; also cf Ezr 2 with Neh 7, etc. Pos-
sible examples of letters representing numbers are:
Ps 90 12, “so” =kén, and képh-+nin =20 +50 =70;
18 181, bén shdénéh is perhaps for bén n shanah,
“fifty years old"; in 14 14, an apparently redundant
& is inserted after “twenty men”; t =20.
Such was the Heb text in the 1st Christian cent.
It was a Received Text obtained by collating MSS
and rejecting variant readings. Hence-
14. Conclu- forward there are no variant readings.
sion But before that date there were, for
the Gr and Sam otten differ from the
Heb. The Book of Jub (middle of 1st cent.) also
varies. The fidelity of the scribes who drew up this
text is proved by the many palpable errors which it
contains.
VI. Alteration of Original Documents.—For
various reasons the original documents were altered
by the scribes, chiefly from motives
1. Jehovah of taste and religion. In the earliest
and Baal _ literary period there was no objection
to the use of the Divine name Jeh;
later this was felt to be irreverent, and Elohim
was put in its place; later still Jeh was written,
but not pronounced. Hence in Pss 1-41, Yahweh
occurs 272 t; ’Elohim. is hardly used as a proper
name; in Psg 42-83 ’Elohim occurs 200 t, Yahweh,
only 44; cf esp. Ps 14 with 58; 40 14-18 with 70;
60 7 with Ex 20 2. Lastly in Pss 90-150 Yahweh
is again used, and Elohim as a proper name does
not occur except in citations in 108 and 144 9. Cf
also 2 K 22 19 with 2 Ch 34 27. A precisely
parallel change is that of Baal into bosheth (“shame”).
At first there was no objection to compounding
names with Baal meaning Jeh (Jes 6 32; 8 35).
Then objection was taken to it (Hos 2.16 or 18),
and it was changed into Bosheth (Jer 3 24; Hos
9 10); hence Ishbosheth (2 5 2-4), Mephibosheth
(2 8 4 4), Eliada (2 S 6 16), Jerrubesheth (11 21).
Later still the objection lost force and the old form
was restored, Eshbaal (1 Ch 8 33 9 39), Merrib-
baal (1 Ch 8 34), Beeliada (1 Ch 14 7;’ ef 3 8).
The LXX follows the Heb: it treats Baal as femi-
nine, i.e.=Bosheth. So too Molech takes its vowels
from Bosheth; it should be Melech. .
Words have been changed from motives of taste,
e.g. “bless” is put for “curse” or “‘blaspheme”’ (1 K
21 10, LXX 20 10; Job 1 5; 2 5.9,


2. Euphe- where the word “‘Lord” follows imme-
mistic Ex- diately; otherwise Ex 22 27, etc).
pressions Sometimes “the enemies of”? was

inserted (eg. 28 12 14). Another


use for the latter expression is 1 8 25 22, where it is
not in the Gr. Cf ae 287 12.14; 24 1,
with the || passages in Ch. :

In eu places the text was slightly altered
by the correction (tikkan) of the scribes, without
any indication being inserted to show that it had
been altered. The following are the passages: Gen
18 22, which originally ran “Jeh stood before Abra-
ham’; Nu 11 15; 12 12; 1 83 13; 28 16 12;


20 1; Ezk 817; Hab 112; Mal 1 18; Zec2 8
(12); Jer 211; Job 7 20; Hos 4 7; Job 32 3; Lam
,_ 2 20; Ps 106 20. The remaining two,
3. Tikkun to make 18, may be accounted for
sophernm either by the third containing more
than one correction, or by counting the
parallels to the sixth. The LXX ignores the snp-
posed original forms of the text, except in the case
of 18313 and Job 7 20. The Syr has the supposed
original form of Nu 12 12 and Siphré of Nu 11 15,
that is, it survived till the 2d cent. AD. Rut the
rest must have been corrected very early. Like the
tikkin is the ‘ittir sdph‘rim, that 1s, the subtraction
or deletion of the conjunction “and” in five places,
viz. Gen 18 5; 24 55; Nu 31 2 and Ps 68 25 (26)
before the word “‘after”; and in Ps 36 6 (7) before
“thy judgments.”

VH. Scribol Errors in the Text.—The Heb text of
the OT in no way resembles a text of one of the classics
which is obtained hy collating many MSS and eliminating
all errors as far as possible. It is to all intents and pur-
Ut a MS, and displays all the forms of error found in


; These are the following, classifying them
according to their source.
_ Failure to understand the sense gives rise to wrong
division into words, e.g. Am 6 12, ‘‘with oxen" (pl.)
should probably he “ with oxen [collective]


1. Mis- the sea’: Jer 15 10; 2214; Ps 734
under- (cf above V, 1). Marginal notes may

fi have found their way into the text, e.g.
standing Ps 40 8.9,‘In a volume of a book it is


written ‘dlay,’’ referring to 2 in ver 7;

28 1 18 (ee Wellhausen). _ oo
Due to the eye are repetitions, transpositions, omis-
sions, mistaking one letter for another, and so forth.
Repetitions will he found: 2 8 6 3.4
2. Errors of (Lx); 1K 15 6 fatto);


th (LXX); Lev 20 10; 35-44=
e Eye § 29-88: Isa 4i 1 (cf 40 31); 58 7; Ps
85 15; 87 40, and very often. Omis-


sions may he supplied from || passages or VSS, as 1 Ch
8 29-31 from Ch 9 35-37; cf 9 41; Josh 22 34
(from oy) Jgs 16 2; Gen_4 8 (Sam Pesh); Prov 10
10 (LXX Syr); 11 16 (LXX Syr); 28 17 3 (LXX).
Transpositions of letters will be found (Josh 6 13; Isa
8 12; cf vs 13.14). Sometimes a letter slips from one
word into another, as in 1 S 14 50.51; Jer 18 23;
Ps 139 20. Other examples are Jgs 10 12, and man
times. Words are transposed in Ps 35 7; 95 7; 1
6 17, ete. Examples of transposition of verses will be
found: Gen 24 29b follows ver 30a; Isa 38 21.22
follows ver 8; cf_2 K 20 6-8; Isa 40 19.20 should
go with 41 6ff. Most omissions and repetitions are
due to homoeoteleuton or homoearchy. Similar letters
are reqveniy mistaken for one another. Examples are:
dand r (Ps110 3; 2 8 22 11; cf Ps18 11). Traditions
mention 6 other places, as well as 154 in which waw and
yédh are interchanged; other examples are: Josh 9 4; Dt
14 13; cf Lev 11 14; 2 Ch 22 10; cf 2 K 11 1.
Errors due to the ear would arise when one scribe
was dictating to another. Snch are: J6'='‘not,” for
Z6="'to him,’’ in 15 places (Ps 100 3, etc).
3. Errors of Also Jeh and Adonai would be sounded
the Ear alike. Again we have Adoram in 1 K 12


18 and Hadoram in 2 Ch 10 18.

Failure of memory in copying would
explain the occurrence of synonymous words in || pas-
sages without any apparent motive, as for ‘I call” in

28 fs ead non 187: end uhe inter
change of Jeh an onai. In Jer
4. Errors of $ohoiakim should be Zedekiah,
Memory Many of the scribalerrors in the MT
are due to carelessness and ignorance:
in Gen 36 2, the Jast ‘‘daughter” should be ‘‘son"’; Nu
96 8, “‘sons’’ for son, &@ common error; cf 1 Ch 3 22;
1 co 6: 13 (28), Vashni means ‘‘and the
secon


5. Errors of jn -1§ 13°) Wat abe V 13 eis
: i , 13),

Careless- number has dropped out, as ae perhaps

ness and = {88,21 Pag allen’ ke “Mephibosheth,

oshe as fallen like Mephibosheth.

Ignorance 7n°3'3 93 18.19 the first “three” should


e ‘thirty."” Cf also Gen 3.10 (Syr);
2 Ch 22 6; Ezk 43 13, and often. The Books of S
seem to be the most carelessly copied of all the OT books,
thongh the text of Ezk is in some respects more unin-
telligible. In Jer the LXX is shorter by one-eighth than
the Heb, but it is doubtful which is original.

VII. History of the Text.—The consonantal
text of the OT was what it now is by the 1st or at
latest the 2d Christian century. Duringthenextfour
centuries it was minutely studied, the number of its
words and even of its letters bemg counted. The
results of this study are found chiefly in the Talm.


Text of the OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2962


All such study was oral. During this period the
text remained a purely consonantal text plus the
puncta extraordinaria.
The text was not always read, however, exactly
asit was written. Soon after the return from Baby-
lon changes were made. Perhaps the
1. Changes earliest was that the proper name Jeh
Made in was read Adonai, whence the LXX,
Reading and through it the NT “Lord.” The
reason will be found in Lev 24 11,
where render ‘pronounced the name.’’ Sometimes
the change was due to motives of taste (Dt 28 30;
18611; 2K 18 27); but the commonest
ground was grammar or logic. Thus a word was
frequently read which was not in the text at all
(Jgs 20 18; 2 S 18 20); or a word was omitted
in reading (2 8 15 21; 2 K 6 18); or the letters
of a word were transposed, as in Josh 6 13; or
one letter was put for another, esp. waw for yddh
or yodh for waw; or words were divided in reading
otherwise than in the text (see above V, 1). The
written text is called the K*thibh (‘written’);
what was read is called the Keré (‘read’).
' The scribes during these centuries, besides
fixing the reading, took means to preserve the text
by counting the words and letters,


2. Preser- and finding the middle verse (Jgs 10
vation of 8; Isa 33 21), and so forth. The
Text middle verse of the Law is Lev 8 7,


and the middle of the words falls in
10 16. The middle verse of the Heb Bible is Jer
6 7. Note was made of words written abnormally
(Hos 10 14; Mic 1 15; Isa 3 8) and lists were
made up. All such lists were retained in the mind;
nothing was written.
When the public reading of the Law was accom-
panied by an Aram. tr (Neh 8 8), the division of
the text into verses would arise spon-
8. Division taneously. The Mish gives rules for
into Verses the number of verses to be read at a
time before translating. These verses
were separated by a space only, as the words were.
Hence VSS frequently divide differently for the
Heb, as Hos 4 11; Isa 112. In the Heb itself
there are 28 old verse divisions no longer observed
(see Baer on Hos 1 2). The space is called piska’
and the verse pastk.
About the same time the Law was divided into
sections (paéra@shah) for the annual reading. In Pal
the Law was read through once in 33
4. Sections years; in Babylon once a year.
of the Law Hence the Law is divided into 54
sections (Gen 6 9; 12 1, etc) for the
annual reading. It is also divided into 379 “shut”
sections, indicated by a space in the middle of a line,
and 290 “open” sections, indicated by a space at
the end of a line. In printed texts these sections
are noted by the letters $ and p, but, if they coincide
with one of the 54, by sss or ppp. The Palestinian
division was into 154 s*dharim.
From Maccabean times 54 passages (haphtarath)
were selected from the Prophets for the purposes of
the synagogue (Lk 417). The Proph-
5. Sections ets were also divided into smaller sec-
of the tions. As in the case of the Law (Ex
Prophets 6 28), there are cases of false division
(Isa 56 9; Hag 1 15).
In the Heb Bible certaim passages were early
written in a peculiar way to resemble the bricks in
the wall of a house, either in three
6. Poetical columns, a half-brick upon a_ brick
Passages and a brick upon a half-brick (Ex 15;
Jgs 5; 2 8 22), or in two columns, a
half-brick upon a half-brick and a brick upon a brick
(Dt 32; Josh 12; Est 9). Im the LXX, Pss,
Prov, Ecel, Cant, Job are written in stichs; but
that this was not done in Heb seems proved by


the variations as to the number of lines (Ps 65 8;
90 2.11).
The number of books is 24, 8, K, Ch each counting
as one, Ezr including Neh, the twelve Minor Prophets
counting one book (Mic 3 12 is the
7. Division middle). The Law counts 5 bcoks,
into Books Pss one, though the division of it into
5 books is ancient (cf Ps 106 48 with
1 Ch 16 35.36). By joining Ruth to Jgs and Lam
to Jer, the number 22 was obtained—the number
of letters in the Heb alphabet. When, probably
about the 3d cent. AD, leather rolls gave place to
parchment books, it would be possible to have the
whole Bible in one volume and the question of the
order of the books would arise. The order in the
Talm is as follows: The Law (5), the Prophets (8),
Josh, Jgs, 8, K, Jer, Ezk, Isa, and the XII, the
Hagiographa or K*thabhim (11), Ruth, Pss, Job, Prov,
Eccl, Cant, Lam, Dnl, Est, Ezr, Ch. The Prophets
are usually subdivided into Former: Josh, Jgs, 8, K;
and Latter: Jer, Ezk, Isa and the XH. ‘The tra-
ditional or ‘Masoretic’ order places Isa_ before
Jer, and in the Hagiographa the order is: Ch, Pss,
Job, Prov, Ruth, Cant, Eccl, Lam, Est, Dnl, Ezr,
the middle verse being Ps 130 3. The order found
in printed texts is that of German MSS. The books
receive their names from a word near the beginning,
from their contents, or from their supposed author.
IX. The Vocalization af the Text.—About the
time of the Reformation it was the universal belief
that the vowel-marks and other poimts were of
equal antiquity with the consonants. The Jews
believed Moses received them orally and Ezra
reduced them +o writing.
The first to assign a late date to the points was
Elias Levita (1468-1549). The battle was fought
out in the 17th cent. Ludovicus Cap-
1. Antiquity pellus (d. 1658) argued for a date about
of the 600 AD. The Buxtorfs defended the
Points Ae view. The following are the
acts.
When the LXX was made, the Heb text had not
even as many vowel-letters as it has now, and still
less points; nor when the Syr version
2. Probable was made in the 2d cent., or Jerome’s
Date of Vulg between 393-405, or the earlier
Invention Tgs. Lastly, the points were unknown
to the Talm. They, therefore, did
not exist before 600 AD. The earliest authority
on the points is Aaron ben Asher of the school of
Tiberias (d. about 989). He wrote a copy of the
Heb Bible with all the points, which became the
standard codex. The probable date is, therefore,
taken to be about the year 700; and this agrees with
what was taking place in regard to Gr, Syr and Arab.
MSS. The Jews probably borrowed from the
Syrians.
No doubt, at first, many systems of pointing
existed. Of these, two survived, the Palestinian
and Bab, or superlinear. The chief


3. Various features of the latter are that the
Systems signs are placed above the line; it
and Re- has no sign for e (seghdl), and has but
censions one system of accents. The Pales-


tinian, the one familiar to us, exists
in two recensions, those of Ben Asher and of his
contemporary, Ben Naphtali of Babylon; hence a
Western and an Eastern.

X, The Palestinian System.—Since the vocaliza-
tion of the text took place about 700 AD, it will be
understood that it vitfers considerably from the
living language. What that was may be found from
the transliteration of proper names in the LXX,
in Origen and Jerome, and from a comparison with
modern Arabic.

A comparison with Arab. indicates that the Heb
héth, and it is certain from the LXX that the ‘ayin,


2963 -


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Text of the OT


had each two distinct sounds. This difference is
not shown in the pointing, though a point was used
to distinguish the two sounds of 8, g,
1. The Con- d, k, p, ¢, and of s, and sh and the two
sonants values of h. The absence of this point
js indicated by ra@pheh. Thesame point
marks the doubling of a consonant. The guttur-
als and r are not doubled, though they certainly
were when the language was spoken (cf Gen 43 26;
Ezk 16 4, etc).
The system of vowel-marks attempts to repro-
duce the sounds exactly. Thus the short a-sound
which must precede a guttural letter
2. The is indicated, and before a guttural 7
Vowels and u are replaced by eando. On the
other hand y before z does not seem
to have been sounded in some cases. Thus the LXX
has Israél, but Ieremias. Sh*wa’ is said by Ben
Asher to sound ¢ before y; before a guttural 1t took
the sound of the guttural’s vowel, as mo’édh
(m’ddh), and had other values as well.
There is a special accentual system for the
poetical books, Prov, Pss, and Job (except the prose


parts). The titles and such marks as
3. The selah are in the Pss accented as form-
Accents ing part of the verse. The accents
had three values, musical, inter-
punctional, and strictly accentual. But these


values have to do with the language, not as it was
spoken, but as it was chanted in the public reading
of the synagogue.
The words were not always pointed in the usual
way, but sometimes according to subjective con-
siderations. Thus the phrase ‘‘to see
4, Anoma- the face of God” is pointed “to appear
lous Point- before God,” on account of Ex 33 20
ings (Ps 42 3; Isa 112). Similarly in
Eccl 3 21, ‘which goeth upward”
is put for “whether it goeth upward.” See also
Jer 34 18; Isa 7 11. Frequently the punctuation
is inconsistent with itself. Thus, ‘gathered to his
peoples’ (Gen 35 29), but “gathered to my people”
(sing., Gen 49 29). So p*lishttm, “Philistines,” re-
ceives the article with prepositions, otherwise not.
In many places two pointings are mixed, as if to-give
a choice of readings (Ps 62 4; 68 3, and often).
XI The Masorah.—The Heb text as printed
with all the points and accents is called the Maso-
retic text. Masorah, or better, Masso-
1. Meaning reth, is derived from _a root meaning
of the Term “to hand down” (Nu 31 5), This
tradition began early. Rabbi Akiba
(d. 135) called it a “hedge about the Law.” It tells
the number of times a particular expression occurs,
and mentions synonymous expressions, and so forth.
The remarks placed in the side margin of the codex,
often merely a letter denoting the number of times
the word occurs, are called the M. parva. The notes
were afterward expanded and placed in the top and
bottom margins and called the M. magna. Notes
too long for insertion in the margin were placed
sometimes at the beginning, generally at the end of
the codex, and called the M. finalis. The Masorah
differs with different Ms) and there is an Eastern
and a Western Masorah.
The oldest and most important part of the Maso-
rah lies in the readings which differ from the written
text, called Keré. ‘These may represent
2. The Keré variant readings of MSS, esp. a class
and Kethibh of them called s’bhir, The most are
mere errata and corrigenda of the
text. Such are the four K. perpetua, ’ddhonay (for
YHW Hi), Jerusalem, Issachar and Aa’, in the case
of which the read form is not appended at the foot
of the page. Sometimes the emendation is right,
as in Am 8 8; cf 9 5; sometimes the Kethibh
represents an archaic form (Jgs 9 8.12; Isa 32 11).


A Keré was inserted at 1 8 17 34 to correct a mis-
print in the Venice Bible of 1521.
Other notes at the foot of the page draw attention
to redundant or defective writing. Directions for
the arrangement of the text are given
3. Other in Gen 498; Dt 31 28, and elsewhere.
Features Each book concludes with a note giving
the number of verses, sections, middle
verse and other particulars about the book. The
second last verses of Isa, Mal, Lam, Eccl are repeated
after the last, which is ill-omened.
XH. MSS and Printed Texts——The MSS of the Heb


Bible are not nearly so old as those of the Gr, old Heb
MSS being generally destroyed. By far


. the oldest MS of any part of the Bible is
1. pe the Papyrus Nash of about 150 AD, con-
Scripts taining the Decalogue and Sh¢ma‘ (Dt 6 4).


Next comes the St. Petersburg codex of the

latter Prophets of 916 AD, thongh Ginsburg considers a
MS of the Pent (Brit. Mus. Orient. 4445) older. The
pointing. of the latter is Palestinian; of the former, super-
jinear. The oldest MS of the whole OT is dated 1010 AD.
The following are the chief printed texts: The Psalter
of 1477, place unknown, with comm. of Kimhbi. The
first few pss are voweled; the Pent, 1482,


2. Early Bologna, with Rashi and Tg Onkelos; per-
Printed haps the Five Rolls appeared at the same

time; the Prophets, unpointed, 1485-86,
Texts at Soncino, with Rashi and Kimbi; the


: Hagiographa, 1486-87, at Naples, with
points, but not accents, and comms. (In the last two
YHWH and ‘Elohim are spelled YH DH and "Elo-
dhim); the 2d ed of the Pent at Faro in Portugal, 1487,
first without comm.; the editio princeps of the whole OT
with points and accents, hut no comm., finished at Son-
cino, February 14, 1488, reprinted in 1491-93, and in the
Brescia Bible of 1494. The last was the one used by
Luther. Owing to persecution, the next edition was not
till 1511-17.

The first Christian edition of the Heb text is that con-
tained in the Complutensian Polyglot, finished July 10,


1517. It has many peculiarities, and first

3. Later discarded the Masoretic sections for the
‘di Christian chapters, the Vulg being followed.
Editions = The first rahbinic’ Bihle—that is, pointed
and accented text, with Masorah, Tgs, and
comms.—was printed by Daniel Bomberg at Venice In
1516-17. The division of S, K, Ch, and Ezr_into two


books each is first marked here in a purely Heh text,
and the consonants of the Keré first given in the margin.
Previously the vowels were inserted in the text only.
Thus in lsa 44 14, Luther did not ohserve the small nun,
taking it fora zayin. _ What is called, however, the editio
princeps of therahbinic Bible is Bomberg's second edition,
ed by Jacoh ben Hayyim (1524-25). This forms the
standard edition of the MT. Sand K are each treated
as two hooks. S*bhirim are noticed for the first time, and
the Kerés marked with k. The Polyglot of Arias Montanus
(1567-71) used the dilatable letters ', h,1, 4, m, broadened
to fill up lines, and + numbered the chapters (in
Heb letters), Buxtorf’s rabhinic Bible appeared in 1618—
19; the Paris Polyglot in 1629-44; the London Polyglot
of Walton in 1654-57, which first gives the Ethiopic and
Pers VSS; that of Athias m 1661, which first inserted
the numbers of Christian chapters in the clauses at the
end of the hooks of the Law, the Mantua edition of
1744 inserting them for all the books. In the last
is ernbodied the Masoretic comm. of Solomon de Norzl
(1626). Recent editors are Baer and Ginshurg. Special
mention must be made of the edition of Kittel which
inserts the variant readings of the VSS at the foot of the
page.
In modern editions of the Heb text the numbers of
the Christian chapters are inserted. The chapters
had their origin in the Vulg, and are
4. Chapters variously ascribed to Lanfranc (d.
and Verses 1089), Stephen Langton (d. 1228), but
with most probability to, Hugo de
Sancto Caro (13th cent.). They mostly coincide
with the Masoretic sections, and came in with the
Polyglots from 1517 on, being used first in a purely
Heb text in 1573-74. Some modern editions mark
the verses in the margin, the 5’s in Heb letters,
except 15, which is denoted by fw=9+6, instead
of yh=10-+5, because the latter would=Yah. After
the Clausula Masoretica at the end of Ch and else-
where, there is an extended note taken from 1 Ch
19 13 (2.8 10 12).


LrreratuRre.—Benzinger, Hebrdische Archdologie, Leip~
zig, 1894; Berger, Histoire de Vécriture dans l'antiquité,
Paris, 1892; Blau, Masoretische Untersuchungen, Strass-
burg, 1891; Einlettung in dic heilige Schrift, Budapest,


Thaddaeus
Theocracy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2964


1894; Studien zum althebrdischen Buchwesen, Pt. I, Strass-
burg, 1902; Buhl, Canon and Text (ET by J. Macpherson),
Edinburgh, 1892; Butin, The Ten Nequdoth of the Torah,
Baltimore, 1906; Buxtorf (father), Tiberias sive Commen-
tarius Masorethicus, Basel, 1620; Buxtorf (son), Tractatus
de Punctorum Origine, etc, Basel, 1648; Cappellus, Arca-
num Puncetationis Revelatum, Leyden, 1624; Chwolson,
Corpus Inscriptionum Hebraicarum, St. Petersburg, 1882;
Driver, Notes on the Hebrew Test of Samuel, Oxford, 1913;
Edersheim, History af the Jewish Natian, London, 1896;
Etheridge, Jerusalem and Tiberias (‘'‘ Post-Biblical
Hebrew Literature”), London, 1856; Frankel, Ueber
paldstinische und alezandrinische Schrififorschung, Bres-
lau, 1854; Geden, The Massoretic Notes Contained in the
Edition of the Heb Scriptures, Published by the British and
Fareign Bible Society, London, 1905; Geiger, Urschrift
und Uebersetzungen der Bibel, Breslau, 1857; Ginsburg,
Intro ta the... . Heb Bible, London, 1897: The Mas-
sorah, London, 1880-85; Kennedy, The Nate-Line in the
Heb Scriptures, Edinburgh, 1908; Kenyon, Our Bible
and the Ancient MSS, London, 1898; King, The Pss in
Three Collections (on the triennial cycle), Cambridge,
1898; Konig, Einleitung in das AT, Bonn, 1893; Loisy,
Histoire critique du texte et des versions de la Bible, Paris,
1892-95; Nowack, Lehrbuch der hebrdischen Archdéologie,
Freiburg and Leipzig, 1894; De Rougé, émotre sur
Varigine Egyptienne de Valphabet phénicien, Paris, 1874;
Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Valkes tm Zeitalter Jesu
Chriatt (ET by John Macpherson and others), Edinburgh,
1890; Schwab, Jerus Talm (Fr. tr), Paris, 1871-90;
Strack, Prolegamena Critica in Vetus Testamentum
Hebraicum, Leipzig, 1873; Einlettung tn den Talmud,
Lelpzig, 1894; Taylor, The Alphabet, London, 1883;
T. H. Weir, A Short Histery of the Heb Text af the OT,
London, 1907; Winckler, Die Thontafeln von Tell-el-
Amarna, Berlin, 1896; The Tell-el-A marna Letters, Berlin,
London and New York, 1896; Wolf, Bibliotheca Hebraea,
Hamburg and Leipzig, 1715-33; Wtinsche, Bibliotheca
Rabbinica, Leipzig, 1880.

Encyclopaedias: Cheyne and Black, #B, London, 1899-—
1903; Fairbairn, Imperial Bible Dict., London, 1866
COT,” “Scriptures,” ‘‘ Writing,’’ by D. H. Weir); HDB,
Edinburgh, 1898-1904 ("‘ Text of the Old Testament,’' by
H. L. Strack); Herzog, RE, Leipzig, 1896 ff; Jew Ene,
New York and London, 1901-6; Vigoureux, Dietionnaire
dela Bible, Paris, 1891 ff.

Hebrewtexts: Dikduke haTe'amim desAhron.... ben
Asher, ed by Baer and Strack, Leipzig, 1879; Massoreth
ha-Massoreth of Elias Levita, with ET and notes by C. D.
Ginsburg, London, 1867; Midrash hag-Gadeol: Genesis,
ed by S. Schechter, Cambridge, 1902; Das Buch, Ochla
Weochla, ed by Frensdorff, Hanover, 1864; Miushnah,
with Lattr, by Guil. Surenhusius, Amsterdam, 1698-1703;
Sifra, ed by Jacob Schlossberg, Vienna, 1862; Sifre,ed by
M. Friedmann (first part), Vienna, 1864; Soferim, ed by
Joel Miiller, Vienna, 1878; Babylonian Talm, ed (with
Ger. tr) by Lazarus Goldschmidt, Berlin, 1896—.

Perlodicals: Academy, XXXI, 454, '*The Moahite
Stone’’; Good Words, 1870, 673, ‘‘The Moabite Stone,”
by D. H. Weir; Jewish Quarterly Review: Dr. A. Biichler
on ‘‘ The Triennial Cycle,’ V, 420, VI, 1; “E.G. Kin
on the Influence of the Triennial Cycle upon the Psalter,”
by I. Abrahams, April, 1904; ‘Neue Masoretische
Studien," by Blau, January, 1904; "On the Decalogue
Papyrus,” by F. C. Burkitt, April, 1903; Journal of
Theological Studies, V, 203, ‘‘The Influence of the Trien-
nlal Cycle upon the Psalter," by_E. G, King; PEP:
‘Heb Mosaic Inscription at Kefr Kenna,'’ by Clermont-
Ganneau, October, 1901; ‘On the Siloam Inscription,”
1881, 198; ‘On the Excavations at Taana and
Megiddo,"’ 1904, 180, 1905, 78; Proceedings of the Society
af Biblical Archaeology: E. J. Pilcher, *‘On the Date of the
Siloam Inscription,’’ XIX, 165, XX, 213; ‘On the
Decalogue Papyrus,” by S. A. Cook, January, 1903;
"Heb Illuminated MSS of the Bible of the 11th and
12th Cents.,’"’ by M. Gaster, XXII, 226; Scottish Review,
1X, 215, ‘‘The Apocryphal Character of the Moabite
Stone,’’ by Albert Liwy; Studia Biblica et Ecclesiastica,
III, 1, ‘The Introduction of the Square Characters in
Biblical MSS, and an Account of the Earliest MSS of the
OT, with a Table of Alphabets and Facsimiles,"' by Ad.
Neubauer: Mittheilungen und Nachrichten des deutschen
Palaestina-Vereins: ‘On the Excavations at Taanach,”
by Sellin, 1902, 13, 17, 33, 1903, 1, and 1905, no. 3;
“On the Excavations at Tell el Mutesellim,’’ by Schu-
macher, 1904, 14, 33, and 1906, no. 3; and by Benzinger,
1904, 65; Zeitschrift des deutschen Palaestina-Vereins:
“On the Siloam Inscription,” by Socin, XXII, 61;
Zeitschrift der deutschen margenldndischen Gesellschaft:
“ur Geschichte der hebraéischen Accente,” by
Kahle, 1901, 167.

Tuomas Hunter WEIR


THADDAEUS, tha-dé’us (@ab5aios, Thad-


datos): One of the Twelve Apostles (Mt 10 3;
Mk 3 18). In Mt 10 3 AV, the reading is ‘““Leb-
bacus, whose surname was Thaddaeus.” The


name corresponds to Judas, the son (RV), or brother
(AV), of James, given in the lists of Lk 6 16; Acts
113. See Jupas not Iscariot; LepBaxrus.


The “Gospel of the Ebionites,” or “Gospel of
the Twelve Apostles,” of the 2d cent. and men-
tioned by Origen, narrates that Thaddaeus was
also among those who received their call to follow
Jesus at the Sea of Tiberias (cf Mt 4 18-22; see
also SIMON THE CANANABAN). |

According to the “Genealogies of the Twelve
Apostles” (cf Budge, Contendings of the Aposiles,
Il, 50), Thaddaeus was of the house of Joseph; ac-
cording to the “Book of the Bee’ he was of the tribe
of Judah. There is abundant testimony In apoc-
ryphal lit. of the missionary activity of a certain
Thaddaeus in Syria, but doubt exists as to whether
this was the apostle. Thus (1) according to the
“Acts of St. Peter” (cf Budge, II, 466 ff) Peter
appointed Thaddaeus over the island of Syria
and Edessa. (2) The “Preaching of the blessed
Judas, the brother of Our Lord, who was sur-
named Thaddaeus” (Budge, 357 ff), describes his
mission in Syria and in Dacia, and indicates him
as one of the Twelve. (3) The ‘Acta Thaddaei”
(cf Tischendorf, Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha, 1851,
261 ff) refers to this Thaddaeus in the text as one
of the Twelve, but in the heading as one of the
Seventy. (4) The Abgar legend, dealing with a
supposed correspondence between Abgar, king of
Syria, and Christ, states in its Syr form, as tr¢ by
Eusebius (HE, I, xiii, 6-22) (cf THomas), that


. “after the ascension of Christ, Judas, who was also


called Thomas, sent to Abgar the apostle Thad-
daeus, one of the Seventy” (cf Hennecke, Neutesta-
mentliche Apokryphen, 76 ff). Jerome, however,
identifies this same Thaddaeus with Lebbaeus and
“Judas... . of Jamies’ of Luke (LK 6 16). Hen-
necke (op. cit., 473, 474) surmises that in the original
form of the Abgar legend Thomas was the central
figure, but that through the influence of the later
‘“Acts of Thomas,” which required room to be made
for Thomas’ activity in India, a later Syr recension
was made, in which Thomas became merely the
sender of Thaddaeus to Edessa, and that this was
the form which Eusebius made use of in his tr.
According to Phillips (cf Phillips, The Doctrine of
Addai the Apostle), who quotes Zahn iu support,
the confusion may be due to the substitution of the
Gr name Thaddaeus for the name Addai of the
Syr MSS. See ApocrypHat Acts.

The general consensus seems +0 indicate, however,
that both Thomas and Thaddaeus the apostle
had some connection with Edessa. Of the various
identifications of Thaddaeus with other Bib. per-
sonages which might be inferred from the foregoing,
that with “Judas .... of James” is the only one
that has received wide acceptance.

The burial place of Thaddaeus is variously placed
at Beirit and in Egypt. A “Gospel of Thaddaeus”
is mentioned in the Decree of Gelasius.

C. M. Kerr

THAHASH, tha’hash. See Tauasu.

THAMAH, tha’ma. See Temau.

THAMAR, thi’mir (Odpap, Thaémar): AV; Gr
form of “Tamar” (thus Mt 138 RV). Mother of
Perez and Zerah.


THAMM0Z, tham’uz (THOM, tammiz).
TAMMuz.


THAMNATHA, tham’na-tha.


See


See Timnatu.


THANK, thank, THANKS, thanks, THANKS-
GIVING, thanks-giv’ing, thanks’giv-ing: Both the
vb. and the nouns appear almost uniformly for
OT, yadhah, and ebxapioréw, eucharistés, and their
cognates. Eucharisted is the usual Gr vb. for “to
thank,” but yadhah takes on this force only


2965


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Thaddaeus
Theocracy


through its context and is rather a synonym for
“praise” or “bless” (q.v.). LXX renders yadhah
usually by éfouodcyéw, exomologéd, “speak forth
together,” “praise” (cf Tob 12 20; Sir 39 6, etc,
and the use of “thank” in EV to correspond), and
this vb. reappears in Mt 11 25 Lk 10 21, with
Eng. “thank” (RVm “praise’”). Cf the use of antho-
mologéomai (Lk 2 38) and homologés (He 13 15,
AV “giving thanks,” RV “make confession”; AV
is preferable). For chdris in the sense of “‘thanks’’
(note the singular “thank” in AV Sir 20 16; Lk 6
32-84), see Grace. 1 Pet 219 AV has “thank-
worthy” for charis, RV “acceptable,” RVm “grace.”
Burton Scorr Easron
é Toe OFFERING. See SacriFicE IN THE


THARA, tha’ra, thAr’a (apt, Thard): AV; Gr
form of ‘‘Terah” (thus Lk 3 34 RY).


THARRA, thar’a (@appé, Tharrd): One of the
two eunuchs, “keepers of the court,’ who with
his companion Gabatha (Bigthan) formed a con-
spiracy against King Artaxerxes which was detected
by Mordecai (Ad Est 12 1=“Teresh” of Est 2
21; 6 2). Tharra and his companion were hanged.
Jos (BJ, II, vi, 4) calls him ‘‘Theodestes.”


THARSHISH, thar’shish (O°O°M, tarshish).
See TaRsHISA.


THASSI, thas’i (8 V, accel, Thasset, B, Oarcis,
Thassis): The surname of Simon, the brother of
Judas Maccabaeus (1 Macc 2 3; Syr ‘“Tharsi’’).
It is uncertain what the name means, perhaps
“director” or “guide,” since Simon was “a man of
counsel,” or “the zealous.”


THAT DAY. Sce Day or rae Lorp.


THEATRE,
GAMES.


THEBES, thébz.


THEBEZ, thé’bez (VAM, tébhée, “brightness”;
B, @nBfs, Thébés, A, @arBals, Thaibais): A city
in Mt. Ephraim which refused submission to Abime-
lech when he set up as king of Israel. After the
reduction of Shechem he turned his arms against
Thebez. There was a strong tower within the city
—the citadel—into which all the inhabitants
gathered for safety, climbing onto the roof of the
tower. Abimelech incautiously venturing near the
tower, @ woman cast an upper millstone upon his
head and broke his skull. Fearing the shame of
perishing by the hand of a woman, he persuaded his
armor-bearer to thrust him through (Jgs 9 50 ff).
The incident is alluded to in 2S 11 21. Onom
places it 18 Rom miles from Neapolis (Nablus)
on the road to Scythopolis (Beisén). There is no
doubt that it is represented by Tubds. This is a
village situated in a district of considerable fer-
tility, about 10 miles from Nablus. There are many
olive trees. The rain is captured and led to rock-
cut cisterns, whence the village draws its water-
supply. According to the Samaritans the tomb of
Neby Toba marks the grave of the patriarch Asher.


W. Ewina
THECOE, thé-ko’é (1 Macc 9 33). See Tx-
Koa.


THEE-WARD, thé’wérd. ‘To thee-ward” (1 8
19 4)=toward thee. See Warp.


thé’a-tér (Acts 19 29.31). See


See No-amon.


THEFT. See Crimes; PUNISHMENTS.


_THELASAR, thé-li/sar (WRbM, tela’ssar,
“WOM, tlassar). See Texassar.


THELERSAS, thé-ldr’sas (@ecdcpods, Thelersds
[1 Esd 6 36)). See Tur-yarsna.


THEOCANUS, thé-ok’a-nus: 1 Esd 9 14 AV=
RV “Thocanus.”


THEOCRACY, thé-ok’ra-si (@eoxparta, theo-
kratia, from 8eés, theds, ‘a god,” and kpétos, kratos,
power”; alter the analogy of the words “democ-
racy,” “aristocracy,” and the like): “Theocracy” is
not a Bib. word. The idea, however, is Bib., and
in strictness of speech exclusively Bib. The reali-
zation of the idea is not only confined to Israel, but
in the preéxilic history of Israel the realization of
the idea was confined to the Southern Kingdom,
and in post-exilic history to the period between the
return under Ezra and the days of Malachi.

For the word “theocracy” we are, by common
consent, indebted to Jos. In his writings it seems
to occur but once (CAp, II, xvi). The passage reads
as follows: ‘‘Our lawgiver had an eye to none of
these,” that is, these different forms of government.
such as monarchy, aristocracy, oligarchy, an
others of which Jos had been speaking, “but, as
one might say, using a strained expression, he set
forth the national polity as a theocracy, referring
the rule and might to God” (Stanton’s tr). It is
generally agreed that the language here used indi-
ae that Jos knew himself to be coining a new
word.

If, now, we turn from the word to the OT idea
to which it gives fitting and apt expression, that
idea cannot be better stated than it has been by
Kautzsch—namely, ‘“‘The notion of theocracy is
that the constitution [of Israel] was so arranged
that all the organs of government were without
any independent power, and had simply to announce
and execute the will of God as declared by priest
and prophets, or reduced to writing as a code of
laws’’ (HDB, extra vol, 630, 1, inii.). The same
writer is entirely correct when he says that in what
is known in certain circles as “the PC’’—though he
might have said in the OT generally—‘everything,
even civil and criminal law, is looked at from the
religious standpoint” (ib, ut supra).

If the foregoing be a correct account of the idea
expressed by the word “theocracy,” and particu-
larly if the foregoing be a correct account of the OT
representation of God’s relation to, and rule in and
over Israel, it follows as a matter of course that the
realization of such an idea was only possible within
the sphere of what is known as special revelation.
Indeed, special revelation of the Divine will, through
Divinely chosen organs, to Divinely appointed
executive agents, is, itself, the very essence of the
idea of a theocracy.

That the foregoing is the OT idea of God’s rela-
tion to His people is admitted to be a natural and
necessary implication from such passages as Jgs
8 23; 18 8; cf 12 12; 2 Ch 18 8; 28 7 1-17;
Ps 89 27; Dt 17 14-20.

Upon any other view of the orlgin of the OT books
than that which has heretofore prevailed, it is certainly
a remarkable fact that whenever the books of the OT were
written, and by whomscever they may have been written,
and whatever the kind or the number of the redactions to
which they may have been subjected, the conception—
the confessedly unique conception—of_ a government
of God such as that described above by Kautzsch is
evidenced by these writings in all their parts. This
fact is all the more impressive in view of the further fact
that we do not encounter this sharply defined idea of a
rule of God among men in any other literature, ancient
or modern. For while the term “ theocracy" occurs in
modern literature, it is evidently_used in a much lower


sense. It is further worth remarking that this OT idea
of the true nature of God's rule in Israel has only to be


Theodotion
Thess, 1st Ep. to


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2966


fully apprehended for it to hecome obvious that many of
the alleged analogies between the OT prophet and the
modern preacher, reformer and statesman are wholly
lacking in any really solid foundation.
_ W. M. MoPuerrers
THEODOTION, thé-d-do’shi-un. See Lan-


GUAGE OF THE NT; SEPTUAGINT.


ear thé-od’6-tus (OedSoros, Thedd-
otos):

(1) One of the three ambassadors sent by the
Syrian general Nicanor to Judas to make peace
(2 Macc 14 19).

(2) One who plotted to assassinate Ptolemy
Philopator, but was prevented by a Jew, Dositheos
(3 Mace 1 2f).


THEOLOGY, thé-ol’o-ji. See Brszicay THE-
oLocy; JOHANNINE THEoLocy; Paunins TuHE-
OLOGY.


THEOPHILUS, thé-of’i-lus (@eépudos, Thedphi-
los, “loved of God’): The one to whom St. Luke
addressed his Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles
(cf Lk 13; Acts 1 1). It has been suggested that
Theophilus is merely a generic term for all Chris-
tians, but the epithet “most excellent” implies it
was applied by St. Luke to a definite person, prob-
ably a Rom official, whom he held in high respect.
Theophilus may have been the presbyter who took
Saw in sending the letter from the Corinthians to

t. Paul, given in the “Acta Pauli” (cf Hennecke,
Neutestamentliche Apokryphen, 378). There is
also a magistrate Theophilus mentioned in the
“Acts of St. James” as being converted by St.
James on his way to India (cf Budge, The Con-
tendings of the Apostles, II, 299), but these and
other identifications, together with other attempts
to trace out the further history of the original
Theophilus, are without sufficient evidence for their
establishment (cf also Knowling in Expos Gr Test.,
II, 49-51). C. M. Kerr


THERAS, thé’ras (gpa, Théra): The river by
which the company assembled in preparation for
the march to Jerus under Ezra (1 Esd 8 41.61).
In Ezr 8 21.31 the name of the river is Ahava.
Possibly the place is represented by the modern
Hit on the Euphrates; but no certain identification
is possible.


THERMELETH, thir’mé-leth (@eppérc?, Ther-
méleth [1 Esd 5 36]). See TE1-MELAH.


THESSALONIANS, thes-a-lé/ni-anz, THE
FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE:


I. Importance of THE EpistLe
II. Crrcumstances oFr THE FouNnpING ar
CHURCH
1. Luke’s Narrative in Acts
2. Confirmation of Luke's Narrative in the
Epistle
III. Conpririons In THE THESSALONIAN CHURCH 48
INDICATED IN THE LETTER
IV. AWNaLysis oF THE EPISTLE
1. Paul's Past and Present Relations with the
Thessalonians and His Love for Them
2. Exhortations_against Vice, and Comfort and
Warning in View of the Coming of Christ


THE


V. Doorrinat ImMpLicaTions OF THE EpistTLeE

VI. Tue EpistLe’s RevevaTions oF Pauvt's CHar-
ACTERISTICS

LiIvrERATURE

I. The Importance of the Epistle.—The letter
is esp. important as a witness to the content of the
earliest Gospel, on account of its date and its
well-nigh unchallenged authenticity. According to
Harnack it was written in the year 48 AD; accord-
ing to Zahn, in the year 53. It is likely that these
two dates represent the extreme limits. We are
thus justified m saying with confidence that we have


before us a document that could not have been
written more than 24 years, and may very easily
have been written but 19 years, after the ascension
of Our Lord. This is a fact of great interest in
view of the contention that the Jesus of the four
Gospels is a product of the legend-making propensity
of devout souls in the latter part of the 1st cent.
When we remember that Paul was converted more
than 14 years before the writing of the Epp., and
that he tells us that his conversion was of such an
overwhelming nature as to impel him in a straight
course from which he never varied, and when we
note that at the end of 14 years Peter and John,
having fully heard the gospel which he preached,
had no corrections to offer (Gal 1 11—% 10, esp.
2 6-10), we see that the view of Christ and His
message given in this Ep. traces itself back into the
very presence of the most intimate friends of Jesus.
It is not meant by this that the words of Paul or
the forms of his teaching are reproductions of things
Jesus said in the days of His flesh, but rather that
the conception which is embodied in the Ep. of the
person of Christ and of His relation to the Father,
and of His relation also to the church and to human

destiny, is rooted in Christ’s own self-revelation.
Il, Circumstances of the Founding of the
Church.—For the founding of the church we have
two sources of information, the Book of


1. Luke’s Acts and the Ep. itself. Luke’s narra-
Narrative tive is found in Acts 17. Here we are
in Acts told that Paul, after leaving Philippi,


began his next siege against intrenched
paganism in the great market center of Thessalonica.
He went first into the synagogues of the Jews, and for
three Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the
Scriptures. Some of them, Luke tells us, “were per-
suaded, and consorted with Paul and Silas; and of
the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the
chief women notafew.” This very naturally excited
the jealousy of the Jews who found themselves losing
the social prestige that came from having a large
number of Greeks, including some of the nobility,
resorting to them for instruction. Accordingly.
they raised a mob of the worst men in town anid
brought the leading members of the church before
the magistrate. These brethren, Jason and cer-
tain others, who seem to have been men of some
property, were compelled to give bond to preserve
the peace, and the intense feeling against Paul made
it necessary for him, for the sake of these brethren
as well as for his personal safety, to flee from the
city.

The historicity of Luke’s story of the founding
of the church is strongly supported by the text

of the Ep. Paul, for instance, notes
2. Con- that the work in Thessalonica began
firmation of after they had been shamefully en-
Luke’s Nar- treated at Philippi (1 Thess 2 2).
rative in He bears witness also in the same
the Epistle verse to the conflict in the midst of

which the Thessalonian church was
founded (see also 2 14). Paul’s exhortation to
salute all the brethren with a holy kiss, his solemn
adjuration that this letter be read unto all the
brethren (5 26.27), and his exhortation to despise
not prophesying (5 20) are harmonious with Luke’s
account of the very diverse social elements out of
which the church was formed: diversities that
would very easily give rise to a disposition on
the part of the more aristocratic to neglect the
cordial greetings to the poorer members, and to
despise their uncouth testimonies to the grace
of God that had come to them (Acts 17 4).

Paul tells us that he was forced to labor for his
daily bread at Thessalonica (1 Thess 2 9). Luke
does not make mention of this, but he tells us of
his work at tent-making in the next town where he


2967


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA  Theodotion


Thess, 1st Ep. to


made a considerable stop (Acts 18 1-3), and thus
each statement makes the other probable.

Perhaps, however, the most marked corroboratlon
of the Acts which we have in the letter is the general
harmony of its revelation of the character of Paul with
that of the Acts. The reminiscences of Paul’s work
among them (1 Thess 2 1-12) correspond, for instance,
in @ marked way, in essence though not in style and
vocabulary, with Luke's report of Paul's account of the
method and spirit of his work at Ephesus (Acts 20 17—
35). | This, however, is only one of many correspondences
which could be polnted out and which will at once be
evident to engane who will read the letter, and then go
over Acts 13-28.

It may seem irrelevant thus to emphasize the his-
toricity of Acts in an art. on Thessalonians, but the
witness of the Ep. to the historicity of the Gospels and
of Acts is for the present moment one of its most Impor-
tant functions.


IIT, Conditions in the Thessalonian Church as
Indicated in the Letter.—A NT ep. bears a close
resemblance to a doctor’s prescription. It relates
itself to the immediate situation of the person to
whom it is directed. If we study it we can infer
with a great deal of accuracy the tendencies, good or
bad, in the church. What revelation of the con-
ditions at, Thessalonica is made in the First Ep.?
Plainly, affairs on the whole are in a very good state,
esp. when one takes into account the fact that most
of the members had been out of heathenism but a
few months. They were so notably devoted to God
that they were known all over Macedonia as
examples to the church (1 Thess 1 7). Inparticular
the Christian grace of cordial good will toward all
believers flourished among them: a grace which they
doubtless had good opportunity to exercise in this
great market town to which Christians from all
parts would resort on business errands and where
there would be constant demands on their hospi-
tality (4 9-10).

There were, however, shadows in the picture.
Some persons were whispering dark suspicions
against Paul. Perhaps, as Zahn suggests, they
were the unbelieving husbands of the rich ladies who
had become members of the church. It was in
answer to these criticisms that he felt called upon
to say that he was not a fanatic nor a moral leper,
nor a deceiver (23). When he is so eareful to
remind them that he was not found at any time
wearing a cloak of covetousness, but rather went to
the extreme of laboring night and day that he
might not be chargeable to any of them (2 9),
we may be sure that the Christians were hearing
constant jibes about their money-making teacher
who had already worked his scheme with the Philip-
pians so successfully that they had twice sent him
a contribution (Phil 4 16). Pawl’s peculiar sensi-
tiveness on this point at Corinth (1 Cor 9 14.15)
was possibly in part the result of his immediately
preceding experiences at Thessalonica.

One wonders whether Greece was not peculiarly
infested at this time with wandering philosophers
and religious teachers who beat their way as best
they could, living on the credulity of the unwary.

Paul’s anxiety to assure them of his intense desire
to see them and his telling of his repeated attempts
to.come to them (1 Thess 2 17-20) show rather
plainly also that his absence had given rise to the
suspicion that he was afraid to come back, or indeed
quite indifferent about revisiting them. ‘‘We would
fain have come unto you,” he says, “I Paul once
and again; and Satan hindered us.”

Some also were gaying that Paul was a flatterer
(2 5), who was seeking by this means to carry ont
unworthy ends. This sneer indeed, after the read~
ing of the letter, would_come quite naturally to
the superficial mind. Paul’s amazing power to
idealize his converts and see them in the light of
their good intentions and of the general goal and


trend of their minds is quite beyond the apprecia-
tion of a shallow and sardonic soul.

More than this, we can see plain evidence that
the church was in danger of the chronie heathen
vice of unchastity (4 3-8). The humble members
also, in particular, were in danger of being in-
toxicated by the new intellectual and spiritual
life into which they had been inducted by the
gospel, and were spending thcir time in religious
meetings to the neglect of their daily labor (4 10—-
12). Moreover, some who had lost friends since
their baptism were mourning lest at the second com-
ing of Christ these who had fallen asleep would not
share in the eommon glory (4 13-18). This is a

uaint proof of the immaturity of their view of

hrist, as though a physical accident could separate
from His love and care. There was likewise, aa
suggested above, the ever-present danger of social
cliques among the members (5 13.15.20.26.27).
It is to this condition of things that Paul pours
forth this amazingly vital and human Ep.

AV. Analysis af the Epistle.—The letter may be
divided in several ways. Perhaps as simple a way as any
is that which separates it into two main divisions.

First, Paul's past and present relations with the Thessa-
lonians, and his love for them (1 1—3 13):

(1) Greeting and Thanksgiving (1 1-10).

(2) Paul reminds them of the character of his life

and ministry among them (2 1-12).


1. Paul’s (3) The sufferings of the Thessalonians
: x the same as those endured’ by their
Prac sets Baul a etione ie eee (2 17-20)
wit Ss aul's efforts to see them —-20).
leaner Bae (5) Paul's surrender of his beloved


helper in order to learn the state of the

Thessalonian church, and his joy over

the good news which Timothy brought (3 1-13):
Second, exhortations against vice, and comfort and

warning in view of the coming of Christ (4 1—-5.28):

(1) Against gross vice (4 1-8).


2. Exhorta- 2) Against ad lener (4 912 : ci
i e oncerning those who have fallen
nous unt asleep (4 13-18).


r (4) Concerning the true way to watch
Warning = tor the Coming (5 1-11).
- (5) Sundry exhortations (§ 12-28).

V. "Doctrinal Implications of the Epistie.—The Ep.
to the Thess is not a doctrinal letter. Paul's great
teaching concerning salvation by faith alone, apart
from the works of the Law, is not sharply defined or haldly
stated, and the doctrine of the cross of Christ as central
In Christianity is here implied rather than enforced.
Almost the only doctrinal statement is that which
assures them that those of their number who had fallen
asleep would notin any wise be shut out from the rewards
and glories at Christ's second coming (1 Thess 4 13—
18). But while the main doctrinal positions of Paul
are not elaborated or even stated in the letter, it may
safely be said that the Ep. could scarcely have been
written by one who denied those teachings. And the
fact_that we know that shortly before or shortly after
Paul wrote the Ep. to the Gal, and the fact that he so
definitely describes his attitude at this very time toward
the preaching of the cross of Christ, in his reminiscences
in 1 Cor (see esp. 1 Cor 2 1-5), show how foolish it is to
assume that an author has not yet come to a position
hecause he does not constantly obtrude it in all that
he writes.

The Ep., however, bears abundant evidence to the
fact that this contemporary of Jesus had seen in the
lite and character and resurrection of Jesus that which
caused him to exalt Him to Divine honors, to mention
Him in the same breath with God the Father, and to
expect His second coming in glory as the event which
would determine the destiny of all men and be the final
goal of history. As such the letter, whose authenticity
is now practically unquestioned, is a powerful proof, that
Jesus was @ personality as extraordinary as the Jesus
of the first three Gospels. And even the Christ of the
Fourth Gospel is scarcely more exalted than He who
now wlth God the Father constitutes the spiritual atmos-
phere in which Christians exist (1 Thess 1 1), and who
at the last day will descend from heaven with a shout
and with the voice of an archangel and the trump of
God, and cause the dead in Christ to rise from their
tombs to dwell forever with Himself (4 16.17).


VI. The Epistle’s Revelations of Paul’s Char-
acteristics.—We notice in the letter the extreme
tactfulness of Paul. He has some plain and humili-
ating warnings to give, but he precedes them in
each case with affectionate recognition of the good
qualities of the brethren. Before he warns against


Thess, 2d Ep.to THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2968


gross vice he explains that he is simply urging them
to continue in the good way they are in. Before
he urges them to go to work he cordially recognizes
the love that bas made them linger so long and so
frequently at the common meeting-places. And
when in connection with his exhortations about the
second coming he alludes to the vice of drunkenness,
he first idealizes them as sons of the light and of the
day to whom, of course, the drunken orgies of those
who are “of the night’? would be unthinkable.
Thus by a kind of spiritual suggestion he starts them
in the right way.

LirrzratuRrL.—Bishop Alexander, the Speaker's Comm.
(published in America under the title, The Bible Comm.,
and bouud with most_excellent comms. on all of the
Pauline Epp.), New York, Scribners; Milligan, The
Epp. to the Thess (the Gr text with Intro and_ notes),
London, Macmillan; Moffatt, The Hxpositor's Gr Test.
coe with comms. by various authors on the Pastoral

pp., Philem, Heand Jas), New York, Dodd, Mead & Co.;
Frame, ICC, New York, Scribners; Stevens, An American
Comm. on the NT, Philadelphia, American Baptist Publi-
cation Society; Adeney, The New Century Bible, “1 and
2 Thess” aud ‘‘Gal,’’ New York, Henry Frowde; Findlay,
“The Epp. to the Thess,’’ Cambridge Bible for Schools and
Colleges, New York, Putnams; James Denney, ‘‘ The Epp.
to the Thess,” Expositor’s Bible, New York, Doran; the
two latter are esp. recommended as inexpensive, popular
and yet scholarly comms. The Cambridge Bibleis a verse-
by-verse comm., and Professor Denney on ‘‘ Thess"’ in
Expositor’s Bible is one of the most vital and vigorous
pieces of homiletical exposition known to the present
writer.

Roitiiw HovucH Waker

THESSALONIANS, THE SECOND EPISTLE
OF PAUL TO THE:


I. Importanen or Stupyine 1 Tress anp 2 THzss
TOGETHER 4
TI. AuTHENTiciTy
1. Arguments against the Pauline Authorship
2. Arguments for the Pauline Authorship
Ill. Tae Man or Sin
1. Primary Reference
2. Permanent Value of the Teaching concerning
the Man of Sin
IV. Pavw's ExuortaTion To Quist InpusTRY
LITERATUR


I. Importance of Studying 1 Thess and 2 Thess
Together.—Those who hold to the Pauline author-
ship of the Ep. unite in ascribing it to a time but
little subsequent to the writing of the First Letter.
It is simply a second prescription for the same case,
made after discovering that some certain stubborn
symptoms had not yielded to the first treatment.
2 Thess should be studied in connection with 1
Thess because it is only from an understanding of
the First Ep. and the sitnation that it revealed that
one can fully grasp the significance of the Second.
And more than that, the solution of the problem as
to whether Paul wrote the Second Letter is likewise
largely dependent on our knowledge of the First.
It would, for instance, be much harder to believe
that Paul had written 2 Thess if we did not know
that before writing it he had used the tender and
tactful methods of treatment which we find in the
First Letter. It is as though one should enter a
sick room where the physician is resorting to some
rather strong measures with a patient. One is
better prepared to judge the wisdom of the treat-
ment if he knows the history of the case, and dis-
covers that gentler methods have already been tried
by the physician without success.

Il, Authenticity.—The different treatment of the
subject of the second coming of Christ, the different

emotional tone, and the different


1. Argu- relationships between Paul and the
ments church presupposed in the First and
against Second Epp., have been among the
Pauline causes which have led to repeated
Authorship questionings of the Pauline anthor-


ship of 2 Thess. Scholars argue, in the
first place, that the doctrine conccrning the coming
of Christ which we find in the Second Letter is not
only differently phrased but is contradictory to that


in the First. We get the impression from the First
Letter that the Day of the Lord is at hand. It will
come as a thief in the night (1 Thess 6 2), and one
of the main parts of Christian duty is to expect it
(1 Thess 1 9.10). In the Second Letter, however,
the writer urges strongly against any influence that
will deceive them into believing that the Day of the
Lord is at hand, because it will not be “except the
falling away come first, and the man of sin be re-
vealed, the son of perdition, he that opposeth and
exalteth himself against all that is called God or
that is worshipped” (2 Thess 2 1-4). :

Again very plainly also, say the critics, a differ-
ent relation exists between the writer and the
church at Thessalonica. In the First Letter he
coaxes; in the Second Letter he commands (1 Thess
4 1.2.9-12; 6 1-11; 2 Thess 2 1-4; 3 6.12-14).
Moreover, the whole emotional tone of the Second
Letter is different from that of the First. The First
Ep. is a veritable geyser of joyous, grateful affection
and tenderness. The Second Letter, while it also
contains expressions of the warmest affection and
appreciation, is quite plainly not written under the
same pressure of tender emotion. Here, say the
critics, is 2 lower plane of inspiration. Here are
Paul’s words and phrases and plain imitations of
Paul’s manner, but here most emphatically is not
the flood tide of Paul’s inspiration. Moreover, the
lnrid vision of the battle between the man of sin
and the returning Messiah in the Second Letter is
different in form and colores iran anything which
we find elsewhere in Paul. These, and other con-
siderations have led many to assume that the letter
was written by a band other than that of the Apostle
to the Gentiles.

The hypothesis, however, that Paul was not the
author of the Ep., while it obviates certain diffi-

culties, raises many more. Into a
2. Argu-~ statement of these difficulties we will
ments for not go here, but refer the reader to a
the Pauline brief and scholarly putting of them in
Authorship Peake’s Critical Intro to the NT, 12-16
(New York, Scribners, 1910).

There is accordingly today a manifest tendency
among all scholars, including those in the more
radical camps, to return to the traditional position
concerning the authorship. The following are some
of the positive arguments for the authenticity:

As for the opposing views of the coming of Christ
in the two Epp., it is to be noted that precisely the
same superficial contradiction occurs in Our Lord’s
own teaching on thissame subject (Mt 24 6.23.24.
25.26; Lk 12 35.40). Jesus exhorts His disciples
to watch, for in such an hour as they think not the
Son of man cometh, and yet at the same time and
in the same connection warns them that when they
see certain signs they should not be troubled, for
the end is not yet. Paul, brooding over the sub-
ject after writing the First. Letter, might easily
have come strongly to see the obverse side of the
shield. The apostle built his theology upon the
tradition which had come from Jesus as interpreted
by its practical effects upon-his converts, and his
mind was quick to counteract any danger due to
overemphasis or wrong inferences. He was not
nearly as eager for a consistently stated doctrine as
he was for a doctrine that made for spiritual life
and efliciency. During thefierce persecutions at the
beginning of the movement in Thessalonica, the
comfort of the thought of the swift coming of Christ
was in need of emphasis, but as soon as the doctrine
was used as an excuse for unhealthful religious
excitement the minds of the disciples must be fo-
cused on more prosaic and less exciting aspects of
reality.

Thet Paul assumes a commanding and peremptory
attitude in the Second Letter which we do not find so


2969


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Thess, 2d Ep. to


plalnly asserted In tho First is readily admitted. Why
should not the First Letter have had Its intended effect
upon the Thessalonian church as a whole? And if Paul
recelved word that his gracious and tactful message had
carrled with It the conviction of the dominant elements
of the church, but that certain groups had continued to
be fanatical and disorderly, we can easily see how, with
the main current of the church behind him, he would
have dared to use more drastic methods with the offend-
ing members.


_ It is also readily admitted that the Second Letter
is not so delightful and heart-warming as the First.
It was plainly not written in a mood of such high
emotional elevation. But the question may be
raised as to whether the coaxing, caressing tone of
the First Ep. would have been appropriate in hand-
ling the lazy and fanatical elements of the church
after it had persisted in disregarding his tender and
kindly admonitions. Jesus’ stern words to the
Pharisees in Mt 23 are not so inspiring as Jn 14,
but they were the words and the only words
that were needed at the time. “Let not your heart
be troubled” would not be inspired if delivered to
hypocrites. Furthermore, we are not called upon
to assume that Paul at all times lived in the same
mood of emotional exaltation. Indeed his Epp.
abound with assertions that this was not the case
(2 Cor 1 8; 1 Thess 3 9), and it is unreasonable
to expect him always to write in the same key. It
must be added, however, that the suggestion that
: the Second Ep. is stern may easily be overdone.
If 1 Thess were not before us, it would be the tender-
ness of Paul’s treatment, of the church which would
most impress us.

Harnack has recently added the weight of his author-
ity to the argument for the Pauline authorship of the
letter. He thinks that there were two distinct societies
In Thessalonica, the one perhaps meeting in the Jewish

uarter and composed chiefly of Jewish Christians, and
the other composed of Greeks meeting in some other part
of the city. In addition to the probability that this
would be true, which arises from the very diverse social
classes out of which the church was formed (Acts 17 4),
and the size of the city, he points to the adjuration in the
First Letter (1 Thess 5 27) that this Ep. be read unto
all the brethren, as a proof that there was a coterie in
the church that met separately and that might easily
have been neglected by the rest, just as the Greeks in
Jerus were neglected in the daily ministration (Acts 6 1).
He thinks that the Second Letter was probably directed
to the Jewish element of the church.

It is to be noted also that Professor Moffatt (Intro to
the Lit. of the NT, 76 ff), who calls in question the authen-
ticity of nearly all of the books of the NT that any
reputable scholars now attack, finds no sufficient reason
to question the Pauline authorship of 2 Thess.


I. The Man of Sin.—The question as to whom
or what Paul refers to in 2 1-12, when he speaks
of the man of sin, whose revelation is
1. Primary to precede the final manifestation of
Reference Christ, has divided scholars during all
the Christian centuries. (For a good
discussion of the history of the interpretation of
this difficult section, see Findlay, ‘I and II Thess,”
Cambridge Bible, 170-80.) The reason why each
age has had its fresh interpretation identifymg the
man of sin with the blaspemous powers of evil then
most active is the fact that the prophecy has never
yet found its complete accomplishment. The man
of sin hag never been fully revealed, and the Christ
has never finally destroyed him. \ Age
But Paul says that the mystery of miquity
already works (2 7), and he tells the ehurch that the
restraining influence which for the time being held
it in check is something that “ye know” (2 6).
Plainly, then, the evil power and that which held it
in check were things quite familiar both to Paul
and to his readers. We must therefore give the
prophecy a Ist-cent. reference. The alternative
probably lies between making the mystery of
iniquity the disposition of the Rom emperor to give
himself out as an incarnation of deity and force all
men to worship him, a tendency which was then


being held in check by Claudius, but which soon
broke out under Caligula (see Peake’s Intro above
cited); or, on the other hand, making the mystery
of iniquity to be some peculiar manifestation of
diabolism which was to break out from the perse-
cuting Jewish world, and which was then held in
check by the restraining power of the Rom govern-
ment.

In favor of making a blasphemous Rom emperor
the man of sin, may be urged the fact that it was
this demand of the emperor for worship which
brought matters to a crisis in the Rom world and
turned the terrific enginery of the Rom empire
against Christianity. And 1 may be argued that
it ia hardly likely that the temporary protection
which Paul received from the Rom government
prevented him from seeing that its spirit was such
that it must ultimately be ranged against Chris-
tianity. One may note also, in arguing for the Rom
reference of the man of sin, the figurative and enig-
matic way in which Paul refers to the opposing
power, a restraint that would be rendered necessary
for reasons of prudence (cf Mk 13 14, and also the
cryptograms used by the anthor of the Book of
Rev in referring to Rome). Paul has none of this
reserve in referring to the persecuting Jewish world
who “please not God, and are contrary to all men”
(1 Thess 2 15). And in view of the fact that the
Jews were in disfavor in the Rom empire, as is
proved by the then recently issued decree of Clau-
dius commanding all Jews to depart from Rome
(Acts 18 2), and by the fact that to proclaim a
man a Jew helped at that time to lash a mob into
fury against him (Acts 16 20; 19 34), it would
seem hardly likely that Paul would expect the
subtle and attractive deception that was to delude
the world to come from Jerus; and particularly
would this seem unlikely in view of the fact that
Paul seems to be familiar with Our Lord’s prophecy
of the swift destruction of Jerus, as is shown by his
assertion in 1 Thess 2 16, that wrath is come upon
them to the uttermost.

On the other hand, however, to make the man of
gin a person or an influence coming from Judaism
is supported by the fact that he is to sit in the
temple of God, setting himself forth to be God
(1 Thess 2 4), and by the fact that the natural
punishment for the rejection of their Messiah was
that the Jews should be led to accept a false Messiah.
Having opposed Him who came in the Father’s
name, they were doomed to accept one who came
in his own name. Again, and far more important
than this, is the fact that during nearly the whole of
Paul’s life it was the Rom empire that protected
him, and the unbelieving Jews that formed the
malicious, cunning and powerful opposition to his
work and to the well-being and peace of his churches, -
and he could very well have felt that the final in-
carnation of evil was to come from the source which
had crucified the Christ and which had thus far
been chiefly instrumental in opposing the gospel.
Moreover, this expectation that a mysterious power
of evil should arise out of the Jewish world seems
to be in harmony with the rest of the NT (Mt 24 5.
23.24; Rev 11 3.7.8). It is the second alternative,
therefore, that is, with misgivings, chosen by the
present writer.

It may be objected that this cannot be the true inter-
pretation, as it was not fulfilled, but, on the contrary, it
was Rome that became the gospel’s most formidable foe.
But this type of objection, if accepted as valid, prac-
tically puts a stop to all attempts at a historical inter-
pretation of prophecy. Jt would force us to deny that
the prophecies of the OT, which are usually taken as
referring to Christ, referred to Him at all, because plainly
they were not literally fulfilled in the time and manner
that the prophets expected them to be fulfilled. 1t


uld almost force us to deny that John the Baptist re-
furred. to Christ when he heralded the coming of the one


Thessalonica


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2970


who would burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire,

because as the Gospels tell us Jesus did not fulfil this

Rienery 22 the way John expected (Lk 7 19). See
AN OF SIN.


Although Paul’s prediction concerning the man


of sin was not literally fulfilled, nevertheless his
teaching has a permanent significance.


2. Perma- It is always true in every battle for
nent Value good that the Son of man does not
of the come until the falling away comes
Teaching and the manof sin is revealed. First,
concerning there is the fresh tide of enthusiasm
the Man and the promise of swift victory for
of Sin the kingdom of heaven, but soon there


is the reaction and the renascence
of opposition in new and overwhelming power.
The battle is to the death. And then above
the smoke of the battle men see the sign of the
coming of the Son of man with power and great
glory; the conviction floods them that after all what
Christ stands for is at the center of the universe and
must prevail, and men begin to recognize Christ's
principles as though they were natural law. This
action and reaction followed by final victory takes
place in practically all religious and reforming move-
ments which involve the social reconstruction of
society according to the principles of the Kingdom.
It is exceedingly important that men should be de-
livered from shallow optimism. And this Ep.
makes its contribution to that good end.

IV. Paul’s Exhortation to Quiet Industry.—The
exhortation that the brethren should work with
quietness and earn their own bread (3 12) is full of
interest to those who are studying the psychological
development of the early Christians under the in-
fluence of the great mental stimulus that came to
them from the gospel. Some were so excited by
the new dignity that had come to them as mem-
bers of the Ghristian society, and by the new hopes
that had been inspired in their minds, that they
considered themselves above the base necessity of
manuallabor. This isnot an infrequent phenomenon
among new converts to Christianity in heathen
lands. Paul would have none of it. Fortunately
he could point to his own example. He not only
labored among them to earn his own livelihood, but
he worked until muscles ached and body rebelled
(2 Thess 3 8).

Paul saw that the gospel was to be propagated
chiefly by its splendid effects on the lives of all
classes of society, and he realized that almost the
first duty of the church was to be respected, and so
he not only exhorts the individual members to in-
dependence, but he lays down the principle that no
economic parasite is to be tolerated in the church.
“Tf any man will not work, neither let him eat”
(3 10). This forms an important complement to
the teaching of Jesus (Mt 5 42): “Give to him that
asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of
thee turn not thou away.”

LirerxatuRE.—See under 1 Thess.

OLLIN HovucH WALKER

THESSALONICA, thes-a-lé-ni’ka (Ocrcadovikn,
Thessaloniké, ethnic Oeroadovikeds, Thessaloniketis) :

One of the chief towns of Mace-
1. Position donia from Hellenistic times down to
and Name the present day. It lies in 40° 40’ N.

lat., and 22° 50’ E. long., at the
northernmost point of the Thermaic Gulf (Gulf of
Salonica), a short distance to the E. of the mouth
of the Axius (Vardar). It is usually maintained
that the earlier name of Thessalonica was Therma
or Therme, a town mentioned both by Herodotus
(vii.121 ff, 179 ff) and by Thucydides (1.61; ii.29),
but that its chief importance dates from about 315
BC, when the Macedonian king Cassander, son
of Antipater, enlarged and strengthened it by con-


centrating there the population of a number of
neighboring towns and villages, and renamed it after
his wife Thessalonica, daughter of Philip II and
step-sister of Alexander the Great. This name,
usually shortened since mediaeval times into
Salonica or Saloniki, it has retained down to the
present. Pliny, however, speaks of Therma as still
existing side by side with Thessalonica (NH, iv.36),
and it is possible that the latter was an altogether
new foundation, which took from Therma a portion
of its inhabitants and replaced it as the most impor-
tant city on the Gulf.
Thessalonica rapidly became populous and
wealthy. In the war between Perseus and the
Romans it appears as the headquarters
2. History of the Macedonian navy (Livy xliv.10)
and when, after the battle of Pydna
(168 BC), the Romans divided the conquered
territory into four districts, it became the capital of
the second of these (Livy xlv.29), while later, after
the organization of the single Rom province of
Macedonia in 146 BC, it was the seat of the gov-
ernor and thus practically the capital of the whole
province. In 58 BC Cicero spent the greater part
of his exile there, at the house of the quaestor
Plancius (Pro Plancio 41, 99; Ep. Ad Ait. ili.8-21).
In the civil war between Caesar and Pompey,
Thessalonica took the senatorial side and formed
one of Pompey’s chief bases (49-48 BC), but in
the final struggle of the republic, six years later, it
proved loyal to Antony and Octavian, and was
rewarded by receiving the status and privileges of a
‘free city’ (Pliny, NA, iv.36). Straho, writing in
the reign of Augustus, speaks of it as the most popu-
lous town in Macedonia and the metropolis of the
province (vii.323, 330), and ahout the same time
the poet Antipater, himself a native of Thessalonica,
refers to the city as “mother of all Macedon”
(Jacobs, Anthol. Graec., II, p. 98, no. 14); in the 2d
cent. of our era Lucian mentions it as the greatest
city of Macedonia (Asinus, 46). It was important,
not only as a harbor with a large import and export
trade, hut also as the principal station on the great
Via Egnatia, the highway from the Adriatic to the
Hellespont.
Paul visited the town, together with Silas and
Timothy, on his 2d missionary journey. He had
been at Philippi, and traveled thence
8. Paul’s by the Egnatian Road, passing through
Visit Amphipolis and Apollonia on the way
(Acts 17 1). He found at Thessa-
loniea a synagogue of the Jews, in which for three
successive Sahbaths he preached the gospel, basing
his message upon the types and prophecies of the OT
Scriptures (vs 2.3). Some of the Jews became
converts and a considerable number of proselytes
and Greeks, together with many women of high
social standing (ver 4). Among these converts
were in all prohability Aristarchus and Secundus,
natives of Thessalonica, whom we afterward find
accompanying Paul to Asia at the close of his 3d
missionary journey (Acts 20 4). The former of
them was, indeed, one of the apostle’s most constant
companions; we find him with Paul at Ephesus
(Acts 19 29) and on his journey to Rome (Acts 27
2), while in two of his Epp., written during his cap-
tivity, Paul refers to Aristarchus as still with him,
his fellow-prisoner (Col 4 10; Philem ver 24).
Gaius, too, who is mentioned in conjunction with
Aristarchus, may have been a Thessalonian (Acts
19 29). How long Paul remained at Thessalonica
on his Ist visit we cannot precisely determine;
certainly we are not to regard his stay there as con-
fined to three weeks, and Ramsay suggests that it
pronee ly extended from December, 50 AD, to
ay, 51 AD (St. Paul the Traveller, 228). In any
case, we learn that the Philippians sent him assist-


2971


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Thessalonica


ance on two occasions during the time which he spent
there (Phil 4 16), although he was “working night
and day’ to maintain himself (1 Thess 2 9;
2 Thess 3 8). Paul, the great missionary strate-
gist, must have seen that from no other center could
Macedonia be permeated with the gospel so effect-
ively as from Thessalonica (1 Thess 1 8).

But his success roused the jealousy of the Jews,
who raised a commotion among the dregs of the city
populace (Acts 17 5). An attack was made on
the house of Jason, with whom the evangelists
were lodging, and when these were not found
Jason himself and some of the other converts were
dragged before the magistrates and accused of har-
boring men who had caused tumult throughout the
Rom world, who maintained the existence of another
king, Jesus, and acted in defiance of the imperial
decrees. The magistrates were duly alive to the
seriousness of the accusation, but, since no evidence
was forthcoming of illegal practices on the part of
Jason or the other Christians, they released them
on ag (vs 5-9). Foreseeing further trouble if
Paul should continue his work in the town, the con-
verts sent Paul and Silas (and possibly Timothy
also) by night to Beroea, which lay off the main
toad and is referred to by Cicero as an out-of-the-
way town (oppidum devium: in Pisonem 36). The
Beroean Jews showed a greater readiness to examine
the new teaching than those of Thessalonica, and
the work of the apastle was more fruitful there, both
among Jews and among Greeks (vs 10-13). But
the news of this success reached the Thessalonian
Jews and inflamed their hostility afresh. Going to
Beroea, they raised a tumult there also, and made
it necessary for Paul to leave the town and go to
Athens (vs 14.15).


Several points in this account are noteworthy as illus-
trating the strict accuracy of the narrative of the Acts.
Philippi was a Rom town, military rather than com-
mercial; hence we find but few Jews there and no
synagogue; the magistrates bear the title of praetors
(Acts 16 20.22.35.36.38 RVm) and are attended by
lictors (Acts 16 35.38 RVm); Paul and Silas are charged
with the introduction of customs which Romans may
not observe (ver a they are beaten with rods (ver
22) and appeal to their privileges as Rom citizens (vs
37.38). At Thessalonica all is changed. We are here
in a Gr commercial city and a seaport, a ‘‘free city,"
moreover, enjoying a certain amount of autonom and
its own constitution. Here we find a large mumber of
resident Jews and a synagogue. The charge against
Paul is that of trying to replace Caesar by another king;
the rioters wish to brin im before “the people,” i.e.
the popular assembly characteristic of Gr states, and
the magistrates of the city bear the Gr name of politarchs
(Acts 17 5-9). This title occurs nowhere in Gr lit.,
hut its correctness is proved beyond possibility of
question by its occurrence in a number of inscriptions
of this period, which have come to light in Thessalonica
and the neighborhood, and_will he found collected in
AJT (1898, 598) and in M. G. Dimitsas, Maxedovia
(Makedonta), 422 ff. Among them the most famous
js the inscription engraved on the arch which stood at
the western end of the main street of Salonica and was
called the Vardar Gate. The arch itself, which was per-
haps erected to commemorate the victory of Philippi,
though some authorities assign it to a later date, has
been removed, and the inscription is now in the British
Museum (CIG, 1967; Leake, Northern Greece, III,
236; Le Bas, Voyage archéologique, nO. 1357; ‘Ux,
Trans. Royal Soc. Lit., VIII, 528). _This proves that the

olitarchs were six in number, and it is a curious Coinci-
Aeace that in it occur the names Sosipater, Gaius and
Secundus, which are borne by three Macedonlan con-
yerts, of whom the first two were probably Thessalonians,
the last certainly.


The Thessalonian church was a strong and
flourishing one, composed of Gentiles rather than
of Jews, if we may judge from the


4, The tone of the two Epp. addressed to ita
Thessa- members, the absence of quotations
lonian from and allusions to the OT, and
Church the phrase “Ye turned unto God


from idols’ (1 Thess 19; cf also
214). These, by common consent the earliest of
Paul’s Epp., show us that the apostle was eager


to revisit Thessalonica very soon after his enforced
departure: “once and agam”’ the desire to return
was strong in him, but “Satan hindered” him (2
18)—a reference probably to the danger and loss in
which such a step would involve Jason and the
other leading converts. But though himself pre-
vented from continuing his work at Thessalonica,
he sent Timothy from Athens to visit the church
and confirm the faith of the Christians amid their
hardships and persecutions (3 2-10). The favor-
able report brought back by Timothy was a great
comfort to Paul, and at the same time intensified
his longing to see his converts again (3 10.11).
This desire was to be fulfilled more than once.
Almost certainly Paul returned there on his 3d
missionary journey, both on his way to Greece
(Acts 20 1) and again while he was going thence to
Jerus (ver 3); it is on this latter occasion that we
hear of Aristarchus and Secundus accompanying
him (ver 4). Probably Paul was again in Thessa-
lonica after his first imprisonment. From the
Ep. to the Phil (1 26; 2 24), written during his
captivity, we learn that his intention was to re-
visit Philippi if possible, and 1 Tim 1 3 records
a subsequent journey to Macedonia, in the course
of which the apostle may well have made a longer
or shorter stay at Thessalonica. The only other
mention of the town in the NT occurs in 2 Tim
4 10, where Paul writes that Demas has forsaken
him and has gone there. Whether Demas was
a Thessalonian, as some have supposed, cannot be
determined.
For centuries the city remained one of the chief
strongholds of Christianity, and it won for itself
the title of “the Orthodox City,”
5. Later not only by the tenacity and vigor
History of its resistance to the successive
attacks of various barbarous races,


but also by being largely responsible for their


conversion to Christianity.


From the middle of the 3d cent._AD it was entitled
Seseeeeee aud colony,’’ and when Diocletian (284-305)
divided Macedonia into two provinces, Thessalonica
was chosen as the capital of the first of these. Jt was
also the scene in 390 AD of the famous massacre ordered
by Theodosius the Great, for which Ambrose excluded
that parece for some months from the cathedral at
Milan. In 253 the Goths had made @ vain attempt to
capture the city, aud again in 479 Theodoric, king ot the
Ostrogoths, found it so strong and well prepared that he
did not venture to attack it. From the 6th to the 9th
cent. it was engaged in repeated struggles against Avars,
Slavonians and Bulgarians, whose attacks it_repelled
with the utmost difficulty. Finally, in 904 AD it was
captured by the Saracens, who, after slaughtering a
great number of tho inhabitants and burning a consider-
ahle portion of the city, sailed away eu tan etal them
22,000 captives, young men, women and children. In
1185, when the famous scholar Eustathius was bishop,
the Normans under Tancred stormed the city, and once
more a general massacre took place. In 1204 Thessa-
lonica became the center of a Latin kingdom under
Boniface, marquis of Monferrat, and for over two
centuries it passed from hand to hand, now ruled by
Latins now by Greeks, until in 1430 it fell before the
sultan Amurath II. After that time it remained in
the possession of the Turks, and it was, indeed, the chief
European city of their dominions, with the exception
of Constantinople, uutil it was recaptured by the Greeks
in the Balkan war of 1912. Its population includes some
32,000 Turks, 47,000 Jews (mostly the descendants of
refugees from Spain) and 16,000 Greeks and other
Europeans. The city is rich in examples of Byzantiue
ecclesiastical architecture and art, and possesses, In
addition to a large number of mosques, 12 churches and
25 synagogues. »

Liveraturs.—The fullest account of the topography
of Thessalonica and its history, esp. from the 5th to the
15th cent., is that of Tafel, De Thessalonica eiusque
agro. Dissertatio geographica, Berlin, 1839; cf also
the Histories of Gibbon and Finlay. A description of
the town and its ancient remains is given by Leake,
Travels in Northern Greece, III, 235 ff; Cousinéry,
Voyage dans la Macédoine, I, 23 ff; Heuzey, Mission
archéol. de Macédoine, 272 ff; and other travelers. The
{nscriptions, mostly in Gr, are collected in Dimitsas,
Maxedovia (Makedonia), 421 ff.

M. N. Top


Theudas
Thomei


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2972


THEUDAS, tht’das (@ev8is, Theudds, a con-
traction of Theodorus, “‘the gift of God”): Theudas
is referred to by Gamaliel in his speech before the
Sanhedrin, when he advised them as to the position
they should adopt in regard to the apostles (Acts
5 36). The failure of the rebellion of Theudas was
quoted by Gamaliel on this occasion as typical of
the natural end of such movements as were inspired
“not of God, but of men.” A rising under one
Theudas is also described by Jos (Ant, XX, v, 1),
but this occurred at a later date (according to Jos
about 44 or 45 AD) than the speech of Gamaliel
(before 37 AD). Of the theories put forward in
explanation of the apparent anachronism in Gama~-
liel’s speech, the two most in favor are (1) that as
there were many insurrections during the period
in question, the two writers refer to different Theu-
dases; (2) that the reference to Theudas in the
narrative of Acts was inserted by a later reviser,
whose historical knowledge was inaccurate (Weiss;
cf also Knowling, Expos Gr Test., 11, 157-59).

: C. M. Kerr

THICK TREES (May PY, ‘é¢ ‘abhoth [Lev 23 40;
Neh 8 15]): One of the varieties of trees which the
Israelites were directed to use at the Feast of Taber-
nacles; in the latter passage they are expressly
directed to make booths with them. According to
the Talmudic writings, the ‘thick trees’ are
myrtles (Suk. 12a; Jer Suk. it, 68d), and further
tradition has prescribed certain special features as
to the varieties of myrtle employed, without which
they cannot be used in the ritual of the feast. In
Sir 1418 ‘thick tree” represents dévdpov saci,
déndron dast, ‘leafy tree.” See MyRriz.


THICKET, thik’et (JA9, s*bhakh [Gen 22 18;
Isa 9 18; 10 34], or FAO, sdbhekh [Jer 4 7]; in


1 § 13 6, MN, Aah): A thick or dense growth of .


trees or shrubs (thorns, brambles), in which wild
beasts may lurk (Jer 4 7), or animals be caught by
their horns (Gen 22 138; Abraham’s ram). See
Forest.


THIEF, théf: In the OT the uniform tr (17 t) of
331, gannabh, from gaénabh, ‘‘steal,” but gannabh is
rather broader than the Eng. “thief,” and may
even include a kidnapper (Dt 24 7). In Apoc
and the NT, AV _ uses “thief” indifferently for
kdérrys, kléptés, and dyor#s, léstés, but RV always
renders the latter word by ‘‘robber” (a great im-
provement). See Crimes. The figurative use of
‘thief?’ as “one coming without warning” (Mt 24
48, etc) needs no explanation.

The penitent thief (‘robber,’” RV Mk 15 27; Mt
27 38.44; “malefactor,” Lk 23 32.39) was one of
the two criminals crucified with Christ. According
to Mk and Mt, both of these jomed in the crowd’s
mockery, but Lk tells that one of them reproached
his fellow for the insults, acknowledged his own
guilt, and begged Christ to remember him at the
coming of the Kingdom. And Christ replied by
promising more than was asked—immediate ad-
mission into Paradise. It should be noted that
unusual moral courage was needed for the thicf to
make his request at such a time and under such
circumstances, and that his case has little in common
with certain sentimental ‘‘death-bed repentances.”

To explain the repentance and the acknowledg-
ment of Christ as Messiah, some previous acquaint-
ance of the thief with Christ must be supposed, but
all guesses as to time and place are of course useless.
Later tradition abundantly filled the blanks and
gave the penitent thief the name Titus or Dysmas.
See Assasstns; BaraBBas.

Burton Scorr Easton


THIGH, thi (JW), yarekh; Aram. 127), yarekhah
[Dn] 2 32]; pypés, mérés [Jth 9 2; Sir 19 12;
Rev 19 16]; as part of a sacrificial animal [Ex 29
22, etc] PIW, shok, AV, RVm “shoulder”; in addi-
tion AV has “thigh” for skék in Isa 47 2 [RV
“Jeg’’]): The portion of the leg from the knee
to the hip, against which _a weapon hangs when
suspended from the waist (Ex 32 27; Jgs 3 16.21;
Ps 46 3, etc). So the thigh of a rider on horse-
back would be covered by a loose girdle, on which
his name might be embroidered (Rev 19 16). The
“hollow of the thigh” (Gen 32 25 ff) is the hip-
socket or the groin. See also Hp.

The thighs were thought to play a part in pro-
creation (Gen 46 26; Ex 1 5, EV “loins’; Jgs
8 30, EV “body’’; cf Nu 5 21 ff), so that an oath
taken with the hand under the thigh (Gen 24 2.9;
47 29) was taken by the life-power (the rabbis
interpreted “by the seal of circumcision’). It is
perhaps significant that this oath in both Gen 24 and
AT is said to have been exacted by persons in danger
of death. Doubtless this association of the thigh
with life (aided perhaps by its excellence as food [1
S 9 24; Ezk 24 4]) determined its choice as a sacri-
ficial portion (Ex 29 22, etc; on the “heave thigh”
see Sacrifice). Consequently it is natural to find
the thigh classed as. forbidden (‘‘sacred’’) food
among certain peoples, and, probably, this sacred
character of the part is the real basis of Gen 32 32:
“The children of Israel eat not the sinew of the hip
which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this
day.” The origin of the prohibition, however, was
unknown to the writer of the verse, and he sought
an explanation from a story in which special atten-
tion was called to the thigh. Nothing else is heard
about this precept in the OT, but it receives elab-
orate attention in the Mish (Hullin, vii), where,
for instance, all food. cooked with meat containing
the sinew (nervus ischiadicus) is rendered unclean
if the sinew imparts a flavor to it, but not otherwise.
(For further details see the comms., esp. Skinner
[ICC] and RS?, 380.) One of the proofs of guilt
in the Jealousy trial (Nu 5 27) was the falling-away
of the “thigh” (a euphemism; see JEaLousy). To
smite upon the thigh was a token of contrition
(Jer 81 19) or of terror (Ezr 21 12).


Burton Scott Easton
THIMNATHAH, thim’na-thi, thim-na’tha
(MYA, timnathah): AV in Josh 19 43. It is
correctly “Timnah” with Hé locale meaning


“toward Timnah.”’ See TiMNau.


THINK, think: The OT often translates VN,
amar, “to say,’ meaning what one says to himself,
and hence a definite and clearly formulated decision
or purpose (Gen 20 11; Nu 24 4; Ruth 4 4, ete),
illustrated by the change made by RV in AV of
Est 6 6, where “thought in his heart” becomes
“said in his heart.” In other passages, for 207 ,
hashabh, V2}, damah, or DAT, z2dmam, indicating
the result of mental activity, as in an intention or
estimate formed after careful deliberation (cf Ecclus
18 25). In the NT, most frequently for doxéw,
dokéé, ‘‘to be of the opinion,” “suppose,” lit. “‘seem”
(Mt 39; 67; Lk 10 36, etc). Sometimes, for
royigouat, lagizomat, ‘‘to compute,” “reckon” (Rom
2 3, ete); sometimes, for voultw, nomizd, lit. re-
ferring to what attains the force of law (véuos,
némos), and then, ‘‘to be of the opinion”; or, for
ppovés, phronéd, implying a thought that is cherished
—a, mental habit, rather than an act (Rom 12 3;
1 Cor 13 11). The Gr fyéouat, hégéomai, “to con-
sider,” implies logical deduction from premises
(Acts 26 2; Phil 2 6), while in Mt 120; 9 4,
and Acts 10 19, é9uyodpa:, enthumotimai, refers


2973


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Theudas
Thomei


to the mental process itself, the thinking-out of a
project, the concentration of the faculties upon the
formation of a plan. H. E. Jacoss


THIRD, thard cue , shtlisht; tplros, tritos):
Isa 19 24, “In that day shall Israel be the third
with Egypt and with Assyria,” etc, brings out very
distinctly the universal and missionary character
of Isaiah’s prophecies and of Israel’s destiny (cf
Ezk 16 63; and see G. A. Smith, Isaiah, Tl, 275,
278; Watkinson, The Blind Spot, 21 ff).

For “third hour,” “third month,” ‘third year,”
see CALENDAR; Day; Time.


THIRD DAY. See Lorn’s Day.


THIRST, thirst (N92, cama’, vb. NAY, came’;
Supdw, dipsdd, Shpos, dipsos, Supa, dipsa): One of
the most powerful natural appetites, the craving
for water or other drink. Besides its natural sig-
nificance, thirst is figuratively used of strong spirit-
ual desire. The soul thirsts for God (Ps 42 2;
63 1). Jesus meets the soul’s thirst with water of
life (In 4 13 ff; 6 35; 7 37). It is said of the
heavenly bliss, “‘They shall hunger no more; neither
thirst any more” (Rev 7 16.17; ef Isa 49 10).


THIRTEEN, thar’tén, thir-tén’, THIRTY, thir’ti.
See NuMBER.


THISBE, thiz’bé (B, OleBy, Thisbé, A, OlBn,
Thibé): The home of Tohit whence he was carried
into captivity to Babylon. It is said to be ‘‘on the
right hand [1.e. S.] of Kedesh-naphtali in Galilee”
(Tob 1 2). Some have thought that this was the
native place of Elijah the Tishbite, but this is mere
conjecture. The site has not been recovered. We
need not expect strict geographical accuracy in
the romance of Tobit, any more than in that of
Judith.


THISTLES, this’'Iz.


THOCANUDS, thé-ka’nus (Odkxavos, Thékanos,
Odxavos, Thékanos; AV Theocanus): The father of
Ezekias, who with Jonathan “took the matter upon
them” in the proceedings under Ezra against foreign
wives (1 Esd 9 14)=“Tikvah” in Ezr 10 15.


THOMAS, tom’as (Owpas, Thimds; DNDN,
ta@’om, “a twin’ (in pl. only): One of the Twelve
Apostles. Thomas, who was also called

1. Inthe ‘Didymus” or “the Twin” (cf Jn 11 16;
NT 20 24; 21 2), is referred to in detail
hy the Gospel of Jn alone. His elec-

tion to the Twelve is recorded in Mt 10 3; Mk 3
18; Lk 615; Acts 113. In Jn 11 1-54, when
Jesus, despite imminent danger at the hands of
hostile Jews, declared His intention of going to
Bethany to heal Lazarus, Thomas alone opposed
the other disciples who sought to dissuade Him,
and protested, “Let us also go; that we may die with
him” (11 16). On the eve of the Passion, Thomas
put the question, “Lord, we know not whither thou
goest; how know we the way?” (14 5). After the
crucifixion, Thomas apparently severed his con-
nection with the rest of the apostles for a time, as
he was not present when the risen Christ first ap-
peared to them (ef 20 24). But his subsequent
conversation with them, while not convincing him
of the truth of the resurrection—“except I shall
see....1 will not believe’ (20 25)—at least
induced him to be among their numher eight days
afterward (20 26) in the upper room, There, hav-
ing received the proofs for which he sought, he
made the confession, “My Lord and my God”


See THorns.


(20 28), and was reproved by Jesus for his previous
unbelief: ‘“Beeause thou hast seen me, thou hast
helieved: blessed are they that have not seen, and
yet have believed’? (20 29). He was one of the
disciples to whom, Jesus manifested Himself during
ee expedition at the Sea of Tiberias (21
According to the “‘ Genealogies of the Twelve Apostles"’
(cf Budge, The Contendings of the Apostles, II, 50),
Thomas was of the house of Asher. The

2. In Apoc- oldest accounts are to the effect that he


ryphal died a natural death (cf Clement of Alex-
, andria iv.9,.71). Two fields are men-
Literature tioned by apocryphal literature as the


fs scene of Thomas’ missionary labors. (1)
According to Origen, he preached in Parthia, and accord-
ing to a Syrian legend he died at Edessa. The Agbar
legend also indicates the connection of Thomas with
Edessa. But Eusebius indicates it was Thaddaeus and
not Thomas who preached there (see Tuapparus). (2)
Along with these are other sources identifying Thomas
with India. Thus ‘‘The Acts of Thomas” (see Apocry-
PHAL Acts, B, V), @ gnostic work dating from the 2d
cent., tells how when the world was partitioned out as
a mission field among the disciples, India fell to “Judas
Thomas, also called Didymus,’’ and narrates his adven-
tures on the way, his trials, missionary success, and death
at the hands of Misdai, king of India (cf Budge, IT, 404
ff; Hennecke, Neutestamentliche Apokryphen, 473-544;
Pick, The A poer hal Acts, 224 ff). The ‘' Preaching of
St. Thomas’ (ct. nudge, If, 319) relates still more fan-
tastic adventures of Thomas in India, and the ‘‘ Martyr-
dom of St. Thomas in India”’ states that on his departure
toward Macedonia he was put to death as a sorcerer.

Of the two, the former is the more probable. Au
attempt at_reconciliation has been made by supposing
that the relics of Thomas were transported from India
to Edessa, but this is based on inaccurate historical in-
formation (cf Hennecke, op. cit.,474). The additional
names ‘‘ Judas'’ and ‘‘ Didymus”’ have caused further con-
fusion in apocryphal literature in regard to Thomas, and
have led to his identification with Judas of James, and
hence with Thaddacus (see THapparvs), and also with
Judas the brother of Jesus (ct Mt 13 55). Thus in the
* Acts of Thomas” he is twice called the “twin brother
of the Messiah.” Another legend makes Lysia the twin
sister of Thomas. A gnostic *‘Gospel of Thomas” (see
AvrocrrpPuaL Gospes, III, 2, [a]) was known to Irenaeus
(cf Iren., Ado. Haer., 1.20).


Although little is recorded of Thomas in the
Gospels, he is yet one of the most fascinating of the
apostles. He is typical of that nature
3. Character —a nature by no means rare—which
contains within it certain conflicting
elements exceedingly difficult of reconciliation.
Possessed of little natural buoyancy of spirit, and
inclined to look upon life with the eyes of gloom or
despondency, Thomas was yet a man of indomi-
table courage and entire unselfishness. Thus with
a perplexed faith in the teaching of Jesus was
mingled a sincere love for Jesus the teacher. In
the incident of Christ’s departure for Bethany, his
devotion to his Master proved stronger than his
fear of death. Thus far, in a situation demanding
immediate action, the faith of Thomas triumphed;
but when it came into conflict with his standards
of belief it was put to a harder test. For Thomas
desired to test all truth by the evidence of his
senses, and in this, coupled with a mind tenacious
both of its beliefs and disbeliefs, lay the real source
of his religious difficulties. It was his sincerity
which made him to stand aloof from the rest of the
disciples till he had attained to personal conviction
regarding the resurrection; but his sincerity also
drew from him the testimony to that conviction,
“My Lord and my God,” the greatest and fullest
in all Christianity. C. M. Kerr


THOMAS, GOSPEL OF. See ApocrypHaL
Gosrs.s, III, 2, (a).


THOMEI, thom’é-i (A, Qopel, Thomet, Fritzsche,
@opot, Thomol, B and Swete, @opel, Thomthei; AV
Thomoi): A family name of temple-servants who
returned with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 6 32)=‘'Temah”
in Ezr 2 53; Neb 7 55.


Thorn in the Flesh
Threshing-Floor


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2974


THORN, thérn, IN THE FLESH (cxddof rH
oapkt, skélops té sarki): St. Paul thus character-
izes some bodily ailment which afflicted him and
impaired his usefulness (2 Cor 12 7). The data
are insufficient to enable us to ascertain its real
nature, and all the speculations on the point are
therefore inconclusive. All that we are told is that
it was a messenger of Satan; that thereby he was
beaten as with a fist, which might be figurative or
actual; that it rendered his bodily presence un-
attractive. It appears that the infirmity recurred,
for thrice he sought deliverance; but, by the help of
God, he was able to glory in it. Sir W. Ramsay
sees in it some form of recurring malarial fever.
It was something that disabled him (Gal 4 12~15);
hence Farrar supposes that it was ophthalmia, from
the reference to his eyes, from his inability to recog-
nize the high priest (Acts 23 5), from his employ-
ing amanuenses to write his epp., and his writing
the Galatian letter in large characters with his own
hand (Gal 6 11). Krenkel has at great length
argued that it was epilepsy, and thereby endeavors
to account for his trances and his falling to the earth
on his way to Damascus, but his work is essentially
a special pleading for a foregone conclusion, and
Paul would not have called his visions “‘a messenger
of Satan.” It is also beside the question to heap
up instances of other distinguished epileptics. On
the whole Farrar’s theory is the most probable.

It is probably only a coincidence that “pricks
in your eyes” (LXX skédlopes) are mentioned in Nu
33 55. Any pedestrian in Pal must be familiar
with the ubiquitous and troublesome thorny shrubs
and thistles which abound there.

Auex. MacaLisTER

THORNS, thérnz, THISTLES, ETC: There are
very many references to various thorny plants in
the Bible, and of the Heb words employed great
uncertainty exists regarding their exact meaning.
The alternative tr* given in the text of EV and in the
margin show how divided are the views of the trans-
lators. In the following list the suggestions given
of possible species indicated, usually by comparison
with the Arab., are those of the late Professor Post,
who spent the best years of his life in study of the
botany of Pal. In the great majority of instances,
however, it is quite impossible to make any reason-
able suggestion as to any particular species being
indicated.

(1) TOS, ’atadh (Jgs 9 14, EV “bramble,” AVm
“thistle,” RVm “thorn”; Ps 58 9, EV ‘thorns’’):
Probably the buckthorn (Rkamnus Palestina Post).
Atad occurs as a proper name in Gen 50 10.11.

(2) DUP AB, barkdnim (Jgs 8 7.16, EV “briers”’):
Some thorny plant. The Egyp-Arab. bargan is,
according to Moore (Comm. on Jgs), the same as
Centaurea scoparius (N.O. Compositae), a common
Palestinian thistle.

(3) ITV, dardar (Gen 3 18; Hos 10 8, EV
“thistle”; LXX tplBodos, tribolos): In Arab.,
shauket ed-dardar is a general name for the thistles
known as Centaureae or star-thistles (N.O. Com-
positae), of which Pal produces nearly 50 species.
The purple-flowered C. calcitrapa and the yellow
C. verutum are among the commonest and most
striking.

(4) PI, hedhek (Prov 15 19, EV ‘thorns’;
LXX dxav0a, dkantha; Mic 7 4, EV “brier’’):
From former passages this should be some thorny
plant suitable for making a hedge (cf Arab. hadak,
“tq inclosc,” “wall in’). Lane states that Arab.
hadak is Solanum sanctum. Post suggests the
oleaster, Eleagnus hortensis.

(5) TM, both; LXX xvtdy, knidé, and dxavéa,
dkantha (2K 149; Job 31 40, EV “thistle,” m
“thorn”; 2 Ch 25 18, EV “thistle,” AVm “furze


“bush,” RVm “thorn”; Hos 9 6; Cant 2 2, EV


“thorns”; Isa 34 13, AV “brambles,” RV ‘‘thistles” ;
Prov 26 9, EV “a thorn’; 18 13 6, “thickets’’;
DMN, hdwahim, is, however, according to Driver
and others a corruption for DTN, hdrtm, “holes”;
Job 41 2, AV “thorn,” RV “hook”; 2 Ch 33 11,
AV “thorns,” RV “in chains,” m “with hooks’):
Clearly 24°) stands for some plant with very strong
thorns, but it is quite impossible to say what species
is intended; indeed, probably the word was used in
a general way. Sec Hoox. : ;

(6) MDIO*W, mestkhah, occurs only in Mic 7 4,
where it means a “thorn hedge.”

(7) PIXT2, na‘dgag (Isa 7 19, AV “thorns,” RV
“thorn hedges”; Isa 56 13, EV “thorn’”’): The word
is derived from ¥ 722, na@‘ac, “to prick,” or “pierce,”
and probably applies to any prickly plant. The
LXX tr croB}, stoibé (Isa 55 13), suggests the
thorny burnet, Poterium spinosum, so common in
Pal (see Botany). Post says, “It may be one of
the thorny acacias” (HDB, IV, 752).

(8) BID, sirim (Eccl 7 6, “the crackling of
thorns [strtm] under a pot” [str]; Isa 34 13, “Thorns
shall come up in its palaces’; Hos 2 6, “I will
hedge up thy way with thorns’; Nah 1 10, “En-
tangled like thorns [AV “folden together as thorns”’]
.... they are consumed utterly as dry stubble’):
The thorny burnet, Poterium spinosum, is today so
extensively used for burning in ovens and lme-
kilns in Pal that it is tempting to suppose this is
the plant esp. indicated here. In Am 4 2 M10,
siroth, is tr? “‘fish-hooks.” See Hoox.

(9) 7130, sillon (Ezk 28 24, EV “brier”);
po, sallintm (Eck 2 6, EV “thorns’”’): Arab.
¥ salla= “thorn.”

(10) D"ANO, sdrabhim (Ezk 2 6, EV “briers,”
AVm “rebels”): The tr as a plant name is very
doubtful.

(11) TBO, sirpddh (Isa 65 13, “Instead of the
brier shall come up the myrtle-tree’”’): LXX has
xévuga, konuza, which is (Post) the elecampane,
Inula viscosa (N.O. Compositae), a plant 2 or 3 ft.
high, growing on the bare hillsides of Pal, not infre-
quently in close association with the myrtle.

(12) DDE, ¢ginntm (Job 6 5; Prov 22 5, EV
“thorns”); DDL, geninim (Nu 33 55; Josh 23
13, EV “thorns’): The words apparently have a
very general meaning.

(13) PIP, koe; LXX dxavOa, dkantha: A general
name for thorny and prickly plants, the commonest
in the OT (Gen 3 18; Ex 22 6; Jgs 8 7.16; 25
23 6; Ps 118 12; Isa 32 13; 3312; Jer 4 3;
12 13; Ezk 28 24; Hos 10 8).

(14) WAP, kimmash (Prov 24 31, “thorns”;
Isa 34 13; Hos 9 6, “nettles”), See Nutrims.

(15) DSW , sikkim, pl. of JW, séh, same as Arab.
Sqr, shauk, “a thorn” (Nu 33 55, “pricks’’).


(16) MW, shayith: A word peculiar to Isa (5 6;
7 23 ff; 9 18; 10 17; 27 4) and always associated
with shémir (sce [17]), always tr? “thorns.”

(17) WOW , shdmir: References as above (16), and
in Isa 32 13, where it is with dg (see [13]) always
trd “briers.””. The Arab. samur is the thorny acacia
A. seyyal and A. tortilis (Post).

(18) &xavéos, dkanthos: The equivalent of ké¢ (see
[13]) (Mt 7 16; 18 7.22; 27 29, etc). Always tr?
“thorns.”

(19) pduvos, rhdmnos (Bar 6 71, “white thorn”):
The Rhamnus Palaestina.

(20) cxddrov, skélops (2 Cor 12.7, EV “thorn,”
m “stake”). See THORN IN THE FLESH.


2975


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA bornin the Flesh


Threshing-Floor


(21) rplBoros, tribolos (Mt 7 16, “‘thistle’; He.
6 8, AV “briers,” RV “thistles’’).

The extraordinary plentifulness of various
prickly plants in Pal—in its present condition—is
evident to any traveler during the summer months.
Many of the trees and shrubs are thorny and the
ground is everywhere covered thick with thistles,
many of which are very handsome and some of which
attain a height of 6 or 8 ft. Before the peasant
ean plough, he must clear these away by burning (cf
Isa 10 17). The early autumn winds often drive
before them in revolving mass some of the star-
thistles—a sight so characteristic that it may be
the “thistle down” (AVm, RV “whirling dust’) of
Isa 17 13. Thorns and thistles are described (Gen

_ 8 18) as God’s curse on the ground for sin. The
Talm suggests that these must be edible and are
therefore artichokes. The removal of them and the
replacement by more useful plants is a sign of God’s
blessing (Isa 65 13; Ezk 28 24).


Gen 3 18 uses the words yp and VIyt for “thorns”
and ‘‘thistles."" Midhrash Rabba’ to Genesis ( Midr. Gen.
'Rabba’ 20 10) says that Tp (‘‘thorn'’) is'the same as
mI27 (‘akkabhith), which means an edible thistle (cf
Levy, Dict., 645), and that \"J"4"J (dardar, ‘‘thistle”) is
the same as OTP (kinrag; Gr «vvépa, kundra, ‘“‘arti-
choke’’) (cf Levy, Dict., 298). ‘But,’’ adds the Midrash,
“some reverse it, and say that \3"\"} (dardar) is PIADSY
(‘akkabhith) and that air) (ké¢) is on (kinras).”’ :


The neglected vineyard of the sluggard “was all
grown over with thorns, the face thereof was covered
with nettles” (Prov 24 31), and in God’s symbolic
vineyard “there shall come up briers and thorns”
(Isa 6 6); “They have sown wheat and have reaped
thorns; they have put themselves to pain, and profit
nothing” (Jer 12 13).

Jotham compares the usurper Abimelech to a
bramble (Rhamnus Palaestina) (Jgs 9 14f), and
Jehoash, king of Israel, taunted Amaziah, king -of
Judah, by comparing him slightingly to a thistle
(m “thorn’”), readily trodden down by a wild beast
(2 K 14 9). ;

Nevertheless thorns and thistles have their uses.
On them the goats and camels browse; scarcely
any thorns seem to be too sharp for their hardened
palates. The thorny burnet (Poterium spinosum),
‘Arab. ballén, which covers countless acres of bare
hillside, is used all over Pal for ovens (Eccl 7 6) and
lime-kilns. Before kindling one of these latter the
fellahin gather enormous piles of this plant—carried
on their heads in masses much larger than the
bearers—around the kiln mouth.

Thorny hedges around dwellings and fields are
very common. The most characteristic plant for
the purpose today is the “prickly pear” (Opunctia
ficus Indica), but this is a comparatively late intro-
duction. Hedges of brambles, oleasters, etc, are
common, esp. where there is some water. In the
Jordan valley masses of broken branches of the
Zizyphus and other thorny trees are piled in a circle
round tents or cultivated fields or flocks as a es
tection against man and beast (Prov 16 19; Mic
7 4, etc).

The Lee “crown of thorns” (Mt 27 29)
was according to Palestinian tradition constructed
from the twisted branches of a species of Rham-
naceae, either the Zizyphus lotus or the Z. spina.

EB. W. G. Masterman |

THOUGHT, thét: The most frequent word in
the OT (M3WN9, makdshebheth, from the vb.
awn, hashabh, “to think”) refers to a “device,” or
a purpose firmly fixed, as in the passage in Isa (66
7-9) where the “thoughts” of God and of man are
contrasted (cf Ps 40 5; 925; Jer 29 11). Inthe
NT diaroyouss, dialogismés (Mt 1619; 1 Cor 3


20), refers to the inner reasoning or deliberation of
one with himself. See Turnx.


THOUSAND, thou'’zand (>®, ’eleph; x (ror,
chiliot). See NumBEr.


THRACIA, thra’shi-a, THRACIAN, thra’shan
(@paxia, Thrakia): The name given to the country
lying between the rivers Strymon and Danube.
Mention is made of a Thracian horseman in 2 Mace
12 35. The cavalry of this fierce people were in
demand as mercenaries in all countries. In 46
AD Thrace became the name of a Rom province.
Some have sought a connection between Thracia
and the Tiras (q.v.) of Gen 10 2, but the identi-
fication is conjectural.


THRASAEUS, thri-sé’us (A, Swete and Fritzsche,
@pacaios, Thrasaios, V, Gaprlov, Tharsiou, V+,
Oapodov, Tharséou; Conjec. Hort, Oapoéa, Tharséa;
AV Thraseas): The father of ApoLLomius (q.v.)
(2 Mace 3 5). RVm gives “Or ‘Thraseas.’” The
Gr text is probably corrupt. Perhaps the true
reading is ‘‘Apollonius of Tarsus.” é


THREE coe, shalosh; tpets, treis). See Num-
BER.


THREE CHILDREN, SONG OF THE. See
Sonc or THE THREE CHILDREN.


THREESCORE, thré’skér. See NumBer.


THRESHING, thresh’ing (WI, dish; ddodo,
alodé): Dish means, lit., “to trample out.” In Jer
61 33, 771, darakh, is used of threshing. Fitches
and cummin were beaten off with a rod. The dis-
tinction between beating and threshing is made in
Isa 28 27. Gideon, in order to avoid being seen
by the Midianites, beat out his wheat in a wine
press instead of threshing it on the threshing-floor
(Jgs 6 11). For ageneral description of the thresh-
ing operations see AGRICULTURE,

Figurative: “Thou shalt thresh the mountains,”
ie. thon wilt overcome great difficulties (Isa 41
15). Babylon’s destruction was foretold poetically
in the language of the threshing-floor (Isa 21 10;
Jer 61 33; Dnl 2 35); | Zion’s foes would be
gathered as sheaves on the threshing-floor (Mic 4
12.18; ef 2 K 18 7; Am 1 3; Hab 3 12); thresh-
ing unto the vintage, i.e. throughout the summer,
indicated an extra abundant yield (Lev 26 5).

James A. Parca

THRESHING-FLOOR, t.-flér (74, goren; &drov,
hdlén; “VIS, ’iddar, occurs in Dnl 2 35): The
location and method of making threshing-floors
have already been described under AGRICULTURE.
These floors have come into prominence because of
the Bib. events which occurred on or near them.
Joseph with his kinsmen and Egyp followers halted
for seven days at the threshing-floor of Atad to
lament the death of Jacob (Gen 60 10). Probably
there was a group of floors furnishing a convenient
spot for a caravan to stop. Travelers today wel-
come the sight of a threshing-floor at their halting-
place. The hard level spot is much preferable to
the surrounding stony fields for their tents.

David built an altar on Ornan’s (Araunah’s)
threshing-floor (2 § 24 18-24; 1 Ch 21 18-27),
which later became the site of the Temple (2 Ch
3 1). David probably chose this place for his altar
because it was on an elevation and the ground was
already level and prepared by rolling. Uzzah died
near the threshing-floor of Nacon for touching the
ark (28 6 6). Ruth reveals herself to Boaz on his
threshing-floor (Ruth 3 6-9).


Threshold
Thyatira


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2976


Threshing-floors are in danger of being robbed
(1S 23 1). For this reason someone always sleeps
on the floor until the grain is removed (Ruth 3 7).
In Syria at the threshing season it is customary
for the family to move out to the vicinity of the
threshing-floor. A booth is constructed for shade;
the mother prepares the meals and takes her turn
with the father and children at riding on the sledge.

The instruments of the threshing-floor referred
to in 2 S 24 22 were probably: (1) the wooden
drag or sledge, hdrtig or méragh, Arab. lauh ed-


bim” (18 44 RVm; cf 28 62; 2 K 19 15);
Solomon’s throne is really Jeh’s throne (1 Ch 29
23), and there shall come a time when Jerus shall
be called ‘the throne of Jeh” (Jer 3 17) and the
enemies of Jeh shall be judged by him (“I will set
my throne in Elam,” Jer 49 38). According to
Ezk 43 7, the Lord said of the future temple:
“This is the place of my throne.” ane

(3) The rule of the promised theocratic king (the
Messiah), its everlasting glory and righteousness.
He, too, is Jeh’s representative, inasmuch as He


ro


Eorrttan THRESHING-FLooR.


diras; (2) the fan (fork), mizréh, Arab. midra, for
separating straw from wheat; (3) shovel, meghra-
phih, Arab. mirfashat, for tossing the wheat into
the air in winnowing; (4) broom, mat’déé’, for
sweeping the floor before threshing and for collect-
ing the wheat after winnowing; (5) goad, malmédh,
Arab. messds; (6) the yoke, ‘dl, Arab. fauk; (7)
sieve, k*bh@rah, Arab. gharbal; (8) dung catcher,
Arab. milkat. James A. Parco


THRESHOLD, thresh’dld. See Hovuss, II, 1, (7).


THRONE, thrén (NOD, kissé’, a “seat” in 2 K
4 10; a “royal seat” in Jon 3 6; Opévos, thrénos):
Usually the symbol of kingly power and dignity.
Solomon’s throne was noted for its splendor and
magnificence (1 K 10 18-20; ef 2 Ch 9 17-19).
It symbolizes:

(1) The exalted position of earthly kings, rulers,
judges, etc, their majesty and power (of kings: Gen
41 40; 1 K 2 19; Job 36 7, etc; denoting govern-
ing or judicial power: 28 149; Neh 37; Ps
122 5, etc; often equivalent to kingdom or reign:
1828; 1 K 1 37.47, etc; in this connection we
note the expressions: ‘‘a man on the throne of
Israel,” 1 K 2 4, etc; “to sit upon a throne,” 1 K
1 13.17, etc; Jer 13 13, etc; “to set a person on a
throne,” 2 K 10 3; “the throne of Israel,” 1 K
8 20, etc; “the throne of David,’ 2 8 3 10, ete;
of Solomon, 2 § 7 18, etc; of Joash, 2 Ch 23 20,
etc). In Jer 17 12 it is equivalent to “temple”
(“A glorious throne . . . . is the place of our sanc-
tuary’’); it symbolizes the power of the Gentiles
being hostile to the people of Jeh (Ps 94 20), and
is used metaphorically in Isa 22 28 (‘He [i.e.
Eliakim] shall be for a throne of glory to his father’s
house’’).

_(2) The majesty and power of Jeh as the true
king of Israel; He ‘is enthroned above the cheru-


“shall rule upon his throne” (Zec 6 13). Thus the
permanence of the throne of David is warranted


Egyptian Throne.


(Isa 9 7); eternal peace (1 K 2 33), loving-kind-
ness and justice (Isa 16 5) characterize his reign.
The NT points to Jesus as this promised king (Lk


2977 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Th
1 32; cf Acts 2 30; He 12 2); Christ Himself | (Isa 29 6). Thunder w ded as th i
refers to His future state of glory (Mt 25 31) and | Jeh: “God thundereth Pie eaite of we —


guarantees His faithful disciples a similar dis-
tinction (Mt 19 28; cf Lk 22 30; Rev 20 4).

(4) The matchless glory, the transcendent power
and absolute sovereignty of God (and Christ);


Arm-Chair or Throne (Khorsabad).


Micaiah “saw Jeh sitting on his throne,” etc (1 K
2219; cf 2 Ch 18 18); Isaiah and Ezekiel had
similar visions (Isa 6 1; Ezk 1 26); cf also Dnl
79 and Rev 4 2 (and often); in trying to depict
the incomparable greatness of the King of kings,
the Bible tells us that His throne is in heaven (Ps
11 4, etc) and, moreover, that heaven itself is His
throne (Isa 66 1; Mt 5 34, etc); His reign is
founded on righteousness and justice (Ps 89 14;
cf 97 2) and of eternal duration (Ps 45 6; cf He
18; Lam 6 19); He acts justly and kindly (Ps
9 4 and 89 14); He defends His glory (Jer 14 21);
He manifests His holiness (Ps 47 8) and His grace
(He 4 16), and yet His dealings with us are not
always fully understood by us (Job 26 9).

(5) Heavenly kingdoms or rulers (angels: Col
116). See Kine, Kinepom. Wituiam Baur


THRUM, thrum: In Isa 38 12 RV reads “He
will cut me off from the loom,” m “thrum.”
“Thrum” is a technical term of weavers, denoting
the threads of the warp hanging down in a loom,
suiting T2%, dallah, “that which hangs down”
(Cant 7 5, “hair’’). A misinterpretation of “‘shang-
ing down” is responsible for AV’s “‘pining sickness.”


THUMMIM, thum’im. See Urim anp THum-
MIM.


THUNDER, thun’dér (O77, ra‘am [18 2 10; .


Job 26 14; 89 19; 40 9; Ps 77 18, 81 7; 104 7;
Isa 29 6], DIP, Fol, “a voice” [Ex 9 23; 187
10; 12 17; Job 28 26; 38 25]): Thunder is the
noise resulting from the lightning discharge. It
is very common in the winter storms of Syria
and Pal and occurs in the extra-season storms.
Thunder accompanied the storm of hail in Egypt
at the time of the plagues: “The Lord sent thunder
and hail’ (Ex 9 23). Reise

Lightning and thunder are indications of the
power of Jeh and His might. ‘The thunder of his
power who can understand?” (Job 26 14); “The
God of glory thundereth” (Ps 29 3). Jeh also con-
fused the Philis with thunder (1 S 7 10), and His
foes were “visited of Jeh of hosts with thunder”


cellency” (Job 37 4), and God spoke to Jesus in
the thunder (6povr}, bronté, Jn 12 29). See also
LIGHTNING. Atrrep H. Joy


THYATIRA, thi-a-ti‘ra (@vdrepa, Thudteira):
Thyatira was a wealthy town in the northern part
of Lydia of the Rom province of Asia, on the river
Lycus. It stood so near to the borders of Mysia,
that some of the carly writers have regarded It as
belonging to that country. Its early history is not
well known, for until it was refounded by Scleucus
Nicator (301-281 BC) it was a small, insignificant
town. It stood on none of the Gr trade routes, but
upon the lesser road between Pergamos and Sardis,
and derived its wealth from the Lycus valley in
which it rapidly became a commercial center, but
never a metropolis. The name ‘“Thyatira’”’ means
“the castle of Thya.’’ Other names which it has
borne are Pelopia and Semiramis. Before the time
of Nicator the place was regarded as a holy city,
for there stood the temple of the ancient Lydian
sun-god, Tyrimnos; about it games were held in
his honor. Upon the early coins of Thyatira this
Asiatic god is represented as a horseman, bearing
a double-headed battle-ax, similar to those repre-
sented on the sculptures of the Hittites. A goddess
associated with him was Boreatene, a deity of less
importance. Another temple at Thyatira was
dedicated to Sambethe, and at this shrine was a
prophetess, by some supposed to represent the
Jezebel of Rev 2 20, who uttered the sayings which
this deity would impart to the worshippers.

Thyatira was specially noted for the trade guilds
which were probably more completely organized
there than in any other ancient city. Every artisan
belonged to a gud and every guild, which was
an incorporated organization, possessed property
in its own name, made contracts for great con-
structions, and wielded a wide influence. Power-
ful among them was the guild of coppersmiths;
another was the guild of the dyers, who, it is be-
lieved, made use of the madder-root instead of
shell-fish for making the purple dyestuffs. A
member of this guild seems to have been Lydia of
Thyatira, who, according to Acts 16 14, sold her
dyes in Philippi. The color obtained by the use of
this dye is now called Turkish red. The guilds
were closely connected with the Asiatic religion of
the place. Pagan feasts, with which immoral
practices were associated, were held, and therefore
the nature of the guilds was such that they were
opposed to Christianity. According to Acts 19 10,
Paul may have preached there while he was living
at Ephesus, but this is uncertain; yet Christianity
reached there at an early time. It was taught by
many of the early church that no Christian might
belong to one of the guilds, and thus the greatest
opposition to Christianity was presented.

Thyatira is now represented by the modern town
of Ak-Hissar on a branch line of the Manisa-Soma
Railroad, and on the old Rom road 9 hours from
Sardis. Ak-Hissar is Turkish for ‘‘white castle,”
and near the modern town may be seen the ruins of
the castle from which the name was derived. The
village is of considerable size; most of the houses
are of mud, but several of the buildings erected by
Caracalla are still standing, yet none of them are
perfect. In the higher part of the town are the
ruins of one of the pagan temples, and in the walls
of the houses are broken columns and sarcophagi
and inscribed stones. The population of 20,000 is
largely Gr and Armenian, yet a few Jews live among
them. Before the town is a large marsh, fever-
laden, and esp. unhealthful in the summer time,
formed by the Lycus, which the Turks now call


2978


Thyine Wood = THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA
Geurdeuk Chai. The chief modern industry is rug- | ping el- Melek, “Palace of the King’s Daughter.”
making. E. J. Banks The strong walls of the city can be traced in .


THYINE, thi/‘in, WOOD (fbdov Qtivov, ailon
thiinon): An aromatic wood described as sold in
“Babylon” (Rev 18 12, AVm “sweet wood”). It


wD
Thyine Wood (Callttris quadrivalvis).
is the wood of the thya (6via, thuia) tree, probably
identical with Thuta articulata, an evergreen tree
growing in North Africa,
resembling the cypress,
which in Rom times was
employed for making
valuable furniture.


TIBERIAS, ti-bé’ri-as
(TiPepids, Tiberids, In 6
23): About the middle
of the western shore of
the Sea of Galilee, the
mountains fall back from
the coast, and leave a
roughly crescent-shaped
plain, about 2 miles in
length. The modern city
of Tiberias (T'abariych)
stands at the northern
extremity, where the
ground begins to rise;
and the Hot Baths (Ham-
math) at the south end.
On the southern part of
this plain Herod Antipas
built a city (e 26 AD),
calling it “Tiberias” in
honor of the emperor who
had befriended him. In
clearing the ground and
digging foundations cer-
tain tombs were dis-
turbed (Ant, XVIII, ii, 3). It may have been the
graveyard of old Hammath. The palace, the
famous ‘‘Golden House,” was built on the top of a
rocky hill which rises on the W. to a height of
some 500 ft. The ruin is known today as Kasr


almost their entire length on the landward side.
Parts are also to be seen along the shore, with
towers at intervals which guarded against attack
by sea. The ruins cover a considerable area.
There is nothing above ground older than Herod’s
city. Only excavation can show whether or not
the Talm is right in saying that Tiberias was
built on the site of Rakkath and Chinnereth
(Neubauer, Géog. du Talm, 208). The Jews were
shy of settling in a city built over an old ceme-
tery; and Herod had trouble in finding occupants
for it. A strange company it was that he ulti-
mately gathered of the “poorer people,” foreign-
ers, and others “not quite freemen”; and these
were drawn by the prospect of good houses and land
which he freely promised them. With its stadium,
its palace “with figures of living things,” and its
senate, it may be properly described as a Gr city,
although it also contained a proseuché, or place of
prayer, for the Jews (BJ, II, xxi, 6; Vita, XII, 54,
etc). This accounts for it figuring so little in the
Gospels. In his anxiety to win the favor of the
Jews, Herod built for them ‘‘the finest synagogue in
Galilee’; but many years were to elapse before it
should become a really Jewish city.

Superseding Sepphoris, Tiberias was the capital
of Galilee under Agrippa I and the Rom procura-
tors. It surrendered to Vespasian, and was given
by Nero to Agrippa Il, Sepphoris again becoming
the capital. During the Jewish war its inhabitants
were mainly Jewish, somewhat turbulent and diffi-
cult to manage. In 100 AD, at Agrippa’s death,
the Romans assumed direct control. After the fall
of Jerus, the Sanhedrin retreated to Galilee, first
to Sepphoris, and then to Tiberias. Here, some
time before 220 AD, under supervision of the famous
Rabbi Jehuda ha-Nasi’, ‘‘Judah the Prince,” or,
as he is also called, ha-kadhdsh, “the Holy,” the


Tiberias.


civil and ritual laws, decrees, customs, ete, held to
be of binding obligation, handed down by tradition,
but not having Scriptural authority, were codified
and written down, under the title of “Mishna.”
Here also later was compiled the Jerus Talm


2979


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Thyine Wood
Tiberius


: (Y¢rashalmi), as distinguished from that compiled
in Babylon (Babili). The city thus became a
great center of Jewish learning. Maimonides’
tomb is shown near the town, and that of Akiba
on the slope of the mountain, where it is said
24,000 of his disciples are buried with him.

In Christian times Tiberias was the seat of a
bishop. It fell to the Moslems in 637. It changed
hands several times as between the Crusaders and
the Saracens. It was finally taken by the Moslems
in 1247.

The inclosing walls of the modern city, and the
castle, now swiftly going to ruin, were built by
Tancred and repaired by Daher el-‘Omar in 1730.
There are over 5,000 inhabitants, mostly Jews, in
whose hands mainly is the trade of the place. The
fishing in the lake, m which some 20 boats are occu-
pied, is carried on by Moslems and Christians.
Tiberias is the chief inhabited place on the lake, to
which as in ancient days it gives its name, Bahr
Tabariyeh, “Sea of Tiberias” (Jn 6 1; 211). It
is the market town for a widedistrict. The opening
of the Haifa-~-Damascus Railway has quickened the
pulse of life considerably. A steamer and motor
boat ply between the town and the station at
Semach, bringing the place into easy touch with the
outside world. The water of the lake is largely used
for all purposes, although there are cisterns for rain
water under some of the houses.

After a residence of over five years in the city, the
present writer can say that it does not deserve the
evil reputation which casual travelers have given it.
In matters of cleanliness and health it stands com-
parison very well with other oriental towns. Some-
times, in east wind, it is very hot, the thermometer
registering over 114° Fahr. in the shade. The
worst time is just at the beginning of the rainy
season, when the impurities that have gathered in
the drought of summer are washed into the sea,
contaminating the water.

The United Free Church of Scotland has here a
well-equipped mission to the Jews. W. Ewine


TIBERIAS, SEA OF.


TIBERIUS, ti-bé’ri-us (TuPépios, Tibérios): The
2d Rom emperor; full name Tiberius Claudius
ero, and official name as emperor
1. Name ‘Tiberius Caesar Augustus; born No-
and Parent- vember 16, 42 BC. His father—of
age the same name—had been an officer
under Julius Caesar and had later
joined Antony against Octavian (Augustus). His
mother was Livia, who became the 3d wife of Augus-
tus; thus T. was a stepson of Augustus.
Much of his early life was spent in successful
campaigning. Although the ablest of the possible
heirs of Augustus, T. was subjected to


See GALILEE, Sua oF.


2. Early many an indignity, Augustus accept-
Life and ing him as his successor_only when
Relation to every other hope failed. When Julia,
Augustus daughter of Augustus, became a widow


for the second time (12 BC), T. was

obliged to marry her (11 BC) in order to become
protector of the future emperors. For, this purpose
he was compelled to divorce his wife, Vipsania
Agrippina, who had borne hima son, Drusus. Julia
brought T. nothing but shame, and for her immoral-
ity was banished by her father (2 BC). T. was
consul in 12 BC, and received the proconsular
authority, 9 BC. He carried on successful wars in
Pannonia, Dalmatia, Armenia and Germany. He
retired in disgust to voluntary exile at Rhodes where
“he spent several years in study. In 2 AD, he re-
turned to Rome, and lived there in retirement, 2-4
AD. OnJune 27,4 AD, T. and Agrippa Postumus
were adopted by Augustus. From this date on T.


came more and more into prominence, receiving
the tribunician power for 10 years.
In 13 AD (or according to Mommsen 11 AD) T.
was by a special law raised to the co-regency.
Augustus died August 19, 14 AD, and
3. Reign TT. succeeded. A mutiny in the Rhine
; legions was suppressed by Germanicus.
The principal events of his reign (see also below)
were the campaigns of Germanicus and Drusus, the
withdrawal of the Romans to the Rhine, the settle-
ment of the Armenian question, the rise and fall of
Sejanus, the submission of Parthia. In 26 AD, T.
retired to Capreae, where rumor attributed to him
every excess of debauchery. On March 16, 37 AD,
T. died at Misenum and was succeeded by Caius.
On the whole, T. followed the conservative policy
of Augustus and maintained the “diarchy.” But
he approached nearer to monarchy by
4, Admin- receiving supreme power for an indefi-
istration nite period. He went beyond Augus-
tus in practically excluding the people
from government by transferring the right of elec-


_tion from the comitia of the people to the senate,


leaving to the people the right merely to acclaim
the nominees of the senate, and further by imposing
laws upon the people without their counsel or dis-
cussion. He established a permanent praetorian
camp at Rome—a fact of great importance in later
Rom history. The administration of T. was that of
a wise, intelligent statesman with a strong sense of
duty. The civil service was improved, and officers
were kept longer at their posts to secure efficiency.
Taxes were light on account of his economy. Pub-
lic security increased. He paid attention to the
administration of justice and humane laws were
placed on the statute-book.
Though T. was unpopular, he left the empire in
a state of prosperity and peace. Of his character
: the most opposite views are held.
5. Character His fame has suffered esp. from his
suspecting nature, which extended the
law of majestas to offences against his person and
encouraged delation, which made the latter part of
his reign one of terror. The tyranny of Sejanus,
too, has been laid upon his shoulders, and he has
been accused of the wildest excesses in his retreat
at Capreae—a charge which seems to be refuted by
the fact that no interruption to his wise adminis-
tration took place. His character has been black-
ened most by Tacitus and Suetonius. But on
nearer criticism T.’s character will appear in better
light. No doubt, toward the close of his reign he
degenerated, but his cruelties affected only the upper
classes. He was called a tyrant and was refused
deification after death, and Augustus was said to
have prophesied ‘“‘Alas for the Rom people who
shall Be ground under such slow jaws.” TT. was
stern and taciturn, critical with himself and, soured
by his own disappointments, was suspicious of others.
Pliny the Elder calls him “the gloomiest of men.”
Much of his unpopularity was due to his inscruta-
bility, to the fact that people could not understand
him or penetrate into the mystery of his motives.
He rarely took counsel with anyone. His life was
frugal and modest—a rebuke to the contemporary
dissipation. He felt contempt for the inanities of
court life, and was supremely indifferent to public
opinion, but actuated by a strong sense of duty.
The reign of T.is memorable as that in which fell
Our Lord’s public ministry, death and resurrection.
. It also witnessed the preaching of
6. Tiberius John the Baptist (Lk 3 1), the conver-
and the NT sionof Pauland perhapshisfirst preach-
ing, the martyrdom of Stephen and
the first Christian persecution (by the Jews). Ti-
berius is mentioned by name only once in the NT
(Lk 31): “the 15th year of the reign [7yevorla,


Tibhath
Time


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2980


hégemonia] of Tiberius.” The question is, From
what date is this to be reckoned—the date of T.’s
co-regency, 13 (or 11) AD, or from his accession,
14AD? He is the “Caesar” mentioned in the Gos-


represent T., if not friendly to the new faith, at
least as condemning the action of Pilate. Accord-
ing to Justin (Apol., 1.35), Tertullian (Apol., 21)
and Eusebius (7 £, II, ii), Pilate reported to T. about
the trial and crucifixion of Jesus—and some snch
report is not improbable. According to one apocry-
phal tradition, T. actually summoned Pilate to
Rome to answer for crucifying Jesus. It is true
that Pilate was sent to Rome by the governor of
Syria to answer to a charge of unjustifiable cruelty,
but T. died before Pilate reached Rome.

Under T., Pal was governed by Rom procurators.
Toward the Jews in Italy, T. showed some intoler-

ance. In 19 AD all the Jews were
7. Tiberius expelled from Rome according to Jos
and the (Ant, XVIII, iii, 5), from Italy accord-
Jews ing to Tacitus (Ann. 11.85), and 4,000

Jewish freedmen were deported to
Sardinia to reduce bands of brigands. Philo at-
tributes this severity to Sejanus, and says that after
Sejanus’ fall T., recognizing that the Jews had been
persecuted without cause, gave orders that officials
should not annoy them or disturb their rites. They
were therefore probably allowed to return to Rome
(see Schtirer, III, 60f, 4th ed).

LitERATURE.—(a) Ancient lit.,as modern, Is divided
on its estimate of T.; Tac. Annals i-vi; Dio Casslus
Rom. Hist. xivi-xlviii, and Suetonius Tb. painting him
in the darkest colors, while Velleius Paterculus II gives
the other side. (6) Of modern lit. it is enough to cite
on opposite sides: J. C. Tarver, Tiberius the Tyrant,
1902; lhne, Zur Ehrenrettung des K. Tib., 1892, and the
moderate estimate of Merivale, Romans under the Empire.

S. Ancus

TIBHATH, tib’hath (MNAY, tibhhath; MeraBn-
x4s, Metabéchds, A, MareBé0, Matebéth; Vulg The-
bath; Pesh Tebhah): A city of Hadadezer, king of
Zobah, from which David took much of the brass
used later by Solomon in the construction of the
temple-furnishings (1 Ch 188). In2 5 8 8 wemust
for the betak of the MT read with theSyr Tebhah. It
may be the same as the Tudzhi of the Am Tab; the
Dibhu of the Karnak lists; and the Tubtht men-
tioned with Kadesh on the Orontes in the ‘‘Travels
of an Egyptian” in the reign of Rameses II]. The
site is unknown, but it must have been on the east-
ern slopes of Anti-Lebanon, between which and the
Euphrates we must locate Hadadezer’s kingdom of
Zobah. ‘“Tebah” occurs also as an Aram. personal
or tribal name in Gen 22 24. W. M. Cuarisme


TIBNI, tib’ni CaM, uibhni; B, Qapvel, Thamnet,
A, QOopvl, Thamni, Luc., OaPevvel, Thabennet):
A rival of Omri for the throne of Israel after the
death of Zimri (1 K 16 2if). This is the only
reference to Tibni that has come down to us} a
comparison of this passage with the account of
Zimri’s death (esp. ver 15) shows that the length of
the struggle was four years.


TIDAL, tidal OPIN, tidh'al; Oaryd, Thalgd,


Oaryda, Thalgdl, E, Oapyad, Thargdl): Tidal is
mentioned in Gen 14 1.9 in the ac-


1. The count of the expedition of Chedorlao-
Name and mer of Elam, with his allies, Amraphel
Its Forms of Shinar (Babylonia), Arioch of


Ellasar, and Tidal, who is called “king
of nations” (AV) (gsyim, Tg ‘ammin). Whether the


last-named took part in this expedition as one of
Chedorlaomer’s vassals or not is unknown. The
Gr form possibly points to an earlier pronunciation
Tadgal.
The only name in the cuneiform inscriptions re-
sembling Tidal is Tudula, or, as it was probably
later pronounced, Tudul. This, from
2. Its Baby- its form, might be Sumerian, meaning
lonian “eyil progeny,” or the like. In addi-
Equivalent tion to the improbability of a name
with such a signification, however, his
title “king of goyim,” or “nations,” in Gen 14 1,
presupposes a ruler of another race.
The inscription in which the name Tudhula
occurs is one of three of late date (4th to 3d cent.
BC), all referring, apparently, to the


3. The same historical period. The text in
Babylonian question (Sp. iii.2) is of unbaked clay,
Tudhala and is broken and defaced. After
and His referring to a ruler who did not main-
Time tain the temples, Durmah-ilani son of


Eri-Aku (Arioch) is referred to, ap-
parently as one who ravaged the country, and
“waters [came] over Babylon and E-sagila,” its
great temple. The words which follow suggest that
Durmab-ilani was slain by his son, after which a
new invader appeared, who would seem to have
been Tudhula, son of Gazzi(ni?). He likewise
ravaged the land, and floods again invaded Baby-
lon and E-sagila. To all appearance he met with
the fate which overtook Durmab-ilani—death at
the hands of his son, who “smote his head.”” Then
came the Elamite, apparently Chedorlaomer, who
was likewise slain. ‘This inscription, therefore, gave
historical quotations of the fate which overtook
those who were regarded as enemies of the gods.

Though we have here the long-sought name of
Tidal, it may legitimately be doubted whether this
personage was the ruler of that name


4. Doubts mentioned in Gen 14. The “nations”
as to His (gdyim) which he ruled are regarded by
Identity Sayce as having been wandering hordes


(umman manda), probably Medes.
On the other hand, the occurrence of the name Dud-
halia, son of Hattu8il (Khetasir), contemporary of
Rameses IT, in the inscriptions found at Hattu, the
capital of the Hittites, suggests that that extensive
confederation may have been the “nations” referred
to. In cther words, Tidal or Tudhula (for Dud-
falia) was an earlier ruler bearing the same name as
Yattusil’s son. If he be, as is possible, the same
personage as is mentioned in Gen 14,
5. Probably he must have fought against Arioch’s
a Hittite son, conquered his domains and been
killed, in his turn, by either the Bib.
Chedorlaomer or another Elamite ruler bearing the
same or a similar name. See AMRAPHEL; ARIOCH;
CHEDORLAOMER; Ert-Axu; Nations.
T. G. Prncugs
TIDINGS, ti’dingz, GLAD. See Guan Trnras.


TIGLATH-PILESER, tig-lath-pi-lé’ zér, -pi-lée'zér
(AON2B main , tighlath pil’eger, as the name is read
in 2 K, 20238 NASM, tilleghath pilneser, in 2 Ch;
LXX ‘AdyabdedrAacdp, Algathphellasir; Assyr,
Tukulti-abal-\-sarra): King of Assyria in the days
of Menahem, Pekahiah, and Pekah, kings of Israel,
and of Uzziah, Jotham and Ahaz, kings of Judah.
The king of Assyria, whom the historian of 2 K
knows as exacting tribute from Menahem, is Pul
(2 K 15 19f). In the days of Pekah who had
usurped the throne of Menahem’s son and successor,
Pekahiah, the king of Assyria is known as Tiglath-
pe who invaded Naphtali and carried the in-

abitants captive to Assyria (2 K 16 29). This


2981


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tibhath
Time


invasion is described by the Chronicler (1 Ch 5
25 f) rather differently, to the effect that ‘‘the God
of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria,
and the spirit of Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria,
and he carried them away, even the Reubenites,
and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh,
and brought them unto Halah, and
Habor, and Hara, and to the river
of Gozan, untothisday.” Still later
we find Pekah forming a coalition
with Rezin, king of Damascus, into
which they tried to force Ahaz, even
going the length of besieging him in
Jerus (2 K 16 5). The siege was
unsuccessful, Ahaz called in the aid
of Tiglath-pileser, sacrificing his
independence to get rid of the in-
vaders (2 K 167.8). He offered
the Assyrian the silver and gold
that were found in the house of the
Lord and in the royal treasury; and
Tiglath-pileser, in return, invaded
the territories of Damascus and
Israel in the rear, compelling the allied forces to
withdraw from Judah, while he captured Damascus,
and carried the people away to Kir and slew Rezin
(2 K 16 9). It was on the occasion of his visit to
Damascus to do homage to his suzerain Tiglath-
pileser, that, Ahaz fancied the idolatrous altar, a
pees of which he sent to Urijah, the priest, that

e might erect an altar to take the place of the
brazen altar which was before the Lord in the
temple at Jerus. It is a significant comment which
is made by the Chronicler (2 Ch 28 21) upon the
abject submission of Ahaz to the Assyrian king:
“Tt helped him not.”

From the inscriptions we learn particulars which
afford striking corroboration of the Bib. narrative
and clear up some of the difficulties involved. It is
now practically certain that Pul, who is mentioned
ag taking tribute from Menahem, is identical with
Tiglath-pileser (Schrader, COT, I, 230, 231). In
all probability Pul, or Pulu, was a usurper, who as
king of Assyria assumed the name of one of his
predecessors, Tiglath-pileser I, and reigned as Tig-
lath-pileser III. This king of Assyria, who reigned,
as we learn from his annals, from 745 BC to 727 BC,
was one of the greatest of Assyr monarchs. See
Assyria. From the fact that no fewer than five
Heb kings are mentioned in his annals, the greatest
interest attaches to his history as it has come down
to us. These kings are Uzziah or Azariah, and
Jehoahaz, that is Ahaz, of Judah; and Menahem,
Pekah and Hoshea of Israel. Along with them are
mentioned their contemporaries Rezin of Damascus,
Hiram of Tyre, and two queens of Arabia, other-
wise unknown, Zabibi and Samsi. When he died
in 727 BC, he was succeeded by Shalmaneser IV,
who had occasion to suspect the loyalty of his vas-
gal Hoshea, king of Israel, and besieged him in
Samaria.

Lirzeraturs.—Schrader, COT, I, 229-57; McCurdy,
HP M, §§ 279-341.

T. Nrcou


TIGRIS, ti’gris (Ttypts, Tigris, the Gr equivalent
of the Heb Spam , hiddekel): One of the rivers of
Eden going “eastward to Assyria” (Gen 2 14m),
called the Great River (Dnl 10 4), elsewhere men-
tioned in the apocryphal books, as in Tob 6 1;
Jth 1 6; Ecclus 24 25, called Diglath in Jos, and
Diglit in Pliny, now called in Mesopotamia Dijleh,
generally supposed to be a Sem corruption of Tigra,
meaning originally an arrow, which from its rapid-
ity of motion is symbolized. The Tigris rises in the
mountains of Armenia, lat. 38° 10’, long. 39° 20’,
only a few miles from the main branch of the


Tiglath-Pileser

(from Rock

Tablet near
Korkhar).


Euphrates. After pursuing a tortuous south-
easterly course for 150 miles, it is joined by the
east branch at Osman Kieui, some distance below
Diarbekr. Here the stream is 450 ft. wide and 3 or
4 ft. deep, Passing through numerous mountain
gorges for another 150 miles, it emerges into the
region of low hills about Nineveh, and a little below
into the great alluvial plain of Mesopotamia.
Thence in its course to Bagdad it is joined by the
Great Zab, the Lesser Zab, the Adhem, and the
Diyaleh rivers, bringing a large amount of water
from the Zagros Mountains. At Bagdad the over-
flows from the Euphrates in high water often increase
the inundations. The flood season begins early in
the month of March, reaching its climax about May
1, declining to its natural level by midsummer.
In October and November, the volume of water in-
creases considerably, but not so much as to over-
flow its banks. Below Bagdad, throughout the
region of Babylonia proper, the Tigris joins with
the Euphrates in furnishing the water for irrigation
so successfully used in ancient times. English
engineers are at present with great promise of suc-
cess aiming to restore the irrigating systems of the
region and the prosperity of ancient times. The
total length of the river is 1,146 miles. It now
joins the Euphrates about 40 miles N.W. of the
Pers Gulf, the two streams there forming the Shat
el Arab, but in early historical times they entered
the Pers Gulf by separate mouths, the Gulf then
extending a considerable distance above the present
junction of the rivers, the sediment of the streams
having silted up the head of the Gulf to that dis-
tance. Seealso Epen.
Grorcs Freprericx WRIGHT

TIKVAH, tik’va, TIKVATH, tik’vath (IPM,
tikwah, “hope’’):

(1) The father-in-law of Huldah the prophetess
(2 K 22 14) (B, Gexxovat, Thekkouai, A, Oexxové,
Thekkoué, Luc., @exové, Thekoué), called in 2 Ch 34
22 “Tokhath” (Kré MPH, Kethibh MTP WN; B,
Kaéovdd, Kathoudl, A, Gaxovdé, Thakoudth, Luc.,
Oexwd, Thekaé). The reading of 2 K is to be pre-
ferred.

(2) The father of Jahzeiah (Ezr 10 15) (B,
"EAxed, Helkeid, A, Gexové, Thekoué, called ‘“The-
ocanus,” RV ‘Thocanus’ in 1 Esd 9 14).


TILE, til, TILING, til'ing (TRAD, Ebhenah,
“brick,” Ezk 4 1; képapos, kéramos, “potter’s clay,”
“9 tile,’ Lk 5 19). See Ezexist, II, 1, (2); House,
II, 1, (10).


TILGATH-PILNESER, til’gath-pil-né’zér, -sér.
See T1GLATH-PILESER.


TILLAGE, til’4j.


TILON, ti’lon (JM, tilon; Kethibh PAN,
Ker JDM; B, "Ivdv, Indn, A, Odrdv, Thildn, Luc.,
Owrelp, Tholeim): A son of Shimon (1 Ch 4 20).


See AGRICULTURE.


TIMAEUS, ti-mé’us (Tipaios, Timatos [Mk 10
46]; EV “Timaeus’’). See Barrimazts.

TIMBREL, tim’brel. See Music, ITI, 3, (1).

TIME, tim: The basis of the Heb measurement
of time was the day and the lunar month, as
with the Semites generally. The division of the
day into hours wala probably not common until
after the exile, although the sun-dial of Ahaz (2 K
20 9; Isa 38 8) would seem to indicate some
division of the day into periods of some sort, as we
know the night was divided. The word used for


Time
Timothy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2982


“hour” is Aram. NW, shea’ (NYU, sha'ta’), and
does not occur in the OT until the Book of Dnl
(4 33; 5 5), and even there it stands for an indefi-
nite period for which ‘‘time’ would answer as well.

The term “day” (O19, yém) was in use from the
earliest. times, as is indicated in the story of the

Creation (Gen 1). It there doubt-
1. The Day less denotes an indefinite period, but

jis marked off by “evening and morn-
ing’ in accordance with what we know was the
method of reckoning the day of 24 hours, ie. from
sunset to sunset.

The night was divided, during preéxilic times, into
three divisions called watches (VOR , ’ashmirah,
NAAN, ’ashmdreth), making periods
of varying length, as the night was
longer or shorter (Jgs 7 19). This
division is referred to in various passages of the
OT, but nowhere with indication of definite limits
(see Ps 90 4; 119 148; Jer 5112; Hab 2 1).

In the NT we find the Rom division of the night
into four watches (¢vAaK}, phulaké) in use (Mt 14
25; Mk 6 48), but it is probable that the former
division still persisted. The use of the term “day”
for the period from sunrise to sunset, or for day as
distinguished from night, was common, as at present
(Josh 10 13; Ps 19 2; Prov 4 18; Isa 27 3; Jn
9 4, ete). But the use of the word in the in-
definite sense, as in the expressions: “day of the
Lord,” “in that day,’’ “the day of judgment,” etc,
is far more frequent (see Day). Other more or less
indefinite periods of the day and night are: dawn,
dawning of the day, morning, evening, noonday,
midnight, cock-crowing or crowing of the cock,
break of day, etc.

The weekly division of time, or the seven-day
period, was in use very early and must have been

known to the Hebrews before the
3. Week Mosaic Law, since it was in use in
Babylonia before the days of Abraham
and is indicated in the story of the Creation. The
Heb YiBW, shabha**, used in the OT for ‘‘week,” is
derived from YAW, shebha‘, the word for “seven.”
As the seventh day was a day of rest, or Sabbath
(Heb M2W, shabbath), this word came to be used
for “week,” as appears in the NT (caBfarédy,-rd, sab-
batén,-id), indicating the period from Sabbath to
Sabbath (Mt 28 1). The same usage is implied
in the OT (Lev 23 15; 26 8). The days of the
week were indicated by the numerals, first, second,
etc, save the seventh, which was the Sabbath. In
NT times Friday was called the day of preparation
(wapackev}, paraskeué) for the Sabbath (Lk 23 54).

The monthly division of time was determined, of
course, by the phases of the moon, the appearance
of the new moon being the beginning
of the month, WIN, hadhesh. Another
term for month was yerah (77),
meaning ‘‘moon,” which was older and derived from
the Phoen usage, but which persisted to late times,
since it is found in the Aram. inscriptions of the 3d
cent. AD in Syria. The names of the months were
Bab and of late origin among the Hebrews, prob-
ably coming into use during and after the Captivity.
But they had other names, of earlier use, derived
from the Phoenicians, four of which have survived
in “Abib,” “Ziv,” “Ethanim” and “Bul” (see
CALENDAR). '

The Heb year (13W , sh@ndh) was composed of 12
or 13 months, the latter being the year when an
intercalary month was added to make
the lunar correspond with the solar
year. As the difference between the
two was from ten to eleven days, this required the


2. Night


4. Month


6. Year


addition of a month once in about three years, or
seven in nineteen years. This month was added at
the vernal equinox and was called after the month
next preceding, w-’ddhar, or the “second Adar.”
We do not know when this arrangement_was first
adopted, but it was current after the Captivity.
There were two years in use, the civil and the ritual,
or sacred year. The former began in the autumn,
as would appear from Ex 23 16; 34 22, where it
is stated that the ‘feast of ingathering”’ should be
at the end of the year, and the Sabbatic year began
in the 7th month of the calendar or sacred year,
which would correspond to September-October (Lev
25 9). Jos says (Ant, I, iii, 3) that Moses desig-
nated Nisan (March-April) as the 1st month of the
festivals, i.e. of the sacred year, but preserved the
original order of the months for ordinary affairs,
evidently referring to the civil year. This usage
corresponds to that of the Turkish empire, where
the sacred year is lunar and begins at different
seasons, but the financial and political year begins
in March O.S. The beginning of the year was
called MPWT WN", 7d’sh ha-shandh, and was deter-
mined by the priests, as was the beginning of the
month. Originally this was done by observation
of the moon, but, later, calculation was em-
ply in connection with it, until finally a system

ased on-accurate calculation was adopted, which
was not until the 4th cent. AD. New-Year was
regarded as a festival. See Astronomy, I, 5;
YEAR.

The return of the seasons was designated by

summer and winter, or seed-time and harvest; for

they were practically the same. There
6. Seasons is, in Pal, a wet season, extending from

October to March or April, and a dry
season comprising the remainder of the year. The
first is the winter ((°1, héreph), and this is the
seed-time (77, zera‘), esp. the first part of it called
yoreh (VIP), or the time of the early rain; the
second is the summer (J P, ayzg, “fruit-harvest,”
or WEP, kacir, “harvest’’).

Seed-time begins as soon as the early rains have
fallen in sufficient quantity to moisten the earth for
plowing, and the harvest begins in some parts, as
in the lower Jordan region, near the Dead Sea,
about April, but on the high lands a month or two
later. The fruit harvest comes in summer proper
and continues until the rainy season. “The time
when kings go out to war” (28 11 1; 1 K 20 22)
probably refers to the end of the rainy season in
Nisan.

We have no mention in the OT of any era for time
reckoning, and we do not find any such usage until the

time of the Maccahees. There are occa-

7. No Era might have served for eras had they been
generally adopted. Such was the Exodus

in the account of the building of the temple (1 K 6 1)
and the Captivity, (Ezk 33 21; 401) and the Earth-
quake (Am 1). Dates were usually fixed by the regnal
years of the kings, and of the Pers kings after the Captiv-
ity. When Simon the Maccahee became independent of
the Sefeucid kings {n 143-142 or 139-138 BC, he seems to
have established an era of his own, lf we may attribute
to him a series of coins dated by the years ‘‘of the inde-
pondea of Israel" (see Corns: Money; also 1 Macc
§ 41 and 15 6.10). The Jews doubtless were famillar
with the Seleucid era, which began in 312 BC, and with
some of the local eras of the Phoen cities, hut we have no


evidence that they made use of them. The era of the
Creation was not adopted by them until after the time


sional references to certain events which


of Christ. This was fixed at 3,830 years hefore the
destruction of the later temple, or 3760 BC. See
RAs
H. Porrer


TIME, LAST. Set Last Tre.


TIME, TIMES AND A HALF (Dnl 12 7; cf
7 25; Rev 12 14): A luni-solar cycle. See As-
Tronomy, I, 5.


2983


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Time
Timothy


TIMES, OBSERVER OF. See Divination;
Maarc.


TIMNA, tim'na (VIAN, timna‘; Oapvd, Thamnd):
A concubine of Eliphaz, Esau’s son, and the mother
of Amalek (Gen 36 12). But in Gen 36 22 and
1 Ch 1 39 Timna is the sister of Lotan, and in
Gen 36 40 and 1 Ch 1 51 a chief or clan of Edom
(see Timnau, [8]). These variations are to be ex-
pected when the origin of genealogies is recalled.
(In Gen EV reads, contrary to rule, “Timnah.”’)
uote theory is that Gen 36 12a is a later inser-

ion in P.


TIMNAG, tim’na (139M, timnah, MMO, tim-
nathah [Josh 19 438; Jgs 14 1.2.5], “allotted por-
tion”; B, Oapvaéa, Thamndtha, also several Gr
variations; AV has Timnath in Gen 38 12.13.14;
Jgs 14 1.2.5; and Thimnathah in Josh 19 48):

(1) A town in the southern part of the hill country
of Judah (Josh 15 57). Tibna proposed by Conder,
a ruin 8 miles W. of Bethlehem, seems too far N.
(PEF, III, 58, Sh XVII). It is possible this may
be the ‘“‘Timnah” of Gen 88 12.13.14.

(2) A town on the northern border of Judah
(Josh 16 10), lying between Beth-shemesh and
Ekron. It is probably the same Timnah as Judah
visited (Gen 38 12-14), and certainly the scene of
Samson’s adventures (Jgs 14 1f); his ‘‘father-in-
law” is called a “Timnite’ (Jgs 15 6). At this
time the place is clearly Philistine (Jgs 14 1),
though in Josh 19 43 it is reckoned to Dan. Being
on the frontier, it probably changed hands several
times. In 2 Ch 28 18 it was captured from the
Philis by Ahaz, and we learn from Assyr evidence
(Prison Inscription) that Sennacherib captured a
Tamna after the battle of Alteka before he besieged
Ekron (Schrader, Die Keilinschrifien und das AT,
170). The site is undoubted. It is now a deserted
ruin called Tibneh on the southern slopes of the
Wady es Surér (Valley of Sorek), about 2 miles W.
of Beth-shemesh. There is a spring, and there are
a signs of antiquity (PEF, ll, 417, 441, Sh
XVI).

(3) There was probably a Timna in Edom (Gen
36 12.22.40; 1 Ch 1 39.51). Eusebius and Jerome
(Onom) recognized a, Thamna in Edom at their time.

(4) The “Thamnatha” of 1 Macc 9 50 (AV)
is probably another Timnah, and identical with the
Thamna of Jos (BJ, III, iii, 5; IV, viii, 1). This
is probably the Tibneh, 10 miles N.W. of Bethel, an
extensive ruin. E. W. G. Masterman


TIM NATH, tim’nath. See Timnag.


TIMNATH-HERES, tim-nath-hé’réz, t.-hé’rez
(DIN MII, tmnath heres, “portion of the sun”;
B, Oapvaddpes, Thamnathdres, A, Gapvabdp tws,
Thamnathér; héds): This is the form of the name
given to Joshua’s property and place of burial in Jgs
29. The name in Josh 19 50; 24 30 is Timnath-
serah, ‘“Serah’” simply reverses the order of the
letters in “Heres.’’? Scholars are divided in opinion
as to which form is correct. It is possible that the
change from Heres to Serah may have been delib-
erate, in order to avoid a form which might savor
of idolatry—sun-worship. The Jews and Samari-
tans hold that Heres is the original form.

W. Ewina

TIMNATH-SERAHG, tim-nath-sé'ra (TI9 NAN,
timnath serah; B, @apapxdpqs, .Thamarchdrés, A,
Oapalcapd, Thamathsard): ‘This place, assigned as
an inheritance to Joshua, is described as being in
Mt. Ephraim, on the north side of the mountain of
Gaash (Josh 19 50; 24 380). Here, when his work
was done, the great leader was laid to rest. The


mountain of Gaash unfortunately cannot be identi-
fied. Jos says that Joshua was buried at Thamna,
a city of Ephraim (Ant, V, i, 29), which probably
corresponds to Thamna, the head of a Jewish
toparchy (BJ, III, iii, 5). Vespasian marched from
Thamnatha to Lydda, which apparently was near
(IV, viii, 1). The place was taken and reduced to
slavery by Cassius (Ant, XIV, xi, 2). It was put
in charge of John the Essene at the beginning of the
Jewish war (BJ, IL, xx, 4). Onom (s.v. ““Thamna”


-and ‘“Thamnathsara”) identifies it with ‘“Timnath”


of Gen 38 12 AV, placing it in the mountain in the
tribe of Dan (or Judah), on the way from Diospolis
(Lydda) to Jerus. The tomb of Joshua was atill
shown there. This points to Tibneh, in the uplands
12 miles N.E. of Lydda. S. of the village, in the
face of a rock, are a series of rock-hewn tombs, the
largest of which, containing 14 loculi, and a small
chamber behind with one loculus, may be that asso-
ciated with Joshua by Onom. A giant oak grows
hard by, perhaps the greatest tree in Pal. Kefr
Ishi‘a, ‘village of Joshua,’’ lies about 3 miles to the
E. This identification is now generally accepted.
The Sam tradition points to the tomb of Joshua
at Kefr Haris, 9 miles S. of Nablus. Outside the
village to the E. are two shrines. One is called
Neby Kifl, the other Neby Kala‘a. The former,
“prophet of division,” or “‘of the portion,” might
apply to Joshua; the latter is identified with Caleb.
This identification assumes that the first element
of the name has fallen out, the second only sur-
viving. W. Ewine


TIMNITE, tim’nit C2AM, timni; Oapvabatos,
Thamnathatos): The father of Samson’s wife, a
native of Timnah (Jgs 15 6).


TIMON, ti’mon (Tlpwov, Timén): One of “the
seven’’ chosen to relieve the apostles by attending
to “the daily ministration” to the poor of the Chris-
tian community in Jerus (Acts 6 5). The name
is Greek, but as Nicolaiis is distinguished from the
remaining six as a proselyte, Timon and the others
were probably Jews by birth.


TIMOTHEUS, ti-md’thé-us (Tipeteos, Timd-
theos):

et A leader of the children of Ammon who was
on several occasions severely defeated by Judas
Maccabaeus (1 Macc 5 6ff.84 ff; 2 Macc 8 30;
9 3; 10 24; 12 2.18 ff) in 165-163 BC. Accord-
ing to 2 Mace 10 37, he was slain at Gazara after
having hidden in a cistern. But in 2 Mace 12 2
he is again at liberty as an opponent of the Jews,
and in 12 24f he falls into the hands of Dositheus
and Sosipater, but by representing that many Jew-
ish captives were at his mercy and likely to suffer
if he were put to death, he is again released. These
discrepancies are so great—though not unusual in
2 Macc—that some suppose another Timotheus
is referred to in 12 2ff. He is most probably the
game person, the careless author of 2 Mace making
a slip in saying Timotheus was killed at Gazara.
He probably escaped by hiding in the cistern. The
Gr name for an Ammonite leader is striking: (a)
he may have been a genuine Ammonite with a Gr
name, or (b) a Syro-Macedonian officer placed by
Syrian authority over the Ammonites, or (c) a Gr
soldier of fortune invited by the Ammonites to be
their commander.


(2) See next article. 8. Aneus

TIMOTHY, tim’6-thi (Tipdeos, Timédiheos
[Acts 17 14; 18 5; 19 22; 20 4; Rom 16 21;
1 Cor 417; 1610; 2 Cor 11.19; Phil1l1; 2


19; Coli i; 1Thess11; 32.6; 2 Thess 1 1;
1 Tim 1 2.18; 6 20; 2 Tim 1 2; Philem ver 1;


Timothy
Tiphsah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2984


He 13 23; AV Timotheus): Timothy was one of
the best known of Paul’s companions and fellow-


laborers. He was evidently one of
1. One of Paul’s own converts, as the apostle de-
Paul’s scribes him as his beloved and faithful
Converts son in the Lord (1 Cor 4 17); and in


1 Tim 1 2 he writes to “Timothy my
true child in faith”; and in 2 Tim 1 2 he addresses
him as ‘‘Timothy my beloved child.”

He was a resident, and apparently a native, either
of Lystra or Derbe, cities which were visited and
evangelized by Paul on his 1st mis-
2. A Native sionary journey (Acts 14 6). It is
of Lystra probable that of these two cities, it
was Lystra that was T.’s native place.
For instance, in Acts 20 4 in a list of Paul’s friends
there are the names of “Gaius of Derbe, and
Timothy”; this evidently infers that T. was not
“of Derbe.” And in Acts 16 3, the brethren who
gave Paul the good report of T. were “at Lystra
and Iconium”; the brethren from Derbe are not
mentioned. Lystra was evidently T.’s native city.
In 2 Tim 3 10.11 Paul mentions that T. had
fully known the persecutions and_afflictions which
came to him at Antioch, at Iconium and
8. Convert- at Lystra. These persecutions occurred
ed at Lystra during the apostle’s first visit to these
towns; and T. seems to have been one
of those who were converted at that time, as we find
that on Paul’s next visit to Lystra and Derbe, T.
was already one of the Christians there: ‘He came
also to Derbe and to Lystra: and behold a certain
disciple was there, named Timothy” (Acts 16 1).
T. was now chosen by Paul to be one of his com-
panions. This was at an early period in Paul’s
apostolic career, and it is pleasing to find that to the
end of the apostle’s life T. was faithful to him.
T.’s father was a heathen Greek (Héllén, not
Hellénistés, a Gr-speaking Jew); this fact is twice
mentioned (Acts 16 1.3). His mother
4. His was a Jewess, but he had not been
Father and circumcised im infancy, probably ow-
Mother ing to objections made by his father.

T.’s mother was called Eunice, and
his grandmother Lois. Paul mentions them by
name in 2 Tim 1 5; he there speaks of the un-
feigned faith which was in T., and which dwelt
at the first in Eunice and Lois, It is evident that
Eunice was converted to Christ on Paul’s Ist mis-
sionary journey to Derbe and Lystra, because, when
he next. visited these cities, she is spoken of as “a
Jewess who believed” (Acts 16 1).

On this 2d visit to Derbe and Lystra, Paul was
strongly attracted to T., and seeing his unfeigned
faith, and that from a child he had

6. Becomes known the sacred Scriptures of the
a Co-worker OT (2 Tim 3 15), and seeing also his
with Paul Christian character and deportment,
and his entire suitability for the work

of the ministry, he would have him ‘‘to go forth with
him” (Acts 16 3). T. acquiesced in Paul’s desire,
and as preliminaries to his work as a Christian mis-
sionary, both to Jew and Gentile, two things were
done. In order to conciliate the Jewish Christians,
who would otherwise have caused trouble, which
would have weakened T.’s position and his work as
a preacher of the gospel, Paul took Timothy and
circumcised him. Paul was willing to

6. Circum- agree to this being done, on account of
cised the fact that T.’s mother was a Jewess.

It was therefore quite a different case
from that of Titus, where Paul refused to allow cir-
cumcision to be performed (15 2)—Titus being, un-
like T., a Gentile by birth. See Trrus.

The other act which was performed for T.’s
benefit, before he set out with Paul, was that he
was ordained by the presbytery or local council


of presbyters in Derbe and Lystra. Showing the
importance which Paul assigned to this act of
ordination, he refers to it in a letter
7. His Or- to T. written many years afterward:
dination “Neglect not the gift that is in thee,
which was given thee by prophecy, with
the laying on of the hands of the presbytery”
(1 Tim 4 14). In this ordination Paul himself
took part, for he writes, ‘‘I put thee in remembrance,
that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee
through the laying on of my hands” (2 Tim 1 6).
“2 Tim 16 should be viewed in the lght of
1 Tim 4 14. Probably it was prophetic voices
(through prophecy; cf 1 Tim 1 18, ‘according to
the prophecies which went before in regard to thee’)
which suggested the choice of Timothy as assistant
of Paul and Silvanus, and his consecration to this
work with prayer and the laying on of hands (cf
Acts 138 2f). The laymg on of hands by the pres-
byters(1 Tim 4 14), and that by Paul (2 Tim 1 6),
are not mutually exclusive, esp. since the former 1s
mentioned merely as an accompanying circum-
stance of his endowment with special grace, the
latter as the efficient cause of this endowment.
The churches in the neighborhood of T.’s home,
according to Acts 14 23, had been furnished with
a body of presbyters soon after their founding”
(Zahn, Intro to the NT, Il, 23).
Thus prepared for the work, T. went forth with
Paul on the apostle’s 2d missionary journey. We
find T. with him at Beroea (Acts 17 14),
8. Accom- having evidently accompanied him
panies Paul to all places visited by him up to that
point, viz. Phrygia, the region of
Galatia, Mysia, Troas, Neapolis, Philippi, Amphip-
olis, Apollonia, Thessalonica and Bercea. Paul next
went—and went alone, on account of the persecu-
tion at Bercea—to Athens (Acts 17 15); and from
that city he sent a message to Silas and T. at
Berea, that they should come to him at Athens with
all speed. They quickly came to him there, and
were immediately sent on an errand to the church
in Thessalonica; ‘‘When we could no longer forbear,
we thought it good to be left behind at Athens
alone; and sent T., our brother, and minister of God,
and our fellow-labourer in the gospel of Christ, to
establish you, and to comfort you concerning your
faith: that no man should be moved by these afflic-
tions” (1 Thess 3 1.2.3 AV). T. and Silas dis-
charged this duty and returned to the apostle, bring-
ing him tidings of the faith of the Christians m
Thessalonica, of their love and of their kind remem-
brance of Paul, and of their ardent desire to see
him; and Paul was comforted (vs. 5.6.7).
Paul had left Athens before Silas and T. were able
to rejom him. He had proceeded to Corinth, and
it was while the apostle was in that city,
9. At that “when Silas and Timothy came
Corinth down from Macedonia, Paul was con-
strained by the word, testifying to the
Jews that Jesus was the Christ” (Acts 18 5). T.
evidently remained with Paul during the year and
six months of his residence in Corinth, and also
throughout this missionary journey toitsend. From
Corinth Paul wrote the Ep. to the Rom, and he sent
them a salutation from T., ‘Timothy my fellow-
worker saluteth you” (Rom 16 21).
In connection with this salutation from T., it
should be noticed that it was Paul’s custom to asso-
ciate with his own name that of one
10. Salu- or more of his companions, in the open-
tations ing salutations in the Epp. T.’s name
: occurs in 2 Cor 1 1; Phil1 1; Coll 1;
Philem ver 1. It is also found, along with that of
Silvanus, in 1 Thess 1 1 and 2 Thess 1 1.
On Paul’s 3d missionary journey, T. again
accompanied him, though he is not mentioned till


2985


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Timothy
Tiphsah


Ephesus was reached. This journey involved much
traveling, much work and much time. At Ephesus

alone more than two years were spent.
11. At And when Paul’s residence there was
Ephesus drawing to a close, he laid his plans
to go to Jerus, after passing en route
through Macedonia and Achaia. “Accordingly he
sent on before him “into Macedonia two of them
that ministered unto him, Timothy and Erastus”
(Acts 19 22). From Ephesus Paul wrote the First
Ep. to the Cor (1 Cor 16 8), and in it he

mentioned (ver 10) that T. was then


12. To traveling to Corinth, apparently a
Corinth prolongation of the journey into Mace-
Again donia. After commending him to a


kind reception from the Corinthians,
Paul proceeded to say that T. was to return to him
from Corinth; that is, T. was to bring with him a
report on the state of matters in the Corinthian
church.
Soon thereafter the riot in Ephesus occurred;
and when it was over, Paul left Ephesus and went
to Macedonia and Greece. In Mace-
13. In donia he was rejoined by T., whose
Greece name is associated with his own, in the
: opening salutation of the Second Ep.,
which he now wrote to Corinth. T. accompanied
him into Greece, where they abode three months.
From Greece the apostle once more set his face
toward Jerus, T. and others accompanying him
(Acts 20 4). “We that were of Paul’s company”
(Acts 21 8 AV), as Luke terms the friends who now
traveled with Paul—and T. was one of them—
touched at Troas and a number of other places, and
eventually reached Jerus, where Paul
14. In was apprehended, This of course ter-
Jerusalem minated, for the time, his apostolic
journeys, but not the codperation of
his friends, or of T. among them.


The details of the manner in which T. was now em-
ployed are not recorded, until he is found once more
with Paul—during his 1st imprisonment

15. InR in Rome. But, from that point onward,
sg OME there are many notices of how he was
occupied in the apostle’s service. He is

mentioned in three of the Epp. written hy Paul at this
time, viz. in Col 1 1, and Philem ver 1, in hoth of which his


16. To Visit able to send T. to
aye Ree hilippi: ‘‘I hope in the Lord Jesus to
Philippi Philipp


send Timothy shortly unto you, that I
also may be ot good comfort, when I know
your state. For I have no man likeminded, who will
care truly for your state. But ye know the proof
of him, that, as a child serveth a father, so he served


with me in furtherance of the gospel. Him therefore I
hope to send forthwith.”


Paul’s hope was realized: he was set free; and
once again 'T. was his companion in travel. Per-
haps it was in Philippi that they re-


17. Ap- joined each other, for not only had
pointed to Paul expressed his intention of sending
Ephesus T. there, but he had also said that he


hoped himself to visit the Philippian
church (Phil 1 26; 2 24). From this pomt on-
ward it is difficult, perhaps impossible, to trace
the course of Paul’s journeys, but he tells us that he
had left T. as his delegate or representative in
Ephesus (1 Tim 1 3); and soon thereafter he wrote
the First Ep. to Tim, in which he gave full instruc-
tions in regard to the manner in which he should
conduct the affairs of the Ephesian church, until
Paul himself should again revisit Ephesus: ‘These
things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee
shortly” (1 Tim 3 14).


“The position which Timothy occupied in Ephesns,
as it is Gescthed in 1 Tim, cannot without doing the


Froutest violence to history be called that of a hishop,
or the office of bishop existed only where the one hishop,
superior to the presbytery, represented the


18. His highest expression of the common church
Position in life. he office was for life, and confined

to the localchurch. This was particularly
Ephesus the case In Asia Minor, where, although as


early as the time of Rev and the time
of Ignatius, bishoprics were numerous and closely adja-
cent, the office always retained its local character. On
the other hand, T.’'s position at the head of the churches
of Asia was due to the position which he occupled as
Paul's helper in missionary work. It was his part in the
spostellc calling, as this calling involved the oversight
of existing churches. T. was acting as a temporary
representative of Paul in his apostolic capacity at Ephe-
sus, as he had done earlier in Corinth, and _in Thessa-
lonica and Philipel (1 Cor 4 17; 1 Thess 3 2f; Phil
2 19-23). His relation was not closer to one church than
to the other churches of the province; its rise and dis-
appearance did not affect at_all the organization of the
local congregations" (Zahn, Intro to the NT, II, 34).


From the Second Ep. still further detail can be
gathered. Paul was a second time imprisoned,
and feeling that on this occasion his


19. Paul trial would be followed by an adverse
Summons judgment and by death, he wrote from
Him to Rome to T. at Ephesus, affectionately
Rome requesting him to come to him: “Give

diligence to come shortly unto me”
(2 Tim 4 9). The fact that at that time, when no


Christian friend was with Paul except Luke (2 Tim
4 11), it was to T. he turned for sympathy and aid,
closing with the request that his own son in the
faith should come to him, to be with him in his last
hours, shows how true and tender was the affection
which bound them together. Whether T. was able
to reach Rome, so as to be with Paul before his exe-

cution, is unknown.
One other notice of him occursin He 13 23: ‘‘Know ye
that our brother Timothy hath heen set at liherty; with
whom, if he come shortly, I will see you.”


sqy AS the author of the Ep. to the He is not
aan Paul, it is problematical what the meaning


of these words really is, except that T. had

heen imprisoned, and—unlike what took

place in Paul's case—he had escaped death and had been
8e Tree.

Nothing further is known of him. Of all Paul's friends,

with the exception, pertapa, of Luke, Paul's beloved

riend, T. was regarded by him with the


21. His. tenderest affection; he was his dearly loved
5 son, faithful and true. _ Various defects
Character have heen alleged to exist in T.’s char-


acter. These defects are inferred from
the directions and instructions addressed to him by Paul
in the Pastoral Epp., but these inferences may be wrong,
and it is a mistake to exaggerate them in view of his un-
broken and unswerving loyalty and of the long and
faithful service rendered by him to Paul, ‘‘as a child
serveth a father" (Phil 2 22).


Joun RuTHERFURD
TIMOTHY, EPISTLES TO. See PastTorau


EPISTLEs.


TIN, tin (O°2, bedhil): Tin is mentioned with
brass, iron and lead in Nu 31 22; Hzk 22 18.20.
Ezekiel mentions tin along with silver, iron and lead
as being imported into Tyre from Tarshish (see
Metaus; Bronze). The tin must haye been
brought in the form of ore and smelted in Syria.
The writer has some slag dug from a deposit near
Beirfit which yielded nearly pure tin. It was prob-


ably the site of an ancient smelter’s shop.


LFRED Ey Day

TIPHSAH, tif’sa (ODM, tiphsah, “ford”; Oapa,
Thapsd): ;

(a This marks the northern extremity of the
dominions ruled by Solomon, Gaza being the limit
on the S. (1 K 4 24). It can hardly be other than
Thapsacus, on the right bank of the bo Sete
before its waters join those of the Balik. The great
caravan route between E. and W. crossed the river
by the ford at this point, Here Cyrus the younger
effected a somewhat perilous crossing (Xen. Anab.
i4, 2).. The ford was also used by Darius; ‘but
‘Alexander the Great, in his pursuit, constructed


Tiras
Tithe


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2986


two bridges for the transport of his army (Arrian
iu.7). Under the Seleucidae it was called Amphip-
olis. The site is probably occupied by the modern
Kal‘at Dibse, where there is a ford still used by the
caravans. It is about 8 miles below Meskene,
where the river makes a bend to the E.

_ (2) (B, Sepod, Thersd, A, Oaipd, Thaird): The
inhabitants of this town, which was apparently not
far from Tirzah, did not favor the regicide Mena-
hem, refusmg to open to him. In his wrath he
massacred the Tiphsites with circumstances of
horrible cruelty (2 K 15 16). Khirbet Tafsah,
about 6 miles 8.W. of Nablus, corresponds in name,
but is probably too far from Tirzah. W. Ewine


TIRAS, ti‘ras (DITA, izras; Oerpas, Theirds, Luc.,
@ipds, Thirds): A son of Japbeth (Gen 10 2 [P];
1 Ch 1 5). Not mentioned elsewhere; this name
was almost unanimously taken by the ancient
commentators (so Jos, Ant, I, vi, 1) to be the same
as that of the Thracians (Opéaxes, Thrdkes); but the
removal of the nominative ending s does away with
this surface resemblance. Tuch was the first to sug-
gest the Tupsymol, Turséniot, a race of Pelasgian
pirates, who left: many traces of their ancient power
in the islands and coasts of the Aegean, and who
were doubtless identical with the Etruscans of Italy.
This brilliant suggestion has since been confirmed
by the discovery of the name TuruSa among the
seafaring peoples who invaded Egypt in the reign
of Merenptah (W. M. Miller, A#, 356 ff). Tiras
has also been regarded as the same as Tarshish.

Horace J. Woir

TIRATHITES, ti’rath-its (DOI VA, tir‘athim;
B A, ’Apyaétcip, Argathieim, Luc., @apatel, Tha-
rathei): A family of scribes that dwelt at Jabez
(1 Ch 2 55). The three families mentioned in
this verse (Tirathites, Shimathites and Sucathites)
are taken by Jerome to be three different classes of
religious functionaries—singers, scribes, recorders
(“canentes atque resonantes et in tabernaculis com-
morantes”’). The Tg takes the same view, save
that the “Sucathites” are those “covered” with a
spirit of prophecy. Bertheau sees the Tirathites
as ‘“gate-keepers” (Aram. JA, ttra‘=Heb “WD,
sha‘ar). Keil holds the three names to be those
of the descendants of unknown men named Tira,
Shemei and Sucah. The passage seems too obscure
to admit of interpretation. Horace J. WoLr


TIRE, tir, HEADTIRE (2 K 9 30; Isa 3 20;
Fzk 24 °17.23; Jth 10 3; 16 8). See Druss, V.


TIRES, tirz, ROUND: Small ornaments in the
shape of crescents (Isa 3 18 AV, RV “‘crescents”).
See Astronomy, I, 3; CrEscEnts.


TIRHAKAH, tér-ha‘ka, tir-ha’/ka (IPT, tir-
hakah; B in 2 K, @apé, Thard, elsewhere and in
A, @apaxda, Tharakd; Jos, Oapalkns,
1. Name Tharstkés): The king of Cush or
and Ethiopia (Baccdeds Alfdrwv, basileis
Prenomen Aithidpon), who opposed Sennacherib
in Pal @ K 199; Isa 87 9). The
name of this ruler of Egypt and his native realm
appears in hieroglyphics as Taharga, his prenomen
being Nefer-atmu-Ra-hu, “Nefer-atmu-Ra protects.”
The Assyr form of Tirhakah is Targ@ or Tarqu’u
(inscriptions of Assur-bani-pal).
Tirhakah was one of the sons, and apparently the
favorite, of Piankhy IJ. He left his mother, and
the city Napata, at the age of 20; and
2. Origin when she followed him northward,
and Length she found him crowned as king of
of Reign Egypt. As he died, after a reign of at
“ least 26 years, in 667 BC, he must have
mounted the throne about 693 BC.


The engagement between Tirhakah’s army and
the Assyrians is regarded as having taken place in
701 BC. Petrie explains this date by
3. A Chron- supposing he acted at first for the
ological reigning Pharaob, his cousin Shaba-
Difficulty toka, Tirhakah not having officially
become Pharach until the former’s
death in 693 BC. There is a general opinion, how-
ever, that the Assyr historians, like those of 2 K
and Isa, have mingled two campaigns made by Sen-
nacherib, one of them being after the accession of
Tirhakah.
According to the OT account, Sennacherib was
besiegmg Libnah when Tirhakah’s army appeared


in Pal. In Sennacherib’s es
4, First however, the battle with “the king[s]
Conflict of Musuru [Egypt] and the bowmen,
with the chariots, and cavalry of Merubha”
Assyrians (Meroé or Ethiopia), who had come


to Hezekiah’s help, took place in the
neighborhood of Eltekeh. He claims to have cap-
tured the sons of the king (variant, ‘“‘kings”’) of
Egypt and the charioteers of the king of Merubha,
and then, having taken Eltekeh, Timna, and Ekron,
he brought out Padi from Jerus, and reseated him
on the throne of Ekron. The name of Tirhakah
does not occur in his account.
It would seem to have been Egypt’s interference
in Palestinian affairs which caused the Assyr kings
to desire the conquest of that distant
5. Struggles country. According to the Bab Chron-
with Esar- icle, the Assyr army fought in Egypt
haddon and in the 7th year of Esar-haddon (675
Assur-bani- BC), and the country “was then ap-
pal. His arently quiet until 672 BC, when
Death sar-haddon marched thither, and after
; fighting three battles, entered Mem-
phis. “The king” (Tirhakah) fled, but his sons
and nephews were made prisoners. In the latter
campaign (670 BC), Esar-haddon fell ill and died
on the way out, so that the operations were, appar-
ently, completed by his son, Assur-bani-pal (Osnap-
par). On hearmg of the Assyr success at Kar-
Baniti, Tirhakah, who was at Memphis, fled to
Thebes. The 20 petty kings installed in Egypt by
Esar-haddon were restored by Assur-bani-pal, but
they feared the vengeance of Tirhakah after the
Assyr army had retired, and therefore made an
agreement with him. On this news reaching the
Assyr king, he sent his army back to Egypt, and
the petty rulers having been abolished, Necho king
of Memphis and Sais was set on the throne, with
his son, Nabfi-Stzbanni, as ruler in Athribes. On
hearing of the success of the Assyr armies, Tirha-
kah fled, and died im Cush (Ethiopia). He was
succeeded by Tantamané (identified with Tanut-
Amon), son of Sabaco, whom the Assyrians de-
feated in the last expedition which they ever made
to Egypt (see W. F. Petrie, Hist of Egypt, TU,
294 ff). T. G. Pincuss


TIRHANA, tir’ha-ni, tér-ha/nd (MPI, tirha-
nih; B, @apap, Thardm, A, @apyxvd, Tharchnd, Luc.,
@apaavd, Tharaand): A son of Caleb by his concu-
bine, Maacah (1 Ch 2 48).


TIRIA, tir’i-a, ti’ri-a (ATW, tir-ya’, Baer NN,
tirya’; B omits, A, Onpid, Therid, Luc., "H@pid,
Ethrid): A son of Jehallelel (1 Ch 4 16).


TIRSHATHA, tér-sha’tha, tdr’sha-tha (ROWAN,
tirshatha’; “A®epra0d, Hathersathd): A title which
occurs 5 t in Ezr and Neh (Ezr 2 63; Neh 7 65,
ARV and ERVm “governor”’). In Neh 8 9; 10 1,
Nehemiah is called the éirshatha’. In Ezr 2 63;
Neh 7 65.70, it is the title of Sheshbazzar, or Zerub-
babel. Asin Neh 12 26, Nehemiah is called a pehah,


2987


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tiras
Tithe


or governor, a title which in Ezr 5 14 is given to
Sheshbazzar also, it has been supposed that pehah
and tirshathd’ were equivalent terms, the former
being of Assyrio-Bab and the latter of Pers origin.
According to Lagarde, it comes from the Bactrian
antarekshatra, that is, “he who takes the place of
the king.’ According to Meyer and Scheftelowitz
it isa modified form of a hypothetical Old Pers word
tarsaia. According to Gesenius and Ewald, it is to
be compared with the Pers éorsh, ‘‘severe,”’ ‘‘austere,”’
ie. “stern lord.”’ It seems more probable that it is
derived from the Bab v rashu, ‘‘to take possession
of,” from which we get the noun rashu, “creditor.”
In this case it may well have had the sense of a tax-
collector. One of the principal duties of the Pers
satrap, or governor, was to assess and collect the taxes
(see Rawlinson’s Persia, ch viii). This would readily
account for the fact that in Neh 7 70 the tirshatha’
gave to the treasure to be used in the building of
the temple a thousand drachms of gold, etc, and that
in Ezr 1 8 Cyrus numbered the vessels of the house
of the Lord unto Sheshbazzar. This derivation
would connect it with the Aram. rashya, “creditor,”
and the New Heb rashuth, “highest power,” “magis-
trate.” R. Dick Wi~son


TIRZAH, tir’za (AR, tircah; Oepord, Thersd):

(1) A royal city of the Canaanites, the king of
which was slam by Joshua (12 24). It superseded
Shechem as capital of the Northern Kingdom (1 K
14 17, etc), and itself gave place in turn to Samaria.
Here reigned Jeroboam, Nadab his son, Baasha,
Elah and Zimri (15 21.33; 16 6.8.9.15). Baasha
was buried in Tirzah. Here Elah was assassinated
while “drinking himself drunk” in the house of his
steward; here therefore probably he was buried.
Zimri perished in the flames of his palace, rather
than fall into Omri’s hands. In Tirzah Menahem
matured his rebellion against Shallum (2 K 15 14).
The place is mentioned in Cant 6 4 AV, where the
Shulammite is said to be “beautiful... . as Tirzah,
comely as Jerus.”” The comparison may be due to
the charm of its situation. The name may possibly
be derived from récah, “‘to delight.” Several identi-
fications have been suggested. Buhl (GAP, 203)
favors et-Tireh, on the W. of the plain of Makhneh, 4
miles 8. of Nablus, which he identifies with the Tira-
thana of Jos. He quotes Neubauer to the effect
that the later Jews said Tir‘an or Tar‘ita instead
of Tirzah, as weakening the claim of Telhizah,
which others (e.g. Robinson, BR, III, 302) incline
to. It is a partly ruined village with no spring, but
with ancient cisterns, on a hill about 4 miles E. of
N. from Nablus. This was evidently the place
intended by Brocardius—Thersa, about 3 miles E.
of Samaria (Descriptio, VII). A third claimant is
‘Teiastr, a fortress at the point where the road from
Abel-meholah joins that from Shechem to Bethshan,
fully 11 miles N.E. of Nablus. It is impossible to
decide with certainty. The heavy ? in Tellizah isa
difficulty. Teiastr is perhaps too far from Shechem.
Buhl’s case for identification with ef-Ttreh is subject
to the same difficulty as Telluzah.

(2) One of the five daughters of Zelophehad (Nu
26 33; 27 1; 36 11; Josh 17 3). W. Ewina


TISHBITE, tish’bit. Expos T,
XII, 383.


TISHRI, tish’ré, TISRI, tiz’ré: The 7th month
of the Jewish ecclesiastical, and 1st of the civil,
year (September-October). The same as Ethanim.
See CALENDAR.


TITANS, ti’‘tanz: In Jth 16 7, “Neither did the
sons of the Titans [vlot Tirdvwy, huiot Titdndn)
smite him.’ The name of an aboriginal Canaan-


See Exisaq;


itish race of reputed giants who inhabited Pal before
the Hebrews, and so used in the sense of “giants”
in general. See Repuam. In 28 6 18.22, the
“valley of Rephaim” is tr’ by LXX as “the valley
of the Titans.”


TITHE, tith (WW2'2, madsér; Sexdry, dekdté):
The custom of giving a 10th part of the products of
the land and of the spoils of war to priests and kings
(1 Mace 10 31; 11 35; 1S 8 15.17) was a very
ancient. one among most nations. That the Jews
had this custom long before the institution of the
Mosaic Law is shown by Gen 14 17-20 (cf He 7 4)
and Gen 28 22. Many critics hold that these two
passages are late and only reflect. the later practice
of the nation; but the payment of tithes is so an-
cient, and deeply rooted in the history of the human
race that it seems much simpler and more natural
to believe that among the Jews the practice was in
existence long before the time of Moses.

In the Pent we find legislation as to tithes in three
places. (1) According to Lev 27 30-33, a tithe had
to be given of the seed of the land, ie. of the
crops, of the fruit of the tree, e.g. oil and wine, and
of the herd or the flock (cf Dt 14 22.28; 2 Ch 31
5.6). As the herds and flocks passed out to pasture
they were counted (cf Jer 33 18; Ezk 20 37), and
every 10th animal that came out was reckoned
holy to the Lord. The owner was not allowed to
search among them to find whether they were bad
or good, nor eould he change any of them; if he did,
both the one chosen and the one for which it was
changed were holy. Tithes of the herds and flocks
could not be redeemed for money, but tithes of the
seed of the land and of fruit could be, but a 5th part
of the value of the tithe had to be added. (2) In
Nu 18 21-382 it is laid down that the tithe must be
paid to the Levites. (It should be noted that ac-
cording to He 7 5, ‘they that are of the sons of
Levi, who receive the office of the priesthood ....
take tithes of the people.’ Westcott’s explanation
is that the priests, who received from the Levites
a tithe of the tithe, thus symbolically received the
whole tithe. In the time of the second temple
the priests did actually receive the tithes. In
the Talm [Y*bhaméth 86a et passim] it is said
that this alteration from the Mosaic Law was
caused by the sin of the Levites, who were not eager
to return to Jerus, but had to be persuaded to do
so by Ezra [Ezr 8 15].) The Levites were to
receive the tithes offered by Israel to Jeh, because
they had no other inheritance, and in return for
their service of the tabernacle (Nu 18 21.24).
The tithe was to consist of corn of the threshing-
floor and the fulness of the wine press (ver 27),
which coincides with seed of the land and fruit of
the trees in Lev 27. The Levites, who stood in the
game relation to the priests as the people did to
themselves, were to offer from this their inherit-
ance a heave offering, a tithe of a tithe, to the
priests (cf Neh 10 39), and for this tithe they were
to choose of the best part of what they received.
(3) In Dt 12 5.6.11.18 (cf Am 4 4) it is said that
the tithe is to be brought ‘unto the place which Jeh
your God shall choose out of all your tribes, to put
his name there,” i.e. to Jerus; and in vs 7.12.18
that the tithe should he used there as a sacred mea.
by the offerer and his household, including the
Levite within his gates. Nothing is said here about
tithing cattle, only corn, wine and oil being men-
tioned (cf Neh 10 36-38; 13 5.12). In Dt 14
22-29 it is laid down that if the way was too long
to carry the tithe to Jerus it could be exchanged for
money, and the money taken there instead, where
it was to be spent in anything the owner chose;
and whatever was bought was to be eaten by him
and his household and the Levites at Jcrus. In


Titius Justus
Titus Justus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2988


the third year the tithe was to be reserved and
eaten at home by the Levite, the stranger, the
fatherless and the widow. In 26 12-15 it is laid
down that in the 3d year, after this feast had been
given, the landowner should go up himself before
the Lord his God, i.e. to Jerus, and ask God’s bless-
ing on his deed. (According to the Mish, Satah 9
10; Ma‘dsér Shéni 6 65, the high priest Johanan
abolished this custom.) In this passage this 3d
year is called ‘the year of tithing.”

There is thus an obvious apparent discrepancy
between the legislation in Lev and Dt. It is har-
monized in Jewish tradition, not only theoretically
but in practice, by considering the tithes as three
different tithes, which are named the First Tithe,
the Second Tithe, and the Poor Tithe, which is
called also the Third Tithe (P2@ah, Ma‘dsérath,
Ma‘dsér Shént, Demat, Rod’sh ha-shanah; cf Tob
17.8; Ani, IV, iv, 3; viii, 8; viii, 22). Ae
cording to this explanation, after the tithe (the
First Tithe) was given to the Levites (of which they
had to give the tithe to the priests), a Second Tithe
of the remaining nine-tenths had to be set apart
and consumed in Jerus. Those who lived far from
Jerus could change this Second Tithe into money
with the addition of a 5th part of its value. Only
food, drink or ointment could be bought for the
money (Ma‘ésér Shént 21; cf Dt 14 26). The
tithe of cattle belonged to the Second Tithe, and
was to be used for the feast in Jerus (Z*bhGhim 6 8).
In the 3d year the Second Tithe was to be given
entirely to the Levites and the poor. But accord-
ing to Jos (Ant, IV, viii, 22) the ‘‘Poor Tithe” was
actually a third one. The priests and the Levites,
if landowners, were also obliged to give the Poor
Tithe (Péah 1 6).

The explanation given by many critics, that the dis-
crepancy between Dt and Lev is due to the fact that
these are different layers of legislation, and that the
Levitical tithe is a post-exilian creation of the PC, is
not wholly satisfactory, for the following reasons: (1)
The allusion in Dt 18 1.2 seems to refer to the Levitical
tithe. (2) There is no relation between the law of Nu
18 and post-exilian conditions, when the priests were
numerous and the Levites a handful. (3) A community
so poor and disaffected as that of Ezra's time would
have refused to submit to a new and oppressive tithe
burden. (4) The division into priests and Levites can-
not have been of the recent origin that is alleged. See
eee Smith and others suggest that the tithe is simply
a later form of the first-fruits, but this is difficult to
accept, since the first-fruits were given to the priest,
while the tithes were not. The whole subject is involved
Im considerable obscurity, which with our present infor-
mation cannot easily be cleared away.

The Talmudic law of tithing extends the Mosaic
Law, with most burdensome minuteness, even to the
smallest products of the soil. Of these, according
to some, not only the seeds, but, in certain cases,
even the leaves and stalks had to be tithed (Ma-
‘dséroth 4 5), “mint, anise, and cummin” (Demat
11.1; cf Mt 23 23; Lk 11 42). The general
principle was that “everything that is eaten, that
is watched over, and that grows out of the earth”
must be tithed (Ma‘dsérdth 1 1).

Considering the many taxes, religious and secular,
that the Jews had to pay, esp. in post-exilian times,
we cannot but admire the liberality and resource-
fulness of the Jewish people. Only in the years
just after the return from exile do we hear that
the taxes were only partially paid (Neh 13 10;
ef Mal 1 7 ff; and for preéxilian times cf 2 Ch
$1 4 ff). In later times such cases seldom occur
(Sdtah 48a), which is the more surprising since
the priests, who benefited so much by these
laws of the scribes, were the adversaries of the
latter. Pau, LeEvVERTOFF


TITIUS JUSTUS, tish’us jus’tus.
(2); Trrus Justus.


See Justus,


TITLE, ti’t’]: Jn 19 19.20 for rirros, fitlos.
The following arrangement of the title on the
cross has been suggested:


Denn pe msn yw


OYTOC ECTIN IHCOYC O BACILEYC
TWN IOYAAIWN


REX JUDAEORUM


See Geikie, Life and Words of Christ, ch 1xiii, note e;
Seymour, The Cross in Tradition, History and Art
(New York, 1898), pp. 115, 116, 136, 138.

In 2 K 28 17, AV has “title” for }P%, ¢iyyin.
The word is connected with ¢awah, “to command,”
and AV seems to have understood giyytn as “that
giving directions,”’ ‘“sign-posts’” (cf HEzk 39 15).
The word, however, means “grave-stone,”’ ‘‘monu-
ment.” See SUPERSCRIPTION.


TITTLE, tit’’] (kepala, kerata (WH, keréa], from
képas, kéras, “a horn”): A small stroke or mark,
specif.on a letter to denote accent, or as a diacritical
mark; used only in Mt 5 18 and Lk 16 17. In
the first passage it is used in connection with iota,
or jot, i.e. the very smallest thing, and in both it
refers to the minutiae of the Law. It is well known
that the scribes paid the greatest attention to such
marks attached to the letters in the Heb Scriptures,
the MT of which abounds in them. See Jor;
Yonou.


TITUS, ti’tus (Tiros, Titos [2 Cor 2 13; 7 6.13 ff;
8 6.16.23; 12 18; Gal 2 1.3; 2 Tim 4 10; Tit 1 4)):
A Gr Christian, one of Paul’s intimate


1. One of friends, his companion in some of his
Paul’s apostolic journeys, and one of his
Converts assistants in Christian work. His name


does not occur in the Acts; and, else-
where in the NT, it is found only in 2 Cor, Gal,
2 Tim and Tit. As Paul calls him “my true child
after a common faith” (Tit 1 4), it is probable that
he was one of the aposile’s converts.

The first notice of T. is in Acts 15 2, where we
read that after the conclusion of Paul’s ist mission-

ary journey, when he had returned to
2. Paul Antioch, a discussion arose in the
Refuses to church there, in regard to the question
Have Him whether it was necessary that gentile
Circumcised Christians should be circumcised and

should keep the Jewish Law. It was
decided that Paul and Barnabas, “‘and certain other
of them,” should go up to Jerus to the apostles and
elders about this question. The “‘certain other of
them’”’ includes T., for in Gal 2 3 it is recorded
that T. was then with Paul. The Judaistic party
in the church at Jerus desired to have T. circum-
cised, but Paul gave no subjection to these persons
and _ to their wishes, “no, not for an hour; that the
truth of the gospel might continue with you” (Gal
25). The matter in dispute was decided as re-
corded in Acts 15 13-29. The decision was in
favor of the free promulgation of the gospel, as
preached by Paul, and unrestricted by Jewish ordi-
nances. Paul’s action therefore in regard to T. was
justified. In fact T. was a representative or test
case.

It is difficult and perhaps impossible to give the
true reason why Titus is not mentioned by name in
the Acts, but he is certainly referred to in 15 2.

There is no further notice of T. for some years
afterward, when he is again mentioned in 2 Cor.
In this Ep. his name occurs 8 t. From the notices
in this Ep. it appears that T. had been sent by
Paul, along with an unnamed “brother,” to Corinth


2989


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Titius Justus
Titus Justus


as the apostle’s delegate to the church there (2 Cor
12 18). His chief business was evidently to deal
with the cases of immorality which
8. Sentto had occurred there. His mission was
Corinth largely successful, so that he was able
iy to return to Paul with joy, because his
spirit was refreshed by the Corinthians (2 Cor 7
13). His inward affection was largely drawn out
to them, and “he remembereth the obedience of
you all, how with fear and trembling ye received
him” (7 15). At Corinth T. seems also to have
assisted in organizing the weekly collections for the
poor saints in Jerus. See 1 Cor 16 1.2 compared
with 2 Cor 8 6: ‘We exhorted Titus, that as he
had made a beginning before, so he would also com-
plete in you this grace also.”

After the departure of T. from Corinth, difficulty
had again arisen in the church there, and T. seems to
have been sent by Paul a second time to that city,
as the apostle’s messenger, carrying a letter from
him—referred to im 2 Cor 2 3ff; 7 8 ff.

The state of the Corinthian church had been
causing much anxiety to Paul, so much so that

when he had come to Troas to preach
4, Paul Christ’s gospel, and a door was opened
Goes to to him of the Lord, he found no rest
Meet Him in his spirit, because he found not T.,

his brother; so he left Troas, and went
thence into Macedonia, in order to mcet T. the
sooner, so as to ascertam from him how matters
stood in Corinth. In Macedonia accordingly the
apostle met T., who brought good news regarding
the Corinthians. In the unrest and fightings and
fears which the troubles at Corinth had caused
Paul to experience, his spirit was refreshed when
T.reached him. ‘‘He that comforteth the lowly, even
God, comforted us by the coming of Titus... .
while he told us your longing, your mourning, your
zeal for me; so that I rejoiced yet more” (2 Cor
7 6.7).

Paul now wrote to the Corinthians again—our
Second Ep. to the Cor—and_ dispatched it to its
destination by the hand of T., mto whose heart
‘God had put the same earnest care for them’
(2 Cor 8 16-18). T. was also again intrusted
with the work of overseeing the weekly collection
in the Cormthian church (2 Cor 8 10.24).

There is now a long interval in the history of T.,
for nothing further is recorded of him till we come

to the Pastoral Epp. From Paul’s
6. Travels Ep. to him these details are gathered:
with Paul On Paul’s liberation at the conclusion
to Crete of his first Rom imprisonment he made

a number of missionary journeys, and
T, went with him, as his companion and assistant,
on one of these—to the island of Crete. From
Crete, Paul proceeded onward but he left T. to “set
in order the things that were wanting, and appoint
elders in every city” (Tit 1 5). Paul reminds him
of the character of the people of Crete, and gives
him various instructions for his guidance; charges
him to maintain sound doctrine, and advises him
how to deal with the various classes of persons met
with in his pastoral capacity.

T. ig informed that Artemas or Tychicus will be sent


to Crete so that he will be free to leave the island and to
rejoin the apostle at Nicopolis, where he


6. Paul has determined to winter. Such were
Ss dsf Paul’s plans; whether they were carried

ends for out is unkown. But this at least is
Him certain, that T. did rejoin Paul, if not at


Nicopolis, then at some other s ot; and

he was with him in Rome on the occasion of his 2d im-
risonment there, for he is mentioned once again (2 Tim
10) as having gone to Dalmatia, evidently on an
evangelistic errand, as the apostle was in the habit of
sending his trusted friends to do such work, when he
himself was no longer able to do this, owing to his im-
prisonment. ‘'Paul regarded as his own the work done
from centers where he labored, by helpers associated


with him, considering the churches thus organized as
under his jurisdiction. This throws light upon the state-
ment in 2 Tim 4 10, that T. at that_time had gone to
Daimatia, and a certain Crescens to Gaul. There is no
indication that they, like Demas, had deserted the apostle
and sought safety for themselves, or that, like Tychicus,
they had_been sent by the apostle upon some special
errand. In either case it would be a question why they
went to these particular countries, with which, so far
as we know, Paul, up to this time, had never had any-
thing to do. The probability is that T., who had long
been associated with Paul sea 2 3), who, as his com-
missioner, had executed difficult offices in Corinth (2
Cor 7-9), and who, not very long before 2 Tim was
written, bad completed some missionary work in Crete
that had been hegun by others, had pone as a missionary
and as Paul's representative and helper to Dalmatia.
see by this means, beginnings of church organiza-
tions had been made... in Spain by Paul himself,
in Gaul by Crescens, in Dalmatia by T., then, in reality,
the missionary map had heen very much changed since
Paul's first defence’ (Zahn, Intro to the NT, II, 11).


T.. was one of Paul’s very dear and trusted friends;
and the fact that he was chosen by the apostle to
act as his delegate to Corinth, to trans-
7. His act difficult and delicate work in the
Character church there, and that he did this
oftener than once, and did it thor-
oughly and successfully, shows that T. was not
merely a good but a most capable man, tactful and
resourceful and skilful in the handling of men and
of affairs. ‘Whether any inquire about T., he is
my partner and fellow-worker to you-ward” (2 Cor
8 23). JoHN RuTHERFURD


TITUS, EPISTLE TO. See Pastorau Episties.


TITUS or TITIUS JUSTUS (Tiros or Tiros
*Ioteros, Tttos or Titios Toustos [Acts 18 7]): Titus
or Titius—for the MSS vary in regard to the spell-
ing—was the prenomen of a certain Corinthian, a
Jewish proselyte (sebémenos tén Theén. See ProsE-
LTE). His name seems also to indicate that he
was a Roman by birth. He is altogether a different
person from Titus, Paul’s assistant and companion
in some of his journeys, to whom also the Ep. to
Tit is addressed.

Titus or Titius Justus was not the “host of St.
Paul at Corinth” (HDB, art. “Justus,” p. 511), for
Luke has already narrated that, when Paul came
to Corinth, “he abode with” Aquila and_Priscilla
(Acta 18 3), What is said of Titius Justus is
that when the Jews in Corinth opposed themselves
to Paul and blasphemed when he testified that Jesus
was the Christ, then Paul ceased to preach the gos-
pel in the Jewish synagogue as he had formerly done,
and “he departed thence, and went into the house
of a certain man named Titus Justus, one that
worshipped God, whose house joined hard to the
synagogue” (ver 7).

“Titius Justus was evidently a Roman or a Latin, one
of the colont of the colony Corinth. Like the centurion
Cornelius, he had been attracted to the synagogue. His
citizenship would afford Paul an opening to the more
educated class of the Corinthian population"' (Ramsay,
St. Paul the Traveller and the Rom Citizen, 256).

Paul’s residence in Corinth continued for a year
and a half, followed without a break by, another
period indicated in the words, he “‘tarried after this
yet many days” (Acts 18 11.18), and during the
whole of this time he evidently used the house of
Titiue Justus, for the purposes both of preaching the

ospel and of gathering the church together for
hristian worship and instruction, “teaching the
word of God among them” (ver 11).

Titius Justus, therefore, must bave been a wealthy
man, since he possessed a house in which there was an
apartment sufficiently large to be used for hoth of these
purposes; and he himself must have heen a most enthu-
siastic member of the church, when in a period of pro-
tracted difficulty and persecution, he welcomed Paul to
his house, that he might use it as the meeting-place ot
the church in Corinth. See Jusrus, (2).

Joun RUTHERFURD


Titus Manius
Tobit, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2990


TITUS MANIUS. See Manius.


TIZITE, ti’zit OX, ha-tici; B, 6 ’Ieacel, ho
Teaset, A, 6 Oacacl, ho Thasact, Luc.,’A@wot, Athast) :
A gentilic attached to the name “Joha” (1 Ch il
45), one of the soldiers of David; the origin is
totally unknown.


TOAH, td’a.


TOB, tob, tsb, THE LAND OF (21D PN, ’ereg
i6bh, “a good land’; ya T4B, gé Tédb): Hither
Jephthah escaped from his brethren after his father’s
death (Jgs 11 3), and perfected himself in the art
of war, making forays with “the vain fellows’? who
joined him. Here the elders of Gilead found him,
when, reduced to dire straits by the children of
Ammon, they desired him to take command of their
army (vs 5ff). This country contributed 12,000
men to the forces of the allies, who with the Ammon-
ites were defeated by [srael (2 S 10 8). In1 Mace
5 13 we read of the land of Tubias where the Jews,
about 1,000 men, were slain by the Gentiles, their
wives and children being earried into captivity.
The Tubieni, ‘‘men of Tob” of 2 Mace 12 17, were
probably from this place. Ptolemy (v.19) speaks
of Thauba, a place to the 8.W. of Zobah, which may
possibly be Tob. The Talm (Neubauer, Géog. du
Talm, 239) identifies the land of Tob with the dis-
trict of Hippene. Tob would then be represented
by Hippos, modern Sustyeh, to the 8.W. of Fik on
the plateau E. of the Sea of Galilee. Perhaps the
most likely identification is that supported by G. A.
Smith (HGHL, 587), with et-Taiyibeh, 10 miles S.
of Umm Keis (Gadara). The name is the same in
meaning as Tob. Ewina


See Nawartu.


TOB-ADONIJAH, tob-ad-6-ni'ja, t6b- (21D
PRIVIN, fobh’ddhdniyah, “good is the Lord’; B,
TuwBadoBed, Tobaddbeid, A and Luc., TwRasovd,
Tobadénid): One of the Levites sent by King Jehosh-
aphat to teach in the cities of Judah (2 Ch 17 8).
The name looks like a dittography arising from the
two previous names, Adonijah and Tobijah.


TOBIAH, té-bi’a (TMA, tabhiyah; A, TwBlas,
Tobias, omitted in B):

(1) An Ammonite slave (AV “servant’’), prob-
ably of Sanballat, the governor of Samaria (Neh
210). He was grieved exceedingly when Nehe-
miah came to seek the welfare of the children of
Israel. In two ways he was connected by marriage
with the Jews, having himself married the daughter
of Shecaniah, the son of Arah, and his son Jehohanan
having married the daughter of Meshullam, the son
of Berechiah (6 18). Because of this close con-
nection with the Jews, the nobles of the latter cor-
responded by letter with him and also reported his
good deeds to Nehemiah and reported Nehemiah’s
words to Tobiah. In consequence of the report,
Tobiah sent letters to Nehemiah to put him in
fear (6 17-19). Nehemiah seems to have consid-
ered him to be his chief enemy; for he put him before
Sanballat in his prayers to God to remember his
opponents according to their works (6 14). In
13 4 we are told that he was an ally of Eliashib, the
high priest who had the oversight of the chambers of
the house of God and had prepared for him as a
guest chamber the room which had before been used
as a storehouse for offerings of various kinds. Ne-
hemiah, having heard during his second visit to Jerus
of this desecration of the temple, cast out the house-
hold stuff of Tobiah and cleansed the chambers,
restoring the vessels of God and the offerings as of


old.
(2) The eponym of a family which returned with


Zerubbabel, but could not trace its descent (Har
2 60; Neh 7 62). ~  R. Dick Wiison


TOBIAS, té-bi’as:

(1) The son of Tobit. See Toxsrr, Book or.

(2) TaBtas, Tabias, A, Twflo, Tadbid, the father
(according to Jos, grandfather) of HyRcaNnus (q.v.)
(2 Mace 3 11).


TOBE, ta’bi.
TOBIEL, té-brel, td’bi-el (ToBijA, Tobiél, A,


To®tqA, Tobiél): The father of Tobit (Tob 1 1);
another form of ‘“Tabeel,” “God is good.”


See TuBtas.


TOBIJAH, té-bi'ja (T2AID, tobhiyah, “Yahweh
is good”’):

(1) A Levite in the reign of Jehoshaphat whom
the king sent to teach in the. cities of Judah (2 Ch
17 8; WHA, tabhiyaha; LXX omits).

(2) One of a party of Jews that came from Baby-
lon to Jerus with gold and silver for a crown for
Zerubbabel and Joshua, or for Zerubbabel alone
(Zec 6 10.14). The crown was to be stored in the
temple in remembrance of the donors (LXX in both
passages translates TRIN by xphowso, chrésimoi,
Le. MAID, tabheyha).


TOBIT, td’bit, BOOK OF:


1. Name 6. Date she
2. Canonicity 7. Place of Composition
3. Contents 8. Versions

4. Fact or Fiction? 9. Original Language

5. Some Sources LITERATURE


The book is called by the name of its principal
hero which in Gr is Taéfir, Tdbil, TwBelr, Tobeit and
(N) TwBelé, Tobetth. The original Heb
word thus transliterated (THANG , tabh7-
yah) means “Yahweh is good.” The
Gr name of the son is Twflas, Tobias, a variant of
the same Heb word. In the Eng., Welsh, ete, tr’,
the father and son are called Tobit and Tobias
respectively, but in the Vulg both are known by the
same name—Tobias—the cause of much confusion.
In Syr the father is called Tobit, the son Tobiya,
following apparently the Gr; the former is not a
transliteration of the Heb form given above and
assumes a, different etymology, but what?

‘Though this beok is excluded from Protestant
Bibles (with but few exceptions), Tob 4 7-9 is read

in the Anglican offertory, and at one
2. Canon- time Tobias and Sarah occupied in
icity the marriage service of the Anglican
rubries the position at present held by
Abraham and Sarah. For the position of the book
in the LXX, Vulg and EV, see Jupiru, 2.
_ The Book of Tob differs in essential matters in
its various VSS and even in different MSS of the
‘ same VSS (cf LXX). The analysis
3. Contents of the book which follows is based on
_ the LXX MSS BA, which EV follows.
The Vulg differs in many respects.

The book tells of two Jewish families, living, one at
Nineveh, the other at Echatana, both of which had fallen
into great trouble, but at length recovered their fortunes
and became united by the marriage ef the son of one to
the daughter of the other. Tobit had, with his brethren
of the tribe of Naphtali, been taken captive by Ene-
messar (=Shalmaneser), remaining in exile under his
two successors, Sennacherib and Sarchedonus (Esar-
haddon). During his residence in the Northern King-
dom (Israel) and after his removal to Nineveh (Assyria),
he continued faithful to the Jewish religion and supperted
the observances of that religion at Jerus. Moreover, he
fasted regularly, gave alms freely, and buried such of
his fellow-countrymen as had been put to death with the
approval or by the command of the Assyr king. Not-


withstanding this loyalty_to the religlon of his fathers
and the fact that he buried Jewish corpses intended to be


1. Name


2991


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Titus Manius
Tobit, Book of


disgraced by exposure, he like other Jews (Daniel, etc)
won favor at court by his upright demeanor and was
made steward of the king's estate. Under the next king
{Sennacherib) all this was changed, for he not only lost
his high office but was deprived of his wealth, and came
erilously near to losing his life. Through an accident
bird dung falling into his eyes) he lost his sight, and, to
make had worse, his wife, In the manner of Job's,
taunted him with the futility of his religious faith. Job-
ie he prayed that God might take him out of his dis-
ress.

Now it happened that at this time another Jewlsh
family, equally loyal to the ancestral faith, had fallen into
similar distress—Raguel, his wife Edna and his daughter
Sarah, who resided at Echatana (Vulg ‘‘Rages"; cf
1 14) in Media. Now Sarah was an only daughter,
comely of person and virtuous of character. She had
heen married to seven successive hushands, hut each one
of them had heen slain on the bridal night by the demon
Asmodeus, who seems to have been eaten up with jeal-
ousy and wished no other to have the charming maid
whom he loved. The parents of Tobias at Nineveh,
like those of Sarah at Ecbatana, wished to see their only
child married that they might have descendants, hut
the marriage must be in each case to one helonging to
the chosen race (3 7-15; but see 7, below). The crux
of the story is the bringing together of Tobias and Sarah
and the frustration of the jealous murders of Asmodeus.
In the deep poverty to which he had been reduced Tobit
bethought himself of the money (ten talents, i.e. ahout
£3,500) which he had deposited with one Gabael of
Rages (LXX AB, Rhdgoi) in Media (see 114). This
he desired his son to fetch; but the journey is long and
dangerous, and he must have a trustworthy guide which
he finds in Raphael, an angel sent by God, but who ap-

ears in the guise of an orthodox Jew. The old man is

elighted with the guide, whom, however, he first of all
carefully examines, and dismisses his son with strict in-
junctions to observe the Law, to give alms and not
to take to_wife a non-Jewish (KV ‘‘strange”) maiden
(4 3 ff). Proceeding on the journey they make a halt
on reaching the Tigris, and during a bath in the river
Tobias sees a fish that made as if it would devour him.
The angel tells him to seize the fish and to extract from
it and carefully keep its heart, liver and gall. Reaching
Echatana they are hospitably lodged in the home ot
Raguel,and at_once Tobias falls madly in love with the
heautiful daughter Sarah, and desires to have her for
wife. This is approved by the girl's parents and by
Raphael, and the marriage takes place. Before going
together for the night the angel instructs the bridegroom
to burn the heart and liver of the fish he had caught in
the Tigris. The smoke that resulted acted as a counter-
charm, for it drove away the evil spirit who nevermore
returned (§ 1 ff). At the request of Tobias, Raphael
leaves for Rages and brings from Gabael the ten talents
left in his charge hy Tobit. Tohias and his hride led
by the angel now set out for Nineveh amid the prayers
and blessings of Raguel and with half his wealth. They
are warmly welcomed hy the aged and anxious parents
Tohit and Anna, and Tobias’ dog which be took with
him (5 16) was so pleased upon getting back to the old
home that, according to the Vulg rendering, he‘'ran on
before as if bringing the news... . , showing his jo
hy fawning and by wagging his tail’? (Vulg 11 9; cf EN
1, 4). Upon Teaching is father, acting upon Raphael's
directions, Tobias heals Tobit’s demon-caused hlindness
by applying to the old man’s eyes the gall of the fish,
whereupon sight returns and the family's cup of happi-
ness is full. The angel is offered a handsome fee for the
services he has rendered, but, refusing all, he declares who
he is and why he was sent by God, who deserves all the
Tobit, having a presentiment of the
his son to leave the


ymn of praise and thanksgiving and a record of
his death at the age of 158 years (chs 13, 14).
and Sarah, in accordance with Tohit's advice, leave for
Echatana. His parents-in-law follow his parents into
the other world, and at the age of 127 he mself dies,
though not before hearing of the destruction of Nineveh
by Nebuchadnezzar (14 13-15).


Luther seems to have been the first to call in
question the literal historicity of this book, regard-
ing it rather in the light of a didactic

4. Factor romance. The large number of details
Fiction? pervading the book, personal, local
and chronological, give it the appear-

ance of being throughout a historical record; but
this is but part of the author’s art. His aim is
to interest, instruct and encourage his readers, who
were apparently in exile and had fallen upon evil
times. What the writer seeks to make clear is
that if they are faithful to their religious duties,
giving themselves to prayer and almsgiving, bury-


ing their dead instead of exposing them on the
Tower of Silence,” as did the Persians, then God
would be faithful to them as He had been to Tobit.
_ That the book was designed to be a book of rellglous
iustructlon and not a history appears from the following
considerations: (1) There are historical and geographical
inaccuracies in the book. It was not Shalmaneser
Enemessar) who made the tribes of Naphtall and
ebulun exiles In Assyria, but Tiglath-pileser (734): see
2 K 15 29. Sennacherib was not the son of Shal-
maneser (1 15), but of Sargou the Usurper. Moreover,


the Tigris does not lle on the way from Nineveh to Echa-
tana, as chs 6f imply.

2) The prominence given to certain Jewish principles
and practices makes it clear that the hook was written
on their account. See 1 3 ff, Tohbit’s integrity, his sup-
po of the Jerus sanctuary, his anion etc: (2) he

uries the dead hodies of Jews; (b) he and his wife pray;

(c) he teaches Tohias to keep the Law, give alms, etc.
Note In particular the teaching of Raphael the angel
(le ta and that contained in Tobit's song of praise
¢.


(3) The writer has borrowed largely from other
sources, Bib. and non-Bib., and he shows no regard for
correctness of facts so long as he succeeds in making the
teaching clear and the tale interesting. The legend
about the angel who pretended to he an orthodox Jew
with a proper Jewish name and polite was taken from
pomuler tradition and could hardly have heen accepted

y_ the writer as literally true.

For oral and written sources used by the author of
Tob see the next section. A writer whose aim was to
give an exact account of things which happened would
hardly have gone to so many sources belonging to such
different times, nor would he hring into one life events
which in the sources belong to many lives (Job, etc).

The Book of Tob is dependent upon older sources,
oral or written, more than is the case with most
books in the Apoc. The following is
a brief statement of some of these:

(1) The Book of Job.—Besides be-
longing to the same general class of
literature as Job, such as deals with the problem of
suffering, Tob presents us with a man in whose
career there are alternations of prosperity and ad-
versity similar to those that meet usin Job. When
Anna reproaches her husband for continuing to
believe in a religion which fails him at the critical
moment (Tob 2 14), we have probably to see a
reflection of the similar incident in Job (“renounce
God and die” [Job 2 9]).

(2) The Book of Sirach—There are so many
parallels between Sir and Tob that some kind of
dependence seems quite clear. Take the following
as typical: Both lay stress on the efficacy of alms-
giving (411; 12 9; cf Sir 3 30; 29 12; 40 24).
Both teach the same doctrine of Sheol as the abode
of feelingless shades to which the good as well as
the bad go (8 6.10; 13 2, cf Sir 4619; 14 16;
17 28). The importance of interring the dead is
insisted upon in both books (1 17; 2 3.7; 4 3f;
ef Sir 7 33; 3018; 38 16). The same moral
duties are emphasized: continued attention to God
and the life He enjoins (4 5f.19; cf Sir 6 37; 8
8-14; 36 10; 37 2); chastity and the duty of
marrying within one’s own people (4 12f; 8 6;
ef Sir 7 26; 36 24); proper treatment of servants
(4 14: cf Sir 7 20f); the sin of covetousness (5 18f;
ef Sir 5); see more fully Speaker's Apoc, I, 161 f.

(3) The Ahikar legend—We now know that the
story of Ahikar referred to in 14 10 existed in many
forms and among many ancient nations. The sub-
stance of the legend is briefly that Ahikar was prime
minister in Assyria under Sennacherib. Being
childless he adopted a boy Nadan (called “Aman”
in 14 10) and spared no expense or pains to estab-
lish him well in life. Upon growing up the young
man turns out badly and squanders, not only his
own money, but that of Ahikar. When rebuked
and punished by the latter, he intrigues against his
adoptive father and by false letters persuades the
king that his minister is a traitor. Ahikar is
condemned to death, but the executioner saves the
fallen minister’s life and conceals him in a cellar


5. Some
Sources


Zopit, Book of “THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2992


below his (Ahikar’s) house. In a great crisis which
unexpectedly arises the king expresses the wish that
be had still with him his old and (as he thought)
now executed minister. He is delighted to find after
all that he is alive, and he loses no time in restoring
him to his lost position, handing over to him Nadan
for such punishment as he thinks fit.

There can be no doubt that the ‘‘Achiacharus” of
Tob (Axidxapos, Achidcharos, 1 21f; 210; 11 18; 14
10), a nephew of Tohit, is the Ahikar of the ahove
story. George Hoffmann of Kiel (Ausziige aus syrischen
Akten persischer Madrtyrer) was the first to connect the
Ahikar legend with the Achiacharus of Toh, though he
beliéved that the story arose in the Middle Ages under
the influence of Tob. Modern scholars, however, agree
that the story is of heathen origin and of older date than
Tob. Rendel Harris published a Syr VS of this legend
together with an Intro and tr (Camhridge Press, 1898),
but more important are the references to this tale in the

apyri found at Elephantine and recently published hy

duard Sachau, Aram. Papyrus und Ostraka, (1911,147
ff). This last proves that the tale is as old as 400 BC at
least. For full bibliography on the suhject (up to 1909)
see Schtirer, GJV!, III, 256 ff. See also The Story of
Ahtkar from the Syr, Arab., Armenian, Gr, Slavonic VSS
by Conyheare, J. Rendel Harris and A. 8. Lewis, 1898,
and in particular Histoire eé Sagesse d’Ahikar, par
Francois Nace, 1909.

(4) The occurrence in 14 10 of “Aman” for
“Nadan” may show dependence upon Est, in which
book Haman, prime minister and favorite of Ahas-
uerus (Xerxes, 485-464 BC) exhibits treachery com-
parable with that of Nadan. But Est seems to the

resent writer to have been written after and not

efore Tob (see Century Bible, “Esther,” 299 ff).
It is much more likely that a copyist substituted,
perhaps unconsciously through mental association,
the name Haman for that which stood originally in
the text. Marshall (HDB, IV, 789) thinks that
the author of Tob was acquainted with the Book of
Jub, but he really proves no more than that both
have many resemblances. In its angelology and
demonology the Book of Jub is much more devel-
oped and belongs to a later date (about 100 BC; sce
R. H. Charles, Book of Jubilees, \vi ff, lviii ff). But
the two writings have naturally much in common
because both were written to express the sentiments
of strict Jews living in the 2d cent. BC.

This book seems to reflect the Maccabean age,
an age in which faithful Jews suffered for their

religion. It is probable that Jth and
6. Date Tob owe their origin to the same set
of circumstances, the persecutions of
the Jews by the Syrian party. The book belongs
therefore to about 160 BC. The evidence is ex-
ternal and internal.

(1) External.—(a) 14 4-9 implies the existence
of the Book of Jon and also the completion and
recognition of the prophetic Canon (about 200 BC).
(b) Since Gir is used as a source, that book must have
been written, ie. Tob belongs to a later date than
say 180 BC. (c) The Christian Father Polycarp
in 112 AD quotes from Tob, but there is no earlier
allusion to the book. The external evidence proves
no more than that Tob must have been written
after 180 BC and before 112 AD.

(2) Internal.—(a) 14 5f seems to show that Jon
was written while the temple of Zerubbabel was in
existence, but before this structure had been replaced
by the gorgeous temple erected under Herod the
Great: ic. Tob was written before 25 BC. (6)
The stress laid upon the burial of the dead suits
well the period of the Syrian persecution, when we
know Antiochus Epiphanes allowed Jewish corpses
to lie about unburied. (c) We have in Tob and
Jth the same zeal for the Jewish Law and its observ-
ance which in a special degree marked the Macca-
bean age. Néldeke and Léhr (Kautzsch, Apok.
des AT, 136) argue for a date about 175 BC, on the
ground that in Tob there is an absence of that fer-
vent zeal for Judaism and that hatred of men and


things non-Jewish which one finds in books written
during the Maccabean wars. But we know for
certain that when the Maccabean enthusiasm was
at its height there existed all degrees of fervor
among the Jews, and it would be a strange thing
if all the literature of the time represented but one
phase of the national life. ‘

We have no means of ascertaining who wrote this
book, for the ascription of the authorship to Tobit

(1 1 ff) is but a literary device. There
7. Place of are, however, data which help in fixing
Composition the nationality of the writer_and the

country in which he lived. That the
author was a Jew is admitted by all, for no other
than a Jew could have shown such a deep interest
in Jewish things and in the fortunes of the Jewish
nation. Moreover, the fact that Tobit, though a
member of the Northern Kingdom, is represented
as worshipping at the Jerus temple and observing
the feasts there (1 4-7) makes it probable that the
author was a member of the Southern Kingdom
wishing to glorify the religion of his country.

That he did not live in Pal is suggested by several con-
Siderations: (1) 'The hook describes the varying fortunes
of Jews in exile so completely and with snch keen sym-
pathy as to suggest that the writer was himself one of
them. (2) The affectionate language in which he refers
to Jerus and its religious associations (1 4 ff) is such as
a member of the Diaspora wonld use. (3) The anthor
nowhere reveals a close personal knowledge of Pal. That


Tobit, the ostensible author (1 1), should he set forth
as a native of Galilee (1 1f) is due to the art of the writer.


Assuming that the book was written in a foreign
land, opinions differ as to which. The evidence
seems to favor either Persia or Egypt. In favor of
Persia is the Pers background of the book. As-
modeus (8 8.17) is the Pers AéSma daeva. The
duty of burying the dead is suggested to the Jewish
writer by the Pers (Zoroastrian) habit of exposing
dead bedies on the ‘“Tower of Silence” to be eaten
by birds. Consanguinecous marriages are forbid-
den in the Pent (see Lev 18 6 ff); but they are
favored by Tob 1 9; 3 15; 4 12; 7 4. The latter
seems to show that Tobias and Sarah whom he
married were first cousins. Marriages between
relatives were common among the Jranians and
were defended by the magicians as a religious duty.
One may say it was allowed in the particular case
in question on account of the special circumstances,
the fewness of Jews in the parts where the families
of Tobit and Raguel lived; cf Nu 36 4 ff for an-
other special case. The fact that a dog is made to
accompany Tobias on his journey to Ecbatana
(6 17; 11 4) favors a Pers origin, but is so repug-
nant to Sem ideas that it is omitted from the Heb
VSS of this story (see Dog). For an elaborate de-
fence of a Pers origin of Tob see J. H. Moulton, Ex-
pos T, XI, 157 ff; ef H. Maldwyn Hughes, The Ethics
of Jewish Apocryphal Literature, 42 ff. The evidence
is not decisive; for a knowledge of Iranian modes of
thought and expression may be possessed by persons
living far away from Iranian territory. And at
some points Tob teaches things contrary to Zoroas-
trianism. Néldeke and Léhr hold that the book
was composed in Egypt, referring to the facts that
the demon Asmodeus on being overcome flees to
Egypt (8 3) and that there were Jews in Egypt who
remained loyal to their ancestral faith and were
nevertheless promoted to high places in the state.
The knowledge of Mesopotamia shown by the author
is so defective (see 4, above) that a Mesopotamian
origin for the book cannot be conceived of.

Tob exists in an unusually large number of MSS and
VSS showing that the hook was widely read and regarded
as Important. But what is peculiar in the
case of this hook is that its contents differ
largely—and not seldom in quite essential
matters—in the various MSS, texts and tr*


(see 3, ahove).
Tob has come down to us in the following languages:


8. Versions


2993


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Tobit, Book of


(1). Greek.— MSS of the Gr text helong to three classes:
(a) that found in the uncials BA (which are almost
identical) and most Gr MSS; our Eng. and other modern
tr are made from this; (6) that of & which deviates from
(a) often 1n important matters. The old Lat tallies with
this very closely; (c) that of Codd. 44, 106 and _107
(adopting the numbers of Holmes and Parsons), which
largely coincides with (8). From 7 10 onward this text
forms the basis of the Syr (Pesh) VS. Opinions differ
as to which of these three Gr texts is the oldest. Fritzsche,
Noldeke and Grimm defend the poor of BA. In
favor of this are the following: This text exists in the
largest number of MSS and tr®; it is most frequently
quoted by the Fathers and other early writers; it ls
less diffuse and more spontaneous, showing less editorial
manipulation. Ewald, Reusch, Schiirer, Nestle and J.
Rendel Harris hold that & represents the oldest Gr text.
Schiirer (GJ V4, III, 243) gives the pelea arguments
for this view (cf Fuller, Speaker's Comm., I, 168 f).
is much fuller than BA. Condensation (cf B A) is muc.
more likely, Fullor and Schiirer say, than expansion (N);
but this is questioned. In some cases N preserves an
admittedly better text, which is of course true often of
the LXX and even the minor VSS as against the MT.

(2) potas Ma The Old Lat hased on & found in (¢)
the editions published in 1751 by Sahbathier (Bib. Sac.
Lat VSS _Antig.); (8) in the Book of Tob (A. Neubauer,
1878). This text exists in at least three recensions. (5)
The Vulg, which simply reproduces_Jerome’s careless tr
made in a single night; see (3). In Jth and Tob the
Vulg is in every respect identical with its tr made by
Jerome.

(3). Aramate (a term which strictly embraces Shes
(a) That from which Jerome's Jewish help made the Heb
that formed the basis of Jerome's Lat VS. We have
no copy of this (see next section). (6) That published
by Neubauer (Book of Tob, a Chaldee Text) which was
found by him imhedded in a Jewish Midr of the 15th
cent. eubauer was convinced and tried to prove that
this ls the VS which Jerome's teacher put into Heh and
which therefore formed the hasis of Jerome's own VS.
In favor of this is the fact that in chs 1-36, and there-
fore throughout the book, Tob is spoken of in the third
VS and in Jerome's


—-7 9. rom % 10 onward the text corresponds
Closely with the Gr, &, and PM esp. in parts, with the MSS
44,106,107. See fully Schtirer, GJV', 244 ff.


Hebrew.—None of the Heh recensions are old.
Two Hob ‘texts of Tob have heen known since the 16th
cent., havi


nople. (8 t F (Hi
account CP ene fact that Paul Fagius published it in 1542.
It had, however, been previously published, i.e. in Con-
stantinople in 1517. F introduces Bib. phraseology
wherever possible. Since these are comparatively lata
tre they have but little critical value, and the same state-
ment applies to the two following Heb tr discovered,
edited and tra hy Dr. M. Gaster_(see PSBA, XVIII,
204 ff, 259 ff; XIX, 27 ff): () A Heb MS found in the
British Museum and designated by him HL. This MS
agrees with the Vulg and Aram. at some points where
the other authorities differ, and Dr. Gaster thinks it not
unlikely that in HL we have a copy of the original text.
He has not been followed hy any scholar in this opinion.
(8) Dr. Gaster copied some years ago from 2 Heb Midr,
apparently no longer existing, a condensed Heb VS (AG)
of Tob. Like HL it agrees often with the Vulg and
Aram. against other VSS and MSS. 7

(6) Ethiopic.—Dillmann has issued the ancient Ethi-
ibe VSS in his Biblia Veterig Testaments Aethiopica, V,
1894.


majority of modern scholars, who have a
aie iewledes of Sem than the older scholars,
hold that the original text of Tob was

9. Original Sem (Aram. or Heb); so Ered: Hilgen-
Language feld, Graetz, Neubauer, Bickell, Fuller
(Speaker's Apoc), Marshall (HDB). In
favor of this are the following considerations: (1) The
existence of an Aram. text in Jerome’s day (see [3],
above). (2) The proper names in the book, male
and female, have a Sem character. (3) The style of


the writer is Sem rather than Aryan, many of the
expressions making bad Gr, but when turned into
Sem yielding good Aram. or Heb. See the argu-
ments as set out by Fuller (Speaker’s Apoc, I,
164 ff). Marshall (HDB, TIT, 788) gives his reasons
for concluding that the original language was Aram.,
not Heb, in this opinion following Neubauer (op.
cit.). Graetz (Monaisschrift fiir Geschichte und Wis-
senschaft der Juden, 1879, 386 ff) gives his grounds
for deciding for_a Heb original. That the book
was written in Gr is the view upheld by Fritzsche,
Néldeke, W. R. Smith, Schiirer and Lohr. The text
of B A, says Lohr, contains Gr of the most idiomatic
kind, and gives no suggestion of being a translation.
_ LITERATURE.—Much of the hest literature has been
cited in the course of the preceding article. See also ‘‘Lit-
erature’’ in art. Apocryraa, for text, comms., etc,and the
Bible Dicts., EB (W. Erbt) and HDB (J. _T. Marshall).
Note in addition the following: K. D. Ilgen, Die Ge-
schichte Tobias, nach den drei verschiedenen Originalen, Grie-
chisch, Lateinisch u. Syr., etc, 1800; Ewald, Gesch.3, IV,
269-74; Graetz, Gesch.?, 1V, 466 ff; Ndldeke, ‘‘ Die Texte
des Buchs Tob," Monatsschrift der Berlin Acad., 1879, 45 ff;
Bickel, ‘‘ A Source of the Book of Tob,"" Athenaeum, 1890,
700 ff; 1891, 123ff; I. Abrahams, ‘‘ Tobit’s Dog,"' Jewish
Quarterly Review, I, 3, 288; E. Cosquin, ‘‘Le livre de
Tohle et l'histoire du sage Ahikar,"’ Rev. Bib. Int., VIII,
1899, 50-82, 510-31, rejects R. Harris’ views; Margarete
Plath, ‘‘Zum Buch Tob," Stud. und Krit., 1901, 377-414;
I. Lev], ‘‘La langue originale de Tob,'' Rev. Juive, XLIV,
niet a Oxford Apocrypha, ‘‘Tobit’’ (full hibliog-
raphy). .
A T. Wirron Davies
TOCHEN, td’ken (j9M, tokhen, “task,” “meas-
ure’; B, @dxca, Thékka, A, @6xxav, Théchchan):
One of the cities of Simeon, mentioned with Rim-
mon and Ashan (1 Ch 4 32). The name does not
appear in Joshua’s list (19 7), but in that place LXX
gives Thokka, from which we may infer that the
name has fallen out in the Heb. It is not identi-
fied.


TOGARMAH, té-gir'ma (MATIN, MANN, #-
gharmah; Oopyapa, Thorgamd, Oepyapd, Thergamd,
Qupyapa, Thurgamd, OvpyaBa, Thur-


1. Its gabdé; Vulg Thorgoma): The 3d son
Forms: A of Gomer, and grandson of Japheth,
Suggested his brothers being Ashkenaz and Ri-
Identifica- phath (Gen 10 3). The meaning of
tion the name is doubtful. Grimm (Géesch.


- deutsch. Sprache, II, 325) suggests
Sanskr. toka, “tribe,” and arma=Armenia. Hty-
mological and other difficulties stand in the way of
Fr. Delitzsch’s identification of Togarmah with the
Assyr Til-garimmu, “hill of Garimmu,” or, possibly,
“of the bone-heap,” a fortress of Melitene, on the
borders of Tabal (Tubal).
In Ezk 27 14 Togarmah is mentioned after Tubal,
Javan and Mesech as supplying horses and mules
to the Tyrians, and in 38 6 it is said
2. Probably to have supplied soldiers to the army
Armenia or of Gog (Gyges of Lydia). In the
a Tract Assyr inscriptions horses came from
Connected Kdsu (neighborhood of Ceppadees)),
Therewith Andia and Mannu, tothe N. of Assyria.
Both Kiepert and Dillmann regard
Togarmah as having been Southeastern Armenia,
and this is at present the general opinion. The
ancient identification of their country with Togar-
mah by the Armenians, though correct, is probably
due to the LXX transposition of g and r (Thorgamd
for Togarmah), which has caused them to see therein
the name of Thorgom, father of Haik, the founder
of their race (Moses of Khor, I, 4, secs.9-11). Ezk
27 14 (Swete) alone has g before r: Oavypayd, Thai-
gramd. The name “Armenia” dates from the 5th
cent. BC. See Arnmenta; Tasue or Nations,


TJ. G. Pincuss
TOHD, to’hi. See Nawara.


TOI, 10, -i. See Tov.


Token
Tongues, Gift of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2994


TOKEN, td’k’n (MN, ’Gth, usually rendered
“sign” [on Dt 22 14 ff see the comms.]): “Sign”
and ‘“‘token” are virtually synonymous words and
in AV are used with little or no distinction (in Ex
13, cf vs 9 and 16). If there is any difference,
“token” is perhaps more conerete and palpable
than “sign,” but this difference cannot be stressed.
The modern use of ‘‘token,” however, as a ‘‘memo-
rial of something past” is found in Nu 17 10; Josh
212. RV has substituted “sign” in Ex 18 16;
Ps 185 9; Isa 44 25, and ARV has “evidence” in
Job 21 29 (a needlessly prosaic change). The four
NT examples, Mk 14 44; Phil 1 28; 2 Thess 1
5; 8 17 (each for a different Gr word) are self-
explanatory. See Sian. :

Burton Scorr Easton

TOKHATH, tok’hath. See Tixvan.


TOLA, td’la in, isla’, “worm” or ‘'scarlet
stuff”):

(1) One of the four sons of Issachar (Gen 46 13;
1 Ch 7 1), mentioned among those who journeyed
to Egypt with Jacob (Gen 46 8f), and in the
census taken by Moses and Eleazar, as father of
the Tolaites (Nu 26 23) whose descendants in the
reign of David included 22,600 “mighty men of
valor” (1 Ch 7 2).

(2) One of the Judges, the son of Puah, a man of
Issachar. He dwelt in the hill country of Ephraim
in the village of Shamir, where after judging Israel
23 years he was buried (Jgs 10 1.2). In the order
of succession he is placed between Abimelech and
Jair. It is interesting to note that both Tola and
Puah are names of colors, and that they occur
together both in the case of the judge and in that of
the sons of Issachar. They may therefore be
looked upon as popular typical or ancestral names
of the Issachar tribe, although current critical
theories seek an explanation in a confusion of texts.

Exxa Davis Isaacs

TOLAD, td’lad. See Evtouap.

TOLAITES, to’la-its. See Toua.

TOLBANES, tol’ba-néz, tol-ba’néz (TodBavys,
Tolbdnés): One of the porters who had taken for-
eign wives (1 Esd 9 25)=“‘Telem” of Ezr 10 24;
perhaps identical with the porter Talmon (Neh 12
25). :


TOLL, tél: (1) Aram. "3%, middah, “toll” or
‘tribute’ paid by a vassal nation to its conqueror
(Ear 4 20; 6 8; Neh 5 4); written also M173,
mindah (Ezr 4 18; 7 24). More accurately for
Joo, hdlakh, “toll,” or “way tax” (4 18.20; 7 24).
In NT times the Romans had placed throughout
Pal many toll stations (reddvor, iclénion). Levi
the publican was stationed at such a tax office (Mt
99; Mk 214; Lk 6 27); ef redtdvns, telinégs, a
“tax collector’ or “publican.” The tax which the
Jews paid toward the support of the temple, a
didrachma, is called rédos, télos, “toll” (Mt 17
25), the same as the word rendered “tribute” (Rom
18 7). Epwarp Bacay PoLLarp


TOMB, t6dm. See Burrau.


TOMORROW, t6é-mor’d. See Morrow.
TONGS, tongz (O°9R3%, melkahayim): This
word is, where it occurs in AV and ERV, with two
exceptions, changed in ARV into ‘‘snuffers’’ (Ex 25
38; Nu 49; 2 Ch 4 21; see Snurrers). The
exceptions are 1 K 7 49, “tongs of gold,” and
Isa 6 6, ‘taken with the tongs from off the altar.”


InIsa 44 12, where another word (332'5 , ma‘d¢adh)
is used, “the smith with the tongs” of AV is changed
in RV into “the smith maketh an axe” (ef Jer
10 3). See also Attar; Toots.


_ TONGUE, tung: Almost invariably for either
WW , lashon, or yYAdooa, gléssa, the latter word with
the cognates érepdyhwooos, heteréglissos, ‘‘of strange
tongues” (1 Cor 14 21), yAwoowdns, glossédés, “talk-
ative,” EV “full of tongue” (Sir 8 3; 9 18), YAwo-
gorouéw, glissotoméd, “to cut out the tongue”
(2 Mace 7 4), dlyAwsoos, digldssos, _‘‘double-
tongued” (Sir 5 9; 28 13). In 1 Tim 3 8, how-
ever, “double-tongued” is for SfAoyos, dilogos, lit.
“‘two-worded.”’ Where “tongue” in AV translates
Siddexros, didlektos (Acts 1 19; 2 8; 21 40; 22 2;
26 14), RV has “language,” while for AV “‘in the
Hebrew tongue’ in Jn 6 2; Rev 911; 16 16
(Efpaicrt, Hebraistt) RV bas simply “in Hebrew.”
In addition, in the OT and Apoe, AV uses ‘‘to hold
one’s tongue” as a tr for various verbs meaning
“to be silent”; RV in the OT writes ‘to hold one’s
peace” and in the Apoc “to be silent,” except in
Sir 32 8, where AV is retained (cwrdw, sidpdd).

The various uses of “tongue” in Eng. are all
possible also for lashdn and gldssa, whether as the
physical organ (Ex 11 7; Mk 7 33, ete) or as
meaning “language” (Gen 10 5; Acts 2 4, ete)
or as describing anything shaped like a tongue
(Isa 1115; Acts 2 3, etc). In addition, both
words, esp. ldshén, appear in a wider range of mean-
ings than can be taken by ‘‘tongue” in modern Eng.
So the tongue appears as the specific organ of
speech, where we should prefer “mouth” or ‘‘lips”
(Ex 410; Ps 71 24; 78 86; Prov 16 1; Phil 2
11, etc), and hence “tongue” is used figuratively
for the words uttered (Job 6 30; Ps 189 4;
1-Jn 3 18, etc). So the tongue can be said to have
moral qualities (Ps 109 2; Prov 15 4, etc) or to
be “glad” (Acts 2 26); to “love with the tongue”
(1 Jn 3 18) is to love in word only, and to be
“double-tongued” (Sir 6 9; 28 13; 1 Tim 8 8)
is to be a liar. A further expansion of this figura-
tive use has produced expressions that sound slightly
bizarre in Eng., although their meaning ig clear
enough: e.g., ‘‘Who have whet their tongue like a
sword” (Ps 64 3); “His tongue is as a devouring
fire’ (Isa 30 27); ‘“‘My tongue is the pen of a
ready writer” (Ps 45 1), and, esp., ‘Their tongue
walketh through the earth” (Ps 73 9).

In Job 20 12, ‘“Though wickedness be sweet in
his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue,” the
figure is that of an uncultured man rolling a choice
morse] around in his mouth so as to extract the
utmost flavor. In Ps 10 7; 66 17 (RVm), how-
ever, ‘under the tongue’ means “in readiness to
utter,” while in Cant 4 11, ‘Honey and milk are
under thy tongue,” the pleasure of a caress is de-
scribed. To “divide their tongue” (Ps 65 9) is to
visit on offenders the punishment of Babel. See
Tonausus, CoNFUSION oF.

Burton Scorr Easton

TONGUES, tungz, CONFUSION OF: <Accord-
ing to Gen 11 1-9, at some time not very long after

the Flood, “the whole earth was of

1. The one language and of one speech. And
Narrative it came to pass, as they journeyed
east” (the “they” is left vague) that
they settled in the land of Shinar (Babylonia).
There they undertook to build “a city, and a tower,
whose top may reach unto heaven,” using the Bab
burned brick and “slime” as building materials.
The motive was to “make us a name; lest we be
scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.”
This seems to meam that the buildings would give
them a reputation for impregnability that would


2995


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Token


Tongues, Gift of


secure them against devastating invasions. ‘And
Jeh came down to see.’ And He said, “Nothing
will be withholden from them, which they purpose
to do. Come, let us go down, and there confound
their language.’ The persons spoken to are not
named (cf Gen 1 26; 3 22), nor is it explained how
Jeh, who in ver 5 was on earth, is now in heaven.
“So Jeh scattered them abroad from thence,’’ and
the name of the city was “called Babel [babhei];
because Jeh did there confound [bdlal] the lan-
guage of all the earth: and from thence did Jeh
scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.”

The purpose of this narrative is the explanation
of the diversity of human languages. They origi-
nated through an act of Jeh, in order to destroy the
presumptuous designs of the first builders of Babylon.


The section admittedly belongs to J and 1t has no con-
nection with the matter (mostly P) in Gen 10. For ch
10 explains the origin of the nations “‘ every
2. Context °2¢ after his tongue, after their families”
* (vs 5.20.31) as due to the orderly migration
and gradual spreading of the sons and de-
scendants of Noah, and names Nimrod aver 10) as the
sole founder of Babylon. Nor does 11 1-9 logically
continue the J matter in ch 9, as too many persons are
Involved for the time immediately following the Flood.
Still, it is quite possible that some J matter was dropped
when the J and P sources were united at this point.
Another possibility is to see in Gen 11 1-9 the con-
tinuation of Gen 16-24, which it carries on smoothiy,
with the same distrust of human culture. The murderer
Cain went to the E. of Eden (4 16), and his descendants
hrought in the knowledge of the various arts (4 a0 aay
These descendants journeyed still farther to the EK.
(11 2), attempted to use their skill in building the tower
and were punished by the bdlal catastrophe. No ac-
count of the Deluge could have followed, for all the di-
versities of languages would have been wiped away by
that event. :

This assumption of a special, early source within J
prohahly best explains the facts. It is indicated by the
very primitive, naive theology, which is much less de-
veloped than that of J as a whole. And the ohscure
relation of Gen 11 1-9 to the Flood narrative is ac-
counted for, for two narratives were comhined here, one
of which contained an account of the Deluge, while the
other did not. "

By using the repeated ‘‘going down”’ of vs 5.7 asa clue,
the section can he resolved fairly easily into two narra-

tives, e.g. (1) The men build a tower, ‘‘whose
3. Homo- top may reach unto heaven,’’ in order to
ieiges make a name for themselves as marvelous
geneity builders. Jeh, secing the work heginning
and “lest nothing be withholden from
them,” ete, goes down and confounds their language.
(2) The men build a city, as a defensive measure, ‘‘lest
we be scattered abroad on the face of the whole earth.”
Jeh goes down to see and scatters them abroad. For
other analyses see the comms. But they _are hardly
imperative. For (2) gives no motive for Jeh‘'s action,
while ‘‘city" and ‘‘tower,"’ ‘confusion of tongues”’ and
“scattering,”” are complementary rather than parallel
terms, The Suprocivon that a few words describing
Jeh’s return to heaven have disappeared somewhere
from yer 6 relieves the awkwardness.


The “historicity” of the narrative will be upheld
by very few persons of the present day. Human
languages began to diverge (if, indeed
4. His- there ever was such a thing as a primi-
toricity tive language) tens, if not hundreds,
of thousands of years before the build-
ing of Babylon and long before human beings had
attained enough skill to erect, the most rudimentary
structures, let alone such an elaborate affair as the
brick-built city and tower of Babel. And what is
true of languages as a whole is equally true of the
languages spoken in the vicinity of Pal. If Egyp,
Hittite, and the Sem group have any common
point of origin, it lies vastly back of the time and
cultural conditions presupposed in Gen 11 1-9.
Tt is needless to enlarge on this, but for the harm
done by a persistent clinging to the letter of the
narrative, White’s History of the Warfare of Science
with Theology may be consulted. It belonged to
the genius of the Hebrews to seek religious explana-
tions of the things around them. And such an
explanation of the origin of languages is the content
of Gen 11 1-9.


This explanation seems, as yet, to be without
parallel, for the tr of the fragmentary British
Museum Inscription K 3657 is en-
§. Sources tirely uncertain. Indeed, legends as
to how the differences of human speech
began seem to be extremely scanty everywhere, as
if the question were not one that occupied the
minds of primitive people. Comparative folklore
still has much work to do as regards this special
topic (for a few references see Hnc Brit, 11th ed, art.
“Babel,” and Gunkel, Genesis’, in loc.). The other
features of the narrative, however, are without
great significance. Buildings that were unfinished
because the builders offended the gods are fairly
abundant, and it is quite possible that the writer
of Gen 11 1-9 had some particular Bab structure
in mind (see Baset, Towrror). Nor are attempts
of men to climb into heaven difficult to con-
ceive, when the sky is thought of (as it nearly
always was until comparatively modern times) as
a material dome. So Gr Bar (3 6 f) specifies that
they “built the tower to the height of 463 cubits.
And they took a gimlet, and sought to pierce the
heaven, saying, Let us sce whether the heaven is
made of clay, or of brass, or of iron.” Closely
parallel to the Babel story is the Gr legend of the
giants, who piled Pelion on Ossa in their attempt to
storm the dwelling of the gods, and, as a matter of
fact, the two accounts seem to be combined in
Sib Or 3 97-104.

Whether aided by a tradition about some par-
ticular Bab tower or not, the localization of the
story in Babylonia was inevitable. The Baby-
lonians, above all nations in the world, relied on their
wisdom and their skill, and so nowhere but in Baby-
jon would this supreme presumption have been
possible. Babylon, the embodiment of pride, at
the very beginning of her existence was guilty of an
act of pride so overwhelming as to call out God’s
vengeance. The “folk-etymology” babhel-bdlal (in
Aram. babhel-balbél) may have been suggested by
this story, or (perhaps more probably) it may have
originated separately, perhaps at first as a piece of
deliberate irony. Certainly the many languages
that could be heard in Babylon were not without
significance for the story.

The religious value of the story is dimmed for
the modern reader because of the very primitive

concepts that it contains. The men
6. Religious are able to build up into heaven. In
Value order to see what they are doing Jeh

is obliged to “come down.” He is
obliged to take action lest His dwelling-place be in-
vaded (cf Gen 3 22). And the “let us go down”
of ver 7, while certainly not polytheistic, is equally
certainly a polytheistic “remnant.” On the other
hand, it is to be noted that God’s power is never in
question and that there is no desperate and uncer-
tain battle as in the Gr legend. Important, also
(and often overlooked), is the realization that God’s
power is just as active in Babylon as it is in Pal.
The primal meaning to the Israelite, however, was
this: In Babylon was seen the greatest enemy of
the people of God, possessing immeasurable re-
sources. Humanly speaking, there were no limits
to this power, and if it had been uncontrolled at the
beginning, all the world would have been over-
whelmed with the rule of evil. This God had pre-
vented.

Lirerature.—Driver in HDB; Cheyne (art. ‘‘Bahel,
Tower of”) in EB; the comms. on Gen, esp. those of
Skinner, Driver, Procksch, and Gunkel.

Burton Scotr Easton

TONGUES, GIFT OF: A spiritual gift men-
tioned in Acts 10 44-46; 11 15; 19 6; Mk 16 17,
and described in Acts 2 1-13 and at length in 1
Cor 12-14, esp. ch 14. In fact, 1 Cor 14 contains


Tongues, Gift of
Tongues of Fire


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2996


such a full and clear account that this passage is


basic. The speaker in a tongue addressed God

(vs 2.28) in prayer (ver 14), princi-
1. Basic pally in the prayer of thanksgiving
Character (vs 15-17). The words so uttered


of 1 Cor 14 wereincomprehensible to the congrega-~
tion (vs 2.5.9, etc), and even to the
speaker himself (ver 14). Edification, indeed, was
gained by the speaker (ver 4), but this was the
edification of emotional experience only (ver 14).
The words were spoken ‘“‘in the spirit” (ver 2); ie.
the ordinary faculties were suspended and the
Divine, specifically Christian, element in the man
took control, so that a condition of ecstasy was pro-
duced. This immediate (mystical) contact with
the Divine enabled the utterance of “mysteries”
(ver 2)—things hidden from the ordmary buman
understanding (see Mystery). In order to make
the utterances comprehensible to the congrega-
tion, the services of an “‘interpreter’’ were needed.
Such a man was one who had received from
God a special gift as extraordinary as the gifts of
miracles, healings, or the tongues themselves (12
10.30); i.e. the ability to interpret did not rest at
all on natural knowledge, and acquisition of it might
be given in answer to prayer (14 13). Those who
had this gift were known, and St. Paul allowed the
public exercise of “‘tongnes’’ only when one of the
interpreters was present (ver 28). As the presence
of an interpreter was determined before anyone
spoke, and as there was to be only one interpreter
for the “two or three’ speakers (ver 28), any in-
terpreter must have been competent to explain
any tongue. But different interpreters did not
always agree (ver 26), whence the limitation to one.
These characteristics of an interpreter make it
clear that “speaking in a tongne”’ at Corinth was
not normally felt to be speaking in a
2. Foreign foreign language. In ver 10 EV is
Languages misleading with “there are, it may be,
Barred Out so many kinds of voices in the world,”
which suggests that St. Paul is refer-
ring directly to the tongues. But tosatita there
should be rendered ‘‘very many,” “ever so many,”
and the verse is as purely illustrative as is ver 7.
Hence foreign languages are to be barred out.
(Still, this need not mean that foreign phrases may
not occasionally have been employed by the speak-
ers, or that at times individuals may not have made
elaborate use of foreign languages. But such cases
were not normative at Corinth.) Consequently,
if “tongues” means “languages,” entirely new lan-
guages must be thought of. Such might have been
of many kinds (12 28), have been regarded as a fit
creation for the conveyance of new truths, and may
even at times have been thought to be celestial
languages—the “‘tongnes of angels” (13 1). On
the other hand, the word for “tongue” (gléssa) is
of fairly common use in Gr to designate obsolete
or incomprehensible words, and, specifically, for
the obscure phrases uttered by an oracle. This use
is closely parallel to the use in Corinth and may be
its source, although then it would be more natural
if the “ten thousand words in a tongne” of 14 19
had read “ten thousand gléssai.””_ In no case, how-
ever, can “tongue’’ mean simply the physical organ,
for 14 18.19 speaks of articulated words and _uses
the pl. “tongues” for a single speaker (cf vs 5.6).
A complete explanation of the tongues is given
by the phenomena of ecstatic utterances, esp. when
taken in connection with the history
8. AState of NT times. In ecstasy the soul feels
of Ecstasy itself so suffused with the Divine that
the man is drawn above all natural
modes of perception (the understanding becomes


“ynfruitful”’), and the religious nature alone is felt °


to be active. Utterances at such times naturally


become altogether abnormal. If the words remain
coherent, the speaker may profess to be uttering
revelations, or to be the mere organ of the Divine
voice. Very frequently, however, what is said is
quite incomprehensible, although the speaker seems
to be endeavoring to convey something. In a still
more extreme case the voice will be inarticulate,
uttering only groans or outcries. At the termi-
nation of the experience the subject is generally
unconscious of all that has transpired.


fis active] . . we are not possessed [by God]... .
hut .... when the Divine light shines, the human
light sets..... The prophet . . is passive, and


another


as preaching as if God or Christ were speaking throng.
them, closing their words with ‘‘strange, fanatical, and
quite unintelligible words, of which no rational person
can find the meaning.’ The Gr papyri furnish us with
ap abundance of magical formulae couched in unintelli-
gible terms (e.g. Pap. Lond., 121, ‘‘Iae, .eloat, mar-
marachada, menepho, mermat, teor, aeio, erephie, phere-
phio,”’ etc), which are not infrequently connected with
an ecstatic state (e.g. Reitzenstein, Poimandres, 53-58).

Interpretation of the utterances in such 2 state would
always be difficult and diversities of interpretation
would be unavoidable. Still, with a fixed content, such
as the Christian religion gave, and with the aid of ges-
tures, etc, men who felt that they had an understanding
of such conditions could undertake to explain them to the
congregation. It is to be noted, however, that St. Paul
apparently does not feel that the gift of interpretation
is much to he relied on, for otherwise he would have
appraised the utility of tongues more highly than he does.
But the popularity of tongues in Corinth is easily under-
stood. The speaker was felt to be taken into the closest
of unions with God and hence to he an especial object of
God's favor. Indeed, the occurrence of the phenomenon
in a neo-convert was irrefragable proof that the conver-
sion was approved hy God (Acts 10 44-48; 11 15;
19 6). Soin Mk 16 17 the gift is treated as an excep-
tional and miraculous Divine blessing (in this verse
“new'’ is textually uncertain, and the meaning of the
word, if read, is uncertain also). Moreover, for the more
selfish, the gift was very showy (1 Cor 13 1 suggests
that it was vociferous), and its possession gratified any
desire for personal prominence.


The account in Acts 2 differs from that of 1 Cor 14
in making the tongues foreign languages, although
the ability to use sncb languages is

4. The Ac- not said to have become a permanent
count in apostolic endowment. (Nor is it said
Acts 2 that the speech of Acts 2 14-36 was
delivered in more than one language.)

When the descent of the Spirit occurred, those who
were assembled together were seized with ecstasy
and uttered praises to God. A crowd gathered and
various persons recognized words and phrases in
their own tongues; nothing more than this is said.
That the occasion was one where a miracle would
have had unusual evidential value is evident, and
those who see a pure miracle in the account have
ample justification for their position. But no more
than a providential control of natural forces need
be postulated, for similar phenomena are abun-
dantly evidenced in the history of religious expe-
rience. At times of intense emotional stress the
memory acquires abnormal power, and persons may
repeat, words and even long passages in a foreign
language, although they may have heard them only
once. ow the situation at Jerus at the time of the
Feast gave exactly the conditions needed, for then
there were gathered pilgrims from all countries,
who recited _in public liturgical passages (esp. the
Shméneh ‘Esreh) in their own languages. These,
in part, the apostles and the “brethren” simply
reproduced. Incomprehensible words and phrases
may well have been included also (Acts 2 13), but
for the dignity of the apostles and for the impor-
tance of Pentecost St. Luke naturally cared to em-


2997


phasize only the more unusual side and that with
the greatest. evidential value. It is urged, to be
sure, that this interpretation contradicts the ac-
count in 1 Cor 14. But it does so only on the
assumption that the tongues were always uniform
in their manifestation and appraisement every-
where—and the statement of this assumption is its
own refutation. If the modern history of ecstatic
utterances has any bearing on the Apostolic age,
the speaking in foreign languages could not have
been limited only to Pentecost. (That, however, it
was as common as the speaking in new “languages”’
would be altogether unlikely.) But both varieties St.
Luke may well have known in his own experience.
St. Paul’s treatment of the tongues in 1 Cor 12-
14 is a classical passage for the evaluation of reli-
it gious emotionalism. Tongues are a
5. Religious Divine gift, the exercise is not to be
Emotiou- forbidden (14 39), and St. Paul him-
alism self is grateful that he has the gift in
an uncommon degree (14 18). In-
deed, to those who treat them simply with scorn
they become a “sign” that hardening is taking
place (14 21-23). Yet alove of them because they
are showy is simply childish (14 20; 13 11), and
the possessor of the gift is not to think that he has
the only thing worth obtaining (ch 12). The only
gift that is utterly indispensable is love (ch 13), and
without it tongues are mere noise (13 1). The
public evidential value of tongues, on which per-
haps the Corinthians were inclined to lay stress,
St. Paul rates very low (14 21-23). Indeed, when
exercised in public they tend to promote only the
self-glorification of the speaker (14 4), and so are
forbidden when there is not an interpreter, and
they are limited for public use at all times (14 27.
28). But the ideal place for their exercise is in
private: ‘Let him speak to himself, and to God”
(14 28). The applicability of all this to modern
conditions needs no commentary. Ultra-emotion-
alistic outbreaks still cause the formation of eccen-
tric sects among us, and every evangelist knows
well-meaning but slightly weak individuals who
make themselves a nuisance. On the other hand,
a purely intellectual and ethical religion is rather
a dreary thing. A man who has never allowed his
religious emotions to carry him away may well be
in a high state of grace—but he has missed some-
thing, and something of very great value. See also
SpinitvuaL Girrs; ToNnGveEs oF Fire.


Lirerature.—Plumptre in DB is still useful. Wright,
Some NT Problema (1898), and Walker, The Gift of
Tongues and Other Essays eee have collections of mate-
rial. Of the comms. on 1 Cor those of Heinrici (latest ed,
1896), Lietzmann (1907) and J. Weiss (1910) are much
the best, far surpassing Robertson and Plummer in ICC
(1911). For the Gr material, see _écracts in the index
of Rhode’s Psyche. Gunkel, Die Wirkungen des heiligen
Geistes (1888, 2d reprint in_1909), was epoch-making.
For the later period, see Weinel, Die Wirkungen des
Geistes und der Geister (1899); Lake, The Earlier Epistles
of St. Paul (London, 1911); and see Inge in The Quarterly
Review (London, 1914).

Bourron Scott Easton


TONGUES, INTERPRETATION, in-tdr-pré-
ta/shun, OF. See Sprrituan Gurts; ToNnauEs,
GIFT oF.


TONGUES OF FIRE (yAéercot doel tupds,
gléssai hose purds): The reference in this topic is
to the marvelous gift of the Holy Spirit on the Day
of Pentecost (Acts 2 1-13). After His resur-
rection the Lord bade His disciples to tarry in Jerus
until He should fulfil to them the promise of the
Father, and until they should be clothed with
power from on high (Lk 24 49). Acts 18 re-
peats the same gracious promise with additional

articulars: ‘But ye shall receive power, when the
Fioly Spirit is come upon you: and ye shall be my
witnesses both in Jerus, and in all Judaea and


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


“2, Sinai


Tongues, Gift of
Tongues of Fire


Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.”
These were probably the last words Our Lord spoke
on earth before He ascended to the right hand of God.
When the Day of Pentecost was fully come and
the disciples, no doubt by previous arrangement
and with one accord, were gathered


1. Super- together in one place, the promise was
natural gloriously fulfilled. On that day, the
Manifesta- 50th after the Passover, and so the
tions first day of the week, the Lord’s day,


: the Spirit of God descended upon
them in marvelous copiousness and power. The
gift of the Spirit was accompanied by extraordi-
nary manifestations or phenomena. These were
three and were supernatural. His coming first
appealed to the ear. ‘The disciples heard a “sound
from heaven,” which rushed with mighty force into
the house and filled it even as the storm rushes, but
there was no wind. It was the sound that filled
the house, not a wind. It was an invisible cause
producing audible effects. Next, the eye was ar-
rested by the appearance of tongues of fire which
rested on each of the gathered company. Our AV
“cloven tongues” is somewhat misleading, for it is
likel; to suggest that each fire-like tongue was cloven
or forked, as one sometimes sees in the pictures
representing the scene. But this is not at all the
meaning of Luke’s expression; rather, tongues
parting, asunder, tongues distributed among them,
each disciple sharing in the gift equally with the
others. ‘‘Like as of fire,” or, more exactly, “as
if of fire,’ indicates the appearance of the tongues,
not that they were actually aflame, but that they
prefigured the marvelous gift with which the dis-
ciples were now endowed. :

Finally, there was the impartation to them of a
new strange power to speak in languages they had
never learned. It, was because they were filled
with the Holy Spirit that this extraordinary gift
was exhibited by them. Not only did the Spirit
enable them thus to speak, but even the utterance
of words depended on His Divine influence—they
spake “as the Spirit gave them utterance.”

Many attempts have been made by writers on the
Acts to explain the phenomenon of Pentecost so as to
exclude in whole or in part the supernatural element
which Luke unquestionably recognizes. Some try to
account for the git of tongues by saying that it was a
new style of speaking, or new forms of expression, or new
and elevated thoughts, but this is both unnatural and
wholly inconsistent with the narrative where a real
difference of language is implied. Others imagine that
the miracle was wrought upon the ears of the hearers,
each of whom supposed what he heard to be uttered in
his mother-tongue. But this view contradicts the dis-
tinct statement in Acts 2 4: they ‘‘began to speak with
other tongues,” i.e. the disciples did. It contradicts
what the multitude affirmed, viz. ‘How hear we, every
man In our own language, wherein we were born ?"' (ver 8).
Furthermore, the view contains an element of falsehood,
for in this case the miracle was wrought to make men
believe what was not actually the fact. The only reason-
able explanation of the phenomeua is that which the
record bears on its face, and which Luke obviously meant
his readers to believe, viz. that the Holy Spirit enabled
the disciples to speak in the various languages repre-
sented by the multitude gathered together at the time.

The scenes witnessed at Pentecost were somewhat
analogous to the events which occurred at the giving
of the Law at Sinai, but the contrast
between them is much more _pro-
and Pente- nounced. We are told in He 12 18.
cost 19 that “tempest,” “fire,” and “the

voice of words” attended the inaugu-
ration of the Mosaic dispensation. Something
similar was witnessed at Pentecost. But the dif-
ferences between the two are very marked. At
Sinai there were also the blackness and darkness, the
quaking earth, the thunderings and lightnings, the
voice of the trumpet exceeding loud, the terror of the
people, and the fear of Moses (Ex 19 16-18; He 12
18.19). Nothing of this was seen at Pentecost.


Tongues of Fire
Tortoise


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2998


The phenomena characterize the two dispensations.
That of Sinai was legal. Its suhstance was: Do and
live; disobey and die. Law knows no mercy, extends
no grace. Exact justice is its rule, perfect righteousness
its requirement, and death its penalty. No wonder ter-
rihle things accompanied its proclamation, and Moses
trembled with fear. No wonder it was called ‘‘a flery
law” (Dt 33 2).


With the advent of the Spirit came perfect grace,
Divine power and complete pardon for the worst
of men. At Simai God spoke in one
3. Qualities language. At Pentecost the Spirit
Imparted by through the disciples spoke in many
the Spirit tongues (15 in all are mentioned in
Acts 2). The Law was for one people
alone; the gospel is for the whole race. The sound
that accompanied the outpouring of the Spirit filled
all the house and all the disciples likewise—token
and pledge of the copiousness, the fulness of the
gift. The tongues of flame signified the power of
speech, boldness of utterance, and persuasiveness
which from henceforth were to mark the testimony
of the disciples.


The marvelous capabilities which the witnesses dis-
play after Pentecost are most noteworthy. It is common
to admire their courage and zeal, to contrast their fear-
Jessness in the presence of enemies and danger with their
former timidity and cowardice. It is perhaps not so
common to recognize in them the qualities that lie at
the foundation of all_effective work, that which gives to
witness-hearing for Christ its real energy and potency.
These qualities are such as: knowledge and wisdom,
zeal and prudence, confidence and devotion, boldness
and love, skill and tact. These and the like gifts
appear in their discourses, in their behavior when diffi-
culties arise and dangers impend, and in their conduct
before the angry rulers. It is altogether remarkable
with what skill and tact they defend themselves before
the Sanhedrin, and with what effectiveness they preach
the gospel of the grace of God to the multitude, often
a scoffing and hostile multitude. In Peter's address on
the Day of Pentecost there are the marks of the highest
art, the most skilful logic, and the most persuasive
argument. Professor Stifler well says of it: ‘It is with-
out a peer among the Gdns of uninspired men. And
yet it is the work of a Galilean fisherman, without culture
or training, and his maiden effort.’’ The like distin-
guished traits are found in Peter's address recorded in Acts
8, in that to Cornelius and his friends, and in his defence
when arraigned by the strict believers at Jerus for having
gone into the company of men uncircumcised and having
eaten with them. No less must he said of the equally
wonderful reply of Stephen to the charge brought against
him as recorded in Acts 7. It is quite true that Stephen
did not share in the effusion of the Spirit on the Day of
Pentecost, so far as we know, but he did share in the glft
and power of the Spirit, soon after, for we are told that
he was full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, that he was
also full of grace and power. Accordingly, it should be
no surprise to read, as the effect of his discourse, that the
high priest and all the rest who heard him ‘were cut to
the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth’
(ver 54). Stephen spoke with a tongue of fire.

In the management of the serious complaint made by
the Grecian Jews against the Hebrews as to the neglect
of their widows in the daily ministration (Acts 6 1), and
in their conduct and defence when brought before the
council, as they were once and again (chs 4, 5, 12),
they exhihited a wisdom and prudence far enough re-
moved from shrewdness and cunning. The qualities
they possessed and displayed are uncommon, are more
than human, they are the gift_of the Holy Spirit with
whom they were baptized on Pentecost. So the Lord
Jesus had promised (Mk 13 11; Jn 16 13; Acts 1 8).


The tongues of fire which we have been con-
sidering appear to have differed in one important
aspect from the like gift bestowed on

4, Distin- the Corinthians (1 Cor 12, 14). At
guished Pentecost the disciples spoke in the
from 1 Cor languages of the various persons who
12, 14 heard them; there needed to be no
interpreter, as was provided for at

Corinth. Paul distinctly orders that if there be no
one to explain or interpret the ecstatic utterance
of a speaker, he shall keep silent (1 Cor 14 28).
At Pentecost many spoke at the same time, for the
Spirit had perfect control of the entire company
and used each as it pleased Him. At Corinth Paul
directed that not more than two or at most three
should speak in a tongue, and that by course (one


at atime). At Pentecost each one of the 15 na-
tionalities there represented by the crowd heard in
his own tongue wherein he was born the wonderful
works of God. At Corinth no one understood the
tongue, not even the speaker himself, for it seems
to have been a rhapsody, an uncontrolled ecstatic
outburst, and in case there was no one to interpret
or explain it, the speaker was to hold his peace and
speak to himself and to God, i.e. he must not dis-
turb the worship by giving voice to his ecstasy unless
the whole assembly should be edified thereby. Paul
sets prophecy, or preaching the word of God, far
above this gift of tongues.

It may not be out of place here to say that the so-
called ‘‘gift of tongues,"’ so loudly proclaimed by certain
excitable persons in our day, has nothing in common with
the mighty action of the Spirit of God on the day of
Pentecost, and hardly anything with that which the
Corinthian Christians enjoyed, and which Paul regu-
lated with a master-hand. See Tonevegs, Girt or.

Lirerature.—Stifler, Intro to the Book of Acts;
Alexander, Comm. on the Acts; Kuyper, Work of the
Holy Spirit; Moorehead, Outline Studies in Acis—Eph.

Wm. G. Mooreueap

TOOLS, tdclz: In the Bible, references to the
handicrafts are almost entirely mcidental, and not
many tools are named. The following art. aims to
give a list of those mentioned, together with those
that must have existed also. For detailed descrip-
tion and the Heb and Gr terms employed, see the
separate articles.

(1) The percussion tool was the hammer, used
for splitting or trimming stone, beating metals, and
in wood-carving, as well as for driving nails, tent
pins, etc. Several words are tr? “hammer,” but
the distinction between them is very vague and in
some cases the propriety of the tr is dubious. Cer-
tainly no such distinction is made as that between
“hammer” and “mallet,” nor were separate names
given to the different hammers used in the various
crafts (cf, eg., Jgs 421; 1K 67; Isa 44 12;
Jer 10 4—all for makkabhah). See Hammer.

(2) Of cutting tools, the simplest was of course
the knife. In Ex 20 25, however, the knife
(“sword,’’ EV “‘tool’) appears as a stone-cutter’s
implement and is without doubt a chisel. But
the hatchet of Ps 746 may be a knife. See
Harcuet; Knire.

For ax, again, various words are employed in a
way that is quite obscure to us and apparently with
meanings that are not fixed. So garzen in Dt 20
19 is certainly an ax, but in the Siloam Inscription
(ll. 2,4) it is a pickax (see Marrockx). The vari-
ous words tr? “ax” (RV “axe’”’) must also some-
where include the word for adz, but the specific
term, if there were any such (ma‘d¢ddh[?]), is un-
known. But the adz is a very ancient tool and must
certainly have existed in Pal. See Ax (Axn), Ax-
HEAD.

The saw was used both for wood and for stone
(1 K 7 9), in the latter case being employed in con-
nection with water and sand. But sawing stone
was a very laborious process, and this was one
reason why the ancients preferred stone in large
blocks. These were quarried by the use of heavy
hammers and wedges. See Saw.

The plane (makco'ah) of Isa 44 18 should be tr?
chisel. Chisels, of course, are almost as old as
humanity, and were used on both wood and stone
and doubtless also on metals. In particular, with a
broad chisel and an adz the surface of wood may be
finished very smoothly, and these two implements
took the place of the plane. For wood-carving the
concave chisel (gouge) may have been invented.

The pencil of Isa 44 13 is probably a stylus, for
engraving as well as for marking out lines. For
engraving on gems (Ex 28 9, etc) particularly
delicate instruments of this kind must have been
used. See Linz; Pencin.


2999


(3) Among the boring tools, only the awl appears
(Ex 21 6; Dt 16 17), an instrument primarily
for the use of workers in leather. Holes in wood or
stone were made by a drill, often worked with the
aid of a drawn bow, through the string of which
the drill was passed. See AWL.

(4) Blunted tools were of course sharpened on
stones, as everywhere. In 1 § 13 21 EV speaks
of sharpening with a file, but the text of the verse
is hopelessly corrupt and the tr mere guesswork.
But files of some sort (stone?) must of course have
been used by metal-workers. See Fixe.

(5) Measuring tools were the line and the rod
(see RErp), and the latter must also have been used
as a straight-edge. The compasses of Isa 44 13
were for drawing circles, but doubtless served
for measuring also. See Compassrs. Plumb-line
(‘dnakh in Am 7 7f, a symhol of the searching
moral investigation which would be followed by a
precise and exact judgment; ef mishkdleth, ‘“‘plum-
met,” 2 K 21 13; Isa 28 17) and plummet (‘ebhen
bedhil, ‘‘a stone of tin,’ Zee 4 10, used by Zerub-
babel in testing the completed walls) were like-
wise necessities and had existed from a very early
period. Tools of some sort must have been used
in addition by builders in drawing plans, but their
nature is unknown. See Linz.

(6) The tools for holding and handling work
(vises, tongs, pincers, etc) are never alluded to (AV
in Isa 44 12 is wrong; see Tones). For moving
larger objects no use was made of cranes, and lifting
wag done by the aid of inclined planes and rollers;
but blocks of stone weighing hundreds of tons could
be handled in this way.

The material of the Heb tools was either iron or
bronze. The former was introduced at least by the
time of David (2 S 12 31), but the mention of iron
as a material is often made in such a way (Am 1 3,
etc) as to show that it was not to be taken for
granted. In fact, iron was hard to work and ex-
pensive, and bronze probably persisted for a while
as a cheaper material, Stone tools would be used
only by the very poor or as occasional makeshifts
or for sacred purposes (Josh 5 2).

For the agricultural tools see AGRICULTURE.
See also CarPENTER; Crarrs; Porrer; Smits,
etc. Burton Scorr Easton


TOPARCHY, td’par-ki, top’ar-ki (rorapxla,
toparchia): AV renders this Gr word by ‘“govern-
ment” in1 Macc 11 28 (AVm and RV “province” ).
It denotes a small administrative district corre-
sponding to the modern Turkish Nahieh, admin-
istered by a Mudir. Three such districts were
detached from the country of Samaria and added to
Judaea. Elsewhere (10 30; 11 34) the word used
to describe them is némos. Some idea of the size
of these districts may be gathered from the fact
that Judaea was divided into ten (Pliny v.14) or
eleven (BJ, III, iii, 5) toparchies.

TOPAZ, td’paz. See Stones, Precious.

TOPHEL, to’fel Opn, téphel; Téod, Téphol):
This name is found in a passage with many difficul-
ties (Dt 11). The verse ostensibly makes clearer
the position occupied by the camp of Israel where
Moses addressed the people, by reference to certain
other places which might be presumed to be better
known. Not one of them, however, bas been sat-
isfactorily identified. Some think Tophel may be
represented by the modern et-Tafeleh, 15 miles 8.E.
of the Dead Sea, on the caravan road from Petra
to Kerak. Apart from the question of position, the
change of £ to ¢ is not easily explained. Meantime
we must suspend judgment. . Ewine


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tongues of Fire
Tortoise


TOPHETH, to’feth (MDM , ha-idpheth, etymology
uncertain; the most probable is its connection with
a root meaning “burning’’—the “place of burning”;
AV Tophet, except in 2 K 23 10): The references
are to such a place: “They have built the high places
of Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of
Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in
the fire’ (Jer 7 31). On account of this abomi-
nation Topheth and the Valley of Hinnom should
be called “The valley of Slaughter: for they shall
bury in Topheth, till there be no place to bury,”
RVm “because there shall be no place else’ (ver 32);
see also Jer 19 6.12.13.14. Josiah is said to have
“defiled Topheth” as part of his great religious
reforms (2 K 23 10). The site of this shameful
place would seem to have been either at the lower
end of the VaLLEy or Hinnom (q.v.), near where
Akeldama is now pointed out, or in the open ground
where this valley joins the Kidron.

E. W. G. Masterman

TORAH, to’ra. See Law 1n THE OT; Revena-
TION.


TORCH, térch (THY, lappidh; Aapmds, lam-
pds; in AV this word occurs only 4 t [Nah 2 3.4
(Heb 4.5); Zec 12 6; Jn 18 3]. In RV it is found
10 t [Gen 15 17; Jes 7 16.20; Job 41 19 (Heb
11); Ezk 113; Dnl 106; Nah 2 4 (Heb 5);
Zec 12 6; Jn 18 3; Rev 8 10]): A flambeau; a
large portable light. See Lamp; LanTern.


TORMAH, tér’ma (WAN, tormah, “fraud”;
B, & kpupqj, en kruphé, ‘‘in secret,’ A, peta Sdpav,
metdé. déron, ‘with gifts’): This name is given in
EVm as an alternative to “privily,” or “craftily”
RV (Jgs 9 31). There is no knowledge of such a
place. The text is corrupt.


TORMENT, tér’ment, PLACE OF: A literal tr
in Lk 16 28 of rénos ris Bacdvov, t6pos tés basdnou.
See Hei.


TORMENTOR, tor-men’tér: AV 2 Macc 7 29
for dius, démios, “belonging to the people,” and
so “public executioner,’ RV “butcher.” A term
of utter contempt, whose force is lost in AV. Also
Mt 18 34 for Bacaveriys, basanistés, “torturer.”
Normally the bankrupt debtor was sold into slavery.
But, apparently, in extreme cases (where con-
cealment of assets was suspected?) the defaulter
was sent to prison until restitution should be
made. Probably the imprisonment itself was re-
garded as “torment” (as it doubtless was), and
the “tormentors” need mean nothing more than
jailers. Burton Scotr Easton


TORTOISE, tdr’tus, tdr’tis, tér’tois (AV) @X,
cabh, RV “great lizard”; cf Arab. 4.6, dabb,


the thorny-tailed lizard): The word cabh occurs as
the name of an animal only in Lev 11 29, being the
third in the list of unclean “creeping things.”


The same word is found in Isa 66 20, tr ‘‘litters,”
and in Nu_7 3, where ‘eghléth cabh is trd ‘covered
wagons.’ Gesenius derives the word, in all senses,
from V cabhabh, ‘‘to move gently,”’ ‘‘to flow’’; cf Arab.
dabba, ‘‘to flow." The Arab. noun dabb is Uromastiz
spinipes, the Arabian thorny-tailed lizard. This lizard
js abont 18 in. long, its relatively smooth body being
terminated with a great tail armed with rings of spiny
scales. The Arabs have a familiar proverb, 'a'kad min
dhanab ud-dabb, ‘‘knottier than the tail of the dabb.”
LXX has for eGbh in Lev 11 29 6 kpoxdderdos 6 pena;
ho krokédeilos ho chersatos, the Eng. equivalent of which,
“Jand-crocodile,"” is used by RV for the fifth in the list
of unclean ‘‘creeping things,"’ k6%h, AV ‘chameleon.


The writer does not know what can have led the
translators of AV to use here the word “tortoise.”
Assuming that the thorny-tailed lizard is meant,


Totemism
Trachonitis


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3000


the ‘great lizard” of RV may be considered to be
afair translation. See Lizarp.
AL¥YRED Ey Day

_ TOTEMISM, 1d’tem-iz’m: How far the belief
in totems and totemistic relationships existed in
early Israel cannot be discussed at length here.
Evidence of the helief in deified animal ancestors
is supposed by some writers to he found in the tribal
names Leah (‘wild cow”?), Rachel (‘‘ewe’’),
Simeon (synonymous with the Arab. sim‘u, which
denotes a cross between a wolf and a hyena), Hamor
(‘‘ass’’), Caleh (‘‘dog’’), Zibiah (“gazelle”), etc. But
these names in themselves ‘‘do not prove a totem
stage in the development of Israel” (HPN, 114);
philologically, the view has a shaky foundation
(see, e.g. art. ‘‘Leah” in 1-vol HDB).

Again, it is true that, as a rule, in totemic com-
munities the individual may not kill or eat the
name-giving object of his kin, these animals being
regarded as sacred in totem worship and therefore
“unclean” (tahoo) as food. But the attempt to
connect such personal names as Shaphan (“rock-
badger’), Achhor (“mouse”), Huldah (‘‘weasel’’)—
all from the time of Josiah (2 K 22 3.12.14; cf
Deborah [“bee’’], Gaal [‘‘beetle’’?], Tola [‘‘crimson
worm,” “cochineal’], Nahash [‘serpent’’])—with
the list of unclean animals in Lev 11 (see vs 5m.29)
and Dt 14 is beset with difficulties (cf, however,
Isa 66 17; Ezk 8 101), since all the names can-
not possibly be explained on this ground. See also
Sacririce In THE OT, II, 2, (4); VI, 1.

Robertson Smith (followed by Stade and Ben-
zinger) strongly advocated the view “that clear
traces of totemism can be found in early Israel”
(see HDB, III, 100). G. B. Gray also seems in-
clined to favor the view that some of these names
may he “indirectly derivative from a totem stage of
society’ (HDB, III, 483 f), while at the same time
he recognizes that “the only question is whether
other explanations are not equally satisfactory”
(HPN, 105).

Other writers, such as Wellhausen, Néldeke
(ZDMG, 157 f, 1886), Marti (Gesch. der israelit.
Religion, 4th ed, 24), Addis (Heb Rel., 33 f), have
opposed or abandoned the theory as applied to
Israel.

“Upon the whole we must conclude once more that,
while it is certainly possible that Totemism once pre-
vailed in Israel, its prevalence cannot he proved; and,
ahove all, we must hold that the religion of Israel as it
presents itself in the OT has not retained the very slight-
est recollection of such a state of things” (Kautzsch,
HDB, extra vol, 6141; cf p. 623).

The theory is also opposed by Jos. Jacobs (art.
“Are there Totem-Clans in the Old Testament?”
in Archaeol. Review, III [1889], no. 3, 145 ff); F.
V. Zapletal, Der Totemismus u. die Religion Israels;
and 8. A. Cook, in JQR, XIV, no. 55. .

The evidence on either side is inconclusive, hut
the weight of authority is opposed to the view that
totemism ever existed in Israel. What is certain
is that totemism was never a potent factor, either
in the early religion of Israel as an organized people,
or in any of the dominant cults of the historical
period as a whole (see arts. ‘‘Family’” in HDB, I,
850 [Bennett]; “Sacrifice,” HDB, IV, 331 [Pater-
son], and DEFILEMENT [Crannell], Imacus, 3, 6
[Cobern], and Israzt, Rexicion or, II, 1, (4)
[Orelli], in this Encyclopaedia).


Lrrerature.—lIn addition to the works clted in the
text, see, for the theory of the prevalence of totemism
in early Isracl, W. R. Smith, Religion of the Semittes
(2d ed, 1894), Kinship and Marriagetn Early Arabia (1903);


A. F. Scot, Offering and Sacrifice (1900); and I. Ben- }.


zinger, Hebrdtische Archdol. (1907); against, Ene_ Brit,
11th ed, XIII, 177, art. ‘‘Hehrew_Rellgion”’ (White-
house): Standard BD, 782; Temple DB, art. '' Shaphan.

For a general account and discussion of totemism, see
Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy (1910) and The Golden
Bough (3d ed, 1907-13); Westermarck, History of Human


Marriage (1891); Deans, Tales from the Totems of Hidery
(1898); Lang, Myth, Ritual, Religion (new ed, 1899), The
Secret of the Totem (1905), and art. “Totemism” in Enc
Brit, 11th ed, XX VII, with extensive hibliography; HDB,
extra vol, 115; and Cymru, 1892-93, p. 137; 1893-94, p. 7.
x M. O. Evans |
TOU, t0’d6 (AIM, t'u; B, Oda, Théa, A, Good,
Thoot): Kingof Hamath. As an enemy of Hadare-
zer, after David’s victory over the latter, he sent
David a message of congratulation (1 Ch 18 9 f).
In 2 8 8 9f spelled “Toi.”


TOW, t6 (MY, ni“areth [Jgs 16 9; Isa 1 31):
The coarser part of flax, with short threads, used
as an example of easily inflammable material. Also
Isa 48 17 AV for MNWD, pishtah, the usual word
for “‘flax’’ (so ERV), here as used for a wick (so ARV,
ERVm).


TOWER, tou’ér. See Fortirication, I, 5;
Crry, Il, 1.


TOWER OF BABEL. See Astronomy; BaBEL,
Tower or; TonavsEs, CONFUSION OF.


TOWER OF DAVID (Cant 4 4). See JErRu-
SALEM.
TOWER OF EDAR (THE FLOCK). See Envir.


TOWER OF HANANEEL. See HANaneEt.


TOWER OF IVORY (P80 239%, mighdal ha-
shén): Occurs only in Cant 7 4. Cheyne would,
not unreasonably, emend the text and read the
“tower of Shenir’ as a parallel to the “tower of
Lebanon” in the same verse. If the reading “tower
of ivory” is correct, the reference must he to some
piece of furniture in the adornment of which ivory
was much used, and when we compare the word
mighdal here with its use for a “pulpit” in Neh 8 4,
we can think only of a reminiscence of something
of the nature of the throne of ivory made by
Solomon (1 K 10 18). W. M. Caristire


TOWER OF LEBANON (j22335 S399, migh-
dal ha-lebhanén [Cant 7 4]): The designation “which
looketh toward Damascus” compels us to identify
it with some portion of, or something in, the eastern
range of ‘Lebanon, toward the sun-rising’’ (Josh 13
5). It would then of necessity correspond to the
chief summit of Hermon, on which there has been
from ancient times also a tower-like temple, and
from which the view is almost of boundless extent,
Damascus. with its gardens and groves being sur-
prisingly near and appearing like a beautiful island
in a wide extended sea. See LEBANON.


W. M. CaristIE
TOWER OF MEAH, mé’a. See Hammean.


TOWER OF PENUEL. See PENIcL.


TOWER OF SHECHEM (0>U 57919, mighdal
shtkhem): Mentioned only in Jgs 9 4649. It
seems along with the Beth-millo and the Beth-el-
berith to bave comprised the three strongest parts
of the fortification when Abimelech besieged the
town. It was, however, abandoned by its defend-
ers, who took refuge in the Beth-millo, in which they
were slain.


TOWER OF SILOAM. See Sitoam.
TOWER OF SYENE, si-@’né. See Snvenern.


TOWER OF THE FURNACES. See Fur-
NACES, TOWER OF.


3001


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Totemism
Trachonitis


TOWN, toun: This word is used to represent a
number of different Heb terms in the OT. (1)
When any explanatory word or attendant circum-
stances show that a “‘city’’ was unwalled, and some-
times in the contrary case (1 S 23 7), the Heb
‘ir is trd “town” by AV, and RV generally agrees
with it (Dt 3 5; 18 27 5; Est 919). (2) Both
AV and RV translate hawwdth by “towns” (Nu
$2 41; Josh 13 30; 1 K 4 18; 1 Ch 2 23), while
hdcértm and p*razdth both appear in AV as “towns,”
but in RV as “villages” (Gen 25 16; Zec 2 4).
See Havvots-sair. (3) Bath, lit. “daughter,” is
sometimes found in the pl. between the name of
a city and hdcérim, ‘‘villages,’”’ as in Josh 16 45m,
“Ekron, with its daughters and its villages.”
“Towns” is evidently the appropriate tr, and, even
without hdgérim, bath is rendered “town” (RV Nu
21 25, etc). The same use of “daughter” occurs
also in the Gr of 1 Macc 5 65 (thugdtér), AV
“town,” RV “village,” m “daughter.” (4) AV and
ERV gloss kir, ‘‘wall,” in Josh 2 15 by rendering
it “town wall’; ARV omits. (5) The Gr term
kémopéleis (Mk 1 38), being a combination of the
_words for “village” and ‘‘city,” is a clear attempt
to describe something between the two, and is well
trd “town.” (6) AV uses “town” (Mt 10 11, etc)
and ‘village’ (Mt 9 35, etc) quite indifferently for
kémé; RV has “village” throughout. For similar
changes of AV “town” cf 2 Macc 8 6 (chéra);
11 5; 12 21 (chdrton, RV “place”). See Crrr;
VILLAGE. W. M. Cuaistiz


TOWN CLERK, kldrk, kKlérk (ypapparets,
grammateis): The word “clerk,” “writer,” “town
clerk,” ‘scribe,’ is found in this meaning only in
Acts 19 35, “when the townclerk had quieted the
multitude.’ Cremer defines the word as signifying
a “public servant among the Greeks and the reader
of the legal and state-papers” (Lex. NT). There
was considerable difference between the authority
of these “clerks” in the cities of Asia Minor and of
Greece. Among the Greeks the grammateis were
usually slaves, or at least persons belonging to the
lower classes of society, and their office was a nomi-
nal, almost a mechanical, one. In Asia, on the con-
trary, they were officers of considerable consequence,
as the passage quoted indicates (Thuc. vii.19, “the
scribe of the city’) and the grammateus is not in-
frequently mentioned in the inscriptions and on the
coins of Ephesus (e.g. Brit. Mus. Inserip., III, 2,
482, 528). They bad the supervision of the city
archives, all official decrees were drawn up by
them, and it was their prerogative to read such
decrees to the assembled citizens. Their social
position was thus one of eminence, and a Gr scribe
would have been much amazed at the deference
shown to his colleagues in Asia and at the power
they wielded in the administration of affairs. See,
further, Hermann, Staats Altertum, 127, 20; and
Epuesvs. Henry E. Doskrr


TRACHONITIS, trak-6-ni'tis: Appears in Scrip-
ture only in the phrase r4s ‘Irovpatas cal Tpaxwvt-
ridos xépas, tés Itouratas kat Trachinitidos chéras,
lit. “of the Ituraean and Trachonian region” (Lk
31). Trachonitis signifies the land associated
with the trachén, “a rugged stony_tract.” There
are two volcanic districts S. and E. of Damascus,
to which the Greeks applied this name: that to
the N.W. of the mountain of Bashan (Jebel ed-
Drize) ig now called el-Leja’, “the refuge’ or
“asylum.” It lies in the midst of an arable and
pastoral country; and although it could never have
supported a large population, it has probably always
been inhabited. ‘The other is away to the NE. of
the mountain, and is called in Arab. es-Safd. This
covers much the larger area. It is a wild and in-


hospitable desert tract, remote from the dwellings
of men. It was well known to the ancients; but
there was nothing to attract even a sparse popula-
tion to its dark and forbidding rocks, burning under
the suns of the wilderness. It therefore plays no
part in the history. These are the two Trachons of
Strabo (xvi.2, 20). They are entirely volcanic in
origin, consisting of lava belched forth by vol-
canoes that have been extinct for ages. In cooling,
the lava has split up and crumbled into the most
weird and fantastic forms. The average elevation
of these districts above the surrounding country is
about 30 ft. Hs-Safd is quite waterless. There are
springs around the border of el-Leja’, but in the in~
terior, water-supply depends entirely upon cisterns.
Certain great hollows in the rocks also form natural
reservoirs, in which the rain water is preserved
through the summer months.

El-Lej@ is roughly triangular in shape, with its apex
to the N. The sides are about 25 miles in length, and
the base about 20. The present writer has described
this region as he saw it during two somewhat lengthened
visits: ‘‘From Zor'a our course lay N.E. by E
What a wild solitude itis! Far on every hand stretched
a veritable land of stone, The first hour or two of our
march no living thing was seeu..... Wherever we
looked, before or behind, lay wide fields of volcanic rock,
black and repulsive, ... . with here and there a deep
circular depression, through which in the dim past red
destruction belched forth, now carefully walled round the
lip to prevent wandering sheep or goat from falling in by
night. The general impression conveyed was as if the
dark waters of a great sea, lashed to fury by a storm,
had been suddenly petrified. .... At times we passed
over vast sheets of lava which in cooling had cracked
in nearly regular lines, and which, broken through in
parts, appeared to rest on a stratum of different char-
acter, like pieces of cyclopaean pavement. Curious
rounded ro were occasionally seen by the wayside,
like gigantic black soap bubbles blown up by the sub-
terranean steam and gases of the active volcanic age;
often, with the side broken out as if burst by escaping
vapor, the mass, haying cooled too far to collapse, re-
mained an enduring monument of the force that formed
it. Scanty vegetation peeped from the fissures in the
rocks, or preserved a precarious existence in the scanty
soil sometimes seen in a hollow between opposing slopes.
In a dreary waterless land where the cloudless sun, beat-
ing down on fiery stones, creates a heat like that of an
oven, it were indeed a wonder if anything less hardy
than the ubiquitous thistle could long hold up its head.
... + When the traveler has fairly penetrated the
rough barriers that surround el-Leja' he finds not a little

leasant land within—fertile soil which, if only freed a
fittle from overlying stones, might support a moderate
population. In ancient times it was partly cleared, and
the work of the old-world agriculturists remains in
gigantic banks of stones built along the edges of the
patches they cultivated’’ (Arab and Druze at Home,
30 ff).

In some parts, esp. those occupied by the Druzes,
fair crops are grown. Where the Arabs are masters,
poverty reigns. They also have an evil reputation.
As one said to the present writer, ‘““They will even
slay the guest.” ’Arab el-Lej@ anjas ma yakiin is
a common saying, which may be freely rendered:
“Than the Arabs of el-Leja’ greater rascals do not
exist.” Until comparatively recent years there
were great breadths of oak and terebinth. These
have disappeared, largely owing to the enterprise
of the charcoal burners. The region to the N.E.
was described by a native as bass wa'r, “nothing
but barren rocky tracts’ (cf Heb ya‘ar), over which
in summer, he said, not even a bird would fly.
There are many ruined sites. A list of 71 names
collected by the present writer will be found in
PEFS, 1895, 366 ff. In many cases the houses,
strongly built of stone, are still practically com-
plete, after centuries of desertion.

There may possibly be a reference to the Trachons
in the OT where Jer speaks of the hdrérim, “parched
places” (17 6). The cognate el-Harrah is the word
used by the Arabs for such a burned, rocky area.
For the theory that el-Leja’ corresponds to the OT
“Argob,”’ see ARGOB.


The robbers who infested the place, making use


Trade


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3002


of the numerous caves, were routed out by Herod
the Great (Ant, XV, x, 1 ff; XVI, ix, 1; XVII, ii,
1f). Trachonitis was included in the tetrarchy of
Philip (viii, 1; ix, 4). At his death without heirs
it was joined to the province of Syria (XVIIL, iv, 6).
Caligula gave it to Agrippa I. After his death in
44 AD, and during the minority of his son, it was
administered by Rom officers. From 53 till 100
AD it was ruled by Agrippa II. In 106 AD it was
incorporated in the new province of Arabia. Under
the Romans the district enjoyed a period of great
prosperity, to which the Gr inscriptions amply tes-
tify. To this time belong practically all the remains
to be seen today. The theaters, temples, public
buildings and great roads speak of a high civili-
zation. That Christianity also made its way into
these fastnesses is vouched for by the ruins of
churches. Evil days came with the advent of the
Moslems. Small Christian communities are still
found at Khabab on the western Lubf, and at Sur
in the interior. The southeastern district, with the
chief town of Damet el-‘Alia, is in the hands of the
Druzes; the rest is dominated by the Arabs.


W. Ewine
TRADE, trad:


I. Geyerau
. Terms
2. Position of Palestine
3. Trade Products of Palestine
4. Palestinian Traders
II. History
1. To David
2. Solomon
3. Maritime Trade
4. To the Exile
5. The Exiie and After
LITERATURE


J. General.—For a full list of the commer-
cial terms used in the OT, reference must be
made to EB, IV, cols. 5193-99. Only
the more important can be given
here.


For ‘‘merchant’’ the Heb uses almost always one of
the two participial forms 30, sdhér, or bon, rokhél,
both of which mean simply ‘‘one who travels.’’ There is
no difference in their meaning, but when the two are used
together (Ezk 27 13 ff) RV distinguishes by usin
‘“‘trafficker’’ for rékhél. The vb. sahar, trom whic!
sohér is derived, is tr¢ ‘to trade” in’Gen $4 10.21 and
“to traffic’ in Gen 42 34, with numerous noun forma-
tions from the same stem. The vb. rakhal trom which
rokhél is derived does not occur, hut the noun formation
rékhullah in Ezk 26 12 (RV ‘‘merchandise''); 28 5.16.
18 (RV “'traffic’’) may be noted. In Ezk 27 24 RV
has ‘‘merchandise”’ for markéleth, but the word means
“place of merchandise,"’ ‘market.’’ The participle
DMN, tarim, from tir, ‘seek out,"’ in combination with


‘an’shé, ‘‘men,” in 1 K 10 15, is trd ‘merchant men”
by AV, “‘chapmen" hy ERV and “traders"’ by ARV:
in 2 Ch 9 14, AV and ERV have ‘“‘chapmen"’ and ARV
‘*traders.'" The text of these verses is suspected. In
Ezk 27 (only) ‘‘merchandise’’ represents awa. ma~


‘drabh, from ‘arabh, “to exchange,” trd ‘‘to deal,” m
‘exchange,’ in ver 9 ARV, with ‘‘dealers,’’ m ‘ex-
changers,’’ in ver 27 (AV and ERV have “oceupy,"”
“occupiers”). JIID> kena‘an, and "3939. kena‘ dni,
“Canaanite,” are sometimes used in the seuse of ‘‘mer-
chant,'' but it is often difficult to determine whether the
literal or the transferred force is intended. Hence ail
the confusion in EV; in RV note ‘‘merchant,’’ Job 41
6; ‘merchant,’ m ‘'Canaanite,’’ Prov 831 24; ‘‘traf-
ficker,’’ Isa 28 8; ‘‘trafficker,"’ m ‘'Canaanite,’’ Hos
12 7; ‘‘Canaan,"’ m ‘merchant people,” Isa 23 11;
Zeph 1 11, and cf ‘land of traffic,” m ‘‘land of Canaan,”
Ezk 17 4. See Cuapman; OccuprY.

In Apoc and NT “merchant” is for g«opos, émpo-~
ros (Sir 26 29, etc; Mt 13 45; Rev 18 3.11.15.23).
So “merchandise” is éurépiov, empérion, in Jn 2 16 and
éumopia, emporta, in Mt 22 5, while éumopevouat, em~
poretiomai, is trd ‘‘make merchandise of'' in 2 Pet 2 3
and ‘'trade’’ in Jas 4 13 (AV ‘‘buy and sell’). But
“to trade” in Mt 26 16 is for épyasouar, ergdzomat (cf
Rev 18 17), and Lk 19 13 for TpayLarevopat, prag-
matetiomat, “oecupy"'; while “merchandise” in
Rev 18 11.12 is for youos, gémos, ‘cargo’ (so Rvm;
cf Acts 21 3). Worthy of notc, moreover, is merafodia,
metabolta, ‘‘exchange"’ (Sir 37 11).


1. Terms


Any road map of the ancient world shows that Pal,
despite its lack of harbors, occupied an extremely
important position as regards the
2. Position trade-routes. There was no exit to
of Palestine the W. from the great caravan center
Damascus, there was virtually no exit
landward from the great maritime centers Tyre and
Sidon, and there was no exit to the N. and N.E. from
Egypt without crossing Pal. In particular, the only
good road connecting Tyre (and Sidon) with Damas-
cus lay directly across Northern Pal, skirting the Sea
of Galilee. In consequence, foreign merchants
must at all times have been familiar figures in Pal
(Gen 37 25.28; 1K 10 15; Neh 13 16; Isa 2
6; Zeph 1 11, etc). As a corollary, tolls laid on
these merchants would always have been a fruitful
source of income (1 K 10 15; Ezk 26 2; Ear 4
20), and naturally Pal enjoyed particular advan-
tages for the distribution of her own products
through the presence of these traders.
Of these products the three great staples were
grain, oil and wine (Hos 2 8; Dt 7 13, etc). The
wine of Pal, however, gained little rep-
3. Trade — utation in the ancient world, and its
Products of export is mentioned only in 2 Ch 2
Palestine 10.15; Ezr 3 7, while Ezk 27 18 says
expressly that for good wine Tyre sent
to Damascus. Grain would not be needed by Egypt,
but it found a ready market in Phoenicia, both for
consumption in the great cities of Tyre and Sidon
and for export (1 K 6 11; Ezr 8 7; Ezk 27 17,
etc). A reverse dependence of Pal on Tyre for food
(Isa 28 18; cf Gen 41 57) could have occurred
only under exceptional circumstances. Oil was
needed by Egypt as well as by Phoenicia (Hos
12 1; Isa 57 9), but from Northern Israel was
probably shipped into Egypt by way of Phoenicia.
Hos 2 5.9 mentions wool and flax as products of
Israel, but neither could have been important.
Flax was a specialty of Egypt (Isa 19 9) and
is hardly mentioned in the OT, while for wool
Israel had to depend largely on Moab (2 K 3
4; Isa 16 1). Minor products that were exported
were “balm.... honey, spicery and myrrh,
pistachionuts and almonds” (Gen 43 11m; see
the separate arts. and cf “pannag and....
balm” in Ezk 27 17). These were products of
Gilead (Gen 37 25). “Oaks of Bashan” had com-
mercial value, but only for use for oars (Ezk 27 5),
and so in small logs. Pal had to import all heavy
timbers (1 K 6 6, etc). Despite Dt 8 9, Pal is
deficient in mineral wealth. The value of Pal’s
manufactured products would depend on the skill
of the inhabitants, but for the arts the Hebrews
seem to have had no particular aptitude (1 K 5 6;
ef 1 § 13 19 ff).
In comparison with the great volume of inter-
national trade that was constantly passing across
Pal, the above products could have
4. Palestin- had no very great value and the great
ian Traders merchants would normally have been
foreigners. A wide activity as “mid-
dlemen” and agents was, however, open to the in-
habitants of Pal, if they cared to use it. Such a
profession would demand close contact with the
surrounding nations and freedom from religious
scruples. The Canaanites evidently excelled in
commercial pursuits of this time, so much so that
“Canaanite” and “merchant”? were convertible
terms.
i. History.—The Israelites entered Canaan as
a nomadic people who had even agriculture yet to
_, learn, and with a religious self-con-
1. To David sciousness that restrained them from
too close relations with their neighbors.
Hence they were debarred from much participation
in trade. The legislation of the Pent (in sharp dis-


3003


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Trade


tinction from that of CH) shows this non-commer-
cial spirit very clearly, as there are no provisions
that relate to merchants beyond such elementary
matters as the prohibition of false weights, ete (Dt
25 18; Lev 19 86; CC has not even these rules).
In particular, the prohibition of interest (Ex 22 25;
Dt 23 19, etc) shows that no native commercial
life was contemplated, for, without'a credit-system,
trade on any extensive scale was impossible. All
this was to be left to foreigners (Dt 28 20; cf 15 6;
28 12.44). The Jewish ideal, indeed, was that
each household should form a self-sufficient pro-
ducing unit (Prov 31 10-27), with local or national
exchange of those commodities (such as tools and
salt) that could not be produced at home. And this
ideal seems to have been maintained tolerably well.
The most northerly tribes, through their proximity
to the Phoenicians, were those first affected by the
commercial spirit, and in particular the isolated
half-tribe of Dan. In Jgs 6 17 we find them

remaining in ships” at the time of Barak’s victory.
As their territory had no seacoast, this must mean
that they were gaining funds by serving in the ships
of Tyre and Sidon. Zebulun and Issachar, like-
wise, appear in Dt 33 19 as the merchants of Israel,
apparently selling their wares chiefly at the time
of the great religious assemblages. But the dis-
orders at the time of the Judges were an effectual
bar against much commerce. Saul at length suc-
ceeded in producing some kind of order, and we
hear that he had brought in a prosperity that
showed itself in richer garments and golden orna-
ments for the women (2S 1 24; see Money).
David’s own establishment of an official shekel
(2 8 14 26) is proof that trade was becoming a
matter of importance.

Under Solomon, however, Israel’s real trade began.
The writer of K lays special stress on his imports.

From Tyre came timber (1 K 5 6,
2. Solomon etc) and gold (9 11). From Sheba

came gold and spices (10 10, “gave’’
here, like “presents’’ elsewhere, is a euphemism).
From Ophir and elsewhere came gold, silver, pre-
cious stones, almug trees, ivory, apes and peacocks
(10 11.22.25). According to MT 10 28f, horses
and chariots were brought from Egypt and re-sold
to the N.

But the text here is suspected. Egypt had no repu-
tation as a horse-mart in comparison with Northern
Syria and Western Armenia (see Tooarman). So many
scholars prefer to read ‘‘Musri"’ (in Northwestern Arabia)
for ‘‘Egypt'' (mer for_merym—see the comms., esp. EB,
III, cols, 3162-63). Yet the change does not clear up all
the difficulties, and Egypt was certainly famous for her
chariots. And cf Dt 17 16.


In exchange Solomon exported to Tyre wheat and
oi (1 K 611; 2 Ch 2 10.15 adds “barley ....
and wine’). What he sent to the other countries
is not specified, and, in particular, there is no men-
tion of what he exchanged for gold. 1 K 6 11;
9 11, however, indicate that Hiram was the inter-
mediary for most of this gold traffic, so that at
the final settlement of accounts Solomon must have
been heavily in Hiram’s debt. 1 K 9 11 proves
this. Solomon had undertaken a larger task than
the resources of Pal could meet, and in payment was
obliged to cede Northern Galilee to Hiram. (The
writer of 1 K explains that ‘the cities were worth-
less,’ while Ch passes over the unedifying incident
altogether, if 2 Ch 8 2 is not a reversal of the case.)

Among Solomon’s other activities sea~-commerce
was not forgotten. David’s victory over Edom

gave access to the Red Sea at Ezion-
3. Maritime geber, and _ this port was utilized by
Trade Hiram and Solomon in partnership
(1 K 9 26ff), Hiram, apparently,
supplying the ships and the sailors (10 11). After
Solomon’s death, Edom revolted and the way to


——


the sea was closed (11 14). It was not recovered
until the time of Jehoshaphat, and he could do
nothing with it, ‘for the ships were broken at Ezion-
geber” (22 48), i.e. in the home harbor. Either
they were badly built or incornpetently manned.
The Hebrews had no skill as sailors. See Suirs
AND Boats.
_ After the time of Solomon the commerce estab-
lished by him of course continued, with fluctuations.
Samaria became so important a city
4. Tothe from the trade standpoint that Ben-
Exile hadad I forced Baasha to assign a
street there to the merchants of Da-
mascus, while Ahab succeeded in extracting the
reverse privilege from Ben-hadad II (1 K 20 34).
The long and prosperous contemporary reigns of
Jeroboam II and Uzziah evidently had great im-
portance for the growth of commerce, and it was
the growing luxury of the land under these reigns
that called forth the denunciations of Amos, Hosea
and Isaiah. Amos complains of the importation
of expensive foreign luxuries by the rich (cf Isa 3
18-23), who wasted the natural products of Pal
(6 3-6; 3 12.15). Grain, the chief article of value,
was extorted from the poor (65 11), and the grain-
dealers were notoriously dishonest (8 4-6); 8 6c
in EV suggests the sale of adulterated grain. The
meaning of the Heb, however, is obscure, but of
course adulteration must have existed, and it is
doubtless not without significance that the labels
on the recently discovered Samaritan jar-fragments
emphasize the purity of the contents (Harvard
Theol. Rev., 1911, 138-389). The extent of commer-
cialism so overwhelms Hosea that he exclaims
‘Ephraim is become a Canaanite!’ (12 7m). The
most unscrupulous dealing is justified by the plea,
“Surely lam becomerich” (ver8). Isaiah isshocked
at the intimate contracts made with foreigners, which
prove so profitable to the makers, but which bring
in idolatry (2 6-8). It was in the time of Isaiah
that Assyr influence began to make itself felt in
Judah, and the setting up in the Temple of a pat-
tern of an Assyr altar (2 K 16 10f) must have
been accompanied with an influx of Assyr commod-
ities of all descriptions. (Similarly, the religious
reaction under Hezekiah would have been accom-
panied by a boycott on Assyr goods.) Data for
the following preéxilie period are scanty, but Ezk
26 2 shows that Jerus retained a position of some
commercial importance up to the time of her fall.
Of especial interest are Isa 23 and Ezk 26, 27 with
their descriptions of the commerce of Tyre. Eze-
kiel indeed confines himself to description, but Isaiah
characterizes the income of all this trade as “the
hire of a harlot’’ (vs 17.18), a phrase that reappears
in Rev 18 3.9—a chapter couched in the genuine
old prophetic tone and based almost exclusively on
Isa and Ezk. But it is important to note that
Isaiah realizes (23 18) that all this enterprise is
capable of consecration to Jeh and is therefore not
wrong in itself.
The deportation into Babylon brought the Jews
directly into the midst of a highly developed com-
mercial civilization, and, although we
5. The Exile are ignorant of the details, they must
and After have entered into this life to a very
considerable extent. Indeed, it is more
than probable that it was here that the famed com-
mercial genius of the Jews made its appearance.
Certain it is that exiles acquired great wealth and
rose to high position (Zec 6 10f; Neh 1 11; 6 17,
etc), and that when an opportunity to return to
Pal was opened, most of the exiles preferred to stay
where they were (see Ex1LE). As a matter of fact,
the Palestinian community was beggarly poor for
years (Zec 8 10; Hag 16; Neh 1 3; Mal 3 10-12,
etc) and could not even prevent the sale of its chil-


Trades.
Transfiguration


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3004


dren into slavery (Joel 3 6). Such trade as existed
was chiefly in the hands of foreigners (Joel 3 17;
Zec 14 21), but the repeated crop-failures must
have forced many Jews into commerce to keep from
starving. The history of the 4th cent. is very ob-
scure, but for the later commercial history of the
Jews the foundation of Alexandria (832 BC) was a
fact of fundamental importance. For Alexandria
rapidly became the commercial center of the world
and into it the Jews, attracted by the mvitations
of the Ptolemies, poured m streams. Alexandria’s
policy was closely copied by Antioch (on the period
see Ant, XII, i, ii; cf ALEXANDRIA; ANTIOCH), and
Ant, XII, iv, shows that the ability of the Jews was
duly recognized by the Gentiles. But this develop-
ment was outside Pal. Sir does not count commerce
among the list of trades in 38 24-30 (note, however,
the increased importance of artisans) and his refer-
ences to commerce throughout are not esp. charac-
teristic (6 8; 8 13, etc; but scc 42 7). But even
the trade of Pal must have been increasing steadily.
Under the Maccabees Joppa was captured, and the
opening of its port for Gr commerce is numbered
among Simon’s “glories” (1 Mace 14 5). The uni-
fication of the trade-world under Rome, of course,
gave Pala share in the benefits. Herod was able to
work coramercial miracles (Ant, XV, vi, 7; viii, 1;
ix, 2; xi, 1; XVI, v, 3, etc), and the Pal of the NT
is a commercial rather than an agricultural nation.
Christ’s parables touch almost every side of com-
mercial life and present even the pearl merchant as
a not unfamiliar figure (Mt 13 45). Into the ethics
of commerce, however, He entered little. Sharp
dealings were everywhere (Mk 12 40; Lk 16 1-12,
etc), and the service of Mammon, which had pushed
its way even into the temple (Mk 11 15-17 and |’s),
was utterly incompatible with the service of God
(Mt 6 19-34, etc). In themselves, however, the
things of Caesar and the things of God (Mk 12 17
and ||’s) belong to different spheres, and with finan-
cial questions pure and simple He refused to inter-
fere (Lk 12 13f). For further details and for the
(not very elahorate) teaching of the apostles see
Eruics. ;


Literature.—The appropriate sections in the HA's
and Bib. dicts., esp. G. A. Smith’s indispensahle art.
“Trade” in EB, IV, cols. 5145-99 (1903); for the later
period, GJ V4, II, 67-82 (1907), III, 97-102 (1909). Of
also Herzfeld, Handelsgeschichte der Juden des Alter-
thums? (1894).


TRADES, tradz.


TRADITION, tra-dish’un: The Gr word is mapd-
docts, parddosis, ‘a giving over,” either by word
of mouth or in writing; then that which is given
over, i.e. tradition, the teaching that is handed
down from one to another. The word does not
occur in the Heb OT (except in Jer 39 [32] 4; 41
[34] 2, used in another sense), or in LXX or Apoe
(exceptin 2 Esd 7 26, used in a different sense), but
is found 13tin the NT (Mt 15 2.3.6; Mk 7 3.5.8.9.
13; 1 Cor 112; Gal114; Col 2 8; 2 Thess
215; 3 6).

The term in the NT has apparently three mean-
ings. It means, in Jewish theology, the oral teach-
ings of the elders (distinguished an-
1. Meaning cestors from Moses on) which were
in Jewish reverenced by the late Jews equally
Theology with the written teachings of the OT,

and were regarded by them as equally
authoritative on matters of belief and conduct.
There seem to be three classes of these oral teach-
ings: (a) some oral laws of Moses (as they supposed)
given by the great lawgiver in addition to the
written laws; (0) decisions of various judges which
became precedents in judicial matters; (c) inter-
pretations of great teachers (rabbis) which came


Burton Scotr Easton
See Crarts.


to be prized with the same reverence as were the
OT Scriptures.

It was against the tradition of the elders in this
first sense that Jesus spoke so pointedly to the scribes
and Pharisees (Mt 15 2f; Mk 7 3f). The Phari-
sees charged Jesus with transgressing ‘‘the tradition
of the elders.’’: Jesus turned on them with the
question, “Why do ye also transgress the com-
mandment of God because of your tradition?” He
then shows how their hollow traditionalism has
fruited into mere ceremonialism and externalism
(washing of hands, vessels, saying ‘“‘Corban” to a
suffering parent, ie. ‘My property is devoted to
God, and therefore I cannot use it to help you,”
etc), but He taught that this view of uncleanness
was essentially false, since the heart, the seat of the
soul, is the source of thought, character and con-
duct (Mk 7 148).

The word is used by Paul when referring to his
personal Christian teachings to the churches at

Corinth and Thessalonica (1 Cor 11
2. As Used 2; 2 Thess 2 15; 3 6). In this sense
in 1 Cor the word in the sing. is better tr?
and 2 Thess “instruction,” signifying the body of

teaching delivered by the apostle to the
church at Thessalonica (2 Thess 3 6). But Paulin
the other two passages uses it in the pl., meaning
the separate instructions which he delivered to the
churches at Corinth and Thessalonica.

The word is used by Paul in Col 2 8 in a sense
apparently different from the two senses above.

He warns his readers against the teach-
8. As Used ings of the false teachers in Colossac
in Col which are “‘after the tradition of men.’

Olshausen, Lightfoot, Dargan, in their
comms. in loc., maintain that the reference is to the
Judaistic character of the false teachers. This may
be true, and yet we must see that the word “tradi-
tion’? has a much broader meaning here than in 1
above. Besides, it is not certain that the false
teachings at Colossae are essentially Jewish in char-
acter. The phrase “tradition of men’ seems to
emphasize merely the human, not necessarily Jewish,
origin of these false teachings.

The vb. wapadléwm, paradiddmi, “to give over,’
is also used 5 t to express the impartation of Chris-
tian instruction: Lk 1 2, where eyewitnesses are
said to have handed down the things concerning
Jesus; 1 Cor 11 2.28 and 15 3 referring to the
apostle’s personal teaching; 2 Pet 2 21, to instruc-
tion by some Christian teacher (cf 1 Pet 1 18).

Lirerature.—Broadus, Allen, Meyer, comms. on
Mt (15 21); Swete, Gould, comms. on Mk (7 3f);
Lightfoot, Meyer, comms. on Gal (1 14); Lightfoot,
Olshausen, Dargan (Am. Comm.), comms. on Col (2 8);
Milligan, comm. on 1 and 2 Thess (2 Thess 2 15 and
3 6); Weher, Jewish Theology (Ger., Alisyn. Theol.);
Pocock, Porta Mosis, 350-402; Schiirer, HJ P, II, i, sec.
25; Edersheim, Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah, II,
ch xxxi; Jos, Ani, XIII, x, 6.

Cuaries B. Witu1AMs

TRAFFIC, traf'ik, TRAFFICKER,  traf’ik-ér
(222, kena'an, WD", mishar, WO, sahar, AbD,
rkhullah): (1) Kena‘an=“Canaan,”’ and, as the
Canaanites were celebrated merchants, came to
mean “merchant,” and so “traffic’? (see CANAAN).
Ezk 17 4 refers to the great eagle who ‘‘cropped off
the topmost of the young twigs [of cedar] thereof,
and carried it unto a land of traffic; he set it in a
city of merchants.” (2) Mishar means “trade,” and
so “traffic”; comes from a root meaning “‘to travel
round,” e.g.asa peddler. 1 K 10 15 reads: “Be-
sides that which the traders brought, and the traffic
of the merchants.” This refers to the income of Sol-
omon. (8) Sdhar means “to go about,” “occupy
with,” “trade,” “traffic,” “merchant,” and so the
business of the moving merchantor peddler. Joseph


3005


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Trades
Transfiguration


said to his brothers: “So will I deliver you your
brother, and ye shall traffic in the land’’ (Gen 42
84). He evidently meant that they should have
license to become, throughout Egypt, traveling
traders. (4) Rekhullah, from a root meaning “to
travel for trading,” and so a peddled traffic, as in
spices,etc. Ezekiel speaks against the prince of Tyre:
“By thy great wisdom and by thy traffic hast thou
increased thy riches’ (28 5); and against the king
of Tyre: “‘in the unrighteousness of thy traffic,” etc.
(Ezk 28 18). See Manxet; Murcuanpiss; SHIps
anp Boars, II, 2, (2); Traps.

Wituiam Epwarn Rarrery

_ TRAGACANTH, trag’a-kanth: For ‘‘spicery”
in Gen 37 25, RVm gives “gum tragacanth or
storax.” See Spice; StTorax.


TRAIN, tran (vb. J20, hdnakh, “educate” [Prov
22 6], with adj. h@ntkh [Gen 14 14]): In1J K 10 2
the Queen of Sheba’s “‘train,’’ the noun is Sn,
hayil, the usual word for “force,” “army.” But in
Isa 6 1 the “‘train’’ fen , shil, “loose hanging gar-
ment”’) is that of God’s robe (RVm “skirts’’).


TRAIN, tran, TRAINED, trind: The word is
used in two places in both AV and RV, viz. Gen
14 14, where it means “‘drilled,” “prepared for war,”
and Prov 22 6. “Train up a child” means more
than to teach, and includes everything that pertains
to the proper development of the child, esp. in its
moral and spiritual nature. In this broader sense
also RV substitutes ‘train’ for the “teach” of AV
in Tit 2 4 (sdphronizo).


TRANCE, trans (éketacts, ékstasis): The con-
dition expressed by this word is a mental state in
which the person affected is partially or wholly
unconscious of objective sensations, but intensely
alive to subjective impressions which, however they
may be originated, are felt as if they were revela-
tions from without. They may take the form of
visual or auditory sensations or else of impressions
of taste, smell, heat or cold, and sometimes these
conditions precede epileptic seizures constituting
what is named the aura epileptica. The word
occurs 5 t in AV, twice in the story of Balaam (Nu
24 4.16), twice in the history of Peter (Acts 10 10;
11 5), and once in that of Paul (Acts 22 17). In
the Balaam story the word is of the nature of.a gloss
rather than a tr, as the Heb naéphal means simply
“to fall down” and is tr¢ accordingly in RV. Here
LXX has en hipna, “in sleep” (see SLEEP, DzEp).
In Peter’s vision on the housetop at Joppa he saw
the sail (othéné) descending from heaven, and heard
a voice. Paul’s trance was also one of both sight
and sound. The vision on the Damascus road
(Acts 9 3-9) and that recorded in 2 Cor 12 2-4
were also cases of trance, as were the prophetic
ecstasies of Saul, Daniel and Elisha, and the con-
dition of John in which he says that he was “in the
Spirit”’ (Rev 1 10).

The border line between trance and dream is
indefinite: the former occurs while one is, in a sense,
awake; the latter takes place in the passage from
sleep to wakefulness. The dream as well as the
vision were supposed of old to be channels of reve-
lation (Job 38 15). In Shakespearean Eng., trance
means a dream (Taming of the Shrew, I, i, 182), or
simply a bewilderment (Lucrece, 1595).

In the phenomena of hypnotic suggestion, some-
times affecting a number of persons simultaneously,
we have conditions closely allied to trance, an
doubtless some of the well-authenticated phantom
appearances are similar subjective projections from
the mind affecting the visual and auditory centers
of the brain. ALEX, MACALISTER


TRANSFIGURATION, trans-fig-t-ra’shun (pera-
poppdopar, metamorphdomat, “to be transformed”’):
Used only with reference to the transfiguration of
Christ (Mt 17 2; Mk 9 2) and the change wrought
in the Christian personality through fellowship with
Christ (Rom 12 2; 2 Cor 3 18).

(1) About midway of His active ministry Jesus,
accompanied by Peter, James and John, withdrew
to a high mountain apart (probably Mt. Hermon;
see next art.) for prayer. While praying Jesus was
“transfigured,”’ “his face did shine as the sun,” “and
his garments became glistering, exceeding white,
so as no fuller on earth can whiten them.” It was
night and it was cold. The disciples were drowsy
and at first but dimly conscious of the wonder in
progress before their eyes. From the brightness
came the sound of voices. Jesus was talking with
Moses and Elijah, the subject of the discourse, as
the disciples probably learned later, being of the
decease (exodus) which Jesus was about to accom-
plish at Jerus. As the disciples came to themselves,
the figures of Moses and Elijah seemed to withdraw,
whereupon Peter impetuously demanded tents to
be set up for Jesus and His heavenly visitants that
the stay might be prolonged and, if possible, made
permanent. Just then a cloud swept over them,
and out of the cloud a voice came, saying, ‘“This is
my beloved Son: hear ye him.” In awe the dis-
ciples prostrated themselves and in silence waited.
Suddenly, lifting up their eyes they saw no one,
save Jesus only (Mt 17 1-138; Mk 9 2-13; Lk
9 28-36).

Such is the simple record. What is its signifi-
cance? The Scripture narrative offers no explana-
tion, and indeed the event is afterward referred to
only in the most general way by Peter (2 Pet 1
16-18) and, perhaps, by John (Jn 1 14). That it
marked a crisis in the career of Jesus there can be
no doubt. From this time He walked consciously
under the shadow of the cross. A strict silence on
the subject was enjoined upon the three witnesses
of His transfiguration until after ‘the Son of man
should have risen again from the dead.” This
means that, as not before, Jesus was made to realize
the sacrificial character of His mission; was made to
know for a certainty that death, soon and cruel,
was to be His portion; was made to know also that
His mission as the fulfilment of Law (Moses) and
prophecy (Elijah) was not to be frustrated by death.
In His heart now would sound forever the Father’s
approval, ‘This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased.”? The scene, therefore, wrought out
in Jesus a new fervor, a new boldness, a new con-
fidence of ultimate victory which, as a source of
holy joy, enabled Him to endure the cross and to
despise the shame (He 12 2). In the disciples the
scene must have wrought a new faith in the heaven-
sent leadership of Jesus. In the dark days which
were soon to come upon them the memory of the
brightness of that unforgettable night would be a
stay and strength. ‘There might be opposition, but
there could be no permanent defeat of one whose
work was ratified by Moses, by Elijah, by God Him-
self. Indeed, was not the presence of Moses and
Elijah a pledge of immortality for all? How in the
face of such evidence, real to them, however it
might be to others, could they ever again doubt
the triumph of life and of Him who was the Lord of
life? The abiding lesson of the Transfiguration
is that of the reality of the unseen world, of its
nearness to us, and of the comforting and inspiring
fact that “spirit with spirit may meet.”

The transflgured appearance of Jesus may have owed
something to the moonlight on the snow and to the
drowsiness of the disciples; but no one who has ever
seen the face of a saint fresh from communion with God,


as in the case of Moses (Ex 34 29-35) and of Stephen
(Acts 6 15), will have any difficulty in helieving that


Transfig., Mt. of
Treasure


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3006


the figure of Jesus wasirradiated with a ‘‘light that never
was on seaor land.’’ See Comms. and Lives of Christ;
also a suggestive treatment in Westcott’s Intro to the
Study of the Gospels.


(2) The transfiguration of Christians is accom-
plished by the renewing of the mind whereby, in
utter abandonment to the will of God, the disciple
displays the mind of Christ (Rom 12 2); and Ly
that intimate fellowship with God, through which,
ag with unveiled face he beholds the glory of the
Lord, he is ‘‘transformed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit”
(2 Cor 3 18). Cuar.es M. Sruart


TRANSFIGURATION, _ trans-fig-ti-ra’shun,
MOUNT OF (referred to as the “holy mount” in
2 Pet 1 18): Records of the Transfiguration are
found in Mt 17 1ff; Mk 92ff; Lk 9 28 ff.
From these narratives we gather that Jesus went
with His disciples from Bethsaida to the neighbor-
hood of Caesarea Philippi, where Peter's memorable
confession was made. Some six or eight days later
Jesus went up into a high mountain to pray, taking
with Him Peter, James and John. There He was
transfigured before them. Descending the next
day, He healed a demoniac boy, and then passed
through Galilee to Capernaum.

It is quite evident that the tradition placing the scene
on the Mount of Olives must he dismissed. Another

tradition, dating from the 4th cent.,

1. Not Oli- identifies the mountain with Tabor. In
rs the art. on Tasor, Mount, reasons are
vetor Tabor stated for rejecting this tradition. It

P was indeed possible in the time indicated
to travel from Caesarea Philippi to Tabor; but there is
nothing to show why this journey should have heen
undertaken; and, the mountain top being occupied by a
town or village, a suitable spot could not easily have
been found.


In recent years the opinion has become general
that the scene must be placed somewhere on Mt.


Hermon. It is near to Caesarea
2. Mt. Philippi. It is the mountain par ez-
Hermon cellence in that district (Lk 9 28). It


was easily possible in the time to make
the journey to Hasbeiyah and up the lofty steeps.
The sacred associations of the mountain might lend
it special attractions (Stanley, S and P, 399). This
is supported by the transient comparison of the
celestial splendor with the snow, where alone it
could be seen in Pal (ib, 400).

It seems to have been forgotten that Mt. Hermon
lay beyond the boundaries of Pal, and that the dis-
trict round its base was occupied by Gentiles (HJP,
II, i, 1331). The sacred associations of the moun-
tain were entirely heathen, and could have lent it no
fitness for the purpose of Jesus; hds chién, “as snow,”
in Mk 9 8, does not belong to the original text, and
therefore lends no support to the identification. It
was evidently in pursuance of His ordinary custom
that Jesus ‘went up into the mountain to pray”
(Lk 9 28). This is the only indication of His pur-
pose. It is not suggested that His object was to be
transfigured. ‘As he was praying,” the glory came.
There is no hint that He had crossed the border of
Pal; and it is not easy to see why in the circum-
stances He should have made this Journey and toil-
some ascent in heathen territory. Next morning
as usual He went down again, and was met by a
crowd that was plainly Jewish. The presence of
“the scribes” is sufficient proof of this (Mk 9 14).
Where was such a crowd to come from in this
gentile district? Matthew in effect says that the
healing of the demoniac took place in Galilee (Mt
17 22). The case against Mt. Hermon seems not
less conclusive than that against Tabor.

The present writer has ventured to suggest an
identification which at least avoids the difficulties
that beset the above (Expos T, XVIII, 333 f).


Among the mountains of Upper Galilee Jebel Jer-
muk is esp. conspicuous, its shapely form rising

full 4,000 ft. above the sea. It is the
3. Jebel highest mountain in Pal proper, and
Jermuk is quite fitly described as hupsélén
(“high”). It stands to the W. over
against the Safed uplands, separated from them by


Safed and Jebel Jermuk.


a spacious valley, in the bottom of which runs the
tremendous gorge, Waédy Leimin. It is by far the
most striking feature in all the Galilean landscape.
The summit commands a magnificent view, barred
only to the 8.W. by other mountains of the range.
It rises from the midst of a district which then sup-
ported a large population of Jews, with such im-
portant Jewish centers as Kefr Bir’im, Gishcala,
Meirén, etc, around its base. Remote and lonely
as it is, the summit was just such a place as Jesus
might have chosen for prayer. It was compara-
tively easy to reach, and might be comfortably
climbed in the evening. Then on His descent next
day the crowd might easily assemble from the
country and the villages near by. How long Our
Lord stayed near Caesarea Philippi after the con-
versation recorded in Mt 16 21ff we do not know.
From Banids to Gishcala, e.g. one could walk on
foot without fatigue in a couple of days. If a little
time were spent in the Jewish villages passed on
the way, the six days, or Luke’s “about eight
days,’’ are casily accounted for. From this place
to Capernaum He would “pass through Galilee”
(Mk 9 30). W. Ewine


TRANSFORM, trans-férm’ (Rom 12 2; RV
2 Cor 3.18 for petapopddopar, metamorphdomai,
and AV 2 Cor 11 13.14.15 for peracynparite,
metaschématizd, RV “fashion”’): The comms. often
explain the former word as connoting a change of
nature, while the latter refers only to the appear-
ance, but this distinction is probably fanciful.


TRANSGRESSION, trans-gresh’un: From
“transgress,” to pass over or beyond; to overpass,
as any rule prescribed as the limit of duty; to break
or violate, as a law, civil or moral; the act of trans-
gressing; the violation of a law or known principle
of rectitude; breach of command; offence; crime;
sin. In the OT SWB, pesha*, occurs 80 t, rendered
in all VSS by “transgression.” Its meaning is
“rebellion”; see REBELLION. The word “rebellion”
differs from this word in that it may be in the heart,
though no opportunity should be granted for its
manifestation: “An evil man seeketh only rebellion”
(Prov 17 11). Here the wise mau contemplates
an evil heart, looking for an excuse or opportunity
to rebel.

The NT uses rapéfacrs, pardbasts, “trespass: ‘The


law... . was added because of transgressions” (Gal
8 19); ‘‘ Where there is no law, neither is there trans-


3007


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Transfig., Mt. of
Treasure


gression’’ (Rom 4 15); “for the redemption of thc
eee that were under the first covenant'' (He


Daviv Rozserts Duncan


TRANSLATION, trans-la’shun: The vb. “trans--


late’’ is found once in the OT (2 8 3 10 AV, in the
sense of “to transfer’) and 3 t in the NT (Col 1
13, pePiornm, methistémi, where it means ‘to trans-
fer’; twice in He 11 5, where it has the quasi-
technical sense of removing one from the earthly
to the heavenly state without the intervening ex-
perience of death).

The noun “translation” occurs only in He 11 5,
werdfeots, metdihesis, where it refers to the transi-
tion, the general nature of which has just been de-
scribed in connection with the vb. With their
customary reserve in regard to such matters, the
Scriptures simply record the fact of Enoch’s trans-
lation without commenting either upon the attend-
ant circumstances, or upon the nature of the change
involved in his experience. Doubtless what Paul
says in 1 Cor 15 51.52 applied in the case of
Enoch and also in that of Elijah (2 K 2 11).

= . M. McPHEETERS

TRAP (WPA, makésh; Ohpa, théra, lit. “hunting,”
used metaphorically in Pss and Rom as “trap’’):
Any of the methods for taking birds; see SNARE;
Net; Gin,etc. It is probable that a trap was more
particularly a hole in the ground covered with
twigs, concealed by leaves and baited with food.
Such devices were common in taking the largest
animals and may have been used with birds also.
Trap is mentioned frequently in connection with
snare and in such manner as to indicate that they
were different devices: ‘Know for a certainty that
Jeh your God will no more drive these nations from
out of yoursight; but they shall be asnare and a trap
unto you” (Josh 23 13). Another such reference
will be found in Ps 69 22:


“Let their table before them become a snare;
And when they are in peace, let it become a trap."’


This is quoted in Rom 11 9:
*‘Let their table be made a snare, and a trap,

And a stumbling block, and 4 recompense unto them.”
An instance where a trap alone is referred to can
be found in Jer 6 26: “They set a trap, they catch
men.” Isa (42 22) uses this expression, “snared in
holes.’ This might mean that a snare was placed
in a hole, or that the hole was the snare to lure bird
or animal to its death. The former proposition is
sustained by Job, who says, “A noose is hid for him
in the ground, and a trap for him in the way” (18
10). This tr appears as if it were reversed and
should read, “A trap is hid for him in the ground
and a noose in the way.”

Gene SrratTron-PoRTER

TRAVAIL, trav’al (129, yaladh [Gen 35 16, etc],
San, hal, 59M Ail [properly “writhe,” Job 15 20,
etc]; @8lv, ddin [classical ddis] [Mt 24 8, etc], o8iva,
adind [Sir 19 11, ete; Gal 4 19, etc]): ‘Travail”
and its derivatives are used in the primary sense
of the labor of childbirth, descriptive of the actual
cases of Rachel (Gen 35 16), Tamar (Gen 38 27),
Ichabod’s mother (1 S 4 19), and the apocalyptic
woman clothed with the sun (Rev 12 2). In the
majority of passages, however, “travail” is used
figuratively, to express extreme and painful sorrow

(9 ¢ in Jer), “as of a woman in travail.” Itis also
employed in the sense of irksome and vexatious
business (6 + in Eccl, where it is the rendering of
the word ‘inydn). In the same book “travail” is
used to express the toil of one’s daily occupation
(4 4.6), where it is the tr of ‘amal. In three places
(Ex 18 8; Nu 20 14, Lam 3 5) where AV has
travel” RV has changed it to “travail,” asin these
passages the word 1*ld’ah refers to the sense of


weariness and toil, rather than to the idea of jour-
neying (in AV the spellings “travel” and “travail”
were used indiscriminately; cf Sir 19 11; 31 5).
The sorrows which are the fruits of wickedness are
compared to the pain of travail in Job 15 20 (hai)
and Ps 7 14 (hdbhal), the word used here meaning
the torture or twisting pains of labor; see also the
fanciful employment of “travail” in Sir 19 11.

In the NT the travail of childbirth is used as the
figure of the painful and anxious struggle against the
evils of the world in the soul’s efforts to attain the
higher ideals of the Christian life (Jn 16 21 [tékt6];
Rom 8 22; Gal 4 27); twice, however, it is the
rendering of médchthos, the ordinary word for “‘toil,”’
“hardship’’ or “distress’’ (1 Thess 29; 2 Thess
3 8). See Birra; Lazor.

Aumx. MAcALIsTER

TRAVELLER, trav’el-@r: Jgs 6 6 for M2"M) F201,
halakh nethibhah, “goers on paths’; 28 12 4 for
20, hélekh, lit. ‘a going’; Job 31 32 for TS,
’drah, participle of a vb. meaning “to wander”; Sir
26 12; 42 3 for édocrépos, hodoipéros, “one making
away.” See Wayrarine Man.


TREAD, tred. See WINE PREss.


TREASON, tré’z’n: The tr of WP, fesher, in
EV 1K 16 20; 2K 11 14/2 Ch 2313. Kesher
(from "WP , kashar, “to bind’”’) means “‘a conspiracy”’
(2 S 16 12; 2 K 12 20, etc), and the tr “‘treason”
is due to AV’s love of variety.


TREASURE, trezh’tr, TREASURER, trezh'tr-ér,
TREASURY, trezh’ir-i (TEIN, ‘dcdr, 124, g*naz,
TB, genez, JIPA, ganzakh, JOM, hdsen, VOD",
matmin, 350, miskenah, JD, mikhman,
ANY, ‘athidh, OW, sdphan; yéta, gdza, Onoravpds,
thésaurés) :

I. In the OT.—The Eng. word “‘treasure’’ has in
the OT at least five somewhat distinct meanings as
expressed in the words: “treasure,”
g’naz (Aram.) or genez (Heb), usually
meaning ‘‘the thing stored”; tr “‘treas-
ures’ in Ezr 6 1, but in 5 17 and
7 20 tr’ “treasure-house’’: “search made in the
king’s treasure-house.” In Est 3 9; 4 7 the Heb
form is tr4 “treasury,” as is ganzakh in 1 Ch 28 11.

“Storehouse,”’ not the thing stored but the place
of storage; ’éc¢@r means depository, cellar, garner,

armory, store or treasure-house. In
2. Store- several places it ought to be tr?.by
house some of these words. It is the most
frequent word for treasure. ERV
and ARV both translate in some instances by other
words, eg. 1 K 7 51, “treasuries of the house of
Jeh,” so also 2 Ch 5 1; “treasury”? in Neh 7 70.
71, “gave to the treasury a thousand darics of gold”;
in Job 38 22, “treasuries of the snow” (cf Prov
8 21; Jer 10 18; 51 16; Bar 2 69).

“Treasure” or something concealed. There are

3 Heb words with this meaning and all in AV tr?
“treasure.” (1) Matmon, which lit.
3. Hidden means “‘a secret storehouse’ and so a
Riches secreted valuable, usually money
buried, and so hidden riches of any
kind, hid treasures: ‘treasure in your, sacks” (Gen
43 23); “dig for it more than for hid treasures”
(Job 3 21); “search for her as for hid treasures”
(Prov 2 4); “We have stores hidden in the field,
of wheat,’ etc (Jer 41 8). (2) Mikhman, treasure
as hidden, used only in Dnl 11 43: “have power
over the treasures of gold and silver.” (3) Saphan,
meaning hidden treasure or valuables concealed:
“hidden treasures of the sand” (Dt 33 19).


1. Treas-
ure


Treasury
Tree of Life


Perhaps the strength of riches and so treasure,
the Heb word being hésen, from a root meaning to
hoard or lay up: “In the house of the
4, Strength righteous is much treasure” (Prov 15
6); “They take treasure and precious

things” (Ezk 22 25).
“Something prepared,” made ready, the Heb
word being ‘athudh, meaning “prepared,” “ready,”
therefore something of value and so


5. Some- treasure: ‘have robbed their treas-
thing Pre- ures,’ fortifications or other things
pared “made ready” (Isa 10 13).


In the OT the Heb word most often trd “treasure”
is ’dcar, It occurs in the sing. as follows: ;
1 Ch 29 8; Neh 10 38;
16; 21 20; Eecl 2 8; 3 1] 2; Hos 13
15; in the pl.: Dt 382 34; 1 K 14 26; 15 18; 2 K 12
18; 14 14; 16 8; 18 15; 20 13.15; 24 13, etc.

The same word is in AV tr4 ‘‘treasuries” in 1 Ch
9 26; 2812; 2 Ch 32 27; Neh 13 12.13; Ps
135 7; and ‘‘treasury” in Josh 6 19.24; Jer 38 11.

I. In the NT.—There are two words tr? “‘treas-
ure’: Gdza is of Pers origin, meaning ‘‘treasure.”’
Found only once in Acts 8 27 con-
cerning the Ethiopian “who was over
all her [Queen Candace’s] treasure.”’

In the compound vyafodvrdxor, gazophuldkion,

“guarding of gaza,”’ the same word appears and the

compound is tr? ‘“‘treasury” in Mk 12 41.48 || Lk

211; Jn8&20. See Trmete; Treasury (or

TEMPLE).
The word thésauros, means lit. a “deposit,’’ so
. wealth and treasure. Evidently throughout the
NT it has a twofold usage as describ-
2. The- ing (1) material treasure, either money
sauros or other valuable material possession,
and (2) spiritual treasure, eg. “like
unto treasure hid in a field” (Mt 13 44); “good
treasure of the heart’? (Mt 12 35). Other refer-
ences to material treasure are Mt 6 21; 13 52; Lk
12 21.34, ete. References to spiritual treasure are
Mt 19 21; Mk 10 21; Lk 6 45; 12 33; 18 22;
pl. Mt 6 20; Col 2 3.

In Mt 27 6 the word for “treasury” is xopBavis,
korbands; cf RVm and see CorBan.

Treasurer (TEN, ’Gcar, NDIA, g’dhabhar, “BI,
gizbar, 429, sakhan; olxovdpos, otkondmos): (1)
Acar, meaning primarily ‘‘to store up,” and hence
one who lays up im store, ie. a “treasurer”: “I
made treasurers over the treasuries’ (Neh 13 13).
(2) Gedhabhar (Aram.), used only in Dnl 3 2.3:
‘treasurers,’ named with judges and counsellors as
recognized officials. (3) Gizbar, used in Ezr 7 21
(Aram.) and equivalent in Ezr 4 8 (Heb): “‘treas-
urers beyond the river’ and “Mithredath the
treasurer.” (4) Sakhan, primarily meaning “one
who ministers to,” and hence a keeper of treasure,
treasurer: “Get thee unto this treasurer” (Isa 22
15). Perhaps the idea of steward is here intended.
(5) Oikonomos, by AV tra “chamberlain,” more prop-
erly in ARV tr? “treasurer”: ‘“Trastus the treasurer
of the city saluteth yon” (Rom 16 23).

Writuiam Epnwarp Rarrery

TREASURY, trezh‘tr-i (OF TEMPLE) ("¥18,
Ocar, usually; JT21, ganzakh, 1 Ch 28 11; yafo-

pvddKiov, gazophuldkion, kopBavas, kor-


1. Gaza


1. Origin bands): The need of a “treasury” in
of the connection with the house of Jeh would
Treasury early be felt for the reception of the


offerings of the people, of tithes, and of
the spoils of war dedicated to Jeh. Already in
Josh 6 19.24, therefore, we read of a “treasury of
the house of Jeh,” into which “the silver and gold,
and vessels of brass and iron,” taken at Jericho,
were brought. In the reign of David, and in his
plans for the future temple, great prominence is


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3008


given to the “treasuries.” In 1 Ch 26 20ff are
given the names of those who were over “the
treasures of the house of God,” and over ‘‘the treas-
ures of the dedicated things” (‘‘the spoil won in
battles,” ver 27), the latter being applied ‘‘to repair

the honse of Jeh.” :
In David’s plans for Solomon the ‘“‘treasuries”
(ganzakkim) are mentioned with the “porch,” “the
houses,’’ the ‘‘upper rooms,” the ‘‘inner


2. The chambers” of the Temple (1 Ch 28 11);
Solomonic and the same distinction is made of
Temple “the treasuries [’d¢*rdth] of the house


of God,” and “the treasuries of the
dedicated things” (ver 12). In the accounts of the
actual building of the Temple, “‘treasuries’’ are not
mentioned, but subsequent notices give ample evi-
dence of their existence. In the narratives of the
repeated plunderings of the Temple (see TEMPLE),
constant allusion is made to the carrying away of
“the treasnres of the house of Jeh” and ‘‘the treas-
ures of the king’s house’ or palace (1 K 14 26;
15 15.18; 2 K 12 18; 14 14; 16 8; 18 15; 24 13).
In the episode of Jehoash’s repair of the Temple
(2 K 12; 2 Ch 24), we have a refreshing glimpse
of the presence and uses of the treasury; but this
brighter gleam is soon swallowed up again in dark-
ness. Of the larger store-chambers we get a glance
in Jer, where we are told that “the house of the
king” was “under the treasury” (38 11), i.e. on a
lower level under the south wall.
The Book of Neh imtroduces us to treasury-
chambers in the second temple—now used for the
voluntary offerings (tithes) of the


3. The people—corn, and wine, and oil (Neh
Second 13 4 ff; cf Mal3 10). A certain
Temple Meshullam had repaired the city wall


“over against his chamber’ (Neh 3
30), and he, with other Levites, kept ‘‘the watch
at the storchouses of the gates’? (12 25). These
gates were probably gates of exit on the southern
side, as in the Herodian temple.
In Herod’s temple the name “treasury” was
specially given to the “court of the women’ (see
TrempLre, Heron’s), where were 13
4. Herod’s trumpet-shaped boxes for the recep-
Temple in tion of the offerings of the worshippers.
the NT It was here that Jesus saw the poor
widow cast in her two mites (Mk 12
41; Lk 21 1-4), and the court is expressly named
the ‘‘treasury” in Jn 8 20: “These words spake he
in the treasury, as he taught in the temple.” It is
a legitimate deduction that this court was the ordi-
nary scene of the Lord’s ministry when teaching in
the temple. See also Treasurn, TREASURER,
TREASURY. W. Saaw CaLpecotTr


TREATY, tré’ti (MA, berth, FI MID, kdrath
berith, “make a covenant,” “league,’’ ‘‘treaty’’):
Although the Israelites were forbidden to make
treaties, or enter into covenant, with the Canaan-
ites because of the risk thereby involved of religious
apostasy and moral contamination (Ex 23 32; 34
12; Dt 7 2; Jgs 2 2), they were so situated in the
midst of the nations that treaty relations of some
sort with their neighbors were from time to time
inevitable. After the rise of the monarchy, treaties
were common. David and Solomon had friendly
relations with Hiram, king of Tyre (1 K 6 15 ff);
Asa, to rid himself of the hostile approaches of
Baasha, king of Israel, entered into a league with
Ben-hadad of Syria, which the prophet Hanani
denounced (2 Ch 16 1ff); Ahab entered into a
similar compact with Ben-hadad’s son and successor,
and set him at liberty when he was his prisoner of
war (1 K 20 34); and at a later time Jehoshaphat
joined Ahab in an expedition against Ben-hadad II
to Ramoth-gilead in which Ahab lost his life (1 K


3009


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Treasury
Tree of Life


22). Sometimes with Syria and neighboring states
against the terrible Assyr power, and sometimes
with Egypt against Assyria or Babylon, the kings of


Israel and Judah entered into treaty to resist their.


advances and to preserve their own independence
(2 K 17 4; Hos 7 11; Isa 30 1). Against such
alliances the prophets raised their testimony (Isa
31 1; Jer 27 3ff). See also War, 9; Roms, V, 1.


NicoL
TREE, tré. See Botany.


TREE OF LIFE (00 79, ‘ee hayyim; ftdov
tis Lots, xilon tés zoés): The expression “tree of
life’ occurs in four groups or connections: (1) in
the story of the Garden of Eden, (2) in the Proverbs
of the Wise Men, (8) in the apocryphal writings, and
(4) in the Apocalypse of John.

The tree was in the midst of the Garden, and its
fruit of such a nature as to produce physical im-

mortality (Gen 29; 3 22). After
1. The Tree guiltily partaking of the tree of the
of Life in knowledge of good and evil, and the
the Garden sinful tendency having thus been im-
of Eden planted in their natures, the man and

woman are driven forth from the
Garden lest they should eat of the tree of life and
live forever (3 22). The idea seems to be that, if
they should eat of it and become immortalized in
their sinful condition, it would be an unspeakable
calamity to them and their posterity. For sinful
beings to live forever upon earth would be incon-
ceivably disastrous, for the redemption and devel-
opment of the race would be an impossibility in
that condition. Earth would soon have been a hell
with sin propagating itself forever. To prevent
such a possibility they were driven forth, cherubim
were placed at the entrance of the Garden, the
flame of a sword revolving every way kept the way
of the tree of life, and this prevented the possibility
of man possessing a physical immortality. It is
implied that they had not yet partaken of this tree
and the opportunity is now forever gone. Im-
mortality must be reached in some other way.

The interpretation of the story is a standing
problem. Is it mythical, allegorical, or historical?
Opinions vary from one of these extremes to the
other with all degrees of difference between. In
general, interpreters may be divided into three
classes:

(1) Many regard the story as a myth, an ancient
representation of what men then conceived early man
to have been, but with no historical basis behind it.
All rationalistic and modern critical scholars are prac-
tically agreed ou this. Budde in his Urgeschichte says
there was but one tree, that is the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, and the intimation of a tree of life is
an interpolation. Barton has endeavored to show that
the tree of life was really the date-palm, and the myth

athered around this tree because of its bisexual nature.
He holds that man came to his self-realization through
the sexual relation, and therefore the date-palm came
to be regarded as the tree of life, and the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil. But this difference came
In later when the knowledge of its orlgin became obscured.
He calls attention to the fact that the sacred palm ls
found in the sanctuary of Ea at Eridu. All such inter-
pretations are too obviously based upon a materialistic
evolution hypothesis.

(2) There are those who regard the entire story as
Ilteral: one tree would actually teaver puyelcs lmmor-
tality, the other the knowledge of evil. But this in-
volves endless difficulties also, requires tremendous
differences between the laws of Nature then and now,
vast_ differences in fruits, men and animals, and an
equally vast difference in God's dealings with man.


(3) We prefer to regard it as a pictorial-spiritual
story, the representing of great spiritual facts and
religious history in the form of a picture. This
is the usual Bible method. It was constantly em-
ployed by the prophets, and Jesus continually
“pictured” great spiritual facts by means of mate-
rial objects. Such were most of His parables.


John’s Apocalypse is also a series of pictures repre-
senting spiritual and moral history. So the tree
of life is a picture of the glorious possibilities which
lay before primitive man, and which might have
been realized by him had not his sin and sinful
condition prevented it. God’s intervention was
&@ great mercy to the human race. Immortality
in sin is rendered impossible, and this has made
possible an immortality through redemption; man
at first is pictured as neither mortal nor immortal,
but both are possible, as represented by the two
trees. He sinned and became mortal, and then
immortality wasdenied him. It hassince been made
possible in a much higher and more glorious way.
This picture was not lost to Israel. The “‘tree
of life,” became a common poetic simile to represent
that which may he a source of great
2. ACom- blessing. In the Book of Prov the
mon Poetic conception deepens from a physical
Simile source of a mere physical immortality
. to a moral and spiritual source of a full
life, mental, moral and spiritual, which will poten-
tially last forever. Life, long life, is here attributed
to a certain possession or quality of mind and heart.
Wisdom is a source and supply of life to man. This
wisdom is essentially of a moral quality, and this
moral force brings the whole man into right rela-
tions with the source of life. Hence a man truly
lives by reason of this relationship (Prov 3 18).
The allusion in this verse is doubtless to Gen 2 9;
3 22. An expression very similar is Prov 10 11,
where the mouth of the righteous is declared to be
a fountain of life. Good words are a power for.
good, and hence produce good living. Prov 11 30
has a like thought: “The fruit of the righteous is a
tree of life,” ie. the good life is a source of good in
its influence on others. Prov 13 12 says: ‘Hope
deferred maketh the heart sick; but when the
desire cometh, it is a tree of life.” The meaning
seems to be that the gratification of good and lawful
desires produces those pleasures and activities which
make up life and its blessings. Prov 15 4 says: “A
gentle tongue is a tree of life,” i.e. its beneficent
influences help others to a better life.
The apocryphal writings contain a few references to the


tree of Ate bee use the phrase in a different sense from
that in which it is used in the canonical


3. The books: ‘‘ They shall have the tree of life for
A hal an ointment of sweet savour "' (2 Esd 2 12).

pocryp. Ecclus 1 20 has only an indirect reference
Writings toit. Ethiopic Enoch, in his picture of the


Messianic age, uses his imagination very
freely in describing it: “It has a fragrance heyond all
fragrances; its leaves and bloom and wood wither not
forever; its fruit is beautiful and resembles the date-
palm” (24 4). Slavonic Enoch speaks thus: ‘‘In the
midst there is the tree of life . . . . and this tree cannot
be described for its excellence and_sweet odor’? (8 3).
2 Esd describing the future says: ‘'Unto you is paradise
opened, the tree of life is planted” (8 52).


The Apocalypse of John refers to the tree of life
in three places (Rev 2 7; 22 2.14). These are
pictures of the glorious possibilities


4, The of life which await the redeemed soul.
Book of In Exzckiel’s picture of the ideal state
Rev and the Messianic age, there flows


from the sanctuary of God a life-giving
river having trees upon its banks on either side,
yielding fruit every month. The leaf of this tree
would not wither, nor its fruit fail, because that
which gave moisture to its roots flowed from the
sanctuary. This fruit was for food and the leaves
for medicine (47 12). Very similar to this and
probably an expansion of it is John’s picture in
Rev: “To him that overcometh, to him will I give
to eat of the tree of life, which is in the Paradise of
God” (2 7). This means that all the possibilities
of a complete and glorious life are open to the one
that overcomes, and by overcoming is prepared to
become immortal in a vastly higher sense than was


Trees, Goodly
Trine Immersion


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3010


possible to primitive man. In his picture of the
New Jerus, the river of water of life has the tree
of life on either side (22 2). Its leaf never fades
and its monthly fruitage never fails. Food and
medicine these are to be to the world, supplied freely
to all that all may enjoy the highest possibilities of
activity and blessedness which can come to those
who are in right relationships with God and Jesus
Christ. In 22 14 John pronounces a blessing on
those who wash their robes, who lead the clean and
pure Christ life, for they thereby have the right and
privilege of entering into the gates of the City and
partaking of the tree of life. This means not only
immortal existence, but such relations with Jesus
Christ and the church that each has unrestricted
access to all that is good in the universe of God.
The limit is his own limited capacity.
James JosIAH RrEve
TREES, GOODLY. See Goopiy Trezs.


TREES, SHADY, sha’di.
TREES, THICK. See Tuicx Trees.
TRENCH, trench, trensh. See Sreas, (5), (8).


See Lorus TREEs,


TRESPASS, tres’pas: To pass over, to go beyond
one’s right in place or act; to injure another; to
do that which annoys or inconveniences another;
any violation of law, civil or moral; it may relate
to a person, a community, or the state, or to offences
against God. The Heb DWN, ’dshdm (“sin”), is
used very frequently in the OT when the trespass
is a violation of law of which God is the author.
The Gr word is rapérrwyua, pardptoma.

In the OT an offering was demanded when the
offence was against God: a female lamb; in other
cases, according to the magnitude of the wrong, a
ram or a goat; the offering was to be preceded by a
confession by the one committing the trespass. If
the trespass was against a human being, the wrong-
doer must make it right with the person, and when
reconciliation should have been effected, then the
offering for sin was to be made. See under Sacri-
FICE IN THE OT, ‘Trespass Offering.” If a person’s
property has been injured, then the trespasser shall
add a fifth to the value of the property injured
and give that to the injured party (Lev 6 5). Zac-
chaeus, wanting to make full restitution, went
beyond the demands of the Law (Lk 19 1-9).

The NT teaching on the subject is, first to be
reconciled to the brother and then offer, or worship
(Mt 5 28.24). In all cases, also, the offended party
must forgive if the offender shall say, “I repent”
(Mt 6 14; Eph 4 32; Col 3 18). We have been
alienated by our trespasses from God (Eph 2 1).
It was the Father's good will to reconcile all to
Himself through Christ (Col 1 20-22). We must
be reconciled to God (2 Cor 5 20.21), This being
done, our trespasses shall be forgiven and we shall
be justified. Davin Rosperts DuNGAN


TRESPASS OFFERING. See Sacririce IN THE
OT.


TRIAL, trial.
HEDRIN.


TRIAL OF JESUS. See Jesus, ARREST AND
TRIAL OF."


TRIBE, trib (in the OT always for MO", matteh,
183 t, or DAW, shébhet, 145 t, also spelled DAW,
shebhet; Aram. O32, sh*bhat[Ezr 6 17]): Both words


mean “staff,” and perhaps “company led by chief
with staff’ (OHL, 641) is the origin of the meaning


See Courts, JupiciaL; San-


“tribe.’ In the Apoc and NT always for $vA%,
phulé, from ¢iw, pid, “beget,” with dwdexdpudoy,
dadekdphulon, “twelve tribes,” in Acts 26 7. Of
the two Heb words, shébhet appears to be consider-
ably the older, and is used in Ps 74 2; Jer 10 16;
51 19 of the whole people of Israel, and in Nu 4 18;
Jgs 20 12 (RVm); 1 S 9 21 (RVm) of subdivisions
of a tribe (but the text of most of these six verses is
suspicious). Further, in Isa 19 13, shébhet is used
of the “tribes”? (nomes?) of Egypt and phulé in Mt
24 30 of “all the tribes of the earth,” but otherwise
shébhet, matteh and phul@ refer exclusively to the
tribes of Israel. In 2 S 7 7 for shibheté, “tribes,”’
read shdphté, “judges’”’ (cf RVm). ‘
Burton Scotr Easton
TRIBULATION, trib-t-la’shun ("X¥ , gar, WY, car,
“staid,” “narrow,” “pent up”; cf Nu 22 26): Closely
pressed, as of seals (Job 41 15[7]); of
1. Inthe — streamspentup (Isa 59 9m); ofstrength
OT limited (Prov 24 10, ‘“‘small’’). Hence,
figuratively, of straitened circumstan-
ces; variously rendered “affliction,” “tribulation,”
‘distress’ (Dt 4 30; Job 15 24; 30 12; Ps 4 2;
18 7; 32 7; 44 11, etc; 78 42; 102 3; 106 44; 119
143; Isa 26 16; 30 20; Hos 5 15; Ezk 30 16). Fre-
quently the fem. form (V)¥, ¢drah) is similarly
rendered ‘‘tribulation” (Jgs 10 14 AV; 18 10 19
AV; 26 24); in other places ‘‘distress,’’ “affliction”
(Gen 42 21; Ps 120 1; Prov 11 8; 2 Ch 20 9; Isa
63 9; Jer 15 11; Jon 2 2; Nah 1 9; Zec 10 11).
The Gr is @Atyxs, thlipsis, a “pressing together”
(as of grapes), squeezing or pinching (from vb.
OriBw, thitbd); used figuratively for ‘‘dis-
tress,’ “tribulation”; LXX for ¢ar.
and ¢drah; Vulg tribulatio pressura
(from tribulum, ‘“‘a threshing sledge’).
The vb. form is rendered “suffer tribulation” (1


2. In the
NT


Thess 8 4 AV, “suffer affliction” RV); “trouble”
(2 Thess 16 AV, “afflict” RV; cf 2 Cor 1 6;
48; 75; 1 Tim 5 10; He 11 37). The noun


form is rendered in AV variously as ‘‘tribulation,”
“affliction,’’ “persecution,” though more uniformly
“tribulation” in RV. The word is used generally
of the hardships which Christ’s followers would
suffer (Mt 18 21; 24 9.21.29; Mk 417; 18 19.
24; Jn 16 33; 1 Cor 7 28); or which they are
now passing through (Rom 5 3; 12 12; 2 Cor
417; Phil 4 14); or through which they have
already come (Acts 11 19; 2 Cor 2 4; Rev 7 14).
Epwarp BacsBy PoLLarp

TRIBUTE, trib’it (073, mas, “tribute,” really
meaning “‘forced laborers,’’ “labor gang” [1 K 4 6;
9 15.21]; also “forced service,” “‘serfdom’’; possibly
“forced payment” is meant in Est 10 1; the idea
contained in the modern word is better given by
m3, middah, [Ezr 6 8; Neh 5 4]): Words used
only of the duty levied for Jeh on acquired spoils are
03%, mekhes, ‘‘assessment” (Nu 31 28.37.38.39.40.
41), D2, bls, “excise” (Ezr 4 13.20; Neh 7 24),
NW, massa’, “burden” (2 Ch 17 11), and way,
‘énesh, ‘fine’ or ‘indemnity’ (2 K 23 33; cf
Prov 19 19). The tr “tribute” for MOA, missath,
in Dt 16 10 is wrong (cf RVm). «fvoos, kénsos
(Mt 22 17; Mk 12 14) = “census,” while ¢épos,
phéros (Lk 20 22; 23 2; Rom 18 6.7), signifies an
annual tax on persons, houses, lands, both being direct
taxes. The phérot were paid by agriculturists, pay-
ment being made partly in kind, partly in money, and
are contrasted with the éélé of the publicans, while
kénsos is strictly a poll tax. The amount of tribute
required as a poll tax by the Romans was the
dldpaxpov, didrachmon (Mt 17 24), AV “tribute,”
RV “half-shekel.”’ The orarip, statér (ver 27),
was a tetradrachm, “one shekel,” or pay for two.
After the destruction of Jerus, the Jews were re-


3011


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Pipes ody


rine Immersion


quired to pay this poll tax toward the support of the
worship of Jupiter Capitolinus. Different kinds
of personal taxes were raised by the Romans: (1)
an income tax, (2) the poll tax. The latter must
be paid by women and slaves as well as by free men,
only children and aged people beingexempted. The


ie Mom
so HL ACLE }¥| Je]


i


payment exacted began with the 14th year in the
case of men and the 12th in the case of women, the
obligation remaining in force up to the 65th year
in the case of both. For B enearieg of assessment,
each person was permitted to put his own state-
ment on record. After public notice had been
given by the government, every citizen was ex-
pected to respond without personal visitation by
an official (see Lk 2 1 ff). On the basis of the
records thus voluntarily made, the tax collectors
would enforce the payment of the tribute. See
also Tax, TAXING. Frank E. Hrrscu


TRIBUTE MONEY (ro vopropa rod xhvorov, t6
némisma tot kénsou [Mt 22 19], “the coin used
in payment of the imperial taxes’): Lit. “the law-
ful money of the tax,’ which, in the case of the poll
tax, had to be paid in current coin of the realm (see
Mt 17 27).


TRICLINIUM, tri-klin’i-um (Lat from Gr
tpicdrlyoy, triklinion, from tri and Kliné, “a couch”):
A couch for reclining at meals among the ancient
Romans, arranged along three sides of a square,
the fourth side being left open for bringing in food
or tables, when these were used. In the larger
Rom houses the dining-rooms consisted of small
alcoves in the atrium arranged to receive triclinia.
In early OT times people sat at their meals (Gen
27 19; Jgs 19 6; 1 8 20 5; 1 K 18 20). Reclin-
ing was a luxurious habit imported from foreign
countries-by the degenerate aristocracy in the days
of the later prophets (Am 2 8; 6 4). Still, we
find it common in NT times (Mt 9 10; 26 7; Mk
6 22.39; 14 3.18; Lk 6 29; 7 36.37; 14 10; 17
7; Jn 12 2; in these passages, though EV reads
“sat,” the Gr words are andkeimai, sunandkeimat,
anaptpto, katdkeimai and anaklind, all indicating
‘veclining”’; cf Jn 18 23; 21 20; here AV trans-
lates these words “lean,’’ probably with reference
to the Jewish custom of leaning at the Passover
feast). In Jn 2 8.9 the ruler or governor of the
feast is called architriklinos, that is, the master of
the triclinium. See Mzats, III. Narsan Isaacs


TRIM: The only non-modern use is in Jer 2 33,
“How trimmest thou thy way to seek love!’’ used
for 207, yatabh, ‘‘to make good,” here “‘to study
out,” and the whole phrase means “to walk in an
artificial manner,” “like a courtesan.”


_ TRINE (TRIUNE) IMMERSION, trin (trian)
i-mfr’shun:
I. Linevistic Basis
1. Immersion
2. Triple Aetion
II. Doctrinan ARGUMENT
III. Historicau Practicz
1. The Jews
. John the Baptist
The Didache
. Justin Martyr
- Tertullian
Eunomius
. Greek Church
LITERATURE


I. Linguistic Basis.—The meaning of the word
Barrifa, baptizd, is “to dip repeatedly,” “to sub-
merge” (Thayer, Gr Lex. NT). It is
1. Immer- probably the frequentative of Bdérrw,
sion bépts, “to dip,” meaning “to dip re-
peatedly.” The word baptizd (and
Bdrricua, bdptisma) in the NT is “used absolutely,
‘to administer the rite of ablution,’ ‘to baptize’”’
(ib). It is “an immersion in water, performed
as a sign of the removal of sin,” etc (ib); “Baptizo,
tp an in or under water’ (Liddell and Scott, Gr
ex),

The threefold immersion is based upon the
Trinity into which the believer is to be baptized

“into the name of the Father and of
2. Triple the Son and of the Holy Spirit” (es
Action 7d bvoua Tol warps cal Tov viob Kal rob
ayloy mveiuaros, eis 16 6noma tot patrds
kat tot huiow kat tou hagiou pnetimatos, Mt 28 19).
(On the genuineness of this passage see Plummer,
Comm. on Mt.)

IT. Doctrinal Argument— Whether Jesus spoke
the words of Mt 28 19 as a baptismal formula or
not does not affect the question. The passages in
Acts, ‘‘in the name of Jesus Christ’ (2 38; 10 48),
and “in the name of the Lord Jesus”’ (8 16; 19 5),
are not baptismal formulae, but: mean the confes-
sion of Christ with all that Christ stands for, viz. the
fulness of God and His salvation. The idea of the
Trinity pervades the NT and many of the earliest
writings (cf 1 Cor 12 4-6; 2 Cor 13 14; Eph 2
18; 31417; 4446; 2 Thess 2 13-15; He6
46; 1 Jn 3 23.24; 42; Jude vs 20.21; Rev 1
4.5). “Baptized into Christ’? has the same reli-
gious content as Mt 28 19. Triune immersion is
the symbol of baptism into the Triune God. All
believers in the Trinity should see the consistency
of this symbol. Baptism is the symbol (1) of a
complete cleansing, (2) of death, (3) of burial, (4)
of resurrection, and (5) of entering into full union
and fellowship with the Triune God as revealed by
Christ. Triune immersion is the only symbol that
symbolizes all that baptism stands for. Note the
words of Sanday on Rom 6 1-14 (comm. on Rom,
ICC, 153): “Baptism has a double function:
(1) It brings the Christian into personal contact
with Christ, so close that it may fitly be described
as personal union with Him. (2) It expresses
symbolically a series of acts corresponding to the
redeeming actsof Christ. Immersion=Death. Sub-
mersion = Burial (the ratification of Death). Emer-
gence= Resurrection. All these the Christian has
to undergo in a moral and spiritual sense, and by
means of his union with Christ.’”’ Hence the psy-
chological need of a true symbol, triune immersion,
to teach and impress the significance of the new
life.

HI Historical Practice.—The Jews received pros-
elytes by circumcision, baptism (complete immer-

sion) and sacrifice (Schirer, HJP,

1. The II, 2, pp. 319f; Edersheim, LDTJM,
Jews II, 745, and 1, 273).

John the Baptist baptized ‘‘in the

river Jordan” (Mt 3 6) and “in Anon near to


Trinity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3012


Salim, because there was much water there” (Jn 3

23). Philip and the eunuch ‘both went down
into the water’ and they “came up

2. John the out of the water.’ All NT baptisms

Baptist ee by immersion (see also Rom 6
1-11).

The Didache (100-150 AD) ch vii: ‘Baptize into

the name of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Spirit in living [ruuning] water.
3. The But if they have not living water, bap-
Didache tize into other water; and if thou
canst not in cold, in warm’’ (Barricate
els 7d Bvoya Tod marpds Kat rod viod Kal rod dylov
mvevparos éy tdaTt fGvrt, baptisate eis t6 édnoma tot
pairés kat tow huiot kat tok hagiou pneimaios en
hidati zonti), ‘“Butif thou have not either, pour out
water thrice [7pls, tris] upon the head into the name
of the Father and Son and Holy Spirit.” Here the
triple action is maintained throughout, even in
clinical baptism, while immersion is the rule.

Justin Martyr (Ap., i61) describes baptism
which can only be understood as triune im-
mersion.

Tertullian (De Corona, iii) says,
‘“Hereupon we are thrice immersed’
(dehine ter mergitamur). Again (Ad
Prazeam, xxvi), “And lastly he commands them to
baptize into the Father and the Son and the Holy
Spirit, not into a unipersonal God.
And indeed it is not only once but
three times that we are immersed into
the Three Persons, at each several
mention of their names” (nam nec semel, sed ter,
ad singula nomina, in personas singulos, tinguimur).

Eunomius (c 360) introduced single immersion ‘‘into


the death of Christ.’’ This innovation was condemned.
Apos Const, 50, says, * If any presbyter or


4, Justin
Martyr


5. Ter-
tullian


6. Euno- bishop does not perform the one initiation
ie with three immersions, but with giving one
mus immersion only into the death of the Lord,


let him be deposed.'’ Single immersion was
allowed by Gregory the Great (c 691) to the church in
Spain in opposition to the Arians who used a trine (not
triune) immersion (Zpis.,i.43). This was exceptional.


The Gr church has always baptized by triune


immersion. The historical practice of the Chris-

tian church may well be summed up
7. Greek in the words of Dean Stanley: ‘There
Church can be no question that the original


form of baptism—the very meaning
of the word—was complete immersion in the deep
baptismal waters; and that for at least four cen-
turies, any other form was either unknown, or re-
garded, unless in the case of dangerous illness, as
an exceptional, almost monstrous case.....
few drops of water are now the western substitute
for the threefold plunge into the rushing river or
the wide baptisteries of the East” (Hist of Eastern
Church, 28). ‘‘For the first three centuries the al-
most universal practice of baptism was... . that
those who were baptized, were plunged, submerged,
immersed into the water” (Christian Institutions,
p. 21). See further, Baptism; Literaturs, Sup-
AposTo.ic, II, 5.

LIreERATURE.—James Quinter, Triune Immersion as
the Apostolic Form of Christian Baptism; Cc. F. Yoder,
God’s Means of Grace, Brethren Pub. House, Elgin, Ill,
U.S.A.: Smith, Dict. of Christian Antiquities; Hastings,
ERE; Bible Dicts.; Church Fathers; Church Histories,
and Histories of Baptism.

_ , Damien Wesster Kurz

TRINITY, trin’)-ti:

The Term ‘'Trinity’’

Purely a Revealed Doctrine

No Rational Proof of It

Finds Support in Reason

Not Clearly Revealed in the OT

Prepared for in the OT

Presupposed Rather Than Inculcated in the NT
. Revealed in Manifestation of Son and Spirit
Implied in the Whole NT

Conditions the Whole Teaching of Jesus


SEAN AUB Ww bo


-


11. Father and Son in Johannine Discourses
12. Bpite in Johannine Discourses

The Baptismal Formula
14, Genuineness of Baptismal Formula
15, Paul's Trinitarianism
16. Conjunction of the Three in Paul
17. Trinitarianism of Other NT Writers
18. Variations in Nomenclature,
19. Implications of ‘‘Son" and ‘Spirit
20. The Question of Subordination |
21. Witness of the Christian Consciousness
22, Formulation of the Doctrine
LiTERATURE


The term “Trinity” is not a Bib. term, and we
are not using Bib. language when we define what is
expressed by it as the doctrine that


1. The there is one only and true God, but
Term in the unity of the Godhead there are
“Trinity” three coeternal and coequal Persons,

the same in substance but distinct ia
subsistence. A doctrine so defined can be spoken


of as a Bib. doctrine only on the principle that the
sense of Scripture is Scripture. And the definition
of a Bib. doctrine in such un-Bib. language can be
justified only on the principle that it is better to
preserve the truth of Scripture than the words of
Scripture. The doctrine of the Trinity lies in
Scripture in solution; when it is crystallized from
its solvent it does not cease to be Scriptural, but
only comes into clearer view. Or, to speak without
figure, the doctrine of the Trinity is given to us in
Scripture, not in formulated definition, but in frag-
mentary allusions; when we assemble the disjecta
membra into their organic unity, we are not passing
from Scripture, but entering more thoroughly into
the meaning of Scripture. We may state the doc-
trine in technical terms, supplied by philosophical
reflection; but the doctrine stated is a genuinely
Scriptural doctrine.
In point of fact, the doctrine of the Trinity is
purely a revealed doctrine. That is to say, it
embodies a truth which has never been
2. Purely a discovered, and is indiscoverable, by
Revealed natural reason. With all his search-
Doctrine ing, man has not been able to find out
for himself the deepest things of God.
Accordingly, ethnic thought has never attained a
Trinitarian conception of God, nor does any ethnic
religion present in its representations of the Divine
being any analogy to the doctrine of the Trinity.


Triads of divinities, no doubt, occur in nearly all
polytheistic religions, formed under very various in-
fluences. Sometimes, as in the Egyp triad of Osiris,
Isis and Horus, it is the analogy of the human family
with its father, mother and son which lies at their basis.
Sometimes they are the effect of mere syncretism, three
deities worshipped in different localities being brought
together in the common worship of ail. Sometimes, as
in the Hindu triad of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, they
represent the cyclic movement of a pantheistic evolu-
tion, and symbolize the three stages of Being, Becoming
and Dissolution. Sometimes they are the result appar-
ently of nothing more than an odd human tendency to
think in threes, which has given the number three wide-
spread standing as a sacred number (so H. Usener).
It is no more than was to be anticipated, that one or
another of these triads should now and again be pointed
to as the replica (or even the original) of the Christian
doctrine of the Trinity. Gladstone found the Trinity in
the Homeric mythology, the trident of Poseidon _hbeiug
its symbol. Hegel very naturally found it in the Hindu
Trimurti, which indeed is very like his pantheizing
notion of what the Trinity is. Others have perceived
it in the Buddhist Triratna (Sdderblom); or (despite
their crass dualism) in some speculations of Parsee-
ism; or, more frequently, in the notional triad of Platon-
ism (e.g. Knapp); while Jules Martin is quite sure that
it is present in Philo’s neo-Stoical doctrine of the

powers,’’ esp. when applied to the explanation of
Abraham's three visitors. Of late years, eyes have
been turned rather to Babylonia; and H. Zimmern
finds a possible forerunner of the Trinity in a Father,
Son, and Intercessor, which he discovers in its my-
thology. 1t should be needless to say that none of these
triads has the slightest resemblance to the Christian
doctrine of the Trinity. The Christian doctrine of the
Trinity embodies much more than the notion of “‘ three-
ness,” and beyond their ‘“‘threeness" these triads
have nothing in common with it.


3013


As the doctrine of the Trinity is indiscoverable
by reason, so it is incapable of proof from reason.
There are no analogies to it in Nature,
3. No not even in the spiritual nature of man,
Rational who is made in the image of God. In
Proof of It His trinitarian mode of being, God is
‘ . upique; and, as there is nothing in the
universe like Him in this respect, so there is nothing
which can help us to comprehend Him. Many
attempts have, nevertheless, been made to con-
struct a rational proof of the Trinity of the God-
head. Among these there are two which are par-
ticularly attractive, and have therefore been put
forward again and again by speculative thinkers
through all the Christian ages. These are derived
from the implications, in the one case, of self-
consciousness; in the other, of love. Both self-
consciousness and love, it is said, demand for their
very existence an object over against which the
self stands as subject. If we conceive of God as
self-conscious and loving, therefore, we cannot help
conceiving of Him as embracing in His unity some
form of plurality. From this general position both
arguments have been elaborated, however, by
various thinkers in very varied forms.


The former of them, for example, is developed hy a
great 17th-cent. theologian—Bartholomew Keckermann
(1614)—as follows: God is self-conscious thought; and
God's thought must have a perfect object, existing
eternally hefore it; this object to be perfect must he
itself God; and as God is one, this object which is
God must be the God that is one. It is essentially the
same argument which is popularized in a famous para-
graph (§73) of peraing 8 The Education of the Human
Race. Must not God have an absolutely perfect repre-
sentation of Himself—that is, a representation in which
everything that is in Him is found? And would every-
thing that is in God be found in this representation if
His necessary reality were not found in it? If every-
thing, everything without exception, that is in God is to
be found in this representation, it cannot, therefore,
remain a mere empty image, but must be an actual dupli-
cation of God. It is obvious that arguments like this
prove too much. If God’s representation of Himself,
to be perfect, must possess the same kind of reality that
He Himself possesses, it does not seem easy to deny that
His representations of everything else must possess ob-
jective reality. And this would he as much as to say
that the eternal objective coexistence of all that God
can conceive is given in the very idea of God; and that
is open pantheism. The logical flaw lies in including in
the perfection of a representation qualities which are
not proper to representations, however perfect. A perfect
representation must, of course, have all the reality
pro er to a representation; but objective reality is so
ittle proper to a representation that a representation
acquiring it would cease to be a representation. This
fatal flaw is not transcended, but only covered up,
when the argument is compressed, as it is in most of its
modern presentations, in effect to the mere assertion
that the condition of self-consciousness is @ real dis-
tinction between the thinking subject and the thought
object, which, in God's case, would be between the sub-
ject ego and the ohject ego. Why, however, we should
deny to God the power of self-contemplation enjoyed by
every finite spirit, save at the cost of the distinct nye
tatizing of the contemplant_and the contemplated self,
it is hard to understand. Nor is it always clear that
what we get is a distinct hypostatization rather than a
distinct substantializing of the contemplant and con-
templated ego: not two persons in the Godhead so much
as two Gods. The discovery of the third hypostasis—
the Holy Spirit—remains meanwhile, to all these attempts
rationally to construct, a Trinity in the Divine Being,
a standing puzzle which finds only a very artificial
solution. : .

The case is much the same with the argument derived
from the nature of love. Our sympathies go out to that
old Valentinian writer—possibly it was Valentinus
himself—-who reasoned—perhaps he was the first so to
reason—that ‘‘God is all love,” “but love is not love
unless there he an object of love.’ And they go out
more richly still to Augustine, when, seeking a basis,
not for a theory of emanations, but for the doctrine of the
Trinity, he analyzes this love which God is into the triple
implication of ‘‘the lover,” ‘‘the loved” and ‘‘the love
itself,’ and sees in this trinary of love an analogue of
the Triune God. It requires, however, only that the
argument thus broadly suggested should be developed
into its details for its artificiality to become apparent.
Richard of St. Victor works it out as follows: It belongs
to the nature of amor that it should turn to another as
caritas. This other, in God's case, cannot he the world;


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Trinity


since such love of the world would be inordinate. It
can only be a person; and a person who is God's equal
in eternity, power and wisdom. Since, however, there
cannot he two Divine suhstances, these two Divine
poo must form one and the same substance. The

est love cannot, however, confine itself to these two
persons; !t must hecome condilectio hy the desire that
a third should he equally loved as they love one another.
Thus love, when perfectly conceived, leads necessarily
to the Trinlty, and since God is all He can he, this
Trinity must he real. Modern writers (Sartorius,
Schéherlein, J. Miiller, Liebner, most lately R. H. Griitz-
macher) do not seem to have essentially improved upon
such a statement as this. And after all Js said, it does
not appear clear that God’s own all-perfect Being could
not supply a satisfying object of His all-perfect love.
To say that in its very nature love is self-communicative,
and therefore implies an ohject other than self, seems an
abuse of figurative language. ;

Perhaps the ontological proof of the Trinity is nowhere
more attractively put than by Jonathan Edwards. The
peculiarity of his presentation of it lies in an attempt to
add plausihility to it by a doctrine of the nature of spirit-
ual ideas or Ideas of spiritual things, such as thought, love,
fear, in general. Ideas of such things, he urges, are just
repetitions of them, so that he who has an idea of any act
of love, fear, anger or any other act or motion of the mind,
simply so far repeats the motion in question; and If the
idea be perfect and complete, the original motion of the
mind is absolutely reduplicated. Edwards presses this
so far that he is ready to contend that if a man could
have an absolutely perfect idea of all that was in his
mind at any past moment, he would really, to all Intents
and purposes, be over again what he was at that moment.
And it he could perfectly contemplate all that is in his
mind at any given moment, as it is and at the same time
that it is there in its first and direct existence, he would
really be two at that time, he would be twice at once:
“The idea he has of himself would be himself again.’”’
This now. is the case with the Divine Being. ‘‘God's
idea of Himself is absolutely perfect, and therefore is an
express and perfect image of Him, exactly like Him in
every respect. .... But that which is the express,
perfect image of God and in every respect like Him Is
God, to all intents and purposes, because there is nothing
wanting: there is nothing in the Deity that renders it
the Deity but what has something exactly answering to
it in this image, which will therefore also render that the
Deity.” The Second Person of the Trinity belng thus
attained, the argument advances. ‘‘The Godhead
being thus begotten of God's loving [having ?] an Idea
of Himself and showing forth in a distinct Subsistence
or Person in that idea, there proceeds a most pure act,
and_an infinitely holy and sacred energy arises between
the Father and the Son in mutually loving and delighting
in each other..... The Deity hecomes all act, the
Divine essence itself flows out and is as it were breathed
forth in love and joy. So that the Godhead therein
stands forth in yet another manner of Subsistence, and
there proceeds the Third Personin the Trinity, the Holy
Spirit, viz. the Deity in act, for there is no other act but
the act of the will.’ The inconclusiveness of the reason-
ing lies on the surface. The mind does not consist in its
states, and the repetition of its states would not, there-
fore, en de or triplicate it. Ifit did, we should have
a plurality of Beings, not of Persons in one Being.
Neither God's parece idea of Himself nor His perfect
love of Himself reproduces Himself. He differs from
His idea and His love of Himself precisely by that which
distinguishes His Being from His acts. When it is said,
then, that there is nothing in the Deity which renders
it the Deity but what has something answering to it in
its image of itself, it is enough to respond—except the
Deity itself. What is wanting to the image to make it
a second Deity is just objective reality.


Inconclusive as all such reasoning is, however,
considered as rational demonstration of the reality
of the Trinity, it is very far from


4. Sup- possessing no value. It carries home
ported by to us in a very suggestive way the
Reason superiority of the Trinitarian concep-


tion of God to the conception of Him
as an abstract monad, and thus brings important
rational support to the doctrine of the Trinity,
when once that doctrine has been given us by reve-
lation. If it is not quite possible to say that we
cannot conceive of God as eternal self-conscious-
ness and eternal love, without conceiving Him as a
Trinity, it does seem quite necessary to say that
when we conceive Him as a Trinity, new fulness,
richness, force are given to our conception of Him
as a self-conscious, loving Being, and therefore we
conceive Him more adequately than as a monad,
and no one who has ever once conceived Him as a
Trinity can ever again satisfy himself with a monad-


Trinity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3014


istic conception of God. Reason thus not only |
performs the important negative service to faith in
the Trinity, of showing the self-consistency of the
doctrine and its consistency with other known truth,
but brings this positive rational support to it of dis-
covering in it the only adequate conception of God
as self-conscious spirit and living love. Difficult,
therefore, as the idea of the Trinity in itself is, it
does not come to us as an added burden upon our
intelligence; it brings us rather the solution of the
deepest and most persistent difficulties in our con-
ception of God as infinite moral Being, and illumi-
nates, enriches and elevates all our thought of God.
It has accordingly become a commonplace:to say
that Christian theism is the only stable theism.
That is as much as to say that theism requires the
enriching conception of the Trinity to give it a,per-
manent hold upon the human mind—the mind
finds it difficult to rest in the idea of an abstract
unity for its God; and that the human heart cries
out for the living God in whose Being there is that
fulness of life for which the conception of the Trinity
alone provides.


So strongly is it felt in wide circles that a Trinitarian
conception is essential to a worthy idea of God, that
there is ahroad a deep-seated unwilling-


5. Not ness to allow that God could ever have
Clearly made Himself known otherwise than as
R led a Trinity. From this point of view it
Keveale is inconceivable that the OT revela-
inthe OT tion should know nothing of the Trinity.


Accordingly, I. A. Dorner, for example,
reasons thus: “If, however—and this is the faith of
universal Christendom—a living idea of God must be
thought in some way after a Trinitarian fashion, it
must be antecedently probable that traces of the Trinity
cannot be lacking in the OT, since its idea of God is a
living or historical one."’ Whether there really exist
traces of the idea of the Trinity in the OT, however, is
@ nice question. Certainly we cannot speak broadly of
the revelation of the doctrine of the Trinity in the OT.
It is a plain matter of fact that none who have depended
on the revelation embodied in the OT alone have ever
attained to the doctrine of the Trinity. It is another
question, however, whether there may not exist in the
pages of the OT turns of expression or records of occur-
rences in which one already acquainted with the doctrine
of the Trinity may fairly see indications of an under-
lying implication of it. The older writers discovered
intimations of the Trinity in such phenomena as the pl.
form of the Divine name Elohim, the occasional employ-
ment with reference to God of pl. pronouns (‘‘ Let
us make man in our image," Gen 1 ; 8 22; 11 7;
Isa 6 8), or of pl. verbs (Gen 20 13; 35 7), certain
repetitions of the name of God_which seem_to distin-
tae between God and God (Gen 19 27; Ps 45 6.7;

10 1; Hos 1 7), threefold liturgical formulas (Dt_16
4; Nu 6 24.26; Isa 6 3), a certain tendency to hy-
postatize the conception of Wisdom (Prov 8), and esp.
the remarkable phenomena connected with the appear-
ances of the Angel of Jeh (Gen 16 2-13; 22 11.16;
81 11.13; 48 15.16; Ex 8 2.4.5; Jgs 13 20-22). The
tendency of more recent authors is to appeal, not so
much to specific texts of the OT, as to the very ‘'organ-
ism of revelation"’ in the OT, in which there is perceived
an underlying suggestion ‘‘that all things owe their
existence and persistence to a threefold cause," both
with reference to the first creation, and, more plainly,
with reference to the second creation. Passages like
Ps 33 6; Isa 61 1; 68 9-12; Hag 2 5.6, in which God
and His Word and His Spirit are brought together,
co-causes of effects, are adduced. A tendency is pointed
out to hypostatize the Word of God on the one hand
en 1 3; Ps 33 6; 107 20; 119 87; 147 15-18;

)}; and, esp. in Ezk and_the later Prophets,
the Spirit of God, on the other (e.g. Gen ] 2; Isa 48 16;
63 10; Ezk 22; 83; Zec 7 12). Suggestions—in
Isa for instance (7 14; 9 6)—of the Deity of the Mes-
siah are appealed to. And if the occasional occurrence
of pl. verbs and pronouns referring to God, and the pl.
form of the name #lohim, are not insisted upon as in
themselves evidence of a multiplicity in the Godhead,
yet a certain weight is lent them as witnesses that ‘‘the
. God of revelation is no abstract EO but the living,
true God, who in the fulness of His life embraces the
highest variety’ (Bavinck). The upshot of it all is that
it is very generally felt that, somehow, in the OT devel-
opment of the idea of God there is a suggestion that the

Deity is not a simple monad, and that thus a preparation

is made for the revelation of the Trinity yet to come.

It would seem clear that we must recognize in the OT

doctrine of the relation of God to His revelation by the
creative Word and the Spirit, at least the germ of the
distinctions in the Godhead afterward fully made known


in the Christian revelation. And we can scarcely stop
there. After all is said, in the light of the later revela-
tion, the Trinitarian interpretation remains the most
natural one of the phenomena which the older writers
frankly interpreted as intimations of the Trinity; esp.
of those connected with the deer puene of the Angel of
Jeh, no doubt, but also even of such a form of expression
as meets us in the ‘Let us make man in our image" of
Gen 1 26—for surely ver 27: ‘‘And God created man
in his own image,'’ does not encourage us to take the
preceding verse as announcing that_man was to be
created in the image of the angels. This is not an ille-
gitimate reading of NT ideas hack into the text of the
OT; it is only reading the text of the OT under the
illumination of the NT revelation. The OT may be
likened to a chamber richly furnished but dimly
lighted; the introduction of light brings into it nothing
which was not in it before; but it brings out into clearer
view much of what is in it but was only dimly or even
not at all perceived before. The mystery of the Trinity
is not revealed in the OT; but the mystery of the Trinity
underlies the OT revelation, and here and there almost
comes into view. Thus the OT revelation of God is not
corrected by the fuller revelation which follows it, but
only perfected, extended and enlarged.


It is an old saying that. what becomes patent in
the NT was latent in the OT. And it is important
that the continuity of the revelation of
6. Prepared God contained in the two Testaments
for in should not be overlooked or obscured.
the OT If we find some difficulty in perceiving
for ourselves, in the OT, definite points
of attachment for the revelation of the Trinity, we
cannot help perceiving with great clearness in the
NT abundant evidence that its writers felt no in-
congruity whatever between their doctrine of the
Trinity and the OT conception of God. The NT
writers certainly were not conscious of being “‘setters
forth of strange gods.” To their own apprehen-
sion they worshipped and proclaimed just the God
of Israel; and they laid no Jess stress than the OT
itself upon His unity (Jn 17 3; 1 Cor 8 4; 1 Tim
25). They do not, then, place two new gods by
the side of Jeh, as alike with Him to be served and
worshipped; they conceive Jeh as Himself at once
Father, Son and Spirit. In presentmg this one
Jeh as Father, Son and Spirit, they do not even
betray any lurking feeling that they are making
innovations. Without apparent misgiving they
take over OT passages and apply them to Father,
Son and Spirit mdifferently. Obviously they under-
stand themselves, and wish to be understood, as
setting forth in the Father, Son and Spirit just the
one God that the God of the OT revelation is; and
they are as far as possible from recognizing any
breach between themselves and the Fathers in pre-
senting their enlarged conception of the Divine
Being. This may not amount to saying that they
saw the doctrine of the Trinity everywhere taught
in the OT. It certainly amounts to saying that
they saw the Triune God whom they worshipped
in the God of the OT revelation, and felt no incon-
gruity in speaking of their Triune God in the terms
of the OT revelation. The God of the OT was their
God, and their God was a Trinity, and their sense
of the identity of the two was so complete that no
question as to it was raised in their minds.
The simplicity and assurance with which the NT
writers speak of God as a Trinity have, however,
a further implication. If they betray


7. Pre- no sense of novelty in so speaking of
supposed Him, this is undoubtedly in part be-
inthe NT cause it was no longer a novelty so to


speak of Him. It is clear, in other
words, that, as we read the NT, we are not wit-
nessing the birth of a new conception of God. What
we meet with in its pages is a firmly established
conception of God underlying and giving its tone
to the whole fabric. It is not in a text here and
there that the NT bears its testimony to the doc-
trine of the Trinity. The whole book is Trinitarian
to the core; all its teaching is built on the assump-


3015


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Trinity


tion of the Trinity; and its allusions to the Trinity
are frequent, eursory, easy and confident. It is
with a view to the cursoriness of the allusions to it
in the NT that it has heen remarked that “the doc-
trine of the Trinity is not so much heard as over-
heard in the statements of Scripture.” It would he
more exact to say that it is not so much inculcated
as presupposed. The doctrine of the Trinity does
not appear in the NT in the making, but as already
made. It takes its place in its pages, as Gunkel
phrases it, with an air almost of complaint, already
“fn full completeness” (véllig fertig), leaving no
trace of its growth. ‘There is nothing more won-
derful in the history of human thought,” says San-
day, with his eye on the appearance of the doctrine
of the Trinity in the NT, “‘than the silent and
impereeptible way in which this doctrine, to us
so difficult, took its place without struggle—and
without controversy—among accepted Christian
truths.” The explanation of this remarkable
phenomenon is, however, simple. Our NT is not
a record of the development of the doctrine or of its
assimilation. It everywhere presupposes the doc-
trine as the fixed possession of the Christian com-
munity; and the process by which it heeame the
possession of the Christian eommunity lies behind

the NT :
We cannot speak of the doctrine of the Trinity,
therefore, if we study exactness of speech, as re-
vealed in the NT, any more than we


8. Mani- can speak of it as revealed in the OT.
fested in The OT was written hefore its reve-
Son and lation; the NT after it. The revela-
Spirit tion itself was made not in word but


in deed. It was made in the incar-
nation of God the Son, and the outpouring of God
the Holy Spirit. The relation of the two Testa-
ments to this revelation is in the one case that of
preparation for it, and in the other that of product
of it. The revelation itself is embodied just in
Christ and the Holy Spirit. This is as much as to
say that the revelation of the Trinity was incidental
to, and the inevitable effect of, the accomplishment
of redemption. It was in the coming of the Son of
God in the likeness of sinful flesh to offer Himself
a sacrifice for sin; and in the coming of the Holy
Spirit to convict the world of sin, of righteousness
and of judgment, that the Trinity of Persons in the
Unity of the Godhead was once for all revealed to
men. Those who knew God the Father, who loved
them and gave His own Son to die for them; and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who loved them and deliv-
ered Himself up an offering and sacrifice for them;
and the Spirit of Grace, who loved them and dwelt
within them a power not themselves, making for
righteousness, knew the Triune God and could not
think or speak of God otherwise than as triune.
The doctrine of the Trinity, in other words, is
simply the modification wrought in the conception
of the one only God by His complete revelation of
Himself in the redemptive process. It necessarily
waited, therefore, upon the completion of the re-
demptive process for its revelation, and its revela-
tion, as necessarily, lay complete in the redemptive
process.

From this central fact we may understand more fully
several circumstances connected with the revelation of
the Trinity to which aliusion has been made. We may
from it understand, for example, why the Trinity was
not revealed in the OT. It may carry us a little way
to remark, as it has been customary to remark since
the time of Gregory of Nazianzus, that lt was the task
of the OT revelation to fix ly in the minds and
hearts of the people of God the great fundamental truth
of the unity of the Godhead; and it would have been
dangerous to speak to them of the plurality within this
unity until this task had been fully accom: lished. Tho
real reason for the delay in the revelation o the Trinity,


, iS grounded in the secular development of
ae eeaemptive purpose of God: the times were not


ripe for the revelation of the Trinity in the unity of
the Godhead until the fulness of the time had come for
God to send forth His Son unto redemption, and His
Spirit unto sanctification. The revelation in word must
needs wait upon the revelation in fact, to which it brings
its necessary explanation, no douht, but from which also
it derives its own entire significance and value. The
revelation of a Trinity in the Divine unity as a mere
abstract truth without relation to manifested fact, and
without significance to the development of the kingdom
of God, would have been foreign to the whole method of
the Divine procedure as it lies exposed to us in the pages
of Scripture. Here the working-out of the Divine pur-
pose supplies the fundamental principle to which all else,
even the progressive stages of revelation itself, is sub-
sidiary; and advances in revelation are ever closcly
connected with the advancing accomplishment of the
redemptive purpose. We may understand also, however,
from the same central fact, why it is that the doctrine
of the Trinity lies in the NT rather in the form of allu-
sions than in express teaching, why it is rather every-
where presupposed, coming only here and there into
incidental expression, than formally inculcated. It is
because the revelation, having been made in the actual
occurrences of redemption, was already the common
property of all Christian hearts. In speaking and writ-
jing to one another, Christians, therefore, rather spoke
out of their common Trinitarian consciousness, and re-
minded one another of their common fund of belief,
than instructed one another in what was already the
common property of all. We are to look for, and we
shall find, in the NT allusions to the Trinity, rather evi-
dence of how the Trinity, believed in by all, was con-
ceived by the authoritative teachers of the church, than
formal attempts, on their part, by authoritative declara-
tions, to bring the church into the understanding that
God is a Trinity.
The fundamental proof that God is a Trinity is
supplied thus by the fundamental revelation of the
Trinity in fact: that is to say, in the
9. Implied incarnation of God the Son and the
in the outpouring of God the Holy Spirit.
Whole NT In a word, Jesus Christ and the Holy
_ Spirit are the fundamental proof of
the doctrine of the Trinity. This is as much as to
say that all the evidence of whatever kind, and from
whatever scurce derived, that Jesus Christ is God
manifested in the flesh, and that the Holy Spirit is
a Divine Person, is just so much evidence for the
doctrine of the Trinity; and that when we go to the
NT for evidence of the Trinity we are to seek it, not
merely in the scattered allusions to the Trinity as
such, numerons and instructive as they are, but
primarily in the whole mass of evidence which the
NT provides of the Deity of Christ and the Divine
personality of the Holy Spirit. When we have said
this, we have said in effect that the whole mass of
the NT is evidence for the Trinity. For the NT
is saturated with evidence of the’ Deity of Christ
and the Divine personality of the Holy Spirit.
Precisely what the NT is, is the documentation of
the religion of the incarnate Son and of the out-
poured Spirit, that is to say, of the religion of the
Trinity, and what we mean by the doctrine of the
Trinity is nothing but the formulation in exact
language of the conception of God presupposed in
the religion of the incarnate Son and outpoured
Spirit. _ We may analyze this conception and
adduce proof for every constituent element of it
from the NT declarations. We may show that the
NT everywhere insists on the unity of the God-
head; that it constantly recognizes the Father as
God, the Son as God and the Spirit as God; and
thai it_cursorily presents these three to us as dis-
tinct Persons. It is not necessary, however, to
enlarge here on facts so obvious. We may content
ourselves with simply observing that to the NT
there is but one only living and true God; but that
to it Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit are each God
in the fullest sense of the term; and yet Father,
Son and Spirit stand over against each other as I,
and Thou, and He. In this composite fact the NT
gives us the doctrine of the Trinity. For the doc-
trine of the Trinity is but the statement in well-
guarded language of this composite fact. Through-


Trinity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3016


out the whole course of the many efforts to formu-
late the doctrine exactly, which have followed one
another during the entire history of the church,
indeed, the principle which has ever determined
the result has always been determination to do
justice in conceiving the relations of God the
Father, God the Sen and God the Spirit, on the
one hand to the unity of God, and, on the other, to
the true Deity of the Son and Spirit and their dis-
tinct personalities. When we have said these three
things, then—that there is but one God, that the
Father and the Son and the Spirit is each God, that
the Father and the Son and the Spirit is each a dis-
tinct person—we have enunciated the doctrine of the
Trinity in its completeness.

That this doctrine underlies the whole NT as its
constant presupposition and determines everywhere
its forms of expression is the primary fact to be
noted. We must not omit explicitly to note, how-
ever, that it now and again also, as occasion arises
for its incidental enunciation, comes itself to ex-
pression in more or less completeness of statement.
The passages in which the three Persons of the
Trinity are brought together are much more numer-
ous than, perhaps, is generally supposed; but. it
should be recognized that the formal collocation
of the elements of the doctrine naturally is rela-
tively rare in writings which are occasional in their
origin and practical rather than doctrinal in their
immediate purpose. The three Persons already
come into view as Divine Persons in the annun-
ciation of the birth of Our Lord: ‘The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee,’ said the angel to Mary, ‘and
the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee:
wherefore also the holy thing which is to be born
shall be called the Son of Ged’ (Lk 1 35m; ef Mt
1 18 ff). Here the Holy Ghost is the active agent
in the production of an effect which is also ascribed
to the power of the Most High, and the child thus
brought into the werld is given the great desig-
nation of “Son of Ged.” The three Persons are
just as clearly brought before us in the account of
Mit (1 18 ff), though the allusions to them are dis-
persed through a longer stretch of narrative, in the
course of which the Deity of the child is twice inti-
mated (ver 21: ‘It is He that shall save His people
from their sins’; ver 23: ‘They shall call His name
Immanuel; which is, being interpreted, God-with-
us’). In the baptismal scene which finds record by
all the evangelists at the opening of Jesus’ minis-
try (Mt 3.16.17; Mk 110.11; Lk 3 21.22; In
132-34), the three Persons are thrown up to sight
in a dramatic picture in which the Deity of each is
strongly emphasized. From the open heavens the
Spirit descends in visible form, and ‘a voice came
out of the heavens, Thou art my Son, the Beloved,
in whom I am well pleased.” Thus care seems to
have been taken to make the advent of the Son of
God into the world the revelation also of the Triune
God, that the minds of men might as smoothly as
possible adjust_themselves to the preconditions of
the Divine redemption which was in process of
being wrought out.

With this as a starting-point, the teaching of
Jesus is Trinitarianly conditioned throughout. He

has much to say of God His Father,
10. Condi- from whom as His Son He is in some
tions the _— true sense distinct, and with whom He
Whole is in some equally true senseone, And
Teaching of He has much to say of the Spirit, who
Jesus represents Him as He represents the

Father, and by whom He works as
the Father works by Him. It is not merely in the
Gospel of Jn that such representations occur in the
teaching of Jesus. In the Synoptics, too, Jesus
claims a Sonship to God which is unique (Mt il
27; 24 36; Mk 13 32; Lk 10 22; in the following


passages the title of “Son of God” is attributed to
Him and accepted by Him: Mt 4 6; 8 29; 14 33;
27 40.43.54; Mk 311; 12 6-8; 15 39; Lk 4 41;
22 70; cf Jn 1 34.49; 9 35; 11 27), and which in-
volves an absolute community between the two in
knowledge, say, and power: both Mt (11 27) and Lk
(10 22) record His great declaration that He knows
the Father and the Father knows Him with perfect
mutual knowledge: ‘No one knoweth the Son, save
the Father; neither doth any know the Father, save
the Son.” In the Synoptics, too, Jesus speaks of
employing the Spirit of Ged Himself for the per-
formance of His works, 2s if the activities of God
were at His disposal: “I by the Spirit of God”—or
as Lk has it, “by the finger of God”—‘‘cast out
demons” (Mt 12°28; Lk 11 20; cf the promise of
the Spirit in Mk 13 11; Lk 12 12).


It is in the discourses recerded in Jn, however, that
Jesus most copiously refers to the unity of Himself, as
the Son, with the Father, and to the mis-
11. Father Sion of the 8 irit from Himself as_the
% Cr dispenser of the Divine activities. Here
and Sonin He not only with great directness declares
Johannine that He and the Father are one (10 30;
Di ef 17 11.21.22.25) with a unity ef inter-
ISCOULSES penetration (‘‘ The Father is in me, and I in
the Father,” 10 38; cf 16 10.11), so that
to have seen Him was to have seen the Father (14 9; cf
15 21); but He removes all doubt as to the ‘essential
nature of His oneness with the Father by explicitly assert-~
ing His eternity (‘‘Before Abraham was born, I am,” Jn
§ 58), His co-eternity with God (‘‘had with thee before
the world was,” 17 5; cf17 18; 6 62), His eternal par-
ticipation in the Divine glory itself (‘the glory which
T had with thee,’ in eee community with Thee
“before the world was,’’ 17 5). Soclearisit thatin speak-
ing currently of Himself as God's Son (§ 25; 9 35; 11 4;
ef 10 36), He meant, in accordance with the underlying
significance of the idea of sonship in Sem speech (founded
en the natural implication that whatever the father is
that the son is also; cf 16 15; 17 10), to make Himself,
as the Jews with exact appreciation of His meaning per-
ceived, ‘ equal with God” (§ 18), or, to put it brusquely,
just ''God” (10 33). How He, being thus equal or rather
identical with God, was in the world, He explains as involv-
ing a coming forth (€éA9ov, exélthon) on His part, not
merely from the piveonte of God (476, ap6,16 30; cf13
8) or from fellowship with God (mapa, pard, 16 27; 17 8),
but from out of God Himself (é«, ek, 8 42; 16 28). And
in the very act of thus asserting that His eternal home
is in the depths of the Divine Being, He throws up, into
as strong an emphasis as stressed pronouns can convey,
His personal distinctness_from the Father. ‘If God
were your Father,’ says He (8 42), ‘ye would love me:
for I came forth and am come out of Ged; for neither
have I come of myself, but it was He that sent me.’
Again, He says (16 26.27): ‘In that day ye shall ask
in my name: and [ say not unte yeu that £ will make
request of the Father for you; for the Father Himself
loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed
that it was from fellowship with the Father that I came
forth; I came from out of the Father, and have come
into the world.’ Less pointedly, but still distinctly,
He says again (17 8): “They know of a truth that it
was from fellowship with Thee that I came forth, and they
believed that it was Thou that didst send me.’ It is
not necessary to illustrate more at large a form of expres-
sion so characteristic of the disceurses of Our Lord re-
corded by Jn that it meets us on every page: a form of
expression which combines a clear implication ef a unity
of Father and Son which is identity ef Being, and an
equally clear implication ef a distinction of Person be-
tween them such as allews not merely for the play of
emotions between them, as, for instance, of love (17 24;
ef 15 9[8 35]; 14 31), but also of an action and reaction
upon one anether which argues a high measure, if not
of exteriority, yet certainly of exterierization. Thus,
to Instance enly one of the most outstanding facts of
Our Lord's discourses (not indeed_confined to those In
John’s Gospel, but found also in His sayings recorded in
the Synoptists, as e.g. Lk 4 43 fet | MK 1 38); 9 48;
10 16; 4 34; § 32; 19; 19 10), He continually rep-
resents Himself as on the one hand sent by God, and as,
en the other, having come forth from the Father (e.g.
Jn 8 42; 10 36; 17 3; 5 23, et saepe).
It 1s more important to point out that these phe-
nomena ef interrelationship are not confined to the
..,,. Father and Son, but are extended alse to
12. Spirit in the Spirit. Thus, for example, in a con-
Johannine text_in which Our Lord had emphasized
in the strongest manner His own essen-
Discourses tial unity and continued interpenetration
with the Father (‘‘ If ye had knewn me, ye
would have known my Father also’; ‘‘He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father"; ‘Tam in the Father, and the
Father in me’; ‘‘The Father abiding in me doeth his


3017


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Trinity


works,’’ Jn 14 7.9.10), we read as follows (Jn 14 16-26):
‘And I will make request of the Father, and He shall


ive you another [thus sharply distlnguished from Our
ord as a distinct Person] Advocate, that He may be


with you forever, the Spirit of Truth ... . He abideth
with you and shall be in you. I will not leave you
orphans; I come unto you. .... In that day Pes shall
know that Tam inthe Father. .... If a man love me,


he will keep my word; and my Father will love him and
we {wae is, hoth Father and Son] will come unto him and
make our abode with him. .... These things have I
spoken unto you while abiding with you. But the
Advocate, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send
in my name, He shall teach you all things, and bring to
pone remembrance all that J said unto you.' It would

e impossible to speak more distinctly of three who were
yet one. The Father, Son and Spirlt are constantly
distinguished from one another—the Son makes request
of the Father, and the Father in response to this request
gives an Advocate, '‘anotber” than the Son, who Js sent
in the Son’s name. And yet the oneness of these three
Is so kept in sight that the coming of this ‘‘another Ad-
vocate’’ is spoken_of without emharrassment as the
coming of the Son Himself (vs 18.19.20.21), and indeed
as the coming of the Father and the Son (ver 23). There
is a sense, then, in which, when Christ goes away, the
Spine comes in His stead; there is also a sense in which,
when the Spirit comes, Christ comes in Him; and with
Christ's coming the Father comes too. There is a dis-
tinction hetween the Persons brought into view; and
with it an identlty among them; for both of which
allowance must be made. The same phenomena meet
us in other passages. Thus, we read again (15 26):
*But when there is come the Advocate whom J will send
unto you from [fellowship with] the Father, the Spirit
of Truth, which goeth forth from [fellowship with] the
Father, He shall bear witness of me.’ In the compass
of this single verse, it is intimated that the Spirit is pee
sonally distinct from the Son, and yet, like Him, has His
eternal home (in fellowship) with the Father, from whom
He, like the Son, comes forth for His saving work, being
sent thereunto, however, not in this instance by the
Father, but by the Son.

This last feature ls even more strongly emphasized in
yet another passage in which the work of the Spirit in
relation to the Son is presented as closely parallel with
the work of the Son in relation to the Father (16_5 ff).
‘But now I go unto Him that sent me..... Never-
theless I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that
I go away; for, if I go not away the Advocate will not
come unto you; but if I go I will send Him unto you.
And He, after He is come, will convict the world ....
of righteousness because I go to the Father and ye be-
hold me no more..... T have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when
He, the Spirit of truth is come, He shall guide you into
all the truth; for He shall not speak from Himself; but
what things soever He shall hear, He shall speak, and
He shall declare unto you the things that are to come.
He shall glorify me: for He shall take of mine and shall
show it unto you. All things whatsoever the Father
hath are mine: therefore said I that He taketh of mine,
and shall declare it unto you.’ Here the Spirit is sent
by the Son, and comes in order to complete and apply
the Son’s work, receiving His whole commission from the
Son—not, however, in derogation of the Father, because
when we speak of the things of the Son, that is to speak
of the things of the Father.

It is not to be said, of course, that the doctrine of the
Trinity is formulated in passages like these, with which
the whole mass of Our Lord’s discourses in Jn are strewn;
but it certainly is presupposed in them, and that is, con-
sidered from the point of view of their probative force,
even better. As we read we are kept in continual con-
tact with three Persons who act, each as a distinct per-
son, and yet who are in a deep, underlying sense, one.
There is but one God—there is never any question of
that—and yet this Son who has been sent into the world
by God not only represents God but is God, and _ this
Spirit whom the Son has in turn sent unto the world is
also Himself God. Nothing could be clearer than that
the Son and Spirit are distinct Persons, unless indeed it
be that the Son of God is just God the Son and the Spirit
of God just God the Spirit.


Meanwhile, the nearest approach to a formal
announcement of the doctrine of the Trinity which
is recorded from Our Lord’s lips, or,


13. The perhaps we may say, which is to be
Baptismal found in the whole compass of the NT,
Formula has been preserved for us, not by John,


but by one of the synoptists. It too,
however, is only incidentally introduced, and has
for its main object something very different from
formulating the doctrine of the Trinity. It is em-
bodied in the great commission which the resur-
rected Lord gave His disciples to be their “marching
orders” “even unto the end of the world”: “Go


ye therefore, and make disciples of all the nations,
baptizing them into the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Spirit”? (Mt 28 19).
In seeking to estimate the significance of this great
declaration, we must bear in mind the high solem-
nity of the utterance, by which we are required to
give its full value to every word of it. Its phrasing
is in any event, however, remarkable. It does not
say, “In the names [plural] of the Father and of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost’’; nor yet (what might
be taken to be equivalent to that), ‘In the name of
the Father, and in the name of the Son, and in the
name of the Holy Ghost,’’ as if we had to deal with
three separate Beings. Nor, on the other hand
does it say, “In the name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost,” as if “the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost” might be taken as merely three designations
of a single person. With stately impressiveness it
asserts the unity of the three by combining them
all within the bounds of the single Name; and then
throws up into emphasis the distinctness of each
by introducing them in turn with the repeated
article: “In the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost’? (AV). These three, the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, each stand
in some clear sense over against the others in dis-
tinct personality: these three, the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, all unite in some profound
sense in the common participation of the one Name.
Fully to comprehend the implication of this mode
of statement, we must bear in mind, further, the
significance of the term, ‘‘the name,” and the asso-
ciations laden with which it came to the recipients
of this commission. For the Hebrew did not think
of the name, as we are accustomed to do, as a mere
external symbol; but rather as the adequate ex-

ression of the innermost being of its bearer. In
Ee Name the Being of God finds expression; and
the Name of God—‘“‘this glorious and fearful name,
Jeh thy God” (Dt 28 58)—was accordingly a most
sacred thing, being indeed virtually equivalent to
God Himself. It is no solecism, therefore, when
we read (Isa 30 27), ‘‘Behold, the name of Jeh
cometh”; and the parallelisms are most instruct-
ive when we read (Isa 69 19): ‘So shall they fear
the Name of Jeh from the west, and His glory from
the rising of the sun; for He shall come as a stream
pent in which the Spirit of Jeh driveth.’ So preg-
nant was the implication of the Name, that it was
possible for the term to stand absolutely, without
adjunction of the name itself, as the sufficient rep-
resentative of the majesty of Jeh: it was a terrible
thing to ‘blaspheme the Name’ (Lev 24 11). All
those over whom Jeh’s Name was called were His,
His possession to whom He owed protection. It is
for His Name’s sake, therefore, that afflicted Judah
cries to the Hope of Israel, the Saviour thereof in
time of trouble: ‘O Jeh, Thou art in the midst of
us, and Thy Name is called upon us; leave us not’
(Jer 14 9); and His people find the appropriate
expression of their deepest shame in the lament,
‘We have become as they over whom Thou never
barest rule; as they upon whom Thy Name was
not called’ (Isa 63 19); while the height of joy
is attained in the cry, ‘Thy Name, Jeh, God of
Hosts, is called upon me’ (Jer 16 16; cf 2 Ch7
14; Dnl 9 18.19). When, therefore, Our Lord
commanded His disciples to baptize those whom
they brought to His obedience “into the name of
....,” Hewasusing language charged to them with
high meaning. He could not have been understood
otherwise than as Eupea OnE for the Name of
Jeh this other Name “‘of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost”; and this could not
possibly have meant to His disciples anything else
than that Jeh was now to be known to them by the
new Name, of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy


Trinity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3018


Ghost. The only alternative would have been that,
for the community which He was founding, Jesus
was supplanting Jeh by a new God; and this alter-
native is no less than monstrous. There is no
alternative, therefore, to understanding Jesus here
to be giving for His community a new Name to
Jeh, and that new Name to be the threefold Name
of “the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.”
Nor is there room for doubt that by ‘the Son” in
this threefold Name, He meant just Himself with
all the implications of distinct. personality which
this carries with it; and, of course, that further
carries with it the equally distinct personality
of “the Father” and “the Holy Ghost,” with
whom “the Son” is here associated, and from whom
alike “the Son’ is here distinguished. This is a
direct ascription to Jeh, the God of Israel, of a three-
fold personality, and is therewith the direct enun-
ciation of the doctrine of the Trinity. We are not
witnessing here the birth of the doctrine of the
Trinity; that is presupposed. What we are wit-
nessing is the authoritative announcement of the
Trinity as the God of Christianity by its Founder,
in one of the most solemn of His recorded declara-
tions. Israel had worshipped the one only true God
under the Name of Jeh; Christians are to worship
the same one only and true God under the Name
of “the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.”
This is the distinguishing characteristic of Chris-
tians; and that is as much as to say that the doc-
trine of the Trinity is, according to Our Lord’s own
apprehension of it, the distinctive mark of the reli-
gion which He founded.

A passage of such range of implication has, of course,
not escaped criticism and challenge. An attempt which


caunot be characterized as other than
frivolous has even been made to dismiss


14. Gen- it trom the text of Matthew's Gospel.
uineness of Against this, the whole hody of external
Baptismal evidence cries out; and the internal evi-
EF ul dence is of itself not less decisive to the same

ormula = effect. When the ‘‘universalism,” ‘‘ec-


clesiasticism,"”’ and “high theology” of
the passage are pleaded against its genuineness, it is for-
gotten that to the Jesus of Mt there are attributed not
only such parables as those of the Leaven and the Mustard
Seed, hut such declarations as those contained in 8 11.12;
91 43: 24 14; thatin this Gospel alone is Jesus recorded
as speaking familiarly about His church (16 18; 18 17);
and that, after the great declaration of 11 27 ff, nothing
remained in lofty attribution to he assigned to Him.
When these same objections are urged against recog-
nizing the passage as an authentic saying of Jesus’ own,
it is quite obvious that the Jesus of the evangelists
cannot be in mind. The declaration here recorded is
quite in character with the Jesus of Matthew's Gospel,
as has just heen intimated; and no Jess with the Jesus of
the whole NT transmission. It will scarcely do, first to
construct a priori a Jesus to our own liking, and then to
discard as “unhistorical” all in the NT transmission
which would he unnatural to such a Jesus. It is not
these discarded passages hut our a priori Jesus which is
unhistorical. In the present instance, moreover, the
historicity of the assailed saying is protected by an im-
portant historical relation in which it stands. It is not
merely Jesus who speaks out of a Trinitarian couscious-
ness, hut all the NT writers as well. The universal
possession hy His followers of so firm a hold on such a
doctrine requires the assumption that some such teaching
as is here attrihuted to Him was actually contained in
Jesus’ instructions to His followers. Even had it not
heen attributed to Him in so many words hy the record,
we should have had to assume that some such declara-
tion had heen made by Him. In these circumstances,
there can he no good reason to doubt that it was made
hy Him, when it is expressly attributed to Him by the
record.
When we turn from the discourses of Jesus to the
writings of His followers with a view to observing
how the assumption of the doctrine
15. Paul’s of the Trinity underlies their whole
Trinita- fabric also, we naturally go first of all
rianism to the letters of Paul. Their very mass
is impressive; and the definiteness with
which their composition within a generation of the
death of Jesus may be fixed adds importance to
them as historical witnesses. Certainly they leave


nothing to be desired in the richness of their test
mony to the Trinitarian conception of God which
underlies them. Throughout the whole series, from
1 Thess, which comes from about 52 AD, to 2 Tim,
which was written about 68 AD, the redemption,
which it is their one business to proclaim and com-
mend, and all the blessings which enter into it or
accompany it are referred consistently to a three-
fold Divine causation. Everywhere, throughout
their pages, God the Father, the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Holy Spirit appear as the joint objects of
all religious adoration, and the conjunct source of
all Divine operations. In the freedom of the allu-
sions which are made to them, now and again one
alone of the three is thrown up into prominent view;
but more often two of them are conjoined in thanks-
giving or prayer; and not infrequently all three
are brought together as the apostle strives to give
some adequate expression to his sense of indebt-
edness to the Divine source of all good for blessings
received, or to his longing on behalf of himself or
of his readers for further communion with the God
of grace. It is regular for him to begin his Epp.
with a prayer for “grace and peace” for his readers,
“from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ,”
as the joint source of these Divine blessings by
way of eminence (Rom 1 7; 1 Cor 13; 2 Corl
2; Gal 1 3; Eph 1 2; Phil 1 2; 2 Thess 1 2; 1
Tim 12; 2 Tim 1 2; Philem ver 3; cf 1 Thess
11). It is obviously no departure from this habit
in the essence of the matter, but only in relative
fulness of expression, when in the opening words of
the Ep. to the Col, the clause “and the Lord Jesus
Christ” is omitted, and we read merely: “Grace to
you and peace from God our Father.’”’ So also
it would have been no departure from it in the:
essence of the matter, but only in relative fulness of
expression, if in any instance the name of the Holy
Spirit had chanced to be adjoined to the other two,
as in the single instance of 2 Cor 13 14 it is ad-
joined to them in the closing prayer for grace with
which Paul ends his letters, and which ordinarily
takes the simple form of, ‘the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you” (Rom 16 20; 1 Cor 16
23; Gal 6 18; Phil 4 23; 1 Thess 5 28; 2 Thess
3 18; Philem ver 25; more expanded form, Eph
6 23.24; more compressed, Col 4 18; 1 Tim 6
21; 2 Tim 4 22; Tit 3 15). Between these open-
ing and closing passages the allusions to God the
Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit
are constant and most intricately interlaced. Paul’s
monotheism is intense: the first premise of all his
thought on Divine things is the unity of God (Rom
3 30; 1 Cor 84; Gal 3 20; Eph 46; 1 Tim
25; ef Rom 16 22; 1 Timi117). Yet to him
God the Father is no more God than the Lord Jesus
Christ is God, or the Holy Spirit is God. The
Spirit of God is to him related to God as the spirit
of man isto man (1 Cor 2 11), and therefore if the
Spirit of God dwells in us, that is God dwelling in
us (Rom 8 10 ff), and we are by that fact consti-
tuted temples of God (1 Cor 3 16). And no ex-
pression is too strong for him to use in order to
assert the Godhead of Christ: He is “our great God”
(Tit 2 13); He is “God over all” (Rom 9 5); and
indeed it is expressly declared of Him that the “ful-
ness of the Godhead,” that is, everything that
enters into Godhead and constitutes it Godhead,
dwells in Him. In the very act of asserting his
monotheism Paul takes Our Lord up into this
unique Godhead. “There is no God but one,”
he roundly asserts, and then illustrates and proves
this assertion by remarking that the heatheu may
have “gods many, and lords many,” but “to us there
is one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and
we unto him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through
whom are all things, and we through him” (1 Cor


3019


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Trinity


8 6). Obviously, this “one God, the Father,” and
“one Lord, Jesus Christ,’’ are embraced together in
the one God who alone is. Paul’s conception of the
one God, whom alone he worships, includes, in other
words, a recognition that within the unity of His
Being, there exists such a distinction of Persons as
is given us in the “one God, the Father” and the
“one Lord, Jesus Christ.”
In numerous passages scattered through Paul's
Epp., from the earliest of them (1 Thess 1 2-5;
2 Thess 2 13.14) to the latest (Tit
16. Con- 346; 2 Tim 1 3.13.14), all three
junction of Persons, God the Father, the Lord
the Three Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit, are
in Paul brought together, in the most inci-
dental manner, as eo-sources of all
the saving blessings which come to believers in
Christ. A typical series of such passages may be
found in Eph 2 18; 3 2-5.14.17; 4 4-6; 5 18-20,
But the most interesting instances are offered to
us perhaps by the Epp. to the Cor. In 1 Cor 12
4-6 Paul presents the abounding spiritual gifts with
which the church was blessed in a threefold aspect,
and connects these aspects with the three Divine
Persons. “Now there are diversities of gifts, but
the same Spirit. And there are diversities of minis-
trations, and the same Lord. And there are diver-
sities of workings, but the same God, who worketh
all things in all.” It may be thought that there isa
measure of what might almost be called artificiality
in assigning the endowments of the church, as they
are graces to the Spirit, as they are services to Christ,
and as they are energizings to God. But thus there
is only the more strikingly revealed the underlying
Trinitarian conception as dominating the structure
of the clauses: Paul clearly so writes, not because
“gifts,” “workings,” “operations” stand out in his
thought as greatly diverse things, but because God,
the Lord, and the Spirit lie in the back of his mind
constantly suggesting a threefold causality behind
every manifestation of grace. The Trinity is al-
luded to rather than asserted; but it is so alluded
to as to show that it constitutes the determining
basis of all Paul’s thought of the God of redemption.
Even more instructive is 2 Cor 13 14, which has
passed into general liturgical use in the churches as
a benediction: ‘“The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy
Spirit, be with you all.” Here the three highest
redemptive blessings are brought together, and
attached distributively to the three Persons of the
Triune God. There is again no formal teaching
of the doctrine of the Trinity; there is only another
instance of natural speaking out of a Trinitarian
consciousness. Paul is simply thinking of the
Divine source of these great blessings; but he
habitually thinks of this Divine source of redemptive
blessings after a trinal fashion. He therefore does
not say, as he might just as well have said, “The
grace and love and communion of God be with you
all,” but “The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the love of God, and the communion of the Holy
Spirit, be with you all.” Thus he bears, almost
unconsciously but most richly, witness to the trinal
composition of the Godhead as conceived by Him.
The phenomena of Paul’s Epp. are repeated in
the other writings of the NT. In these other writ-
ings also it is everywhere assumed that
17. Trini- the redemptive activities of God rest
tarianism of on a threefold source _in God_ the
Other NT Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Writers Holy Spirit; and these three Persons
repeatedly come forward together in
the expressions of Christian hope or the aspirations
of Christian devotion (e.g. He 2 3.4; 6 46; 10
29-31; 1 Pet 1 2; 2 3-12; 4 13-19; 1 Jn 5 4-8;
Jude vs 20.21; Rev 146). Perhaps as typical


Instances as any are supplied by the two following:
“According to the foreknowledge of God the Father,
in sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ” (1 Pet 1 2);
“Praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the
love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ unto eternal life’? (Jude vs 20.21). To these
may be added the highly symbolical instance from
the Apocalypse: ‘Grace to you and peace from
Him which is and was and which is to come; and
from the Seven Spirits which are before His throne;
and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness,
the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of the kings
of the earth’ (Rev 1 4.5). Clearly these writers,
too, write out of a fixed Trinitarian consciousness
and bear their testimony to the universal under-
standing current in apostolical cireles. Everywhere
and by all it was fully understood that the one God
whom Christians worshipped and from whom alone
they expected redemption and all that redemption
brought with it, included within His undiminished
unity the three: God the Father, the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Holy Spirit, whose activities rela-
tively to one another are conceived as distinctly
personal, This is the uniform and pervasive testi-
mony of the NT, and it is the more impressive that
it is given with such unstudied naturalness and
simplicity, with no effort to distinguish between
what have come to be called the ontological and the
economical aspects of the Trinitarian distinctions,
and indeed without apparent consciousness of the
existence of such a distinction of aspects. Whether
God is thought of in Himself or in His operations,
the underlying conception runs unaffectedly into
trinal forms.
It will not have escaped observation that the
Trinitarian terminology of Paul and the other
writers of the NT is not precisely
18. Varia- identical with that of Our Lord as


tions in recorded for us in His discourses.
Nomen- Paul, for example—and the same is
clature true of the other NT writers (except


: John)—does not speak, as Our Lord
is recorded as speaking, of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, so much as of God, the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Holy Spirit. This difference of
terminology finds its account in large measure in
the different relations in which the speakers stand
to the Trinity. Our Lord could not naturally
speak of Himself, as one of the Trinitarian Persons,
by the designation of “the Lord,”’ while the desig-
nation of “the Son,” expressing as it does His con-
sciousness of close relation, and indeed of exact
similarity, to God, came naturally to His lips. But
He was Paul’s Lord; and Paul naturally thought
and spoke of Him assuch. In point of fact, “Lord”
is one of Paul’s favorite designations of Christ, and
indeed has become with him practically a proper
name for Christ, and in point of fact, his Divine
Name for Christ. It is naturally, therefore, his
Trinitarian name for Christ. Because when he
thinks of Christ as Divine he calls Him “Lord,”
he naturally, when he thinks of the three Persons
together as the Triune God, sets Him as “Lord”
by theside of God—Paul’s constant name for “the
Father’’—and the Holy Spirit. Question may no
doubt be raised whether it would have been possible
for Paul to have done this, esp. with the constancy
with which he has done it, if, in his conception of
it, the very essence of the Trinity were enshrined in
the terms ‘Father’ and ‘“‘Son.”’ Paul is thinking of
the Trinity, to be sure, from the point of view of a
worshipper, rather than from that of a systematizer.
He designates the Persons of the Trinity therefore
rather from his relations to them than from their
relations to one another. He sees in the Trinity
his God, his Lord, and the Holy Spirit who dwells


Trinity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3020


in him; and naturally he so speaks currently of the
three Persons. It remains remarkable, neverthe-
less, if the very essence of the Trinity were thought
of by him as resident in the terms ‘‘Father,” “Son,”
that in his numerous allusions to the Trinity in the
Godhead, he never betrays any sense of this. It is
noticeable also that in their allusions to the Trinity,
there is preserved, neither in Paul nor in the other
writers of the NT, the order of the names as they
stand in Our Lord’s great declaration (Mt 28 19).
The reverse order occurs, indeed, occasionally, as,
for example, in 1 Cor 12 4-6 (cf Eph 4 4-6): and
this may be understood as a climactic arrangement
and so far a testimony to the order of Mt 28 19.
But the order is very variable; and in the most
formal enumeration of the three Persons, that of
2 Cor 13 14, it stands thus: Lord, God, Spirit.
The question naturally suggests itself whether the
order Father, Son, Spirit was esp. significant to
Paul and his fellow-writers of the NT. If in their
conviction the very essence of the doctrine of the
Trinity was embodied in this order, should we not
anticipate that there should appear in their num-
erous allusions to the Trinity some suggestion of

this conviction?
Such facts as these have a bearing upon the tes-
timony of the NT to the interrelations of the Per-
sons of the Trinity. To the fact of


19. Impli- the Trinity—to the fact, that is, that
cations of in the unity of the Godhead there sub-
“Son” and sist three Persons, each of whom has
“Spirit” his particular part in the working out


of salvation—the NT testimony is
clear, consistent, pervasive and conclusive. There
is included in this testimony constant and decisive
witness to the complete and undiminished Deity
of each of these Persons; no language is too exalted
to apply to each of them in turn in the effort to
give expression to the writer’s sense of His Deity:
the name that is given to each is fully understood
to be “the name that is above every name.”’ When
we attempt to press the inquiry behind the broad
fact, however, with a view to ascertaining exactly
how the NT writers conceive the three Persons to
be related, the one to the other, we meet with great
difficulties. Nothing could seem more natural, for
example, than to assume that the mutual relations
of the Persons of the Trinity are revealed in the
designations, “the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit,” which are given them by Gur Lord in the
solemn formula of Mt 28 19. Our confidence in
this assumption is somewhat shaken, however,
when we observe, as we have just observed, that
these designations are not carefully preserved in
their allusions to the Trinity by the writers of the
NT at large, but are characteristic only of Our
Lord’s allusions and those of John, whose modes of
speech in general very closely resemble those of
Our Lord. Our confidence is still further shaken
when we observe that the implications with respect
to the mutual relations of the Trinitarian Persons,
which are ordinarily derived from these desig-
nations, do not so certainly lie in them as is com-
monly supposed.

It may be very natural to see in the designation
“Son” an intimation of suhordination and deriva-
tion of Being, and it may not be difficult to ascribe
a similar connotation to the term “Spirit.” But it
is quite certam that this was not the denotation of
either term in the Sem consciousness, which under-
lies the phraseology of Scripture; and it may even
be thought doubtful whether it was included even
in their remoter suggestions. What underlies the
conception of sonship in Scriptural speech is just
‘Tikeness”’; whatever the father is that the son is
also. The emphatic application of the term ‘Son”
to one of the Trinitarian Persons, accordingly,


asserts rather His equality with the Father than
His subordination to the Father; and if there is any
implication of derivation in it, it would appear to
be very distant. The adjunction of the adjective
“only begotten” (Ju 114; 3 16-18; 1 Jn 4 9)
need add only the idea of uniqueness, not of deriva-
tion (Ps 22 21; 25 16; 35 17; Wisd 7 22m); and
even such a phrase as “God only begotten” (Jn 1
18 m) may contain no implication of derivation, but
only of absolutely unique consubstantiality; as
also such a phrase as ‘the first-begotten of all
creation’ (Col 1 15) may convey no intimation of
coming into being, but merely assert priority of
existence. In like manner, the designation ‘Spirit
of God” or “Spirit of Jeh,’’ which meets us fre-
quently in the OT, certainly does not convey the
idea there either of derivation or of subordination,
but is just the executive name of God—the desig-
nation of God from the point of view of His activity
——and imports accordingly identity with God; and
there is no reason to suppose that, in passing from
the OT to the NT, the term has taken on an essen-
tially different meaning. It happens, oddly enough,
moreover, that we have in the NT itself what
amounts almost to formal definitions of the two
terms “Son” and “Spirit,” and m both cases the
stress is laid on the notion of equality or sameness.
In Jn 5 18 we read: ‘On this account, therefore,
the Jews sought the more to kill him, because, not
only did he break the Sabbath, but also called God
his own Father, making himself equal to God.’
The point lies, of course, In the adj. “own.” Jesus
was, rightly, understood to call God “his own
Father,” that is, to use the terms “Father” and
“Son” not in a merely figurative sense, as when Israel
was called God’sson, but in therealsense. And this
was understood to be claiming to be all that God is.
To be the Son of God in any sense was to be like
God in that sense; to be God’s own Son was to be
exactly like God, to be “equal with God.” Simi-
larly, we read in 1 Cor 2 10.11: ‘For the Spirit
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.
For who of men knoweth the things of a man, save
the spirit of man which is in him? Even so the
things of God none knoweth, save the Spirit of
God.’ Here the Spirit appears as the substrate
of the Divine self-consciousness, the principle of
God’s knowledge of Himself: He is, in a word, just
God Himself in the innermost essence of His Being.
As the spirit of man is the seat of human life, the
very life of man itself, so the Spirit of God is His
very life-element. How can He he supposed, then,
to be subordinate to God, or to derive His Being
from God? If, however, the subordination of the
Son and Spirit to the Father in modes of subsistence
and their derivation from the Father are not impli-
cates of their designation as Son and Spirit, it will
be hard to find in the NT compelling evidence of
their subordination and derivation.

There is, of course, no question that in ‘‘modes of


operation,’’ as it is technically catled—that is to say, in
the functions ascribed to the several Per-

20. The sons of the Trinity in the redemptive proc-
oe ess, and, more broadly, in the entire deal-
Question of ing of God with the world—the principle
Subordi- of subordination is clearly expressed. The
ation Father is first, the Son is second, and the
ni Spirit is third, in the operations of God as
_ revealed to us in general, and very esp. in
those operations by which redemption is accomplished.
Whatever the Father does, He does through the Son (Rom
16; 3 22; 6 1.11.17.21; Eph 1 5; 1 Thess 6 9: Tit 3
5) by the Spirit. The Son is sent by the Father and does
His Father's will (Jn 6 38); the Spirit is sent by the Son
and does not speak from Himself, but only takes of Christ's
and shows it unto His people (Jn 17 7 ff): and we have
Our Lord's own word for it that ‘one that is sent is not
greater than he that sent him’ (Jn 18 16). In crisp
decisiveness, Our Lord even declares, indeed: ‘My Father
is greater than I’ (Jn 14 28); and Paul tells us that Christ
is God's, even as we are Christ's (1 Cor 8 23), and that as
Christ is '‘the head of every man," so God is ‘the head


3021


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Trinity


of Christ"' (1 Cor 11 3). But it is not so ciear that the
principie of subordination rules also in “modes of sub-
sistence,"" as it is technically phrased; that is to say,
in the necessary reiation of the Persons of the Trinity to
one another. The very richness and variety of the
expression of their subordination, the one to the other,
in modes of operation, create a difficulty in attaining
certainty whether they are represented as also subordi-
nate the one to the other in modes of subsistence.
Question is raised in each case of apparent intimation
of subordination in modes of subsistence, whether it may
not, after all, be explicabie as oniy another expression of
subordination in modes of operation. It may be naturai
to assume that a subordination in modes of operation
rests on a subordination in modes of subsistence; that
the reason why it is the Father that sends the Son and
the Son that sends the Spirit is that the Son is subordi-
nate to the Father, and the Spirit to the Son. But we
are bound to bear in mind that these relations of sub-
ordination in modes of operation may just as weli be due
to @ convention, an agreement, between the Persons of
the Trinity—a * Covenant” as it is technically caiied—
by virtue of which a distinct function in the work of
redemption is voiuntarily assumed by each. It is
eminently desirabie, therefore, at the ieast, that some
definite evidence of subordination in modes of subsist-
ence should be discoverabie before it is assumed. In
the case of the reiation of the Son to the Father, there is
the added difficulty of the incarnation, in which the Son,
by the assumption of a creatureiy nature into union with
Himself, enters into new reiations with the Father of a
definitely subordinate character. Question has even been
raised whether the very designations of Father and Son
may not be expressive of these new reiations, and there-
fore without significance with respect to the eternai
reiations of the Persons so designated. This question
must certainly be answered in the negative. Although,
no doubt, in many of the instances in which the terms
“Father'’ and ‘Son’’ occur, it would be possihie to take
them of mereiy economicai reiations, there ever remain
some which are intractabie to this treatment, and we may
be sure that ‘Father"’ and ‘‘Son" are epoled to their
eternal and necessary reiations. But these terms, as
we have seen, do not appear to impty reiations of first
and second, superiority and subordination, in modes of
subsistence; and the fact of the humiliation of the Son
otf God for His earthly work does introduce a factor into
the interpretation of the passages which import His
subordination to the Father, which throws doubt upon
the inference from them of an eternai reiation of sub-
ordination in the Trinity itself. It must at least be said
that in the presence of the great NT doctrines of the
Covenant of Redemption on the one hand, and of the
Humiliation of the Son of God for His work's sake and
of the Two Natures in the constitution of His Person as
incarnated, on the other, the difficulty of interpreting
subordinationist passages of eternai relations between the
Father and Son becomes extreme. The question con-
tinually obtrudes itself, whether they do not rather find
their full expianation in the facts embodied in the doc-
trines of the Covenant, the Humiliation of Christ, and
the Two Natures of His incarnated Person. Certainly
in such circumstances it were thoroughly illegitimate to

ress such passages to suggest any subordination for the
oon or the Spirit which would in any manner impair that
compiete identity with the Father in Being and that
compiete equality with the Father in powers which are
constantiy presupposed, and frequently emphaticaliy,
though only incidentaiiy, asserted for them throughout
the whgie fabric of the NT.


The Trinity of the Persons of the Godhead, shown
in the incarnation and the redemptive work of God
the Son, and the descent and saving

21. Witness work of God the Spirit, is thus every-
of the where assumed in the NT, and comes
Christian to repeated fragmentary but none the
Conscious- less emphatic and illuminating ex-
ness pression in its pages. As the roots of
its revelation are set in the threefold

Divine causality of the saving process, it naturally
finds an echo also in the consciousness of everyone
who has experienced this salvation. Every re-
deemed soul, knowing himself reconciled with God
through His Son, and quickened into newness of
life by His Spirit, turns alike to Father, Son and
Spirit with the exclamation of reverent gratitude
upon his lips, ‘“My Lord and my God!” If he could
not construct the doctrine of the Trinity out of his
consciousness of salvation, yet the elements of his
consciousness of salvation are interpreted to him
and reduced to order only by the doctrine of the
Trinity which he finds underlying and giving their
significance and consistency to the teaching of the
Scriptures as to the processes of salvation. By means


of this doctrine he is able to think clearly and con-
sequently of his threefold relation to the saving
God, experienced by him as Fatherly love sending a
Redeemer, as redeeming love executing redemption,
as saving love applying redemption: all manifes-
tations in distinct methods and by distinct agencies
of the one seeking and saving love of God. Without
the doctrine of the Trinity, his conscious Christian
life would be thrown into confusion and left in dis-
organization if not, indeed, given an air of unreality;
with the doctrine of the Trinity, order, significance
and reality are brought to every element of it.
Accordingly, the doctrine of the Trinity and the
doctrine of redemption, historically, stand or fall
together. A Unitarian theology is commonly
associated with a Pelagian anthropology and a
Socinian soteriology. It is a striking testimony
which is borne by E. Koenig (Offenbarungsbegriff
des AT, 1882, I, 125): “I have learned that many
cast off the whole history of redemption for no other
reason than because they have not attained to a
conception of the Triune God.” It is in this inti-
macy of relation between the doctrines of the
Trinity and redemption that the ultimate reason
lies why the Christian church could not rest until
it had attained a definite and well-compacted doc-
trine of the Trinity. Nothing else could be ac-
cepted as an adequate foundation for the experience
of the Christian salvation. Neither the Sabellian
nor the Arian construction could meet and satisfy
the data of the consciousness of salvation, any more
than either could meet and satisfy the data of the
Scriptural revelation. The data of the Scriptural
revelation might, to be sure, have been left unsat-
isfied: men might have found a modus vivendi with
neglected, or even with perverted Scriptural teach-
ing. But perverted or neglected elements of Chris-
tian experience are more clamant in their demands
for attention and correction. The dissatisfied Chris-
tian consciousness necessarily searched the Scrip-
tures, on the emergence of every new attempt to
state the doctrine of the nature and relations of God,
to see whether these things were true, and never
reached contentment until the Scriptural data were
given their consistent formulation in a valid doc-
trie of the Trinity. Here too the heart of man
was restless until it found its rest in the Triune
God, the author, procurer and applier of salvation.

The determining impulse to the formulation of

the doctrine of the Trinity in the church was the

church’s profound conviction of the
22. Formu- absolute Deity of Christ, on which
lation of the as on a pivot the whole Christian con-
Doctrine ception of God from the first origins

of Christianity turned. The guiding
principle in the formulation of the doctrine was
supplied by the Baptismal Formula announced by
Jesus (Mt 28 19), from which was derived the
ground-plan of the baptismal confessions and “rules
of faith’? which very soon began to be framed all
over the church. It was by these two fundamental
principia—the true Deity of Christ and the Baptis-
mal Formula—that all attempts to formulate the
Christian doctrine of God were tested, and by their
molding power that the church at length found itself
in possession of a form of statement which did full
justice to the data of the redemptive revelation ag
reflected in the NT and the demands of the Chris-
tian heart under the experience of salvation.

In the nature of the case the formulated doctrine was
of siow attainment. The influence of inherited con-
ceptions and of current philosophies inevitabiy showed
itself in the efforts to construe to the intellect the imma-
nent faith of Christians. In the 2d cent. the dominant
neo-Stoic and neo-Piatonic ideas deflected Christian
thought into subordinationist channels, and produced
what is known as the Logos-Christology, which looks


upon the Son as a proiation of Deity reduced to such
dimensions as comported with reiations with a worid of


Trinity
Trophimus


time and space; meanwhile, to a great extent, the Spirit
was neglected altogether. A reaction which, under the
name of Monarchianism, identified the Father, Son, and
Spirit so completely that they were thought of only as
different aspects or different moments in the life of the one
Divine Person, called now Father, now Son, now Spirit,
as His several activities came successively into view,
almost succeeded in establishing itself_in the 3d cent. as
the doctrine of the church at large. In the conflict be-
tween these two opposite tendencies the church grad-
nally found its way, under the guidance of the Baptismal
Formula elaborated into a ‘Rule of Faith,” to a better
and more well-balanced conception, until a real doctrine
of the Trinity at length came to expression, particularly
in the West, through the brilliant dialectic of Tertullian.
It was thus ready at hand, when, in the early years of
the 4th cent., the Logos-Christology, in opposition to
dominant Sabellian tendencies, ran to seed in what is
known as Arianism, to which the Son was a creature,
though exalted above all other creatures as their Creator
and Lord; and the church was thus prepared to assert
its settled faith in a Triune God, one in being, but
in whose unity there suhsisted three consuhstantial
Persons. Under the leadership of Athanasius this doc-
trine was proclaimed as the faith of the church at the
Council of Nice in 325 AD, and by his strenuous labors
and those of ‘‘the three great Cappadocians,’’ the two
Gregories and Basil, it gradually won its way to the
actual acceptance of the entire church. It was at the
hands of Augustine, however, a century later, that the
doctrine thus hecome the church doctriue in fact as
well as in theory, received its most complete elaboration
and most carefully grounded statement. In the torm
which he gave it, and which is embodied in that ‘“‘ battle-
hymn of the early church,"’ the so-called Athanasian
Creed, it has retained its place as the fit expression of the
faith of the church as to the nature of its God until
today. The language in which it is couched, even in
this final declaration, still retains elements of speech
which owe their origin to the modes of thought charac-
teristic of the Logos-Christology of the 2d cent., fixed
in the nomenclature of the church by the Nicene Creed of
325 AD, though carefully guarded there against the suh-
ordinationism inherent in the Logos-Christology, and
made the vehicle rather of the Nicene doctrines of the
eternal generation of the Son and procession of the Spirit,
with the consequent subordination of the Son and Spirit
to the Father in modes of suhsistence as well as of oper-
ation. In the Athanasian Creed, however, the principle
of the equalization of the three Persons, which was
already the dominant motive of the Nicene Creed—the
homootsia—is so strongly emphasized as practically to
push out of sight, if not quite out of existence, these
remanent suggestions of derivation and subordination.
It has been found necessary, nevertheless, from time to
time, vigorously to reassert the evaeile of equaliza-
tion, over against a tendency unduly to emphasize the
elements of subordinationism which still hold a place
thus in the traditional language in which the church
states its doctrine of the Trinity. In particular, it fell
to Calvin, in the interests of the true Deity of Christ—the
constant motive of the whole body of Trinitarian thought
—to reassert and make good the attribute of self-exist-
ence (autetheotés) for the Son. Thus Calvin takes his
place, alongside of Tertullian, Athanasius and Augustine,
as one of the chief contributors to the exact and vital
statement of the Christian doctrine of the Triune God.

Literaturs.—F. C. Baur, Die christliche Lehre von der
Dreieinigkett Gottes, 3 vols, Tuhingen, 1841-43; Dionysius
Poetavius, De Trinitate (VoLII, of De Theologicis Dogmaticis,
Paris, 1647); G. Bull, A Defence of the Nicene Creed (1688),
2 vols, Oxford, 1851; G.S. Faher, The A postolicity of Trini-
tarianism, 2 vols, 1832; Augustine, On the Holy Trinity
(vol III of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian
Church, 1-228), New York, 1887; Calvin, Institutes of the
Christian Religion, I, ch xiii; C. Hodge, Systematic Theology
and Indez, I, New York, 1873, 442-82; H. Bavinck,
Gereformeerde DRogmatiek?, II, Kampen, 1908, 260-347
(gives excellent references to literature); ._ Harris,
God, Creator, and Lord of Al, New York, 1896; R.
Rochoill, Der christliche Gottesbegrif, G6ttingen, 1900;
Ww. fF. Adeney, The Christian Conception of God, London,
1909, 215-46; J. Lebreton, Les origines du dogme de
la Trinité, Paris, 1910; J. C. K. Hofmann, Der Schrift-
beweis?, Nbrdlingen, 1857-60, I, 85-111; J. L. 8. Lutz,
Biblische Dogmatik, Pforzheim, 1817, 319-94; R. W.
Landis, A Plea for the Catholic Doctrine of the Trinity,
Philadelphia, 1832; E. H. Bickersteth, The Rock of Ages,
etc, London, 1860, New York, 1861; E. Riggenbach,
“Der trinitarische Taufhefehl, Mt 28 19°" (in Schlatter
and Cremer, Bettrdge zur Férderung christlicher Theo-
logie, 1903, VII; also 1906, X); F. J. Hall, The Trinity,
London and New York, 1910, 100-141; J. Pearson, An
Exposition of the Creed, od Chevallier and Sinker, Cam-
bridge, 1899; J. Howe, ‘‘Calm Discourse on the Trinity,”
in Works, ed Hunt, London, 1810-22; J. Owen, ‘ Vindi-
cation of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity," and ‘‘Saint’s
Fellowship with the Trinity,’ in Works, Gould'sed, Lon-
don, 1850-55; J. Edwards, Observations concerning the
Scripture Economy of the Trinity, etc, New York, 1880,
also An Unpublished Essay on the Trinity, New York,
1903; J. R. Dltingworth, The Doctrine of the Trinity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3022


Apologetically Considered, London and New York, 1907;
A. F. Ingram, The Love of the Trinity, New York,
1908.


[Norz.—In this art. the anthor has usually given his
own renderings of original passages, and not those of
any particular VS.—Ep1rors.]

Bensamin B. WaRFIELD


TRIPOLIS, trip’é-lis (Iplwodts, Tripolis, “‘triple
city”): Demetrius the son of Seleucus, having fled
from Rome, collected “a mighty host and _ fleet,”
sailed into the haven of Tripolis, took the city, oh-
tained possession of the country, and put to death
his cousin, Antiochus V, along with his guardian
Lysias (2 Macc 14 1ff; Jos, Ant, XII, x, 1).
After a period of unsuccessful guerrilla warfare
against Hyrcanus in Samaria, Antiochus Cyzi-
cenus retired to Tripolis (Ant, XII, x, 2). The
city was founded hy the Phoenicians and was a
member of the Phoen league. It was divided into
3 quarters by walls—hence the name “triple city”
—and these were occupied hy settlers from Tyre,
Sidon, and Aradus, respectively. The federal
council of these states sat here. Its position on the
Phoen seacoast, with easy access to the interior, gave
it many advantages from the commercial point of
view. The Seleucid monarchs, the Romans, and
Herod the Great did much to heautify the city; the
last-named building a gymnasium (Jos, BJ, I, xxi,
11). When attacked by the Arabs the inhabitants
took ship and escaped. Later their places were
taken hy Jews and Persians. Captured by the
Crusaders in 1109, it was taken hy the Egyptians
in 1289. The ancient city was surrounded on three
sides hy the sea. The site is now occupied by el-
Mina, the harbor of the modern city, Taradbulis,
which stands on the hank of Nahr Kadisha, about 2
milesaway. The inhabitants number about 23,000.
The town gives its name to a district under the vild-
yet of Beirdt, which has always heen famous for its
fruitfulness. W. Ewine


TRIUMPH, tri’umf (OprapBevwo, thriambeud, “to
lead in triumph”): The word is used by Paul to
express an idea very familiar to antiquity, and
to the churches at Corinth and Colossae: ‘But
thanks be unto God, who always leadeth us in
triumph in Christ” (2 Cor 2 14); “Having de-
spoiled the principalities and the powers, he made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them in it”
(Col 2 15).

A triumph in Rome was a magnificent procession
in honor of a victorious general, and the highest
military distinction which he could obtain. It was
granted by the senate only to one who had held the
office of dictator, consul, or praetor, and after a
decisive victory in the complete subjugation of a
province. In a Rom triumph the victorious general
entered the city in a chariot drawn by four horses.
He was crowned with laurel, having a scepter in
one hand and a branch of laurel in the other. He
was preceded by the senate and magistrates, musi-
cians, the spoils of his victory, and the captives in
fetters; and followed by his army on foot, in march-
ing order. The procession thus advanced along
the Via Sacra to the Capitol, where a bull was sac-
rificed to Jupiter, and the laurel wreath deposited
in the lap of the god. During the triumphal entry
the priests burned incense, and hence the reference
of the apostle: “For we are a sweet savor of Christ
unto God, in them that are saved, and in them that
perish; to the one a savor from death unto death; to
the other a savor from life unto life” (2 Cor 2 15.16).
The incense that was to the victor the “savor” of his
triumph would be to the wretched captives the
“savor,” or intimation, of a rapidly approaching
death in the Rom arena or in the damp vaults of
the Tullianum. Thus the “incense,” or influence,
of the apostolic gospel would he to the believer the


8023


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Trinity
Trophimus


assurance of redemption through Christ, and to the
unbeliever the assurance of spiritual death.


After the suicide of Antony in Alexandria (830 BC)
Augustus Caesar succeeded in getting Cleopatra into
his power. She had hoped to subdue him by her charms,
but without avail. Aware that she was doomed, she
revolted against the thought of being Ied in triumph to
Rome, and, as tradition states, took her own life by
allowing an asp to bite her, saying, ‘I will not be led
in triumph"; soe Shakespeare's Antony and Cleopatra,

eas


‘‘He'll lead me, then, in triumph? ....
Thon, an Egyptian puppet, shalt be shown
In Rome as well as I: mechanie slaves,
With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers shall
Uplift us to the view. .... he


ARTHUR WaALWYN Evans

TROAS, trd’as (Tpwds, Trdds): The chief city
in the N.W. of Asia Minor, on the coast of Mysia
in the Rom province of Asia. From here, accord-
ing to Acts 16 8, Paul sailed. Here, also, accord-
ing to Acts 20 5-12, Paul raised Eutychus from the
dead. The name Troas was not confined to the
town itself, but it was also applied to the surround-
ing district, or to that part of the coast which is
now generally known as the Troad. In its early
history it bore the name of Antigona Troas, which
was given it by its founder Antigonus, but after
300 BC it was generally known to the classical
writers as Alexander Troas, a name given to it by
Lysimachus. For a time the Seleucid kings made
their homes at Troas. Later, when the city became
free, it struck its own coins, of which vast numbers
are found; a common type is one upon which is
stamped a grazing horse. In 133 BC Troas came
into the possession of the Romans, and later, during
the reign of Augustus, it was made a Rom colonia,
independent of the Rom governor of the province
of Asia. Its citizens were then exempt from poll
and land tax. During Byzantine times Troas was
the seat of a bishopric.

The ruins of Troas, now bearing the name of
Eski Stambul, are extensive, giving evidence of the
great size and importance of the ancient city.
They have, however, long been used as a quarry,
and the columns of the public buildings were taken
+o Constantinople for use in the construction of the
mosque known as the Yeni Valideh Jami. The site
is now mostly overgrown with oaks, but from the
higher portions of the ruins there 1s an extensive
view over the sea and the neighboring islands. It
is only with difficulty that one may now trace the
city walls and locate the square towers which flanked
them at intervals. Within the walls are the remains
of the theater, the temple and the gymnasium, which
was provided with baths. The port from which
Paul sailed was constructed by means of a mole,
with an outer and an inner basin. The most impos-
ing of the ruins, however, is a large aqueduct which
was built in the time of Trajan. E. J. Banxs


TROGYLLIUM, tré-jil’i-um, tré-gil’i-um_ (Tpo-
yodduov,-Trogullion): According to Acts 20 15 AV,
ARVm, the ship in which Paul sailed to Caesa-
rea on his return from his 3d_ missionary Journey
tarried at Trogyllium. Several of the early MSS
omit the words, “tarried at Trogyllium’ (WH
omits as “Western” interpolation); yet, whether
the words belonged to the text or not, Paul evi-
dently passed the promontory, and probably stopped
there. From the coast near Miletus the promon-
tory projects into the sea toward the island of
Samos; the strait separating the mainland from the
island is scarcely a mile wide. It was in this strait
which is now called Kutchuk Boghaz by the Turks
that the battle of Mycale was fought_in 479 BC.
The promontory now bears the name of Santa Maria,
and the place of anchorage is called Saint Paul’s
port. E. J. Banks


TROOP, troop. See Army.


_ TROPHIMUS, trof’i-mus (Ipépipos, Tréphimos,
lit. “a foster child” [Acts 20 4; 21 29; 2 Tim
4 20]): An Asiatic Christian, a friend and com-
panion-in-travel of the apostle Paul.

In the first of the three passages in which Trophi-
mus is mentioned, he and Tychicus are called

Asianot, that is, natives of the Rom
i. An province of Asia; and making it still
Ephesian more definite, in Acts 21 29, he is
f termed an ‘“Ephesian.” TT. was one of
eight friends, who accompanied Paul at the close of
his 3d missionary journey, and traveled with him
from Greece through Macedonia into Asia, and
onward by sea until Jerus was reached (see TycuHI-
cus). T. went with Paul all the way, for, in the
second of the passages referred to, he is mentioned
as being with Paul in Jerus immediately on the close
of this journey.
_ He was the innocent cause of Paul being assaulted
in the courts of the.temple by the Jewish mob, and

then of his being arrested and im-
2. Cause of prisoned by the Romans. The occa-
Paul’s sion of this outrage was that the Jews
Arrest supposed that Panl had “brought

Greeks also into the temple, and... .
defiled this holy place’ (Acts 21 28). The modi-
cum of fact lying at the root of this false accusation
was that they had seen Paul and T. in each other’s
company in the city. On this slender basis “they
supposed” that Paul had brought T. past the barrier
or middle wall of partition (Eph 2 14; see Parti-
tT10N), beyond which no Gentile was allowed to
penetrate on pain of death. They supposed that
T., who was neither a Jew nor a proselyte, but a
gentile Christian, had been introduced into the
temple itself by Paul—which would have been
profanation. Hence their fury against the apostle.

How strongly they insisted on the crime which
Trophimus was falsely alleged to have committed
on that occasion, is seen again in the way in which
the orator Tertullus repeated the charge against
Paul before the Rom governor Felix, ‘‘who more-
over assayed to profane the temple”’ (Acts 24 6).

The third reference to T.is in 2 Tim 4 20,
“Trophimus I left at Miletus sick.’ This final

notice shows that he was again—several
3. At years after the date indicated in the
Miletus previous passages—traveling with Paul
on one of the missionary journeys
which the apostle undertook after bemg liberated
from his first imprisonment in Rome. It is exceed-
ingly difficult, perhaps impossible, to trace the-
course of the different journeys which Paul now
made, as there is no such narrative as is given in
Acts for the former journeys, but merely incidental
notices of his later travels, in the Pastoral Epp. In
this, the last of all his letters—2 Tim—Paul indicates
various places which he had visited, and also the
names of friends who traveled with him on this the
last of his apostolic journeys.

Among other places, he had visited Miletus, a city on
the coast of the province of Asia; and there his old friend
T. had been laid down with illness, so severe that he
could travel no farther, but Paul left him ‘‘at Miletus
sick.” It is to be noted that Miletus was not far from
Ephesus, which was T.'s nativo city. There would be
much intercourse between the two cities (see Acts 20
17, where Paul sends for the elders of the churcli at
Ephesus to come to him at Miletus, which they did).
7, therefore, in his sickness, could easily reach Ephesus,
or his friends from that city could quickly come to him
at Miletus, and give him whatever attention and nursing
he might require.

It has been conjectured that T. is to be identified
with the person mentioned in 2 Cor 8 16-24.
Paul there speaks in the highest terms of one of his
companions—but without giving his name—whom


Trough
Troth


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3024


he sent with Titus. Titus and this disciple were
evidently those to whose care Paul intrusted the

carrying of the Second Ep. to the
4, The Cor to its destination. The apostle
Description says of this unnamed brother, not only
of 2 Cor that his praise is in the gospel through-
8:18 out all the churches, but also that he

was chosen by the churches to travel
with him, ie. with Paul, with this grace, i.e. with the
contribution of money collected in the gentile
churches for the poor saints in Jerus.


_ Now it is certain that at the close of his 3d missionary
journey Paul carried these gifts to Jerus (‘I came to
bring alms to my nation, and offerings,’’ Acts 24 17);
and some of the eight friends who accompanied him on
the journey (20 4) were those who had been intrusted hy
the churches with the safe conveyance of the money.
Speaking of these collections, Paul writes (1 Cor 16

4), ‘“Whomsoever ye shall approve, them will I send
with letters to carry your hounty unto Jerus: and if it
be meet for me to go also, they shall go with me.’ These
conditions were fulfilled, when Paul and his eight friends
traveled from Greece to Jerus, carrying the money with
them. There is therefore certainty that one of the eight
is the brother referred to in 2 Cor 8 18, whose praise in
the gospel was in all the churches, and whom the churches
had appointed to travel with Paul for the purpose of
carrying the money contribution, and whom Paul had
“many times proved earnest in many things’’ (2 Cor 8
18.19.22). The eight were Sopater of Beroea, Aristarchus
and Secundus, hath from Thessalonica, Gaius of Derhe,
Tinguays Tychicus and T., both ‘ Asians,’”’ and lastly

e.


There is certainly the possibility that the unnamed
brother was T.: if not T., then he was one of the other
seven. Of these seven, hy the process of elimination, the
unnamed brother could only he one of those who traveled
with Paul the whole distance as far as Jerus, for this was
the work which “the brother” had been appointed hy
the churches to do. Now it is certain that Luke and T.
were with him on his arrival in Jerus (Acts 21 17.29).
Therefore the brother whose praise in the gospel was
in all the churches may very well have been, T.: if
not T., then possihly Luke or Aristarchus. Gaius and
Aristarchus are termed ‘‘Paul’s companions in travel”
(Acts 19 29); and Aristarchus was afterward with
Paul in Pal, and sailed with him to Rome. It is quite
remarkable that the same word, ovvéxdnuos, sunékdé-
mos, ‘‘companion in travel,” is applied to the unnamed
brother (2 Cor 8 19), and to Gaius and Aristarchus in
Acts 19 29. ;

As the conditions do not seem to be satisfied in Sopater,
Secundus or Timothy, the brother so highly com-
mended must have heen either Luke or Gaius or Aris-
tarchus or Tychicus or Trophimus.


JoHN RUTHERFURD
TROUGH, tréf. See Suzer Tenpine; BREAD.
TROW, tro: An obsolete vb. meaning “to be-
lieve”; cf “trust” and the Ger. trauen. It occurs
only in Lk 17 9, AV “Doth he thank that serv-
ant.... 7? I trow not,” as a tr of od doxd, ou
doké, “I believe not.’’? The words ou doké, however,
-are not part of the original text, but are a later
gloss to supply an answer to the question, and
hence “I trow not” is omitted by RV.


TRUCEBREAKER, troos’brak-ér: The AV ren-
dering in 2 Tim 3 3 of domovdos, dspondos, hit.
“without a libation.’’? As a libation always accom-
panied the making of a treaty in Gr lands, the lack
implied that no treaty had been made, or, by a
natural extension of meaning, could be made.
Hence the word came to mean “implacable” (RV).


TRUMP, trump, TRUMPET, trum’pet, trum’-
pit. See Music.


TRUMPETS, FEAST OF: In Lev 23 23-25 the
first day (new moon) of the seventh month is set
apart as a solemn rest, “a memorial of
blowing of trumpets” (the Heb leaves
“of trumpets” to be understood), sig-
nalized further by ‘‘a holy convocation,”
abstinence from work, and the presentation of ‘‘an
offering made by fire.” In Nu 29 1-6 these direc-
tions are repeated, with a detailed specification of


1. De-
scription


the nature of the offering. In addition to the usual
daily burnt sacrifices and the special offerings for
new moons, there are to be offered one bullock, one
ram, and seven he-lambs, with proper meal offerings,
together with a he-goat for a sin offering.

The significance of the feast lay in the fact that it
marked the beginning of the new year according

to the older calendar. Originally the
2. Signifi- “revolution” of the year was reckoned
cance in the fall (Ex 28 16; 34 22), and the
change to the spring never thoroughly
displaced the older system. In fact the spring New
Year never succeeded in becoming a specially recog-
nized feast, and to Jewish ears ‘“New Year’s Day”
(MWA WS, 1d’sh ha-shandh) invariably signifies an
autumnal festival. So the Mish (Ré’sh ha-shdaah,
i.1): “There are four periods of commenceme-.t of
years: On the Ist of Nisan is a new year for kings
and for festivals; the Ist of Elul is » new year for
the tithe of cattle... .. The Ist of Tishri is new
year’s |day] for the ordinary or civil year, for the
computation of 7th years, and of the jJubilees; also
for the planting of trees, and for herbs. On the 1st
of Shebat is the new year for trees.”

The ritual for the day consequently needs little
explanation. All new moons were heralded by

trumpeting (Nu 10 10), and so the
3. Ritual custom was of course observed on this

feast also. There is nothing in the
language of either Lev 23 or Nu 29 to require a
prolongation of the music on this special new moon,
but its special distinction was no doubt marked
by special trumpeting at all times, and at a later
period (see below) elaborate rules were laid down
for this feature. The additional sacrifices simply
involved an increase of those prescribed for new
moons (Nu 28 11-15), without changing their
type. Perhaps Ps 81 was esp. written for this feast
(ef ver 3).

Mentions of a special observance of the 1st of
Tishri are found also in Ezk 45 20 (reading, as
is necessary, ‘first day of seventh
month’’ here for “seventh day”) and
Neh 8 1-12. In the former passage,
the day is kept by offering a bullock as a sin offering
and sprinkling its blood in a way that recalls the
ritual of the Day of Atonement. In Neh an assem-
bly of the people was held to hear Ezra read the
Law. The day was kept as a festival on which
mourning was forbidden (ver 9). Apart from these
references there is no mention of the feast elsewhere
in the OT, and, indeed, there is some reason to
think that at one time the 10th, and not the Ist,
of Tishri was regarded as the begimning of the year.
For Ezk (40 1) specifically calls this day rd’sh ha-
shanah, and Lev 25 9 specifies it as the opening of
the Jubilee year (contrast the Mish passage, above).
Consequently scholars generally are inclined to
assign Lev 23 23-25 and Nu 29 1-6 to the latest
part, of the Pent (P*). This need not mean that
the observance of the 1st (or 10th) of Tishri was late,
but only that the final adoption of the day into
Israel’s official calendar, with a fixed ritual for all
Israelites, was delayed. If the original New Year’s
Day fell on the 10th of Tishri, its displacement ten
days earlier was certainly due to the adoption of the
10th for the Day of Atonement. An explanation
of the date of the latter feast. would be gained by
this supposition.

The instrument to be used in the trumpeting is
not specified in the Bible, but Jewish tradition de-

cided in favor of the horn and not the
5. Later metal trumpet, permitting for syna-
History gogue use any kind of horn except a
cow’s, but for temple use only a
straight (antelope’s) horn and never a crooked


4. Origin


3025


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Trough
Truth


(ram’s) horn (R@’sh ha-shanah, iii.2-4). According
to iv. 1, when the new year began on a Sabbath the
horns were blown only in the temple, but after its
destruction they were blown in every synagogue.
Every Israelite was obliged to come within hearing
distance of the sound (iii.7). In the synagogue


Ancient Herns and Curved Trumpets.


liturgy of iv.5-9 (which forms the basis of the
modern Jewish practice), four sets of “benedictions”
were read, and after each of the last three sets the
horn blown nine times. Modern Judaism sees in the
signals a call to self-examination and repentance, in
view of the approaching Day of Atonement. See
Trumpet, III, 2, (8). Burton Scorr Easton


TRUST, BREACH OF: The clearest reference
to the crime designated by this modern expression
is found in Lev 6 2-7, where the transgression is
defined and the penalty set forth. Breach of cove-
nant or contract and the removal of landmarks
(Dt 19 14; 27 17; Prov 22 28; 23 10) may be
included.


TRUTH, trooth (QR , "meth, MIAN, 'Emandh,
primary idea of “firmness,” ‘‘stability’ [cf Ex 17
12], henee “‘constancy,” “faithfulness,” etc; LXX
Apoc and NT, dAffea, alétheia [Rom 3 7], riots,
pistis [Rom 3 3]; in adjectival and adverbial sense,
“in truth,” “of a truth,” “faithful,” etc; dAnQds,
aléthés (Lk 21 3; Jn 6 14; 7 40; 1 Thess 2 13],
dAnOivds, aléthinds [Jn 17 3], évras, éntds [1 Cor 14
25), murrés, pisids [1 Tim 3 1], m AV; RV, ARV,
as generally, ‘faithful’; AS iréow, tryw with Teu-
tonic stem trau, “to believe,” “to keep faith’’):


I. Terms
TI. Generat View
1. Aspects of Truth
(1) Ontological
(2) Logica!
(3) Moral
(4) Religions
2. Standards of Truth a
3. Special Features in Biblical Writings
III, Awapyticat Summary
1. Truth in Ged
2. Truth in Man
3. Truth in Religion


I. Terms.—The Eng. word has developed and main-
tained the broadest, mest general and varied usage, going
beyond beth Heb and Gr, which were already extended
in connotation. It is pessible to analyze and classify
the special applications of the term almost indefinitely,
using other terms to indicate specific meanings in special
connections, e.g. loyalty (Jgs 9 15), honesty (Ex 18 21),
fidelity (Dt 32 i justice (Rom 2 2), uprightness
(isa $8 3), faith (26 2), righteousness (Ps 85 10), real-
ity (Jn 17 19), veracity (Gen 42 16). Itis unfortunate
that translators have generally adhered to single terms
to represent the original words. On the other hand,
they have sometimes introduced words not represented
in the original, and thus unduly limited the meaning.
An example is Eph 4 15, where the original meaning
‘being true,” f.e. in all respects, is narrowed to “‘speak-
ing the truth.”


IL General View.—No term is more familiar
and none more difficult of definition.


With applications in every phase of life and thought
the word has varying general senses which may be classi-
fled as:


{1) Ontological truth, i.e. accurate and adeqnate idea of
existence as ultimate reality. In this sense it is a term
of metaphysics, and will be differently de~-
1. Aspects fined according to the type of philosophical
f Truth theory accepted. This aspect of truth is
or iru never primary in Scripture unless in the

i question ef Pilate (Jn 18 38). He had so
far missed the prefound ethical sense in which Jesus used
the word that Jesus did not at all answer him, nor,
Indeed, does Pilate seem te have expected any reply te
what was probably only the contemptuous thrust of a
skeptical attitude. In Prov where, if at all, we might
lock for the abstract idea, we find rather the practical

a papel an of the true meaning and method of life
¢ 23). Ontological reality and possible ideas of real-
ity apprehending it are obviously presupposed In all
Scripture. There is objective reality on which subjec-
tive ideas depend for their validity; and all knowing is
knowledge of reality. There is also in the whole of
Scripture a subjective idea, the product of revelation or
inspiration in some form of working, that constitutes an
ideal to be realized objectively. The Kingdom of God,
for example, is the formative idea of Scripture teaching.
In a definite sense the kingdom exists and still it is to be
created. It must he kept in mind, however, that only
vaguely and indirectly does truth have abstract, meta-
physical meaning to the Bib. writers. For John it
approaches this, but the primary interest is always
concrete.

(2) Logical truth is expressive of the relation between
the knower and that which is known, and depends upen
the arrangement of ideas with reference to a central or
composite idea. Truth in this sense involves the corre-
spondence of concepts with facts. While this meaning
ef truth is involved in Scripture, it is not the primary
meaning anywhere, save in_a practical religious appli-
cation, as in Eph 4 21; 1 Jn g 421.

(3) Moral truth is correspondence of expression with
inner conception. Taken in its full meaning of corre-
spondence of idea with fact, of expression with thought
and with intention, of concrete reality with ideal type,
this is the characteristic sense of the word in the Scrip-
tures. Here the aim of religion is to relate man te Ged
in accordance with truth. In apprehension man is to
knew Ged and His order as they are in fact and in idea.
in achievement man is to make true in his own expe-
rience the idea of God that is given to him. Truth is
thus partly to be apprehended and partly to be produced.
The emphatically characteristic teaching ef Christianity
is that the will te preduce truth, te de the will of God,
is the requisite attitude for apprehending the truth.
This teaching of Jesus in Jn 7 17 is in accord with the
entire teaching of the Bible. Eph 1 18 suggests the
importance of right attitude for learning, while 4 18
eae the effect of a wrong attitude in ignorance of vital
truth.

__ (4) Religious truth is a term frequently met in medern
literature, but it has no sound “basis in reason and
it has none at all in the Bible. All truth is ultimately
religious and only in a superficial way can religious
truth be spoken of as an independent conception.
Least of all can religious truth and scientific truth he at
variance.


Philosophy has continuously tried to find tests


for truth, and so has wrought out theories of know!l-
edge—epistemologies. Not to go back


2, Stand- into the Gr philosophy, we have in
ards of modern times such theories as (1) the
Truth Kantian, (2) the scholastic, (3) the


Hegelian, (4) the pragmatic, (5) that of
the “new realism’; and these include only such as
may be defined with some elearness, for the tend-
encies of current thought have been toward con-
fusion concerning all standards of truth and reality,
and so toward widespread agnosticism and skepti-
cism. This temper has, naturally, reacted on
thinking in practical ethics and upon the sanctions
of religion. There is thus in religion and morals a
tendency to obscure the distinction between what
is and what ought to be. See Auruority; Eruics;
PuHiLosoPHy; RIGHT; SiN.

In the Bible the known will of God is final for
man as a standard of truth, not as arbitrary, but as
expressive of God’s nature. God’s nature is all-
comprehensive of fact and goodness, and so is, all
and in all, the source, support and objective of all
concrete being. The will of God thus reveals, per-
suades to and achieves the ideals and ends of com-
plete existence. The term “truth” is sometimes,
therefore, nearly equivalent to the revealed will of


od.
(1) The OT uses the term primarily of God and


Truth
Tumor


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3026


applies the principle to man. The practical ob-
jective is ever prominent.

F (2) The Synoptic Gospels and Acts
3. Special use the term chiefly in popular idio-
Features in matic phrases “of a truth,” “in truth,”
Biblical “surely” (cf Lk 22 59; Acts 4 27).
Writings In Mt 22 16 there is a more serious
ie and comprehensive application, but it
is in the flattermg words of Pharisaic hypocrisy (cf
Mk 12 14; Lk 20 21). To be sure, we are to
understand that even in the phrases of common
speech Jesus employed the term in all seriousness
(Lk 4.25; 9 27).
_ (3) In Paul the sense of Divine faithfulness, as
in the OT, is occasionally met (Rom 8 3.7; 15 8).
Again the term emphasizes sincerity (1 Cor 5 8;
2 Cor 7 14). Generally it has direct or clearly
implied reference to God’s revelation in Jesus Christ
with a view to redeeming men. In a general way
the term is thus equivalent to the gospel, but there
is never identification of the two terms (see Rom 2
8; Eph 118; 1 Tim 3 15). In Gal 2 5; 5 7,
“the truth of the gospel” is its content in the pur-
pose of God, in contrast with misconceptions of it:
the true gospel as against false representations of
the gospel.

(4) In the Johannine writings we find occasion-
ally the emphatic phrase of genuineness (1 Jn 3
18; 2 Jn ver 1; 3 Jn ver 1) and emphatic reality
(Jn 8 46; 16 7). In Rev we have “true” in the
sense of trustworthy, because ultimately real or in
accord with ultimate reality (3 7.14; 6 10; 15 3;
19 9.11, etc). Generally, as in the Gospel, we
approach more nearly than elsewhere in Scripture
a metaphysical use, yet always with the practical
religious end dominant. Truth is reality in rela-
tion to the vital interests of the soul. It is pri-
marily something to be realized and done, rather
than something to be learned or known. In the
largest. aspect it is God’s nature finding expression
in His creation, in revelation, in Jesus Christ in
whom “grace and truth came’ (Jn 1 17), and
finally in man apprehending, acceptig and prac-
tically realizing the essential values of life, which
are the will of God (Jn 1 14; 8 32; 17.19; 18
37f; 1 Jn 221; 319). Truth is personalized in
Jesus Christ. He truly expresses God, presents the
true ideal of man, in Himself summarizes the har-
mony of existence and becomes the agent for unify-
ing the disordered world. Hence He is the Truth
(Jn 14 6), the true expression (“Logos,” Jn 1 1)
of God. See the same idea without the terminology
in Paul (Col 1 14ff; 2 9). Similarly, the Holy
Spirit is the Spirit of truth because His function is
to guide into all truth (Jn 16 18; 1 Jn 2 27; 6 7).

(5) It is understood by many that in Jas, Pet,
He, and possibly the Pastoral Epp., the term
connotes “the body of Christian teaching” (cf Jas
118; 3 14; 1 Pet 1 22; 2 Pet 22; He 10 26;
1 Tim 3 15). The use of the article here cannot
be conclusive, and instead of “the body of Christian
teaching,’ it seems more correct to understand the
reality of life values as represented in the gospel
plan of salvation and of living. In a general way
this would include “the body of Christian teaching,”
but the reference would be less concrete. Jas is
too early a writing to employ the term in this so
specific a sense.

Ul. Analytical Summary.— (1) Truth is pre-
sented in Scripture as a chief element in the nature

of God (Ps 31 5; Isa 65 16). (2)
1. Truth But this quality is never given as an
in God abstract teaching, but only as qualify-
ing God in His relations and activities.
So it is a guaranty of constancy (Dt 32 4; Ps 100
5; 146 6; Jas 1 17); esp. a ground of confidence
in His promises (Ex 34 6; Ps 91 4; 146 6); of


right dealing with men without reference to auy
explicit pledges (Ps 85 11; 89 14); a basis of
security in the correctness of His teachings (Neh
9 13; Pg 119 142; Isa 25 1); of assurance
within His covenant relations (Ps 89 5; Isa 55 3).
(8) God’s truth is esp. noteworthy as a guaranty
of merciful consideration of men. This is an im-
portant element in the theology of the OT, as it is
a point guarded also in the NT (Ps 26 10; 31 5;
61 7;. 85 10; 983; Jn 316; Rom 3 23-26).
(4) Equally is the truth of God an assurance to men
of righteous judgment in condemnation of sin and
sinners (1 8 15 29; Ps 96 18; Rom 2 2.8). In
general the truth of God stands for the consistency
of His nature and guarantees His full response in
all the relations of a universe of which He is the
maker, preserver and end. ae

As related to God in origin and obligation, man
is bound morally to see and respond to all the de-

mands of his relations to God and to
2. Truth the order in which he lives under God.
in Man (1) Truthfulness in speech, and also
in the complete response of his nature
to the demand upon it, is urged as a quality to be
found in man and is commended where found, as
its lack is condemned. It is essential to true man-
hood. Here, as in the case of truth in God, truth
is regarded as revealed in social relations and respon-
sibilities. Truth is not merely in utterance, nor
is it only response to a specific command or word,
but lies in the response of the will and life to the
essential obligations of one’s being (Ps 15 2; 119
30; Prov 12 19; 23 23; Isa 69 4.14.15; Jer 7 28;
9 38; Hos 4 1; Rom 1 18.25; Eph 4 15; 2 Thess
2 10.12).

(2) Truth in man is in response to truth in God,
and is to be acquired on the basis of a gift from God.
This gift comes by way of teaching and also by way
of the working of the Divine Spirit in the life of man.
Highest truth in correspondence to ideal is possible
only by the working of ‘‘the God of truth’ in the
spirit of the man. Man’s freedom to realize his
being is dependent upon his receptive attitude
toward the Son of God. Hence salvation in its
fullest idea is stated in terms of truth (Jn 11 3 ff;
Phil 3 10 ff). See in general, Ps 61 6; Isa 25 1;
Jn 3 21; 8 32; 16 13; 17 19; 18 37; Eph 4 21.
24; 59; He 10 26; 1 Jn 2 27.

The modern study of religion on an evolutionary
hypothesis and the comparative study of religions

have contributed to an_ extensive
3. Truth in questioning whether there is any ab-
Religion solute truth in religion, or at least any

standards by which truth in religion
may be known. Isa 43 and 44 and Paul in Acts
17 and Gal 3 accord with modern findings that
there is an element of truth in religions generally,
and that God’s faithfulness pledges Him to bring
the light of fuller truth to all men. This He does
through the religion and the testimony of them to
whom He has already come with this fuller light.
This light is contained in the revealed word of the
OT prophets and of the NT witnesses to Jesus.
In a definite way the Scriptures preserve these
standards of religious truth. But always the atti-
tude of the individual, as also of the group, deter-
mines the measure of apprehension of the truth and
the certainty with which it is held. It is always
important to keep in mind that truth in religion is
not primarily an intellectualistic affair, to be cog-
nized, but is essentially a voluntaristic experience
and a duty to be done for the glory of God in the
realization of the complete truth of God. Jesus
Christ as the truth of God becomes the standard
and test for truth in the religion of men. And this
not in any objective and formal way of a series of
propositions, to be accepted and contended for,


3027


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Truth
Tumor


but in the subjective way of experience, in a series
of ideals to be realized and propagated. If any
man wishes to do God’s will, be shall be able to
decide the truth of religious teaching, and the Son
who is true will give the freedom of truth (Jn 7 17;
8 32). WittiamM OwEN CARVER


TRYPHAENA, tri-fé’na (Tpidawo, Triphaina;
AV Tryphena): Tryphaena is coupled with “Try-
phosa’’—among those members of the Christian
community at Rome to whom Paul sends greetings
(Rom 16 12). He describes them as those “who
labor in the Lord.” “The names, which might be
rendered ‘Dainty’ and ‘Disdain’ (see Jas 5 5;
Isa 66 11), are characteristically pagan, and unlike
the description” (Denney). They were probably
sisters ‘or near relatives, for “it was usual to desig-
nate members of the same family by derivatives of
the same root” (Lightfoot, Phil, 175). Both names
are found in inscriptions connected with the im-
perial household, “Tryphosa” occurring more fre-
quently than ‘‘Tryphaena.” HUNTER


TRYPHON, tri‘fon (Tptpev, Triéphdn): The
surname of Diodotus, a usurper of the Syrian
throne. He was a native of Apamea, and had been
in the service of Alexander Balas. On the death of
Balas (145 BC), Tryphon, taking advantage of the
murmurs of discontent among the troops of De-
metrius II (Nicator), set up the younger son of
Balas, Antiochus VI, as claimant to the throne
agaist Demetrius (1 Macc 11 39). The Jews
under Jonathan came to the assistance of Demetrius
in his difficulties against his revolting subjects. But
Demetrius, when confirmed on his throne, soon
made it apparent that he did not intend to fulfil his
promises to his Jewish allies (11 53). Conse-
quently Jonathan and Simon joined Tryphon and
Antiochus VI, securing many advantages for their
country (11 54ff). Jonathan inflicted a severe
defeat on the forces of Demetrius. The successes
of the Jewish leaders awakened the jealousy and
suspicion of Tryphon, who determined to thwart
the further plans of Jonathan and to remove him
as an obstacle in the way of his securing the crown
for himself. By an act of shrewd treachery, Try-
phon captured Jonathan at Ptolemais and butchered
all his followers (12 48). Simon, brother of Jona-
than, now undertook the conduct of affairs and
thwarted Tryphon in his attempts upon Jerus,
whereupon the latter murdered Jonathan at Bas-
cama (18 1 ff) i 148 BC. Tryphon next mur-
dered the young Antiochus VI (13 31) and claimed
the throne of Syria for himself (148 BC) (but see
the chronology as given in Schiirer, HJP, 4th ed,
I, 172). Simon now went over to the side of
Demetrius on condition that Judaea should be free
from tribute to Syria—a privilege that was rather in
the power of Tryphon than of Demetrius to give, and
so “in the 170th year [148 BC} was the yoke of
the heathen taken away from Isracl” (13 41). In
138 BC Demetrius was captured by Mithridates I
(Arsaces), king of Parthia (14 2). His brother,
Antiochus VII (Sidetes), continued the struggle
against Tryphon, first with the aid of Simon, but
later repudiating it. Tryphon was obliged to flee
before Sidetes to Dor (15 11), where Antiochus
refused the assistance of Simon (15 26). He next
escaped to Ptolemais, then to Orthosia, and finally
to his native Apamea, where he was driven to suicide
(Jos, Ant, XIII, vii, 2; Strabo, 668; Appian, Syr,
68). (The best account is given in Schiirer, 4th
ed, I, 172 ff; cf also Speaker’s Comm. in loc.) See
Annmiocuus; DEMETRIUS. 8. Ancus


TRYPHOSA, tri-fd’sa (Tpupdca, Truphdsa):
Greetings are sent by Paul to “‘Tryphaena and Try-


phosa, who labor in the Lord” (Rom 16 12). See
TRYPHAENA.


TSADHE, tsé-tha’. See Capue.

TUBAL, ta/bal (933M, tabhal, 53M, tubhal; LXX
Oped, Thébel, A in Ezk 39 1, @6Bep, Thdber):
As the text stands, Tubal and Meshech are always
coupled, except in Isa 66 19 (MT) and Ps 120 5.
In the former cent Tubal is yoked with Javan;
in the latter Meshech occurs in ver 5 and Kedar in
ver 6. In Gen 10 2], they are sons of Japheth.
In Ezk (27 13) the two are mentioned as ex-
porters of slaves and copper, as a warlike people
of antiquity (82 26), in the army of Gog (38 2 ff;
39 1). Jos identifies them with the Iberians and
Cappadocians respectively; but they are most prob-
ably the TiPapyvol, Tibarénot, and Mécxo., Méschoi,
first mentioned in Herod. iii.94 as belonging to the
19th satrapy of Darius, and again (vii.78) ag furnish-
ing a contingent to the host of Xerxes. Equally
obvious is their identity with the Tabali and Mu&ki
of the Assyr monuments, where the latter is men-
tioned as early as Tiglath-pileser I, and the former
under Shalmaneser IT; both are described as power-
ful military states. They appear together in Sar-
gon’s inscriptions; and during this entire period their
territory must have extended much farther S. and
W. than in Gr-Rom times. They are held (Winckler
and Jeremias) to have been remnants of the old
Hittite population which were gradually driven
(probably by the Cimmerian invasion) to the moun-
tainous district S.E. of the Black Sea.

Horace J. Wor

TUBAL-CAIN, ti’bal-kan (7p. 225M, sibhal
kayin): One of the sons of Lamech (Gen 4 22).
He is a brother of Jabal and Jubal, who appear to
have been the founders of several industries and
arts. Thetext OT31 mw wan->s wud, Latash
kol horésh n*hosheth ti-bharzel) has been the cause of
endless dispute. Holzinger and Gunkel hold that
wo> was a marginal gloss to WIT, and that, as in
vs 20 and 21, there stood before ~>D originally
YAR TMT RW, he haéyah ’dbhi. This would make
Tubal-cain the founder of the metal industry, and
place him in a class similar to that of his brothers.
The LXX, however, has no equivalent of Pp. This
omission leads Dillmann, Wellhausen, and others to
the position that ‘Tubal’ originally stood alone,
and PP, being a later addition, was tr? “smith.”
Many commentators identify Tubal with the
Assyr Tubal, a people living 8.W. of the Black Sea;
in later times they were called ‘Tibareni’’ (Ezk 27
13). Tubal may be the eponymous ancestor of
these people, whose principal industry seems to
have been the manufacture of vessels of bronze and
iron. Horace J. Wor


TUBIAS, ti’bi-as, ti’bi-as (év rots TwBlov, en
tots Tobtou; AV “in the places of Tobie,’ RV ‘‘in
the land of Tubias’’): A place in Gilead where 1,000
men of the Jews were slaughtered by the Gentiles,
their wives and children being carried away captive
(1 Macc & 18). It is identified with the land of
Tos (q.v.). 7


TUBIEN], ti-bi-é'ni (3pds robs Acyouévous TouBuy-
vous “lovSalous, prés tos legoménous Toubiénous
Toudaious, “unto the Jews that are called Tubieni’’):
Men of Tos (q.v.) who had occupied the town of
Charax (2 Mace 12 17).


TUMOR, ti'mér, ta’mor (BY, ‘ophel): RV sub-
stitutes this word for ‘emerods” in 1 S 5 12; 6 4;
Dt 28 27m. See EmMeRops.


Turban
Type


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3028


TURBAN, ttir’ban (Lev 16 4m). Sce Dress, V.


TURPENTINE, tir’pen-tin, TREE. See TERE-
BINTH.

TURTLE-DOVE, tir’t’l-duv. See Dovz.

TUTOR, tii’tér: In modern Eng. an “instructor,”
more particularly a private instructor, but the word
properly means a ‘‘guardian.’”’ Hence its use in
Gal 4 2 AV for éirporos, epitropos, here ‘“‘guard-
ian” (so RV), and 1 Cor 4 15; Gal 3 24.25 RV
for racdaywyés, paidagégés. See ScHOOLMASTER.


TWELVE, twelv (WY DW, sheném ‘asar;
Sdbexa, dideka). See APostte; NuMBER.


TWELVE APOSTLES, GOSPELS OF THE.
See ApocryPHAL GosPELs.


TWELVE PATRIARCHS, TESTAMENTS OF
THE. See Apocauypric Literature, IV, 1.


TWELVE STARS.
TWENTY, twen’'ti.


TWILIGHT, twi'lit (U3, nesheph): The
twilight of Pal is of short duration, owing to the
low latitude, there being scarcely more than an hour
between sunset and complete darkness. It is a dis-
tinct boundary hetween daytime and the darkness.
The people of Pal still give the time of an event as
so many hours before or after sunrise or sunset:
“David smote them from the twilight even unto the
evening of the next day” (1 S 30 17), and “They
rose up in the twilight, to go” (2 K 7 5). The
word is evidently used in the sense of darkness in
‘the stars of twilight’”’ (Job 3 9) and “The adulterer
waiteth for the twilight’? (Job 24 15). AV has
“twilight” im Ezk 12 6 ff, but RV has “dark.”

ALFRED H. Joy

TWIN BROTHERS (Acts 28 11). See Dios-

CURI.


TWINE, twin (IW, shazar, “to be twined’’):
The word is used in Ex 26 1 ff; 36 8 ff, etc, of the
“fine twined linen’’ used for the curtains and hang-
ings of the tabernacle, and for parts of the priests’
dress. It denotes linen the finely spun threads of
which consisted of two or more smalier threads
twined together. See Linen; TABERNACLE.


TWO, too.


TYCHICUS, tik’i-kus (Tixtxos, Trchikos, lit.
“chance’”’): Mentioned 5 t m the NT (Acts 20 4;
Eph 6 21; Col 47; 2 Tim 4 12; Tit 3 12); an
Asiatic Christian, a friend and companion of the
apostle Paul.

(1) In the first of these passages his name occurs
as one of a company of the friends of Paul. The
apostle, at the close of his 3d missionary Journey,
was returning from Greece through Macedonia
into Asia, with a view to go to Jerus. This journey
proved to be the last which he made, beiore his
apprehension and imprisonment. It was felt, both
by himself and by his friends, that this journey was
a specially important one. He was on his way to
Jerus, “bound in the spirit’? (Acts 20 22). But
another cause which gave it particular importance
was that he and his friends were carrying the money
which bad been collected for several years previous
in the churches of the Gentiles, for the help of the
poor members of the church in Jerus (Acts 24
17). No fewer than eight of his intimate friends ac-


See Astronomy, IT, 12.


See NumsBer.


See NuMBER.


companied him inte Asia, and one of these was T.
Luke uses the word ‘“‘Asian” (EV “of Asia,” Acts
20 4) to describe T. He was with Paul at Troas,
and evidently journeyed with him, as one of “Paul’s
company’? (Acts 21 8 AV), all the way to Jerus.

(2) The 2d and 3d passages in which the name of

Tychicus occurs (see above) give the information
that he was with Paul in Rome during his first
imprisonment. In Col Paul writes, “All my affairs
shall Tychicus make known unto you, the beloved
brother and faithful minister and fellow-servant m
the Lord: whom I have sent unto you for this very
purpose, that ye may know our state, and that he
may comfort your hearts’ (4 7.8). In almost iden-
tical words he writes in Eph, “But that ye also may
know my affairs, how I do, Tychicus, the beloved
brother and faithful minister m the Lord, shall
make known to you all things: whom I have sent
unto you for this very purpose, that ye may know
our state, and that he may comfort your hearts”
(6 21.22).
__ Paul had intrusted T. with a very important mission.
He was to deliver the Ep. to the Eph, that is, ‘‘ the cir-
cular letter’? (see LaopicEans, EpistTLe To THE) to the
churches in proconsular Asia, to which it was_ sent,
giving a copy of it to the church in Laodicea. Hoe was
then to proceed to Colossae, with the Ep. to the church
there. ta Colossae T. would plead_the cause of Onesi-
mus, who accompanied him from Rome. ‘Under his
shelter Onesimus would be safer than if he encountered
Philemon alone” (Lightfoot, Comm. on Col, 314). In
Laodicea and Colossae T. would not only deliver the Epp.
from Paul, but he would also, as the apostle had written
to the churches in those places, communicate to them
all information about his “‘state,” that is, how things
were going with him in regard to his appeal to the em-
peror, and his hope of heing soon set at liberty. T.
would make known to them all things.

(3) The passages in the Epp. to Titus and to
Timothy show that T. was again with Paul, after
the appeal to the emperor had resulted in the apostle
regaining his freedom. The passage in Tit evi-
dently refers to the interval between Paul’s first
and second Rom imprisonments, and while he was
again engaged in missionary journeys. The apostle
writes to Titus, who was in Crete in charge of the
churches there, that he mtended to send either
Artemas or T. to him, so as to take the oversight
of the work of the gospel in that island, that Titus
might be free to come to be with the apostle at
Nicopolis.

(4) The last passage where T. is mentioned
occurs in 2 Tim, which was written in Rome not


long before Paul’s execution. To the very end


Paul was busy as ever in the work of the gospel;
and though it would have been a comfort to him
to have his friends beside him, yet the interests of
the kingdom of Christ are uppermost in his thoughts,
and he sends these friends to help the progress of
the work. To the last, T. was serviceable as ever:
“Tychicus I sent to Ephesus” (4 12). As Timothy
was in charge of the church in Ephesus (1 Tim
1 3), the coming of T. would set him free, so as
to enable him to set off at once to rejoin Paul at
Rome, as the apostle desired him (2 Tim 4 9.21).

It should also be noted that at Ephesus T. would be
able to visit his old friend Trophimus, who was, at that
Be ee only a few miles away—at Miletus, sick (2

It is possihle that T. is the brother referred to in 2
Cor 8 22.23 as one ‘‘whom we have many times proved
earnest in many things ... . [one of] the messengers
of the churches .. . . the glory of Christ.”


(5) The character and career of T. are such as
show him altogether affectionate, faithful and
worthy of the confidence reposed in him by Paul,
who, as already seen, sent him again and again on
important work, which could be performed only by
a man of ability and of high Christian worth and
experience, Thus all that is known regarding T.
fully bears out the description of his character given


3029


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Turban
Type


by the apostle himself, that he was a beloved brother,
a faithful minister and fellow-servant in the Lord.
JoHN RUTHERFURD
TYPE, tip:


1. Definition of Type

2. Distinctive Features

3. Classification of Types

4. How Much of the OT Is Typical ?
LireratuRE


The Bible furnishes abundant evidence of the
presence of types and of typical instruction in the
Sacred Word. The NT attests this fact. It takes
up a large number of persons and things and events
of former dispensations, and it treats them as
adumbrations and prophecies of the future. A
generation ago a widespread interest in the study of
typology prevailed; latterly the interest has largely
subsided, chiefly because of the vagaries and ex-
travagances which attended its treatment on the
part of not a few writers. Pressing the typical
teaching of Scripture so far as to imperil the his-
torical validity of God’s word is both dangerous
and certain to be followed by reaction and neglect
of the subject.

The word ‘‘type”’ is derived from a Gr term réros,
tipos, which occurs 16 t in the NT. It is variously

trt in AV, eg. twice “print”? (Jn 20
1. Defini- 25); twice “figure” (Acts 7 43; Rom
tion of Type 5 14); twice “pattern” (Tit 2 7;

He 8 5); once “fashion” (Acts 7 44);
once “manner” (Acts 23 25); once “form” (Rom
6 17); and 7 t “example” (1 Cor 10 6.11; Phil
3.17; 1 Thess 17; 2 Thess 39; 1 Tim 4 12;
1 Pet 5 3). It is clear from these texts that the
NT writers use the word “type” with some degree
of latitude; yet one general idea is common to all,
namely, “likeness.” A person, event or thing is
so fashioned or appointed as to resemble another;
the one is made to answer to the other in some
essential feature; in some particulars the one
matches the other. The two are called type and
antitype; and the link which binds them together
is the correspondence, the similarity, of the one with
the other.

Three other words in the NT express the same general
idea. One is ‘‘shadow”’ (cxtd, skid, He 10 1), ‘For the
Jaw having a shadow of the good things to come”’-—as if
the substance or reality that was still future cast its
shadow backward into the old economy. ‘“Shadow’’ im-
plies dimness and _transitoriness; but it also implies a
Measure of resemblance between the one and the other.

The 2d term is ‘‘parable’’ (rapeBodj, parabolé, He
9 9); the tabernacle with its services was an acted

arable for the time then present, adumbrating thus the
blessed reality which was to come.

The 3d term is “copy,” or “pattern” (trdseryue,
hupédeigma), a word that denotes a sketch or draft of
something future, invisible (He 9 23); the tabernacle
and its furniture and services were copies, outlines of
heavenly things.

Types are pictures, object-lessons, by which God
taught His people concernmg His grace and saving
power. The Mosaic system was a sort of kinder-
garten in which God’s people were trained in Divine
things, by which also they were led to look for
better things tocome. An old writer thus expresses
it: “God in the types of the last dispensation was
teaching His children their letters. In this dis-
pensation He is teaching them to put the letters
together, and they find that the letters, arrange
them as they will, spell Christ, and nothing but
Christ.”

In creation the Lord uses one thing for many pur-
oses. One simple instrument meets many ends. For
ow many ends does water serve! And the atmosphere:

it supplies the lungs, conveys sound, diffuses odors,
drives ships, supports fire, gives rain, fulfils besides one
knows not how many other purposes. And God's word
is like His work, is His work, and, like creation, is inex-
haustible. Whatever God touches, he it a mighty sun


or an insect’s wing, a vast prophecy or a little type, He
perfects for the place and the purpose He has in mind.


What are the distinctive features of a type? A
type, to he such in reality, must possess three well-
defined qualities. (1) It must be a
2. Distinc- true picture of the person or the thing
tive Fea- it represents or prefigures. A type
tures is a draft or sketch of some well-
defined feature of redemption, and
therefore it must in some distinct way resemble its
antitype, e.g. Aaron as high priest is a rough figure
of Christ the Great High Priest, and the Day of
Atonement in Israel (Lev 16) must be a true picture
of the atoning work of Christ. (2) The type must
be of Divine appointment. In its institution it is
designed to bear a likeness to the antitype. Both
type and antitype are preordained as constituent
parts of the scheme of redemption. As centuries
sometimes lie between the type and its accomplish-
ment in the antitype, of course infinite wisdom alone
can ordain the one to be the picture of the other.
Only God can make types. (3) A type always pre-
figures something future. A Scriptural type and
predictive prophecy are in substance the same,
differing only in form. This fact distinguishes
between a symbol and a type. A symbol may
represent a thing of the present or of the past
as well as of the future, e.g. the symbols in the
Lord’s Supper. A type always looks to the future;
an element of prediction must necessarily be in it.
Another thing in the study of types should be
borne in mind, namely, that a thing in itself evil
cannot be the type of what is good and


8. Classi- pure. It is somewhat difficult to give
fication of a satisfactory classification of Bib.
Types types, but broadly they may be dis-


tributed under three heads: (1) Per-

sonal types, by which are meant those personages of
Scripture whose lives and experiences illustrate
some principle or truth of redemption. Such are
Adam, who is expressly described as the “figure of
him that was to come’ (Rom 6 14), Melchizedek,
Abraham, Aaron, Joseph, Jonah, etc. (2) His-
torical types, in which are included the great his-
torical events that under Providence became
striking foreshadowings of good things to come,
e.g. the Deliverance from the Bondage of Egypt;
the Wilderness Journey; the Conquest of Canaan;
the Call of Abraham; Deliverances by the Judges,
etc. (3) Ritual types, such as the Altar, the
Offerings, the Priesthood, the Tabernacle and its
furniture. There are typical persons, places,
times, things, actions, in the OT, and a reverent
study of them leads into a thorough acquaintance
Hi the fulness and the blessedness of the word of

od.

How much of the OT is to be regarded as typical

is a question not easily answered. Two extremes,
however, should be avoided. First,


4. How the extravagance of some of the early
Much of Fathers, as Origen, Ambrose, Jerome
the OT Is (revived in our time hy Andrew Jukes
Typical? and his imitators). They sought for


types, and of course found them, in
every incident and event, however trivial, recorded
in Scripture. Even the most simple and common-
place circumstance was thought to conceal within
itself the most recondite truth. Mystery and
mysticism were seen everywhere, in the cords and
pins of the tabernacle, in the yield of herds, in the
death of one, in the marriage of another, even in the
number of fish caught by the disciples on the night
the risen Saviour appeared to them—how much
some have tried to make of that number, 153!
The very serious objection to this method is, that
it wrests Scripture out of the sphere of the natural
and the historical and locates it in that of the arbi-
trary and the fanciful; it tends to destroy the
validity and trustworthiness of the record.


Tyrannus
Tyre


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3030


Second, the undue contraction of the typical
element. Professor Moses Stuart expresses this
view as follows: ‘Just so much of the OT is to be
accounted typical as the NT affirms to be so, and
no more.” This opinion assumes that the NT
writers have exhausted the types of the OT, while
the fact is that those found in the later Scripture
are but samples taken from the storehouse where
many morearefound. If they are not, then nothing
is more arbitrary than the NT use of types, for
there is nothing to distinguish them from a mul-
titude of others of the same class. Further, the
view assumes that Divine authority alone can
determine the reality and import of types—a view
that applies with equal force against prophecy.
This rule may be safely followed: wherever the
three characteristics of types are found which have
been already mentioned, there is the type.


identify him with a certain Tyrannus, a sophist,
mentioned by Suidas. Paul would thus appear
to be one of the traveling rhetors of the time, who
had hired such a hall to proclaim his own peculiar
philosophy (Ramsay, Paul the Traveller, 246,
271


(2) Meyer thinks that as the apostle had not
passed wholly to the Gentiles, and Jews still flocked
to hear him, and also that as Tyrannus Is not spoken
of as a proselyte (sebémenos t6n Thedn), this scholé
is the béth Midhrash of a Jewish rabbi. ‘Paul with
his Christians withdrew from the public synagogue
to the private synagogue of Tyrannus, where he and
his doctrine were more secure from public annoy-
ance’ (Meyer in loc.). :

(3) Another view (Overbeck) is that the expres-
sion was the standing name of the place after the
original owner. 8. F. Hunter


View or Tyre.


Weighty are the words of one equally eminent for his
piety as for his learning: “That the OT is rich in types,
or rather forms in its totality one type, of the NT, fol-
lows necessarily from the entirely unique position which
belongs to Christ as the center of the history of the world
and of revelation. As we constantly see the principle
embodied in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, that
the higher species are already typified in a lower stage
of development, so do we find, in the domain of saving
revelation, the highest not only prepared for, but also
shadowed forth, by that which precedes in the lower
spheres’’ (Van Oosterzee).

Lirzratrore.—P. Fairbairn, Typology of Scripture,
2 vols; Angus, The Bible and-Book; Jukes, Law of
Offerings in Lev; Mather, Gospel of OT, Explanation of
Types; McEwen, Grace and Truth: Types and Figures
of the OT; Soltau, Tabernacle, Priesthood and Offerings.

Wituram G. MoorruraD

TYRANNUS, ti-ran’us (Tépavvos, Trirannos):
When the Jews of Ephesus opposed Paul’s teaching
in the synagogue, he withdrew, and, separating his
followers, reasoned daily in the school of Tyrannus.
“This continued for the space of two years” (Acts
19 9.10). D Syr (Western text) adds after Tyran-
nus (ver 9), “from the 5th hour unto the 10th.”
Scholé is the lecture-hall or teaching-room of a
philosopher or orator, and such were to be found
in every Gr city. Tyrannus may have been (1) a
Gr rhetorician or (2) a Jewish rabbi.

(1) This is the common opinion, and many


TYRE, tir (1%, WX, cdr, “rock”; Tépos, Tiros,
“Tyrus’; modern Sur): The most noted of the
Phoen cities, situated on the coast,

1. Physical lat. 33° 17’, about 20 miles S. of Sidon
Features and about 35 N. of Carmel. The date
of its foundation is uncertain, but it

was later than that of Sidon. It is mentioned in the
travels of the Egyp Mohar, dating probably from
the 14th cent. BC, and in the Am Tab of about the
same period. Herodotus describes the temple of
Hercules at T. and says it was built 2,300 years
before his time, which would carry back the begin-
ning of the city to more than 2700 BC. It was a
double city, one part on an island, a short distance
from the shore, and the other on the mainland
opposite. The island city had two harbors, con-
nected by a canal, one looking N. and the other S.
The island was rocky and the city was fortified on
the land side by a wall 150 ft. high, the wall being
of less elevation on the other sides. It was an cx-
ceedingly strong position, and is referred to in the
Bible as the “strong” or “fortified” city (Josh 19
29). The space within the walls was crowded with
buildings, and is said to have contained 40,000 in-
habitants. The town on the mainland was sit-
uated in a plain extending from the Ras el-‘Abyad,


3031


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tyrannus
Tyre


on the 8. to Sarepta on the N., a distance of about
20 miles. It was fertile and well watered, the river
Leontes (Litany) passing through it to the sea, about
5 miles N. of Tyre, and the copious fountain of Ras
el-‘Ain, 3 miles to the S., furnishing an abundant

supply both for the city and the gardens.
(1) T. was for centuries subordinate to Sidon,
but when the Philis subdued the latter city, prob-
ably in the 12th cent. (see Sipon), Tyre


2. History received an accession of inhabitants
: from the fugitives which gave it the
preéminence. From this time dates its great com-


mercial and colonial activity. Its mariners pushed
boldly out to the W. and founded colonies in Spain
and North Africa, some of which, like Gades, Ab-
dera and Carthage, became famous. They ex-
tended their commerce more widely than Sidon had
ever done and ventured into the Atlantic and
reached the coasts of Britain and West Africa.
They reached out to the E. also, and had their ships
‘in the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean, and their land
routes threaded all Western Asia (see PHOENICIA).
T., like all the Phoen cities, became subject to Egypt
under Thothmes III in the first half of the 15th
cent. BC, and remained so for some 300 years, but
it enjoyed practical autonomy under native kings,
bemg only subject to tribute and to furnishng
contingents of ships when the Egyp kings made
their expeditions to the N. In the Am Tab, dating
from the first half of the 14th cent., we find a certain
Abi-melek (or Abi-milki) writing from T. to the
king of Egypt asking for aid against the Amorite
leader, Aziru, and the king of Sidon, who had joined
the rebels. The name is Phoen, and we know that
it was the policy of the Egyp kings to leave the
native dynasts on the throne.

(2) After the decline of Egypt, T. regained her
independence and exercised the hegemony over
most of the Phoen towns, at least as far N. as Gebal
(Byblus), as appears in the control that Hiram had
over the Lebanon forests in the time of David and
Solomon. Hiram was evidently desirous of an
alliance with Israel, since he sent messengers to
David and furnished cedar and workmen to build
him a house, apparently without solicitation. The
friendly connection between the two kingdoms was
advantageous to both, since David and Solomon
needed the timber and the skilled artisans that
Hiram could furnish, and Hiram needed the food


products of the land of Israel (1 K 5). T. was at.


this time noted for the skill of its artificers, and its
manufactured products were famous throughout
the world (see Puornicia, 4). The purple dye
and works in bronze were esp. famous, and Hiram,
the Tyrian artisan, was engaged by Solomon to cast
the bronzes required for the temple (1 K 7 13 ff).
Hiram, the king, enlarged and beautified his capital.
He united the two small islands on which the city was
built by filling up the space between, where he made
an open square and built a splendid temple to Mel-
karthand Astarte. He engaged in commercial enter-
prises with Solomon (1 K 9 26-28; 10 22), both in
pursuance of the friendly alliance and also for the ad-
vantage of having the use of the port of Ezion-geber
onthe Red Sea. His brilliant reign lasted 43 years.

(3) The list of kings who succeeded him contains
the names of Baal-azar, Abd-ashtoreth, murdered
by his brothers, the eldest of whom succeeded him,
followed by Astartus and Aserymus murdered by
his brother, Pheles, who was overthrown by the
high priest Eth-baal, showing how disturbed_the
period was. Eth-baal, or Ithobal, was the king
who made an alliance with Ahab and gave hin
Jezebel, his daughter, in marriage, which proved
most disastrous both to her and the country because
of the introduction of the Baal-worship into Israel.
Fth-baal was an energetic monarch, and is said to


have founded Botrys (Batrin). He reigned 32
years, and was followed by Badezor and Mattan,
who gave his daughter, Elissa (Dido), in marriage to
her uncle Sicharbas and transferred the throne to
them; but they were set aside by an uprising of the
people, and Pygmalion, son of Mattan, was placed
on the throne, and Sicharbas put to death. Elissa
fled with a party of nobles, by sea, to Africa and
founded the city of Carthage. This happened about
the middle of the 9th cent. BC, Jos putting it at 860.
; (4) In the first half of this century T. became sub-
ject to Assyria, and her hegemony in Phoenicia came
to an end, but her prosperity was not seriously
checked as we may infer from Isa 23 8, which was
written a century or so later. Assyria was satisfied
with the payment of tribute until the time of Tig-
lath-pileser III (745-727), who laid a heavier hand
upon her, and this led Elulaeus, king of T., to form
a confederacy of the Phoen cities against Assyria.
Shalmaneser IV subdued all except T., which he
distressed by cutting off her water-supply. But
the people dug wells and obtained enough to sub-
sist upon for five years, when Shalmanueser was killed
and Elulaeus recovered control of his territory. He
was not molested by Sargon, but Sennacherib ad-
vanced against him with 200,000 men, and Elulaeus
fled to Cyprus. The citizens made a successful
resistance and Sennacherib did not take T., but it
submitted to Esar-haddon, and its king, Baal, ob-
tained the special favor of the Assyr king, who
made him ruler of all the coast cities from Dar to
Gebal, and the Lebanon was placed under his con-
trol (680-673 BC). Itisrather surprising that Baal
refused to assist him in his attack upon Egypt and that
Esar-haddon did not punish him, probably because
he was too much occupied with Egypt. Ashur-bani-
pal, however, did compel him to submit and to give
him his daughter, and those of his brothers, as
secondary wives, but left him as king of T.


(5) On the decline of Assyria, T. regained its independ-
ence, and its greatness is indicated by the fact that it
resisted Nehuchadnezzar 13 years (598-585); it is un-
certain whether the island city was taken, but it evi-
dently came to terms with the king of Babylon (cf Ezk
27 26; Jos, Ant, X, xi, 1 and see Expos T, 1899, pp.
378, 430, 475, 520). After this siege Sidon took the lead
and T. was in a disturbed state: the monarchy was over-
thrown and suffetes, or judges, toolcits place for six years,
when the old order was restored. The decline of Bahylon
enabled T. to regain her independence for a short period
until its submission to the Persians about 525 BC, and
thenceforth it was a vassal state during the continuance
of the Pers empire.

(6) It was by no means hindered in its commercial
prosperity, and its great strength is seen in the brave and
energetic resistance it made to Alexander the Great.
All Phoenicia submitted to him without resistance, and
TT, was willing to admit his suzerainty, but declined to
receive him into the city. This so angered Alexander
that he at once commenced a siege that proved the most
difficult undertaking in all his wars. e had no fleet
and was obliged to build a mole from the mainland to the
island, but before he could finish it the Tyrians destroyed
it and beat back their assailants with loss. Alexander
had to do the work all over again, and as he was con-
vinced that without a fleet he would not be able to take
the city, he procured ships from the Phoen towns that
had submitted, and with the aid of these was able to
blockade the port and prevent the besieged from issuin
forth to destroy the new mole. This was at lengt!

ushed up to the very wall of the city, which was finally
Breached, and the troops of Alexander forced their way
in. But even then the defenders would not yield, and
the king himself had to lead the assault upon them with
his bodyguard and put them all to the sword. Those
who died with arms in their hands were 8,000, and the
survivors, women, children and slaves, to the numher of
30,000, were sold in the open market. He placed over
the ruined city, Into which he introduced some colonists,
a certain Ahd-elonim, and left it after having spent about
seven months in subduing it.


(7) After the death of Alexander, T. passed into
the hands of Ptolemy Lagi, and when Antigonus,
in 314 BC, took Phoenicia from him, T. resisted,
and he had to blockade it 15 months before it would
yield, showing how quickly it had recovered from


Tyre, Ladder of
Unchangeable


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3032


its previous disaster. It became a part of the Se-
leucid kingdom when Antiochus III drove the
Ptolemies from Syria (198 BC), and the Seleucid
kings regarded it of importance and gave it the right
of asylum, and it was allowed the status of a free
city by the Romans, Antony recognizing the mag-


Coin of Tyre.


istrates and council of T. as allies. When the
Parthians attacked and took Syria, in 40 BC, T.
would not submit and was left untouched, being
too strong for them. Augustus deprived it of its
freedom, but it was given the status of a ‘“‘metropo-
lis” by Hadrian, and this title appears on its coins.

(8) T. is mentioned in the NT several times:
Christ visited its territory (Mt 15 21; Mk 7 24),
and people from there came to hear Him (Lk 6 17).
Herod Agrippa I had trouble with T., and a deputa-
tion came to visit him at Caesarea (Acts 12 20).
Paul visited T. on his journey from Asia to Jerus
(Acts 21 3-7).


UCAL, t’kal (D8 , ukhdl [see below]): This name
occurs along with that of Ithiel (Prov 30 1), both
being taken by older interpreters as those of an-
cient sages. Some have suggested (see Toy, Prov,
519 f) that Ucal might be the “Caleol” of 1 K 4 31
(Heb 5 11). Uceal was also explained as “I can,”
ie. “I can maintain my obedience to God,” just
as Ithiel was taken to be “signs of God.” LXX,
Aq, Theodotion do not take the words as proper
names, and so BDB with others point this word as
a vb., “Jand] I am consumed” QDR}, wa’ ékhel, for
S28) , w’ukhal). The last three words of the verse
are then tr’ “I have wearied myself, O God, I have


wearied myself, O God, and am consumed.” See
ITHIEL. Davin Francis RoBerts


VEL, i’el ONIN, wal, “will of God”): One of
the sons of Bani who had taken foreign wives (Har
10 34). The name in 1 Esd 9 35 is “Juel” (B,
Ouyjr, Ouél, A, ‘lovjd, Touél).


UKNAZ, uk’naz (T2795, akenaz, “and Kenaz,”
probably): Found in AVm of 1 Ch 4 15 for AV
“even Kenaz,”’ RV “and Kenaz,’”’ whereas LXX
omits “and.” It is probable that some name has
dropped out after Elah. Curtis suggests reading
“end these are the sons of Kenaz,”’ i.e. those men-
tioned in vs 13f. See Kenaz. :


ULAI, Gli, Wi CON SDN, 'abhal 'alay,
“river Ulai”; Theod. Dnl 8 2, OdPddA, Oubdl; LXX
and Theod. in ver 16, OtdAal, Oulat;

1. The Lat Eulaeus): A river which, run-
Name and ning through the province of Elam,
Tts Forms flowed through Shushan or Susa. It
was from “between” this river that

Daniel (8 16) heard a voice, coming apparently


Christianity was accepted by the people of T., so that
the 2d cent. AD saw a bishopric established there, and
in the 4th a council was held there to consider charges
against Athanasius, by the party of Arius; he was con-
demned, a decision which brought the Tyrian church
into disrepute. T. was already obnoxious to Christians
because the anti-Christian Bde oes Porphyry was
from there. Tyre continued a commercial center, and
Jerome says that it was the noblest and most peautiful
of the Phoen cities and an emporium of commerce for
almost the whole world (Comm. on Ezk). It was of
considerable importance in the Crusades and continued
so until toward the end of the 13th cent., when its trade
declined, and it has now dwindled to a town of some
5,000 inhabitants. For ‘literature’? see PHoEnictia.

; H. Porter

TYRE, LADDER OF (kAtpoxos Tipov, klimakos
Trou): Given in 1 Macc 11 59 as the northern
limit of the territory placed under the authority of
Simon Thassi the Maccabee by Antiochus VI
(Theos), in the year 143 BC. The statement of
Jos (BJ, II, x, 2) that it was 100 furlongs N. of
Ptolemais, and a similar indication of position in
the Jer Talm (Ab Zar 1 9) lead us to identify it
with Ras-en-Nakirah and not with Ras-el-‘Abyad
(Promontorium Album of Pliny), as has been done.
Here the rugged hills of Upper Galilee descend in
bold precipices to the sea and leave no beach be-
tween. A natural barrier is thus formed which pre-
vented the histories of Israel and Tyre from ever
touching one another except in peaceful relations.

W. M. CuristiE


TYROPEON, ti-ré-pé’on, THE. See JERUSALEM.
TYRUS, ti’rus. See Tyne.


TZADDI, tzi-dé’. See Canae.


U


from the waters which flowed between its two
banks.
Notwithstanding that the rivers of Elam have
often changed their courses, there is but little doubt
that the Ulai is the Kerkhah, which,
2. Present rising in the Pers plain near Neh4vend.
Names and (there called the Gamas-db), is even
Course there a great river. Turned by the
mountains, it runs N.W. as far as
Bistittin, receiving all the waters of Southern
Kurdistan, where, as the Sein Merre, it passes
through the inaccessible defiles of Luristan, its
course before reaching the Kebir-Kuh being a suc-
cession of rapids. Turned aside by this mountain,
it follows for about 95 miles the depression which
here exists as far as the foothills of Luristan, reach-
ing the Susian plain as a torrent; but it becomes
less rapid before losing itself in the marshes of
Hawizeh. The course of the stream is said to be
still doubtful in places.
In ancient times it flowed at the foot of the citadel
of Susa, but its bed is now about 1} miles to the W.
The date of this change of course
3. Changed (during which a portion of the ruins of
Bed at Susa Susa was carried away) is uncertain,
: but it must have been later than the
time of Alexander the Great. The stream’s greatest
volume follows the melting of the snows in the
mountains, and floods ensue if this coincides with
the advent of heavy rain. Most to be dreaded are
the rare occasions when it unites with the Ab-e-Diz.
The Ulai (Assyr Uléa or Uldia) near Susa is
regarded as being shown on the sculptures of the
_ _ Assyr king Ashur-bani-pal (Brit. Mus.,
4, Assyrian Nineveh Gal.) illustrating his cam-
References paign against Te-umman. Its rapid
stream bears away the bodies of men
and horses, with chariots, bows and quivers. The


3033


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Tyre, Ladder of
Unchangeable


bodies which were thrown into the stream hindered
its course, and dyed its waters with their blood.


Litarature.—See Délégation en Perse: Mémoires,
I, Recherches Archéologiques, 25 ff.


T. G. Pincuss

ULAM, i’lam (D558, 'alam, “preceding”):

(1) A “son” of Peresh; a Manassite clan (1 Ch
7 16.17). Luc. reads ’HAdu, Eldm.

(2) A descendant of Benjamin who had sons,
“mighty men of valor’ (1 Ch 8 39.40). LXX B
has Afddu, Atlém, in ver 39, Al\elu, Aileim in ver
40; A, OvAdu, Ouldm, in both, and so Luc.


ULLA, ul’a (Nd7, ‘ull@, meaning unknown):
An Asherite (1 Ch 7 39).


UMMAH, uma (VAP , ‘ummah; 'ApxsB, Archéb,
'Auud, Ammd): One of the cities allotted to the
tribe of Asher (Josh 19 30). By a slight emenda-
tion of the text it would read Acco, the name of the
place subsequently known as Ptolemais, the modern
Akka. This emendation is generally adopted by
scholars, although it is at best a conjecture. No
other identification is yet possible.


UMPIRE, um’pir. See Daysman.


UNBELIEF, un-bé@léf’: The word (AV) repre-
sents two Gr words, dmelfem, apeitheia, “disobe-
dience” (only in Rom 11 30.32; He 4 6.11), and
dmigria, apistia, “distrust,” the antithesis to “faith”
(q.v.). The two words are not only akin etymo-
logically but run into one another by mental con-
nection, certainly where spiritual relations are con-
cerned, as between man and God. For when God
has spoken, in precept and yet more in promise,
distrust involves, at least potentially, an element of
disobedience. His supreme claim is to be trusted
to command only what is right, and to promise
only what is true. He is infinitely sympathetic in
His insight, and infallibly knows where distrust
comes only of the dim perceptions and weak mis-
givings of our mortal nature, and where, on the
other hand, a moral resistance lies at the back of
the non-confidence. But the presence of that
darker element is always to be suspected, at least,
and searched for in serious self-examination.

We may remark that it is a loss in our language
that “unbelief’’ is the only word we can use as the
antithesis to “faith”; for ‘faith’ and “belief”
(q.v.) are not exactly synonyms. “Unfaith” would
be a welcome word for such use, if it were generally
so understood. Hanpitey DunELmM


UNBELIEVER, un-bé-lév’ér: This word fol-
lows closely the lines of “unbelief” (q.v.) in its
relation to originals. Once only (Acts 14 2) it rep-
resents the participle dmedodrres, apeithotintes, “dis-
obeying fones].’’ Elsewhere (nine cases) it represents
dmitos, Gpistos, “faithless,” “without faith.” In six
of these passages (all in 1 and 2 Cor) it denotes
the unconverted pagan as distinguished from the
convert. In the other passages (Lk 12 46; Tit
115; Rev 21 8) the reference is to the unbelief
which comes of moral resistance to God.


UNCERTAIN, un-sfr’tin, UNCERTAINTY, un-
sir’tin-ti: Adj. &édydos, ddélos, 2 Macc 7 34; 1
Cor 14 8; advb. adélés, 1 Cor 9 26; noun adélétes,
1 Tim 6 17; adélos means “not clear,” and so
“uncertain.” Also AV_Wisd 9 14 for éruagarjs,
episphalés, “‘unsteady,’’ RV “prone to fall.”


UNCHANGEABLE, un-chénj’a-b’1, UNCHANGE-
ABLENESS, un-chinj’a-b’l-nes:
I. UncHanoraBLeness or Gop a Trout or NaturRau
THroLtooy


II. Scriprurnay Doctrine or THe UNCHANGEABLENESS
or Gop
1. Not Lifeless Immobility
2. As Contrasted with the Finite
3. God's Knowledge, Will and Purpose
4. In His Relation to the World
5. His Relations to Men
LIvBRATURE

The unchangeableness or immutability of God is
that Divine attribute which expresses the truth that
in His nature and_perfections, in His knowledge,
will and purpose, He always remains the same in
the fulness of His infinite and perfect Being; infi-
nitely exalted above change, becoming and develop-
ment, which are the specific characteristics of all
finite existence. This is one of what theologians
have called the incommunicable attributes of God,
that is, one of those specific characteristics of the
Divine nature which make God to be God in dis-
tinction from all that is finite. These attributes
have also been called negative attributes. By
calling them negative, however, it is not meant that
they express the nature of God in go far as He is
unknowable and incomprehensible by the finite
mind, while the positive attributes, such as love
and rightcousness, express God’s nature as revealed
and known. Both kinds of attributes can be known
only in so far as God reveals Himself, and further-
more the so-called negative attributes involve a
positive idea, while the positive ones in turn imply
the negation of all finite limitations. Moreover,
since the finite mind cannot comprehend the infinite
God, back of all that God has revealed of Himself,
back even of His absoluteness, eternity and un-
changeability, lies the fulness of His infinite Being,
unsearchable, unknowable, and incomprehensible
alike in His nature and attributes (Ps 145 3; 147
5; Job 11 7-9; Isa 40 28).

It is these incommunicable attributes, including
unchangeableness, which make God to be God, and
mark the specific difference between Him and all
finite existence. Unchangeableness is, therefore, the
characteristic of God’s entire nature and of all
His attributes. It cannot be limited to His ethical
nature or to His love, and, while it is true that
these incommunicable attributes are revealed with
especial richness in God’s saving activity, they
cannot be limited to marks of God’s saving action
or purpose. It is true that God is unchangeable
in His love and grace and power to save, but that is
only because it is the love and grace and power of
the absolute, infinite and immutable God.

I. Unchangeableness of God a Truth of Natu-
ral Theology.—As the One infinitely perfect and
absolute or self-existent Being, God is exalted far
above the possibility of change, because He is inde-
pendent, self-existent and unlimited by all the causes
of change. As uncaused and self-existent, God can-
not be changed from without; as infinitely perfect,
He cannot suffer change from within; and as eternal
and independent of time, which is the “form” of
change and mutability, He cannot be subject to
any change at all. God’s unchangeableness, there-
fore, follows from His self-existence and eternity.

il. Scripture Doctrine of the Unchangeableness
of God.—The Scripture doctrine of God reaffirms
this truth. It conceives of God as a living Person
in relation to the world and man, and at the same
time as absolutely unlimited by the world and man,
and as absolutely unchangeable. The God who
has revealed Himself in the OT and the NT is never
identified with, or merged in, the processes of Na-
ture. He is complete and perfect in Himself, and is
not the result of any process of self-realization. He
is so great that His relations to the created universe
cannot begin to exhaust His Being, and yet He
stands in the closest relations to man and the world
as Creator, Preserver, Governor, and Saviour.


Unchangeable
Uncleanness


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3034


On the one hand, then, the Bible never represents
the unchangeableness of God as a dead immobility
out of all relation to man and the

1. Not world. This tendency of thought,
Lifeless Im- fearing anthropomorphism, proceeds
mobility on the principle that to make any defi-

; nite predications about God is to limit
Him. The logical result of this is to conceive of
God as abstract Being or Substance, so that the word
“God” becomes only a name for the Unknowable.
Over against this error, the Scripture represents
God concretely as a Person in relation to the world
and man. In the beginning He created the heavens
and the earth, and from that time on He is the life
of the world, esp. of Israel, His chosen people. To
bring out this truth anthropomorphisms are em-
ployed. God comes and goes, reveals Himself and
hides Himself. He repents (Gen 6 6; 1 S 15 11;
Am 7 3; Joel 2 13); He becomes angry (Nu
111; Ps 106 40); and lays aside His anger (Dt
13 17; Hos 14 4). He sustains a different relation
to the godly and the wicked (Prov 11 20; 12 22).
In the fulness of time He became incarnate through
the Son, and He dwells in His people by His Spirit,
their experience of His grace being greater at some
times than at others.

But on the other hand, the Scripture always
asserts in unmistakable terms the unchangeableness
of God. He is unchangeable in His nature. Al-
though the name ’El Shadday, by which He made
Himself known in the patriarchal period of revela-
tion, denotes esp. God’s power, this name by no
means exhausts the revelation of God in that period.
His unchangeableness is involved _in His eternity as
made known to Abraham (Gen 21 33). This
attribute finds its clearest expression in the name
“Jehovah” as revealed to Moses, the significance of
which is unfolded in the passage Ex 3 13-15. God
here reveals Himself to His people as “I Am Tuat
J Am,” using the future tense of the vb. “to be,”
which, as the context shows, is given as the meaning
of the name “Jehovah.” Some recent writers would
derive these words from the Hiphil stem of the vb.,
and affirm that it signifies that God is the giver of
life. The vb., however, is in the Kal stem, the
tense denoting the changeless continuity of the life
and nature of God. The idea expressed is not
merely that of self-existence, but also of unchange-
ableness, and this unchangeableness, as the context
clearly indicates (esp. ver 15), is here set forth not
simply as belonging to the nature of God in Himself,
but is brought into closest connection with His
covenant relation to His people, so that the reli-
gious value of God’s unchangeableness is most clearly
implied in this fundamental assertion of the attri-
bute. The same idea of God’s immutability is
reaffirmed in the prophecy of Isaiah. It is con-
nected with the name Jeh (Isa 41 4; cf also 48 12),
where Jeh affirms that He is the first and, with the
last, the same God, thereby asserting not merely
His eternity, but also that He is the same in His
Divine existence throughout all ages. This attri-
bute, moreover, is claimed by Jeh, and set forth as
an especial mark of His Godhead in Isa 44 6. The
unchangeableness of the Divine nature is also as-
serted by the prophet Malachi in a difficult passage
(3 6). This is a clear affirmation of the unchange-
ableness of God, the only question being whether it
is set forth as the ground of Israel’s confidence, or
in contrast with their fickleness, a question which
depends partly on that of the text.

In the NT the thought of the passage in Ex 3 is
reiterated in the Apocalypse where God is described
as He who is and was and is to come (Rev 1 4).
This is an expansion of the covenant name ‘‘Jehovah”
in Ex 8 13-15, denoting not merely eternity but also
immutability. The phrases “the Alpha and the


Omega” (Rev 1 8; 21 6; 22 13); and “‘the first
and the last” (1 17; 22 13); and “the begmning
and the end” (21 6; 22 13) bring out the same
idea, and are applied to Christ as well as to God,
which is a clear indication of Our Lord’s Deity.
The apostle Paul likewise asserts the incorruptibility,
eternity and immortality of the Divine nature, all
of which ideas imply the unchangeableness of God
(Rom 1 23; 1 Tim 1 17; 6 16).

Not only is the unchangeableness of God's nature
asserted in Scripture, and placed in relation to His deal-


ings with men, but also it is declared to he
2. AsCon- the distinctive characteristic of God's
trasted with Dature as contrasted with the entire uni-
as eC wi verse of finite heing. While the heavens
the Finite and the earth change and are passing
away, God endures forever and forever the

same God (Ps 102 26-28 [Heb 27-29]). The applica-
tion of the language of this psalm to Christ by the author
of the Ep. to the He (1 10-12) involves the unchange-
ableness of Christ, which is again explicitly asserted in
this Ep. (13 8), heing another clear indication of the
way in which the Deity of Jesus Christ pervades the NT.
This idea of God’s immutability, as contrasted with the
mutability of finite existence which is His creation, is
given expression in the NT by the apostle James. As
Creator of the heavenly bodies, God is called the Father
of lights. While their lights, however, are intermittent,
rane is subject to neither change nor obscuration


In accordance with this idea of the unchangeableness
of God's nature, the Scripture, in_ascrihing life and per~
sonality to Him, never regards God as subject to any
process of hecoming or self-realization, and the views
which so conceive of God are unscriptural whether they
proceed upon a unitarian or a trinitarian basis.

God is also represented in Scripture as unchange-
able in His knowledge, will and purpose. He is not

a man that He should repent (1 8 16
3. God’s 29). His purposes, therefore, are un-
Knowledge, changeable (Nu 23 19; Isa 46 11; Prov
Will and 19 21); and His decrees are accordingly
Purpose likened to ‘mountains of brass” (Zec

6 1). His righteousness is as immut-
able as mountains (Ps 36 6 [Heb 7]); and His power
also is unchangeable (Isa 26 4). Hence, while the
Scripture represents God as sustaining living rela-
tions to His creatures, it does not conceive of Him
as conditioned or determined in any way by men’s
acts, in either His knowledge, will, purpose or power.
God knows eternally the changing course of events,
and He acts differently upon different occasions,
but all events, including human actions, are deter-
mined by God’s unchangeable purpose, so that God’s
knowledge and actions are not contingent upon any-
thing outside Himself.

Although, therefore, the idea of God as pure
abstract Being, out of all relation to the world, is
unscriptural, it is no less true that that conception
of God which represents a reaction from this, and
which conceives of God anthropomorphically and
as conditioned and determined by the world and
man, is also quite contradictory to the Scripture
conception of God. This latter tendency goes too
far in the opposite direction, and falls into the error
of conceiving God’s knowledge, will, purpose and
power too anthropomorphically, and as limited by
the free acts of man. While the opposite tendency
kept God out of all relation to the world, this one
erects God’s relation to the world into something
which limits Him. This way of conceiving of God,
which is the error of Rationalism, Socinianism and
Arminianism, is as unscriptural as that which con-
ceives of God as abstract Bemg, unknowable, and
entirely out of relation to the world.

_ Unchangeable in His nature and attributes, God
is likewise unchangeable in His relation to the
world, which relation the Scripture


4. In His represents as creation and providence,
Relation to and not as emanation. Hence while
the World everything finite changes, God remains


ever the same (Ps 102 26-28). Con-
sequently the pantheistic idea is also unscriptural,


3035


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Unchangeable
Uncleanness


which idea, going farther than the anthropomorphic
and dualistic conception which places the world
over against God, completely merges God’s Being
in the world and its processes of change, affirming
that God comes to self-realization in the evolution
of the world and man. In its reaction from the
denial of God’s living relation to the world, this
view does not stop with limiting God by reason of
this relation, but merges Him completely in the
world-development. The Scripture, on the con-
trary, always conceives of God as immutably free
and sovereign in His relation to all the creation.

In accordance with this idea of the unchange-
ableness of God’s nature and attributes, the Bible
always maintains God’s absoluteness and tran-
scendence of Nature and her processes in all of the
relations which He sustains to the finite universe.
It came into being by His creative fiat, not by any
process of emanation from His Being. He sustains
it in existence, and governs it, not by any process of
self-realization in the series of second causes, but
from without, by His sovereign will and power.
And He intrudes into the series of finite causes
miraculously, producing events in Nature which
are due solely to His power. When for man’s sal-
vation the Son of God became incarnate, it was not
by any change of His nature in laying aside some or
all of the attributes of Deity, but by assuming a
human nature into personal union with the Divme
nature. The Scripture passages which speak of
the incarnation of Our Lord clearly indicate that
the Son retained His full Deity in “becoming flesh”
(ef esp. the prologue to John’s Gospel and Phil 2
6-8). Moreover, the OT doctrine of the Spirit of
God as the source of life to the world is always at
pains to avoid any mingling of the Spirit with the
processes of Nature, and the same thing is true of
the NT doctrine of the indwelling of the Spirit in
the believer, always keeping the Spirit distinct
from the spirit of man (Rom 8 16). :

Finally, God is unchangeable not only in relation
to the universe, but in His relations to men and esp.
to His Deore: This follows from His

e€


5. His unchangea ‘ethical nature. The
Relations Scripture often connects the unchange-
to Men ableness of God with His goodness


(Ps 100 5; Jas 117); with His
truthfulness and mercy (Ps 100 5; 117 2); and
with His covenant promises (Ex 3 13 ff). In
connection with His covenant promises, God’s un-
changeableness gives the idea of His faithfulness
which is emphasized in the OT to awaken trust in
God (Dt 7 9; Ps 36 5 [Heb 6]; Ps 92 2 [Heb 3];
Isa 11 5; Lam 3 23). This idea of God’s un-
changeableness in His covenant promises or His
faithfulness is repeated and emphasized in the NT.
His gifts or graces and election are without repent-
ance (1 Thess 5 24; Rom 11 29); He is faithful
toward men because unchangeably true to His own
nature (2 Tim 2 13); His faithfulness abides in
spite of men’s lack of faith (Rom 3 5), and is in
many places represented as the basis of our confi-
dence in God who is true to His election and gracious
promises (1 Cor 19; 1013; 2 Thess 3 3; He
10 23; 1111; 1 Pet 419; 1 Jn 1 9). See
Fairarutness. It is thus the religious significance
and value of God’s unchangeableness which is esp.
emphasized throughout the Scripture. Because He
is unchangeably true to His promises, He is the
secure object of religious faith and trust, upon whom
alone we can rely in the midst of human change and
decay. It is this idea to which expression Is given
by calling God a rock, the rock of our strength and
of our salvation (Dt 32 15; Ps 18 2 [Heb 3];
42 9 [Heb 10]; 71 3; Isa 17 10). God is even
eternally a rock, the never-failing object of confi-
dence and trust (Isa 26 4).


It appears, therefore, that the Scripture idea of
the unchangeableness of God lays emphasis upon
four points. First, it is not lifeless immobility,
but the unchangeableness of a living Person.
Second, it is, however, a real unchangeableness of
God’s nature, attributes and purpose. Third, this
unchangeableness is set forth as one of the specific
characteristics of Deity in distinction from all that
is finite. Fourth, God’s unchangeableness is not
dealt with in an abstract or merely theoretic man-
ner, but its religious value is invariably emphasized
as constituting God the one true object of religious
faith,

Lirernarurz.—Besides the comms. on appropriate
passages, and the discussion of the Divine attributes
in the general works on systematic theology, see DIll-
mann, Handbuch der alitest. Theol., 1895, 215-20, 243-
44; Oehbler, Theol. of the OT, ET, 1883, 95, 100; Schultz,
Alttest. Theol., 1896, 419; Davidson, The Theol. of the
OT, 1904, 45-58, 165. For a fuller discussion see Char-
nock, “The Immutability of God," Works, vol I, 374—-
419; Dorner, Ueber die richtige Fassung des dogmatischen
Begriffs der Unverdnderlichkeit Gottes, u.s.w.; Article I
‘Die neueren Liugnungen der Unvyerinderlichkeit des
Laban ane Gottes, u.s.w.,'"" JDT, I, 201-77; II, “ Die

eschichte der Lehre von der Unverinderlichkeit Gottes
bis auf Schleiermacher,"’ JDT, II, 440-500; IIT, '‘ Dog-
matische Erérterung der_Lehre von der Unverdnder-
lichkeit Gottes,"’ JDT, III, 579-660; H. Cremer, Die
christliche Lehre von den Eigenschaften Gottes, 1897, pub.
in the Bettrdge zur Férderung christlicher Theol., I, 7-111;
see pp. 10 ff, and esp. pp. 102-9.

Caspar Wistar Hopes
UNCHASTITY, un-chas’ti-ti. See Crimes; Pun-


ISHMENTS.


UNCIRCUMCISED, un-stir’kum-sizd, UNCIR-
CUMCISION, un-sér-kum-sizh’un: The adj. in’


the OT is Sy , ‘Grél (Gen 17 14, etc), from a root
of uncertain meaning, with the noun mow , ‘orlah,
‘“mneircumcised [person]’’? (Lev 19 23; Jer 9 25),


and the vb. buy , ‘éral, “count as uncircumcised”
(Lev 19 23; RV Hab 2 16). In Apoe and the
NT the noun is éxpofverla, akrobustia (a physio-
logical term, 1 Macc 1 15; Acts 11 3, etc), and
the adj. édmepirunros, apertimétos (Ad Est 14 15;
1 Macc 1 48; 2 46; Acts 7 51), with the vb.
érurdopat, epispdomat, “become uncircumcised’
(1 Cor 7 18). The language of 1 Macc 1 15 sug-
gests the performance of some surgical operation,
but no such operation appears to be possible, and
“behaved like uncircumcised persons’’ (as in 1 Cor
7 18) is the probable meaning. See Crrcumcision.
.. Burton Scotr Easton
UNCLE, un’k’] (3%, dodh, “beloved,” ‘uncle,’
“relation”). See RELATIONSHIPS, FAMILY.


UNCLEAN, un-klén’, SPIRIT. See Spirit, Un-
cLeAN; Demon, DEmontac.


UNCLEANNESS, un-klén’nes:


I. Terms
1. In the OT
2. Inthe NT
3. In LXX
II. Possrpre Revation or Israev's Laws on Un-
CLEANNESS WITH THE Laws oF TABOO AMONG THE
Nations
III. TeracninGc As To UNCLEANNESS
1, In the OT
2. In the Apoc
3. In the NT
LivERATURE
I Terms.—TNOD . fum'ah, “uncleanness,”’ ‘‘ defile-


ment,” occurs 26 t (Lev 7 20.21; 14 19; 15 3.25.26.
30.31, ete). mt). niddah, ‘‘separation,”’
‘impurity,"” occurs in Lev 20 21; Ezr 9
tae 11; Zee 18 1. FAY, ‘erwah, occurs in
Dt 23 14. “2 MAY, ‘erwath dabhar,
‘¢unclean thing” (Dt 24 1), is trd‘'uncleauness’’ in AV.
The adj. ND. fame’, “defiled,” ‘‘unclean,"’ occurs 72 t


(over half in Lev), but is never trd ‘‘uncleanness,"’ but
always ‘unclean.'’ The vb. NAY, t4mé’, “to make" or


Uncleanness
Unknown God


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3036


,


“declare unclean,’
defile” are oNa. g@al, SOT, halal, DIM, banzph, DID,
tanaph, poy. ‘alal, TLD, ‘dnah.
The Gr word for ‘‘uncleanness” is dxa@apofa, aka~
tharsta, which occurs 10 t (Mt 23 27; Rom 1 24; 6 19;
2 Cor 12 21, etc). piacuds, miasmés,
2. In the ‘“pollution,’’ occurs only in 2 Pet 2 10.
NT The adj. axd@apros, akdthartos, ‘“‘unclean,"’
occurs 31 t, 23 t In reference to unclean
spirits (Lk once using the expression ‘‘un-
clean demon,'’ 4 33), 4 t to ceremonial uncleanness
(three by Peter and one by John the revelator), and 4 t
te moral uncleanness (three by Paul and one by John
the revelator). xowwés, koinés, ‘‘common,’’ ‘‘ unclean,”
occurs 8 t in the sense of ‘‘unclean"’ (Mk % 2.5; Acts


10 14.28; 118; Rom 14 14; Rev 21 27). The vb.
xowdw, koinéd, ‘‘to defile," occurs 11 t (Mt 15 11.18.
20; Mk 7% 15, etc). piaive, miaind, ‘to defile,”


occurs 5 t (Jn 18 28; Tit 115; He 12 15; Jude ver
8). podrdvw, molind, “to make filthy,’’ occurs 3 t
(1 Cor 8 7; Rev 3 4; 14 4). omaAdw, spiléd, occurs
twice (Jas 3 6; Jude ver 23) and $%cipw, phthetro, ‘to
corrupt,”’ occurs 7 t in Gr, once in EV (1 Cor § 17).
Akatharsia, ‘‘uncleanness,’’ occurs 59 t in LXX (in-
cluding many instances in apocryphal books) (1 and 2
Esd, Tob, 1 and 2 acc, etc). _ Akathar-
3. In LEX


tos, ‘‘unclean,"’ occurs 134 t in LXX (in-

cluding one example in] Macc). Kotnos,
‘“‘unclean,’’ and koinod, ‘‘to make unclean,’’ occur in
Est, Prov, Wisd, 1, 2, 3 and 4 Macc). Miainé, ‘to
defile,"" occurs over 100 t. Moluné, ‘‘to make filthy,"
occurs 18 t (hoth in the OT and in Apoc).

I. Possible Relation of Israel’s Laws an Un-
cleanness with Laws af Taboo among the Nations.
—W.R. Smith (Lectures on the Religion of the Sem-
ites, 152-55) thinks there is a kinship between Israel’s
laws of uncleanness and the heathen taboo. Frazer,
in The Golden Bough, shows numerous examples of
the taboo among various tribes and nations which
present striking similarity to some of Israel’s laws
on uncleanness. But does this diminish our respect
for the OT laws on uncleanness? Might not Jeh
use this natural religious perception of men as to an
intrinsic distinction between clean and unclean in
training Isracl to a realization of a higher concep-
tion—the rea] difference between sin and holiness,
i.e. between moral defilement and moral purifica-
tion? The hand of Jeh is visible even in the devel-
opment of Israel’s rudimentary laws on ceremonial
uncleanness. They are not explicable on purely
naturalistic grounds, but Jeh is training a people to
be holy, and so He starts on the lower plane of
ceremonial uncleanness and cleanness (see Lev 11
44 as to the purpose of Jeh in establishing these
laws respecting clean and unclean animals).

IH, Teaching as ta Uncleanness.—Each term
above for uncleanness is used in two senses: (a) to

signify ceremonial uncleanness, which
1. Inthe is the most usual significance of the
OT term in the OT; (6) but, in the

Prophets, to emphasize moral, rather
than ceremonial, uncleanness. There are four prin-
cipal spheres of uncleanness in the OT:

(1) Uncleanness in the matter of food.—The law as
to clean and unclean beasts is laid down in Lev 11
1-23. Notice that the law does not extend to
vegetable foods, as does a similar law in the Egyp
religion. Four kinds of beasts are named as fit
for food: (a) among quadrupeds, those that both
chew the cud and part the hoof; (6) among
fishes, only those having both fins and scales; (c)
most birds or fowls, except, in the main, birds of
prey and those noted for uncleanness of habits, are
permitted; (d) of insects those that have legs
above the feet to leap withal (e.g. the cricket, the
grasshopper, etc), but those that go on all four, or
have many feet, or go upon the belly (e.g. worms,
snakes, lizards, etc), are forbidden. See, further,
Foon.

(2) Uncleanness connected with the functions of
reproduction (Lev 12 and 15).—In Lev 16 2-18,
we find the laws applied to issues of men; in 15
19 ff, to the issues of women. Not only is the man


occurs often. Other Heb vbs. ‘'to | or woman unclean because of the issue, whether


normal or abnormal, but the bed on which they lic,
or whatever or whoever is touched by them while
they are in this state, is unclean. The uncleanness
lasts seven days from the cessation of the issue. To
become clean men must wash their clothes and
bathe their bodies (though this requirement is not
made of women), and both men and women must
offer through the priest a pair of turtle-doves, or
two young pigeons (Lev 15). According to Lev
13, the woman who conceives and bears a child is
unclean. This uncleanness lasts seven days if the
child born is a male, but 14 days if the child is a
female. However, there is a partial uncleanness of
the mother that continues 40 days from the birth
of a male, 80 days from the birth of a female, at the
end of which period she is purified by offering a lamb
and a young pigeon (or turtle-dove), or if too poor
to offer a lamb she may substitute one of the birds
for the lamb.

(3) Uneleanness connected with leprosy.—Accord-
ing to Lev 14 and 165, the leper was regarded as
under the stroke of God, and so was deemed un-
clean. The leper (so adjudged by the priest) must
separate himself from others, with torn clothes, di-
sheveled hair, and crying with covered lips, ‘“Un-
clean! Unclean!’’? That is, he was regarded as a
dead man, and therefore unclean and so must live
secluded from others. See, further, Lprr,
Leprosy.

(4) Uncleanness associated with death—Accord-
ing to Lev 15 2440, anyone who touched a dead
beast, whether unclean or clean, was rendered un-
clean. According to Nu 19 11-22, anyone touch-
ing the corpse of a human being is unclean. Like-
wise, everyone in the tent, or who enters the tent,
where lies a dead man, is unclean seven days. Even
the open vessels in the tent with a dead person are
unclean seven days. Whoever, furthermore, touched
a dead man’s bone or grave was unclean seven days.
Purification, in all these cases of uncleanness as
related to death, was secured by sprinkling the
ashes of a red heifer with living water upon the
unclean person, or object, on the 3d and 7th days.
See PuRIFICATION.

In Tob 8 7-9; 6 13.14; 7 11;_ 8 1-3;. 1 Macc l


41-53, and in other books, we find the same laws on un-
cleanness Teconnized by the descendants


2. In the of Abraham. It was regarded as abomi-
A nable to sacrifice other animals (swine for
poc instance) than those prescribed by Jeh.


There is a growing sense in Israel during
this period, that all customs and all conduct of the
heathen are unclean. Witness the resistance of the
loyal Jews to the demands of Antiochus Epiphanes (1

acc 1, 2, 6, 7). The sense of ceremonial uncleanness
was still a conspicuous element in the religious conscious-
ness of the Jews in the inter-Bib. period. But the train-
ing of God in ceremonial purification and in the moral
and spiritual teachings of the prophets had prepared the
way for an advance in moral cleanness (both in thought
and in practice).

By the days of Jesus the scribes and rabbis had
wrought out a most cumbrous system of ceremonial

uncleanness and purification. Nor did
3. Inthe they claim that all their teachings on
NT this subject were found in the OT.
f See Tranition. This is fitly illus-
trated in the NT in the washing of hands. See
UnwasHen. When the Mish (the collection of
rabbinic teachings) was produced, the largest book
was devoted to the laws of purification, 30 chapters
poe used to describe the purification of vessels
alone.

See Jn 2 1-11, and note how the Jews had six
stone waterpots for purification at the wedding in
Cana. See Jn 3 25 as to the controversy on purifica-
tion between John’s disciples and the Jews. This
question of cleanness and uncleanness was a, tre-
mendousissue with every Jew. He must keep himself


3037


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Uncleanness
Unknown God


ceremonially clean if he would be righteous and win
the approval of God.

Jesus utterly disregarded for Himself these laws
of purification, though He orders the cleansed leper
to return to the priest and secure his certificate of
cleansing. He did not wash His hands before eat-
ing, and His disciples followed Hisexample. There-
fore the Pharisees challenged Him to give an account
of His course and that of His disciples (Mt 15
3-20=Mk 7 6-23). Jesus then enunciated the
great principle that there is no ceremonial, but only
moral and spiritual, uncleanness. Not what goes
into a man from hands that touch unclean things
defiles the man, but the things that come out of his
heart, evil thoughts, hatred, adultery, murder, etc,
these defile the man.

Paul likewise regarded nothing as unclean of
itself (Rom 14 14.20; Tit 1 15), yet no man
should violate the scruples of his own conscience
or that of his brother (and thus put a stumbling-
block in his way). Love, not ceremonialism is the
supreme law of the Christian. Paul, in submitting
to the vow of purification in Jerus, set an example
of this principle (Acts 21 26). See also Crimus;
PUNISHMENTS.


Literaturse.—W. R. Smith, Lectures on the Religion
of the Semites (esp. pp. 152-55, on taboo, and pp. 455,
456, on the uncleanness of sexual intercourse); Frazer,
The Golden Bough (examples of taboo and similar laws
and customs among various nations); Frazer, art.
“Taboo” in Enc Brit, 9th ed; Benzinger, Heb Archae-
ology; Nowack, Heb Archaeology; Kellogg, comm. on
‘Lev’? (Ezpositor’s Belle Kalisch, Leviticus; Dillmann-
Ryssel, Leviticus; Schultz, Dillmann, Smend, Marti,
Davidson, in their OT Theologies, give useful bints on
this subject; art. ‘‘Casuistry’’ (Heb) in #RE, III, is
valuable.

CHaries B. WinitaMs


UNCLOTHED, un-klothd’. See Croraep Upon.


UNCTION, unk’shun: The AV tr of xpicua,
chrisma (1 Jn 2 20), which RV renders “‘anoint-
ing,’’ as AV renders the same word in 1 Jn 2 27.


UNDEFILED, un-dé-fild’: In the OT DM, tam,
“nerfect,’’? presents the positive side. Hence Ps
119 Listr?in RV: ‘Blessed are they that are per-
fect in the way.”’ In the NT dplavros, amianios,
presents the negative side, ‘‘unstained,” “‘unsullied,”
“without taint.’ Used to describe the sinlessness
of Christ (He 7 26), to declare the marriage act
free from all guilt, disgrace or shame (He 18 4),
to contrast the heavenly inheritance with earthly
possessions (1 Pet 1 4).


UNDERGIRDING, un-dér-gird’ing. See Snips
AND Boars, III, 2.


UNDERNEATH, un-dér-néth’ (OTM , tahkath, “the
bottom [as depressed]”’): ‘Underneath are the ever-
lasting arms’”’ (Dt 33 27). In these words Moses
sums up the history of Israel and gives expression
to his final thought about life and time and all things
visible. Underneath all phenomena and all the
chances and changes of life and time there is un-
changing law, everlasting principle, an all-enfolding
power, an all-embracing love.


UNDERSETTER, un’dér-set-ér (HIND , kathéph):
The word, used in I K 7 30.34 of supports of the
laver, means lit. “shoulder,” and is so rendered in
RVm. See Laver.


UNDERTAKE, un-da-tak’: “To take upon
one’s self,” “assume responsibility,” and so in
Elizabethan Eng. “be surety.” In this sense in
AV Isa 38 14, “O Lord, .. . . undertake for me”
(219, ‘drabh, RV “be thou my surety’’). Perhaps
in the same sense in Sir 29 19, although the idea is


scarcely contained in the Gr vb. didxw, didké, “pur-
sue.’’ In the modern sense in 1 Esd 1 28; 2 Macc
2 29; 8 10; AV 2 27. See Sure; Surery.


UNEQUAL, un-é’kwal: Ezk 18 25.29 for Jom 8,
le thakhan, “not weighed,” “illogical.” “Un-
equally” in 2 Cor 6 14, in the phrase “unequally
yoked,” érepoivyéw, heterozugéd, is used of the yoking
together of two animals of different kinds (cf LXX
of Lev 19 19).


UNFEIGNED, un-fand‘ (avuméxpiros, anupdkritos,
“unfeigned,’”’ “undisguised’’): The Gr word occurs
only in the NT (1 Tim 1 5; 2 Tim 1 5) and is
designative of the moral-quality of faith as “the
mark of transparency and simplicity of soul—the
most complete and distinct exponent of a man’s
character—the natural hypothesis of a pure and
good heart—a readiness to believe in goodness”
(Martineau, Hours of Thought, First Series, 86 ff).
Cf 2 Cor 6 6; 1 Pet 1 22; Jas 3 17.


UNGODLY, un-god’li (V01, rasha‘* [Ps 1 1],
‘wicked,”’ Syro8 , beltya‘al (2 S 22 5], “worthless”;
in the NT doeBhs, asebés [Rom 5 6], e.g. indicating
that the persons so called are both irreverent and
impious): Trench says that the idea of active oppo-
sition to religion is involved in the word, that it is
a deliberate withholding from God of His dues of
prayer and of service; a standing, so to speak, in
battle array against God and His claims to respect,
reverence and obedience. Those whose sins are
particularly aggravating and deserving of God’s
wrath are the “ungodly.” And yet it is for such
that Jesus Christ died (Rom 5 6).

Wittiam Evans

UNICORN, i’ni-kérmm (ON, r’ém [Nu 23 22;
24 8; Dt 33 17; Job 39 9.10; Ps 22 21; 29 6;
92 10; Isa 34 7]): “Unicorn” occurs in AV in the
passages cited, where RV has “wild-ox”’ (q.v.).


UNITY, @ni-ti: Ps 133 1 for "UW, ydahadh,
‘“ynitedness,’’ and Eph 4 3.13 for évérns, hendtés,
“oneness.” Also Sir 25 1 AV for éuévoa, homénoia,
“eoncord” (so RV).


UNKNOWN, un-nin’, GOD (ayvwrras Oeds,
dgnostos theds): In Acts 17 23 (St. Paul’s speech
in Athens) ARV reads: “I found also an altar with
this inscription, To an Unknown Gop. What
therefore ye worship in ignorance, this I set forth
unto you.” AV and ERVm translate “to the
Unknown God,” owing to the fact that in Gr certain
words, of which theds 1s one, may drop the art. when
it is to be understood. In the present case the use
of the art. is probably right (cf ver 24). In addi-
tion, AV reads “whom” and “him” in place of
“what” and “this.’’ The difference here is due to
a variation in the Gr MSS, most of which support
AV. But internal probability is against AV’s
reading, as it would have been very easy for a scribe
to change neuters (referring to the Divine power)
into masculines after ‘‘God,”’ but not vice versa.
Hence modern editors (except von Soden’s margin)
have adopted the reading in RV.

St. Paul in Athens, ‘‘as he beheld the city full of
idols,” felt that God was truly unknown there.
Hence the altar with the inscription struck him as
particularly significant. Some Athenians, at any
rate, felt. the religious inadequacy of all known
deities and were appealing to the God who they
felt, must exist, although they knew nothing definite
about Him. No better starting-point for an ad-
dress could be wished. What the inscription
actually meant, however, is another question.
Nothing is known about it. Altars dedicated ‘‘to
unknown gods” (in the pl.) seem to have been fairly


Uniearned
Uriah, Urijah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3038


common (Jerome on Tit 1 12; Pausanias, i.1.4;
Philaster, Vita Apoll., vi.3), and Blass (Comm. ad
loc.) has even suggested that the words in Acts were
originally inthe pl. But this would spoil the whole
point of the speech, and the absence of references to
a single inscription among thousands that existed
can cause no surprise. Those inscriptions in the
pl. seem to have beeu meant in the sense “‘to the
other deities that may exist in addition to those
already known,” but au inscription in the sing. could
not have this meaning. Perhaps a votive inscrip-
tion is meant, where the worshipper did not know
which god to thank for some benefit received. That
a slur on all the other Athenian objects of worship
was intended is, however, most improbable, but
St. Paul could not of course be expected to know
the technical meaning of such inscriptions. See
ATHENS. Burton Scorr Eastan


UNLEARNED, un-hir’ned: Acts 4 13 for dypap-
wares, agrdmmatos, lit. ‘illiterate.’ But nothing
more than “lacking technical rabbinical instruction”
seems to be meant (cf Jn 7 15). 1 Cor 14 16.23.24
for (é:drys, ididtés, “private person,” RVm “he that
is without gifts,” correctly expresses the sense (‘‘un-
believer” is hardly in point); also AV 2 Tim 2 23;
2 Pet 3 16 (RV “ignorant’’).


UNLEAVENED, un-lev’’nd.
PASSOVER; SACRIFICE IN THE OT.


See LEavEN;


UNNATURAL VICE, un-nat’i-ral vis. See


Crimes; PUNISHMENTS.


UNNI, uni (39, ‘unni, meaning unknown):

(1) One of “the twelve brethren” (so Curtis for
RV “brethren of the second degree’) appointed as
singers (1 Ch 16 18.20)...

(2) In Neh 12 9 (Kethibh “SY, ‘unnd) =RV Unno
(q.v.).


UNNO, un’6 (189, ‘unnd; LXX omits the name,
but in & a later hand has added "Iava, Iand; the
Keré of the MT has "5¥, ‘unni, as in 1 Ch 15 18,
whence AV “Unni’’): A Levite who returned with
Zerubbabel (Neh 12 9).


UNPARDONABLE, un-pir’d’n-a-b’l, SIN. See
BLASPHEMY.


UNQUENCHABLE, un-kwench’a-b’], FIRE (wip
aoBerros, pur dsbestos): The phrase occurs in Mt
3 12 and its || Lk 3 17 in the words of the Bap-
tist on the Messianic Judgment: ‘The chaff he will
burn up with unquenchable fire’; but also on the
lips of Christ Himself in Mk 9 48, where the
‘“unquenchable fire’ is equated with ‘“Gehenna”
(q.v.). The same idea lies in ver 48, ‘The fire is not
quenched” (ow sbénnutai), and is implied in the
numerous allusions to fire as the instrument of
punishment and destruction in the Gospels and other
parts of the NT (eg. “the Gehenna of fire,” Mt
5 22m, etc; “furnace of fire,” Mt 18 40.42.50; “eter-
nal fire,’ Mt 25 41; cf also2 Thess 1 8; 2 Pet 3
7; Jude ver 7; Rev 19 20; 20 10.14.15; 21.8). For
OT analogies cf Isa 1 31; 34 10; 66 24; Jer 4 4;
7 20; 17 27; 21 12; Ezk 20 47.48. The language
is obviously highly metaphorical, conveying the
idea of an awful and abiding judgment, but is not
to be pressed as teaching a destruction iu the sense
of annihilation of the wicked. An unquenchable
fire is not needed for a momentary act of destruc-
tion. Even in the view of Rev. Edward White the
wicked survive the period of judgment to which
these terms relate. See PUNISHMENT, EVERLASTING.

JAMES ORR


UNTEMPERED, un-tem’pérd (SDI, taphél):
Used of mortar in Ezk 13 10-15; 22 28. Taphal
probably refers to mortar made with clay instead
of slaked lime. In the interior of Pal and Syria
walls are still commonly built of small stones or
mud bricks, and then smeared over with clay mortar.
The surface is rubbed smooth and is attractive in
appearance. This coating prolongs the life of the
ee requires yearly attention if the wall is to
stand.

Ezekiel uses the practice to typify the work of
false prophets. They build up stories and make
them plausible by an outward semblance to truth,
while, in fact, they are flimsy, unreliable prophecies,
resembling the walls described above, which can be
broken down by a push or a heavy rain storm.

James A. Patcu

UNTOWARD, un-té’érd, un-térd’ (ckodtds,
skoliés): Appears only in Acts 2 40, AV “Save
yourselves from this untoward generation.” It
means ‘‘perverse,”’ “wilful,”’ “crooked,” and is so
trd in RV: “this crooked generation” (apé tés
geneds tés skolids taiités). AV headings to Isa 28
and Hos 6 have “untowardness.’”” This now obso-
lete term probably derived its orgin from the idea
of the heart that was not inclined toward the Di-
vine will and teaching. Hence “not-toward,” or
“untoward.”

UNWALLED, un-wiéld’. See Vinnace; WALL.

UNWASHEN, un-wosh’n (awqros, dniptos):
Occurs only twice in the NT, not at all in the Heb
or Gr OT (Mt 15 20=Mk 7 2). Jesus is here de-
nouncing the traditionalism of the scribes and Phari-
sees. Uncleanness, to them, was external and
purification was ceremouial. Hence the Pharisaic
view that the hands became unclean (religiously,
not physically), and so before meals must be cleansed
(religiously) by washing, which consisted in two
affusions and must extend up to the wrist, else the
hand was still unclean. Jewish tradition traced
this custom back to Solomon (see Shabbath 14b,
end), but the first unmistakable occurrence of the
custom is in the Sib Or (3 591-93), where the hands
are said to be washed in connection with prayer
and thanksgiving. The schools of Shammai and
Hillel, though usually differing on points of tradition,
agreed on the washing of hands as necessary for
ceremonial purification (having reached this agree-
rent in the early part of Jesus’ life). See Purrry;
UNCLEANNESS.

Lrrerature.—Broadus, Comm. on Mt (15 2-20);
Gould, Swete, comms. on Mk (7 2);_Edersheim, The
Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah, II, 8 ff; Schtirer,
HJP, div I, vol I, §25 (‘Seribism”).

Cuartes B. WILLIAMS

UNWORTHILY, un-wir’thi-li: 1 Cor 11 27.29
AV for dvatiws, anazids. In ver 29, RV, on con-
vincing textual evidence, has omitted the word,
which is a needless gloss (cf RV’s tr of the whole
verse). In ver 27 ARV has changed “unworthily”
to “in an unworthy manner,” a rather pointless
alteration.


UNWRITTEN, un-rit’n, SAYINGS. See
AGRAPHA.


UPHARSIN, 0-far’sin (ODI, aphargtn). See
Mens, Mens, Texen, Upuarsin.


UPHAZ, i'faz (TDIN, ’aphdz): A gold-bearing
region, mentioned in Jer 10 9; Dnl 10 5, other-
wise unknown. Perhaps in both passages Ophir,
which differs in one consonant only, should be read.
In the second passage, instead of “gold of Uphaz,”
perhaps “gold and fine gold” (aphaz) should be


3039


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Unlearned
Uriah, Urijah


read. The Jerus Talm states that there were seven
kinds of gold, good gold, pure, precious, gold of
Uphaz, purified, refined, and red gold of Parvaim
(2 Ch 3 6). That of Uphaz, which is so called
from the place from which it comes, resembles
“flashes of fire fed with pitch” (M. Schwab, The
Talmud of Jerusalem, V, 207 f).
Tuomas Hunter Weir

UPPER CHAMBER, up’ér chim’bér, UPPER
ROOM (759, ‘altyah [2 K 1 2], etc; dvdyeov,
andgeon [Mk 14 15; Lk 22 12], twepdov, huperdon
[Acts 1 13; 9 37.39; 20 8]): In Jgs 3 20 ERV
renders “‘summer parlor’ and in m ‘Heb ‘Upper
chamber of cooling.’” This was probably a roof-
chamber. The “upper chamber” of Ahaziah in
2 K 1 2 was evidently in the 2d story of the build-
ing. On the “upper chambers’ of the temple (1 Ch
28 11; 2 Ch 3 9), see TemptE. The “large upper
room”’ which was the scene of the Last Supper, with
that in Acts 1 13, was also plainly an upper-story
chamber. That in Acts 20 8 was in the 3d story
(at Miletus, a Gr city). See also Houses.

JAMES ORR

UR, dr (AN, ’dr, “flame”; B, Z6up, Sthir, &,
"Qed, Ord): Father of Eliphal, one of David’s
“mighty men,” in 1 Ch 11 35; in the || 2 S 23
34 called ‘“Ahasbai.”


UR OF THE CHALDEES, kal’déz (B7™"WD “AN,
dr kasdim; 4 xapa [tdv] XedSalov, hé chéra [tsn]
Chaldatén): For more than 2,000 years efforts have
been made to identify the site of this city. The
writers of the LXX, either being unfamiliar with the
site, or not considering it a city, wrote chéra, “land,”
instead of Ur. Eupolemus, who lived about 150
BC, spoke of it as being a city of Babylonia called
Camarina, which he said was called by some Ouria.
St. Stephen (Acts 7 2.4) regarded the place as being
in Mesopotamia. The Talm, however, as well as
some later Arab. writers, regarded Erech (LXX
"Opex, Orek) as the city. The cuneiform writing
of this city, Uru“, would seem to support this view,
but Erech is mentioned in Gen. Ammianus Mar-
cellinus identified the city with the castle of Ur in
the desert between Hatra and Nisibis, but this was
only founded in the time of the Persians. Owing
to its nearness to Haran, and because St. Stephen
placed it in Mesopotamia, Urfa or Oorfa, named
Edessa by the Greeks, has also im modern times
been identified as the city. But Seleucus is credited
with having built this city.

The most generally accepted theory at the present
time is that Ur is to be identified with the modern
Mugheir (or Mughayyar, ‘‘the pitchy”) in Southern
Babylonia, called Urumma, or Urima, and later
Ural in the inscriptions. This borders on the dis-
trict which in the Ist millennium BC was called
Chaldaea (Kalda). :

This, some hold, accords with the view of Eu-
polemus, because Camarina may be from the Arab.
name of the moon kamar, which refers perhaps to
the fact that the ancient city was dedicated to
the worship of the moon-god. Another argument
which has been advanced for this identification is
that Haran, the city to which Terah migrated, was
also a center of moon-god worship. _This, however,
is precarious, because Urumma or Urima in Abra-
ham’s day was a Sumerian center, and the seat of
Nannar-worship, whereas Haran was Semitic, and
was dedicated to Sin. Although these two deities
in later centuries were identified with each other,
gtill the argument seems to have little weight, as
other deities were also prominently worshipped in
those cities, particularly Haran, which fact reminds
us also that the Talm says Terah worshipped no
less than 12 deities.


It should be stated that there are scholars who
hold, with the LXX, that Ur means, not a city, but
perhaps a land in which the patriarch pastured his
flocks, as for instance, the land of Urior Ura (Akkad).
The designation “of the Chaldaeans’” was in this
ease intended to distinguish it from the land where
they were not found. i

Still another identification is the town Uru
(Mar-tu) near Sippar, a place of prominence in the
time of Abraham, but which was lost sight of in sub-
sequent periods (cf Amurru, 167). This fact would
account for the failure to identify the place in the
late pre-Christian centuries, when Urima or Ura
still flourished. Western Semites—for the name
Abram is not Bab—lived in this city in large num-
bers in the age when the patriarch lived. The Bab
contract lit. from this, as well as other sites, is full
of names from the western Sem lands, Aram and
Amurru. This fact makes it reasonable that the
site should be found in Babylonia; but, as stated,
although the arguments are by no means weighty,
more scholars at the present favor Mugheir than
any other site. A. T. Cuay


URBANE, tr’b4n, -bain’. See Urpanvs.


URBANUS, dr-ba’nus (OipBavds, Ourbands; AV
Urbane): A common slave name. Gifford says
that it 1s found ‘as here, in juxtaposition with Am-
pliatus, in a list of imperial freedmen, on an in-
scription, 115 AD.’’ He was a member of the
Christian community at Rome to whom Paul sent
greetings. Paul calls him “our fellow-worker in
Christ” (Rom 16 9). “The ‘our’ (as opposed to
‘my,’ ver 3) seems to suggest that all Christian work-
ers had a common helper in Urbanus” (Denney).


URI, fri, 60’ri OER PR in 1 K 4 19], ’art,
‘fiery,’ unless the word be contracted for M778,
artyah, “Uriah”’):

(1) Son of Hur, and father of Bezalel (Ex 31 2;
36 30; 38 22; 1 Ch 2 20; 2 Ch 1 5).

(2) Father of Geber, one of Solomon’s 12 pro-
vision officers (1 K 4 19; LXX BA, ’Aéal, Adat).

(3) A porter who had married a foreign wife
(Ezr 10 24; LXX BR, ’23088, Odouith, A, ’Q8ové,
Odoué, Luc., Ovplas, Ourtas).


URIAH, t-ri’a, URIJAH, o-ri‘ja (TEN, ari-
yah, in Jer 26 20 172748, ’ariyahi, “flame of Jeh’’
or “my light is Jeh’; LXX and NT Oipleltas,
Ourleias, with variants; AV has Urijah in 2 Kk 16
10-16; Neh 3 4.21; 8 4; Jer 26 20):

(1) A Hittite, who had settled in Jerus at the
time of David and who had entered David’s serv-
ice. He had become a worshipper of Jeh (judging
from the usual interpretations of his name) and had
married a Heb wife, BATH-sHEBA (q.v.). David’s
sin with this woman occurred while Uriah was en-
gaged in warfare, and David had him recalled to
Jerus in order to hide what had transpired. Uriah,
however, felt himself bound by the consecration of
a soldier (cf 1 8 21 5; Dt 23 107) and refused to
do violence to his religion, so that David’s ruse was
in vain. (The point is missed here by speaking of
Uriah’s ‘chivalrous determination,’ as in HDB,
IV, 837.) David, in desperation, wrote Joab in-
structions that were virtually a command to have
Uriah murdered, and these instructions were duly
carried out (25 11 2-27). The inclusion of
Uriah’s name in the list of the “mighty men” in
28 23 391 Ch 11 41 is proof of his reputation
as a soldier, and the name is found also in 2 S 12
9.10.15; 1 K 15 5; Mt 16. On the occurrence in
Mt see esp. Heffern, JBL, XXXT, 69 ff (1912).

(2) A priest under Ahaz, who carried into effect


Urias
Usury


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


the latter’s commands to introduce an Assyr altar
into the Temple and to use it for the sacrifices (2 K
16 10-16; see ALTar). The same Uriah appears in
Isa 8 2 as one of the two “faithful witnesses” taken
by Isaiah in the matter of Maher-shalal-hash-baz.
This description has seemed to many to conflict
with Uriah’s compliancy in obeying Ahaz, but it
must be remembered that (a) “faithful witness”
means simply “one whom the people will believe,’’
and (5) the articles in the sanctuary were not held
ag immutably sacred in the time of Ahaz as they
were in later days. The omission of Uriah’s name
from the list in 1 Ch 6 10-14 is probably without
significance, as Ch records only nine names from
Solomon to the exile, showing that there must be
many omissions. The corresponding list in Jos,
Ani, X, viii, 6, contains 18 names, including Uriah’s.

(3) A son of Shemaiah, of Kiriath-jearim, and
a contemporary of Jeremiah. He was a prophet,
and his prophecy agreed with Jeremiah’s in all
regards. Jehoiakim, roused to anger, arrested
him, even at the trouble of a pursuit into Egypt,
put him to death and desecrated his body (Jer 26
20-23). The story is told partly in order to show
the greatness of Jeremiah’s dangers, partly to bear
record of the goodness of AHIKAM (q.v.), Jeremiah’s
protector.

(4) A priest, the father of Meremoru (q.v.) (Ear
8 33; Neh 3 4.21; 1 Esd 8 62 [‘‘Urias,” AV
“Tri?]), :

(5) One of those on Ezra’s right hand at the
reading of the Law (Neh 8 4; 1 Esd 9 43
[‘‘Urias’”’]). Quite possibly identical with (4) above.

Burton Scotr Easron

URIAS, ti-ri’as (Odpelas, Oureias; Bb, Ovpla,
Ouria, A, Ort, Ourt; AV Ini):

(1) The father of Marmoth (1 Esd 8 62)=
“Uriah” of Ezr 8 33, and perhaps identical with

(2) Bb A, Oureias, Ourias=one of those who
stood on Ezra’s right hand as he read the Law
(1 Esd 9 43)=“Uriah” of Neh 8 4.


URIAS (Oiplas, Ourfas): AV; Grform of “Uriah”
(thus RV). The husband of Bath-sheba (Mt 1 6).


URIEL, Wri-el NSN, 'ar7’al, “fame of El
[God],” or “El is my light’’):

(1) A Kohathite, said in 1 Ch 15 5 to be the
chief of the sons of Kohath (1 Ch 6 24 [Heb ver
9]; 16 5.11). He corresponds to Zephaniah in the
pedigree of Heman in 1 Ch 6 33-38 (Heb 18-23).
See Curtis, Chron., 130 f. ;

(2) A man of Gibeah, and father of Micaiah the
mother of King Abijah of Judah (2 Ch 13 2).

(3) The archangel (En 20 2, etc). See next
article.


URIEL (Oipifd, Ouriél, “fire or flame of God”
or ‘‘my light is God”): Called only in 2 Esd an
“angel,” except 2 Esd 4 36 where RV and AV
rightly give ‘‘Jeremiel the archangel” for AV ‘Uriel
the archangel,” but elsewhere known as one of the
four chief archangels. He was the angel who in-
structed Ezra (2 Esd 4 1; 5 20; 10 28). In En
20 2 Uriel is the angel who is “over the world and
Tartarus” (6 érl roi xkécpov Kai Tob Traprdpov, ho ept
to: késmou kat tov tartdérou), and as such is the
conductor to Enoch in the world below, the secrets
of which he explains. Cf also (Gr) 191; 21 5.
In the (Lat) “Life of Adam and Eve,” 48 (ed W.
Meyer in Abhand. d. Bayer, Akad. der Wiss., XIV,
1878, 250), Uriel (Oriel) accompanied Michael when
at God’s bidding he wrapped the bodies of Adam
and Abel in three linen sheets and buried them in
Paradise. In the lost ‘Prayer of Joseph’ Uriel is
the angel who wrestles and converses with Jacob


3040


and knows the secrets of heaven (as in En those of
Tartarus), but stands only 8th in rank, whereas in
(Gr) En 20 2 ff he is the ist of the six (or seven)
archangels. In Sib Or 2 229 he is intrusted with
the judgment of the Titans. Cf Milton, Paradise
Lost, ITI, 690, “regent of the sun, and held the
sharpest sighted Spirit of allin heaven.” __
(2) “Uriel? AV=RV and AVm “Jeremiel.”


S. Aneus
URIJAH. See Urnian, Urnisag.


URIM AND THUMMIM, wrim and thum’im
(DOAN) DOAN, ha-’arim wha-tummim (art.
omitted in Ezr 2 63; Neh 7 65},
perhaps “‘light and perfection,” as in-
tensive plurals): Articles not specifi-
cally described, placed in (next to, or on
[Heb ’el; LXX epi; Sam-Heb ‘al]) the high priest’s
breastplate, called the “‘breast-plate of decision”
(EV “judgment”) (Ex 28 30; Lev 8 8). Their
possession was one of the greatest distinctions con-
ferred upon the priestly family (Dt 33 8; Ecclus
AB 10), and seems to have been connected with the
function of the priests as the mouthpiece of Jeh, as
well as with the ceremonial side of the service (Ex
28 30; cf Arab. kahin, ‘“‘soothsayer’’).

Through their use, the nature of which is a matter
of conjecture, the Divine will was sought in national

crises, and apparently the future fore-


1. Defini-
tion


2. Use in told, guilt or innocence established,
the OT and, according to one theory, Jand

divided (Babha’ Bathra’ 122a; Sanh.
16a). Thus, Joshua was to stand before Eleazar


who was to inquire for him after the judgment
(decision) of the Urim (Nu 27 21). It seems that
this means was employed by Joshua in the matter of
Achan (Josh 7 14.18) and overlooked in the matter
of the Gibeonites (9 14). Though not specifically
mentioned, the same means is in all probability
referred to in the accounts of the Israelites consult-
ing Jeh after the death of Joshua in their warfare
(Jgs 11.2; 20 18.26-28). The Danites in their
migration ask counsel of a priest, perhaps in a simi-
lar manner (Jgs 18 5.7). It is not impossible that
even the prophet Samuel was assisted by the Urim
in the selection of a king (1 8 10 20-22). During
Saul’s war with the Philis, he made inquiry of God
with the aid of the priest (1 S 14 36.37), Ahijah,
the son of Ahitub, who at that time wore the ephod
(1S 14 3). Although on two important occasions
Jeh refused to answer Saul through the Urim (1 8
14 37; 28 6), it appears (from the LXX version of
18 14 41; see below) that he used the Urim and
Thummim successfully in ascertaining the cause of
the Divine displeasure. The accusation of Doe
and the answer of the high priest (1 S 22 10.13.15)
suggest that David began to inquire of Jeh through
the priesthood, even while he was an officer of Saul.
After the massacre of the priests in Nob, Abiathar
fled to the camp of David (ver 20), taking with him
the ephod (including apparently the Urim and
Thummim, 23 6) which David used frequently
during his wanderings (23 2-4.9-12; 30 7.8), and
also after the death of Saul (28 21; 5 19.23;
211). After the days of David, prophecy was in
the ascendancy, and, accordingly, we find no clear
record of the use of the Urim and Thummim in the
days of the later kings (cf, however, Hos 3 4;
Ecclus 33 3). Still, in post-exilic times we find
the difficult question of the ancestral right of cer-
tain priests to eat of the most holy things reserved
till there would stand up a priest with Urim and
with Thummim (Ezr 2 68; Neh 7 65; 1 Esd 5
40; Sotah 48b).

Though Jos sets the date for the obsolescence of
the Urim and Thummim at 200 years before his
time, in the days of John Hyrcanus (Ant, III,


3041


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Urias
Usury


viii, 9), the Talm reckons the Urim and Thum-
mim among the things lacking in the second Temple

(Sétah 9 10; Yoma’ 21b; Yeru Kid
3. Older 66b). Both Jos and the Talm identify
(Tradition- the Urim and Thummim with the
al) Views _ stones of the breastplate. The former

simply states that the stones shone
whenever the sh*khindh was present at a sacrifice
or when the army proceeded to battle.

“God declared beforehand by those twelve stones
which the high priest bare on his breast, and which were
inserted into his breastplate, when they should be vic-
torious in battle; for so great a splendor shone forth
from them before the army began to march, that all the


people were sensible of God's being present for their
assistance’ (Ant, ITI, vili, 9).


The Talmudic explanation suggests that by the illumi-
nation of certain letters the Divine will was revealed,
and that in order to have a complete alphabet, in addi-
tion to the names of the tribes, the breastplate bore the
names of the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
the words shibht2 y®shirun. A later scholar even sug-
gests that the letters moved from their places to form
words (Yéma’ %8a,b). Characteristically enough the
Talm prescribes rules and suggestions for the consul-
tation of the non-existing Urim and Thummim: that
the one asking must be a man of public importance, that
the question must pertain to the public weal; that the
ee must face the sh¢khinah (west); that one question

e asked at a time, and so forth (ib).

It is difficult to tell just how much, if anything,
of a lingering tradition is reflected in the view that
the Urim and Thummim and stones of the breast-
plate were identical. In the absence of other an-
cient clews, however, it is not safe to reject even
the guesses of the Jews of the second temple in
favor of our own. We do not even know the mean-
ing of the word hishen, so confidently tr4 “pouch”
or “receptacle” by opponents of the older view, with-
out any basis whatever. On the other hand the
theory of identification was widespread. Even
Philo leans toward it in his De Monarchia, although
in his Vita Mosis (iii) he seems to have in mind two
small symbols representing Light and Truth em-
broidered on the cloth of the hoshen or hung round
the neck of the high priest, similar to the Egyp
symbol of justice. Another very old view is that
the Urim and Thummim consisted of a writing
containing the Ineffable Name (Pseudo-Jonathan
on Ex 28 20; cf Rashi and Nachmanides ad
loc.).

The view most generally held today is that the
Urim and Thummim were two sacred lots, one

indicating an affirmative or favorable


4. Recent answer, the other a negative or un-
(Critical) favorable answer (Michaelis, Ewald,
Views Wellhausen, Robertson Smith, Driver,


G. F. Moore, Kennedy, Muss-Arnolt).
The chief support of this view is found, not in the
MT, but in the reconstruction by Wellhausen and
Driver of 1 S 14 41 ff on the basis of LXX: “If
this fault be in me or in Jonathan, my son, give
Urim [dés délous}, and if it be in thy people Israel,
give Thummim [dds hosidtéta].” The following sen-
tence clearly suggests the casting of lots, possibly
lots on which the names of Saul and Jonathan were
written, and “Jonathan” was taken. Efforts have
been made to support the view that the Urim
and Thummim themselves were sacred lots on the
basis of analogous customs among other peoples
(e.g. pre-Islamic Arabs [Moore in ZB] and Babylo-
nians [W. Muss-Arnolt in Jew Ene and AJSL,
July, 1900]). It must be borne in mind, however,
that whatever the lot-theory has to recommend it,
it is inconsistent not only with the post-Bib. tradi-
tions, but also with the Bib. data. For those who
are not inclined to give much weight to the passages
connecting the Urim and Thummim with the high
priest’s apparel (Ex 28 30; Lev 8 8, both “P”),
there is of course no difficulty in dissociating the
two, in spite of the fact that for the use of this


system of divination the one thing necessary in the
historical passages on which they rely seems to be
the ephod. Still, if we are to think of two lots, one
called and possibly marked ‘“‘Urim” and the other
“Thummim,” it is difficult to get any meaning from
the statement (1 S 14 37; 28 6) that Jeh did not
answer Saul on certain occasions, unless indeed we
surmise for the occasion the existence of a third
nameless blank lot. A more serious difficulty arises
from the fact that the answers ascribed to the Urim
and Thummim are not always the equivalent of
“yes” or “no” (cf Jgs 1 2; 20 18; 1S 22 10; 28
5 23; 21 1), even if we omit from consideration
the instances where an individual is apparently
pointed out from all Israel (cf the instances of the
detection of Achan and the selection of Saul with
that of Jonathan, above).
If we turn to etymology for assistance, we are not
only on uncertain ground, but when Bab and other
foreign words are brought in to bolster
5. Ety- up a theory about anything so little
mology understood as the Urim and Thummim,
we are on dangerous ground. Thus
Muss-Arnolt is ready with Bab words (urtu, ‘““com-
mand,” and tamitu, “‘oracular decision’’); others
suggest tmé, the Egyp image of justice; still others
connect Urim with ‘drar, “‘to curse,” in order to
make it an antonym of tummim, ‘‘faultlessness.’’
It is generally admitted, however, that, as pointed
in the MT, the words mean “‘light’”’ and “perfection,”
on the basis of which the Talm (Yémda’ 73b) as well
as most of the Gr VSS tr? them (délésis kat alétheia;
phitismot, kat teleiététes), although Symmachus in
one place (Dt 33 8), who is followed by the Vulg,
connects Urim with the word Térdh and under-
stands it to mean “‘doctrine’”’ (teleiétés kat didaché).
Though loth to add to the already overburdened
list of conjectures about these words, it appears to
the present writer that if Urim and Thummim are
antonyms, and Urim means “light,” it is by no
means difficult to connect Thummim with darkness,
inasmuch as there is a host of Heb stems based on
the root -im, all indicating concealing, closing up,
and even darkness (ef CON, DON, Onn, Bony,
TaD, FOU [see Job 40 13], ONO and even Dan
and cognate Arab. words in BDB). This explana-
tion would make Urim and Thummim mean ‘4llumi-
nated” and “dark” (cf Gaster in Hastings, ERE,
IV, 813), and, while fitting well with the ancient
theories or traditions, would not be excluded by
the recent theory of lots of opposite purport.
Natuan Isaacs
USURY, wWzht-ri: The Heb law concerning ex-
action of interest upon loans was very humane.
Hebrews were to lend to their brethren
without interest (Ex 22 25; Lev 25
36f; Dt 23 19f). This, however,
did not apply to a stranger (Dt 23 20).
Two stems are used in the OT, rendered in AV
“usury,” in RV better rendered ‘interest’: (1)
vb. TP) , nashah (Ex 22 25; Isa 24 2; Jer 16 10),
and the noun form, NWA, mashsha’ (Neh 6 7.10);
(2) a stronger and more picturesque word, JW),
nashakh, ‘to bite,” “to vex,” and so ‘to lend on
interest” (Dt 23 19.20); noun form JP}, neshekh
(Ex 22 25; Lev 26 36f; Ps 15 5; Prov 28 8;
Ezk 18 8.13.17; 22 12). It would be easy to go
from a fair rate of interest to an unfair rate, as seen
in the history of the word ‘‘usury,’”’ which has come
to mean an exorbitant or unlawfulinterest. Abuses
arose during the exile. Nehemiah forced the people
after the return to give back exactions of ‘‘one hun-
dredth,” or 1 per cent monthly which they took
from their brethren (Neh 6 10f; ef Ezk 22 12).
A good citizen of Zion is one who put not out his


1. In the
OT


Uta
Uzziah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3042


money to usury (Ps 15 5). One who is guilty of
this comes to disaster (Prov 28 8).
The Gr word is rbxes, tékos, lit. “offspring,” inter-
est springing out of the principal. Money lenders
were numerous among the Jews in
2. Inthe Christ’s day, and, in the parable of the
NT Talents, He represents the lord of the
unprofitable servant as rebyking the
sloth in the words, ‘I should have received mine
own with interest’? (Mt 25 27; Lk 19 23 RV).
Epwarp Bacsy PoLLarp
UTA, ita (Otra, Ould): “The sons of Uta’ re-
turned with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 5 30); wanting
in the || Ezr 2 45; Neh 7 48.


UTHAI, @’-thi, i’tha-1 (099, ‘whay, meaning
uncertain):

(1) A descendant of Judah, of the clan of Perez
(1 Ch 9 4)=“‘Athaiah” of Neh il 4.

(2) Son of Bigvai (Ezr 8 14); called ‘“Uthi”’ in
1 Esd 8 40.


UTHI, i’thi (A, 0801, Outhi, B, Ovros, Outori):
One of the sons of Bago (Bigvai) who returned at
the head of his family with Ezra (1 Esd 8 40)=
“Uthai” of Ezr 8 14.


UTMOST, ut’mist, UTTERMOST, ut’é-most,
SEA. See MrniTERRANEAN SBA.


UTTERMOST, ut’@-mist: A pleonastic com-
pound of a comparative (“utter”; cf “outer’) and
a superlative (“most”), in AV used interchange-
ably with the ordinary superlative forms ‘‘utmost”’
(cf Mt 12 42; Lk 11 31) and “outmost” (cf Ex
26 4.10). RV adds still another form, ‘outer-
most,” in 2 K 7 5.8 (AV “uttermost’”’). RV has
made a few changes to secure a more accurate
tr (Jer 9 26; Joel 2 20, etc) or to give uniformity
(Ex 26 4; Mt 5 26; 12 42, etc), but for the most
part has left AV undisturbed.


UZ, uz (PI, ‘ae, YA PIS


“QE, Ox, Abctns, Ausitis):

(1) In Gen 10 23 Uz is the eldest son of Aram
and grandson of Shem, while in 1 Ch 1 17 Uz is
the son of Shem. LXX inserts a
passage which supplies this lacking
name. As the tables of the nations
in Gen 10 are chiefly geographical and
ethnographical, Uz seems to have been the name
of a district or nation colonized by or descended
from Semites of the Aramaean tribe or family.

(2) The son of Nahor by Milcah, and elder
brother of Buz (Gen 2 21). Here the name is
doubtless personal and refers to an individual who
was head of a clan or tribe kindred to that of
Abraham.

(3) A son of Dishan, son of Seir the Horite (Gen
36 28), and personal name of a Horite or perhaps
of mixed Horite and Aramaean blood.

(4) The native land and home of Job (Job 1 1),
and so situated as to be in more or Jess proximity
to the tribe of the Temanites (2 11), the Shuhites
(2 11), the Naamathites (2 11), the Buzites (32 2),
and open to the inroads of the Chaldaeans (1 17),
and the Sabaeans (1 15 RV), as well as exposed to
the great Arabian Desert (1 19). See next article.

(5) A kingdom of some importance somewhere in
Southern Syria and not far from Judaea, having a
number of kings (Jer 25 20).

(6) A kingdom, doubtless the same as that of
Jer 25 20 and inhabited by or in subjection to the
Edomites (Lam 4 21), and hence not far from
Edom. James JosiaH REEVE


ere ‘uc; "Qs, Os,


Biblical
Data


UZ (PAP , ‘ue; LXX Aictns, Ausitis; Vulg Ausi-
tis): The home of the patriarch Job (Job 1 1; Jer
25 20, “all the kings of the land of Uz’; Lam 4 21,
“daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the land of
Uz’). The land of Uz was, no doubt, the pasturing-
ground inhabited by one of the tribes of that name,
if indeed there be more than one tribe intended.
The following are the determining data occurring in
the Book of Job. The country was subject to raids
by Chaldaeans and Sabacans (1 15.17); Job’s three
friends were a Temanite, a Naamathite and a Shu-
hite (2 11); Elihu was a Buzite (82 2); and_Job
himself is called one of the children of the East
(Kedhem).- The Chaldaeans (kasdim, descendants of
Chesed, son of Nahor, Gen 22 22) inhabited Meso-
potamia; a branch of the Sabaeans also appears
to have taken up its abode in Northern Arabia (see
SuEeBa). Teman (Gen 36 11) is often synonymous
with Edom. The meaning of the designation Na-
amathite is unknown, but Shuah was a son of
Keturah the wife of Abraham (Gen 25 2), and so
connected with Nahor. Shuah is identified with
Suhu, mentioned by Tiglath-pileser I as lying one
day’s journey from Carchemish; and a “land of
Uzza” is named by Shalmaneser IT as being in the
same neighborhood. Buzisa brother of Uz (‘“Huz,”
Gen 22 21) and son of Nahor. Esar-haddon, in an
expedition toward the W., passed through Bazu
and Hazu, no doubt the same tribes. Abraham
sent his children, other than Isaac (so including
Shuah), “eastward to the land of Kedhem” (Gen 26
6). These factors point to the land of Uz as lying
somewhere to the N.E. of Pal. Tradition supports
sush a site. Jos says “Uz founded Trachonitis
and Damascus” (Ant, I, vi, 4). Arabian tradition
places the scene of Job’s sufferings in the Hauran
at Deir Eiyib (Job’s monastery) near Nawa.
There is a spring there, which he made to flow by
striking the rock with his foot (Koran 38 41), and
his tomb. The passage in the Koran is, nowever,
also made to refer to Job’s Well (cf JERUSALEM).


Literatore.—Talm of Jerus (Fr. tr by M. Schwab,
VII, 289) contains a discussion of the date of Job; Le
Strange, Pal under the Moslems, 220-23, 427, 515.

5 Toomas Hunter WEIR

UZAI, zi, i’z4-i (OTN, 'azay, meaning un-
known): Father of Palal (Neh 3 25).


UZAL, i’zal (OTIN, 'aeal): Sixth son of Joktan
(Gen 10 27; 1 Ch 1 21). Uzal as the name of a
place perhaps occurs in Ezk 27 19. RV reads,
“Vedan and Javan traded with yarn for thy wares.”
Here an obscure verbal form, m*’dzzdl, is taken
to mean “something spun,” “yarn.” But with a
very slight change we may read mé’azal= “from
Uzal.”

The name is identical with the Arab. ‘Auzdal, the
old capital of Yemen, later called San‘a’. San‘a’
is described as standing high above sea-level in a
fertile land, and traversed by a river bed which in
the rainy season becomes a torrent. Under the
Himyarite dynasty it succeeded Zafar as the resi-
dence of the Tubba'‘s. If it is the same place as the
Audzara or Ausara of the classics, it is clear why
Arab. geographers dwell upon its great antiquity.
The most celebrated feature of the town was Ghum-
dan, an immense palace, the building of which tradi-
tion ascribes to Shorahbil, the 6th known king of the
Himyarites. According to Ibn Khaldoun this
building had four fronts in color red, white, yellow
and green respectively. In the midst rose a tower
of seven stories, the topmost being entirely of marble
(Caussin de Perceval, Essai, II, 75). In the 7th
cent. AD the town became the capital of the Zaidite
Imams, and the palace was destroyed toward the
middle of that century by order of the caliph Oth-
man. A. 8. Furton


3043


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Uta
Uzziah


UZZA, uz’a, UZZAH, uz’a (IY, ‘uzzdh [2 8 6
6-8], otherwise JZ, ‘uzza’, meaning uncertain):

(1) One of those who accompanied the ark on
its journey from Kiriath-jearim toward David’s cita-
del (2 8 6 3-8, “Uzzah”=1 Ch 13 7-11, “Uzza’’).
From the text of 2 8 6 3-8, as generally corrected
with the help of LXX, it is supposed that Uzzah
walked by the side of the ark while Ahio (or “his
brother’) went in front of it. The word which
describes what happened to the oxen is variously
tr?; RV has “stumbled”; others render it, “They
let the oxen slip,’’ “The oxen shook [the ark].”
Uzzah, whatever it be that took place, caught hold
of the ark; something else happened, and Uzzah
died on thespot. If the word tr‘ “rashness” (RVm)
in ver 7 (not “error” as EV) is to be kept in the text,
Uzzah would be considered guilty of too little rever-
ence for the ark; but the words ‘for [his] rashness”
are wanting in LXX B, while 1 Ch 13 10 has
‘because he put forth his hand to the ark,” and
further no such Heb word as we find here is known
tous. The older commentators regarded the death
as provoked by non-observance of the provisions
about the ark as given in the Pent, but it is generally
believed today that these were not known in
David’s time.

What is clear is that, Uzzah’s act led to an acci-
dent of some kind, and the event was regarded by
David as inauspicious, so that the journey with the
ark was discontinued. We know how the OT
writers represent events as due to Divine inter-
vention where we would perhaps discern natural
causes.

(2) The garden of Uzza (2 K 21 18.26). Manas-
seh the king is said (ver 18) to have been “buried in
the garden of his own house, in the garden of Uzza’’;
and Amon (ver 26) ‘‘was buried in his sepulchre in
the garden of Uzza.” 1t has been suggested that
“Usza=“Uzziah” (MY, ‘uzztyah)=“Azariah”
(cf 2 K 16 1-6). The garden of Manasseh would
then be identical with that of Uzziah, by whom it
was originally laid out. 2 Ch 33 20 does not
mention the garden.

(3) Son of Shimei, a Merarite (1 Ch 6 29 [Heb
14]), RV “Uzzah,” AV “Uzza.”

(4) A descendant of Ehud, and head of a Ben-
jamite family (1 Ch 8 7, “Uzza’). Hogg, JQR,
102 ff (1893) (see Curtis, Chron., 156-59), finds a
proper name “Iglaam” in ver 6, and so reads ‘and
Iglaam begat Uzza and Ahishahar.”’

(5) Head of a Nethinim family that returned
from Babylon (Ezr 2 49)=“Uzza” of Neh 7 51.

Davin Francis RoBerts


UZZEN-SHEERAH, uz’en-shé’é-ra (TINW FIR,
‘uzeén she’érah; LXX, instead of a place-name,
reads kal viot “Otdv: Lenpé, kat huiot Ozdn, Seérd,
“and the sons of Ozan, Sheera”; AV Uzzen-sherah,
u.-she’ra): As it stands in MT this is the name of a
town built by Sheerah, daughter of Ephraim, to
whom is attributed also the building of the two
Beth-horons (1 Ch 7 24). No satisfactory identi-
fication has been proposed. LXX suggests that
the text may have been tampered with.


UZZI, uz’i (42, ‘uzzi, perhaps “my strength’):

(1) A descendant of Aaron and high priest, un-
known apart from these sources (1 Ch 6 5.6.51
[Heb 5 31.32; 6 36]; Ezr 7 4).

(2) An eponym of a family of Issachar (1 Ch 7
(3) Head of a Benjamite family (1 Ch 7 7), or
more probably of a Zebulunite family (see Curtis,
Chron., 145-49). ets

(4) Father of Elah, a Benjamite (1 Ch 9 8),
perhaps the same as (5).


(5) A son of Bani and overseer of the Levites in
Jerus (Neh 11 22).

(6) Head of the priestly family of Jedaiah (Neh
12 19.42). Davip Francis RoBerts


UZZIA, u-zi'a (NY, ‘uzztyd’, “my strength is
Jeh”; see Uzztan): An Ashterathite and one of
David’s mighty men (1 Ch 11 44).


UZZIAH, vu-zi’a, 00-zi'a (AZARIAH) (4,
‘uaztyah [2 K 16 13.30; Hos 11; Am 11; Zec
14 5), WEID, ‘uzziyaha [2 K 16 32.34; sa
11; 61; 71; 2 Ch 26 1ff; 27 2]; also called
TY, ‘dzaryah [2 K 14 21; 15 1.7; 1 Ch 3
12), STI, ‘azaryaha [2 K 16 6.8]; "Ataplas,
Azarias, in K, elsewhere "Ot{as, Ozias; the sig-
nifications of the names are similar, the former
meaning “my strength is Jeh’’; the latter, ‘“Jeh
has helped.” 1t has been thought that the form
“Uzziah”’ may have originated by corruption from
the other. The history of the reign is given in 2
K 16 1-8 and 2 Ch 26):

Uzziah or Azariah, son of Amaziah, and 11th
king of Judah, came to the throne at the age of 16.
The length of his reign is given as 52
years. The chronological questions
raised by this statement are consid-
ered below. His accession may here
be provisionally dated in 783 BC. His father
Amaziah had met his death by popular violence
(2 K 14 19), but Uzziah seems to have been the
free and glad choice of the people (2 Ch 26 1).

The unpopularity of his father, owing to a great
military disaster, must ever have been present to

the mind of Uzziah, and early in his
2. Foreign reign he undertook and _ successfully
Wars carried through an expedition against

his father’s enemies of 20 years before,
only extending his operations over a wider area.
The Edomites, Philis and Arabians were succes-
sively subdued (these being members of a confeder-
acy which, in an earlier reign, had raided Jerus and
nearly extirpated the royal family, 2 Ch 21 16;
22 1); the port of Eloth, at the head of the Red
Sea, was restored to Judah, and the city rebuilt
(2 K 14 22; 2 Ch 26 2); the walls of certain
hostile towns, Gath, Jabneh and Ashdod, were
razed to the ground, and the inhabitants of Gur-baal
and Madan were reduced to subjection (2 Ch 26 6.7).
Even the Ammonites, E. of the Jordan, paid tribute
to Uzziah, and “his name spread abroad even to
the entrance to Egypt; for he waxed exceeding
strong’’ (ver 8).

Uzziah next turned his attention to securing the
defences of his capital and country. The walls of
Jerus were strengthened by ° towers
built at the corner gate, at the valley
gate, and at an angle in the wall (see
plan of Jerus in the writer’s Second
Temple in Jerus); military stations were also formed
in Philistia, and in the wilderness of the Negeb, and
these were supplied with the necessary cisterns for
rain storage (vs 6.10). The little realm had now
an extension and prosperity to which it had been a
stranger since the days of Solomon.

These successes came so rapidly that Uzziah had
hardly passed his 40th year when a great personal

calamity overtook him. 1n the earlier
4. Uzziah’s part of his career Uzziah had enjoyed


1. Acces-
sion


3. Home
Defences


Leprosy and profited by the counsels of Zech-
and Re- ariah, a man ‘who had understanding
tirement in the vision of God’? (2 Ch 26 5),


and during the lifetime of this godly
monitor “he set himself to seek God.” Now it
happened to him as with his grandfather Jehoash,
who, so long as his preserver Jehoiada lived, acted


Uzziel
Vanity, Vanities


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3044


admirably, but, when he died, behaved like an
ingrate, and slew his son (2 K 12 2; 2 Ch 24 2.
22). So now that Zechariah was gone, Uzziah’s
heart was lifted up in pride, and he trespassed against
Jeh. In the great kingdoms of the East, the kings
had been in the habit of exercising priestly as well
as royal functions. Elated with his prosperity,
Uazziah determined to exercise what he may have
thought was his royal prerogative in burning in-
cense on the golden altar of the temple. Azariah
the high priest, with 80 others, offered stout remon-
strance; but the king was only wroth, and pressed
forward with a censer in his hand, to offer the in-
cense. Ere, however, he could scatter the incense
on the coals, and while yet in anger, the white spots
of leprosy showed themselves upon his forehead.
Smitten im conscience, and thrust forth by the
priests, he hastened away, and was a leper ever
after (2 Ch 26 16-21).

Uzziah’s public life was now ended. In his en-
forced privacy, he may still have occupied himself
with his cattle and agricultural operations, “for
he loved husbandry” (2 Ch 26 10); but his work
in the government was over. Both K and Ch state
in nearly identical words: ‘“Jotham the king’s son
was over the household, judging the people of the
land” (2 K 15 5; 2 Ch 26 21). Works of the
same kind as those undertaken by Uzziah, viz.
building military stations in the hills and forests of
Judah, repairing the walls of city and temple, ete,
are attributed to Jotham (2 Ch 27 3 ff); the truth
being that Jotham continued and completed the
enterprises his father had undertaken.

The chronology of the rei of Uzziah presents pe-


culiar difficulties, some of which, probably, cannot be
satisfactorily solved. Reckoning upward


5. Chro- from the fail of Samaria in 721 BC, the
nology of Bib. data would suggest 759 as the first

logy year of Jotham. If, as is now generally
Reign conceded, Jotham's regnal years are


reckoned from the commencement of his
regency, when his father had been stricken with leprosy,
and if, as synchronisms seem to indicate, Uzziah was
about 40 years of age at this time, we are brought for
the year of Uzziah's accession to 783. His death, 52
years later, would occur in 731. (On the other hand, it
is known that Isaiah, whose call was in the year of Uz-
ziah’s death, Isa 6 1, was already exercising his min-
istry in the reign of Jotham, Isa 1 1.) Another note of
time is furnished hy the statement that the earliest
utterance of Amos the prophet was ‘‘two years before


VAGABOND, vag’a-bond (M3, nidh, “to
wander’): The word is used in the curse pronounced
on Cain (Gen 4 12.14). RV _ substitutes in each
case ‘‘wanderer,” but in Ps 109 10 it retains “vaga-
bonds.” “Vagabond Jews” (mepiepxouat, periércho-
mai; RV “strolling Jews”) were persons who traveled
about as professional exorcists (Acts 19 13).


VAHEB, vaheb (271, wahébh; ZusB, Zo6b):
The name occurs in a quotation from the book of
the Wars of Jeh in Nu 21 14. See Supwan. It
was apparently in Amorite territory. It is not
identified.


VAIL, vil.


VAIN, vin: The adj. of ‘‘vanity,” and represent-
ing the same Heb and Gr words as does the latter,
with a few additions (chiefly xevés, kends, “empty,”
and its compounds in the NT). d
always be replaced by its synonym “empty,” often
with advantage in modern Eng. (Job 15 2; 1 Cor
15 14, etc). The exception is the phrase “in vain,”
and even there the interchange can be made if some
(understood) noun such as “ways” be added. So


See Vai.


the earthquake” (Am 1 1). This earthquake, we are
told by Zechariah, was ‘in the days of Uzaiah, king of
Judah” (Zec 14 5). Jos likewise embodies a tradition
that the earthquake occurred at the moment of the
ere entry into the temple (Ant, IX, x, 4). Indubi-
tably the name of Uzziah was associated in the popular
mind with this earthquake. If the prophecy of Amos
was uttered a year or two before Jeroboam’s death, and
this is placed in 759 BC, we are brought near to the date
already given for Uzziah's leprosy (Jeroboam’s date is
put lower by others).


In 2 K 15 Uzziah is referred to as giving data
for the accessions of the northern kings (ver 8,
Zechariah; ver 18, Shallum; ver 17, Menahem;
ver 23, Pekahiah; ver 27, Pekah), but it is difficult
to fit these synchronisms into any scheme of chro-
nology, if taken as regnal years. Uzziah is men-
tioned as the father of Jotham in 2 K 15 32.34;
2 Ch 27 2, and as the grandfather of Ahaz in Isa
71. He was living when Isaiah began his ministry
(Isa 1 1; 6 1); when Hosea prophesied (Hos 1 1);
and is the king in whose reign the afore-mentioned
earthquake took place (Zec 14 5). His name occurs
in the royal genealogies in 1 Ch 3 11 and Mt 1 8.9.
The place of his entombment, owing to his having
been a leper, was not in the sepulchers of the kings,
but “in the garden of Uzza’’ (2 K 21 26; ef 2 Ch
26 23). Isaiah is stated to have written a life of
Uzziah (2 Ch 26 22). W. Saaw CaLpEcoTT


UZZIEL, w-zi’el, uz‘i-el, 60’zi-el (ONY , ‘uzzi’él,
“Fl [God] is my strength’):

(1) A “son? of Kohath (Ex 6 18.22; Lev 10
4; Nu 8 19.30; 1 Ch 6 2.18 [Heb 5 28; 6 3]; 15
10; 23 12.20; 24 24), called in Lev 10 4 “uncle of
Aaron.” The family is called Uzzielites che yy ,
ha@‘uzz? él [coll.]) in Nu 3 27; 1 Ch 26 23.

(2) A Simeonite captain (1 Ch 4 42).

(3) Head of a Benjamite (or according to Curtis
a Zebulunite) family (1 Ch 7 7).

(4) A Hemanite musician (1 Ch 25 4); LXX B
has ’Afapa#d, Azaraél=“‘Azarel,” the name given in
ver 18. See AzAREL.

(5) A Levite “son’’ of Jeduthun (2 Ch 29 14).

(6) A goldsmith who joined in repairing the wall
of Jerus (Neh 3 8).

(7) The reading of LXX ('Oesr, Oziél) for
Jahaziel in 1 Ch 23 19. See JawazrEt, (3).

_ Davip Francis Roserts


“to take God’s name in vain” (Ex 20 7; Dt 5 11)
means simply to take it for an “empty” (“not good’’)
purpose.


VAINGLORY, van-gld‘ri (kevoSofla, kenodoxia):
“Vainglory” is the tr of kenodoxia, “empty glory”
or “pride,” nearly akin to vanity in the modern sense
(Phil 2 3). Kenédoxes is ‘“vainglorious” (Gal 5
26, “Let us not be desirous of - vainglory,’ RV
“Let us not become vainglorious’). In 1 Jn 2 16
RV has “the vainglory of life’ (alazonefa tow biou)
for ‘the pride of life’; ef Jas 4 16, “Ye glory in
your vauntings”’ (alazoneia). Kenodoxia is tr4
“vainglory” (Wisd 14 14, ‘‘For by the vain glory of
men they [idols] entered into the world,” RV “vain-
gloriousness”); alazoneia occurs in Wisd 5 8, tr4
“vaunting.” “Pride is applicable to every object,
good or bad, high or low, small or great; vanity ig
applicable only to small objects; pride is therefore
good or bad; vanity is always bad; it is always
emptiness or nothingness” (Crabb, English Syno-
nymes). W. L. Waker


VAIZATHA, vi'za-tha, va-iz’a-tha, VAJEZATHA,
va-jez'a-tha, vaj-é-za/tha (NII, wayzdtha’): One


3045


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Uzziel


Vanity, Vanities


of the sons of Haman (Est 9 9). The form has
been held to be corrupt, the 1 (w) being exception-
ally long, and the T (z) exceptionally short (Benfey,
Die persischen Ketlinschrifien [1847], XVIII, 93),
and points to Vahyazddta, ‘‘Given of the Best-One”’
(OHL, 255).


VALE, val, VALLEY, val’i:

(1) S12, gay’; either absolute: “from Bamoth to
the valley that is in the field of Moab” (Nu 21 20);
or with a proper name: ‘‘valley of Hinnom,” also
“valley of the son of Hinnom” (Josh 16 8); ‘‘valley
of Slaughter” (Jer 7 32); “valley of Zeboim” (1 58
18 18); “valley of Zephathah” (2 Ch 14 10); “valley
of Hamon-gog” (Ezk 89 11); ‘‘valley of Iphtah-el”
(Josh 19 14); “valley of the mountains” (Zec 14 5);
“Valley of Salt” (28 8 18); “valley of vision”
(Isa 22 1); once (in RV) as a place-name: “until
thou comest to Gai” (AV “‘the valley”) (1 S 17 52);
also (RV) ‘“‘Ge-harashim” (1 Ch 4 14); ef ‘valley
of craftsmen” (m ‘“Ge-haharashim’) (Neh 11 35).

(2) P22, ‘émek, V POY, ‘amék, “to be deep’’; cf


Arab. Re ee ‘amuk, “to be deep’’; Cie. umk,


“depth”; Gane , ‘Ammtk, a village in the valley of


Coele-Syria; absolute: ‘He could not drive out the
inhabitants of the valley” (Jgs 1 19); often with
place-names: ‘valley of Achor’” (Josh 7 24);
“valley of Aijalon’” (Josh 10 12); “valley of
Gibeon”’ (Isa 28 21); ‘“‘vale of Hebron’? (Gen 37
14); “valley of Jehoshaphat”’ (Joel 3 2); ‘‘vale of
Rephaim,’” AV “valley of the giants” (Josh 16 8);
“vale of Shaveh” (Gen 14 17); ‘‘vale of Siddim”
(Gen 14 3); “valley of Succoth (Ps 60 6); cf
“valley of Weeping’ (AV ‘“‘Baca’”’) (Ps 84 6);
‘valley of Beracah” (m ‘“‘Blessing’’) (2 Ch 20 26);
“valley of decision” (Joel 3 14); ‘‘vale of Elah” (m
“terebinth”) (1 8 17 2); “the King’s Vale’ (Gen
14 17); but “the king’s dale” (2 8 18 18); ‘“Emek-
keziz,”’ AV ‘valley of Keziz” (Josh 18 21).

(3) AIPA, bik‘ah, V MP3, baka', ‘to cleave,’’ hence
“valley,” esp. “broad valley” or “plain”; cf Arab.


Kas , bak‘at, “wet meadow,” els, Bika’,


Coele-Syria; absolute: ‘‘a land of hills and valleys’
(Dt 11 11); with place-names: “valley of Jericho”
(Dt 34 3); “valley of Lebanon’ (Josh 11 17);
“valley of Megiddo”’ (2 Ch 35 22); “valley of
Mizpah” (Josh 11 8).

(4) 502, nahal, also “river” or “stream”; ab-
solute: ‘Isaac’s servants digged in the valley’
(Gen 26 19); with place-names: “valley [AV
“river’] of the Arnon” (Dt 2 24); “valley of
Eshcol”’ (Nu 32 9); “valley of Gerar’’ (Gen 26
17); “valley of Shittim’” (Joel 3 18); “valley of
Sorek” (Jgs 16 4); ‘‘valley of Zered” (Nu 21 12).


(5) MODw, shephélah, y 5NW, shaphél, “to be


low”; ef Arab. das, safal, “to be low’; AV
“valley” or ‘vale,’ RV “lowland,” the coast and
foothills of Western Pal.
(6) atrddv,aulén, “valley” (Ith 4 4; 7 3; 10 10).
(7) @dpayé, phéragz: ‘Every valley shall be filled”
Lk 3


5).

‘ The valley gate (Neh 2 18, etc) may have had
about the location of the present Jaffa gate, if by
“valley” is meant the valley of Hinnom. If the
Tyropceon is meant, it would have been near the
southwestern corner of the hdrdm area. See
JERUSALEM. 3

The valleys of the mountainous part of Pal are
mostly dry, rocky wadies with occasional torrents
in the winter season. Those which descend to the
W. widen out as they approach the plain and contain
broad fields and meadows which in the winter and


spring at least are fresh and green. The valley of
the Jordan, the valley of Megiddo and the valley of
Lebanon (i.e. Coele-Syria) contain much cultivable
land: “the herds that were in the valleys” (1 Ch
27 29): ‘They of Beth-shemesh were reaping their
wheat harvest in the valley” (1 S 613); ‘The
valleys also are covered over with grain” (Ps 65
13). See Brook; Cuampaien; LowLanp; River;
SHEPHELAH. ALFRED Ety Day


VALIANT, val’yant, VALIANTLY, val’yant-li
Orn, hayil; toyvupds, ischurds): “Valiant” in the
OT is for the most part the tr of hayil, “‘power,” or
“might,’’ and is applied to the courageous and to
men of war (‘mighty men of valor’), as in 18
14 52; 31 12; 25 11 16, etc; in some passages
ben haytl, ‘‘a son of might” (Jes 21 10; 185 18
17; 25 27, etc). A few other Heb words (gib-
bér, etc) are thus rendered. In the NT the word
occurs once in AV (He 11 34, “valiant in fight’;
RV “mighty in war”). ‘‘Valiantly’” is the tr of
the same Heb word (Nu 24 18; Ps 60 12, etc);
in one case in AV of hdzak (1 Ch 19 138, ARV
“play the man,” ERV ‘“men’’). In some instances
RV has variations, as “‘man of valor’ for ‘valiant
man” (1 8 16 18), “‘valiant” for “strong” (1 Ch
26 7.9; Jer 48 14, etc). W. L. Waker

VALLEY, val'i. See VALE, VALLEY.

VALLEY GATE (8530 “WW, sha‘ar ha-gay’, “Gate
of the Gai”): Is placed (Neh 3 13) between the
“tower of the furnaces” and the ‘‘dung gate’; from
here Nehemiah (2 13) set out on his ride down the
“Gai’ (Hinnom) to Siloam, and, too (12 31.38),
from here the Levites commenced their compass of
the city in two directions. It must have been an
ancient gate, for Uzziah added towers to it (2 Ch 26
9). It was probably near the S.W. corner of the
city and near to, if not identical with, the gate
found by Bliss near (now in) the Protestant Ceme-
tery. See JERUSALEM, VI, 13.

E. W. G. Masterman

VALLEY, JORDAN. Sce Jornpan Vary.


VALLEY OF DECISION (77°01 P'ay, ‘mek
he-hartig). See JeHOSHAPHAT, VALLEY OF.


VALLEY OF GIANTS. See Repwamm, VALE oF.
VALLEY OF KEZIZ. See EMEXK-KEzIz.


VALLEY OF SLAUGHTER.
SLAUGHTER, VALLEY oF; TOPHETH.


VALLEY OF VISION (JVM NA, gé’ hizedyon):
A symbolic name generally understood to signify
Jerus as being the home of prophetic vision
(Isa 22 1.5).


VAMPIRE, vam’pir (Mp%>¥, ‘élakah): RVm for
‘thorseleach” (Prov 30 15) has ‘“‘vampire.” See
HoRsELEACH.


See Hinnom;


VANIAH, va-ni’a (7173, wanyah, meaning un-
known): A son of Bani, who had married a foreign
wife (Ezr 10 36). The text is, however, doubtful.
LXX B has Ovtexwd, Oulechid, S , Ovvepexd, Ouiere-
ché, A, Ovovrd, Ouounid, Luc., Ovavd, Ouanid.


VANITY, van‘i-ti, VANITIES, van’i-tiz (27,
hebhel, TIN, ’dwen, NTU, shdw’; Kevés, kends, para
érys, mataidtés): The words “vain,” ‘‘vanity,” ‘‘vani-
ties’ are frequent in the Bible. Their idea is almost
exclusively that of ‘“‘evanescence,” “emptiness,”


Vapor
Verily, Verity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3046


including “idolatry” and “wickedness” as being not |


only evil but vain and empty things. They also
signify falseness. The chief word tr? ‘“vanity,”
“vanities” is hebhel, a “breath of air, or of the
mouth,” often applied to idolatry (Dt 32 21; 1 K
16 13; Ps 31 6; Jer 8 19, etc); to man’s days and
to man himself (Job 7 16; Ps 39 5.11, etc); to
man’s thoughts (Ps 94 11); to wealth and treasures
(Prov 13 11; 21 6); to everything, Eccl, where
the word occurs frequently in various applications:
“Vanity of vanities, all is vanity” (Eccl 1 2; 12 8).
Hebhel is also the name of Adam’s second son (Gen
4 2). ’Awen, meaning also “breath,” is likewise tr4
“yanity’’ in similar connections, but it inclines more
to “Sniquity” (so often rendered); it is jomed with
mischief and iniquity (Isa 41 29; 58 9; Zec 10 2);
another frequent word is sh&w’, having also the idea
of “falsity,” “wickedness” (Ex 20 7; Dt 5 11; Ps
31 6, etc).

“Vanity” does not often occur in the NT; but see
Varn, Varnetory. In Acts 14 15 we have mditaios,
“empty,” tr4 ‘vanities’ (of idols); mataiotés, “empti-
ness,” “transitoriness’ (Rom 8 20, “The creation
was subjected to vanity,’ frailty, transitoriness);
“emptiness,” “folly” (Eph 4 17; 2 Pet 2 18).


falsehood" (Ps 12 2; 41 6);
; vapor" (Prov 21 6); ‘'calamity”
, m vanity’); ‘‘a breath" (Isa 57 18); ‘ wick-
edly” (58 9). Conversely, for ‘'Wherefore hast thou
made all men in vain?" (Ps 89 47), ‘‘For what vanity
hast thou created all the children of men!"; for ‘Be-
hold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing"
(Isa 41 29), ‘Behold, all of them, their works are vanity
and nought,"’ mas AV, with ‘‘nought"’ for ‘‘ nothing.”
. L. WALKER
VAPOR, va’pér: (1) 8, ’adh: “For he draweth
up the drops of water, which distil in rain from his
vapor” (Job 36 27); “There went up a mist [’édh]
from the earth, and watered the whole face of
the ground” (Gen 2 6). (2) N°}, nds?’, “vapor,”
ie. that which rises, from ¥ NW), nasa’, “to lift”:
“Who causeth the vapors to ascend from the ends
of the earth” (Ps 185 7; cf Jer 10 13; 61 16);
also trd “clouds”: “as clouds and wind without
rain” (Prov 26 14). (3) In Job 36 33, AV has
“vapour” (“concerning the vapour’) for my , ‘alah,
v my, ‘alah, “to go up,’’ where RV reads “con-
cerning the storm that cometh up.” (4) TO"P,
kttér: “fire and hail, snow and vapor’ (Ps 148 8);
elsewhere, “smoke”: ‘The smoke of the land went
up as the smoke of a furnace” (Gen 19 28); “I am
become like a wineskin in the smoke’ (Ps 119 83).
(5) aruts, atmis: “blood, and fire, and vapor of
smoke’ (Acts 2 19); ‘For ye are a vapor that
appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth
away” (Jas 4 14). The first two of the preceding
quotations are interesting as indicating the knowl-
edge that vapor of water from the earth or sea is
the source of the rain. Visible vapor, ie. mist or
fog, is much less common in Pal than in many
other countries. In the mountains, however, esp.
in Lebanon, mists are of frequent occurrence, ap-
pearing to those below as clouds clinging to the
mountains. Atrrep Evy Day


VASHNI, vash'’ni (21, washni, see below;
LXX B, Zavel, Sanei, A, Zavl, Sant): Read in 1 Ch
6 28 AV (Heb 13) as the name of the firstborn
son of Samuel. According to ver 33 (Heb 18)
and 18 8 2, Samuel’s eldest son was Joel, and
the second Abijah. The explanation of this is that
in 1 Ch 6 28 the word taken then as a proper
name is really ‘and second”; so following LXX,
Lue. and Syr we read (as RV), “And the sons
of Samuel: the first-born, Joel, and the second
Abijah.”’


VASHTI, vash’ti CINW, washtit; “Acrl, Astin;
Old Pers “beautiful woman”): The former queen
of Xerxes, whom he divorced. On the 7th day of
a great feast which the king was giving to the as-
sembled nobles of the empire and others, he com-
manded the seven chamberlains who served in his
presence to bring the queen into the assembly. We
are told (Est 1 11) that his purpose was “to show
the peoples and the princes her beauty; for she
was fair to look on.” The king’s command was
met by Vashti with a mortifying refusal to obey.
The reason which is sometimes assigned for her dis-
obedience—that no man but the king was permitted
to look upon the queen—is without foundation.
Esther invites Haman on two occasions to accom-
pany the king to a banquet at which she was present.
Nor can it be said that there was any lack of recog-
nition of Vashti's high dignity; the seven highest
officials of the palace were sent to escort her. The
refusal had to be visited with a punishment severe
enough to reéstablish the supremacy which it threat-
ened to overthrow. She was, accordingly, divorced
and dethroned. 3

There is no known reference to Vashti outside of
Est. The suggestion has been made that Vashti
was an inferior wife, or one of the royal concubines.
There is nothing, however, to support it; and it is,
besides, directly opposed to several statements in
the narrative. She is always named “queen’’ (Est
1 9.11.12.15-18). Itis only (ver 19) when the decree
is proposed to repudiate and degrade her that she is
called merely ‘“Vashti.” She also (ver 9) presides
at the banquet for the women. It is evident, there-
fore, that in the palace of the women there was no
higher personage than Vashti. JoHN URQUHART


VAT. See WINEVaT.
VAULT, vélt (1X), naar, “to guard,” “protest’’):


Isaiah’s charge against Israel as “a people that
.... lodge in the secret places’ (Isa 65 4, m
‘vaults,’ AV “monuments”) probably refers to the
custom of sleeping in sacred tombs or vaults of idol
temples to learn the future through dreams by the
method known as incubation. See Divination, 6,
(i); 7, 1; Famiuiar Sprrir; Witcuorart; and
Expos T, IX, 157 ff.


VAULT OF EARTH. See Astronomy, III, 1.
VAY, viv. See Waw.


VEDAN, vé'dan (771, w*dhdn): A place-name
occurring only in Ezk 27 19, ‘“Vedan and Javan
traded with yarn for thy wares.” AV, taking the
syllable w* as the Heb conjunction, renders “and
Dan also.” The text is in bad condition. Some
read “‘Dedan,” but Dedan is spoken of separately in
the following verse. Assuming that Vedan is the
correct reading, an identification may be conjectured
with Waddan, also called al-Abwa‘, between Mecca
and Medina. It was the object of Mohammed’s
first expedition (Jbn Hisham, 415). The name
contains that of the god Wadd who was worshipped
chiefly by the Arab tribe Kalb. A. 8. Fuuron


VEHEMENT, vé’hé-ment, VEHEMENTLY, vé’-
hé-ment-li CWI", hdrisht; émvmdOnors, epipsthasis):
“Vehement”’ (from Lat vehere, “to carry,’ or ve,
“out. of,” and mens, “mind’’), carried away by the
mind or force of passion, occurs twice in the OT
(Cant 8 6, AV “a most vehement flame” (jealousy])
as the tr of shalhebheth-yah, ‘the flame of Jeh,’’ which
perhaps means lightning (RV “‘a very flame of Jeh,’’
m “a most vehement flame, Heb Jah’’); and as the
tr of AV hdrishi, “silent,” “still,” hence “sultry”


3047


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Vapor
Verily, Verity


(Jon 4 8, AV “a vehement east wind,” RV “sul-
try”). In the NT, “vehement desire’ is (AV) the
tr of epipothésis, “earnest desire’ (2 Cor 7 11, RV
“longing’’).

“Vehemently” is the tr of deinés, “greatly”
(Lk 11 53); of ek perissou or ekperissés, “beyond
measure’ (Mk 14 31, “He spake exceeding vehe-
mently”); of euténds, “intensely” (Lk 23 10);
and in AV of prosrhégnumi, “to break” or “dash
upon” (Lk 6 48.49, RV “break’”’).

W. L. Waker

VEIL, val: The following words are so tr? in
EV (sometimes AV vail): (1) MOBY, mitpahath,
Ruth 3 15 AV, RV ‘mantle.’ As the material
was strong enough to serve as a bag for a large
quantity of grain RV is certainly right; cf Isa 3
22. (2) TIO, magweh, Ex 34 33-35. St. Paul
in his quotation of the passage in 2 Cor 3 13-16
uses KGéAuuua, kdlumma, following LXX. The
covering worn by Moses to conceal the miraculous
brightness of his face, although, according to MT,
he seems to have worn it only in private. (3)
T1202 , massékhah, Isa 26 7; in 28 20 trd “cover-
ing.” The use in 26 7 is figurative and the form
of the “veil” a matter of indifference. (4) AZ,
gammah, RV Cant 41.3 (m “locks” [of hair]);
6 7; Isa 47 2, AV “locks.” The meaning of the
word is uncertain and AV may very well be right.
If, however, RV’s tr is correct, a light ornamental
veil is meant. (5) S°9Z, ca'tph, Gen 24 65; 38
14.19. A large wrap is meant, which at times was
used to cover the face also. In 24 65 Rebekah con-
formed to the etiquette which required the veiling
of brides (see Marriace). In ch 38 one motive
for Tamar’s use of the veil was certainly to avoid
recognition, but it seems clear from the passage that
veils were used by courtesans. Why is unknown,
perhaps partly to conceal their identity, perhaps
partly in parody of the marriage custom. (6)
WT, redhidh, Cant 6 7 (RV “mantle,’’ m ‘“‘veil’’);
Isa 3 23. A light mantle is certainly meant. In
Cant 5 7 it is torn from the maiden in the watch-
men’s endeavor to detain her. (7) wapaxddupya,
parakdlumma, Wisd 173 AV, RV “curtain.”
(8) Vb. xaraxadinrw, katakalipts, 1 Cor 11 6f,
with dxaraxadiarw, akatakalipté, “unveil” in ver 5;
AV has “cover” and “uncover”; cadvrrw, kalipto,
2 Cor 4 3 (bis), dvaxadéarw, anakalipto,2 Cor 3 18;
AV “hid” and “open.” ‘

It will be seen that there is a certain reference to
what in modern times would be termed a ‘veil’
only in (2) above. For a possible additional refer-
ence see MurrLER.

The use of the face veil as a regular article of
dress was unknown to the Heb women, and if “veil’’
is to be understood in Cant 4 1, etc, it was worn
as an ornament only. The modern oriental cus-
tom of veiling is due to Mohammedan influence and
has not been universally adopted by Jewesses in the
Orient. In NT times, however, among both Greeks
and Romans, reputable women wore a veil in public
(Plutarch Quaest. Rom. xiv) and to appear without it
was an act of bravado (or worse); Tarsus, St. Paul’s
home city, was especially noted for strictness in this
regard (Dio of Prusa, Tarsica prior, §48). Hence St.
Paul’s indignant directions in 1 Cor 11 2-16,
which have their basis in the social proprieties of
the time. The bearing of these directions, however,
on the compulsory use of the hat by modern women
in public worship would appear to be very remote.

For the Veil of the Tabernacle and the Temple
see next article. Burton Scorr Easton


VEIL: (1) (M958, parékheth; kaeraréracpa, ka-
tapétasma; AV vail): In Ex, Lev, Nu, the veil
that hung between the two holy chambers of the


tabernacle is mentioned 23 t (Ex 26 31, etc). In
several places it is termed ‘the veil of the screen,”
and it is distinguished from “‘the screen for the door
of the tabernacle’ (Ex 35 12.15; 39 34.38). By
the latter is meant the curtain that hung outside the
holy place, ie. at the tabernacle entrance. Ex 26
31 informs us that the veil was made of fine-twined
linen, and that its colors were blue and purple and
scarlet. It was embroidered with cherubim. At
each removal of the tabernacle the veil was used
to enwrap the ark of the testimony (Nu 4 5).
From its proximity to this central object of the Heb
ceremonial system, the veil is termed ‘the veil of
the testimony” (Lev 24 3), “the veil which is
before the testimony” (Ex 27 21), etc. In Solo-
mon’s Temple the veil is mentioned but once (2 Ch
3 14). It was protected by doors of olive wood
(1_K 6 31). In the later temple it is alluded to in
1 Mace 1 22. Its presence in Herod’s temple is
attested by the statement in each of the Synop-
tists that at the time of Christ’s death the veil of
the temple was rent from top to bottom, or in the
midst (Mt 27 51; Mk 15 38; Lk 23 45; cf in
Mish, Mid. ii.1; iv.7). This fact is the basis of
the profound truth expressed by the writer to the
Hebrews that Jesus, by His sacrificial death, opened
for all believers a way into the holiest “through the
veil, that is to say, his flesh’ (He 10 20). See
TaBERNACLE; TEMPLE. (2) See preceding art. and
Dress, V. W. SHaw CaLpDEcotTr


VEIN, van: Only in Job 28 1, AV “a vein for the
silver,’ or N¥VA, méca’, “going forth,” “source.”
Both AV “vein” and RV “mine” are more special-
ized than mécd’, but RV doubtless conveys the
original meaning.


VENGEANCE, ven’jans. See AVENGE; GOEL;
RETRIBUTION; REVENGE.
VENISON, ven'i-z’n, ven’z’n: Is derived


(through the Fr. venaison) from the Lat venari, “to
hunt,” and means properly “the spoils of the chase.”
As, however, the object of the chase, par excellence,
was the deer, venison came to mean usually (as it n-
variably does in modern Eng.) “deer’sflesh.” Butin
EV this technical force seems not to be implied, for
“venison’’ is used only for the two Heb words TX,
cayidh (Gen 25 28; 27 5ff), and MTL, cédhah
(Gen 27 3), and both these words (from TX, ¢idh,
“to hunt’’) mean simply “game’’ of any kind.


VERDIGRIS, vir’di-grés.


VERILY, ver'i-li, VERITY, ver'i-ti O28, ’dbhal,
etc; aphy, amén): “Verily,” as confirmatory advb.,
represents various Heb and Gr words and particles
(abhal, “truly,” in Gen 42 21, etc; ’akh, “only,”
“surely,” in Ps 66 19; Isa 45 15, etc). For AV
“verily thou shalt be fed” (Ps 37 3, where ’éminah),
ARV has “feed on his faithfulness’ and ERV
“follow after faithfulness,’ m in both “feed se-
curely.”” The Gr amén (Heb ’dmén) is used very
frequently in the Gospels as an emphatic confirma-
tion of Christ’s sayings (Mt 5 18.26; 6 2; Mk 3
28, etc), and in John’s Gospel is repeated to give
additional emphasis (Jn 1 51; 3 3.5.11, ete). RV
makes various changes, as “wholly” for “verily”
(Job 19 13), “surely” (Ps 39 5; 73 13), “indeed’’
(Mk 9 12; Rom 2 25; He 3 5; 7 5), etc, and
sometimes puts “verily” where AV has other words,
as “also” (Mt 13 23), “doubtless” (Phil 3 8), etc.

Verity is the tr of ’émeth, “truth,” “stedfastness”
(Ps 111 7, “The works of his hands are verity and
judgment,” ARV “truth and justice,” ERV “truth
and judgment”); and of alétheia, “truth,” “reality,


See Scum.


Vermilion
Vine


“certainty” (1 Tim 2 7), “faith and verity,” RV
“faith and truth.” W. L. WaLkKER


VERMILION, vér-mil’yun.


VERSIONS, vir’shunz. See American Re-
VISED VERSION; ARABIC VERSIONS; ARMENIAN
VERSIONS; Coptic VERSIONS; ENGLISH VERSIONS;
Eruiopic Versions; Latin Version, THE OLp;
SEPTUAGINT; Syriac Versions; TarGcum; TExtT
or THE NT; Text oF THE OT; VULGATE.


VERSIONS, GEORGIAN, jér’ji-an, GOTHIC,
goth’ik, SLAVONIC, sla-von’ik: Georgia is the
name given to the territory extending


See Cotors, (8).


1. The to the E. of the Black Sea, a country
Georgian that. has had an independent national
Version existence of 2,000 years but is now


(under the name Grusinia) a part of
the trans-Caucasian domain of Russia. The lan-
guage has no affinities with any of the recognized
groups, but is becoming obsolete under Russian
pressure. Christianity was introduced into Georgia
in the 4th cent., and a national conversion followed.
A well-supported tradition makes the first tr of the
Bible almost contemporaneous with this conver-
sion and refers it to St. Mesrop (d. 441; see ARME-
N1AN VERSIONS), but the fact is not quite certain and
the beginnings of a native VS may really bc as much
as two centuries later. The oldest MS extant is a
Psalter of the 7th-8th cent., and the earliest copy
of the Gospels is perhaps a century later; in all,
Gregory (Textkrittk, 573-75) enumerates 17 Geor-
gian MSS of the NT, but his list is not exhaustive.
The first printed Bible was produced in the ancient
alphabet in Moscow in 1743 and has never been
reprinted, but other edd, perhaps only of the NT,
were issued at least in 1816 and 1818, using the non-
ecclesiastical alphabet. According to Conybeare
(ZNTW, XI, 161-66, 232-39 [1910]) the Georgian
VS was first made from the Old Syr and then later
(11th cent.) revised from the Gr. In 1910 a new
edition, based on two MSS dated respectively 913
and 995, was begun (Quattuor Ev. versio Georgia
vetus, St. Petersburg). The Georgian VS was used
by S. C. Malan, The Gospel according to St. John
Tr® from the 11 Oldest VSS, London, 1862.

Ulfilas, the Arian bishop of the West Goths and
the chief agent in their conversion to Christianity,
was also the first translator of the Bible


2. The into Gothic, a work for which he had
Gothic even to invent an alphabet. Accord-
Version ing to tradition, his tr included the


entire Bible with the exception of K
(which he thought unadapted to the already too
warlike character of his converts), but there is doubt
whether his work actually included more than the
NT. Too little of the OT has survived to enable a
settling of this question, nor is it possible to tell
how much revision the NT tr has undergone since
Ulfilas’ work.

A list of the six Gothic MSS is given in HDB, IV,
862, to which is to be added a bilingual Lat-Gothic
MS containing portions of Lk 24, known as the
Arsmoé Fragment (published in ZNTW, XI, 1-38
[1910] and separately [Giessen, 1910]). In all there
have been preserved in the OT Gen 5 (in part); Ps
62 2f; Neh 6-7 (in part), and in the NT the Gos-
pels and Pauline Epp. (all incomplete), with quo-
tations from He. The best complete ed is that of
Stamm-Heyne® (Paderborn, 1896), but as the VS
is of basic importance for the history of the Germanic
languages there are many edd of various portions
prepared for philological purposes.

The OT fragments are a tr of a text very closely
allied to the Lucianic Gr (see Sepruacint) and are
certainly not from the Heb. The NT undoubtedly


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3048


was made from a text of the type used in Antioch
(Constantinople) in the 4th cent., with very slight
variations, none of which are “neutral” (von Soden
classes them as of the J-type). Either in making
the tr or (more probably) in a subsequent revision an
Old-Lat text was used, of the type of Codex Brixi-
anus (f), and certain Old-Lat readings are well
marked. For brief lists of these peculiarities see
Burkitt in Jour. Theol. Studies, I, 129-34 (1900), or

von Soden, Schriften des NT, I, 1469f (1906).
It is definitely known that the first Slavonic tr
of the Bible was commenced in 864 or earlier by
the two brothers Cyril (d. 869) and


3. The Methodius (d. 885), and that the latter
Slavonic worked on it after the former’s death.
Version Their work was undertaken for the


benefit of the Balkan Slavs, and at
first only the liturgical portions (Gospels, Acts,
Epp. and Ps) were tr¢, but, after the completion of
this, Methodius carried the tr farther to include
larger portions of the OT. How much of this he
accomplished is obscure, but he seems not to have
finished the OT entirely, while almost certainly he
did not translate Rev. Uncertain also is the exact
dialect used for this work; although this dialect was
the basis of the present liturgical language of the
Russian church, it has undergone much transforma-
tion before arriving at its final stage. At different
times the tr of the Bible was revised to conform
to the changes of the language, in addition to other
revisional changes, and, as a result, the MSS (some
of which go back to the 10th cent.) exhibit very
varying types of text that have not been satisfac-
torily classified.

An attempt to bring the discrepant material
into order was made about 1495 by Archbishop
Gennadius, but he was unable to find Slavonic MSS
that included the entire Bible and was forced to
supply the deficiencies (Ch, Ezr, Neh, Est and most
of Jer and the Apoc) by a new tr made from the Vulg.
This Bible of Gennadius was the basis of the first
printed edition, made at Ostrog in 1581, although


: the liturgical portions had been printed earlier


(Acts and Epp. first of all in 1564). The Ostrog ed
followed Gennadius fairly closely, but Est, Cant
and Wisd were new tr® made from the LXX. The
next revision was undertaken by order of Peter the
Great and was performed by using the Gr (OT and
NT); although the resulting text was not printed
until 1751. A slightly emended ed of 1756 is still
the official Bible of the Russian church.

This Slavonic VS is to be distinguished from the
VS in the true Russian language, begun first in 1517,
revised or remade at various times, with an excellent
modern tr first published complete in 1876. See,
on the whole subject, esp. Bebb in Church Quart.
Rev., XLI, 203-25, 1895.

Lireraturse.—On all three VSS see HDB, IV, 861-64,


1902, and the art. ‘‘ Bibeliibersetzung"’ in PRE, III
(1897), with the Important supplement in XXIII (1913).


Burton Scotr Easton
VERY, ver’i: As adj. (from verus, ‘‘true’’),
“true,” “real,” “actual,” ete (Gen 27 21.24, “my
very son Esau”; Josh 10 27, “this very day”;
Jn 7 26, “the very Christ,” etc); chiefly as advb.,
“in a high degree,” “extremely.’’ As advb. it is
commonly in the OT the tr of TINA, m°’6dh, and in
the NT represents, as adj. and advb., several Gr
words, as aléthés, “truly” (Jn 7 26, above), auiéds
(Jn 14 11, “the very works’ sake’; Rom 18 6),
sphédra (Mt 18 31, “very sorry,” RV ‘exceeding
sorry”; Mk 16 4, “very great,” RV “excceding’’),
hupér- (in composition 1 Thess 6 13), etc. RV
frequently omits ‘‘very,’’ and also substitutes
other words for it, as ‘exceeding’ (2 Ch 16 8;
Mt 26 7; cf above), “sore’’ (Zec 9 5), ete.
W.L. WALKER


3049


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Vermilion
Vine


VESSEL, ves’el: Is used freely in EV to translate
">, kelt, the Aram. JNA, ma’n, and oxedos, sketios,
words all meaning “an implement or utensil” of
any kind, when the context shows that a hollow
utensil is meant. In 1S 21 5, however, the tr of
the pl. of kelt by “‘vessels’’ is dubious. EV evidently
intended something in the nature of provision
wallets, and the “holiness” of such objects finds
partial parallels in Nu 19 15; Lev 11 32-34, ete.
But in 1 § 21 8, in the immediate context of the
verse above, kit certainly means ‘‘weapons,” and
this tr is quite intelligible in ver 5 also. For war
among the Hebrews was a holy function, calling
for extreme ceremonial purity (Dt 23 9-14). See
the comms. and esp. RS*, 455-56. In addition,
“vessel” appears in Isa 30 14 for Pichi nebhel,
‘Gar’; in Mt 18 48 for dyvos, dggos, ‘vessels’;
and in Sir 21 14; Mt 25 4 for dyyetov, aggeton,
a dimin. form of aggos. A different use is that of
Wisd 14 1, where “vessel”? represents rAotov, ploton,
“a, boat,” while Wisd 14 5.6 AV has “weak vessel’
for cxeéla, schedia, ‘raft’? (go RV). Vessels of all
sorts and kinds and for all sorts of uses were
so familiar as to make them natural illustrations
for different sorts of human beings (Hos 8 8; Isa
2224; Jer 22 28, etc; see Porrsr), and throug)
Acts 9 15 the word “vessel” has passed into Chris-
tian theology as signifying simply a human being.
But the figure of such “vessels” as (passively) filled
with different contents is nop Bib. In 1 Thess 4 4
“vessel” may be taken as a figure for either the
man’s own body or for his wife. Between these
possibilities the comms. are almost equally divided.

Burton Scott Easton

VESTMENTS, vest’ments. See Dress.


VESTRY, ves’tri (IMSS, meliahah): Once, in
2 K 10 22, asa place for vestments.


VEX, veks, VEXATION, vek-sa’shun: ‘‘Vex,”
meaning originally to shake or toss in carrying, has
a much more intensive meaning in Scripture than
in common modern usage. It represents over a
score of Heb and Gr words, most of them tr¢ by
this word only once, and many of them changed in
RV into other forms. Thus bahél in Ps 6 2.3.10
is in ARV “troubled” (in Ps 25,RVm “trouble”’);
cdrar in Neh 9 27 is in RV “distressed”; pdschd in
Mt 17 15 is “suffereth grievously”; kakd6o in Acts
12 1 is “afflict,” etc. So ‘‘vexation only” in Isa
28 19 is in RV “nought but terror,” and there are
other changes of this word (cf Dt 28 20, “discom-
fiture”; Isa 9 1, ‘in anguish’’). On the other hand,
RV has “vex” for “distress” (Dt 2 9.19); “they
that vex” for “the adversaries of” (Isa 11 13);
“vexeth himself” for ‘‘meddleth” (Prov 26 17), etc.

W. L. WaLKER

VIAL, vi‘al: In modern Eng. means “a tiny
flask.” The word appears in EV 1S 101 and
RV 2 K 9 1.3 (AV “box”) for JB, pakh, a word
found nowhere else and from a root meaning
“to pour.’ The shape and size of the pakh are
quite uncertain. In 1 Esd 2 13; and AV Rev 5 8,
etc, “vial” translates piddy, phidlé. The phialé
was a flat, shallow bowl (Lat patera), shaped much
like a saucer. Hence RV’s change to “bowl’’ in
Rev, a change that should have been made in 1 Esd
also.


VICE, UNNATURAL. Sce Unnatural. VicE.


VICTUALS, vit’’lz. See Foon.


VILE, vil, VILLANY, vil’an-i: The original words
for “vile” and ‘“villany” are used in about 10 differ-
ent senses, e.g. despised (1 S 16 9), despicable


(Dnl 11 21 AV), lightly esteemed (Dt 25 3), empty
(Jgs 19 24 AV), foolish (Isa 32 6, AV and ERV),
dishonorable (Rom 1 26), filthy or dirty (Jas 2 2),
humiliation (Phil 3 21).

Villany occurs but twice in AV (Isa 82 6; Jer
29 23), and signifies emptiness or folly (so RV).
From the foregoing meanings it will be seen that
the word “vile” does not always bear the meaning
which has come to be invariably given it in our
present-day speech. Anything common or ordi-
nary or humble might, in the Scriptural sense, be
termed “vile.” So Job 40 4, RV ‘Behold, I am
of small account’’; also “the low estate of his hand-
maid” (Lk 4 48). Ordinarily, however, the idea
of contemptible, despicable, is read into the word.

WituiaM Evans

VILLAGE, vil’éj (DD, baphar, N73, hawwoth,
DME, hdgerim, ND, bandh, MIMD, p*razdth;
képn, kdmé): (1) The general term for a village, in
common with Aram. and Arab., is kaphar (Cant
7 11; 1 Ch 27 25; kopher, 1S 6 18; kephir, Neh
6 2). This designation is derived from the idea of
its offering “cover” or shelter. It is used in com-
bination, and place-names of this formation became
prominent in post-Bib. times, probably because
the villages so named had then grown into towns.
A well-known Bib. instanée of such names is Caper-
naum. (2) Hawwoth (always “town” in EV; see
HAvVVoTH-JAIR) means originally a group of tents
(Arab. hiwa’). These in settled life soon became
more permanent dwellings, or what we understand
by a village. The term, however, is applied only
to the villages of Jair in the tribe of Manasseh (Nu
32 41; 1K 4 13). (8) Hégérim likewise came
from nomadic life. They were originally enclosures
specially for cattle, alongside of which dwellings for
the herdsmen and peasantry naturally grew up
(see Hazar-aAppaR; Hazon). They were unwalled
(Lev 26 31) and lay around the cities (Josh 19 8).
(4) Banoth is lit. “daughters.” The word is applied
to the dependent villages lying around the larger
cities, and to which they looked as to a kind of
metropolis (Nu 21 25, etc); RV ‘towns’ except
in Nu 32 42. (5) P*raz6th means “the open coun-
try,” but it soon came to mean the villages scat-
tered in the open (Ezk 38 11; Zec 2 4; Est 9 19).
Some have sought to connect the Perizzites with
this word and to regard them, not as a distinct
people, but as the peasant class. Attempts have
also been made to connect p‘razon in Jgs 5 7.11
with the same root, and AV rendered it ‘“‘inhabit-
ants of the villages.” RV, on the contrary, gives
it the meaning of “rulers.” The VSS indicate a
word meaning authority, and probably the text
should be emended to read réznim, “rulers.” A
similar emendation is required in Hab 3 14.
“Village” in RV of the NT invariably represents the
Greek kdmé, but in 2 Macc 8 6 the RV Apoc has
“village” for chdéra, lit. “country.” See City;
Town. W. M. Curist1£


VILLANY. See Vine.


VINE, vin: :
(1) }P4, gephen, usually the cultivated grape
vine. In Nu 6 4; Jgs 13 14 we have 7771 724,
gephen. ha-yayin, lit. ‘vine of wine,”
1. Hebrew tr’ “grape vine” (Nu) and “vine,”
Words m “grape vine” (Jgs); 2 K 4 39,
TVND PA, gephen sddheh, EV “wild
vine’; Dt 32 32,070 ]B3, gephen s*dhom, “vine
of Sodom.”
(2) pM, sdrék, in Isa 6 2, “choicest vine’’;
piw, sorék, in Jer 2 21, “noble vine’; MPA,
sorekah, in Gen 49 11, “choice vine’; cf VALLEY


Vine
Virgin, Virginity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3050


or SorEK (q.v.). The Heb is supposed to indicate
dark grapes and, according to rabbinical tradition,
they were unusually sweet and almost, if not quite,
stoneless.

(3) 32, nazir, in Lev 26 5.11, “undressed
vine,” AV “vine undressed,” m “separation.”
This may mean an unpruned vine and be a reference
to the unshorn locks of a Nazirite, but it is equally
probable that WT) should be X32, bagir, “vint-
age.”

For the blossom we have TT1® , perah (Isa 18 5),
“blossom”; MX), niccdh, either the blossom or half-
formed clusters of grapes (Gen 40 10; Isa 18 5);

TOD, s°madhar, “sweet-scented blossom” (Cant
2 13.15; 7 12).

For grapes we have commonly: 227, ‘énabh (a
word common to all Sem languages) (Gen 40 10;
Dt 32 14; Isa 5 2,etc),; DXAIY DI, dam ‘énabhim,
lit. “blood of grapes,” i.e. wine (Gen 49 11); 103,
baser, “the unripe grape” (Isa 18 5, “ripening
grape,’ AV “sour grape’; Job 15 33, “unripe
grapes”; Jer 31 29f; Kzk 18 2, ‘‘sour grapes’’);
DURE, b’ushim, “wild grapes’ (Isa 5 2.4; see
Grapss, WILD); SDON , eshkél, a “cluster” of ripe
grapes (Gen 40 10; Cant 7 8f; Hab 3 17,
etc; cf Esacon [q.v.]); D0, harcannim,
usually supposed to be the kernels of grapes (Nu
6 4)


In Gr we have &yredos, Gmpelos, “vine” (Mt 26
29, etc), srapvaAy, staphulé (Sir 39 26, “blood of


grapes’; Mt 7 16, “grapes,” ete),
2. Greek and Bérpus, bétrus (Rev 14 18), “cluster
and Latin of the vine.” In the Lat of 2 Esd


vinea is ‘vine’ in 6 23 (‘‘vineyard”
in 16 30.43); botrus (9 21) and racemus (16 30)
are “cluster”; acinium (9 21) and wa (16 26) are
ag grape.”

Pal appears to have been a vine-growing country
from the earliest historic times. The countless

wine presses found in and around
3. Antiquity centers of early civilization witness to
and Im- this. It is probable that the grape
portance was largely cultivated as a source of

sugar: the juice expressed in_ the
“wine press’? was reduced by boiling to a liquid of
treacle-like consistency known as ‘‘grape honey,” or
in Heb d¢bhash (Arab. dibs). This is doubtless the
“honey” of many OT references, and before the
days of cane sugar was the chief source of sugar.
The whole OT witnesses to how greatly Pal de-
pended upon the vine and its products. Men re-
joiced in wine also as one of God’s best gifts (gs
913; Ps 104 15). But the Nazirite might eat
nothing of the vine “from the kernels even to the
husk” (Nu 6 4; Jgs 13 14).

The land promised to the children of Israel was
one of ‘‘vines and fig trees and pomegranates” (Dt
8 8); they inherited vineyards which they had
not planted (Dt 6 11; Josh 24 13; Neh 9 25).
Jacob’s blessing on Judah had much reference to
the suitability of his special part of the land to the
vine (Gen 49 11). When the leading people were
carried captive the poor were left as vine dressers
(2 K 25 12; Jer 52 16), lest the whole land should
lapse into uncultivated wilderness. On the prom-
ised return this humble duty was, however, to fall
to the “sons of the alien” (Isa 61 5 AV).

The mountain regions of Judaea and Samaria,
often little suited to cereals, have always proved
highly adapted to vine culture. The
stones must first be gathered out and
utilized for the construction of a pro-
tecting wall or of terraces or as the
bases of towers (Isa 5 2; Mt 21 33). Every an-
cient vineyard had its wine press cut in a sheet of


4, Its Cul-
tivation


rock appearing at the surface. As a rule the vine-
stocks lie along the ground, many of the fruit-bearing
branches falling over the terraces (ef Gen 49 22);
in some districts the end of the vine-stock is raised
by means of a cleft stick a foot or more above the
surface; exceptionally the vine branches climb into


Large Vine at Jericho, Age 333 Years. Length of Trunk,
9 ft. 7in.; Girth of Trunk at Base, 53 in.; Girth
of Trunk Half-Way Up, 38 in.


trees, and before a dwelling-house they are some-
times supported upon poles to form a bower (ef
1 K 4 25, etc).

The cultivation of the vine requires constant care
or the fruit will very soon degenerate. After the
rains the loosely made walls require to have breaches
repaired; the ground must be ploughed or harrowed
and cleared of weeds—contrast with this the vine-
yard of the sluggard (Prov 24 30-31); in the early
spring the plants must be pruned by cutting off dead
and fruitless branches (Lev 25 3.4; Isa 6 6) which
are gathered and burned (Jn 15 6). As the grapes
ripen they must be watched to keep off jackals and
foxes (Cant 2 15), and in some districts even wild
boars (Ps 80 13). The watchman is stationed in
one of the towers and overlooks a considerable area.
When the grape season comes, the whole family of
the owner frequently take their residence in a booth
constructed upon one of the larger towers and
remain there until the grapes are practically finished.
It is a time of special happiness (ef Isa 16 10).
The gleanings are left to the poor of the village or
town (Lev 19 10; Dt 24 21; Jgs 8 2; Isa 17 6;
24 13; Jer 499; Mic 7 1). In the late summer
the vineyards are a beautiful mass of green, as con-
trasted with the dried-up parched land around, but
in the autumn the leaves are sere and yellow (Isa
34 4), and the place desolate.


The expression ‘‘ vinc of Sodom” (Dt $2 32) has been
supposed, esp. because of the description in Jos (BJ,
IV, viii, 4), to refer to the colocynth
6. Vine of (Ctérullus colocynthis), but it is far more
Sod probable that it means ‘‘a vine whose
odom Juices and frnits were not fresh and
Fe healthy, but tainted by the corruption of
which Sodom was the type’’ (Driver, Comm. on D2).
See Sopom, VINE or.


3051


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Vine
Virgin, Virginity


Figurative: Every man “under his vine and under
his fig-tree” (1 K 4 25; Mic 4 4; Zec 3 10) was
a sign of national peace and prosperity. To plant
vineyards and eat the fruit thereof implied long
and settled habitation (2 K 19 29; Ps 107 37; Isa
37 30; 65 21; Jer 31 5; Ezk 28 26; Am 9 14);
to plant and not eat the fruit was a misfortune
(Dt 20 6; cf 1 Cor 9 7) and might be a sign of
God’s displeasure (Dt 28 30; Zeph 1 13; Am 5
11). Not to plant vines might be a sign of delib-
erate avoidance of permanent habitation (Jer 35
7). A successful and prolonged vintage showed
God's blessing (Lev 26 5), and a fruitful wife is
compared to a vine (Ps 128 3); a failure of the
vine was a sign of God’s wrath (Ps 78 47; Jer 8
13; Joel 1 7); it might be a test of faith m Him
(Hab 3 17). Joseph ‘‘is a fruitful bough, ... . his
branches run over the wall” (Gen 49 22). Israel
is a vine (Isa 6 1-5) brought out of Egypt (Ps 80
8f; Jer 221; 12 10; cf Ezk 15 2.6; 17 6).

a later period vine leaves or grape clusters figure
prominently on Jewish coins or in architecture.

Three of Our Lord’s parables are connected with
vineyards (Mt 20 1 ff; 21 28.33 ff), and He has
made the vine ever sacred in Christian symbolism
by His teaching regarding the true vine (Jn 15).

E. .W. G. Masterman

VINEGAR, vin’é-gér (770, homeg; SEos, dxos):
Vinegar, whose use as a condiment (Ruth 2 14)
needs no comment, is formed when a saccharine
fluid passes through a fermentation that produces
acetic acid. In the ancient world vinegar was
usually made of wine, although any fruit juice can
be utilized in its manufacture, and “‘vinegar of strong
drink” (palm juice?) is mentioned in Nu 6 3. Un-
diluted vinegar is of course undrinkable, and to
offer it to a thirsty man is mockery (Ps 69 21),
but a mixture of water and vinegar makes a bever-
age that was very popular among the poor (Gr
oxos, oxukraton, Lat posca—names applied also to
diluted sour wine). It is mentioned in Nu 6 8 (for-
bidden to the Nazirite) and again in the Gospels in
the account of the Crucifixion. The executioners
had brought it in a vessel (Jn 19 29) for their own
use and at first “offered” it to Christ, while keeping
it out of reach (Lk 28 36). But at the end the
drink was given Him on a sponge (Mk 15 36; Mt
27 48; Jn 19 29.30). In addition, AV, following
TR, has “vinegar . . . . mingled with gall” in Mt
27 34, but this rests on a false reading, probably
due to Ps 69 21, and RVrightly has ‘‘wine.” Vine-
gar, like all acids, is injurious to the teeth (Prov
10 26); and when it is combined with niter an
effervescence is produced (Prov 25 20). The ap-
propriateness of the last figure, however, is obscure,
and LXX reads “as vinegar on a wound,’ causing
pain. Burton Scorr Easton


VINEYARD, vin’yard. See Vine.


VINEYARDS, MEADOW (PLAIN) OF THE
(Jgs 11 33). See ABet-cHERAMIM; MEanow.


VINTAGE, vin'taj.


VIOL, vi'ol ([A2, nébhel, 523, nebhel): AV and
RV in Isa 14 11; Am 5 28; 6 5; AV alone in Isa
5 12, RV “lute.” “Viol” is derived from Lat
vitella, a doublet of vitula, a “viol”; hence Fr.
vielle, doublet of viole. The viol was a bowed in-
strument, the parent of the violin tribe, and is not
a true equivalent for nebhel. See Music.


See V1NE.


VIOLENCE, vi’é-lens, VIOLENT, vi'é-lent:
Chiefly for oT, gdzal, O12, hamas; Bla, bia, and
their derivatives. Difficulty is offered only by the


very obscure passage Mt 11 12 || Lk 16 16. Both
Mt and Lk contain the vb. fidtera:, bidzetat, but
this form may be either a middle, ‘presses violently,”
“storms,” or a passive, “is forced.” Mt, in addi-
tion, contains the adj. biastat, but whether this is
a term of praise, “heroic enthusiasts,” or of blame,
“hot-headed revolutionaries,” is again a problem.
Nor can it be determined whether the words ‘from
the days of John the Baptist until now” are meant
to include or exclude the work of the Baptist him-
self. The difference in wording in Mt and Lk
further complicates the problem, and, in conse-
quence, scholars are widely at variance as to the
proper interpretation. ‘The Baptist has fanned a
new Messianic storm of ill-advised insurrection,”
“the Pharisees have shamefully used forcible sup-
pression of God’s teachers,” “the Kingdom of God
comes like a storm and is reccived by those who
have used drastic self-discipline,” are instances of
the differing explanations proposed.
Burton Scorr Easton

VIPER, vi'pér (WYER, ’eph'eh [Job 20 16; Isa
30 6; 59 5]; exr8va, échidna [Mt 3 7=Lk 3 7;
Mt 12 34; 23 33; Acts 28 3]): Several vipers
are found in Pal, but it is not certain that ’eph‘eh
referred definitely to any of them. See SERPENT.


VIRGIN, vir’jin, VIRGINITY, vér-jin’i-ti: ()
mana , bthalah, from a root meaning “separated,”
is “a woman living apart,’ ie. “in her father’s
house,” and hence “a virgin.” Bthulah seems to
have been the technical term for ‘‘virgin,” as ap-
pears from such a combination as na‘drah bhethilah,
“a damsel, a virgin,” in Dt 22 23.28, etc. An
apparent exception is Joel 1 8, “Lament like a
virgin [b¢thalah}] .... for the husband of her
youth,” but the word is probably due to a wish to
allude to the title “virgin daughter of Zion” (the
tr “a betrothed maiden” is untrue to Heb ‘senti-
ment). And the use of “virgin” for a city (Isa 37
22, etc; cf Isa 28 12; 47 1) probably means “un-
subdued,” though, as often, a title may persist after
its meaning is gone (Jer 81 4). AV and ERV
frequently render b*thilah by “maiden” or ‘‘maid”
(Jgs 19 24, etc), but ARV has used “virgin”
throughout, despite the awkwardness of such a
phrase as “young men and virgins’ (Ps 148 12).
For ‘tokens of virginity” (‘proofs of chastity”)
see the comm. on Dt 22 15 ff. (2) maoy , ‘almah,
rendered in RV by either “damsel” (Ps 68 25),
“maiden” (so usually, Ex 2 8, etc), or “virgin”
with m “maiden” (Cant 13; 6 8; Isa 7 14).
word (see OHL) means simply “young woman”
and only the context can give it the force “virgin.”
This force, however, seems required by the con-
trasts in Cant 6 8, but in 1 3 “virgin” throws the
accent in the wrong place. The controversies re-
garding Isa 7 14 are endless, but LXX took ‘almah
as meaning “virgin” (parthénos). But in NT times
the Jews never interpreted the verse as a prediction
of a virgin-birth—a proof that the Christian faith
did not grow out of this passage. See IMMANUEL;
VirGin-BirtH. (3) rapéévos, parthénos, the usual
Gr word for “virgin” (Jth 16 5, etc; Mt 1 23, ete).
In Rev 14 4 the word is masculine. In 1 Cor 7
25 ff RV has explained “virgin” by writing “virgin
daughter’ in vs 36-38. This is almost certainly
right, but ‘virgin companion” (sce Lietzmann and
J. Weiss in loc.) is not quite impossible. (4) vedus,
nednis, ‘young woman” (Sir 20 4). (5) Lat virgo
(2 Esd 16 38).

The OT lays extreme emphasis on chastity before
marriage (Dt 22 21), but childlessness was so great
a misfortune that death before marriage was to be
bewailed (Jgs 11 37.38). St. Paul’s preference
for the unmarried state (1 Cor 7 29 ff) is based


Virgin-Birth


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3052


on the greater freedom for service (cf Mt 19 12),
and the Gr estimate of virginity as possessing a
religious quality per se is foreign to true Jewish
thought (such a passage as Philo Mund. opif., § 53,
is due to direct Gr influence). Some have thought
to find a trace of the Gr doctrine in Rev 14 4.
But 144,000 1st-cent. Christian ascetics are out of
the question, and the figure must be interpreted
like that of Jas 4 4 (reversed).
Burton Scorr Easton
VIRGIN-BIRTH (OF JESUS CHRIST):


DEFINITION
THe TEextTuaL QUESTION
Tur Historical QUESTION
1. Statement Not Dogmatic but Vital as History
2. Its Importance to Leaders of the Early Church
3. Hypothesis of Invention Discredits the Church
THE CRITICAL QUESTION
1. Basis of Virgin-Birth Statement
2, Interrelationship of Narratives
3. Sources, Origin and Age of Documents
V. Tue DoctrinaL QUESTION
1. Inthe NT
2. Portrait of Jesus in Synoptic Gospels
3. In Rest of the NT
4. Oppositions to the Doctrine
5. Its Importance to Modern Thought
Liter aTURE

I. Definition.—‘Virgin-birth”’ is the correct and
only correct designation of the birth statement
contained in the Gospels of Mt and Lk. ‘“Immacu-
late conception”’ is of course manifestly a blunder
due to the confusion of one idea with another.
“Supernatural or miraculous birth” will not do,
because there is no intimation that the process of
birth was in any way exceptional. ‘Supernatural
or miraculous conception” is equally unsatisfactory
as it involves a question-begging comparison be-
tween the birth of Christ and the exceptional births
of the Sons of Promise (e.g. Isaac, John the Bap-
tist, etc). The only statement which is sufficiently
specific is ‘‘virgin-birth,” inasmuch as according to
the NT statement Mary was at the time of this
birth virgo intacta.

If. The Textual Question.—We may deal with
this division of our subject very briefly, because if
we are to allow any weight at all to textual evidence
there is no question as to the infancy narratives,
either in whole or in part. Their position is flaw-
less and unassailable. There is a voluminous lit-
erature devoted to the discussion of the subject,
but it is notably jejune even for critical writing, and
much more impressive for ingenuity and dialectic
skill in arguing a poor case than for anything in
the way of results. We do not hesitate to refer the
reader who is interested in discussions of this sort
to entirely satisfactory reviews of them found else-
where (see Machen, Princeton Review, October,
1905; January, 1906; and Orr, The Vorgin Birth
of Christ). We may summarize the entire dis-
cussion in the words of Johannes Weiss (Theolo-
gische Rundschau, 19038, 208, quoted by Machen,
ut sup.): ‘There never were forms of Mt and Lk
without the infancy narratives.”” One point only
we shall consider in this connection; namely, the
disputed reading of Mt 1 16. The Ferrar group of
MSS (nos. 346, 556, 826, 828) interpose a second
“begat”? between the names Joseph and Jesus.
It is affirmed that this reading with the variants
represents an original form of the genealogy pre-
served in the Gospels which affirms the literal son-
ship of Jesus to Joseph. The first and most obvious
remark to be made upon this question is, granting—
what is extremely uncertain—that this reading is
original, it does not prove nor begin to prove the
point alleged. This is now widely conceded. For
one thing, the word “‘begat’”’ is used elsewhere for
legal or putative fatherhood (cf ver 12 and see
GENEALOGY oF Jesus Curisr). Allen’s statement
of the case indicates clearly enough that the radical


Ts
Il.
III.


IV.


use of this variation has broken down (see ICC,
“Matthew,” 8). This writer holds that the read-
ing of S 1 (‘Jacob begat Joseph. Joseph, to whom
was betrothed Mary the Virgin, begat Jesus, called
the Messiah,’ Mt 1 16) is nearest the original form.
By four steps, which he enumerates in order, he con-
ceives that the original text, which was intended to
convey the idea of a legal fatherhood on the part
of Joseph, was modified so as to guard the state-
ment from misinterpretation. This hypothesis is
ingenious if somewhat complicated. The weak
spot in the whole case (for the variation) lies in the
fact that all MSS concur in the name of Mary and
the term “‘virgin.”’ It is evident, in any view of the
relative standing of the various readings, (1) that
the genealogy as deposited in public or private
record would read: “Jacob begat Joseph, Joseph
begat Jesus,” (2) that the person who used the
genealogy in the Gospel and placed it in connection
with vs 18-25 (a) had Mary particularly in mind
and inserted the names of women to prepare the
way for the mention of Mary, all of which was a
departure from usual and orderly procedure; (6)
that he used the word “‘begat’’ in the legal sense
throughout (vs 8.12; ef 1 Ch 8 11.12.19); (c) that
he believed in the virgin-birth as evinced by the
connection and the use of names of women in-
cluding Mary’s. There is therefore no basis for
the idea that the genealogy, even without the
strongly attested relative clause of 1 16, ever
tae anything but an attestation of the virgin-

irth.

II, The Historical Question.—The twofold birth
announcement of Mt and Lk is a statement of his-


torical or, more strictly speaking,
1. State- biographical fact. The accounts, as
ment Not we shall see, are very rigidly confined
Dogmatic tothe matter of fact concerned. It is
but Vital not a dogma and receives very little
as History doctrinal elaboration even in the in-


fancy narratives themselves. It is
an event, wholly real or wholly imaginary. The
statement of it is wholly true or entirely false. But
as a historical statement this narrative is of pecul-
jar quality and significance. (1) It touches upon
the most delicate matters, at a place where the line
between that which is most sacred and that which
is most degraded in human life is closely drawn.
To discredit it leaves the most intimate mystery of
Our Lord’s earthly life under the shadow of sus-
picion. It is therefore a statement of the greatest
personal moment in the evangelic record. (2) It
involves the secret history and public honor of a
family most dear and sacred to the entire Christian
body. It records the inner and outer experiences
of the mother of the Lord and of His brethren,
themselves honored leaders in the church. (3) It
touches upon the central mystery of the Lord’s
person in such a way as to involve either a very
important contribution to the doctrine of the incar-
nation or a very serious mutilation of the truth.
We may dismiss altogether the contention of many,
that whether true or not the fact is of no great im-
portance. It must be of importance. No fact in
which the relationship of Jesus to His ancestors
according to the flesh, to His mother, to the laws
of life in the race at large, are so evidently and so
deeply involved can possibly be a matter of in-
difference. The nature of His experience in the
world, the quality and significance of His manhood,
the fundamental constitution of His person, the
nature and limits of the incarnation are necessarily
and vitally concerned in the discussion. It is im-
possible to begin with the acceptance or rejection
of the fact and arrive by logical processes at like
convictions on any fundamental matter in the
region of Christology.


3053


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Virgin-Birth


All this must have been as patent to the carliest
believers as to ourselves. The men who incorpo-
rated this incident into the gospel nar-

2. ItsIm- rative could not possibly have been
portance to blind to the importance of what they
Leaders of were doing (cf Lk 1 3), In view of
the Early these facts it would be well for the
Church serious student to ask himself this
question: “On the hypothesis of in-
vention, what manner of men were they who fab-
ricated these narratives and succeeded in foisting
them upon the church so early as to dominate its
earliest official records and control the very making
of allits creeds?” It is clear that deliberate inven-
tion is the only alternative to historical credit.
We may throw out of court as altogether inad-
missible the hypothesis that the church as a whole,
by a naive and semi-unconscious process, came to
believe these stories and to accept them without
criticism. Rumors always grow in the absence of
known facts, esp. where curiosity is keen. Absurd
rumors multiply among the credulous. But no
statement contrary to natural expectation was ever
yet promulgated among people of even average
intelligence without meeting the resistance of in-
credulity on the part of some individuals who wish
to inquire, esp. if means of verification are within
reach. In this particular instance, the issue may be
stated much more sharply. At no period reason-
ably to be assigned for the origin and incorporation
of these documents could they have been honestly
accepted by any member of the Christian commu-
nity, sufficiently taught to occupy a position of
authority. If the story was invented, there must
have been a time when Jesus was universally ac-
cepted as the son by natural generation of Joseph
and Mary. The story surely was not invented be-
fore His birth nor for some time after. The first
person, therefore, who spoke contrary to the prev-
alent and natural belief must have had it from the
family, which alone knew the truth, or else have
been a wanton and lying gossip. Such a story is
recognizable on the face of it as authoritative or
pure invention. There is no middle ground. It
could not have been recounted without being
challenged for its strangeness and for its contra-
vention of the accepted belief. It could not have
been challenged without the exposure of its ground-
less and fraudulent character, for the simple reason
that the lack of positive and authoritative cer-
tification would be its immediate and sufficient
condemnation. It is not difficult to draw the por-
trait of the inventor of this story. He must have
been lacking, not only in the sense of truthfulness,
but also in the elementary instinct of delicacy, to
have invaded the privacy of the most sacred home
known to him and deliberately invented a narrative
which included the statement that Mary had come
under suspicion of wrongdoing in such a way as to
shadow the lifeof her Son. He must also have been
doctrinally lax in the extreme, as well as tempera-
mentally presumptuous, to have risked a mutila-
tion of the truth by an invention dealing with such
essential matters. F ‘
Moreover, this hypothesis demands that this
fabrication must have met with instantaneous and
universal success. It passed the scru-

3. Hypothe- tiny of the church at large and of its


sis of In- authorized teachers, and was never
vention challenged save by a small group of
Discredits heretics who disliked it on purely


the Church dogmatic grounds.


To whatever origin in the way of suggestion from
without one may attribute the story—whether one ma
ascribe it to the influence of OT prophecy, or Jewis
Messianic expectations in general, or to ethnic analogies,
Bab. Egyp or Gr—the fact remains that the story had


to be invented and published by those who ought to
have known hetter and could easily have known better
had they possessed sufficient interest in the canse
of truth to have made even casual inquiries into the cre-
dentials of such an important statement offered for their
acceptance. It is fairly true to say that ethnic anal-
ogles for the birth of Christ fail (see art. on ‘‘ Heathen
Wonder-Births and the Birth of Christ," Princeton
Review, January, 1908). It is also true that the rooted
Sem convictlon shared by the Hehrews, that famlly
descent is to be traccd through the male line only, so
persistent even among the NT writers that hoth evan-

elists, on the face of them, trace the lineage of

Oseph, would have acted as an effectual barrier against
this particular ean development. It is further
true that no passage of the OT, including Isa 7 14, can
be adduced as convincing evidence that the story was
invented under the motive of finding fulfilment for
Messianlc predictions (see ImmMaNuEL). But far more
satisfactory Is the elementary conviction that the
founders of the Christian church and the writers of its
documents were not the kind of men to accept or cir-
culate stories which they knew perfectly well would he
used hy unhelief in a malignant way to the discredit
of thelr Master and His family. The hypothesis of
invention not only leaves an ugly cloud of mystery over
the birth of Jesus, but it discredits beyond repair every
man who had to do with the writing and circulation of
the Gospels, down to and including the man who pro-
fesses to have ‘‘traced the course of all things accu-
rately from the heginning,’’ according to the testimony
of those who were ‘‘eyewitnesses and ministers of the
word” (Le 1 2f). It is simply impossihle to save the
credit, in any matter involving honesty or common-
sense, Of one who uses words like these and yet incor-
porates unauthenticated legends into the narrative to
which he has thus pledged himself.


_One may venture at the close of this section of the
discussion to point out that everything which the
inventor of this story must have been, the narrators
of it are not. Both narratives exhibit a profound
reverence, a chaste and gracious reserve in the
presence of a holy mystery, a simplicity, dignity
and self-contained nobility of expression which are
the visible marks of truth, if such there are any-
where in human writing.

_IV. The Critical Question.—The infancy narra-
tives evidently stand somewhat apart from the main

body of apostolic testimony. The per-
1. Basis of sonal contact of the disciples with
Virgin-Birth Jesus, upon which their testimony pri-
Statement marily rests, extended from the call of
hae the disciples, near the opening of the
ministry, to the resurrection and post-resurrection
appearances. It is hyper-skepticism to deny that
the substance of the gospel narrative rests upon the
basis of actual experience. But all four evangelists
show a disposition to supplement the immediate
testimony of the disciples by the use of other well-
attested materials. Luke’s introductory paragraph,
if it was written by an honest man, indicates that
he at least was satisfied with nothing less than a
careful scrutiny of original sources, viz. the testi-
mony, written or oral, of eyewitnesses. It may
reasonably be surmised that this was the general
attitude of the entire group of apostles, evangelists
and catechists who are responsible for the author-
ship and circulation of the Gospels.

But, to say nothing of the infancy narratives, for
one of which Luke himself is responsible, these writers
have embodied in the narrative the ministry of John the
Baptist, the baptism and temptation of Jesus, all of
which events happened before their fellowship with
Jesus, strictly speaking, began. In particular, assuredly
no disciple was an eyewitness of the temptation. None
the less the narrative stands, simply because imaginative
Invention of such an incident in the absence of accred-
ited facts cannot reasonably he considered. The fact
that the birth narratives do not rest upon the testimony
of the same eyewitnesses who stand for the ministry of
Jesus does not discredit them as emhodying reliahle
tradition, unless it can he proved that they contradict
the rest of the apostolic testimony or that no reliable
witness to the events in question was within reach at
the time when the documents were composed. In the
present instance such a contention is absurd. The
very nature of the event points out the inevitahle first-
hand witnesses. There could he no others. In the
absence of their decisive word, bald invention would
he necessary. To charge the entire church of the time
(for this is what the hypothesis amounts to) as particeps


Virgin-Birth


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3054


criminis in its own official and dacumentary deception
is an extreme position as unwarranted as it is cruel.
The internal harmony of the facts as recorded
points in the same direction. The silence or com-
parative lack of emphasis with reference to the birth
of Christ on the part of the other NT writers is to
be explained partly on the basis of doctrinal view-
point (see V, below) and partly because an ingrained
sense of delicacy would naturally tend to reticence
on this point, at least during the lifetime of Mary
and the Lord’s brethren. The following intimately
corresponding facts are sufficiently significant in
this connection: (1) that the fact of Jesus’ unique
birth could not be proclaimed as a part of His own
teaching or as the basis of His incarnate life; (2) that
He was popularly known as the sou of Joseph; (3)
that the foster-fatherhood of Joseph, as embodied
in the genealogy (sce GENEALOGY oF JESUS CHRIS‘),
was the recognized basis of His relationship to the
house of David. All these facts appear just as
they should in the narrative. The very fact that
the genealogies, ending with the name of Joseph,
and the current representations of Jesus as Joseph’s
son, are allowed to appear in the same documents
in which the virgin-birth statements appear, to-
gether with the entirely congruous facts that the
main synoptic narrative does not emphasize the
event, and that neither Paul nor John nor any other
NT writer gives it a prominent place, is indication
enough that it rested, in the opinion of the entire
witnessing body, ona sufficient basis of evidence and
required no artificial buttressing. Internal har-
monies and incidental marks of truthfulness are of
the utmost importance here because in a narrative
so complex and vital it would have been easy to
make a misstep. Since none was made, we are con-
strained to believe that the single eye to truth filled
the apostolic mind with light. Every item, in the
infancy narratives themselves, as well as in the more
strictly doctrinal statements of other NT books, is
as we should expect, provided the birth statement
be accepted as true. Internal evidence of truthful-
ness could not be stronger.
This general conclusion is confirmed when we
come to consider the relationship of the two narra-
tives to each other. To begin with, we


2. Inter- have two narratives, differing greatly
relation- in method of treatment, grouping of
ship of details, order and motive of narration,
Narratives and gencral atmosphere. It is evi-


dent that we have two documents
which have had quite a different history.


In two points, at any rate, what might be considered
serious discrepancies #re discoverable (see DiscrEPan-
cries, BisuicaL), These two points are: (1) the rela-
tionship of the Massacre of the Innocents and the jour-
ney to Egypt, asrelated by Matthew, to Luke's account,
which carries the holy family directly back to Nazareth
from Bethlehem after the presentation in the temple;
(2) the discrepancy as to the previous residence at
Nazareth (Lk) and the reason given for the return
thither (Mt). As to (1) it is quite clear that Mat-
thew’s account centers ahout an episode interpolated, so
to say, into the natural order of events (see INNOcENTs,

ASBACRE OF THE). It is also clear that the order of
Luke's narrative, which isin the highest degree condensed
and synoptic, does not forhid the introduction of even
a lengthy train of events into the midst of ver 39 (cf
condensation in vs 40—42.51.52). It may easily be
that the lacunae in each account are due to a lack of
knowledge on the part of either writer as to the point
supplied hy the other. Matthew may not have known
that the family had resided formerly in Nazareth, and
Luke may not have known that a return to Galilee as
a permanent residence was not contemplated in the
original plan. The difficulty here is not serious. We
consider the discrepancy as it stands as of more value
to the account as Indicating the independence of the
two accounts and the honesty of those who incorporated
them into the Gospels without attempting to harmo-
nize them, than any hypothetical harmonization however
satisfactory. We introduce this caveat, however, that
Matthew had an especial reason for introducing the
episode connected with Herod and for explaining the
residence at Nazareth during Our Lord's early years


as occurring by Divine authority (see Sweet, Birth and
Infancy of Jesus Christ, 218f, for discussion of this
point; and cf Innocents, MassacR& OF THE).


We are now free to consider the remarkable con-
vergence of these two documents. The following
particulars may be urged: (1) the synchronism in
the Herodian era; (2) the name “Jesus” given by
Divine authority before birth; (8) Davidic kinship;
(4) the virgin-birth; (5) the birth at Bethlehem;
(6) residence at Nazareth. In addition we may
urge the essential and peculiar harmony of descrip-
tive expressions (see V, below) and the correspond-
ence of the inner and outer experiences of Mary
(see Mary, II).

We have now reached the final and crucial point
of this phase of our discussion when we take up the

question as to the sources, origin and
3. Sources, date of these narratives. Our method
Origin and of approach to the general question of
Age of their credibility delivers us from the
Documents necessity of arguing in extenso the

theories which have been framed to
account for the narrative in the absence of historical
fact. We resort to the simple and convincing prin-
ciple that the story could not have been honestly
composed nor honestly published as derived from any
source other than the persons who could have guar-
anteed its trustworthiness. Every indication, of
which the narratives are full, of honesty and intelli-
gence on the part of the narrators is an argument
against any and all theories which presuppose a
fictitious origin for the central statement. Nega~
tively, we may with confidence assert that wide
excursions into ethnic mythology and folklore have
failed to produce a single authentic parallel either
in fact or in form to the infancy narratives. In
addition to this, the attempt to deduce the story
from Messianic prophecy also fails to justify itself.
In addition, there are two considerations which may
justly be urged as pointing to trustworthy sources
for the narrative: First, the strongly Hebraic nature
of both narratives. It has often been pointed out
that nowhere in the NT do we find documents so
deeply tinged with the Hebraic spirit (see Adeney,
Essays for the Times, no. XI, 241f; and Briggs, New
Lights on the Life of Christ, 161). This statement
involves both narratives and is another evidence of
profound internal unity. A second important fact
is that the doctrinal viewpoint is Jewish-Christian
and undeveloped. The term “Holy Spirit” is used
in the OT sense; the Christology is undeveloped,
omitting reference to Christ’s preéxistence and in-
terpreting His sonship as official and ethical rather
than metaphysical. The soteriology is Jewish and
Messianic, not unfolding the doctrine of the cross.
All these facts point in one direction, namely, to
the conclusion that these documents areearly. It is
impossible reasonably to suppose that such docu-
ments could have been composed in the absence of
sources, or by persons devoid of the historical spirit,
after the death and resurrection and ascension of
Jesus had shed such light upon His person and mis-
sion as to transform both Christology and soteriology
through the ideas of incarnation, atonement and
the Trinity.

It is still asserted, in the face of the most convincing
evidence to the contrary, that the infancy narratives
are late addenda to the gospel tradition as a whole.
This idea is due, primarily, to a confusion of thought
between origin and publication. The latter must have
been coincident with the original issue of the Gospels
in their present form. The textual evidence here is
convincing. On the other hand, the main body of testi-
mony incorporated into the Gospels at the time of
their publication had been in the hands of the apostles
and their helpers for some years, as evidenced by the
Pauline letters and the Book of Acts. In all probability
the sources npon which the infancy narratives rest,


which had their origin and received the impress which
characterizes them in the period antecedent to the


3055


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Virgin-Birth


puhiic ministry of Jesus, came into the hands of the
Gospel writers toward the end of the formative period
at the close of which the Gospels were !ssued. In other
words, the story of the Lord’s birth was withheld until
the time was up for its publication. Two occasions
may have served to release it: the death of Mary may
have made it possible to use her private memoirs, or
the rise of anti-Christian calumny may have made the
publication of the true history imperative. At any
rate, the narratives show every Indication of being
contemporary documents of the period with which they
deal. This fact puts an additional burden of proof,
already heavier than they can bear, upon those who
would antagonize the documents. We may reasonably
affirm that the narratives will bear triumphantly any
fair critical test.


V. The Doctrinal Question.—The discussion of
the doctrinal significance of the virgin-birth state-
ment falls naturally into three parts:
1. In (1) its doctrinal elaboration in the NT;
the NT (2) its historic function in the develop-
ment of Christian doctrine; (3) its per-
manent value to Christian thought. We begin with
the narratives themselves. As has just been said,
they were incorporated into the Gospels at a time
when the NT Christology had reached maturity in
the Pauline and Johannine writings and the Ep. to
the He. The doctrine of the incarnation was fully
unfolded. It had been unequivocally asserted that
in Jesus all the fulness of the Godhead was his-
torically and personally manifested (Jn 1 14; Phil
2 5-8; Col 118; 29; He 2 14). In contrast
with these statements the infancy narratives not
only, as adverted to above, exhibit on the surface
a rudimentary Christology, but in several items, of
profound interest and most surprising tenor, show
that the birth notice was not apprehended or stated
in view of the doctrine of the incarnation at all.
The detailed justification of this statement follows:
(1) Matthew (see 1 18-25) does not use the term ‘‘Son
of God.’’. The only expression implying a unique rela-
tionship to God, other than in the ‘‘of Holy Spirit’’
hrase, twice used, is in the word ‘‘Immannel’”’ quoted
rom Isa, which does not necessarily involve incarnation.
At the beginning of the genealogy Jesus is introduced
as the son of David, the son of Abraham. (2) The
assertion as to His conception by Hoiy Spirit is condi-
tioned by three striking facts: (a) His conception is
interpreted in, terms of conception by the power of
Holy Spirit, not of begetting by the Father. The OT
expression ‘This day have I begotten thee,'’ used twice,
occurs in quite a different connection (He 1 5; 5 5).
(b) The term “Holy Spirit’’ is used without the article.
(c) The phrase descriptive of the being conceived is
expressed | in the neuter, ‘the thing conceived in her is of
Holy Spirit’ (73 yap év aury yevundév cx mveipatos cot ayiov,
t6 gaér en auté gennéthén ek paces estin hagtou).
The ae pee of these three facts is (i) that


the sons of Jesus through His exceptionai birth is
interpreted in terms of Divine power working upon
humanity, not as the correlative of Divine and essentiai


fatherhood; it is the historical sonship that is in view
(contrast with this the two passages in. He referred to
above); Gi) the writer is speaking in the OT sense of
“Holy Spirit” as the forthgoing of creative power from
God, not as personal hypostasis; (iii) he is also emphasiz-
ing (in the use of the neuter) the reality of the physical
birth. These three facts, ali the more remarkable
because they are attributed to a heavenly messenger
who might be expecied to speak more fully concerning
the mystery, exclude the supposition that we have one
historic form of the doctrine of incarnation. On the
contrary, had we no other statements than those found
here we should be unabie logically to postulate an in-
carnation. Every statement made concerning Jesus,
apart from the virgin-birth statement itself, might be
true were He the son of Joseph and Mary.
The case is far stronger when we turn to Luke’s
account, in spite of the fact that the terms ‘‘Son of the
Most High” and ‘‘Son of God” ordinarily implying
incarnation are used. We notice (d) that the anartbrons
use of ‘‘Holy Spirit’ reappears and that a poetic parallel-
ism defines the term (ver 35), making ‘‘Holy Spirit’ =
“Power of the Most High’’; (¢) that the neuter phrase
is also found here, ‘‘the holy thing which is begotten,
etc (bid Kai To yerydpevov aytov KAnOycerat, did kat t6
genndmenon hdgion hlathésetai); (f) that future tenses
are used in connection with His career and the titles
which He bears: ‘‘ He shall be [as the outcome of a proc-
ess] great,"’ and ‘‘ He shall be called [as a matter of ulti-
mate titular recog anion the Son of the Most High
ver 32); ‘The holy thing... . shall be called the
on of God" (ver 35). In these instances the title is
connected directly with the career rather than the birth.


Even the ‘‘ wherefore”’ of ‘ver 35, in connection with the
future vb., carries the power of God manifested in the
hely conception forward into the entire career of Jesus
rather than bases the career upon the initial miracle.
These three facts taken together excinde the reference
to any conception of the Incarnation. The incarnation
is directly and inseparably connected with Christ’s
eternal sonship to the Father. The title “‘Son of God’”’
includes that but does not specify it. It includes also
the ethical, historical, human sonship. The term ‘‘ Holy
Spirlt’’ used without the article also is a comprehensive
expression covering both a work of Divine power In
any sphere and a work of Divine grace in the personal
sphete oniy.

These accounts are concerned with the historic
fact rather than its metaphysical implications.
This historic fact is interpreted in terms of a Divine
power in and through the human career of Jesus.
(which is so stated as to include an impersonal,
germinal life) rather than a dogmatic definition of
the Messiah’s essential nature. The omission of all
reference to preéxistence is negatively conclusive
on this point. The Divine power manifested in His
exceptional origin is thought of as extending on and
including His entire career. This leads us directly
to a second phase in the interpretation of Christ
and compels to a reconsideration at a new angle
of the miracle of His origin.

The narrators of the life and ministry of Jesus
on the basis of ascertained fact and apostolic testi-
mony were confronted with a very
definite and delicate task. They had
to tell with unexaggerating truthful-
ness the story of the human life of
Jesus. Their ultimate aim was to
justify the doctrine of incarnation, but
they could not have been unaware that the genuine
and sincere humanity of Christ was a pillar of the
doctrine quite as much as His essential Deity. To
portray the human experience of a being considered
essentially Divine was the Herculean task attempted
and carned to a successful issue in the Synoptic
Gospels. These writers do not conceal for a moment
their conviction that they are depicting the career
of the wonder-working Son of God, but they never
forget that it is a career of self-limitation within
the human sphere, the period of self-imposed and
complete humiliation undertaken on behalf of the
Father, “for us men and for our salvation.” Hence
the nature and limitations of the narrative. Mark
omits reference to the virgin-birth. Matthew and
Luke narrate it and forthwith drop it. These facts
are exactly onapar. It isno more remarkable that
Mark omits the story than that Matthew and Luke
make so little of it. ‘To allege either fact as a motive
to doubt is to misinterpret the whole situation. By
the terms of their task they could do nothing else.
The Fourth Gospel and the Epp. announce that the
human life of Jesus was due to the voluntary extra-
temporal act of a preéxistent Divine being, but in
the synoptic narrative four passages only hint at
preéxistence, and then as incidental flashes from
the inner consciousness of Jesus. This omission is
no more remarkable and no less so than the omis-
sions noted above. By the terms of their task the
synoptic writers could do nothing else. The fact
of preéxistence could be announced only when the
earthly task had been triumphantly finished (see
Mk 99.11). During the entire period of the
earthly life as such Jesus was under trial (note Mt
8 17, correctly translating the acrist; cf the re-
markable words of Jn 10 17), performing a task,
accomplishing a commission, achieving a victory
as human son. The story of the Temptation ex-
hibits the conditions under which Jesus performed
His task. The temptations were one and all ad-
dressed to His consciousness as God’s Son. They
were resisted on the sole basis of self-humiliation
and dependence. The entire synoptic narrative is
consistent with this representation. Jesus is con-


2. Portrait
of Jesus in
Synoptic
Gospels


Virgin-Birth
Vision


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3056


sciously one in will and spirit with God, but that
oneness with God is consummated and conducted
in the Spirit, through faith, by prayer. They de-
scribe His entire career of holiness, wisdom and
power, each unique, in the terms of the Spirit-filled,
trustful, prayerful human life. Here is the vital
point. They disclose the eternal Sonship (in which
beyond question they believe) on its ethical, not on
its metaphysical side, by prediction of His future
triumph rather than by definition of His person.
In such a narrative, consistently carried out, there
can be no resort to the preéxistent, eternal Sonship,
nor to the miracle of His human origin in the story
of His career under trial, In particular, the miracle,
whereby His germinal connection with the race
was established could not extend to the personal
and spiritual life in which His victory was His own
through the personal Holy Spirit. The argument
from the virgin-birth to His sinlessness (see IMMa-
CULATE CONCEPTION) was made by the church, not
by the NT writers. The sinlessness of Christ was
His own achievement in the flesh which He sacrificed
through His holy will of obedience to the Father.
This leads us to a third phase of development
in the NT doctrine of incarnation. In the Fourth
Gospel and the Epp. it is asserted that
3. In Rest the innermost moral significance of the
of the NT earthly career of Jesus lay in the fact
that it was the consistent carrying-out
of an extra-temporal volition of Divine mercy and
love whereby He became the Revealer of God and
the Saviour of men. This doctrine is based upon
the story of the human career completed in the
glorification which, according to the testimony,
ensued upon His death and disclosed His place
in the Divine sphere of being. But it is also based
upon the virgin-birth narrative and grounded in it.
Attention has already been called to the fact that
the virgin-birth is not (in the infancy narrative)
connected with the metaphysical sonship of Jesus.
All that is said then, doctrinally, concerning Jesus
might be true were He the son of Joseph and Mary.
On the contrary, what is said in Jn and the Epp.
depends upon the virgin-birth narrative for its
foundational basis. It has often been asserted
that Paul and John do not refer to the virgin-birth.
This statement the present writer takes to be more
than doubtful, but if it is true, all the more striking
is the indirect and unconscious testimony to the
virgin-birth involved in their doctrinal reliance upon
it. According to these writers the incarnation was
due to a Divine act of self-limitation whereby the
Divine mode of existence was exchanged for the
human (Phil 2 5-11 et al.). According to the
infancy narrative, the birth of Jesus was due to a
Divine creative act whereby a human life began
germinally and passed through the successive stages
of growth to maturity. The synoptic narrative
outside the infancy narrative supplies a third point,
that the entire conscious personal career of Jesus
upon earth was lived in the power of the Holy
Spirit. The infancy narrative is the keystone of
an arch, one half resting upon the synoptic account,
the other upon the doctrinal construction of Jn
and the Epp. The virgin-birth statement by its
adoption of OT terminology makes room for a Di-
vine activity both in the impersonal and in the per-
sonal spheres. The doctrine of incarnation implies
that as in every new human being the creative Di-
vine power manifests itself impersonally in germinal
beginnings, so in the life of Christ the Divine power
conditions itself within the impersonal forces of
germinant life with this important and_ suggestive
difference: In the career of Jesus there issues from
the sphere of germinal beginnings not a new human
person created from the life-stock of the race, but the
personal human life, including all human powers,


of a preéxistent Divine person self-conditioned and
self-implanted within the human sphere. The
central conscious self, the agent of His activities
and the subject of His experiences in the historic
sphere was the eternal Son of God. His life in the
human sphere was that of a true human being in
the full actuality of a human life. Hence it follows,
since ordinary generation involves necessarily (that
is the intent of it) the origination of a new person
not hitherto existing, that the birth of Jesus could
not have been by ordinary generation. The birth
of Christ through ordinary generation would have
involved a quite incomprehensible miracle, namely,
the presence and action of the ordinary factors in
human origins with a contrary and unique result.
The virgin-birth is the only key that fits the vacant
space in the arch. In addition it may reasonably
be urged that the relationship of human parents to
each other, ordinarily a natural, necessary and
sacred act, could bave no part in this transaction,
while the very fact that Mary’s relationship was to
God alone, in an act of submission involving com-
plete self-renunciation and solitary enclosure within
the Divine will, fulfils the spiritual conditions of this
unique motherhood as no other imaginable expe-
rience could.
Historically the virgin-birth statement performed
a function commensurate with the importance as-
eribed to it in this discussion rather
4. Opposi- than the current depreciation of it.
tions to the The doctrine of Christ was menaced in
Doctrine two opposite directions, which may be
designated respectively by the terms
“Ebionite”’ and ‘‘Gnostic.”” According to the former
teaching (the word “‘Ebionite’’ being used in a general
sense only), Jesus was reduced to the human category
and interpreted as a Spirit-led man or prophet, in the
OT meaning oftheterm. According to the opposite
tendency, He was interpreted as Divine, while His
human experience was reduced to mere appearance
or a temporary external union with the Logos. The
virgin-birth statement resisted both these tendencies
with equal effectiveness. On the one hand, it
asserted with unequivocal definiteness a real hu-
manity conditioned by true birth into an actual
connection with the race. On the other hand, it
asserted an exceptional birth, setting Jesus apart
as one whose entrance into the world was due to a
new, creative contact of God with the race. His-
torically, it is difficult to sce how the NT doctrine
could have escaped mutilation apart from the state-
ment, seemingly framed with express reference to
conditions arising afterward, which so wonderfully
guarded it. The holy mystery of the Lord’s origin
became the symbol of the holier mystery of His
Divine nature. It thus appears in every one of the
historic creeds, an assertion of fact around which
the belief of the church crystallized into the faith
which alone accounts for its history, a profound and
immovable conviction that Jesus Christ was really
incarnate Deity.
The importance for modern thinking of the virgin-
birth statement is threefold: (1) First, it involves
in general the question, never more


6. ItsIm- vital than at the present time, of the
portance to trustworthiness of the gospel tradition.
Modern This particular fact, i.e. the virgin-
Thought birth, has been a favorite, because


apparently a vulnerable, point of
attack. But the presuppositions of the attack and
the method according to which it has been con-
ducted involve a general and radical undermining
of confidence in the testimony of the gospel wit-
nesses. This process has finally met its nemesis in
the Christus-myth propaganda. The virgin-birth
statement can be successfully assailed on no grounds
which do not involve the whole witnessing body of


3057


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Virgin-Birth
Vision


Christians in charges of blind credulity or wilful
falsification, very unjust indeed as respects their
character and standing in general, but very difficult
to repel in view of the results of denial at this
point.

(2) The virgin-birth is important for the simple
historical reason that it involves or is involved in a
clear and consistent account of the Lord’s birth and
early years. Apart from the infancy narratives
we are utterly without direct information as to His
birth, ancestry or early years. Apart from these
narratives we have no information as to the marriage
of Joseph and Mary; we are shut up to vague infer-
ences as to this entire period. No biographer ever
leaves these points obscure if he can avoid it. It is
very earnestly suggested that those who cast dis-
credit upon the infancy story do not clearly recog-
nize the seriousness of the situation brought about
in the absence of any narrative which can be trusted
as to this vital point. Calumny there is and has
been from an early day. If there is nowhere an
authoritative answer to the calumny, in what sort
of a position is the Christian believer placed? He
can assert nothing, because apart from what he has
too lightly thrown away he knows nothing.

(3) Lastly, the more closely the statement as to
the Lord’s birth is studied, the more clearly it will
be seen that it involves in a most vital and central
way the entire doctrine of the incarnation. This
doctrine is an interpretation of facts. Those facts
stand together. In the midst of those facts, har-
monizing with them, shedding light upon them and
receiving light from them, resting upon the same
consentient testimony is the statement, which is
thus worded in the oldest symbol of our historical
faith: “Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the
Virgin Mary” (see Aposties’ Creep). There is
no adequate reason why the intelligent believer
should feel uncertain as to this statement of our
holy religion.

LiveRATURE.—There is a vast and growing literature
which more or less directly deals with the subject of
Onr Lord's birth. The literature may be classified_as
follows: (1) Lives of Christ; (2) critical comms. on Mt
and Lk; (3) critical and historical investigations of
Christian origins; (4) monographs on the Apostles’
Creed; (5) monographs and arts. on the specifle sub-
ject. For a list and analysis of discussions see Sweet,
Birth and Infancy of Jesus Christ, 354-57.

Louis Matruews Swenr

VIRTUE, vir’ti: This word has two quite dis-
tinct meanings in AV: (1) It was formerly often
used in the now obsolete sense of “manly power,”
“valor,” “efficacy” (Lat virtus, “manly strength”
or “excellence,” from vir, “man’”’):

“Trust in thy single virtue; for thy soldiers
All levied in thy name, have in thy name
Took their discharge."
—Shakespeare, King Lear, V, ili, 103 ff.
It was also used in the sense of a mighty work,
a miracle. Thus Wycliffe translates Mt 11 20:
“Thanne Jhesus bigan to saye repreef to cities in
whiche ful many vertues of him weren don.” So in
AV Mk 6 30; Lk 6 19; 8 46, in the sense of
“ower,” “miraculous energy or influence’ (dévayes,
dinamis, “inherent power, residing in the nature of
a thing”; contrast éfovcla, exousia, “‘power arising
from external opportunity or liberty of action”). In
these passages it is tr? in RV “power” (as elsewhere
in AV; cf Acts 8 12, etc). (2) In its ordinary
modern meaning of “moral goodness” it occurs in
AV and RV Wisd 4 1; 5 13; 8 7; Phil 4 8; 2 Pet
1 3.5. In these passages it stands for dpery, areté,
the usual classical term for “moral excellence”
(originally “fitness” of any sort), used in LXX to
translate words meaning “glory,” ‘praiseworthi-
ness,” as in Hab 3 3; Isa 42 12; 63 7 (of God);
Zee 6 13 (of the Messiah). The LXX sense may
color the meaning of the word as applied to God


in 2 Pet 1 3 RV; as also in its pl. use (of God) in
I Pet 2 9 (AV “praises,”’ RV “excellencies’’).

The adj. “virtuous” occurs in AV, ERV Ruth 3
Il; Prov 12 4; 31 10 (ARV ‘“worthy’’), and the
advb. “virtuously’’ in Prov 31 29(ARV “worthily’’),
in each: case for Son, hayil, “strength,’’ “force”
(whether of body or of mind), then in a moral sense
of “worth,” “virtue.” D. Miati Epwarps


VISION, vizh’un (JI, hazin, JIN, hizzayon,
ANA, mar’ah; Spapa, hérama, orracla, optasia):
Psychologists find that man is prevailingly and per-
sistently ‘“eye-minded.” That is, in his waking
life he is likely to think, imagine and remember in
terms of vision. Naturally then, his dreaming is
predominantly visual; so strongly visual, we are
told, that it is not rare to find dreams defined as
“trains of fantastic images.’”’ Whether man was
made this way in order that God might communi-
cate with him through dreams and visions is hardly
worth debating; if the records of human life, in
the Bible and out of it, are to be trusted at all, there
is nothing better certified than that God has com-
municated with man in this way (Ps 89 19; Prov
29 18; cf Am 8 11.12; Hos 12 10). If one is
disposed to regard the method as suited only to
primitive peoples and superstitious natures, it still
remains true that the experience is one associated
with lives and characters of the most saintly and
exalted kind (1 8 31; Jer 111; Ezk 11; Dnl
219; Acts 9 10; 10 3; 16 9).

The vision may come in one’s waking moments
(Dnl 10 7; Acts 9 7); by day (Cornelius, Acts
10 3; Peter, Acts 10 9ff; cf Nu 24 4.16) or night
(Jacob, Gen 46 2); but commonly under condi-
tions of dreaming (Nu 12 6; Job 4 13; Dnl 4 9).
The objects of vision, diverse and in some instances
strange as they are, have usually their points of
contact with experiences of the daily life. Thus
Isaiah’s vision of the seraphim (6 2) was doubtless
suggested by familiar figures used in the decoration
of the temple at Jerus; Paul’s ‘‘man of Macedonia”
(Acts 16 9) had its origin in some poor helot whom
Paul had seen on the streets of Troas and who em-
bodied for him the pitiful misery of the regions
across the sea; and “Jacob’s ladder” (Gen 28 12)
was but a fanciful development of the terraced
land which he saw sun-glorified before him as he
went to sleep. Among the recurring objects of
vision are natural objects—trivers, mountains, trees,
animals—with which man has daily and hourly
association.

The character of the revelation through vision
has a double aspect in the Bib. narrative. In one
aspect it proposes a revelation for immediate di-
rection, as in the case of Abram (Gen 16 2 and
frequently); Lot (Gen 19 15); Balaam (Nu 22 22),
and Peter (Acts 12 7). In another aspect it deals
with the development of the Kingdom of God
as conditioned by the moral ideals of the people;
such are the prophetic visions of Isaiah, Hzckiel,
Hosea, and Micah, and the apocalypses of Daniel
and John. The revelation for immediate direction
has many correspondences in the life of the devout
in all ages; the prophetic vision, dealing in a pene-
trating way with the sources of national growth and
decay, has its nearest approach in the deliverances
of publicists and statesmen who are persuaded that
the laws of God, as expressed in self-control, truth,
justice, and brotherly love, are supreme, and that
the nations which disregard them are marked for
ultimate and speedy extinction.

From the nature of the vision as an instrument
of Divine communication, the seeing of visions is
naturally associated with revivals of religion (Ezk
12 21-25; Joel 2 28; cf Acts 2 17), and the ab-


Visitation
Vulgate


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3058


sence of visions with spiritual decline (Isa 29 11.
12; Lam 29; Ezk 7 26; Mic 8 6).

One may see visions without being visionary in
the bad sense of that word. The outstanding char-
acters to whom visions were vouchsafed in the his-
tory of Israel—Abraham, Moses, Jacob, David,
Isaiah, Jesus and Paul—were all men of action as
well as sentiment, and it is manifest from any fair
reading of their lives that their work was helped
and not hindered by this aspect of their fellowship
with God. For always the vision emphasizes the
play of a spiritual world; the response of a man’s
spirit to the appeal of that world; and the ordering
of both worlds by an intelligent and compelling
Power able to communicate Himself to man and
apparently supremely interested in the welfare of
man. CHaries M. Sruart


VISITATION, viz-i-ta’shun, vis- (IPP, p’kud-
dah; emoxorh, episkopé): In Bib. writings, the
Divine investigation or inspection of men’s char-
acter and deeds with a view to apportioning to them
their due lot, whether of reward or of chastisement;
Divine dispensation of mercy or of punishment.
(1) In a general sense: ‘Visited after the visitation
of all men” (Nu 16 29), ie. in natural death, the
usnal lot of men, as opposed to a calamitous death;
“She shall have fruit in the visitation of souls”
(Wisd 3 13 AV), ie. in the time of Divine judg-
ment. So Sir 18 20 and perhaps 1 Pet 2 12.
(2) In a good sense, of God’s care, providence and
mercy: “Thy visitation [RVm ‘‘care’] hath pre-
served my spirit’ (Job 10 12). So Lk 19 44,
and, according to some, 1 Pet 2 12 (see above).
(3) Most frequently in an evil sense, of calamity
or distress viewed as Divine punishment: ‘What
will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the deso-
lation which shall come from far?” (Isa 10 3).
So Jer 8 12; 10 15; 11 23; 28 12; 46 21; 48 44;
60 27; 5118; Hos 97; Mic 7 4; Wisd 14 11.


D. Mirai Epwarps
VOCATION, vé-ka’shun. See Canina.
VOICE, vois.


VOID, void: The uses of “void” in EV are all
modern, except for the phrase ‘‘void place’ in AV
1 K 22 10||2 Ch 18 9 (RV “open’”); 2 Mace 14
44(soAVandRVm). On the OT passages see OPEN
Puace. In 2 Macc the Gr word is xevew», kenedn,
which may mean either ‘‘an open place,” in general,
or, specifically, “the hollow between the ribs and the
hip,” whence RV “his side.” Moffatt in Charles’
Apoc translates “the open street.”


VOLUME, vol’im: This word (from Lat volvere,
“roll’’), twice used in AV (Ps 40 7 [Heb meghillah];
He 10 7), is better Englished as “roll” in RV. See
Rou.


VOLUNTARY, vol’un-ti-ri: For the sake of
variety AV in Lev 7 16; Ezk 46 12 (bis) has ren-
dered 7137}, nedhabhah, by ‘‘voluntary offering”
instead of the usual ‘‘freewill offering’ (so RV).
The words “of his own voluntary will’ in Lev
1 3 AV are a pure gloss, properly omitted in RV,
as they represent nothing in the Heb. 1 Macc
2 42 has “voluntarily” as part of the tr of
éxovord{w, hekousidzd, RV “willingly.”


See Batu Kot.


VOPHSI, vof’st COD), wophst, meaning un-
known): Father of Nahbi the Naphtalite spy (Nu
13 14); but the text is doubtful. LXXB has
"lapel, Tabet, A F Luc., Iasi, Iabt.


VOW, vou (3, nedher; ebyh, euché; “OB,
"“igsar, found only in Nu 30 6.8.10 and tr4 épwopés,


horismés, by UXX): A vow could be positive (nedher)
and included all promises to perform certain things
for, or bring certain offerings to, God, in return for
certain benefits which were hoped for at His hand
(Gen 28 20-22, Jacob; Lev 27 2.8; Nu 30; Jgs 11
30, Jephthah; 1 S 1 11, Hannah; 2 8 16 8, Absa-
lom; Jon 1 16, vows of heathen); or negative (’is-
gGr), and included promises by which a person bound
himself or herself to abstain from certain things
(Nu 80 3). Nowhere in the OT do we find the
making of vows regarded as a religious duty (Dt 23
22), but the fulfilling of a vow was considered as
a sacred and binding duty (Dt 28 21-23; Jgs 11
35; Eccl 6 4; cf Ps 22 25; 66 13; 76 11; 116
18). A vow was as binding as an oath (see Oat)
and therefore to be kept to the letter; and it was
not to be lightly made (Prov 20 25). A father
could veto a daughter’s vow, and a husband a
wife’s. If a husband did not veto a wife’s vow,
and then caused her to break it, the sin was his and
not hers (Nu 80, passim). It seems that vows were
considered binding only when actually uttered
(Dt 283 23). Persons, including one’s self, animals,
land and other possessions, could be vowed, but
all these could be redeemed with money (see JEPH-
THAH), which money was to be estimated by the
priest, except in the case of a clean animal. In
the case of land, houses and unclean animals a fifth
part of the estimated value was to be added to
make up the redemption money. In the case of
land the sum was greater or smaller as the coming
year of Jubilee was far off or near (Lev 27, passim).
Nothing which was by nature holy could be made
the object of a vow, e.g. firstlings, tithes, ete (Lev
27 26.28.30); and, on the other hand, an abomina-
tion, e.g. the hire of a prostitute, could not be made
the object of a vow (Dt 23 18). In Mal 1 14 the
offering of what was of less value than what had
been vowed is vigorously condemned.

In the NT Jesus refers to vows only to condemn
the abuse of them (Mt 15 4-6; Mk 7 10-13; ef
Talm, Nedhdrim, and see Corzan). In Acts 18 18
(cf Acts 21 23.24) Paul desires to show his Jewish
brethren that he is willing to keep the forms of
Jewish piety so long as they do not clash with his
Christian conscience (cf 1 Cor 9 21). For the vow
of the Nazirite, see N aztRITE.

PauL LEVERTOFF

VOYAGE, voi’4j, AND SHIPWRECK, ship’rek,
OF ST. PAUL. See Pau THE AposTLE; PHOENIX;
and “Literature” to Suips anp Boats.


VULGATE, vul’git:


I. Name anpb Irs History
1. Present Usage
. Earlier Usage
. Post-Hieronymic
. Historical Importance of the Vulgate
RIGIN
. Corruption and Confusion of Old Versions
. Heresy
. Inevitable Separation of East and West
. Request of Pope Damasns
EROME'S TRANSLATIONS AND REVISIONS: METHOD
The NT
Gospels or Whole NT ?

2. OT from the LXX

3. OT from the Hebrew
IV. Svssequent Recensions aNp History or VuL-


OATE
i. In the MSS
2. Printed Vulgate
Vv. MSS or Vuueate
VIL Latinity
. Use or Vuboata
. DIFFERENCES BETWEEN VULOGATE AND ENOLISH
VERSIONS
LITERATURE
A. Name and Its History.—The term “Vulgate”
with us means but one thing—the standard authori-
tative Bible of the Lat or Rom church, prepared
mostly by the labors of Jerome. But this is not


ON


oF


II.


pane


III.


aah


3059


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Visitation
Vulgate


the original use of the word and it was never so
used by Jerome himself; indeed, it did not at first
refer to a Lat VS or tr at all. The word
1. Present “Vulgate” comes from the adj. or
Usage participle vulgata which usually accom-
panied editio, and meant at first current
or regularly used text. It was originally used as the
equivalent of «owh exdocrs, koiné ékdosis=the LXX.
Jerome and Augustine both use the
term in this sense. Jerome (Comm. in
Isa 65 20), “Hoe juxta LXX inter-
pretes diximus, quorum editio toto
orbe vulgata est” (and ib 30 22), vulgata editio again
refers to the LXX. Elsewhere Jerome actually
gives the Greek words (of the LXX) as found in
editione vulgata (Comm. in Osee 7 13). Augustine
identifies the expression with the LXX (De doctr.
christ., xvi.10): “Secundum vulgatam editionem,
hoe est interpretum Septuaginta.”’ The term editio
vulgata was next extended to the form in which
the LXX was at, first known to the West—the Old
Lat VSS (see Latin; Latin Versions), although,
as Westcott remarks, there does not appear to
be any instance in the age of Jerome of the ap-
plication of the term to the Lat VS of the OT with-
out regard to its derivation from the LXX or to
that of the NT, so that Jerome usually intended the
LXX though he quoted it in Lat form. Vulgata
editio, having acquired the meaning of the current
or ordinarily used text of LXX, was once again
extended to mean a corrupt or uncorrected text
as opposed to the standard emended LXX VS of
Origen’s Hexapla, and in this sense is used by
Jerome as synonymous with antiqua or vetus editio.
Ep., cvi.2 deserves citing in this connection: ‘‘Admoneo
aliam esse editionem quam Origenes et Caesariensis Euse-
bius omnesque Graeciae translatores xouyjv [koinén}, i.e.
communem appellant atque vulgatam, et_a_plerisque
Aovecavds, [Louktanés] nune dicitur: aliam LXX interpre-
tum quae in 'Efamdots [Hezaplots] [i.e. of Origen] codicibus
reperitur, et a nobis In Latinum sermonem fideliter versa
‘ . wows [koiné] [communis editio) -. +. Vetus corrupta
editio est, ea antem quae habetur in 'EfamAois [ Hexa plots]
et quam nos vertimus, ipsa est quae in eruditorum libris
incorrupta et immaculata LX X interpretum translatio re-
servatur."’ (‘'I recall that one is the text which Origen
and Eusebius of Caesarea and all the Greek translators
call the xowy [koin4], i.e. the common and current text, and
is now called by most persons Lucian's [version]; the other
is the text of the translators of the LXX which is found
in the codices [or books] of Origen [or the Hexapla], and
has been faithfully translated by us into the Latin lan-
guage... . the koiné [the ordinary text] .... is the
old corrupted text, but that which is found in the Hexa-
pla, and which we are translating, is the same one which
the version of the translators of the LXX has preserved
unchanged and immaculate in the hooks of the scholars.*’)
* It was only very slowly that Jerome’s VS ac-
quired this name, the phrase edtito vulgata being ap-
plied to the LXX or the Old Lat VSS of
3. Post- the LXX sometimes down to mediaeval
Hieronymic times, while Jerome’s tr was known as
editio nostra, codices nostri, tr emendat-
tor, or tr quam tenet Rom ecclesia. The Tridentine
Fathers were therefore guilty of an anachronism
when they referred to Jerome's tr as vetus et vulgata
editio. Roger Bacon was apparently the first, in the
13th cent., to apply the term Vulgata in our sense
(not exclusively, but also to the LXX), and this
usage became classic through its acceptance by the
Tridentine Council (“vetus et vulgata editio’’).
The interest of the Vulg will be apparent when
we reflect that this tr proved to be to the West what
the LXX had been to the East, that
4. Historical it was prepared with great care by
Importance the greatest scholar whom Lat Chris-
of the tianity produced, that it was for
Vulgate hundreds of years the only Bible in
universal use in Europe, that it has
given to us much of our modern theological termi-
nology as well as being the sponsor for many Gr
words which have enriched our conceptions. It


2. Earlier
Usage


has also proved of primary importance as an early
and excellent witness to the sacred text. Add to
this that “directly or indirectly it is the real parent,
of all the vernacular VSS of Western Europe”
except the Gothic of Ulfilas. For Eng.-speaking
students it possesses peculiar interest as the source
of the earlier tr* made by the Venerable Bede, and
portions of the OT were tr4 in the 10th cent. from
the Vulg by Atlfric. Its greatest influence was
exerted in the Eng. VS of Wycliffe—a literal tr
from the Vulg (1383). And’ Coverdale’s Bible
(1535) was “faithfully and truly tr¢ out of Dutch
fie. German of Luther] and Latin.” The Rheims
and Douay VS was based on the Vulg, though
“diligently conferred with the Heb and Gr.” The
Vulg exercised considerable influence upon Luther’s

VS and through it upon our AV.
I. Origin of the Vulgate.—Lat Christianity had
not been without a Bible in its own language. Old
Lat VSS are found in North Africa


1. Corrup- as early as the middle of the 3d cent.
tion and and are found in the texts of Cyprian
Confusion and Tertullian. But these tr? were
of Old characterized by “simplicity,” “rude-
Versions ness’ and provincialism. There was


not one standard authoritative VS with
any ecclesiastical recognition. VSS were rather
due to “individual and successive efforts.’”’ Augus-
tine says that anyone who got hold of a Gr MS and
thought he knew Gr and Lat would venture on a
tr. These VSS originated in Africa and not from
Rome, else they had been more authoritative. Be-
sides, the first two centuries of the Rom church
were rather Gr; the earliest. Christian literature of
Rome is Gr, its bishops bear Gr names, its earliest
liturgy was Gr. When the church of Italy became
Lat-speaking—probably at the end of the 3d cent.
—the provincialisms of the African VS rendered it
unfit for the more polished Romans, and so recensions
were called for. Scholars now recognize a Euro-
pean type of Old Lat text. And Westcott thinks
a North Italian recension (at least in the Gospels)
was made in the 4th cent. and known as the /tala
(see Latin), and which he recognizes in the Jiala
mentioned in Aug., De doctr. christ., xv, as “verborum
tenacior cum perspicuitate sententiae’; but F. C.
Burkitt (The bid Lat and the Tiala, 54 ff) takes the
Ttala here as referring to Jerome’s VS. Amid such
confusion and the appearance of national or pro-
vincial recensions, the Lat church became conscious
of the need of a standard ed. There were almost
as many types of texts as there were MSS: ‘Tot
exemplaria paene quot codices,” says Jerome (Pref.
to Gospels). Independent and unauthorized or
anonymous tr°—esp. of the NT—aided by the gross
carelessness of scribes, made confusion worse con-
founded. Angustine complains of this “Latinorum
interpretum infinita varietas.”’ :
In addition to the inconvenience in preaching
and the liturgical variations, a greater demand for
an authoritative VS arose from the
continual watch of the early church
against heretics. Confusion of text
abetted heresy, and the absence of a standard text
made it harder to refute it. Besides, the Jews, with
one authoritative text, laughed at the confusion of
the Christian Scriptures.
The inevitable separation of East and West, both
politically and ecclesiastically, and the split between
Gr and Lat Christianity, rendered the


2. Heresy


8. Inevi- existence of a standard Lat text im-
table Sepa- perative. Christianity was felt to be
ration of the religion of a book, and hence that
East and book must be inspired and authori-
West tative in every word—even in its order


of words. .
Pope Damasus determined to remedy this state


Vulgate


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3060


of affairs, and with all the authority of the papal
see commissioned Jerome to produce an authentic
and standard authorized VS.


4. Request

The pope's choice could not have fallen
of Damasus ypon a more competent scholar—a man
who had been providentialiy gifted and
prepared for the task. Jerome—his Lat name was
usebius Hieronymus—was horn at Stridon on the
borders of Dalmatia ahout 340, or a little later, of
Christian parentage. He had the advantages of the
best. classical education and hecame a devoted student
of the best. Lat writers. In a dream he saw a vision of
judgment, and on claiming to he a Christian he was re-
buked: ‘‘Mentiris, Ciceronianus es, non Christianus.”’
He began his theological studies in Gaul; but later
sought the seclusion of ascetic life in the desert near
Antioch. Here he studied Heh from a converted rahhi
in order to suhdue fierce passions by the difficulties of
that language. About 375 or 376 hegan his correspond-
ence with Damasus. In 382 he came to Rome, and

hecame the intimate friend and adviser of Damasus.


If, Jerome’s Translations and Revisions:
Method.—These fall into three main groups: (1)
revision of the NT; (2) OT juxta LXX;
1. The NT (3) OT from Heb. The exact date of
the pope’s commission is not given: it
was probably in 382—the year of Jerome’s arrival
in Rome—or early in 383, in which year the Gospels
appeared in revised form. Damasus asked simply
for a revision of the Old Lat VSS by the help of
the Gr rather than a new VS. Jerome collated
Gr MSS, and carefully compared them with the
“Ttalian” type of Old Lat texts; where possible the
Old Lat was preserved. Thus Jerome approached
the task with a conservative spirit. Still the result
was a considerable departure from the Old Lat VS,
the changes being (1) linguistic, removal of pro-
vincialisms and rudeness, (2) in interpretation, e.g.
supersubstanitalis for ériotecev, epiotision, in the
Lord’s Prayer, (3) the removal of interpolations,
(4) the insertion of the Eusebian Canons.

The Gospels or the whole NT revised ?—It is dis-
puted whether Jerome revised the whole NT or
only the Gospels.

Against the revision of the whole NT the arguments
briefly are: (1) That Augustine, writing 20 years after
the appearance of the revised Gospels, speaks only of
‘Gospel’: ‘‘Evangelium ex Graeco interpretatus est’’
(Ep., civ.6); hut Augustine may here be speaking gen-
erally or applying “Gospel” to the whole NT. (2)
Jerome in his preface apparently speaks of ‘only four
Gospels”’ (‘‘quattuor tantum evangelia’’). (3) The rest
of the NT does not show the same signs of revision as
the Gospels. (4) The ahsence of the prefaces usual
(‘‘solita praefatione’’) to Jerome’s revised VSS. On the
other hand, to more than counterbalance these, (1)
Damasus required a revision of the whole NT, not only
of the Gospels (Pref. of Damasus). (2) In other state-
ments of Jerome he expressly says he revised the NT (not
Gospel or Gospels); in Fp., cxii.20, he seems to correct
Augustine’s evangelizum by writing: ‘‘Si me, ut dicis, iu
Novi Testamenti emendatione suspicis,"’ and in Ep., Ixxi.
5, “I translated the NT according to the Gr” (*NT
Graecae reddidi auctoritati’’); cf also De Vir. Il,
cxxxv. (8) Jerome quotes passages outside the Gospels
where his VS differed from the Old Lat VSS, e.g. Rom
12 11; 1 Tim 1 15; cf Ep., xxvii. (4) Damasus died
at the end of 384—perhaps before the rest of Jerome’s
revision was published, and so Jerome thought no further
prefaces needed.


The more likely conclusion is that Jerome revised

the whole NT, though not all with equal care.

His revision was hasty and soon be-

2. OT came more or less confused with the

Juxta LXX Old Lat VSS to which the people clung

as they do to all old VSS. Having

probably completed the NT from the Gr, Jerome

began immediately on the OT from the Gr of the
LXX.

(1) Roman Psalier—He commenced with the
Pss, which he simply emended only where impera-
tively required (cf preface), and cursorily (c 384).
This revision is called the Rom Psalter (Psaltertum
Romanum), which continued in use in Rome and
Italy till it was displaced under the pontificate of
Pius V by the Gallican Psalter, though the Rom


Psalter is still used in St. Peter’s, Rome, and in St.
Mark’s, Milan.

(2) Gallican Psalter—This Psalter soon became
so corrupted by the Old Lat VS that Jerome (c 387)
undertook a second revision at the request of Paula
and Eustochium. This became known as the Galh-
can Psalter because of its early popularity in Gaul.
It was also made from the LXX, but with the aid
of other Gr VSS. Jerome adopted in it the critical
signs used by Origen—a passage inclosed between
an obelus and two points being absent from the
Heb but present in the LXX, that between_an
asterisk and two points being absent from the LXX
but supplied from Theodotion (Preface to Pss).

(3) Rest of the OT.—About the same time Jerome
published tr® of other OT books from the LXX.
Job was revised very soon after the Gallican Psalter.
The preface to Prov, Eccl, Cant and Ch is extant
to show he had revised these books. Job and Pss
are the only books of this revision juxta LXX
extant.

It is again disputed whether Jerome completed the
whole OT in this revision hecause (1) the usual prefaces
are again lacking (except to the books already men-
tioned), and (2) in his prefaces to the revision from the
Heh Jerome makes no reference to an earlier revision of
his own; (3) the work implied was too great for the
brief space possible and must have been done between
387 and 390 (or 391), for hy this latter date he was
already on the tr from the Heh. But Jerome was a
phenomenal worker, as we Jearn that his tr of Prov, Eccl
and Cant from the Heb was made in three days. And
his commentary on Eph was written at the rate of
1,000 lines a day.

Jerome probably completed the whole, as we infer
from his own direct positive statements. He speaks
of “‘mea in libris canonicis interpretatio” (E'p., exti.
19; see references in Westcott), and in the preface
to the Books of Solomon after the LX X he states he
did not correct Wisd and Ecclus, ‘desiring only to
emend the canonical books” (‘‘tantummodo canon-
icas scripturas vobis emendare desideraus’’). Once
again, he speaks of having carefully tr? the LXX
into Lat (Con Ruf., 11.24; ef Ep., lxxi).

If the postscript to Ep., cxxxiv, to Augustine is
genuine, Jerome complains he had lost the most of

his former labors by fraud (‘“pleraque
3. Transla- enim prioris laboris fraude cuiusdam
tion of OT amisimus’’). And Augustine requests
from (Zp., xcvi.34) from Jerome his VSS
Hebrew from the LXX (“Nobis mittas, ob-

secro, interpretationem tuam de LXX
quam te edidisse nesciebam’’). Having in the course
of these labors discovered the unsatisfactory condi-
tion of the LXX text and his friends pleading the
need of a tr direct from the Heb, Jerome began this
huge task about 390 with S and K, which he pub-
lished with the Prologus galeatus (“helmeted pro-
logue”), next the Pss (c 392), Job and the Prophets
(393), 1 and 2 Esd (c 394) (3 and 4 being omitted),
Ch (896). Then followed a severe illness until 398,
when “post longam aegrotationem” he tr? Prov,
Eccl and Cant. He then started on the Octateuch:
“Octateucho quem nunc in manibus habeo” (Ep.,
Ixxi.5), the Pent being first tr4 in 401, Josh, Jgs,
Ruth and Est soon after (xl.4: “post sanctae
Paulae dormitionem”’). Tob and Jth were tr@ for
him from Chaldec into Heb from which he then tr4
them into Lat (c 405), and shortly before or after
these he added the apocryphal additions to Dnl
and Est. Bar he passed over. Wisd and Ecclus
were not revised by him. Whether he revised Macc
is doubtful. Thus was completed in 15 strenuous
years (390-405) a work which has proved a «rfjua és
del, kiéma es aet (Thue. 1.22), “a possession for all
time.” The tr was largely undertaken at the re-
quest of friends and at no papal request. Indeed
Jerome did not pretend to be working for publicity;
he actually asked one friend not to show his tr.


3061


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Vulgate


Reception.—But human nature rarely recognizes
merit in its own generation, and the spirit of con-
servatism rose in rebellion against beneficial _inno-
vation. Jerome was accused of slighting the LXX,
which even in the eyes of Augustine was equally
inspired with the Heb original. Jerome’s fiery
temper and his biting tongue were not calculated
to conciliate.

IV. Subsequent Recensions and History of the
Vulgate.—By degrees the fierce opposition died

down, and even by the time of Jerome’s
1. In MSS death men were beginning to perceive

the merits of his VS which Augustine
used in the Gospels. Some parts of Jerome’s Vulg
won their way to popularity much sooner than
others—the Old Lat VSS died hard and not without
inflicting many a wound on the Vulg. His Psalter
from the Heb never ousted the Gallican which still
holds its place in the Vulg. Some scholars were
able to appreciate Jerome’s ed sooner than others.
And it was at different dates that the different
provinces and countries of the West adopted it.
Pelagius used it in his comm. on the Pauline Epp.
As might be expected, the Old Lat VSS retained
their place longest in the place of their origin—
North Africa. Britain proved the next most con-
servative. The old VSS were never authoritatively
deposed, and so Jerome’s VS was compelled to win
its way by its own merits. In the 5th cent.—esp.
in Gaul—it continued to grow in popularity among
scholars, being adopted by Vincent of Lérins,
Eucherius of Lyons, Sedulius, and Claudianus Ma-
mertus, and Prosper of Aquitaine. In the next
century its use became almost universal except in
Africa, where the Old Lat was retained by Junilius
and Facundus. At the close of the 6th cent. Pope
Gregory the Great acknowledges that the new (i.e.
the Vulg) and the old are both equally used by the
Apostolic See; and thus the Vulg was at least on
equal footing with the old. In the 7th cent. the
Old Lat retreats, but traces of it survive down into
the Middle Ages, affecting and corrupting the
Jerome VS. Mixed texts and conflated readings
arose—the familiarity of the Old Lat in_lection-
aries and liturgies telling on the Vulg. The NT,
being only a revision and not a fresh tr, and being
most in use, degenerated most.

(1) As early as the 6th cent. the need of an
emendated Vulg text was felt, and Cassidorius
undertook to revise part of it. This was merely
private enterprise and did little to stem the flood
of corruption.

(2) About tbe close of the 8th cent. Charlemagne
commissioned an Englishman Alcuin, abbot of
St. Martin, Tours, to produce a revised text on the
basis of the best Lat MSS, without reference to
the Gr text. Alcuin sent to York for his MSS and
thus produced a text after British MSS. On
Christmas Day, 801 AD, he presented the emperor
with the emended text. The authority by which
this text was prepared and its public use together
with the class of MSS used did much to preserve
a pure Vulg text and stay interpolations: ‘“The best,
MSS of his recension do not differ widely from the
pure Hieronymian text” (Westcott).

(3) Another recension of about the same date—but a
scholar’s private enterprise—was produced by a Visi-

oth, Theodulf, bishop of Orleans. e made the Spanish
family of MSS together with those of Southern France
the basis of his text. His inscribing variant readings in
the margin really helped the process of corruption, His
text—though prepared at enormous labor—was far in-
ferior to that of Alcuin and exerted little influence in face
of the authoritative VS of Alcuin. MSS were rapidly
multiplied in the 9th cent. on the Alcuinian model Ah
the school of Tours, but with carelessness and haste whic
helped to a speedy degeneration of the text. Again the


confusion called for remedy. s ;
(4) In the 11th cent. Lanfranc, bishop of Canterbury
(1069-89), attempted correction—apparently with little


success. About the middle of the 12th cent., Stephen
Harding of Citeaux produced a revision—extant in MS
in Dijon public library (no. 9), as did also Cardinal
Nicolaus. The Increased demand for Bibles in the 13th
cent. gave opportunity for further corruption of the
text—publishers and copyists being indifferent as to the
character of MS chosen as a hasis.


(5) In consequence of the fame of the University of
Paris in the 13th cent. and the enormous activity in
producing Bible MSS, thcre resulted a type of text called

y Roger Bacon Exemplar Parisiense, for which he has
nothing good to say.


(6) In the same century steps were taken toward a
standard tex¢ and to stay corruption by the drawing up
of correctoria, i.e. books in which the readings of Gr and
Lat MSS were weighed to decide a text, the authority
of Fathers cited, etc. Some of the principal correctoria
are: Correctorium Parisiense known also as Senonense—
one of the worst, following the Parisian type of text;
Correctorium Vaticanum, the best; Correctortum Sor-
bonicum, in the Sorbonne; Correctorium Dominicanum.


(1) Early editions.—Little more was done till
the invention of printing, and the first products of
the press were Lat Bibles. Unfor-
2. Printed tunately at first the current text was
Vulgate accepted without any critical labors,
and so the earliest printed Vulgates
only perpetuated an inferior text. Only a few from
among some hundreds of early VSS can be noted:
(a) the Mazarin Bible—one of the most beautiful
and valuable books in the world—printed at Mainz
about the middle of the 15th cent. (1455, Westcott)
by Gutenberg, Schéffer or Fust; (6) the first Bible
published at Rome in 1471 by Sweynheym and Pan-
nartz and reprinted in Nuremberg in 1475; (c)
1504 a Paris ed with variaut readings; (d) an ed
in Complutensian Polyglot (1514 ff) from ancient
MSS and from the re (e) practically the first
critical ed, by Robertus Stephanus (1st ed 1528, 2d
1532, reprinted later), of interest as being practically
the basis of the standard Rom Vulg; (f) Hentenian
critical ed (Louvain, 1547). Attempts to produce
a corrected text by aid of the original were made by
Erasmus in 1516, Pagninus in 1518 ff, Cardinal
Cajetan, Steuchius in 1529, Clarius in 1542, etc.
Even new tr® were made by both Roman Catholic
and Protestant scholars. This bewildering number
of VSS and the controversies of the 16th cent. called
for a standard ed. The Council of Trent (1546)
took up the matter and decreed that the “ipsa vetus
et vulgata editio quae longo tot saeculorum usu in
ipsa ecclesia probata” (‘the same old and ordina-
rily used text which has been approved in the church
itself by the long usage of so many centuries’’)
should bs regarded as authentic (authentica). By
this they apparently meant the Jerome VS, but
did not state in which MS or printed ed it was to he
found.

(2) Sixtine edition (1590).—No further steps
were taken for the present to secure a standard
official Bible for the church—the private ed of John
Hentenins of Louvain serving in the meanwhile
until the pontificate of Sixtus V. This pope in-
trusted the work to a committee under Cardinal
Caraffa, but he himself strenuously coéperated.
MSS and printed edd were examined, but the origi-
nal Gr or Heb was to be regarded as decisive in
difficulties. The result was published as the Six-
tine ed of the Vulg by the Vatican press in 1590 (see
title on 1st and 2d pages). The text resembles
the Stephanus ed of 1540. A new puzzling method
of verse enumeration was introduced. As one
would expect, there was prefixed to the ed a Bull
Aeternus ille, etc, in which the divines gave them-
selves credit for their painstaking labors, and the
result was declared the authorized Vulg of the Tri-
dentine Council, “pro vera, legitima, authentica
et indubitata, in omnibus publicis privatisque dis-
putationibus ... .” (“by virtue of truth, usage,
authenticity and certainty, in all public and private
disputes’). Errors of printing were corrected by


Vulgate
Wait


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3062


the pen or by pasting a slip of paper with the cor-
rection over the error. This ed was not to be re-
printed for 10 years except at the Vatican, and after
that any ed must be compared with the Vatican
ed, so that “not even the smallest particle should
be altered, added or removed’’ under pain of the
“sreater excommunication.” Sixtus died the same
year, and the Jesuit Bellarmine persuaded Clement
VIII to recall the Sixtine ed and prepare another
standard Vulg in 1592.

(3) Clementine edition (1592).—In the same year
appeared the Clementine ed with a preface by Bellar-
mine asserting that Sixtus had himself determined
to recall his ed on account of printers’ errors (from
which it was remarkably free). The pains and
penalties of the Sixtine Bull were evaded by print-
ing the book as a Siztine ed, actually printing the
name of Sixtus instead of Clement on the title-page:
Biblia Sacra Vulgatae Editionis Sixti Quinti Pont.
Moz. tussu recognita atque edita. The awkward
system of verse enumeration of the Sixtine was
dropped. The text itself was rather of the Henten-
ian type. No future ed was to be printed except
on the exact pattern, “even to the smallest particle”
of the Vaticaned. Thanks largely to the papal Bull
this Clementine ed of 1592 still remains the official
VS of the Roman Catholic church. A second ed
appeared in 1593, and a third in 1598. Roman
Catholic scholars were discouraged from under-
taking a new VS, and Protestant scholars were,
until recently, too occupied with the original
texts.

Bentley’s projected ed of the NT never appeared.
Under cover of the works of Jerome a corrected
text was published by Vallarsi, 1734—really the
completion and revision of the ed of Martianay of
1706. Little more was done in the way of critical
edd till the latter half of the 19th cent.

(4) Modern critical editions —In 1861 Vercellone
reprinted the Clementine Vulg (with an excellent
preface), the names of Sixtus and Clement both
appearing on the title-page. In 1906 an ed—Bib
Sac Vulgatas ed by Hetzenauer—was published at
Oeniponte. (The majority of recent edd have been
confined to the NT or part of it: Tischendorf, Nov.
Test. Lat.: textum Hieronymi .. . . restituit, Leip-
zig, 1864; Hetzenauer, Nov. Test. Vulg. ed.: ex Vat.
edd. earumgue correctorio critice edidit P. M. H.,
Oeniponte, 1899.) The Oxford Vulg, prepared by
Bishop J. Wordsworth and H. J. White, of which
the first part was issued in 1889, is a compre-
hensive work of great value. P.Corssen published
the first instalment of a Vulg NT (Ep. ad Gal,
Berlin, 1885). This is exclusive of the printed
edd of several important MSS. Pope Pius X
intrusted the preparation of a revised ed of the
Vulg to the Benedictine order—but as yet nothing
has appeared.

V. MSS of the Vulgate.—To give a satisfactory lst
would be impossible within our spacelimits. Thenumber
is legion—estimated at about 8 000. As yet the same order
has not been called out of the chaos of Vulg and Old Lat
MSS in the manner in which Westcott and_Hort have
reduced the Gr MSS of the NT toasystem. Thestudent
may conveniently approach the subject in White's lst in
the 4th ed of Scrivener, A Plain Intro to the Criticism of
the NT, II, 67 ff, or the longer one by Gregory in Tisch-
endort's NT Gr, 8th ed, III, 983 ff, also In Westcott’s


art. in DB or White's in HDB; Vercellone, Variae
Lectiones, 1860; Berger, Histoire de la Vulgate, 374 ff.


VI. Latinity.—Space permits only a few general
remarks. The Lat of the old VSS was simple, rude
and vernacular, abounding in literalisms and pro-
vincialisms. In many ways, in vocabulary, diction
and construction, it offended scholars. As was
natural Jerome smoothed the roughness of the old
VSS and removed the most glaring solecisms and
offensive provincialisms. His work is a master-
piece—like our AV—in the harmonious blend of


simple, popular, forceful language and a scholarly
graceful tr. ‘‘As a monument of ancient linguistic
power the tr of the OT stands unrivaled and unique”
(Westcott). The Vulg has enriched our language
by introducing many Gr words, “apostle,” “evan-
gel,” “synagogue,” “baptism,” etc. It has also
given us much of our theological vocabulary, ‘‘edi-
fication,” “justification,” “propitiation,” ‘regen-
eration,” “Scripture,” etc. It still retains many
marks of its birth in (1) Old Lat words elevated
from the vernacular, (2) Africanisms: clarijfico, etc,
saeculum for mundus, long compound vbs. like ob-
tenebrare, etc, (3) Graecisms, like the use of the pro-
noun for the art., as hic mundus=6 xécpos, ho késmos,
(4) Hebraisms, like adposuit ut apprehenderet et Pet-
rum (Acts 12 8; see special works mentioned in
“Literature”).

VIL Use of the Valgate.—In the OT the Vulg is
not of much importance for the criticism of the Heh
text, because of the freedom which Jerome permitted
himself in tr, and because our present Massoretic
Heb text had by that time taken on its present
form. But on the LXX it often throws a very use-
ful light. In the NT Jerome’s VS ranks practically
in importance with our oldest and best Gr MSS in
establishing (in conjunction with the Old Lat VSS)
the received Gr text_of the 4th cent., both by way
of supplementing and correcting our Gr authorities.
It is in the Gospels that Jerome’s work is most
thorough and useful. His VS also supplies many
a hint for the interpretation of our Gr text.


VIN. Differences between Vulgate and Our English
Version. —Apart from differences of rendering and minor
points, the Fale text differs from the Eng. in the order
of the books, in the amount contained in some of them,
in the occasional divergence of chapter and verse enumer-
ation. The NT is practically the same in the Clementine
text, shoe the order of books varies in many MSS—
the Catholic Ep. being placed sometimes after Acts.
In some MSS the Ep. to the Laodiceansis found. Most
variety obtains in the OT. The sequence of canonical
books is the same, but the apocryphal books are inter-
spersed among them and not_placed_at the end. Tob
and Jth are inserted between Neh (2 Esd) and Est, Wisd
and Ecclus between Cant and Isa. Bar follows Lam,
ch § of which is called the ‘‘Prayer of_Jeremiah the
prophet 1 and 2 Maccare placed after Mal; 3 and 4

sd_and Pr Man appear as an appends after the NT.
In Pss the divergence is considerable, the Vulg—like the
Heb—counting the title as the first verse. Pss 9, 10
of our VS=Ps 9 in Vulg, so that the Vulg is one Ps
behind the Eng. till Ps 114, then Pss 114, 115 again form
one peer 13. he Vulg is now two behind. Mat-
ters are equ zed by Ps 116 being divided into two in the
Vulg a 14, 115), and 147 again=two Vulg Pss 146,
147. ‘Thus only Pss 1-§ and 148-150 run the same.
Against Jerome's advice the apocryphal parts of Dnl and
Est were accepted as integra parts of those books, the
Three being inserted at Dn! 3 23, Sus forming ch 18 and
Bel ch 14. d Est is linked on to the end of Est. In
conclusion, the present Vulg, as Westcott remarks, is a
composite of elements belonging to every period and
form of the Lat VS, including (1) unrevised Old Lat
(Wisd, Ecclus, 1 and_2 Macc and Bar); (2) Old Lat cor-
rected from the LXX (Psalter); (3) Jerome's free tr
from the original (Job and Jth); (4) Jerome's tr from the
original (the OT except the Psalter); (5) Old Lat revised
from Gr MSS (the Core): (6) Old Lat cursorily re-
vised (the rest of the NT). 3

Literaturs.—This is too vast to cite, but In some of
the following works sufficient bibliographies will be
found: Berger, Hist de la Vulg_ pendant les premiers
siécles du moyen age, 1893; H. Bale De bib. textibus
originalibus, 1705; F. Kaulen, Gesch. der Vulg, 1868;
Van Ess, Pragmatisch-krit. Gesch. der Vulg, 1824: EB.
Nestle, Urtext u. Uebersetzeungen der Bibel, 1897, and
Hin Jubildum d. lat. Bib., 1892, Two splendid arts.—
each by an authority— in DB (Westcott) and in HDB
(White). A very readable account is in Kenyon, Our
Bible and the Ancient MSS, 165 ff, and in his Handbook
to the Text Crit. of the NT, 168 ff. For the language:
Ronsch, Itala u. Vulgata, 2d ed, 1875; A. Hartl, Sprach-
liche Eigentimlichkeiten d. Vulg, 1894.

‘ 8. ANeus

VULTURE, vul’tir (ANI, da’ah; LXX yi, gps,
and Yxtwvos, thtinos; Lat Vulturidae): Any mem-
ber of a family of large birds that subsist wholly
or in part on carrion. The largest vulture of Pal


was the Lammer-geier. This bird waited until


3063


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Vulgate
Wait


smaller vultures, eagles and hawks stripped a car-
case to the bone, then carried the skeleton aloft and
dashed it on the rocks until the marrow could be
secured. This was a favorite delicacy. This bird
was fond of tortoise also, and is said to have dropped
the one that struck the bald head of Aeschylus,
which the bird mistook for a stone, so causing the
death of the poet. Several smaller species, includ-
ing “Pharaoh’s chickens,” flocked all over Pal.
These were protected by a death penalty for their
value as scavengers in cities. They fed on carcascs
of animals that killed each other, ate putrid fish
under the nests of pelican and cormorant, followed
caravans across the desert, and were ready for offal
thrown from animals dressed for feasting. They
flocked over the altars for the entrails from sacrifice,
and devoured scraps cast aside by tent-dwellers


and residents of cities. They paired with affection-
ate courting and nested in crevices, in walls, hollow
trees and on cliffs. They raised only one pair of
young to the season, as the nestlings were over two
months old before they took wing. The young
were white at first, then black feathers enveloped
them. On account of their steady diet of carrion,
no one ever has been able to use their flesh for food,
although some daring ornithologists have tried.
For this reason the vulture was placed among the
abominations and should by right have headed the
lists (Lev 11 18; Dt 14 13). The other references
that used to be tr4 “vulture” in AV (LXX Zdados,
élaphos, Vulg correctly milous) are changed to ‘‘fal-
con” and “kite.” Isa 34 15 changes “vulture” to
“kite.” Job 28 7 changes “vulture” to “falcon.”
Gene STRATTON-PoRTER


W


WAFER, wa‘fér. See Brean.

WAGES, wa’ jez, wi/jiz (039, hinnam, NDY'2,
maskoreth, MDVD, p*‘ullah, "DW, sakhar, 12D, sa-
khar; p.o0és, misthés, abdviev, opsénion): (1) Hin-
na@m means “gratis,” without cost or any advan-
tage, for nought, or in vain; wages in the sense
of reasonable return. Jeremiah pronounces woe
upon him who “useth his neighbor’s service without
wages, and giveth him not his hire’ (Jer 22 13;
the only place where the word is used). (2) Masko-
reth means ‘‘reward” or ‘‘wages.’’ Laban said to
Jacob: ‘Shouldest thou therefore serve me for
nought? tell me, what shall thy wages be?” (Gen 29
15). Jacob said, concerning Laban, speaking to
Rachel and Leah: “Your father hath deceived me,
and changed my wages ten times” (Gen 31 7; cf
ver 41). (3) Peullagh generally means “work,”
“labor,” “reward,” ‘“wages.”” The old Levitical Law
was insistent on honesty in wages and on prompt-
ness in payments: ‘“The wages of a hired servant
shall not abide with thee all night until the morn-
ing” (Lev 19 13). (4) Mistakkér means “earning,”
“hire,” “reward,” “wages,” from root sdkhar, mean-
ing ‘‘to hire,” and has in it the idea of temporary
purchase: “He that earneth wages earneth wages
to put it into a bag with holes’’ (Hag 1 6). (5)
Sakhar means “payment of contract,’”’ in the mate-
rial way of salary, maintenance, fare, and so com-
pensation, reward, price, benefit, wages—seemingly
wages received after an understanding as to time,
manner and amount of payment. Laban (employ-
er) said to Jacob (employee): “Appoint me thy
wages, and I will give it” (Gen 30 28); “‘If he said
thus, The speckled shall be thy wages” (Gen 31 8);
Pharaoh’s daughter said to Moses’ mother: ‘Take
this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give
thee thy wages” (Ex 2 9); Nebuchadrczzar and his
army served against Tyre, ‘‘yet had he no wages,
nor his army” (Ezk 29 18), and the prey of Egypt
“shall be the wages for his army” (ver 19); swift
and sure judgment is predicted against “those that
oppress the Tirsling in his wages, the widow, and
the fatherless”’ (Mal 3 5). (6) Misthos means
either in a literal or figurative sense ‘‘pay for serv-
ice,” either primitive or beneficial, and so reward,
hire, wages. In Jn 4 36 Jesus said, ‘‘He that reap-
eth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life
eternal.” 2 Pet 2 15 has changed “wages” (AV)
to “hire,” reading “who loved the hire of wrong-
doing.” (7) Opsonion, meaning primarily “rations
for soldiers” (opson being the word for cooked meat)
and so “pay” or stipend, provision wages. In Lk
3 14 John said to the soldiers, ‘‘Be content with


| covert to lie in wait” (Job 38 40).


your wages’; ‘‘The wages of sin is death’ (Rom
6 23); Paul said: “I robbed other churches, taking
wages of them’ (2 Cor 11 8); the same word in
1 Cor 9 7 is tr? “charges.”

The Bible refers to wages actual and wages figurative.
Of actual wages there are three kinds: (1) money wages,
(2) provision (usually food) wages, and (3) what may be
called ‘‘exchange’’ ‘wages, wages in kind, sometimes
“bhuman-kind,"’ e.g. Jacob’s wages from Laban. Often
laborers and soldiers received both money and “keep”
wages. The laborer in NT times received about 15 ceuts
per day (the “‘shilling’’ of Mt 20 2), besides in some
cases his provisions. The old Law required daily pay-
ment, honesty in dealing, also sufficient food for the
laborer.

It is practically impossible to test ‘Bible’ wages by
any of the theories of modern economists. In this con-
nection, however, mere mention of the six principal
theories may be of interest. Concisely put t ey are:
(1) wage-fund, (2) standard-of-living, (3) German-social-
istic, (4) production, (5) Henry George’s, and (6) the
laborer’s-value theories. The incidents in the OT of
Jacob and in the NT of Mt 20 both show that the
laborer was at the caprice of the employer. Therefore
we may designate the Bible law of wages as the ‘‘em-
ployer's theory.”

Wituram Enwarp Rarrety


WAGON, WAGGON, wag’un. See Carr.


WAIL, wal, WAILING, wal’ing. See Buriat,
III, 2; IV, 4, 5, 6.


WAIT, wat: The word is used in the OT both as
a substantive and as a vb. In the NT it appears
as a vb. only. 27%, ’erebh, JN,
1. The Sub- ma’drabh, mean a concealed hiding-
stantive place for purposes of sudden attack,
an ambuscade. (1) “Lie in wait’:
“Abimelech rose up... . from lying in wait”
(Jgs 9 35 AV); “When they . abide in the
(2) “Lay
wait”: “They compassed him in, and laid wait for
him” (Jgs 16 2).
(1) FW, shdrath, “to serve,” ‘to minister,” to
act in the capacity of servant or attendant: ‘‘These
waited on the king’ (2 Ch 17 19).
2. The Verb Used esp. in this sense with regard
to the ceremonial service of the host:
“They shall go in to wait upon the service in the
work of the tent of mecting” (Nu 8 24; cf ver 25);
“The Levites wait upon their business” (2 Ch 13
10 AV). ‘‘Wait at” occurs in the same sense in
the NT: “They which wait at [RV ‘wait upon”]
the altar,” etc (1 Cor 9 13 AV). (2) The simple
vb. is used to describe the longsuffering and
patience of God toward His wilful people: ‘And
therefore will Jeh wait, that he may be gracious
unto you” (Isa 80 18); ‘‘When the longsuffering
of God waited in the days of Noah” (dmexdéxoua,


Walk
Wanderings


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3064


apekdéchomat, 1 Pet 3 20). (3) The most impor-
tant and frequent use of the word “wait,” however,
is to define the attitude of a soul God-ward. It
implies the listening ear, a heart responsive to
the wooing of God, a concentration of the spiritual
faculties upon heavenly things, the patience of faith,
“the earnest expectation of the creation’? (Rom
8 19). It describes an eager anticipation and
yearning for the revelation of truth and love as
it is in the Father. Thus: ‘My soul, wait thou
.... for God only” (Ps 62 5); ‘Our soul hath
waited for Jeh” (Ps 33 20); ‘Mine eyes fail while
I wait for my God” (Ps 69 3); ‘‘Wait for Jeh,
and he will save thee” (Prov 20 22).


Also the NT thus: ‘‘ Waiting for our adoption, to wit,
the redemption of our -body” (Rom 8 23); ‘‘For we
through the pp by faith wait for the hope of right-
eousness'’ (Gal § 5). From various references in the
NT there seems to have been in the days of Jesus a sect
in whose name the word ‘‘wait" Played an important
part. Of the aged Simeon, who met Mary and Joseph
when they brought the infant Jesus to the temple, it is
said that he was ‘‘ waiting for [RV ‘'looking for''] the
consolation of Israel" (Lk 2 25), that is, he was looking
for the fulfilment of the Messianic promise. Again,
after Our Lord's crucifixion, when Joseph of Arimathaea
begged for the body of Jesus, we are told that he was one
of those that ‘waited for the kingdom of God’' (mp.c-
béxouat, prosdéchomat, Mk 1§ 43 AV; Lk 23 51 AV).
It is thought by some authorities that this implies their
having belonged to the sect of the Essenes. Epiphanius
associates the sect with one which he names ‘‘ Gortheni,”’
whose title is derived from a word which means ‘to
expect.’”

ARTHUR WaLwyn Evans


WALK, wok (weptraretv, peripatein): Aside from
its frequent occurrence in the usual sense, the
word ‘‘walk’”’ is used figuratively of conduct and of
spiritual states. (1) Observance of laws or cus-
toms: ‘“Thou teachest all the Jews who are among
the Gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to
circumcise their children, neither to walk after the
customs” (Acts 21 21). (2) Of the spiritual life:
“Tf we walk in the light, as he is in the light” (1 Jn
1 7); “That like as Christ was raised from the dead
through the glory of the Father, so we also might
walk in newness of life’ (Rom 6 4); ‘‘Walk by the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh”
(Gal 6 16); “For we walk by faith, not by sight”
(2 Cor 5 7). Russet BenyamMin MILLeR


WALL, wél. See Arcuirscrurs; City; For-
TIFICATION; House; JERUSALEM; VILLAGE.


WALLET, wol’et, -it. See Scrip.


WANDERING, won'dér-ing, STARS. See As-
TRONOMY.


WANDERINGS, won’dér-ingz, OF ISRAEL:


‘J. Conpitrons
. The Wilderness
. Four Separate Regions Included
“The Sandy Tract”
. Description of the Arabah __
. Physical Condition of the Wilderness
. Difficulties Regarding the Numbers of Israel
and Account of Tabernacle
. Difficulty as to Number of Wagons
. Fauna of the Desert
Characteristic Names of the Districts
TRsT JOURNEY
. Mode of Traveling
. The Route: the First Camp
. Waters of Marah
4. Camp by the Red Sea
5. Tho Route to Sinai
III. Seconp Journey
1. The Stay at Sinai
2. Site of Kadesh-barnea
8. The Route: Hazeroth to Moseroth
4. The Camps between Hazeroth and Moseroth
IV. Tue Turrty-ricur Years
1. The History.
2. The Camps Visited


ON QabOhe


yO


Ii.


Coho


V. Tus Finat Journey
1. The Route

. The Five Stations to the Border of Moab

. From Iyim to Arnon

. The Message to Sihon

From the Arnon to Shittim

Review

I. Conditions.—A consideration of the geography

and natural features of the desert between Egypt
and Edom, in which the Hebrews are

1. The said to have wandered for 40 years,

Wilderness has a very important bearing on the
question of the genuineness of the

Pent narrative. This wilderness forms a wedge

between the Gulfs of Suez and ‘Akabah, tapering


Poup oor


RS
Wilderness of Judaea.


SS ee


S. to the granite mountains near Sinai. It has a
base 175 miles long EF. and W. on the N., and the
distance N. and 8. is 250 miles. The area is thus
over 20,000 square miles, or double the size of the
Promised Land E. and W. of Jordan. On the N.
of this desert lie the plains of Gaza and Gerar, and
the Neghebh or “‘dry region” (the south; see Nu 13
17 RV), including the plateau and low hills round

Beersheba.
There are four separate regions included in the
area, the largest part (13,000 square miles) being
a plateau which on the S. rises 3,000


2. Four to 4,000 ft. above the sea, and shelves
Separate gently toward the Phili plains. It
Regions is drained into the broad Wédy el-
Included ‘Arish, named from el-‘Arish (‘the


booth’), a station on the Mediter-
ranean coast 8. of Gaza, where this valley enters the
sea. In this direction several prominent mountains
occur (Jebel Yelek, J. Hilal, and J. Ikhrimm),
while further E.—near the site of the Western Ka-
desh—there is a step on the plateau culminating
on the 8. in Jebel el-Mukhrah; but none of these
ranges appears to be more than about 4,000 ft.
above the sea. The plateau is known as Badiet
el-Tih (“the pathless waste’), and though some
Arab geographers of the Middle Ages speak of it
as the desert “‘of the wandering of the Beni Isr4tl,”
they refer to the whole region as far as ‘Akabah,
and not to the plateau alone. The elevation on the
S. forms a very steep ascent or ‘wall’ (see Sur),
bending round on the W. and E., and rising above
the shore plains near Suez and the ‘Arabah near
Edom. Near the center of the plateau is the small
fort of Nakhl (‘the palms’’), where water is found;
but, as a whole, the Tih is waterless, having very
few springs, the most important being those near
the western Kadesh (‘Ain Kadis); for Rehoboth
belongs to the region of the Neghebh rather than to
the Tih. In winter, when very heavy rains occur,
the valleys are often flooded suddenly by a seil, or
“torrent,” which is sometimes 10 ft. deep for a few
hours. Such a seil has been known to sweep away
trees, flocks, and human beings; yet, in consequence
of the hard rocky surface, the flood rushes away to


3065


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Walk
Wanderings


the sea and soon becomes a mere rivulet. Where
soft soil is found, in the valleys, grass will grow and
afford pasture, but even early in spring the Arabs
begin to suffer from want of water, which only re-
mains in pits and in water holes among rocks.
They have then much difficulty in watering their

goats and sheep.
Below the Tih escarpment on the 8. is another
region called Debbet er-ramleh (“the sandy tract”),
which is only 20 miles across at its


3. “The widest; and to the W. are the sandy
Sandy plains, with limestone _ foothills,
Tract” stretching E. of the Bitter Lakes and

of the Gulf of Suez. The third region


consists of the granite chain (see Sinai) which rises
to 8,550 ft. above the sea, and some 6,000 ft.
above its valleys, near Jebel Masa. Parts of this
region are better watered than is any part of the
Tih, and the main route from Egypt to Edom has
consequently always run through it.

The fourth region is that of the ‘Arabah, or broad
valley (10 miles wide) between_the Gulf of ‘Akabah and
the Dead Sea. It has a watershed some
700 ft. high above the Gulf (S. of the
ti f th neighborhood ef Petra); and N. of this
ion of the = shed the water flows to the Dead Sea 1,292
Arabah ft. below the Mediterranean. The total

length of this valley is 120 miles, the
watershed being (near the Edomite chain) about 45
miles N. of ‘Akabah. The head of the Gulf was once
farther N.; and, near ‘Ain Ghudién cpeapanly Ezion-
‘geber) and ‘Ain ef-Tabah (probably Jotbath), there is a
mud flat which becomes a lake in winter—about 20 miles
from the sea. Lower down—at ‘Ain ed Defftyeh—there
is another such flat, the head beiug 10 miles from ‘ Aka-
bah, The whole region is much hetter watered than
either of the three preceding districts, having springs
at the foot of the mountains on either side; and the
‘Arabah is thus the best pastoral country within the
limits described. It now supports a nomad population
of about 2,000 or 3,000 so (Haiwatét and ‘Alawin
Arabs), while the region round Sinai has some 2,000
souls (Towdrah Arabs): the whole of the Tih has prob-
ably not more than 5,000 inhabitants; for the stronger
tribes (‘Azdzimeh and Terabtn) live chiefly hetween Gaza
and Beersheba. These Arabs have goats, sheep and
camels, but cattle are only found near Beersheba. The
flocks are watered. at ere in Pal generally—and are
sometimes driven 20 miles in winter to find pasture and
water. The water is also brought on donkeys and
camels to the camps, and carried in goatskin bags on a
journey through waterless districts. See also ARaBAH.


There is no reason to think that the conditions
at the time of the Exodus differed materially from
those of the present time. The Arabs

5. Physical have cut down a good many acacia
Condition trees for firewood in recent times, but
of the the population is too small materially
Wilderness to affect the vegetation. The annual
rainfall—except in years of drought—is

from 10 to 20 in., and snow falls in winter on the
Tth, and whitens Sinai and the Edomite mountains
for many days. The acacia, tamarisk and palm
grow in the valleys. At Wddy Feirdn there are said
to be 5,000 date palms, and they occur also in the
‘Arabah and the Edomite gorges, while the white
broom (1 K 19 5, AV “juniper”) grows on the Tih
plateau. This Tih plateau is the bed of an ancient
ocean which once surrounded the granite mountains
of Sinai. It was upheaved probably in the Miocene
age, long before man appeared on earth. The sur-
face formation (Hull, Memoir on the Geology and
Geography of Arabia-Petraea, etc, 1886) consists of
Cretaceous limestones of the Eocene and Chalk ages,
beneath which lies the Nubian sandstone of the
Greensand period, which is also visible all along the
route from Sinai to ‘Akabah, and on the east side of
the Dead Sea, and even at the foot of the Gilead
plateau. These beds are all visible in the Tth escarp-
ment; and N. of Sinai there are yet older formations
of limestone, and the “desert sandstone” of the Car-
boniferons period. Since the conditions of natural
water-supply depend entirely on geological forma-
tion and on rainfall, neither of which can be re-


4. Descrip-


garded as having changed since the time of Moses,
the scientific conclusion is that the desert thus de-
scribed represents that of his age. This, as we shall
see, affects our conclusion as to the route followed
by Israel from Egypt to the ‘Arabah; for, on the
direct route from Suez to Nakhl (about 70 miles),
there is no water for the main part of the way, 80
it has to be carried on camels; while, E. of Nakhl,
in a distance of 80 miles, there is only one known
supply in a well (Bir eth- Themed) a few miles S. of the
road. This route was thus practically impassable
for the Hebrews and their beasts, whereas the Sinai
route was passable. Thus when Wellhausen (Hist
of Israel and Judah, 343) speaks of Israel as going
straight to Kadesh, and not making a “digression
to Sinai,” he seems not to have considered the
topography as described by many modern travelers.
For not only was the whole object of their journey
first to visit the “Mount of God,” but it also lay
on the most practicable route to Kadesh.


Tt is true that there are certain difficulties as regards
both the numbers of Israel and the account of the taher-


nacle. The first of these objections has
6. Diffi- been considered elsewhere (see Exonvus).
culties The detailed account of the tabernacle


(Ex 25-28; 36-89) belongs to a part of
: the Pent which many critical writers as-
sign to a later date than that of the old narrative and
laws (Ex 1-24). The description may seem more appli-
cahle to the semi-permanent structure that existed at
Shiloh and Nob, than to the original ‘‘tent of meeting”
in the desert. On the other hand, living so long in civi-
lized Egypt, the Hebrews no douht had among them
skilled artificers like Bezalel. The Egyptians used
acacia wood for furniture; and though the desert acacia
does not grow to the size which would furnish planks 1}
cubits broad, it may be that these were made up by
joiner's work such as the ancients were able to execute.
There was plenty of gold in Egypt and Asia, hut none
near Sinai. Itis suggested, however, that the ornaments
of which the Hebrews spoiled the Egyptians were pre-
sented, like the stuffs (Ex 36 6) wrought for the cur-
tains—just as the Arabs weave stuffs for their tents—
and they might have served to spread a thin layer of
gold over acacia boards, and on the acacia altar. It is
more difficult to understand (on our pies information)
where silver enough for the bases ( Xx 26 25) would be
found. Copper (27 4) presents less difficulty,’ since
there were copper mines in Wédy Nusb near Serabit el
Khadim. The women gave gold earrings to Aaron
(82 3) for the Golden Calf, but this may have been a
small object. Eusebius (Onom), referring to Dizahab,
‘‘the place of gold” (Dt 1 1), now Dhahab (‘‘gold"') on
the west shore of the Gulf of ‘Akabah, E. of Sinai, men-
tions the copper mines of Punon, aud thought that veins
of gold might also have existed in the mountains of Edom
in old times. A little gold is also found in Midian. We
know that the Egyptians and Assyrians carried arks
aud portable altars with their armies, and a great leather
tent of Queen Habasu actually exists. Thothmes III,
before the Exodus, speaks of ‘‘seven tent poles covered
with plates of gold from the tent of the hostile king"
which he took as spoil at Megiddo. The art of engraving
gems was also already ancient in the time of Moses. See
NumpBers, Boor or.


Another difficulty is to understand how six ox
wagons (Nu 7 3) sufficed to carry all the heavy
planks and curtains, and vessels of the
7. Difficulty tabernacle; and though the use of ox
as to Num- carts, and of four-wheeled wagons
ber of also, is known to have been ancient
Wagons in Asia, there are points on even the
easiest route which it would seem im-
possible for wagons to pass, esp. on the rough road
through Edom and Moab. On the other hand, we
know that an Egyp Mohar did drive his chariot
over the mountains in Pal in the reign of Rameses
II, thongh it was finally broken near Joppa.
Whatever be thought as to these questions, there
are indications in other passages of actual acquaint-
ance with the desert fauna. Although
8. Fauna of the manna, as described (Ex 16 31),
the Desert is said not to resemble the sweet gum
which exudes from the twigs of the
tamarisk (to which it has been compared by some),
which melts in the sun, and is regarded as a delicacy
by the Arabs, yet the quail (Ex 16 13; Nu 11


Wanderings


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3066


31) still migrate from the sea northward across the
desert in spring, flying low by night. The birds
noticed (Lev 11; Dt 14) include—as Canon Tris-
tram remarked—species found on the seashores and
in the wilderness, such as the cormorant, pelican
and gnll; the ostrich (in the desert E. of Moab);
the stork, the crane and the heron which migrate
from Africa to the Jordan valley. It is notable
that, excepting the heron (Assyr anpatu), the Heb
names are not those used by later Assyrians. The
mammals include the boar which loves the marshes,
and the hyrax (AV “coney’’) which still exists near
Sinai and in the desert of Judah, with the desert
hare. It is remarkable that in Dt (14 5), besides
the ibex and the bubak, two species are added (the
fallow deer, Heb ’ayyal, AV ‘‘hart,” and the roe-
buck, Heb yahmir, Arab. yahmir, AV “fallow
deer’) which are not desert animals. The former
occurs at Tabor; the latter was found by the
resent writer in 1873 on Carmel, and is since
nae in Gilead and Lebanon. But Dt refers to
conditions subsequent to the capture of Gilead and

Bashan.
The various districts in the desert receive char-
acteristic names in the account of the Exodus.
Thus Shur is the coast region under the


9. Charac- ‘‘wall”’ of the Tih, and Sin (Ex 17 1;
teristic Nu 33 11) was the “glaring” desert
Names of (see Srnar) of white chalk, W. of Sinai.


the Districts Paran is noticed 10 t, as a desert and
mountain region (Dt 33 2; Hab 3 3)
between Sinai and Kadesh. The name seems to
survive in Wddy Feiraén W. of Sinai. It means
some kind of “burrows,” whether referring to
mines, caves or water pits, according to the usual
explanation; but in Arab. the root also means
“hot,” which is perhaps more likely. The term
seems to be of very wide extension, and to refer to
the Tih generally (Gen 21 21); for David (18
26 1) in Paran was not far from Maon and Carmel
S. of Hebron, and the same general application
(1 K 11 18) is suggested in another passage.
Finally the desert of Zin (cin) is noticed 9 t, and
very clearly lay close to Kadesh-barnea and E. of
Paran (Nu 13 21; 201; 343; Dt 32 51; Josh
15 3). The rabbis rendered it “palm” (gin), which
is appropriate to the ‘Arabah valley which still
retains the old name mentioned in Dt 1 1. These
various considerations as to the conditions to be
fulfilled may serve to show that the difficulties often
raised, as to the historic character of the Exodus
narrative, have been much overstated; and a further
stndy of the various journeys serves to confirm this
view.
IL First Journey.—Israel left Egypt in the early
part of April (after the 14th of Abib) and reached
Sinai abont the 14th or 19th of the
1. Mode of 3d month (Ex 19 1), or at the end of
Traveling May. They thus took two months to
accomplish a journey of about 117
miles; but from the first camp after crossing the
Red Sea to that in the plain before the Monnt ten
marches are mentioned, giving intervals of less than
12 miles between each camp. Thus they evidently
remained in camp for at least 50 days of the time,
probably at the better supplied springs, including
that of the starting-point, and those at Elim and
Rephidim, in order to rest their flocks. The
camps were probably not all crowded round one
spring, but spread over a distance of some miles.
The Arabs indeed do not camp or keep their flocks
close to the waters, probably in order not to defile
them, but send the women with donkeys to fetch
water, and drive the sheep and goats to the sprin
or well in the cool of the afternoon. Thus we rea
that Amalek “smote the hindmost” (Dt 25 18),
which may either mean the stragglers unable to


keep up when “weary,” or perhaps those in the camp
most in the rear.
The route of Israel has been very carefully de-
scribed by Robinson (BR, 1838, I, 60-172; Il, 95-
195), and his account is mainly follow-
2. The ed in this and the next sections. We
Route: the may place the first camp (see Exonvs),
First Camp between the springs which supply
Suez (‘Ain Néb’a and ‘Ayydn Masa),
which are about 4 miles apart. The first of these is
scooped out among the sand hillocks, and bubbles
up in a basin some 6 ft. deep. The water is brack-
ish, bnt supplies as many as 200 camel loads at
once for Suez. At ‘Ayytin Masa (“the springs of
Moses”) there are seven springs, some being small
and scooped in the sand. A few palms occur near
the water (which is also brackish), and a little barley
is grown, while in recent times gardens of pome-
granates have been cultivated (A. E. Haynes,
Man-Hunting in the Desert, 1894, 106), which, with
the palms, give a grateful shade.
From this base Israel marched “‘three days in the
wilderness” of Shur, “and fonnd no water” (Ex 15


22). They no doubt carried it with
3. The them, and may have sent back camels
Waters of to fetch it. Even when they reached
Marah the waters of Marah (‘‘the bitter’)


they found them undrinkable till
sweetened. The site of Marah seems clearly to
have been at ‘Ain Hawérah (“the white chalk
spring”), named from the chalky mound beside it.
This is 36 miles from ‘Ayyan Misa, giving an aver-
age daily march of 12 miles. There is no water on
the route, though some might have been fetched
from ‘Ain Abu Jerdd in Wdédy Sudr, and from the
small spring of Abu Suweirah near the sea. Burck-
hardt thought that the water was sweetened from
the berries of the Gharkad shrub (which have an
acid juice) on the thorny bushes near the spring.
This red berry ripens, however, in June. There is
no doubt, on the other hand, that the best treat-
ment for brack water is the addition of an acid
taste. The Arabs consider the waters of this spring
to be the most bitter in the country near.
From Marah, the next march led to Elim (‘‘the
palms”), where were “‘twelve springs [not ‘‘wells’’]
of water and seventy palms.”’ The
4. The site seems clearly to have been in
Camp by Wéddy Gharandil, where a brook is
the Red Sea found fed by springs of better water
than that of Marah. The distance is
only about 6 miles, or an easy march, and palm
trees exist near the waters. Israel then entered the
desert of Sin, stretching from Elim to Sinai, reachin;
a camp “by the Red Sea” (Nu 33 10) just a Etenth
after leaving Egypt (Ex 16 1). The probable site
is near the mouth of Wddy et-Taiyibeh (‘‘the goodly
valley”), which is some 10 or 12 miles from the
springs of Gharandil. The foothills here project
close to the coast, and N. of the valley is Jebel
Hammam Faratn (“the mountain of Pharaoh’s
hot bath”), named from hot sulphur springs. The
water in Wddy et-Taiyibeh is said to be better than
that of Marah, and this is the main Arab watering-
place after passing Gharandil, A small pond is here
described by Burckhardt at el-Murkhat, in the sand-
stone rock near the foot of the mountains, but the
water is bitter and full of weeds, moss and mud.
The site is close to a broad shore plain stretching 8.
Here two roads diverge toward Sinai, which lies
about 65 miles to the §8.E., and in this interval (Nu
33 11-15) five stations are named, giving a daily
march of 13 miles. The Hebrews probably took
the lower and easier road, esp. as it avoided the
Egyp mines of Wédy el-Maghérah (‘valley of the
cave’) and their station at Serdbit el-Khadim
(“pillars of the servant”), where—though this is


3067


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Wanderings


not certain—there may have been a detachment

of bowmen guarding the mines.

_ None of the five camps on this section of the route

is certainly known. Dophkah apparently means
“overdriving”’ of flocks, and Alush


5. The {according to the rabbis) “crowding,”
Route to thus indicating the difficulties of the
Sinai march. Rephidim (‘refreshments’)


contrasts with these names and indi-
cates a better camp. The site, ever since the 4th
cent. AD, has always been shown in Wddy Feirdn
(Eusebius, Onom, s.v. “Rephidim”’)—an oasis of
date palms with a running stream. The distance
from Sinai is about 18 miles, or 14 from the western
end of the broad plain er-Réhah in which Israel
camped in sight of Horeb; and the latter name
(Ex 17 6) included the Desert of Sinai even as
far W. as Rephidim. Here the rod of Moses,
smiting the rock, revealed to the Hebrews an
abundant supply, just as they despaired of water.
Here apparently they could rest in comfort for some
three weeks before the final march tothe plain “before
the mount” (Ex 19 1.2), which they reached two
months after leaving Egypt. Here Amalek—
coming down probably from the mines—attacked
them in the rear. Meanwhile there was ample time
for the news of their journey to reach Midian, and
for the family of Moses (Ex 18 1-5) to reach Sinai.
On one of the low hills near Wédy Feiran, Moses
watched the doubtful fight and built his stone altar.
A steep pass separates the oasis from the Rahah
plain, and baggage camels usually round it on the
N. by Wéady esh-Sheikh, which may have been the
actual route. The Rephidim oasis has a fertile
alluvial soil, and the spot was chosen by Christian
hermits perhaps as early as the 3d cent. AD.
Hl. The Second Journey.—Israel remained at
Mt. Sinai for 10 months, leaving it after the Pass-
over of the “second year’ (Nu 9 1-3),


1. The and apparently soon after the feast,
Stay at since, when they again witnessed the
Sinai spring migration of the quail (11 31)


“from the sea”—as they had done in
the preceding year (Ex 16 13) farther W.—they
were already about 20 miles on their road, at Kib-
toth-hattaavah, or “the graves of lust.”

(1) In order to follow their journey it is necessary
to fix the site of Kadesh-barnea to which they were
going, and there has been a good deal


2. Site of of confusion as to this city since, in
Kadesh- 1844, Rev. John Rowlands discovered
barnea the site of the western Kadesh, at ‘Ain


Kadis in the northern part of the Tih.
Robinson pointed out (BR, II, 194, n. 3) that this
site could not possibly be right for Kadesh-barnea ‘
and, though it was accepted by Professor Palmer,
who visited the vicinity in January, 1870, and has
been advocated by Henry Clay Trumbull (Kadesh-
barnea, 1884), the identification makes hopeless
chaos of the OT topography. The site of ‘Ain
Kadis is no doubt that of the Kadesh of Hagar (see
Snur), and a tradition of her presence survives
among the Arabs, probably derived from one of the
early hermits, since a small hermitage was found
by Palmer in the vicinity (Survey of Western Pal,
Special Papers, 1881, 19). But this spring is not
said to have been at the “city’’ of Kadesh-barnea,
which is clearly placed at the southeast corner of
the land of Israel (Josh 16 3), while, in the same
chapter (ver 23), another site called Kedesh is
mentioned, with Adadah (‘Ada’deh 7 miles 8.E. of
Arad) and Hazor (at Jebel Hadireh); this Kedesh
may very well have been at the western Kadesh.

(2) Kadesh-barnea is noticed in 10 passages of
the OT, and in 16 other verses is called Kadesh only.
The name probably means “the holy place of the
desert of wandering,’ and—as we shall see—the


wanderings of Israel were confined to the 'Arabah.
The place is described as “‘a city in the uttermost
.. .. border” of Edom (Nu 20 16), Edom being
the “red land” of Mt. Seir, so called from its red
sandstones, as contrasted with the white Tth lime-
stone. It is also very clearly placed (Nu 34 3.4)
S. of the Dead Sea (cf Josh 15 3), while Ezekiel
also (47 19) gives it as the southeastern limit of the
land, opposed to Tamar (Tamrah near Gaza) as the
southeastern border town. A constant tradition,
among Jews and Christians alike, identifies Kadesh-
barnea with Petra, and this as early as the time of
Jos, who says that Aaron died on a mountain near
Petra (Ant, IV, iv, 7), and that the old name of
Petra was Arekem (vii, 1). The Tg of Onkelos
(on Nu 34 4) renders Kadesh-barnea by ‘““Rekem
of the G’aia,” and this name—meaning ‘“many-
colored’’—was due to the many-colored rocks near
Petra, while the g’ava or “outcry” is probably that
of Israel at Meribah-kadesh (Nu 27 14), and may
have some connection with the name of the village
el-Jii, at Petra, which is now called Waédy Masa
(“the valley of Moses’) by the Arabs, who have a
tradition that the gorge leading to Petra was cloven
by the rod of Moses when he struck the rock at the
“waters of strife’ (Nu 27 14), forming the present
stream which represents that of ‘‘Meribah of Ka-
desh.” Eusebius also (Onom s.v. ‘‘Barne”) con-
nects Kadesh with Petra, and this traditional site
so fully answers the requirements of the journey in
question that it may be accepted as one of the best-
fixed points on the route, esp. as the position of
Hazeroth agrees with this conclusion. Hazeroth
(Nu 11 35; 12 16; 33 17; Dt 11) means “in-
closures,” and the name survives at ‘Ain Hadrah
(“spring of the inclosure’”’) about 30 miles N.E. of
Mt. Sinai on the way to the ‘Arabah. It was the
3d camp from Sinai, the Ist being Taberah (Nu 11
3) and the 2d Kibroth-hattaavah (11 35), giving a
daily march of 10 miles. See KanEsH-BarnEA.
After passIng Hazeroth (12 16; 13 3) the journey
appears to have heen leisurely, and Israel probahly


camped for some time in the hest pastures
3. Th of the ‘Arabah. For the spies were sent
Y e from Paran near Hazeroth to explore the
Route: ronte ats Kcadesh, and fo oeamine the
“soul country "’ ough whic sray
Sadly hoped to enter Pal (13 17.21). They
OSer9 explored this district (13 21; 32 8) from
“the wilderness of Zin,’’ or otherwise
‘from Kadesh-harnea,’’ on the E., to Rehob—prohably
Rehohoth (now er-Ruheibeh)—on the W.; and—having
heen absent 40 days (13 25)—after visiting Hebron
(ver 22) they returned hy the direct route eading 8.
of Arad (Tell ‘Ardd) to Petra, which road is called (21 1)
the ‘‘ way of the spies.’ On their return, in the season of
‘first-ripe grapes’ (13 20), they found Israel at Kadesh
(13 26). No place N. of Hebron is mentioned in the
account of their explorations, and it is difficult to suppose
that, in 40 days, they could have reached the Syrian city
of Hamath, which is some 350 miles N. of Petra, and
have returned thence. The definition of Rehoh (men-
tioned _hefore Hebron) as helng ‘on the coming to
Hamath’ (13 21) is best explained as a scribe’s error,
due to an indistinct MS, the original reading being
hdldgeth (mgm), and referring to the classical Elusa


a
(mow Khalasah) which lles 10 miles N. of Rehohoth on
the main road to Beersheba and Hebron. Israel left Sinal
jn the spring, after the Passover, and was near Hazeroth
in the tlme of the quall migration. Hazeroth possesses
the only perennial supply of water in the region, and
from its vicinity the spies set forth in August.


~ Most of the sites along this route are unknown,
and their position can only be gathered from the
meaning of the names; but the 6th


4. The station from Hazeroth was at Mt.
Camps Shepher (Nu 33 23), and may have
between left its name corrupted into Tell el-
Hazeroth ‘Asfar (or ‘Asfar), the Heb meaning
and “the shining hill,” and the Arab.
Moseroth either the same or else “‘the yellow.”


This site is 60 miles from Hazeroth,
giving a daily march of 10 miles. As regards the


Wanderings
War, Warfare


other stations, Rithmah means ‘“‘broomy,” referring
to the white desert broom; Rimmon-perez was a
“cloven height,” and Libnah a “white” chalky
place; Rissah means “dewy,” and Kehelathah,
“gathering.” From Mt. Shepher the distance to
the vicinity of Mt. Hor is about 55 miles, and seven
stations are named, giving an average march of 8
miles. The names are Haradah (Nu 83 24),
“fearful,” referrmg to a mountain; Makheloth,
“gatherings”; Tahath—probably “below’’—mark-
ing the descent into the ‘Arabah; Terah, ‘‘delay,”’
referring to rest in the better pastures; Mithkah,
“sweetness” of pasture or of water; Hashmonah,
“fatness”; and Moseroth, probably meaning “the
boundaries,” near Mt. Hor. These names, though
now lost, agree well with a journey through a rugged
region of white limestone and yellow sandstone,
followed by a descent into the pastoral valley of the
eee The distances also are all probable for
ocks.

IV. The Thirty-eight Years.—From the time
of their first arrival at Kadesh-barnea, in the autumn
of the 2d year, to the day that the
Hebrews crossed the brook Zered in
Moab on their final march, is said to
have been a period of 38 years (Dt
2 14), during which the first generation died out,
and a strong race of desert warriors sueceeded it.
During this period Israel lived in the nomadic
state, like modern Arabs who change camp accord-
ing to the’season within well-defined limits, visiting
the higher pastures in summer, and wintering in
the lower lands. On their first arrival near Kadesh-
barnea, they were discouraged by the report of the
spies, and rebelled; but when they were ordered
to turn 8. “by the way of the Red Sea’ or Gulf of
‘Akabah, they made an unsuccessful attempt to
enter Pal by the way of the spies (Nu 14 25-45).
They were diseomfited by Amalekites at Hormah
(“cutting off’), which place is otherwise called
Zephath (Jgs 117). Here also they were again
defeated by the king of Arad (Nu 21 1.3) in the
early autumn of the 40th year of wandering. This
site may well be placed at the ascent now called
Nukb es-Sufah (‘the pass of Zephath’’), which pre-
serves the Heb name, 45 miles N.W. of Mt. Hor,
on the main road from Hebron to Petra. The
route is well watered, and ‘Ain Yemen is a spring
at-the foot of this ascent leading to the higher ter-
race of the Tth. Arad lies N. of the road, and its
Can. king no doubt marched 8. some 40 miles,
to defend the top of the ascent down which the
Amalekites had driven the first generation of
Hebrews, who returned to the Kadesh-harnea
eamp.

We are not left without any notice of the stations
which Israel visited, and no doubt revisited an-

nually, during the 38 years of nomadic


1. The
History


2. The life. We have in fact three passages
Camps which appear to define the limits of
Visited their wanderings. (1) In the first of


these (Nu 83 31-36) we find that
they left Moseroth, near Mt. Hor, the site of which
latter has always been shown—since the time of
Jos at least—at the remarkable mountain W. of
Petra, now called Jebel Harin (‘‘Aaron’s Moun-
tain’); thence they proceeded to the wells of the
Bene-jaakan, to Hor-haggidgad, and to Jotbathah.
Hor-haggidgad (or Gudgodah, Dt 10 7) signifies
apparently the “hill of thunder,” and the word is
not in any way connected with the name of Wddy
Ghadaghid (‘‘the valley of failing waters’’), apply-
ing to a ravine W. of the ‘Arabah; for the Heb and
Arab. words have not a letter in common. The site
of Jotbathah, which was in “a land of brooks of
waters’? (Dt 10 7), is, on the other hand, pretty
clearly to be fixed at ‘Ain el-Tdbah (‘the good


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3068


spring”), 28 miles N. of ‘Akabah, and about 40
along the road from Mt. Hor. This spring, near a
palm grove, feeds the winter lake of ef-Tébah to its
W.inthe ‘Arabah. The next station was Abronah
(“the crossing”), and if this refers to crossing the
‘Arabah to the western slopes, we are naturally
brought—on the return journey—to Ezion-geber,
at. ‘Ain-ghudian (the usual identification), which
springs from the western slopes of the 7th on the
side of the lake opposite to Jotbathah. Thence the
migrants gradually returned to Kadesh.

(2) The second passage (Dt 10 6.7) is one of
many geographical notes added to the narrative
of the wanderings, and gives the names in a differ-
ent order—Wells of the Bene-jaakan, Moserah,
Gudgodah, and Jotbathah—but this has little im-
portance, as the camps, during 38 years, would often
be at these springs.

(3) The third passage is in the preface to Dt
(1 1.2), which enumerates the various places where
Moses spoke to Israel at various times after leaving
Sinai. These include the region E. of Jordan, the
wilderness, the ‘Arabah, “over against Suph,” with
all the district between Paran and Tophel (now
Tufileh, on the southern border of Moab), as well
as Laban (probably the Libnah of Nu 33 20),
Hazeroth, and Dizahab which may be Dhahab on
the seashore EF. of Sinai. This list, with the val-
uable notes added showing that Kadesh-barnea
was 11 days from Horeb in the direction of Mt. Seir,
refers to speeches down to the last days of Moses’
life. The wanderings of the 38 years do not inelude
the march through Edom and Moab; and, though
it is of course possible that they may have extended
to Hazeroth and Sinai, it seems more probable that
they were confined to the ‘Arabah between Petra
and Jotbathah. Elath (now ‘Akabah), on the east-
ern shore at the head of the gulfs, is not mentioned;
for the raised beach 8. of the Lake of Jotbathah
would not give pasture. In summer the camps
would be on the western slopes of the valley, where
grass might be found in April; and the annual mi-
grations were thus within the limits of some 500 sq.
miles, which is about the area now occupied by a
strong tribe among Arabs.

V. The Final Journey.—In the 1st month of the
40th year (Nu 20 1) Israel was at Kadesh in the
desert of Zin, where Miriam was buried.
They were troubled once more by
want of water, till Moses smote the
rock of Meribah (‘strife’). They
were commanded to keep peace with their relatives
of Edom and Moab, whose lands were not attacked
by the Hebrews till the time of Saul, and of David
and his successors. They camped on the border of
Kadesh, desiring to reach the main road to Moab
through the city; and, when this was refused by
the king of Edom, they withdrew a few miles W.
to Mt. Hor. Here Aaron was buried, and was
mourned for 30 days (Nu 20 29), after which the
2d attempt to reach Hebron by the main road (21 1)
was also repulsed. Since, on this oecasion, Israel
remained ‘“‘many days” in Kadesh (Di 1 46) and
left it less than 38 years after they first reached it
in autumn, it would seem that they may have
started in August, and have taken about a month
to reach the brook Zered; but only five stations are
noticed (Nu 21 10-12; 38 41-44) on the way.
They are not said—in any passage—to have gone
to Elath, but they turned ‘from mount Hor by the
way to the Red Sea, to compass the land of Edom”
(Nu 21 4), or, as otherwise stated (Dt 2 8), they
went “from the way of the Arabah” on the road
which led “from Elath and from Ezion-geber’’;
and thus, starting on the ‘‘way to the Red Sea,’
they “compassed mount Seir many days,’ turning
“northward” by the ‘way of the wilderness of


1. The
Route


3069


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Wanderings


War, Warfare


Moab” (Dt 2 1.8) after passing through the coast
of Edom (2 4).


If the list of five statlons is complete, we may suppose
that they left the ‘Arabah road not many miles 8. of
pete seeing. E. Dy at existing road
. eading to ‘an, an us gaining the
2. The Five high plateau above Petra to the Ee and
Stations to reaching the present Hdj route. This
the Border ae es tee by the netlee of Punon
as the 2d camp, if we acce e statement
of Moab of Eusehius (Onom, s.v. YPhinon” ; for
he appears to have known it as an Edomite
village N. of Petra, in the desert, where convicts were
employed digging copper. The name, however, has not
been recovered. The preceding camp at Zalmonah sug-
gests some “gloomy” valley leading up to the Edomite
plateau. N. of Punon, the 3d camp was at Oboth
ee bags’’), and the 4th was at Iyim or Iye-abarim
“the ruins” or ‘‘the ruins of the crossings’’), the site
of which is pretty certainly at ‘Aimeh, a few miles N. of
Tophel. The total distance thus seems to have heen
about 60 miles for four marches, or 15 miles a day. Iyim
was ‘‘in the border of Moab" (Nu 33 44) and in the
desert facing Moab, in the East (21 11).


Here therefore Israel left Edom; and between lyim
and the river Arnon, in a distance of about 32 miles,
only one station is mentioned, being at


3. From the valley of Zered (2112; Dt 2
Iyim to 13.14). This has usually been placed
Arnon at Wady el-Hesy (‘the pebbly valley’),


which flows into the Dead Sea, having
its head near Iyim; but this is evidently too far S.,
and it is no doubt the great gorge at Kerak that is
intended, having its head close to the Hj road, half-
way from Iyim to Arnon, giving a daily march of 16
miles. The traditional identification of the Arnon
with Wady Moéjib is rendered certain by the posi-
tions of Diban (Dhibén) and Aroer (‘Ar‘air) close by.
It was the border of the Amorites, who had driven
the Moabites S. of this river (Nu 21 13; Dt 2 36),
depriving them of their best lands which stretched
to Heshbon. These Amorites were apparently
recent intruders who, with the Hittites (see Hrr-
viTes), had invaded Damascus and Bashan from
North Syria, and who no doubt had thus brought
the fame of Balaam from Pethor (Nu 22 5), on the
Euphrates near Carchemish.
The Hebrews were now a strong people fit for
war, and Moses sent messengers from the ‘‘wilder-
ness of Kedemoth” (Dt 2 26) to


4. The Sihon in Heshbon, demanding a peace-
Message ful passage through his lands, such as
to Sihon had been accomplished through Edom


and Moab. Kedemoth (‘the Eastern
Lands’*) was evidently the desert of Moab.

It was objected, by Colenso, to the narrative of the
Pent that, since Israel only reached the brook Zered in
autumn of the 40th year, only six months are left for the
conquest of North Moab, Gilead_and Bashan. But it
must be remembered that the Hebrews left all their
impedimenta in the ‘‘plains of Moab” (Nu 22 1) oppo-
site Jericho at Shittim, so that the advance of their army
in Gilead and Bashan was unimpeded. The Assyrians,
in later times, covered in a season much longer distances
than are attributed to Heh conquerors, and the six months
leave quite enough time for the two missions sent from
Moab (Nu 22 5-36) to fetch Balaam. See Numsens,
Boox or.

(1) It is notable that, for the march from the
Arnon to Shittim, we have two lists of stations.

That which is said to have been written
5. From down by Moses himself (Nu 33 45-
the Arnon 49) mentions only four stations in a
to Shittim distance of about 25 miles—namely

Dibon-gad, Almon-diblathaim, Nebo
and the plains of Moab, where the camps were placed
at various waters from .Beth-jeshimoth (Sdeimeh)
on the northeastern shore of the Dead Sea to Abel-
shittim (“the Meadow of Acacias”), now called
the Ghér es-Seisebdn, or “Valley of Acacias.” An
this area of 50 square miles there were four running
streams, besides springs, and excellent pasture for
flocks. ‘This therefore was the headquarters of the
nation during the Amorite war.


.


(2) In the 2d list (Nu 21 13-20) we read of a still
more gradual and cautious advance in the Amorite lands,
and this may represent the march of the main body fol-
lowing the men of war. Leaving the Arnon, they
reached ‘ta well’ (Beer), probably near Dihon, this


being one of those shallow water pits which the Arabs


still scoop out in the valleys when the water runs below
the surface. Between Arnon and Pisgah (or Nebo) no
less than five stations are noticed in about 20 miles,
namely Beer, Mattanah (‘‘the gift’), Nahaliel (‘‘ the valley
of God"), Bamoth (or Bamoth-Baal [Nu 22 41], ‘‘the
monuments of Baal”), and Pisgah (Jebel Neba). Of
these only_the last is certainly known, but the central
station at Nahaliel may be placed at the great gorge of
the Zerka Mé4'atn, the road from Dibon to Nebo crossing
ite head near Beth-meon. There was plenty of water In
this vicinity. The last stage of Israel's march thus seems
to represent a program of only about 4 miles a day,
covered by the more rapid advance of the fighting men;
and no doubt the women, children and flocks were not
allowed to proceed at all until, at least, Sihon had been
driven from Heshbon (Nu 21 21-25).


We have thus considered every march made by
the Hebrews, from Egypt to Shittim, by the light
of actual knowledge of their route.
6. Review We have found no case in which the
stations are too far apart for the pas-
sage of their beasts, and no discrepancies between
any of the accounts when carefully considered. If,
as some critical writers think, the story of the spies
and the list of camps said to have been written down
by, Moses are to be attributed to a Heb priest
writing in Babylonia, we cannot but wonder how
he came to be so accurately informed as to the
topography of the wilderness, its various regions,
its water-supply and its natural products. It does
not seem necessary to suppose a ‘double source,’”’
because, in the spring of two successive years, the
manna is noticed, and Israel is recorded as having
eaten the quail flying (as now) by night to the
Jordan valley from Africa. The march was not
continuous, and plenty of time is left, by the re-
corded dates, for the resting of the flocks at such
waters as those of Elim, Rephidim and Hazeroth.
The wanderings of the 38 years represent a nomadic
life in the best pastures of the region, in and near
the ‘Arabah. Here the new race grew up—hardy
as the Arabs of today. When they left Egypt the
Pharaoh still had a firm hold on the ‘way of the
Philistines,” and the Canaanites owned his sway.
But 40 years later Egypt was defeated by the Amor-
ites, and the forces of the Pharaoh were withdrawn
from Jerus after suffering defeat in Bashan (see
Am Tab, no. 64, Brit. Mus., where no less than nine
known places near Ashteroth and Edrei are noticed);
general chaos then resulted in Southern Pal, when
the ‘Abiri (or Hebrews) appeared from Seir, and
“destroyed all the rulers” (see Exopus). This,
then, was the historic opportunity for the defeat
of the Amorites, and for Joshua’s conquest of the
Promised Land. C. R. Conprer


WAR, wor, WARFARE, wér'fér (Mem,
milhamah, "1 WIN, ’anshé m., “men of war,”
“soldiers’’; médepos, pdlemos, twodepeiv, polemein,
orparever Oar, strateiesthai, erparid, slratid):


1. Religious Significance 7. Deteat and Victory


2. Preliminaries 8. Spoils and Trophies
3. Operations of War 9. Treaties of Peace
4. Strategy 10. War in the NT

5. Important Requisites LITBRATURE

6. Characteristics


From an early period of Heb history war had a
religious significance. The Hebrews were the people
of Jeh, and they were reminded in their

1. Religious wars by the priest or priests who ac-
Significance companied their armies that Jeh was
with them to fight their battles (Dt

20 1-4). It was customary to open a campaign,
or to enter an engagement, with sacrificial rites
(1 S 7 8-10; 13 9). Hence, in the Prophets, to
“prepare” war is to carry out the initiatory religious


War, Warfare


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3070


rites and therefore to “sanctify” war (Jer 6 4; 22
7; 6127.28; Mic 85; Joel 39; RVm in each
case); and Isaiah even speaks of Jeh mustering His
host and summoning to battle His “consecrated
ones” (Isa 13 3), the warriors consecrated by the
sacrifices offered before the war actually opened.
The religious character attaching to war explains
also the taboo which we find associated with it
(Dt 20 7; 23 10; 2 8 41 11).

(1) Religious preliminaries—It was in keeping

with this that the oracle should be consulted before
a campaign, or an engagement (Jgs
2. Pre- 20 18ff; 18 14 37; 232; 28 6;
liminaries 30 8). The ark of God was believed
to be possessed of special virtue in
assuring victory, and, because it was identified in
the eyes of the Israelites with the presence of Jeh,
it was taken into battle (1 8 4 3). The people
learned, however, by experience to put their trust
in Jeh Himself and not in any outward token of
His presence. At the battle of Ebenezer the ark
was taken into the fight with disastrous results to
Israel (1 S 4 4 ff). On theother hand at the battle
of Michmash, the sacred ephod at Saul’s request
accompanied the Israelites into the field, and there
was a great discomfiture of the Philis (1 S 14 18).
In the later history prophets were appealed to for
guidance before a campaign (1 K 22 5; 2 K 3 11),
although fanatical members of the order sometimes
gave fatal advice, as to Ahab at Ramoth-gilead, and
probably to Josiah at Megiddo. Upon occasion
the king addressed the host before engaging the
enemy (2 Ch 20 20-22, where Jehoshaphat also had
singers to go before the army into battle); and
Judas Maccabaeus did so, with prayer to God, on
various occasions (1 Macc 3 58; 4 30; 6 32).

(2) Military preliminaries ——The call to arms was
given by sound of trumpet throughout the land
(Jgs 3 27; 6 34; 1 8 13 3; 2S 16 10; 20 1; ef
Nu 10 2). It was the part of the priests to sound
an alarm with the trumpets (2 Ch 13 12-16; cf
1 Macc 4 40; 16 8), and the trumpets were to be
blown in time of battle to keep God in remembrance
of Israel that they might gain the victory. In the
Prophets, we find the commencement of war de-
scribed as the drawing of the sword from its sheath
(Ezk 21 3 ff), and the uncovering of the shield (Isa
22 6). Graphic pictures of the mobilizing of forces,
both for invasion and for defence, are found in Isa
(22 6-8) and Nah (8 2) and other Prophets. It
was in the springtime that campaigns were usually
opened, or resumed after a cessation of hostilities in
winter (28 11 1; 1 K 20 22.26).

Of the actual disposition of troops in battle there
are no full accounts till the Maccabean time, but an

examination of the Bib. battlefields by


3. Opera- modern travelers with knowledge of
tions of military history has yielded valuable
War results in showing the position of the


combatants and the progress of the
fight (an excellent example in Dr. Wilham Miller’s
Least of All Lands, 85 ff, 116 ff, 150 ff, where the
battles of Michmash, Elah and Gilboa are described
with plans). With the Israelites the order of battle
was simple. The force was drawn up, either in line,
or in three divisions, a center and two wings. There
was a rearguard (called in AV “rereward,” in RV
‘Tearward’’) to give protection on the march or to
bring in stragglers (Jgs 7 16; 1 S 11 11; 2 8 18 2;
1 Macc 5 33; cf also Nu 10 25; Josh 6 9; 1 S 29
2; Isa 58 8). The signal for the charge and the
retreat was given by sound of trumpet. There
was a battle-cry to inspire courage and to impart
confidence (Jgs 7 20; Am 1 14, etc). The issue
of the battle depended upon the personal courage
and endurance of the combatants, fighting man
against man, but there were occasions when the


decision was left to single combat, as at the battle
of Elah between the giant Goliath and the stripling
David (1 S 17). The combat at Gibeon between
the men of Benjamin, twelve in number, followers
of Ish-bosheth, and twelve of the servants of David,
in which each slew his man and all fell together by
mutual slaughter, was the prelude to “a very sore
battle” in which Abner and the men of Israel were
beaten before the servants of David (2 S 2 16).
To the minor operations of war belong the raid,
such as the Philis made into the Valley of Rephaim
(1 Ch 14 9), the foray, the object of which was
plunder (2 § 3 22), the foraging to secure supplies
(2 S 23 11m), and the movements of bands who
captured defenceless habitants and sold them as
slaves (2 K 6 2).
Of strategical movements in war there was the
ambush with liers-in-wait resorted to by Joshua at.
Ai (Josh 8 3 ff); the feint, resorted
4. Strategy to by the Israelites against the tribe
of Benjamin (Jgs 20 20 ff); the flank
movement, adopted by David in the Valley of
Rephaim to rout the Philis (2 8 5 22f); and the
surprise, inflicted successfully at the Waters of
Merom upon the Canaanites under Jabin by Joshua
(Josh 11 1f). Of all these the story of Judas Mac-
cabaeus, the great military leader of the Jewish
nation, furnishes illustrations (1 Macc 4 5 and else-
where).
Among the requisites for the proper conduct of
war the most important was the camp (mahdneh).
Of the exact configuration of the camp
5. Impor- of the Israelites, it is not possible to
tant Requi- speak with certainty. The camp of
sites Israel in the wilderness seems to have
been quadrilateral, although some have
supposed it to be round or triangular (Nu 2 1 ff).
The camp in the wilderness was furnished with


Roman Standards or Banners.
From Montfaucon (1, 2). Hope (8, 4). Arch of Titus (5).


ensigns and standards—the family ensign (’dth),
and a standard (deghel) for the group of tribes
occupying each of the four sides. The standard
or banner (nés) is used of the signal for the muster-
ing of troops, but standard-bearer, which occurs
only once in the Bible, is a doubtful reading (Isa
10 18, where RVm, “sick man,” is rather to be
followed). In time of war the camp was surrounded
by a barricade, or wagon-rampart (ma‘gal), as at
ilah (1S 17 20); and Saul lay within such a bar-
ricade in the wilderness of Ziph with his people
round about him when David surprised him and
carried off his spear (1 S 26 5ff). Tents were
used for the shelter of troops, at any rate when


3071


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA War, Warfare


occupied with a siege (2 K 7 7), although at the
siege of Rabbah we read of booths for the purpose
(2$ 11 11). Pickets were set to watch the camp,
and the watch was changed three times in the course
of the night (Jgs 7 19; 1 Macc 12 27). It was
usual to leave a guard in charge of the camp when
the force went into action or went off upon a raid
(1 S 26 18; 3010). Careful prescriptions were
laid down for the preservation of the purity of the
camp, “for Jeh thy God walketh in the midst of thy
camp, .... therefore shall thy camp be holy” (Dt
23 9-14; cf Nu 6 1-4).

Garrisons (mageabh) were placed in occupation
of fortresses and strategical centers (2 Ch 17 2).
No doubt the caves in the hillsides and rocky fast-
nesses of the land, as at Michmash, would serve
for their reception (1 § 18). The garrisons, how-
ever, which are expressly mentioned, were for the
most part military posts for the occupation of a
subject country—Philis in Israelitish territory (1 S
13 23; 14 1.11), and Israelites in Syrian and Edom-
ite territory (2 S 8 6.14).

Among the characteristic notes of war, the tu-
mult and the shouting were often noticed by the

sacred historians (1S 46; 14 19;
6. Char- 2K 7 6). In the figurative language
acteristics of the prophets the terrors and horrors
and devastation of war are set forth
in lurid colors. ‘“The snorting of his horses is heard
from Dan,” is Jeremiah’s description of an invad-
ing army, ‘‘at the sound of the neighing of his strong
ones the whole land trembleth” (Jer 8 16). ‘The
crack of the whip and the noise of the rumbling
wheel and the galloping horse, and the jolting
chariot and the rearing horsemen; and the flash of
the sword and the glitter of the spear, and the mul-
titude of slain; and a mass of dead bodies and no
end to the carcases’ (Nah 3 2-4: J. M. P. Smith’s
tr in ICC). Because of the devastation of terri-
tory and the slaughter of men which it entails, the
sword is named with famine and ‘“noisome beasts”
(ARV has “evil beasts”) and “pestilence” as one of
God’s “four sore judgments” (Ezk 14 21 AV).
By a familiar figure “the sword” is often taken
for all the operations of war, because it is char-
acteristic of it to devour and to destroy (2 8 2 26;
Jer 2 30). : ;

While the treatment of the vanquished in the

wars of Israel never reached the pitch of savagery
common in Assyr warfare, there are
7. Defeat not wanting examples of excessive
and Victory severity, such as David’s treatment
of his Moabite prisoners (2 S 8 2)
and of the Ammonites captured at Rabbah (2 8
12 31), and Menahem’s barbarous treatment_of
Tiphsah (2 K 16 16; cf Nu 3117; Josh 6 21).
That it was common for the Philis to mutilate and
abuse their prisoners is shown by Saul’s determi-
nation not to fall into their hands (1 § 31 4). On
that occasion the Philis not only stripped the slain,
but cut off Saul’s head and fixed his body to the
wall of Bethshan (1 8 31 9.10). It was usual to
carry off prisoners and sell them as slaves (2 K 6
2; 1 Macc 8 41). The conquerors were wont to
deport the population of the subjugated country
(2 K 17 6), to carry off treasure and impose tribute
(2 K 16 8), and even to take the gods into cap-
tivity (Isa 46 1). On the other hand, the victors
were hailed with acclamations and songs of rejoicing
(1 8 18 6), and victory was celebrated with public
thanksgivings (Ex 16 1; Jgs 6 1; 1 Macc 4 24).

The spoils of war, spoken of as booty also—
armor, clothing, jewelry, money, captives and ani-
mals—falling to the victors, were divided equally
between those who had taken part in the battle
and those who had been left behind in camp (Nu
31 27; Josh 22 8; 1S 30 24f). A proportion


of the spoils was reserved for the Levites, and ‘‘a
tribute unto the Lord” was also levied before
distribution was made of the collected


8. Spoils booty (Nu 31 28.30). To the Lord,
and in the Israelitish interpretation of war,
Trophies _ the spoils truly belong, and we see this


exemplified at the capture of Jericho
when the silver and the gold and the vessels of brass
were put into the treasury of the house of the Lord
(Josh 6 24). Under the monarchy, part of the
spoils fell to the king who might in turn dedicate
it to the Lord or use it for the purposes of war
(2 K 14 14; 1 Ch 18 7.11). The armor of the
conquered was sometimes dedicated as a trophy of
victory and placed in the temple of the heathen or
preserved near the ark of God (1 8 21 9; 31 9).
As the blast of the war-horn summoned to war,
so it intimated the cessation of hostilities (2S 2
28); and as to draw the sword was
9. Treaties the token of the entrance upon a cam-
of Peace paign, so to return it to its sheath, or
_ to put it up into the scabbard, was
emblematic of the establishment of-peace (Jer 47
6). As ambassadors were scnt to summon to war
(Jer 49 14), or to dissuade from war (2 Ch 36 21),
so ambassadors were employed to negotiate peace
(Isa 33 7). Treaties of peace were made on occa-
sion between combatants, as between Ahab and
Ben-hadad II after the defeat of the latter and his
fortunate escape from the hands of Ahab with his
life (1 K 20 30.31). By the appeal of Ben-hadad’s
representative to Ahab’s clemency his life was
spared, and in return therefor he granted to Ahab
the right to have bazaars for trade in Damascus as
his father had had in Samaria (1 K 20 34). Al-
liances, offensive and defensive, were common, as
Ahab and Jehoshaphat against Syria (1 K 22 2 ff),
Jehoram and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom
against Moab (2 K 3 7 ff), and the kings of the
West, including Ahab and Hadadezer of Damascus,
to resist Shalmaneser II of Assyria, who routed
the allies at the battle of Karkar in 854 BC. It is
among the wonderful works of Jeh that He makes
war to cease to the end of the earth, that He breaks
the bow, and cuts the spear in sunder, and “burneth
the chariots in the fire’ (Ps 46 9). And prophetic
ictures of the peace of the latter days include the
Brcnene of “the bow and the sword and the battle
out of the land” (Hos 2 18), the beating of “swords
into plowshares, and .... spears into pruning-
hooks” (Isa 2 4; Mic 4 8).
Among the signs of the last days given by Our
Lord are ‘wars and rumors of wars” (Mt 24 6;
Mk 13 7; Lk 219; 21 24). Jesus
10. War in accepts war as part of the present
the NT world-order, and draws from it an im-
pressive illustration of the exacting
conditions of Christian discipleship (Lk 14 31 ff).
He foresees how Jerus is to be encompassed with
armies and devoted to the bitterest extremities of
war (Lk 19 41 ff). He conccives Himself come, not
to send peace on earth, but a sword (Mt 10 34);
and declares that they who take the sword shall
perish by the sword (Mt 26 52). The apostles
trace war to the selfishness and greed of men (Jas
4 1ff); they see, speaking figuratively, in fleshly
lusts enemies which war against the soul (1 Pet 2
11); they find in war apt figures of the spiritual
struggle and Divine protection and ultimate victory
of the Christian (Rom 7 23; 8 37; 2 Cor 10 3.5;
1 Tim 118; He 18 138; 1 Pet 1 5), and of the
triumphs of Christ Himself (2 Cor 2 14; Col 2 15;
Eph 2 16.17). St. Paul made the acquaintance
of the barracks, both at Jerus and at Caesarea
(Acts 21 34.27; 23 35); and at Rome his bonds
became familiar to the members of the Preetorian
guard who were from time to time detailed to have


War, Man of
Wasp


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3072


him in keeping (Phil 1 13). It is under the figures
of battle and war that St. John in the Apocalypse
conceives the age-long conflict between righteousness
and sin, Christ and Satan, and the final triumph of
the Lamb, who is King of kings, and Lord of lords
(Rev 16 14-16; 17 14; 19 14). For other refer-
ences see ARMY, 9; PR@ToRIAN GUARD; TREATY.


Literature.—Benzinger, art. ‘‘Kriegswesen’’ in
Herzog, RE’, XI; Nowack, Hebrdische Archacologie,
72, Browne, Heb Antiquities, 44-47.

T. Nicon


WAR, MAN OF (7an>1 UN, ish milhamah):


‘Jehovah is a man of war:
Jehovah is his name’’ (Ex 15 3).


In early Israel the character of Jeh as the war-God
forms a prominent feature in the conception of God
(Nu 10 35; 21 14; Josh 5 13; 10 11; Jgs 5 4.13.
20.23.31, etc). See Gov, Names or, JII, 8; Lorp
or Hosts; and HDB, V, 635 ff.


WARD, wird: “Ward” and “guard” are two
different spellings of the same word, and in conse-
quence no cledr line can be drawn between them.
EV, however, has used “guard” only in the sense of
“a special bedy of soldiers” (Gen 37 36, etc), while
‘ward’ is used, not only in this sense (Jer 37 13;
contrast 39 9), but also in a variety of others. So
a “ward” may mean “any body of men on special
duty,” as 1 Ch 9 23; AV 1 Ch 26 16; Neh 12
24.25 (RV “watch”’), or the duty itself, as Isa 21 8;
1 Ch 12 29 AV (RV “‘allegiance’”’); 25 8; 26 12


(RV “office,”’ m ‘“ward’’); Neh 12 45; 13 30
(RV ‘‘charge”). Or “ward” may mean “guarded
place,” always in the phrase “put in ward.” RV


has kept this phrase throughout (Gen 40 3, etc),
changing it only in Ezk 19 9, where “cage” better
carries out the figure of the context.

The distinction of the older Eng. between ‘‘watch"’
and ‘‘ward,"’ as applying respectively to the night and
+o the day seems unknownin EV. CfiIsa 21 8

The affix ‘-ward,” denoting direction and still
used in such forms as “toward,” ‘northward,’ etc,
had a much wider range in Bib. Eng. So “to God-
ward” (Ex 18 19; 2 Cor 3 4; 1 Thess 1 8); “to
thee-ward” (1 S 19 4); ‘to us-ward” (Ps 40 5;
Eph 119; 2 Pet 39 AV); “to you-ward” (2
Cor 1 12; 13 3; Eph 3 2; 2 Pet 3 9 RV); and
in Ex 37 9, AV “even to the mercy seatward”
(RV “toward the mercy-seat’’).

Burton Scorr Easton

WARES, wArz (AMPS, makkahah, \2%2 , mekher,
“29%, mimkar, 1932, kin‘ah, mI, ma‘dseh,
PAT , ‘izeabhin, ">, kelt): (1) makkahah, some-
thing received or purchased (Neh 10 31); (2) mekher,
“price” or “pay,” value, merchandise (Neh 13 16);
(3) mimkar, a “selling,” the thing sold (Neh 13 20),
(4) kin‘ah, a “package,” hence wares (Jer 10 17);
(5) matdseh, “transaction,” activity, property, pos-
session, work, occupation, thing made, deed, business
(Ezk 27 16.18); (6) ‘izzabhon, “selling,” trade, rev-
enue, mart, letting go for a price (Ezk 27 33);
(7) kel, a “prepared” something, as an implement,
tool, weapon, utensil, armor, furniture, sack, vessel,
hence wares (Jon 1 5). In most cases the real sense
is merchandise (see Mercwanpisz). ‘That which
did not a little amuse the Merchandizers [in Vanity-
Fair] was, that these Pilgrims set very light by all
their Wares; they cared not so much as to look upon
them” (Bunyan, The Pilgrim’s Progress).

Wiuiiam Epwarp RafFretTy

WARFARE. See War, WARFARE.


WARP, wérp Om, shetht [Lev 13 48-59)):
The long threads fixed into the loom to form the
basis of the web, and into which the woof is wrought
from the shuttle. The warp and the woof lying at


right augles to one another have in their Heb form
(shthi w**érebh) given to modern Jewish speech
a secret. expression to designate the cross. See
WravING.


WARS, wérz, OF JEHOVAH (THE LORD),
BOOK OF THE. See Bisse, IV, 1, (1), (0).


‘WASH, wosh, WASHING, wosh’ing: The two
usual Heb words for “wash” are 7), rahag, and
032, kabhas, the former being normally used of
persons or of sacrificial animals (Gen 18 4, ete,
often tr? “bathe”; Lev 165 5, etc), and the latter
of things (Gen 49 11, etc), the exceptions to this
distinction being few (for ra@hac, 1 K 22 38m; for
kabhas, Ps 61 2.7; Jer 2 22; 4 14). Much less
common are TI, dith (2 Ch 4 6; Isa 4 4; Ezk


40 38) and ROW, shataph (1 K 22 38; Job 14 19;
Ezk 16 9), tré “rinse” in Lev 6 28; 15 11.12.
In Neh 4 23 AV has “washing” and RV “water”
for mayim, but the text is hopelessly obscure (cf
RVm). Inthe Apoc and NT the range of terms is
wider. Most common is virrw, nipid (Mt 6 17,
etc), with apontptd in Mt 27 24. Of the other
terms, Aovw, lovd (Sus vs 15.17; Jn 13 10, etc), with
apolows (Acts 22 16; 1 Cor 6 11) and the noun
loutrén (Sir 34 25b; Eph 5 26; Tit 3 5), usually
has a sacral significance. On farrlt{w, baptizd (Sir
34 25a; Mk 7 4; Lk 11 38), with the noun bap-
tismés (Mk 7 4 [text?]; He 9 10), see Bapmsm. In
Lk 5 2; Rev 7 14; 22 14 RV occurs T\vvw, plind,
while Jth 10 3 has repucdvtw, periklizd. Virtually,
as far as meaning is concerned, all these words are
interchangeable. Of the figurative uses of washing,
the most common and obvious is that of cleansing
from sin (Ps 51 2; Isa 1 16, etc), but, with an
entirely different figure, “to wash In” may signify
‘to enjoy in plenty’ (Gen 49 11; Job 29 6; the
meaning in Cant 5 12 is uncertain). Washing of
the hands, in token of innocence, is found in Dt 21
6; Mt 27 24.

The “washing balls’ of Sus ver 17 (onuiyua,
smégma, a very rare word) were of soap. See Soar.

Burton Scotr Easton

WASHING OF FEET: The OT references (Gen
18 4; 19 2; 24 32: 43 24; Jes 19 21; 18 26
41; 28 11 8; Cant 5 3; Ps 58 10) show that the
washing of the feet was the first act on entering
the tent or house after a journey. The Orientals
wore only sandals, and this washing was refreshing
as well as cleanly. In the case of ordinary people,
the host furnished the water, and the guests washed
their own feet, but in the richer houses, the washing
was done by a slave. It was looked upon as the
lowliest of all services (1 S 26 41). Jesus pointedly
contrasts Simon’s neglect of even giving Him water
for His feet with the woman’s washing His feet with
tears and wiping them with her hair (Lk 7 44).
On the last evening of His life, Jesus washed the
disciples’ feet (Jn 18 1-16). Their pride, height-
ened by the anticipations of place in the Messianic
kingdom whose crisis they immediately expected,
prevented their doing this service for each other.
Possibly the same pride had expressed itself on this
same evening in a controversy about places at table.
Jesus, conscious of His Divine dignity and against
Peter’s protest, performed for them this lowliest
service. His act of humility actually cleansed their
hearts of selfish ambition, killed their pride, and
taught them the lesson of love. See also Hxpos T,
XI, 536 f.

Was it meant to be a perpetual ordinance? Jn
13 15, with its ‘‘as” and the present tense of the vb.
“do,” gives it a priori probability. It has been so
understood by the Mennonites and the Dunkards.
Bernard of Clairvaux advocated making it a sacra-


3073 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA wee of
ment. The Pope, the Czar, and the Patriarch of (4) The command.—“IE I then, the Lord and the


Constantinople wash the feet of 12 poor men on
Maundy Thursday; so did the Eng. kings till James
II, and it is still practised in the royal palaces of
Madrid, Munich and Vienna. But the objections
to such an interpretation are overwhelming: (1)
It is never referred to in the Synoptic Gospels, the
Acts or the Epp.; 1 Tim 5 10 refers only to lowly
service to the saints. (2) It was first in the 4th
cent. (cf Ambrose and Augustine) that it became
the custom to wash the feet of the baptized on
Maundy Thursday. (3) Ritualizing such an act of
love absolutely destroys its meaning. (4) No large
body of Christians has ever received it as a sacra-
ment or an ordinance. F. L. ANDERSON


ACCORDING To THE BELIEF AND PRACTICE OF THE
CuHURCE OF THE BRETHREN


Feet-washing is always practised in connection
with the Agape and Eucharist. This entire service
1s usually called ‘‘Love Feast.’’ These

1. Practice Love Feasts are always held in the
evening (in conformity to the time of

Jesus’ Last: Supper). Preparatory services on self-
examination are held either at a previous service
or at the opening of the Love Feast. Each church
or congregation is supposed to hold one or two Love
Feasts annually. No specified time of the year is
set for these services. Before the supper is eaten
all the communicants wash one another’s feet; the


brethren by themselves, and likewise the sisters by


themselves.

(1) The mode.—In earlier years the “Double
Mode” was practised, where one person would
wash the feet of several persons and another would
follow after and wipe them. At present the “Single
Mode” is almost universal, wherein each com-
municant washes and wipes the feet of ancther.
Hence each one washes and wipes the feet of an-
other, and in turn has this same service performed
to himself.

(2) The salutation.—Feet-washing is also accom-
panied with the “Holy Kiss.” As soon as one has
finished washing and wiping the feet of another, he
takes him by the hand and greets him with the
“holy kiss,” usually with an appropriate benedic-
tion as: ‘God bless you,” or “May the Lord bless
us.”

There are three texts in the NT referring to feet-
washing (Lk 7 36-50; Jn 13 1-17; 1 Tim 5 10).

(1) Jesus washing the disciples’ feet

2. Scriptur- (Jn 18 1-17).—“At supper time’ (dela-

al Basis for vou yevoudvov, deipnou genoménou) Jesus

Feet- arose, laid aside His garments (iudria,

Washing himdtia=“outer garments’’), girded

Himself with a towel, poured water

into a basin, and began to wash and wipe the feet,
of the disciples. : ,

(2) Peter’s objection.—‘Simon Peter . . . . saith
unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my feet [o¥ you
wares Tovs rédas, sti mou niptets tos pédas|? Jesus
answered .... What I do thou knowest not now;
but thou shalt understand hereafter. Peter saith
unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet.’”” Where-
upon Jesus said: “If I wash thee not, thou hast no
part with me.”

(3) Jesus explains.—Peter now goes to the other
extreme and desires complete washing. Jesus
answers “He that is bathed [AeAoupévos, lelouménos,
from dotw, lov, “to bathe the entire body”] need-
eth not save to wash [yimrev, niptein—"to wash
a part of the body”] his feet.” Jesus was not insti-
tuting a new symbol to take the place of baptism,
to cleanse the entire person, but clearly distin-
guishes between the bathing (loud) of the entire body
and the partial cleansing needed after the bath
(baptism or immersion).


Teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to
wash one another’s feet” (ver 14, kat tueis dpelrere
DdMpruv vlrrey rods rhdas, kat humets ophetlete allélon
niptein totis pédas), “I have given you an example
(sign, symbol, trédeyua, hupddeigma), that ye also
should do as I have done to you” (ver 15). “If ye
know these things, happy [or “blessed” RV, paxd-
pot, makdriot] are ye if ye do them” (éay mojjre
aird, edn potéte autd). No language is clearer, and
no command of Jesusisstronger than this. Further-
more, no symbol is accompanied with a greater
promise. Note also, “If I wash thee not, thou hast
no part with me.”

(I) Nepal eel tte) It cannot be explained as neces-


sity or custom, i.e. that the dust must be washed from
the feet of the sien. before proceeding


3. The with the supper. was so cold that
z : Peter had to warm himself, and this is
Meaning sufficient evidence that they wore shoes
of the instead of sandals at this time. Further-
Symbol more, Peter did not understand the action
ym of Jesus, hence it could not have been cus-


tomary. Most of all, Jesus was not
scrupulous about keeping the customs or practices of the
Jews; cf Jesus’ breaking of the Jewish Sabbath ( 2
23-26); the Jewish fasts (Mk 2 18-22); the Jewish
cleansings (Mk 7 1-20). (6) It was not customary for
the host to wash the feet of the guests. Peter objected,
and Jesus told him distinctly that he could not under-
stand at the time (dpm, drti), but would afterward
(nerd tabra, metd tata). The symbol had a deeper mean-
ing.

(2) Positively.—(a) Feet-washing symbolizes humility
and service. The apostles had been quarreling as to
who would be greatest in the kingdom which they thought
Jesus was about to setup (Lk 22 24-30). Most authori-
ties agree that this guano) took place before the supper.
Peter's question, ‘‘Dost thou wash my feet?” shows
clearly that his objection lay principally in this, that
Jesus, the Lord and Master, should perform such a
bumble service. But Jesus was trying all the time to
teach His disciples that true greatness in His kingdom is
humility and service. ‘“‘I_ am in the midst of you as
he that serveth” (Lk 22 27; cf Mt 6 5; 23 11.12).
Humility and service are fundamental virtues in_ the
Christian life. To wash the feet of another symbolizes
these virtues in the same way that the Eucharist sym-
bolizes other Christian virtues. (6) Cleansing: Jesus
clearly distinguished hetween the first cleansing which
cleanses the whole person, and the washing of a part of
the body. Baptism is the new birth, which means a
complete cleansing. But after baptism we still commit
sins, and need the partial cleansing as symbolized by feet-
washing. Cf Bernard of Clairvaux: ‘‘Feet-washing is a
cleansing of those daily offences which seem inevitable
for those who walk in the dust of the world”’ (sed pedes
[abluti sunt] qui sunt animae affectiones, dum in hac pul-
vere gradimur, ex tote mundi esse non possunt).


Feet-washing is practised by the Church of the
Brethren for the following reasons: (1) Jesus washed
His disciples’ feet and said, ‘TI have

4. Practised given you an example, that ye also


by the should do as I have done to you” (Jn
Church 13 15). (2) Jesus said, “Ye also ought
of the [“‘are bound,” ophetlete] to wash one
Brethren | another’sfeet” (ver 14). (3) “If I wash

thee not, thou hast no part with me”
(ver 8). (4) “If ye know these things, blessed are


ye if ye do them” (ver 17). (5), Feet-washing
symbolizes humility and service, which are funda-
mental virtues. (6) Feet-washing symbolizes cleans-
ing from the sins committed after baptism.

Lireratvre.—For the Church of the Brethren: C. F.
Yoder, God's Means of Grace; R. H. Miller, The Doctrine
of the Brethren Defended; tracts issued by the Bretbren
Publishing House, Elgin, Ill. For history of feet-
washing,-seo ERE, V; New Sch-Herz Enc of Religtous
Knowledge, 1V,4; Smith and Cheetham, Dict. of Christian
Antiquities, arts, ‘‘ Baptism,” ‘Maundy Thursday."

DanieL Wenster Kurtz

WASHPOT, wosh’pot (f1T1 V8, str raha,
“vessel for washing’): Only Ps 60 8=108 9, “Moab
is my washpot”; i.e. “Moab is my chattel, to be
treated contemptuously,”’ as the vessel in which the
conqueror’s feet are washed.


WASP, wosp. See Hornet.


Watch
Way


WATCH, woch (TWAUN, 'ashmurah, NVA,
’ashmGreth; pudanh, phulaké): A division of the night.
The night was originally divided into three watches
(Jgs 7 19), but later into four, as we find in the NT
(Mt 14 25; Mk 6 48). Wedo not know the limits
of the watches in the first division, but the middle
watch probably began two hours before midnight
and ended two hours after. The fourfold division
was according to the Rom system, each of which
was a fourth part of the night. See Tims.

“Watch” is also the guard placed on watch
(N20, mishmar, Neh 4 9; xoverwdla, koustddia,
from Lat custodia, Mt 27 65.66; 28 11). It some
times refers to the act of watching, as in 2 K 11 6.7
(AYQWA, mishmereth); Lk 2 8 (phulaké).

“Watch” is also used figuratively, as in Ps 141 3
for restraint: “Set a watch, O Jeh, before my mouth”


(YQ, shomrah). See Warp. H. Porter


WATCHER, woch’er (Aram. VY, ‘ir, “wakeful
one’): In Nebuchadnezzar’s dream (Dnl 4 13.17.
23 [MT 10.14.20]) a messenger who with “a holy
one” descended from heaven, they having joint
authority to issue decrees. In the apocryphal lit-
erature the doctrine of the “watchers” is much
elaborated. In Jub they are regarded as angels
sent to instruct mankind in righteousness. In En
they sometimes appear as archangels and at other
times as fallen angels. In the latter condition only
we find them in the Book of Adam and Eve. The
place of descent was according to En 6 6 the sum-
mit of Mt. Hermon. W. M. Cuarisne


WATCHMAN, woch’man (ME, ¢épheh, WAU,
shémér, MEX'A , m*cappeh, VZ2 , nocér) : Used to desig-
nate a sentinel on the city walls (2S 18 25; 2 K
9 18; Ps 127 1; Isa 62 6) or on the hilltops (Jer
31 6). Cant 3 3; & 7 introduces another class,
“the watchmen that go about the city,” and thus,
it would seem, points to some system of municipal
police. The distinction in meaning between the
various words is clear, ¢dpheh having the idea of
“outlooker” and négér that of ‘careful watcher”
(being applied even to besiegers from outside: Jer
4 16, ‘“watchers”), while shOmér also embraces the
idea of “defending” or “guarding.” In Isa 21 6
mécappeh is to be taken generally in the sense of
“watch.” In Sir 37 14 cxords, skopdés, means simply
“looker.” W. M. Curistie


WATCH-TOWER, woch’tou-ér (MBX, migpeh
[Isa 21 8; 2 Ch 20 24]; |B, bakan [Isa 32 14
RV}): In Isa 2 16 the words s*khiyoth ha-hemdah
have puzzled the translators. AV gives ‘‘pleasant
pictures,” RV “pleasant imagery,” while RVm has
“pleasant watchtowers.” Guthe in Kautzsch’s Bible
translates Schaustticke, which practically agrees with
RV. See MizpeH; ToweEr.


WATER, wé'tér (OM, mayim; t8wp, hidér):

(1) The Gr philosophers believed water to be the
original substance and that all things were made
from it. The Koran states, “From water we have
made all things.” In the story of the creation
(Gen 1 2) water plays an elemental part. .

(2) Because of the scarcity of water in Pal it is
esp. appreciated by the people there. They love
to go and sit by a stream of running water. Men
long for a taste of the water of their native village
(1 Ch 11 17). A town or village is known through-
out the country for the quality of its water, which is
described by many adjectives, such as “light,”
“heavy,” ete.

(3) ‘The rainfall is the only source of supply of
water for Pal. The moisture is carried up from the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3074


sea in clouds and falls on the hills as rain or snow.
This supplies the springs and fountains. The rivers
are mostly small and have little or no water in
summer. For the most part springs supply the
villages, but in case this is not sufficient, cisterns
are used. Most of the rain falls on the western
slopes of the mountains, and most of the springs
are found there. The limestone in many places
does not hold the water, so wells are not very com-
mon, though there are many references to them in
the Bible.

(4) Cisterns are usually on the surface of the ground
and vary greatly in size. Jerus has always had to depend
for the most part on water stored in this way, and carried
tothe city inaqueducts. Alarge number of cisterns have
heen found and partially explored under the temple-area
itself. The water stored in the cisterns is surface water,
and is a great menace to the health ofthe people. During
the long, dry summer the water gets less and less, and
becomes so stagnant and filthy that it is not fit to drink.
In a few instances the cisterns or pools are sufficiently
large tosupply water for limited irrigation. See CistERN.

(5) During the summer when there is no rain,
vegetation is greatly helped by the heavy dews.
A considerable amount of irrigation is carried on
in the country where there is sufficient water in
the fountains and springs for the purpose. There
was doubtless much more of it in the Rom period.
Most of the fruit trees require water during the
summer.

(6) Many particular wells or pools are mentioned
in the Bible, as: Beersheba (Gen 21 19), Isaac’s
well (Gen 24 11), Jacob’s well (Jn 4 6), Pool of
Siloam (Jn 9 7), “waters of Nephtoah” (Josh 16 9).

(7) Washing with water held a considerahle place
in the Jewish temple-ceremony (Lev 11 32; 16 4;
17 15; 22 6; Nu 19 7; Ex 30 18; 40 7). Sac-
Hn were washed (Ex 29 4; Lev 19; 6 28;

(8) The lack of water caused great suffering (Ex
18 22; Dt 8 15; 2 K 3 9; Ps 63 1; Prov 9 17;
Ezk 411; Lam 5 4). See also Fountain; Prt;
Poot; Sprinc; WELL. ALFRED H. Joy


WATER OF BITTERNESS (OR OF JEAL-
OUSY). See AputtEry, (2).


WATER OF SEPARATION (OR OF UNCLEAN-
NESS). See DerivemMEent; Separation; UNCLEAN-
NESS.


WATERCOURSE, wé’tér-kors: (1) P"DN,
'aphik (Ezk 6 3; 31 12; 326; 34 13; 35 8; 36
4.6), AV “river,” elsewhere ‘‘stream,” “channel,” or
“brook.” (2) >) , pelegh (Prov 211). “The
king’s heart is in the hand of Jeh as the water- -
courses,” AV “Tivers,” elsewhere “streams” or
“rivers.” (3) 22D, yabhal, DD "22, yibhrley
mayim, ‘‘watercourses”’ (EV) (Isa 44 4); in Isa 30
25, EV has “streams of water’; cf ban, yubhal,
“rivers” (Jer 17 8); 20, yubhal, “Jubal” (Gen
4 21); Sa, ‘abhal, “the river Ulai” (Dnl 8 2.3.6).
(4) Mod, é*alah, “channel,” AV “watercourse”
(Job 38 25); elsewhere “conduit,” “the conduit
of the upper pool” (2 K 18 17; Isa 7 3; 36 2).
(5) VEX, ginndr, “watercourse,” AV “gutter” (2 §
5 8). See Broox; River; Stream; WATERFALL.

ALFRED Ety Day

WATERFALL, wé’tér-f6l (Wi9¥, ¢cinndr; only in
ARV [Ps 42 7]):

‘Deep calleth unto deep at the
noise of thy waterfalls;


All thy waves and thy billows
are gone Over me."’


AV and ERV have “waterspouts,” ERVm “cata-
racts.”” The etymology of the word is uncertain.


A VENDOR OF WATER


3075 -


It occurs also in 28 6 8, tr? “watercourse,” AV
“utter.” Cf MIA, canterdth, “spouts” (Zec 4
12).


WATERPOT, wi'tér-pot (v8pla, hudria; cf Sup,
hidor, “water’): An earthen vessel, or jar, for
carrying or holding water (in LXX for TD, kadh,


Eastern Waterpots.


‘Sar,’ or ‘“pitcher’). It was usually carried by
women upon the head, orupon theshoulder (Jn 4 28).
Pots of larger size, holding eighteen or twenty gal-
lons apiece, were used by the Jews for purposes of
ceremonial purification (Jn 2 6).


WATERS, w6’térz (A , mayim, pl. of *, may,
“water”; in the NT Sup, hidar, ‘water’; Kvdbvors
notapav, kindunois potamon[2 Cor 11 26), AV “perils
of waters,’’ is in RV “perils of rivers’): In the NT
there is frequent reference to the water of baptism.
Pilate washes his hands with water to signify his
guiltlessness. Jesus tells the Sam woman of the
living water. The Lamb shall guide the redeemed
unto fountains of waters of life.

The uses of mayim are well classified in BDB,
esp. the figurative references, as follows: a symbol
of distress, “when thou passest through the waters”
(Isa 43 2); of force, “like the breach of waters”
(2 8 & 20); of that which is overwhelming, “‘a tem-
pest of mighty waters overflowing” (Isa 28 2); of
fear, ‘The hearts of the people .. . . became as

“water” (Josh 7 5); of transitoriness, “Thou shalt
remember it as waters that are passed away’? (Job
11 16); of refreshment, ‘as streams of water in a
dry place’ (Isa 32 2); of peace, “He leadeth me
beside still waters” (Ps 23 2); of legitimate pleas-
ures, “waters out of thine own cistern” (Prov 5
15); of illegitimate pleasures, “Stolen waters are
sweet’? (Prov 9 17); of that which is poured out
abundantly, blood (Ps 79 3), wrath (Hos 5 10),
justice (Am 6 24), groanings (Job 3 24).

ALrrep Evy Day

WATERS OF MEROM. See Merom, Waters

OF.


WATERS OF STRIFE, strif. See Merisan.


WATERSPOUT, w6’tér-spout: (1) TX, ginnér
(Ps 42 7), ARV “waterfalls,” AV and ERV “water-
spouts,” ERVm “cataracts.” (2) PPR, tannin
(Ps 148 7), ARV “sea-monsters,” AV and ERV


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Watch
Way


“dragons,” ERVm “sea-monsters’’ or ‘water-
spouts.”
Praise Jeh from the earth,
Ye sea-monsters, and all deeps.’’
See Dracon; Sra-MonstTER; WATERFALL.
Aurrep Evy Day
WAVE OFFERING, wav of’ér-ing. See Sacri-


FICE IN THE OT.


WAW, waw (1): The sixth letter of the Heb
alphabet; transliterated in this Encyclopacdia w
(or v). It came also to be used for the number 6.
For name, etc, see ALPHABET.


WAX, waks: | ;

(1) Noun (427%, dénagh}: Used only in a simile
of melting (Ps 22 14; 68 2; 97 5; Mic 1 4). But
see WRITING.

(2) A now archaic vb., meaning ‘‘to grow,’ used
freely in EV as a tr of various terms in Gr and Heb.
The past participle in AV and ERV is “waxen,”
except in Gen 18 12. There (and throughout in
ARV) the form is “waxed.”


WAY, w4 (TIN, ’drah, SIS, ’orha’, 7S, eree,
Bia, ba’, JWI, derekh, MDT, haltkhah, T1299,
ma'‘galah, 3), nathibh; 686s, hodés, wapoSes, pdro-
dos, ropeta, poreia, tpé-wos, trépos; “highway,” mo :
mésillah, D120, mashil; S.eks8ou trav 684v, diexddoi
tén hodén): The list just cited contains only a por-
tion of the words tr? “way” or “highway” in AV.
Most of them have the primary meaning of “road,”
“customary path.” “course of travel’? (Gen 3 24;
Ex 23 20; Nu 20 17, etc). By a very easy and
natural figure “way” is applied to the course of
human conduct, the manner of life which one lives
(Ex 18 20; 328; Nu 22 32; 1883; 1K 13
33, etc; Acts 14 16; 1 Cor 4 17; Jas 6 20). “The
way of an eagle....of a serpent....of a
ship... . and of a man” (Prov 30 19) agree in
that they leave no trace behind them (cf Wisd 5
10.11). In some cases the language may be such
as to leave it indeterminate whether the way or
course of conduct is good or bad (Dt 28 29; 1S 18
14; 2 Ch 27.7; Job 13 15; Prov 36; 6 6; Jas
1 8), though im most cases the Bible writers attach
to every act an ethical evaluation. Sometimes this
way of conduct is of purely human choice, without
reference to either God or good (Jgs 2 19; Job 22
15; 34 21; Ps 119 9; Prov 12 15; 16 2). Such
a course is evil (2 Ch 7 14; Ps 1 6; 119 101.104.
128; Prov 1 19, etc) and will obtain such punish-
ment as its lack of merit warrants (1 K 8 32.39;
2 Ch 6 23; Job 30 12; 3411; Jer 17 10; Ezk
7 3.9; Hos 12 2). At the opposite extreme from
this is the good way (Ps 16; Prov 8 20; 12 28;
15 10; Isa 26 7), which is that course of conduct
enjoined by God and exemplified in His perfect
conduct (Gen 6 12; 18 19; Dt 8 6; 2617; 1K
23; Job 28 11; Ps 61 13, etc). These two ways
briefly but graphically described by the Lord (Mt 7
13.14; ef Lk 13 24) became the subject of extended
eatechetical instruction in the early church. See the
Ep. of Barnabas, xviii, and the Did.,i.1. Frequently
the way in this metaphorical sense is characterized
by that quality which is its outstanding feature, e.g.
mention is made of the way of life (Prov 16 24;
Jer 21 8; Acts 2 28); of truth (Ps 119 30; 2 Pet
2 2); of peace (Isa 59 8; Lk 1 79; Rom 8 17);
of justice (Prov 17 23; Dnl 4 37); of righteousness
(Mt 21 32; 2 Pct 2 21); of salvation (Acts 16 17);
of lying (Ps 119 29), and of death (Jer 21 8). Fre-
quently God’s purpose or His customary action is
described as His way (Ps 103 7; Isa 26 8; Mt 22
16; Acts 13 10). Since all of God’s plans and pur-


Way, Covered
Weaving


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3076


poses tend toward man’s salvation, His provisions
to this end are frequently spoken of as His Way, and
inasmuch as all of the Divine plans center in Christ
He is preéminently the Way (Jn 14 6). Out of this
fact grew the title, “The Way,’’ one of the earliest
names applied to Christianity (Acts 9 2; 18 25.26;
19 9.23; 22 4; 24 22).

The word highway is used to denote a prominent
road, such a one for example as was anciently main-
tained for royal travel and by royal authority. It
is always used in the literal sense except in Prov 15
19; 16 17, where it is a course of conduct. See also
Patu, Paruway. W. C. Morro


WAY, COVERED. See Coverep Way.


WAY, LITTLE (M32, kibhrah, “length,” “a
measure’): A technical measure of distance in the
Heb; but it must be considered undefined (Gen 35
16; 48 7 AV, ERV “some way,” ARV “some dis-
tance’; 21 5 19, ERV “some way,’ ARVm
“some distance’). The Heb term kibhrah is also
found in Phoen inscriptions as a measure of dis-
tance.


WAYFARING, wa'far-ing, MAN: The tr in Jgs


19 17; 28 12 4; Jer 9 2; 14 8 of TN, ’Grah,
the participle of ’Grah, “to journey.” In Isa 33 8
of ‘dbhér ’drah, “one passing on a path,” and in Isa
35 8 of halékh derekh, “one walking on a road.”
“Traveler” is the meaning in all cases.


WAYMARK, wa’/mark (J1°X, ¢iyan): In Jer
31 21, “Set thee up waymarks,” explained by the
parallel, “Make thee guide-posts” (AV “Make thee
high heaps”). A sign or guiding mark on the high-
way.


WEALTH, welth, WEALTHY, wel’thi (7, han,

bon, hayil, D°O), n°*khadsim; ebaopla, euporia, “to
possess riches,” ‘‘te be in a position of ease’ [Jer
49 31]): The possession of wealth is not regarded
as sinful, but, on the contrary, was looked upon as a
sign of the blessing of God (Eccl 6 19; 6 2). The
doctrine of “blessed are the poor, and cursed are the
rich” finds no countenance in the Scriptures, for Lk
6 20.24 refers to concrete conditions (disciples and
persecutors; note the “‘ye’’). God is the maker of
rich and poor alike (Prov 22 2). But while it is
not sinful to be rich it is very dangerous, and cer-
tainly perilous to one’s salvation (Mt 19 23). Of
this fact the rich young ruler is a striking example
(Lk 18 22.23). Itis because of the danger of losing
the soul through the possession of wealth that so
many exhortations are found in the Scriptures
aimed esp. at those who have an abundance of this
world’s goods (1 Tim 6 17; Jas 1 10.11; 5 1, etc).
Certain parables are esp. worthy of note in this
same connection, e.g. the Rich Fool (Lk 12 16~21),
the Rich Man and Lazarus—if such can be called a
parable—(Lk 16 19-31). That it is not impossible
for men of wealth to be saved, however, is apparent
from the narratives, in the Gospels, of such rich men
as Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathaea (Jn 19
38.39; Mt 27 57-60), and Zacchaeus (Lk 19 1-10).
It may fairly be inferred from the Gospel records
that James and John, who were disciples of Our
Lord, were men of considerable means (Mk 1 19.
20; Jn 19 27).
- Wealth may be the result of industry (Prov 10
4), or the result of the special blessing of God (2 Ch
1 11.12). We are warned to be careful lest at any
time we should say ‘‘My power and the might of
my hand hath gotten me this wealth. But thou
shalt remember Jeh thy God, for it is he that giveth
thee power to get wealth” (Dt 8 17.18).


19 1-10);
self-conceit (Prov 28 11); self-trust (Prov 18 11).

It is of interest to note that in the five placesin the NT
in which the word “‘lucre''—as applying to wealth—is
used, it is prefaced by the word “filthy” (1 Tim 3 3
{AV].8; Tit 1 7.11; 1 Pet 5 2), and that in four of these
five places it refers to the income of ministers of the gospel,
as though they were particularly susceptible of being led
away hy the influences and power of money, and so needed


special warning.

The Scriptures are not without instruction as
to how we may use our wealth wisely and as well-
pleasing to God. The parable of the Unjust Steward
(Lk 16) exhorts us to “make... . friends by means
of the mammon of unrighteousness,” by which is
meant that we should use the wealth which God has
committed to us as stewards in order that we may
win friends (souls) with it for Him and His kingdom,
just as the unfaithful steward used the goods with
which his master had intrusted him to make friends
for himself. The parable of Dives and Lazarus
gives us the sad picture of a selfish rich man who had
abused his trust, who had failed to make friends
with his money, and who, in the other world, would
have given anything just for such a friend (Lk 16
19-31). See also Rrcwss. WILLIAM Evans


WEAN, wén: “To wean’ in EV is always the tr
of S708 , gamal, but gamal has a much wider force
than merely ‘‘to wean,” signifying ‘to deal fully
with,” as in Ps 13 6, ete. Hence, as applied to a
child, gamal covers the whole period of nursing and
care until the weaning is complete (1 K 11 20).
This period in ancient Israel extended to about 3
years, and when it was finished the child was mature
enough to be intrusted to strangers (1 8 1 24).
And, as the completion of the period marked the
end of the most critical stage of the child’s life, it
was celebrated with a feast (Gen 21 8), a custom
still observed in the Orient. The weaned child, no
longer fretting for the breast and satisfied with its
mother’s affection, is used in Ps 181 2 as a figure
for Israel’s contentment with God’s care, despite
the smallness of earthly possessions. In Isa 28 9
there is an ironical question, ‘Is God to teach you
knowledge as if you were children? You should’
have learned His will long ago!’


Burton Scott Easton
WEAPONS, wep’unz.


See ARMOR.
o?

WEASEL, wé’z’l (12K, haledh; ef Arab. JUS,
khuld, “mole-rat’’): (1) Hoéledh is found only in
Lev 11 29, where it stands first in the list of eight
unclean ‘‘creeping things that creep upon the earth.”
AV and RV agree in rendering hdledh by ‘‘weasel,”
and LXX has ya, galé, “weasel” or “marten.”
According to Gesenius, the Vulg, Tg and Talm
support the same rendering. In spite of this array
of authorities, it is worth while to consider the claims
of the mole-rat, Spalax typhlus, Arab. khuld. This
is a very common rodent, similar in appearance and
habits to the mole, which does not exist in Pal. The
fact that it burrows may be considered against it,
in view of the words, ‘‘that creepeth upon the earth.’
The term “creeping thing”’ is, however, very appli-
cable to it, and the objection seems like a quibble,
esp. in view of the fact that there is no category of
subterranean animals. See Moin. (2) The weasel,
Mustela vulgaris, has a wide range in Asia, Europe,
and North America. It is from 8 to 10 in. long,
including the short tail. It is brown above and
white below. Iv the northern part of its range, its
whole fur, except the tail, is white in winter. It is
active and fearless, and preys upon all sorts of small
mammals, birds and insects. See Lizarp.

Aurrep Ety Day


3077


WEATHER, weth’ér (AQT, zahabh [Job 37 22],
DY, yom [Prov 25 20], tra “day”; «t8la, eudia,
“clear sky,” xeupov, chetmén, ‘‘tempest’’): In tbe
East it is not customary to talk of the weather as
in the West. There seems to be no word in the Heb
corresponding to ‘weather.’ In Job 37 22 AV
translates “Fair weather comes out of the north,”
but RV translates more literally, “Out of the north
cometh golden splendor.’ ‘‘As one that taketh off
a garment in cold weather [or lit. ‘on a cold day’’],
. .». 80 is he that singeth songs to a heavy heart”
(Prov 25 20).

Jesus rebukes the Pharisees for their lack of
spiritual foresight when they took such interest in
natural foresight. He said, ‘‘When it is evening, ye
say, It will be fair weather: for the heaven is red.
And in the morning, It will be foul weather to-day:
for the heaven is red and lowering” (Mt 16 2.3).
The general conditions of the weather in the differ-
ent seasons are less variable in Pal than in colder
countries, but the precise weather for a given day
is very hard to predict on account of the proximity
of the mountains, the desert and the sea.

Aurreo H. Joy

WEAVING, wé’ving: Although weaving was one
of the most important and best developed of the
crafts of Bible times, yet we have but few Bib.
references to enlighten us as to the processes used
in those early days. A knowledge of the technique
of weaving is necessary, however, if we are to under-
stand some of the Bib. incidents. The principle of
weaving in all ages is illustrated by the process of
darning. The hole to be darned is laid over with
parallel threads which correspond to the ‘warp”’
Cry, sheth?) of a woven fabric. Then, by means
of a darning needle which takes the place of the
shuttle in the loom, other threads are interlaced
back and forth at right angles to the first set of
strands. This second set corresponds to the woof
(AZ, ‘érebh) or weft of woven cloth. The result
is a web of threads across the hole. If the warp
threads, instead of being attached to the edges of
a fabric, are fastened to two beams (see Fig. 1)


which can be stretched either on a frame or on the
ground, and the woof is interlaced exactly as in
darning, the result will be a web of cloth. The
process is then called weaving GX, ’Gragh), and
the apparatus a loom. The most up-to-date loom
of our modern mills differs from the above only in
the devices for accelerating the process. The first
of these improvements dates back some 5,000 years
to the early Egyptians, who discovered what is
technically known as shedding, i.e. dividing the
warp into two sets of threads, every other thread
being lifted so that the woof can run between, as is
shown in the diagram of the Arab. loom.


Figs. 1 and 2 show the working of the looms stiil
commonly used among the Bedouins. For the sake of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Wy, Covered


clearness only elght threads are shown in the warp. In
reallty the elght strands are made hy passing one continu-
ous thread back and forth between the two poles (a) and
(>), held apart by the stakes (p) driven into the ground.

n Fig. 1 the even strands are shown running through
loops of string attached to the rod (c), and thence under
the beam (d) to the pole (6). By placing the ends of (c)
on stones (see Flg. 3), or by suspending (c) on loops, the


even threads are raised above the odd, thus forming a
shed through which the weft can he passed. The sepa-
rating of odds and evens is assisted hy a flat board (h) of
wedge-shaped cross-section, which is turned at right
angles to the odds, After the shuttle has been passed
across, this same stick is used to heat up the weft.

In Fig. 2 the second position of the threads is shown:
(c) is removed from the stones or loops, and allowed to
lie loosely on the warp; (¢) is pulled forward toward the
weaver and raised on the stones in the position previous]
occupied by (c). The flat spreader is passe through
the new shed in which the odds are now ahove and the
evens below. The weft is run through and is beaten
into place with the thin edge of (k). The shuttle (s)
commonly used is a straight tree branch on which the
thread is loosely wound ‘‘kite-string’’ fashion.

The loom used by Delilah was no doubt like the
one described above (Jgs 16 13.14). It would
have been an easy matter for her to run in Sam-
son’s locks as strands of the weft while he lay sleep-
ing on the ground near the loom at a position cor-
responding to (g). The passage might be trans-
posed thus: ‘‘And he said unto her, If thou weavest
the seven locks of my head into the web. And she
passed in his locks and beat them up with the bat-
ten [7M", yathédh] [see h, Fig. 1], and said unto
him, The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And
he awakened out of his sleep and as he jumped up
he pulled away the pins of the loom” (p, Fig. 1).

The counterpart of the Bedouin loom is shown
on the ancient tombs at Beni Hasan (see EB, 5279,
or Wilkinson, I, 817). As Dr. Kennedy points out,
the artist of that ancient picture has unwittingly
reversed the order of the beams. The shedding
beam, of the two, should be nearer the weaver. At
what period the crude shedding device described
above was replaced by a double set of loops worked
by pedals is unknown. Some writers believe that
the Jews were acquainted with it. The “flying
shuttle’”’ of the modern loom is probably a compara-
tively recent invention. ;

The products of the Bedouin looms are coarse
in texture. Such passages as Ex 35 35; Isa 19 9,
and examples of ancient weaving, lead us to believe
that in Bible times contemporaneous with the
primitive loom were more highly developed ma-
chines, just as in the cities of Egypt and Pal today,
alongside of the crude Bedouin loom, are found the
more intricate hand looms on which are produced
the most delicate fabrics possible to the weaver’s
art. Examples of cloth comparing favorably with
our best grades of muslin have been found among
the Egyp mummy wrappings.

Two other forms of looms have been used for weaving,
in both of which the warp is upright. In one type the


strands of the bier singly or in bundles, are suspended
from 2 beam and held taut by numerous small weights


Weaving
Weights


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3078


made of stones or pottery. Dr. Bliss found at Tei el-
Hesy collections of weights, sometimes 60 or more to-
gether, individual examples of which showed marks
where cords had been attached to them. These he
assumed were weavers’ weights (see A Mound of Many
Cities). In this form the weaving was necessarily from
top to hottom.

The second type of upright loom is still used in some
arts of Syria, esp. for weaving coarse goat’s hair cloth.
n this form the warp is attached to the lower beam and

passes vertically upward over another beam and thence

to a wall where it is gathered in a rope and tied to a peg,

or itis held taut by heavy stone weights. The manipu-

lation is much the same as in the primitive loom, ex-

cept that the weft is beaten up with an iron comb. The

Hohe Neal up on the lower beam as it is woven (cf
sa i


r


In all these kinds of weaving the Syrian weavers of
today are very skilful. Ifa cylindrical web isreferred
to in Jn 19 23, then Jesus’ tunic must have been
woven with two sets of warp threads on an upright
loom so arranged that the weft could be passed first
through one shed and then around to the other side
and back through the shed of the second set.

Goliath’s spear was compared in thickness to that
of the weaver’s beam, i.e. 2 in. to 23 in. in diameter
(1 8 17 7; 28 21 19; 1 Ch 11 23; 20 5) (see d,
Fig. 1).

In Job 7 6, if “shuttle” is the right rendering


Fic. 3.—SHowrne ‘SuHep'’ or ARAB Loom.


Patterns are woven into the web (1) by making
the warp threads of different colors, (2) by alter-
nating colors in the weft, (3) by a combination of


(1) and (2); this produces checked work (VAD,


Fie. 4.—Showing Upright Loom.


shibbéc, Ex 28 39 RV); (4) by running special weft
threads through only a portion of the warp. This
requires much skill and is probably the kind of
weaving referred to in Ex 26 1ff; Ezk 16 13; 27
16; (5) when metals are to be woven, they are rolled
thin, cut into narrow strips, wound in spirals about
threads of cotton or linen (cf Ex 28 5 ff; 39 3 ff).


for A"8, ’eregh, the reference is to the rapidity
with which the thread of the shuttle is used up, as
the second part of the verse indicates.
For a very full discussion of the terms employed see
A.R.S. Kennedy in ZB, IV, 5276-90.
James A. Patcu
WEB. Sce Srinmr; WEAVING.


WEDDING. See Maratace.


WEDGE, wej, OF GOLD (AT T02, lashon
zahabh, lit. “tongue of gold’’): A piece of gold in the
form of a wedge found by Achan in the sack of
Jericho. It was in one of the forms in which gold
was used for money and was probably stamped or
marked to indicate its weight, which was 50 shekels,
ie. one maneh, according to the Heb standard, or
nearly two pounds troy. Its value would be £102
10s., or $510. See Monsy; Pounn. A wedge,
or rather, oblong rectangular strip of gold, of similar
weight has been found in the excavations of Gezer
(Macalister, Bible Side-Lights, 121). Along with
metal rmgs they were doubtless used as an early
form of currency. In Isa 13 12 AV, kethem, “pure
gold” (so RV), is tr’ as “golden wedge’ on insuffi-
cient grounds. H. Porter


WEEDS, wédz (30, siiph, “a weed” [Jon 2 5)).


‘See Frac; Cocks; Rep Sua.


WEEK, wék (PAW, sh*bhus*, from PIB, shebha', |
“seven”; oéPBarov-ra, sébbaton-ta, “from sabbath


3079


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Weaving
Weights


to sabbath’): The seven-day division of time com-
mon to the Hebrews and Babylonians (Gen 29 27.
28; Lk 18 12). See Astronomy; Time. ‘‘Week’’
is used in the apocalyptic writings of Daniel for an
unknown, prophetic period (Dnl 9 24-27). For
the names of the days see AsTRoLoy, 12.


WEEKS, FEAST OF. See Pentecost.
WEEKS, SEVENTY. See Ssvenry WEEKs.
WEEPING, wép’ing. Sce Buriat, IV, 4, 5, 6.


WEIGHT, wat (Measure of quantity) Cpt,
mishkal, Sp, mishkol [Ezk 4 10], from >pw,
shakal, “to weigh,” JQ, ’ebhen, “a stone,’’ used for
weighing in the balance): Weights were commonly


Bronze and Stone Weights Used in Nineveh.


of stone or bronze (or of lead, Zec 5 7.8). They
were of various forms, such as the liou-shaped
weights of Babylonia and Assyria, or in the form of
birds and other animals. The Heb and Phoen
weights, when made of stone, were barrel- or spindle-
shaped, but in bronze they were often cubical or
octagonal or with numerous faces (see illustration
under WEIGHTS AND Measures). Hemispherical or
dome-shaped stone weights have beeu found in Pal
(PEFS, 1902, p. 344; 1908, p. 117; 1904, p. 209).
Figurative: The phrase ‘without weight” (2 K 25
16) signifies a quantity too great to be estimated.
“Weight of glory” (2 Cor 4 17, Sdpos, bdéros) has
a similar meaning, but with a spiritual reference.
“Weighty,” “weightier’ (Mt 23 23; 2 Cor 10 10,
Bapés, baris, Baptrepos, bartteros), signify what is
important. The Gr éy«os, égkos (He 12 1), is used
in the sense of burden, hindrance, as _is also the
Heb nétel (Prov 27 3). PorTER


WEIGHTS, wats, AND MEASURES: The sys-
tem of weights and measures in use among the
Hebrews was derived from Babylonia and Egypt,
esp. from the former. The influence of these
countries upon Pal has long been recognized, but
archaeological investigations in recent years have
shown that the civilization of Babylonia impressed
itself upon Syria and Pal more profoundly in early
times than did that of Egypt. The evidence of this


has been most clearly shown by the discovery of
the Am Tab, which reveal the fact that the official
correspondence between the Egyp kings and their
vassals in these lands was carried on in the language
of Babylonia long after its political influence had
been supplanted by that of Egypt. It is natural,
then, that we should look to Babylonia for the
origin of such important elements of civilization
as a system of weights and measures.

It was quite natural that men should have found
a standard for linear measures in the parts of the

human body, and we find the cubit,
1. Linear originally the length of the forearm,
Measures taken as the standard, and the span,

the palm and the digit, or finger-
breadth, associated with it in linear measurement.
They do not seem to have employed the foot, though
it is represented in the two-thirds of the cubit,
which was used by the Babylonians in the manu-
facture of building-brick.
_ This system, though adequate enough for mau
in the earliest times, was not so for an advanced
stage of civilization, such as the Babylonians reached
before the days of Abraham, and we find that they
had introduced a far more accurate and scientific
system (see Cunit). They seem to have employed,
however, two cubits, of different lengths, one for
commercial purposes and one for building. We
have no undoubted examples of either, but judging
by the dimensions of their square building-bricks,
which are regarded as being two-thirds of a cubit
on a side, we judge the latter to have been of about
19 or 20 in. Now we learn from investigations in
Egypt that a similar cubit was employed there,
being of from 20.6 to 20.77 in., and it can hardly be
doubted that the Hebrews were familiar with this
cubit, but that in more common use was certainly
shorter. We have no certain means of determining
the length of the ordinary cubit among the Hebrews,
but there are two ways by which we may approxi-
mate its value. The Siloam Inscription states that
the tunnel in which it was found was 1,200 cubits
long. The actual length has been found to be about
1,707 ft., which would give a cubit of about 17.1
in. (see PEFS, 1902, 179). Of course the given
length may be a round number, but it gives a close
approximation.

Again, the Mish states that the height of a man
is 4 cubits, which we may thus regard as the average
stature of a Jew in former times. By reference to
Jewish tombs we find that they were of a length to
give a cubit of something over 17 in., supposing the
stature to be as above, which approximates very
closely to the cubit of the Siloam tunnel. The con-
sensus of opinion at the present day inclines toward
a cubit of 17.6 in. for commercial purposes and one
of about 20 in. for building. This custom of having
two standards is illustrated by the practice in Syria
today, where the builder’s measure, or dra’, is about
2 in. longer than the commercial.

Of multiples of the cubit we have the measuring-
reed of 6 long cubits, which consisted of a cubit and
a hand-breadth each (Ezk 40 5), or about 10 ft.
Another measure was the Sabbath day’s journey,
which was reckoned at 2,000 cubits, or about 1,000
yds. The measuring-line was used also, but
whether it had a fixed length we do not know. See
SappatTH Day’s Journry; Mrasurine Line.

The following is the table of linear measures:


Lanzar MEASURE


Finger or digit (JAX WEhG iwhiadas py einewee eee
Hand-breadth or palm (DY. fephab). 0... eee
Span ny, a1)
Cubit (TAN TAMMGN) occ eee
Reed (ARR: Kanth) os ee ageee errs esd piel caeta Galea. Sherk Meter
Sabbath day’s journey (caBBdrov 686s, sabbdtou hodés).....


Meh eer antieg tee Sab ey SMe fe sada aeteuih me lar eteonneed sh BRS ENS about ¢ in.
oiiita den 2 hauees @°IgitSis cae ee ei te OO 3 in
de ast tes, Sekt S'DAMMNS 5 5c ie paige eames 9 in.
les aumegecenede PiSPans sien seas eee. oe ein
scat ncn taenaneatees 6 cubits, 6 palms............ ‘ 10 ft.
asietelaparata Zi OOO: es Baieials aenisintieteestasinedsiaws, ot so sOOORb.


Weights
Well


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3080


In the NT we have the fathom (épyud, orguid),
about 6 ft., and the furlong (crdéior, stddion), 600
Gr ft. or 6063 Eng. ft., which is somewhat less than
one-eighth of a mile. The mile («ixtov, milion)
was 5,000 Rom ft., or 4,854 Eng. ft., somewhat less
than the Eng. mile.

Regarding the absolute value of the measures of
capacity among the Hebrews there is rather more

uncertainty than there is concerning


2. Meas- those of length and weight, since no
ures of examples of the former have come down
Capacity to us; but their relative value is known.


Sir Charles Warren considers them to
have been derived from the measures of length by
cubing the cubit and its divisions, as also in the
case of weight. We learn from Ezk (45 11) that
the bath and ephah were equivalent, and he (War-
ren) estimates the capacity of these as that of yy of
the cubit cubed, or about 2,333.3 cubic in., which
would correspond to about 9 gallons Eng. measure.
Assuming this as the standard, we get the following
tables for liquid and dry measure:


the talent, but the Hebrews reckoned only 50 shekels
to the maneh, as appears from Ex 38 25.26, where
it is stated that the amount of silver collected from
603,550 males was 100 talents and 1,775 shekels, and,
as each contributed a half-shekel, the whole amount
must have been 301,775. Deducting the 1,775
shekels mentioned besides the 100 talents, we have
300,000 or 3,000 to the talent, and, as there were 60
manehs in the talent, there were 50 shekels to each
maneh. When the Hebrews adopted this system we
a not know, but it was in vogue at a very early
ate.

The shekel was divided into gerahs, 20 to a shekel
(Ex 30 13). The gerah (M74, gérah) is supposed
to be some kind of seed, perhaps a bean or some
such plant. The shekel of which it formed a part
was probably the royal or commercial shekel of 160
grains, derived from Babylon. But the Hebrews
certainly had another shekel, called the Phoen from
its being the standard of the Phoen traders. This
would be natural on account of the close connection
of the two peoples ever since the days of David and


Liqurip Measure


Jlog >, lagh, Lev 14 10)... eee eee


4 logs, 1 kab (ap, kabh, 2 K 6 25)


12" 3 kabs, 1 hin qua » hin, EX 80 24). 0 ccc eee cee ee eee eee eee eens a 1} gals.
72“ 18 “ 6hins, [bath (M3, bath, Ezk 45 10)........ tease teen ees oe aos
720 " 180 ‘* 60 “ 10 baths, 1 homer or kor van, homer, 3D, kor, Bzk 45 14).... e Uy ae


Dry Measure


1 log
4@ logs, Wkabre Aig. ee Ma onid th 2S eS aaa Oe Se


Sih Raiatide meade tak, Unantaat se sysc Osta ate! approximately 1 pint
ee 2 ats.


7h Lomer (YAS), ‘Smer, EX 16 16)... cc escccceee cece eee cece eee een eee eeneteen es 3 ats., 12 pts.
24 ** 6kabs, 3h omers, 1 seah (AND, sah, 1 K 18 32)..........-..22--2 eee re 134 pecks
722 " 18 * 10 “ 8 seahs,1ephah (ADN, ‘ephah, Ex 16 36)............ 7 43
360 “ 90“ 50 “ 15 “ Sephahs, Llethech (TID, lethekh, Hos 8 2).... 5 bu., 24 pecks
720 #‘“180 ‘*“ 100 “  300—C**—«10 te 2, lethechs, 1 homer or kor (Bzk 45 14) eo 11 bu., 1 peck


S’ah and lethekh, in the above, occur in the Heb
text, but only in the margin of the Eng. It will be
noticed that the prevailing element in these tables
is the duodecimal which corresponds to the sexagesi-
mal of the Bab system, but it will be seen that in the
case of weights there was a tendency on the part of
the Hebrews to employ the decimal system, making
the maneh 50 shekels instead of 60, and the talent
3,000 instead of 3,600, of the Bab, so here we see
the same tendency in making the ‘dmer the tenth
of the ’éphah and the ’éphah the tenth of the homer
or kar.
Weights were probably based by the ancients
upon grains of wheat or barley, but the Egyptians
and Babylonians early adopted a more
3. Weights scientific method. Sir Charles War-
ren thinks that they took the cubes
of the measures of length and ascertained how many
grains of barley corresponded to the quantity of
water these cubes would contain. Thus he infers
that the Egyptians fixed the weight of a cubic inch
of rain water at 220 grains, and the Babylonians at
2222, Taking the cubic palm at 25.928 cubic in.,
the weight of that quantity of water would be
5,760 ancient grains. The talent he regards as the
weight of 2/3 of a cubit cubed, which would be equal
to 101.6 cubic palms, but assumes that for conveni-
ence it was taken at 100, the weight being 576,000
grains, deriving from this the mdneh (1/60 of the
talent) of 9,600 grains, and a shekel (1/50 of the
maGneh) 192 grains. But we have evidence that the
Heb shekel differed from this and that they used
different shekels at different periods. The shekel
derived from Babylonia had a double standard: the
light of 160 grains, or 1/3600 of the talent; and the
heavy of just double this, of 320 grains. The former
seems to have been used before the captivity and
the latter after. The Bab system was sexagesimal,
i.e. 60 shekels went to the maneh and 60 manehs to


Solomon, but we have certain evidence of it from
the extant examples of the monetary shekels of the
Jews, which are of this standard, or very nearly so,
allowing some loss from abrasion. The Phoen
shekel was about 224 grains, varying somewhat in
different localities, and the Jewish shekels now in
existence vary from 212 to 220 grains. They were
coined after the captivity (see Corns), but whether
this standard was in use before we have no means
of knowing.

Examples of ancient weights have been discovered
in Pal by archaeological research during recent
years, among them one from Samaria, obtained by
Dr. Chaplin, bearing the inscription, in Heb, rebha‘
neceph (S¥3 YIN). This is interpreted, by the help
of the cognate Arab., as meanmg ‘‘quarter-half,”
ie. of a shekel. The actual weight is 39.2 grains,
which, allowing a slight loss, would correspond
quite closely to a quarter-shekel of the light Bab
standard of 160 grains, or the quarter of the half of
the double standard. Another specimen discovered
at Tell Zakariyeh weighs 154 grains, which would
seem to belong tothe same standard. The weights,
of which illustrations are given in the table, are all
in the collection of the Syrian Protestant College, at
Beirfit, and were obtained from Pal and Phoenicia
and are of the Phoen standard, which was the com-
mon commercial standard of Pal. The largest, of
the spindle or barrel type (Fig. 1), weighs 1,350
grains, or 87.46 grams, evidently intended for a 6-
shekel weight, and the smaller ones of the same type
are fractions of the Phoen shekel. Figs. 2 and 3 are
of the same standard, one a shekel and the other a
two-shekel weight. They each have 12 faces, and
the smaller has a lion stamped on each face save
one, reminding us of the lion-weights discovered in
Assyria and Babylonia. The spindle weights are of
black stone, the others of bronze.


3081 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA weenie
e
Taste or Hezsrew Werouts
Gerah (Ex 30 18, mv. REP ET S O a ee Ee ep y aah a eee ee hgh Bg es Gat Jee LA aie eae ahout 11 gralns
Beka‘ (halt-shekel, Ex 38 26, DPA: BEES aS MR Ke on Mien GNI Me Sid yl) tk ata S ae 122 grains
Shekel Opty. She kel)csacsme a ies A ctr, Coed Sion tye Sieh a1 sie atm OE A a 224 or 225 grains
Méaneh =50 shekels (pound, 1 K 10 17, ng. MONER) or Wepre ta Death area tae: i 11,200 os
Talent =60 manehs or 3,000 shekels (Ex 38 25, "DD, kikhar).. 20.00.0000. ce, 672,000 “


Weicuts or PHOENICIAN STANDARD.


The above is the Phoen standard. In the Bab
the shekel would ke 160 or 320 grains; the maneh
8,000 or 16,000, and the talent 480,000 or 960,000
grains, according as it was of the light or heavy
standard. H. Porter


WELL: (1) "83, b°ér; cf Arab. A), bi’r, “well’’


or “cistern”; usually artificial: “And Isaac’s serv-
ants digged m the valley, and found there a well of
springing [m “‘living’’] water’ (Gen 26 19); some-
times covered: “Jacob .... rolled the stone from
the well’s mouth” (Gen 29 10). B® ér may also be
a pit: “The vale of Siddim was full of slime pits”
(Gen 14 10); ‘‘the pit of destruction” (Ps 55 23).
(2) “13, bér, usually “pit”: “Let us slay him, and
cast him into one of the pits” (Gen 37 20); may be
‘well’; “drew water out of the well of Beth-lehem”
(2 8 23 16).

(3) «ny, pégé, usually “running water,” “fount,”
or “gouree’: ‘Doth the fountain send forth from
the same opening sweet water and bitter?” (Jas
3 11); may be “well’’; cf ‘“Jacob’s well” (Jn 4 6).
(4) gpéap, phréar, usually “pit”: “the pit of the
abyss” (Rev 9 1); but “well”; cf ‘“Jacob’s well”
(Jn 4 14.12): “Which of you shall have an ass or
an ox fallen into a well’ (AV “pit’’) (Lk 14 5).
(5) xphvn, kréng, ‘wells’ (Sir 48 17), Lat fons,
“spring” (2 Esd 2 32). oe

(6) P12, ‘ayin,; cf Arab. ut, ‘ain, “fountain,”
“spring”: “the fountain [EV] which is in Jezreel”’
(1 § 29 1); “In Elim were twelve springs [AV ‘‘foun-
tains’’] of water’? (Nu 33 9); ‘She [Rebekah] went
down to the fountain’”’ (AV “well’’) (Gen 24 16);
“the jackal’s well’ (ERV “the dragon’s well,” AV
“the dragon well”) (Neh 2 13). (7) J19"2, ma‘yan,
game root as (6); “the fountain [AV ‘“‘well’’] of the
waters of Nephtoah” (Josh 18 15); ‘Passing through
the valley of Weeping [AV “Baca’’] they make it a
place of springs’ (AV “‘well’’) (Ps 84 6); “Ye shall


draw water out of the wells of salvation” (Isa 12 3).
(8) “ipa, makér, usually figurative: ‘With thee is
the fountain of life’ (Ps 36 9); ‘The mouth of
the righteous is a fountain [AV ‘‘well’’] of life’
(Prov 10 11); ‘make her [Babylon’s] fountain [AV
“spring’’] dry’’ (Jer 51 36); ‘‘a corrupted spring”
(Prov 25 26). (9) 12%, mabbu, ¥ Jal, nabha',


_ “to flow,” “spring,” “bubble up”; cf Arab. 5,


rue en
nad‘, ee: manda’, epee, yanbu', “fountain”:
“or the pitcher is broken at the fountain” (Eecl 12
6); “the thirsty ground springs of water” (Isa 36 7).
(10) NEW, moca’, “spring,” VNX?, ydca’, “to go
out,” “the dry land springs of water” (Isa 41 18);
“a dry land into watersprings’”’ (Ps 107 35); ‘‘the
upper spring of the waters of Gihon” (2 Ch 32 30).
(11) 22, nébhekh, root uncertain, reading doubt-
ful; only in Job 38 16, “Hast thou entered into
the springs of the sea?” (12) DWM, thom, “deep,”
“abyss”; cf Gen 1 2; trd “springs,” AV “depths”
(Dt 8 7). (13) 53, gal, v 583, galal, “to roll”;
cf Gilgal (Josh 5 9); “a spring shut up” (Cant 4
12). (14) m3, gullah, “bowl,” “basin,” “pool,”
same root: “Give me also springs of water. And he
gave her the upper springs and the nether springs”


we
(Josh 16 19); cf Arab. ay, kullat, pronounced gul-


lat, “a marble,” ‘a cannon-ball.”

As is clear from references cited above, wells and
springs were not sharply distinguished in name,
though b’ér, and phrear are used mainly of wells,
and ‘ayin, ma‘yan, mdca’, mabbi** and (poetically)
makor are chiefly used of fountains. The Arab.
bi’r, the equivalent of the Heb b°ér, usually denotes
a cistern for rain-water, though it may be qualified
as bir jam‘, “well of gathering,” i.e. for rain-water,
or as bvr nab‘, “well of springing water.” A spring


Well, Jacob’s
Wickedness


or natural fountain is called in Arab. ‘ain or nab‘
(cf Heb ‘ayin and mabba*'). These Arab. and Heb
words for “well” and “spring” figure largely in
place-names, modern and ancient: Beer (Nu 21 16);
Beer-elim (Isa 15 8), etc; ‘Ain (a) on the north-
east boundary of Pal (Nu 34 11), (6) in the S. of
Judah, perhaps=En-rimmon (Josh 15 32); Enaim
(Gen 38 14); Enam (Josh 15 34), etc. Modern
Arab. names with ‘ain are very numerous, e.g. “Ain-
ul-fashkhah, ‘Ain-ul-hajleh, ‘Ain-kérim, ete. See
Cistern; Founrarn; Prr; Poou.
ALFRED Entry Day
WELL, JACOB’S. See Jacop’s WELL.


WELLSPRING, wel’spring (“1p'2, makor):
Usually “spring” or “fountain” (figuratively), tr4
‘Swellspring”’ only in two passages: “Understand-
ing is a wellspring of life unto him that hath it”
(Prov 16 22); “The wellspring of wisdom is as a
flowing brook” (Prov 18 4). See Burroughs, Pe-
pacton, p. 35; WELL.


WEN: Only in Lev 22 22, “maimed,” or “having
a wen [m “sores’’], or scurvy,” for ba, yabbal,
“running,” hence “a suppurating sore’ (cf RVm).
A “wen” is a non-inflamed indolent tumor, and so


‘Sven’ is about as far as possible from the meaning
of the Heb.


WENCH, wench, wensh (INHW, shiphhah): The
word “wench” is found only in 2 8 17 17 AV, where
RV has ‘‘maid-servant.”” The Heb word shiphhah
here used isa common term for maid-servant, female
slave. AV used the word ‘‘wench” to convey the
meaning maid-servant, which was a common use
of the word at that time, but it is now practically
obsolete.


WEST: (1) Usually 0°, yam, “sea,” because the
Mediterranean lies to the W. of Pal; not usually in
figurative expressions; but cf Hos 1110. (2)


Often 370, ma'irabh; cf Arab. we, gharb,
“5


3 or
Wyte '
or 7 is
maghrib-ush-shems, or simply wy, maghrib,


“sunset.” (8) WUT NID, mbhd’ ha-shemesh,
“entrance of the sun,” R12, mabha’, ¥ NB, ba’,
“to come in.” (Just as MA, mizrah, is the rising
of the sun, or east, so N12, mabho’ [or 11,
ma‘drabh], is the setting of the sun, or west: “From
the rising of the sun [mizrah- shemesh] unto the going
down [mdabho’] thereof” [Ps 50 1; cf 113 3; Mal
111).) (4) dvcu7, dusmé, from dvw, dé, ‘to enter,”
“sink,” “set.’’ The Gr usage is || to the Heb just
cited: “Many shall come from the east [anaitolé,
“rising”’] and the west” (dusmé, “setting’”) (Mt 8
11)


ow


ow
and wy) maghrib, “west,”
hd “


The chief figurative use of the word “west” is in
combination with “east” to denote great or infinite
distance, as:

“(As far as the east is from the west,
So far hath he removed our transgressions
from us" (Ps 103 12).
ALFRED Eny Day

WHALE, hwAl: (1) xijros, kétos (Sir 48 25 [RV
“sea-monster’]; Three ver 57 [RV ‘‘whale’]; Mt
12 40 [RV “whale,” m ‘“‘sea-monster’; AV “whale”
throughout]). (2) P21, tannin (Gen 1 21; Job
7 12), ‘“sea-monster,’”? AV “whale.” (3) DBA,
tannim (Ezk 32 2), “monster,” ERV ‘dragon,”
AV “whale,” AVm “dragon.”


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3082


It will be seen from the above references that the
word “whale’’ does not occur in RV except in Three
ver 57 and Mt 12 40. Kétos, the original word in
these ‘passages, is, according to Liddell and Scott,
used by Aristotle for “whale,’”’ Aristotle using also
the adj. xyrdwdns, kétédés, “cetacean”; Homer and
Herodotus used kéfos for any largé fish or sea-mon-
ster or for a seal. It is used in Euripides of the
monster to which Andromeda was exposed. In the
Heb, in the Book of Jon, we find dagh or ddghah,
the ordinary word for “fish’’: “And Jeh prepared a
great fish to swallow up Jonah” (Jon 117). Whales
are found in the Mediterranean and are sometimes
cast up on the shore of Pal, but it is not likely that
the ancient Greeks or Hebrews were very familiar
with them, and it is by no means certain that a
whale is referred to, either in the original Jonah
story or in the NT reference toit. If any particular
animal is meant, it is more likely a shark. Sharks
are much more familiar objects in the Mediterranean
than whales, and some of them are of large size.
See Fisx.

In Gen 1 21, “And God created the great sea-
monsters” (AV ‘“‘whales’”’), and Job 7 12,

“‘Am Ta, sea, or a sea-monster (AV ‘‘whale’’],
That thou settest a watch over me?”
the Heb has tannin, which word occurs 14 t in the
OT and in ARV is tr¢ “‘monster,”’ ‘‘sea-monster,”’ or
“serpent,” and, exceptionally, in Lam 4 3, “jackals.”
AV renders in several passages “dragon” (cf Ezk 29
3 ERY).

Tannim in Ezk 29 3 and 32 2 is believed to
stand for tannin. ARV has ‘monster,’ ERV
“dragon,” AV “whale,” AVm “dragon,” in 32 2,
and “dragon” in 29 3. Tannim occurs in 11 other
passages, where it is considered to be the pl. of tann,
and in RV is tr? “jackals,” in AV “dragons” (Job
30 29; Ps 44 19; Isa 13 22; 34 13; 35 7; 43 20;
Jer 911; 10 22; 14 6; 49°33; 51 37). "In Mal
1 3 we find the fem. pl. tannoth. See Dracon;
JACKAL. ALFRED Ey Day


WHEAT, hwét ([1] NOM, hittah, the specific word
for wheat [Gen 30 14; Ex 34 22, etc], with <upés,
purés [Jth 3 3; Sir 39 26]; [2] 13, bar, or A, bar
[Jer 28 28; Joel 2 24; Am 6 11; 8 6]; in other
passages tr? “grain” or “corn”; [8] otres, sétos [Mt
3 12; 13 25.29.30; Lk 3 17; 16 7; 22 31, etc] [for
other words tr? occasionally ‘wheat’? in AV see
Corn; Foop]): Wheat, usually the bearded variety,
is cultivated all over Pal, though less so than barley.
The great plain of the Hauran is a vast expanse of
wheat fields in the spring; considerable quantities are
exported via Beirfit, Haifa and Gaza. The ‘wheat
harvest” was in olden times one of the regular divi-
sions of the year (Ex 34 22; Jgs 16 1; 1 S 12 17);
it follows the barley harvest (Ex 9 31.32), occurring
in April, May or June, according to the altitude.

EK. W. G. Masrerman

WHEEL, hwél: (1) JEN, phan, is the usual
word (Ex 14 25, etc). In Prov 20 26; Isa 28 27
the rollers of a threshing wagon are meant (see
AGRICULTURE). (2) Saba, galgal, “rolling thing,”
generally in the sense of ‘‘wheel” (Isa 5 28, etc),
but RV in Ezk 10 2.6.13 has “whirling wheels,” an
advantageous change. The ‘wheel... . broken
at the cistern” in Eccl 12 6 is the windlass for
drawing the water, and by the figure the break-
down of the old man’s breathing apparatus is prob-
ably meant. In Ps 83 13, AV has “wheel,” but
this tr (that of LXX) is quite impossible; RV
“whirling dust’? (sucked up by a miniature whirl-
wind) is perhaps right, but the tr® proposed are end-
less. (8) Sab8 gilgal, Isa 28 28, the roller of a
threshing wagon. (4) D'SAN, ‘obhnayim, Jer 18 3.


3083


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Well, Jacob’s
Wickedness


See Porter. (5) DYB, pa‘am, Jes 6 28, lit. “step” Paar the power and might of Jeh: “Jeh hath


(soR Vim), and the sound of horses’ hoofs is intended.
(6) rpoxés, trochés, Sir 33 5; Jas 3 6 (AV “course’’).
In the former passage, “‘The heart of a fool is as a
cart-wheel,” the changeableness of a light disposition
is satirized. In Jas the figure is of a wheel in rota-
tion, so that a flame starting at any point is quickly
communicated to the whole. Just so an apparently
insignificant sin of the tongue produces an incalcula-
bly destructive effect.

The phrase ‘wheel of nature” (rooxds tis yeréoews,
trochés tés genéseds) is used here for ‘the world Yn prog-
ress.’ Itls not avery naturai figure and has given rise
to much discussion. AV accents éréchos (‘‘course’’)
instead of trochés (' wheel’), but the ianguage through-
out is metaphorical and '‘course” is not 4 sufficientiy
metaphorical word. The tr “birth” for geneseds (so
RVm), i.e. ''a wheel set in motion by birth,” is out of the
question, as the argument turns on results wider than
any individuai’s existence. ‘*Wheei of nature’ is cer-
tainly right. Buta comparlson of life to a wheei in some
sense or other (chiefly that of ‘‘Fortune's wheei"’) is
common enough in Gr and Lat writers, and, indeed, the
exact combination trochos geneseds is found in at ieast
one (Orphic) writer (full references in the comms. of
Mayor and W. Bauer). It wouid seem, then, that St.
James had heard the phrase, and he used it as a striking
figure, with entire indifference to any technicai signifi-
cance it might have. This supposition is preferable to
that of an awkward tr fromthe Aramaic. See Coursz.


Burton Scorr Easton

WHELP, hwelp (""3, gir, or ‘VU, gar; either
absol. [Ezk 19 2.3.5; Nah 2 12]; or constr. with
’aryéh, “lion” [Gen 49 9; Dt 33 22; Jer 51 38;
Nah 2 11]; also sad “al, bené labhi’, lit. “sons of a
lioness,’”’ tr4 “the whelps of the lioness’’ [Job 4 11].
In Job 28 8, AV has “lion’s whelps” for PTW 724,
bené shahac, which RV renders “proud beasts,”’ m
“sons of pride.” In Lam 4 38, gér is used of the
young of tannin, RV “jackals,” AV “sea-monsters,”’
AVm “‘sea-calves’’; it may possibly mean “‘wolves”’;
ckipvos, sktimnos, the technical word for “lion’s
whelp” [1 Macc 3 4]): These references are all
figurative: ‘Judab is a lion’s whelp’”’ (Gen 49 9);
“Dan is a lion’s whelp” (Dt 33 22); it is said of
the Babylonians, “They shall roar together like
young lions; they shall growl as lions’ whelps”
(Jer 51 38); of the Assyrians, ‘Where is the den of
the lions, and the feeding-place of the young lions,
where the lion and the lioness walked, the lion’s
whelp, and none made them afraid? The lion did
tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled
for his lionesses, and filled his caves with prey, and
his dens with ravin’ (Nah 2 11.12). In Ezk 19
2-9, the princes of Israel are compared to lions’
whelps. Bee Dragon; Lion.

Aurrep Evy Day

WHIRLWIND, hworl’wind (M510, siphah
[Prov 1 27; 10 25; Isa 5 28; 17 13; 66 15; Hos
87; Am 114; Nah 1 3], WO, sa‘ar [Hab 3 14;
Zec 7 14; Hos 13 3; Ps 58 9; Dnl 11 40],0799 ,
sarah (2 K 21; Job 38 1; 40 6; Isa 40 24; 41
16; Zec 9 14]): When two currents from opposite
directions meet, a circular motion results called a
whirlwind. On the sea this takes up small par-
ticles of water from the sea and condenses some of
the moisture in the clouds above, forming a great
funnel-shaped column. They are quite common
off the coast of Syria. Considerable damage might
be done to a small ship overtaken by them. In the
desert sand is taken up in the same way, causing
terrible sand storms which are greatly dreaded by
caravans. Most of the references in the Bible do
not necessarily imply a circular motion, and the
word “tempest” might be used in translation.

Storms usually come from the 8.W. “Out of
the . ... . south cometh the storm” (Job 37 9);
yet in Ezekiel’s vision he saw a whirlwind coming
out of the north (1 4). Elijah “went up by a whirl-
wind into heaven” (2 K 211). The whirlwind


his way in the whirlwind and in the storm” (Nah
1 3); He “answered Job out of the whirlwind”
(Job 38 1).

Most of the Scriptural uses are figurative; of
destruction: ‘He will take them away with a whirl-
wind” (Ps 68 9; Prov 1 27; 10 25; Hos 18 3; Dnl
11 40; Am 1 14; Hab 8 14; Zec 7 14); of quick-
ness: “wheels as a whirlwind” (Isa 5 28; 66 15;
Jer 4 18); of the anger of God: “A whirlwind of
the Lord is gone forth in fury” (Jer 23 19 AV); of
punishment to the wicked: “A continuing whirlwind

. shall fall... . on the wicked” (Jer 30 23
AV). Aurrep H. Joy


WHITE, hwit. See Conors.
WHITE HORSE. See Horsz, Waite.


WHITEWASH, hwit’wosh: ARVm gives “white-
wash” for ‘‘untempered mortar’ in Ezk 13 10 and
22 28. ‘Her prophets have daubed for them,’ i.e.
seconded them, “with whitewash,” thus giving “a
slight wall” (18 10 m) a specious appearance of
strength. See Mortar; UNTemPrren.


WHOLE, hil, WHOLESOME, hil’sum:
“Whole,” originally “hale” (a word still in poetic
use), had at first the meaning now expressed by its
derivative “healthy.” In this sense “whole” is
fairly common (Job 6 18, etc) in EV, although much
more common in the NT than in the OT. From
this meaning “‘healthy,’’ the transition to the modern
force “complete,” “perfect,’’ “entire’ (Ex 12 6,
etc) was not unnatural, and it is in this later sense
alone that the advb. “wholly” (Lev 6 22, etc) is
used. ‘Wholesome,’ however, is derived from the
earlier meaning of “whole.” Itoccurs in Prov 16 4,
AV,ERV, “a wholesome tongue’ (82), raphd’,
“heal,” RVm “the healing of the tongue,’ ARV “a
gentle tongue’), and in1 Tim 6 3, AV “wholesome
words” (vyialvw, hugiaind, “be healthy,’ RVm
“healthful,” RV ‘“sound”’).

Burton Scorr Easton

WHORE, hir, WHOREDOM, haor’dum. See
Crimes; HarRLot; PUNISHMENTS.


WICKEDNESS, wik’ed-nes: The state of being
wicked; amental disregard for justice, righteousness,
truth, honor, virtue; evil ix thought
and life; depravity; sinfulness; crim-
inality. See Sin. Many words are.
rendered ‘‘wickedness.’’ There are
many synonyms for wickedness in Eng. and also
in the Heb. Pride and vanity lead to it: “All the
proud, and all that work wickedness [T3Y , rish‘ah]
shall be stubble’ (Mal 4 1). Akin to this is the
word 439, ‘dwen, “iniquity,” “vanity”: “She eateth,
and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no
wickedness” (Prov 30 20). Then we have the word
MM, hawwdh, meaning “mischief,” “calamity,”
coming from inward intent upon evil: ‘Lo, this is
the man that made not God his strength, but trusted
in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened
himself in his wickedness” (Ps 52 7); V2} , zimmah,
“wickedness” in thought, carnality or lust harbored:
“And if a man take a wife and her mother, it is
wickedness’ (Lev 2014); TR, ‘awlah, “per-
verseness,”’ ‘Neither shall the children of wickedness
afflict them any more, as at the first’’ (2 8 7 10).
The word for evil (771, ra‘) is many times employed
to represent wickedness: “Remember all their
wickedness’”’ (Hos 7 2). Wickedness like all forms
and thoughts of wrong, kept warm in mind, seems
to be a thing of growth; it begins with a thought,


1. In
the OT


Widow
Wind


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3084


then a deed, then a character, and finally a destiny.
Even in this life men increase in wickedness till
they have lost all desire for that which is good in the
sight of God and good men; the men in the vision
of Isaiah seem to be in a condition beyond which
the human heart cannot go: “Woe unto them that
call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for
light, and light for darkness” (Isa 5 20). Shades


of thought are added by such words as ba » rar,


“evil,” “badness”: “Give them according to their
work, and according to the wickedness of their
doings” (Ps 28 4), And IW}, resha‘, or MIW,
rish‘ah, also gives the common thought of wrong,
wickedness. The prophets were strong in denun-
ciations of all iniquity, perverseness, and in announ-
cing the curse of God which would certainly follow.

Wickedness, malignity, evil in thought and pur-
pose is presented by the word rovnpla, ponéria:

“But Jesus perceived their wickedness,
2. In and said, Why make ye trial of me, ye
the NT hypocrites?’ (Mt 22 18). Jesus pomts
out the origin of all wrong: ‘For from
within, out of the heart of men, evil thoughts pro-
ceed .... wickednesses, deceit, lasciviousness... .
allthese evil things proceed from within, and defilethe
man” (Mk 7 21-23). See Imitation of Christ, xiii, 5.

Davip Roserts Duncan

WIDOW, wid’d maby ,’almanah; xia, chéra):
In the OT widows are considered to be under the
special care of Jeh (Ps 68 5; 146 9; Prov 15 25).
Sympathetic regard for them comes to be viewed as
a mark of true religion (Job 31 16; Jas 1 27). Dt
is rich in counsel in their behalf (24 17, etc).

The word is first mentioned in the NT in Acts
61: “There arose a murmuring of the Grecian
Jews against the Hebrews, because their’ widows
were neglected in the daily ministration.” Paul
charges that they be particularly cared for, esp. those
that are “widows indeed,” i.e. poor, without sup-
port and old (1 Tim 5 2-16). Some try to find
proof in this passage of that ecclesiastical order of
widows mentioned in post-apostolic writings. See
LITERATURE, SUB-APOSTOLIC; Woman, IV, 5.

Gro. B. Eaazr

WIFE, wif. See Marriage; RELATIONsHIPs,
FAMILY.


WIFE, BROTHER’S. See MarriacE;
TIONSHIPS, FAMILY.


RELa-


WILD BEAST, wild bést: (1) TT, 2%, only with
"TW , sddhay, “field,” in the expression, *1W TT, z7z
sddhay, tr4 ‘wild beasts of the field” (Ps 60 11; 80
13); ef Tg to Ps 80 18, NT°T, ziza’, “worm” (BDB);

o


Arab. (2) DY, ctyim (Isa


13 21; 34 14; Jer 50 39). (8) DUS, 'tytm (Isa
13 21; 3414; Jer 50 39). (4) "J, hay, “living
thing,” often tr4 “wild beast” in EV (1 8 17 46,
etc). (5) In Apoc (Ad Est 16 24, etc) and the
NT (Mk 1 13), @nplov, thérton. (6) Acts 10 12
AV; 11 6, rerpdmrodor, tetrdpodon, RV ‘four-footed
beast.”

(1), (2) and (8) are of doubtful etymology, but
the context makes it clear in each case that wild
beasts of some sort are meant. The Tg <iza’,
“worm,” is possible in Ps 80 13, though not prob-
able in view of the || “boar”: ‘The boar out of the
wood doth ravage it, and the wild beasts of the
field feed on it,” i.e. on the vine (figurative)
brought out of Egypt. In Ps 50 11, however, such
an interpretation is out of the question. All the
references from ver 8 to ver 13 are to large animals,
bullocks, goats, cattle and birds. Vulg and LXX


: y) tz, “worm.”


have in 80 13 ‘wild beast” and in 50 11 “beauty
of the field’ (tr4)!

Ciyim, doubtfully referred to ¢iyah, “drought,”
occurs in prophecies of the desolation of Babylon
in Isa 13 21 (‘wild beasts of the desert’’) and Jer
60 39, of Edom in Isa 34 14, of Assyria im Isa 28
13 (“them that dwell in the wilderness’). It is
associated in these passages with names of wild
beasts and birds, some of them of very doubtful
Meaning, such as tannim, ’dhim, "tyim, s*trim,
benath ya‘inah. Wild beasts of some sort are clearly
meant, though the kind can only be conjectured.
The word occurs in Ps 74 14 (‘‘the people inhabit-
ing the wilderness’’), where it is possible to under-
stand “heasts”’ instead of “people.” It occurs also
in Ps 72 9 (“they that dwell in the wilderness’),
where it seems necessary to understand “men.” If
the reading stands, it is not easy to reconcile this
passage with the others.

’Iytm occurs in Isa 18 21 and 34 14 and in Jer
60 39, three of the passages cited for ¢tyim. AV
referring to 7%, “island,’’? renders ‘wild beasts of
the islands” (Isa 18 22). RV has ‘wolves,’


m “howling creatures’; cf Arab. wes ,» ‘anwa’, “to
ae S.

” = ne 9

howl,” and wl wh tbn-’Gwa’, or sly , whut,


‘Gackal.” ALFRED Eiy Day
WILD-OX (ON", 7’@m): The word “unicorn”
occurs in AV in Nu 28 22; 24 8; Dt 38 17; Job
39 9.10; Ps 22 21; 29 6; 92 10; Isa 34 7 (AVm
‘Thinoceros’). RV has everywhere ‘‘wild-ox’’
(m “ox-antelope,’’ Nu 23 22). LXX has povéxe-
pws, mondkeréds, “‘one-horned,”’ except in Isa 34 7,
where we find of adpot, hot hadroi, ‘‘the large ones,”
“the bulky ones.”’ In this passage also LXX has
ol xpiol, hor kriot, ‘the rams,” instead of EV “bul-
locks.” Vulg has rhinoceros in Nu 28 22; 24 8;
Dt 33 17; Job 39 9.10; and unicornis m Ps 22
21 (21 22); 29 6 (28 6); 92 10 (91 11); Isa 34 7.
As stated in the arts. on ANTELOPE and Carrie,
r’ém and t’d (Dt 14 5; Isa 51 20) may both be
the Arabian oryx (Oryz beatriz), of which the com-
mon vernacular name means “wild-ox.” It may
be presumed that ‘“ox-antelope” of Nu 23 22 RVm
is meant to indicate this animal, which is swift and
fierce, and has a pair of very long, sharp and nearly
straight horns. The writer feels, however, that
more consideration should be given to the view of
Tristram (Natural History of the Bible) that r?’ém
is the urus or aurochs, the primitive Bos taurus,
which seems to be depicted in Assyr monuments
and referred to as rému (BDB). The etymology
of r’@m is uncertain, but the word may be from a
root signifying ‘‘to rise” or “to he high.” At any
rate, there is no etymological warrant for the as-
sumption that it was a one-horned creature. The


Arab. pe)? raim, is used of a light-colored gazelle.


See JACKAL.


The great strength and fierceness implied in most of
the references suit the wild-ox better than the
oryx. On the other hand, Edom (Isa 34 7) was
adjacent to the present home of the oryx, while
there is no reason to suppose that the wild-ox came
nearer than Northern Assyria. There is possibly a
reference to the long horns of the oryx in “But my
horn hast thou exalted like the horn of the wild-ox”’
(Ps 92 10). For i°6, LXX has 8pvé, éruz, in Dt
14 5 (but cevrdov tqutedbov, seutlion hémtephthon,
“half-boiled beet’? [!] in Isa 51 20). Vulg has
oryz in both passages. While we admit that both
r’ém and t°’6 may be the oryx, it is perhaps best to
follow RVm, rendering r’én “wild-ox.” The
rendering of “antelope” (RV) for 6 is defensible,
but “oryx” would be better, because the oryx is the


3085


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Widow
Wind


only antelope that could possibly be meant, it and
the gazelle (¢*bh7), already mentioned in Dt 14 5,
being the only antelopes known to occur in Pal and
Arabia. In Isa 34 7 it seems to be implied that
the r’ém might be used in sacrifice.

Figurative: The wild-ox is used as a symbol of the
strength of Israel: “He hath as it were the strength
of the wild-ox” (Nu 23 22; 24 8). In the bless-
ing of the children of Israel by Moses it is said
of Joseph:

“‘ And his horns are the horns of the wlld-ox:
With them he shall push the peoples all of them,
even the ends of the earth" (Dt 33 17).

The Psalmist (29 5.6) in describing the power of
Jeh says:

“Yea, Jeh breaketh In pleces the cedars of Lebanon.

He maketh them also to skip like a calf;
Lebanon and Sirion llke a young wild-ox.”’

Again, in praise for Jeh’s goodness (92 10): “But

my horn hast thou exalted like the horn of the wild-


In Job 39 9-12 the subduing and training of the
wild-ox are cited among the things beyond man’s
power and understanding. See ANTELOPE; CATTLE.

Aurrep Exry Day

WILDERNESS, wil’dér-nes. See Desert;

Jupara, WILDERNESS OF; WANDERINGS OF ISRAEL.


WILL. See TESTAMENT.


_WILL, VOLITION, vé-lish’un (MAR, ’abhah,
PEI, rdcdn; Cra, théld, Botdopar, borilomat, Anya,
théléma): ‘Will’ as noun and vb., trans and in-
trans, carries in it the idea of ‘‘wish,” “purpose,”
“volition.” ‘Will’ is also used as an auxiliary of
the future tense of other words, but the independent
vb. is frequent, and it is often important to distin-
guish between it and the mere auxiliary, esp. in the


NT.

In the OT the word chiefly rendered “to will’ is
’abhah, “to breathe after,” “to long for.” With the
exception of Job 39 9; Isa 1 19, it is accompanied
by a negation, and is used of both man and God.
Several other words are employed, but only sparsely.
“Will” as noun is the tr chiefly of ragdn, “good-will,”
‘““wilfulness” (Gen 49 6), with emphasis on the vol-
untariness of action (Lev 13; 19 5; 22 19.29,
etc); also of nephesh, and a few other words. In
the NT “will” is chiefly the tr of thelé and boulomat,
the difference between the two being that thelo
expresses an active choice or purpose, boulomai,
“passive inclination or willingness, or the inward
predisposition from which the active choice_pro-
ceeds” (cf Mk 16 9.12 with ver 15). “Will,”
noun, is theléma. With the exception of a few pas-
sages, it is used of the will of God (over all, Mt 18
14; in all things to be done, Mt 6 10; 26 42],
etc; ordering all things, Eph 1 11, etc); human will,
however, may oppose itself to the will of God (Lk
23 25; Jn 113; Rom 7 18; here the capacity to
will is distinguished from the power to do, ete).
Bouléma is properly counsel or purpose. While it
is possible to oppose the will of God, His counsel
or purpose cannot be frustrated (Acts 2 23; 4 28;
Rom 9 19; Eph 111; He 6 17); it may, how-
ever, be resisted for a time (Lk 7 30).


In Apoc, for “ wlll'’ we have theléma (1 Esd 9 9 [of


God]; lus 43 16; 1 Macc 3 60; Ecclus 8 15, “his
Goal: it; ede (Wlsd 9 13, RV ‘‘counsel); botléma
(2 Macc 15 5, ‘‘ wicked will,” RV “ernel purpose"’);
" wilful’ (Eeclus ae ay proces PY gy ones
«willing '' is , boulomat, .
rat ‘ 6 35); ‘wilt’? (Wisd 12 18), theld, Rv


6 a
thee She will” (ef 2 Macc 7 16).

RV has many changes, several of them of note as
bringing out the distinction between the auxiliary
and the independent vb. Thus, Mt 11 27, “will-


eth to”; Jn 7 17, “if any man willeth to do his
will’; 1 Tim 6 9, ARV “they that are minded to
be rich,” ERV “‘desire,” ete.

The words employed and passages cited show
clearly that man is always regarded as a respon-
sible being, free to willin harmony with the Divine
will or contrary toit. This is further shown by the
various words denoting refusal. ‘Ye will not come
to me, that ye may have life’ (Jn 5 40). So with
respect to temptation. We may even choose and
act deliberately in opposition to the will of God.
Yet God’s counsel, His will in its completeness, ever
prevails, and man, in resisting it, deprives himself


‘of the good it seeks to confer upon him.


In modern psychology the tendency is to make

will primary and distinctive of personality.
W. L. WALKER

WILL-WORSHIP: In Col 2 23, “a show of
wisdom in will-worship,” for ¢@edo@pycxta, ethelo-
thréskia, a word found nowhere else but formed
exactly like “will-worship’’: worship originating in
the human will as opposed to the Divine, arbitrary
religious acts, worthless despite their difficulty of
performance.


WILLOW TREE, wil’6-tré (MDRDY , capheaphah):


Comparison with the Arab. wilare , safsdaf, “the
willow,’ makes it very probable that the tr of Ezk
17 5 is correct.


WILLOWS, wil’dz (DIAN, ‘drdbhim; tréa,
itéa [Lev 23 40; Job 40 22; Ps 137 2; Isa 16
7; 44 4]): In all references this tree is mentioned
as beside running water. They may all refer to
the willow, two varieties of which, Salix fragilis
and S. alba, occur commonly in Pal, or to the closely
allied Populus euphratus (also N.O. Salicaceae),
which is even more plentiful, esp. on the Jordan
and its tributaries. The Brook of the Willows (Isa
16 7) must have been some stream running from
Moab to the Jordan or Dead Sea. Popular fancy
has associated the willows of Ps 187 2 with the
so-called “weeping willow’ (Solix babylonica), but
though this tree is found today in Pal, it is an intro-
duction from Japan and cannot have existed ‘‘by
the waters of Babylon” at the time of the captivity.

E. W. G. Masterman

WILLOWS, THE BROOK OF THE: Evidently
mentioned as the boundary of Moab (Isa 15 7) and
generally identified with the brook Zered. See
Brook; ZERED.


WIMPLE, wim’p’l: RV _ substitutes “shawls”
for AV “wimples” in Isa 3 22. The precise article
of dress intended is unknown. See Dress.


WIND, wind (77, rath; Gvepos, dnemos): Un-
equal distribution of heat in the atmosphere causes
currents of air or wind. The heated
air rises and the air from around rushes
in. The direction from which a cur-
rent comes determines its name, as west wind coming
from the W. but blowing toward the BE. When
two currents of air of different directions meet,
a spiral motion sometimes results. See WxIRL-


1. Causes


IND.
In Pal the west wind is the most common. It
comes from the sea and carries the moisture which
condenses to form clouds, as it is turned
2. West upward by the mountains, to the cooler
Wind layers of the atmosphere. If the tem-
perature reached is cool enough the.
cloud condenses and rain falls. Elijah looked
toward the W. for the ‘‘small cloud,” and soon “the
heavens grew black with clouds and wind” (1 K
18 441). ‘‘When ye see a cloud rising in the west,


Window
Wine, Wine Press


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3086


straightway ye say, There cometh a shower; and
so it cometh to pass” (Lk 12 54).
The south wind is frequent in Pal. If it is slightly
8.W., it may bring rain, but if it is due S. or S.E.,
there is no rain. It is a warm wind
3. South bringing good weather. “When ye
Wind see a south wind blowing, ye say,
There will be a scorching heat; and it
cometh to pass” (Lk 12 55). In the cooler months
it is a gentle, balmy wind, so that the “earth is still
ise of the south wind” (Job 37 17; cf Cant
The north wind is usually a strong, continuous
wind blowing down from the northern hi
while it is cool it always “drives away
4. North —rain,”’ as correctly stated in Prov 26
Wind 23 AV; yet it is a disagreeable wind,
and often causes headache and fever.
The east wind or sirocco (from Arab. shark=
“east’’) is the “scorching wind” (Jas 1 11) from


the desert. It is a hot, gusty wind
5. East Jaden with sand and dust and occurs
Wind most frequently in May and October.


The temperature in a given place often
rises 15 or 20 degrees within a few hours, bringing
the thermometer to the highest readings of the year.
It is customary for the people to close up the houses
tightly to keep out the dust and heat. The heat
and dryness wither all vegetation (Gen 41 6).
Happily the wind seldom lasts for more than three
days at a time. It is the destructive ‘‘wind of the
wilderness” (Job 119; Jer 411; 13 24): “Jeh
caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all
the night”? (Ex 14 21) for the children of Israel
to pass; the “rough blast in the day of the east

ind” (Isa 27 8). The strength of the wind makes
it dangerous for ships at sea: “(With the east wind
thou breakest the ships of Tarshish’’? (Ps 48 7).
Euraquilo or Euroclydon (Acts 27 14 AV), which
caused Paul’s shipwreck, was an E.N.E. wind, which
was esp. dangerous in that region.
The wind is directly of great use to the farmer
in Pal in winnowing the grain after it is threshed
by treading out (Ps 14; 35 5; Isa
6. Practical 17 13). It was used as a sign of the
Use weather (Eccl 11 4). It was a neces-
sity for traveling on the sea in ancient
times (Acts 28 13; Jas 3 4), but too strong a wind
caused shipwreck (Jon 1 4; Mt 8 24; Lk 8 23).
The Scriptural references to wind show many
illustrative and figurative uses: (1) Power of God

(1 K 19 11; Job 27 21; 38 24; Ps 107
7. Scripture 25; 185 7; 147 18; 148 8; Prov 30 4;
References Jer 10 18; Hos 4 19; Lk 8 25): ‘He

caused the east wind to blow in the
heavens; and by his power he guided the south
wind” (Ps 78 26). (2) Scattering and destruction:
“A stormy wind shall rend it’ (Ezk 13 11; ef
52; 12 14; 17 21; Hos 419; 87; Jer 49 36;
Mt 7 25). (8) Uncertainty: ‘tossed to and_ fro
and earried about with every wind of doctrine”
(Eph 4 14; ef Prov 27 16; Eccl 1 6; Jn 3 8; Jas
1 6). (4) Various directions: “toward the four
winds of heaven” (Dnl 11 4; cf 8 8; Zee 26; Mt
2431; Mk 13 27). (5) Brevity: ‘‘a wind that
passeth away” (Ps 78 39; cf 1 4; 35 5; 103 16).
(6) Nothingness: “Molten images are wind” (Isa
41 29; cf Jer 5 18). Atrrep H. Joy


WINDOW, win'ds. See Hovss, II, 1, (9).


WINDOWS OF HEAVEN. See Astronomy,
II, 4.


WINE, win, WINE PRESS, win’pres:
I. Terms.—(1) 77, yayin, apparently from a
non-Sem root allied to Gr (w)otnes, Lat vinum, etc.


hills, and,


This is the usual word for ‘wine’ and is found
141 t in MT. (2) VOM, hemer, perhaps “foam- .
ing” (Dt 32 14and MT Isa 27 2 [but
see ERVm]); Aram. AG, hamar
; (Ezr 6 9; 722; Dnl 6 1.2.4.23). (3)
WrwN, grdsh. Properly this is the fresh grape
juice (called also IW, mishreh, Nu 6 3), even
when still in the grape (Isa 65 8). But unfer-
mented grape juice is a very difficult thing to keep
without the aid of modern antiseptic precautions,
and its preservation in the warm and_not over-
cleanly conditions of ancient Pal was impossible.
Consequently, ttrdsh came to mean wine that was
not fully aged (although with full intoxicating
properties [Jgs 9 13; Hos 4 11; cf Acts 2 13])
or wine when considered specifically as the product
of grapes (Dt 12 17; 18 4, etc). LXX always
(except Isa 65 8; Hos 4 11) translates by oinos
and the Tgs by hdmar. AV has “wine” 26 t, “new
wine’ 11 t, ‘sweet wine’ in Mic 6 15; RV “‘vint-
age’ in Nu 18 12; Mic 6 15 (with the same
change in Neh 10 37.39 RVm; Isa 62 8 ERVm).
Otherwise ERV has left AV unchanged, while ARV
uses “new wine” throughout. (4) Two apparently
poetic words are O°OY, ‘dsis (RV “sweet wine,”
Isa 49 26; Am 9 13; Joel 15; 3 18, ‘juice’;
Cant 8 2), and R20, sdbhe’ (“wine,” Isa 1 22;
“drink,” Hos 418 [m ‘carouse’]; Nah 1 10).
(5) For spiced wine three words occur: 99%),
mesekh, Ps 75 8 (EV “mixture’); JOO, mim-
sakh, Prov 23 30 (“mixed wine’); Isa 65 11 (RV
“mingled wine’); AT, mezegh, Cant 72 (RV
“mingled wine’); cf also MPV 7M, yayin ha-
rekah, Cant 8 2 (“spiced wine’). (6) D°pNs's,
mam‘thakkim, lit. “sweet,’’ Neh 8 10.

(7) ADU. shékhdr (22 t), tra “‘strong drink” in EV.


Shékhar appears to_mean “intoxicating drink” of any
sort and in Nu 28 7 is certainly simply ‘‘ wine" (cf also
its use in parallelism to “wine” in Isa § 11.22, etc).
In certain passages (Lev 10 9; Nu 6 3; 2181 15,
etc), however, it is distinguished from ‘‘ wine,’’ and the
meaning is not quite certain. But it would seem to
mean “drink not made from grapes.’’ Of such only
POUperene ts wine is named in the Bible (Cant 8 2), -
ut a variety of such preparations (made from apples,
quinces, dates, barley, etc) were known to the ancients
and must have been used in Pal also. The tr * strong
drink" is unfortunate, for it suggests ‘‘distilled liquor,’
gcrendy which is hardly in point. See Drinz,
TRONG.


(8) In the Apoc and NT “wine” represents oivos,
oinos, with certain compounds, except in Acts 2 18,
where the Gr is yAcdxos, gletikos, ‘sweet,’ EV “new
wine.”

See also BLoon; Drink; Fiacon; Fruir; Honey.

(1) Properly speaking, the actual wme press was
called MA, gath (Jgs 6 11, etc), and the receiving
vat (‘fat’) 3p?, yekebh (Nu 18 27,
etc), but the names were interchange-
able to some degree (Isa 16 10; Job
24 11; cf Isa 5 2, RV text and m)
and either could be used for the whole apparatus
(see Gato and cf Jgs 7 25; Zec 14 10). In Isa
63 3 the Heb has MB, purah, “winctrough,” a
word found also in Hag 2 16 where it seems to be
a gloss (so, apparently, ARV).

(2) In the Apoc (Sir 33 16) and in the NT (Mt
21 33; Rev 14 19.20 [bis]; 19 15) “winepress” is
Aqvés, lends; in Mk 12 1 brodjuov, hupol mion, by
which only the receiving vat seems to be meant
(RV “a pit for a winepress’’).

AI. Wine-Making.—For the care of the vine, its
distribution, different varieties, etc, see VINE.
The ripening of the grapes took place as early as
June m the Jordan valley, but on the coast not
until August, while in the hills it was delayed until
September. In whatever month, however, the


1. Wine


2. Wine
Press


MODERN SYRIAN WINE PRESS


3087


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Window
‘Wine, Wine Press


coming of the vintage was the signal for the vil-
lagers to leave their homes in a body and to encamp
in booths erected in the vineyards,

1. The so that the work might be carried on
Vintage without interruption (see TapBEer-
NACLES, Feast oF). It was the great
holiday season of the year and the joy of the vintage
was proverbial (Isa 16 10; Jer 26 30; 48 33;
ef Jgs 9 27), and fragments of vintage songs seem
tobe preserved in Isa 27 2; 65 8. The grapeswere
pene usually by cutting off the clusters (see

ICKLE), and were carried to the press in baskets.

Many of the ancient wine presses remain to the
present day. Ordinarily they consisted of two
rectangular or circular excavations,

2. Wine hewn (Isa 5 2) in the solid rock to a
Presses depth of 2 or 3 feet. Where possible
one was always higher than the other
and they were connected by a pipe or channel.
Their size, of course, varied greatly, but the upper


atari es


hie


LA


Large Foot Press (Egyptian).


vat was always wider and shallower than the lower
and was the press proper, into which the grapes
were thrown, to be crushed by the feet of the tread-
ers (Isa 63 1-3, etc). The juice flowed down
through the pipe to the lower vat, from which it
wags removed into jars (Hag 2 16) or where it was
allowed to remain during the first fermentation.

Many modifications of this form of the press are
found. Where there was no rock close to the sur-
face, the vats were dug in the earth and lined with
stonework or cement, covered with pitch. Or the
pressvat might be built up out of any material
(wood was much used in Egypt), and from it the
juice could be conducted into a sunken receptacle
or into jars. Not infrequently a third (rarely a
fourth) vat might be added between the other two,
in which a partial settling and straining could take
place. Wooden beams are often used either to
finish the pressing or to perform the whole operation,
and holes into which the ends of these beams fitted
can still be seen. A square of wood attached to
the beam bore down on the pile of grapes, while the
free end of the beam was heavily weighted. In the
simpler presses the final result was obtained by
piling stones on the mass that remained after the
readers had finished their work. :

It is a general principle of wine-making (cf Or)
that “the less the pressure the better the product”;

therefore the liquid that flowed at the
3. Grading beginning of the process, esp. that pro-

duced by the mere weight of the grapes
themselves when piled in heaps, was carefully kept
separate from that which was obtained only under
heavy pressure. A still lower grade was made
by adding water to the final refuse and allowing
the mixture to ferment. Possibly this last con-
coction is sometimes meant by the word “vinegar
(homeg). : :

In the climate of Pal fermentation begins almost
immediately, frequently on the same day for juice
pressed out in the morning, but never later than
the next day. At first a slight foam appears on


the surface of the liquid, and from that moment,
according to Jewish tradition, it is liable to the
wine-tithe (Ma'‘dsérath 1 7). Theac-
4. Fermen- tion rapidly becomes more violent, and
tation while it is in progress the liquid must be
kept in jars or in a vat, for it would
burst even the newest and strongest of wine-skins
(Job 32 19). Within about a week this violent
fermentation subsides, and the wine is transferred
to other jars or strong wine-skins (Mk 2 22 and
\|’s), in which it undergoes the secondary fermen-
tation. At the bottom of the receptacles collects
the heavier matter or “lees” (D™'7QW , shemarim, Ps
76 8 [“dregs’]; Jer 48 11; Zeph 1 12; in Isa 25
6 the word is used for the wine as well), from which
the ‘‘wines on the lees” gather strength and flavor.
At the end of 40 days it was regarded as properly
‘Swine’ and could be offered as a drink offering
(‘Edhuyyoth 6 1). The practice after this point
seems to have varied, no doubt depending on the
sort of wine that was being made. Certain kinds
were left undisturbed to age ‘“‘on their lees’ and
were thought to be all the better for so doing, but
before they were used it was necessary to strain
them very carefully. So Isa 25 6, ‘A feast of wine
aged on the lees, thoroughly strained.’ But usually
leaving the wine in the fermentation vessels inter-
fered with its improvement or caused it to degen-
erate. So at the end of 40 days it was drawn off
into other jars (for storage, 1 Ch 27 27, etc) or
wine-skins (for transportation, Josh 9 4, etc). So
Jer 48 11: ‘Moab has been undisturbed from his
youth, and he has rested on his lees and has not
been emptied from vessel to vessel... .. There-
fore his flavor remains unchanged [or “becomes
insipid’’] and his scent is unimproved [or “lacks
freshness”’]’; ¢f Zeph 1 12. .
Jars were tightly sealed with caps covered with
pitch. The very close sealing needed to preserve
sparkling wines, however, was un-
5. Storage known to the Hebrews, and in conse-
quence (and for other reasons) such
wines were not used. Hence in Ps
75 8, “The wine foameth,” the allusion must be to
very new wine whose fermentation had not yet
subsided, if, indeed, the tr is not wrong (RVm ‘‘The
wine is red’). The superiority of old wine to new
was acknowledged by the Hebrews, in common
with the rest of the world (Sir 9 10; Lk 5 39), but
in the wines of Pal acetous fermentation, changing
the wine into vinegar, was likely to occur at any
time. Three years was about the longest time for
which such wines could be kept, and “‘old wine”
meant only wines that had been stored for a year
or more (Bab. Bath. 63). See also Crarts, IT, 19.
II. Use of Wine.—In OT times wine was drunk
undiluted, and wine mixed with water was thought
to be ruined (Isa 1 22). The “mixed”
1. Mixed or “‘mingled wines” (see I, 1, (5), above)
Wine were prepared with aromatic herbs
of various sorts and some of these com-
pounds, used throughout the ancient world, were
highly intoxicating (Isa 6 22), Wine mixed with
myrrh was stupefying and an anaesthetic (Mk 15
23). At a later period, however, the Gr use of
diluted wines had attained such sway that the
writer of 2 Macc speaks (15 39) of undiluted wine
as “distasteful” all This dilution is so
normal in the following centuries that the Mish
can take it for granted and, indeed, R. Eliezer even
forbade saying the table-blessing over undiluted
wine (Berakhath 7 5). The proportion of water
was large, only one-third or one-fourth of the total
mixture being wine (Niddah 2 7; P*sahim 108b).
Norse.—The wine of the Last Supper, accordingly,


may be described in modern terms as a sweet, red, fer-
mented wine, rather highly diluted. As it was no doubt


Winebibber
Wisdom


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3088


the ordinary wine of commerce, there is no reason to
suppose that it was particularly ‘‘ pure."

Throughout the OT, wine is regarded as a neces-
sity of life and in no way as a mere Juxury. It

was a necessary part of even the sim-
2. Wine- plest meal (Gen 14 18; Jgs 19 19;
Drinking 15 16 20; Isa 55 1, etc), was an

indispensable provision for a fortress
(2 Ch 11 11), and was drunk by all classes and all
ages, even by the very young (Lam 2 12; Zec 9
17). “Wine” is bracketed with “‘grain’”’ as a basic
staple (Gen 27 28, etc), and the failure of the wine-
crop or its destruction by foreigners was a terrible
calamity (Dt 28 30.39; Isa 62 8; 65 21; Mic 6 15;
Zeph 1 13, etc). On the other hand, abundance of
wine was a special token of God’s blessing (Gen 27
28; Dt 713; Am 9 14, etc), and extraordinary
abundance would be a token of the Messianic age
(Am 9 13; Joel 318; Zec 917). A moderate “glad-
dening of the heart” through wine was not looked
upon as at all reprehensible (2 8 13 28; Est 1 10;
Ps 104 15; Eccl 9 7; 10 19; Zec 9 15; 10 7), and
while Jgs 9 13 represented a mere verbal remnant
of a long-obsolete concept, yet the idea contained in
the verse was not thought shocking. ‘Drink offer-
ings,’’ indeed, were of course a part of the prescribed
ritual (Lev 23 13, etc; see Sacrirtce), and a store
of wine was kept in the temple (tabernacle) to insure
their performance (1 Ch 9 29). Even in later and
much more moderate times, Sir writes the laudation
of wine in 31 27, and the writer of 2 Mace (see
above) objects as strongly to pure water as he does
to pure wine. Christ adapted Himself to Jewish
customs (Mt 11 19 || Lk 7 34; Lk 22 18), and ex-
egetes usually suppose that the celebrated verse
1 Tim 6 23 is meant as a safeguard against ascetic
(gnostic?) dualism, as well as to give medical advice.

On the temporal conditioning of the Bib. cus-
toms, the uncompromising opposition of the Bible
to excess, and the non-applicability of the ancient
attitude to the totally different modern conditions,
see DRUNKENNESS.

The figurative uses of wine are very numerous,
but are for the most part fairly obvious. Those
offering difficulty have been discussed in the course
of the article. For wine in its commercial aspect
see TRADE. Burton Scorr Kasron


WINEBIBBER, win’bib-ér: In Prov 23 20,
PD Rao, sobh? yayin; in Mt 11 19=Lk 7 34,
olvorérys, oinopotés, of habitual wine-drinkers. The
accusation was falsely brought against Jesus of being
“a gluttonous man and a winebibber,” because,
unlike John, He ate and drank with others.


WINEFAT, win‘fat, WINE PRESS, win’pres,
WINEVAT, win’vat. See Crarrs, II, 19; Vine;
WINE.


WINE-SKINS (9M, hémeth [Gen 21 14 ml],
SN), n’édh [Jgs 4 19, “bottle”], 532, nébhel, 232,
nebhel [1 S 10 3m], 218, ’6bh [Job 32 19]; aokés,
askés[Mt 9 17; Mk 2 22; Lk 6 37; cfdacxorvrtvy,
askoputiné, Jth 10 5, RV ‘eathern bottle’]):
These words are all used to designate skins for the
containing of liquids, nébhel, however, being the
most common in the case of wine. The Israelite,
like the modern Arab and Syrian, used mainly the
skin of the goat and the sheep, but the skins of the
ox and the camel have also been put to this purpose.
The skin is removed from the animal by drawing
it over the body from the neck downward, half the
skin on each of the limbs being also retained. It
is then tanned, the hair cut close, turned inside out,
and has all the openings save one closed with cords,
when it is ready for use. The reference to “a wine-


skin in the smoke” in Ps 119 83 is generally ex-
plained on the supposition of its being hung there
for mellowing purposes, but this can scarcely be
accepted, for wine is never left for any length of
time in the skin on account of its imparting a dis-
agreeable flavor to the contents. The explanation
of the NT passages is that the new wine, still liable
to continue fermenting to a small extent at least,
was put into new, still expansible skins, a condition
that had ceased in the older ones. See WINE.
W. M. Cuaristin
WINEVAT. Sce Winerat, WINEVAT.


WINGS, wingz (92, kandph; wrépv§, ptérux):
Bib. references to the wings of birds are common,
esp. in Pss, many of them exquisitely poetical. Often
the wings of an eagle are mentioned because they
are from 7 to 9 ft. in sweep, of untiring flight, and
have strength to carry heavy burdens: so they
became the symbol of strength and endurance.
Ancient monuments and obelisks are covered with
the heads of bulls, lions, different animals, and men
even, to which the wings of an eagle were added to
symbolize strength. Sometimes the wings of a2
stork are used to portray strong flight, as in the
vision of Zechariah: “Then lifted I up mine eyes,
and saw, and, behold, there came forth two women
and the wind was in their wings; now they ha
wings like the wings of a stork; and they lifted
up the ephah between earth and heaven” (6 9).
The wings of a dove symbolized love. Wings in the
abstract typified shelter, strength or speed, as a rule
while in some instances their use was ingenious and
extremely poetical, as when Job records that the
Almighty used wings to indicate migration: ‘And
stretcheth her wings toward the south” (39 26).
In Ps 17 8 there is a wonderful poetical imagery
in the plea, ‘Hide me under the shadow of thy
wings.” In Ps 18 10 there is a reference to ‘‘the
wings of the wind.’ And in 55 6 the Psalmist
cries, “Oh that I had wings like a dove!’ The
brightness and peace of prosperous times are beau-
tifully described in Ps 68 13, ‘the wings of a dove
covered with silver, and her pinions with pale green
gold.’ The first rays of dawn are compared to
“the wings of the morning” (139 9). Solomon was
thinking of the swiftness of wings when he said, ‘‘For
riches certainly make themselves wings, like an
eagle that flieth toward heaven’? (Prov 23 5). So
also was Isaiah in 40 31, “They that wait for Jeh
shall renew their strength; they shall mount up
with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not
be weary; they shall walk, and not faint.” In
Mal 4 2 AV, there is a beautiful reference, “But
unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of right-
eousness arise with healing in his wings.” RV
changes “his” to “its.” Wings as an emblem of
love were used by Jesus in the cry, ‘O Jerusalem

. » how often would I have gathered thy children
.... as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings” (Mt 23 37). GENE StratTron-PorTER


WINK, wink (O77, razam, lit. ‘to roll the eyes’’):
The act or habit of winking was evidently considered
to be evil both in its motives and in its results. The
idea of its facetiousness, prevalent in our day, is
nowhere apparent in the Scriptures. It is men-
tioned frequently, but is always associated with sin
in the OT esp. in the sense of conceit, pride, an
rebellion agamst God: “Why doth thine heart
carry thee away? and what do thy eyes wink at,
that thou turnest thy spirit against God’’ (Job 15
12.13 AV). So also Ps 35 19: “Neither let them
wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.”
“A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh with a
froward mouth. He winketh with his eyes,’ ete
(Prov 6 12.13 AV). “He that winketh with the


3089


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Winebibber
Wisdom


eye causcth sorrow” (10 10). Sce Watkinson, Edu-
cation of the Heart, ‘““Fithics of Gesture,” 194 ff.

In the NT the word is uscd to express the long-
suffering patience aud forgiveness of God toward
erring Israel: ‘“‘And the times of this ignorance God
winked at” (Acts 17 30 AV, brepetiov, hupereidon,
“overlooked,” and so tr? in RV; ef Wisd 11 23;
Ecclus 30 11). The use of “winked” in this con-
nection would in our day, of course, be considered
in bad taste, if not actually irreverent, but it is an
excellent example of the colloquialism of AV.

ARTHUR WaLwyn Evans

WINNOWING, win’o-ing. See AGRICULTURE;

Fan; THRESHING.


WINTER, win’tér (970, héreph, from 215,
haéraph, “‘to inundate,” ‘“overflow”’): The rainy
season, also the autumn harvest season (Gen 8 22;
Ps 74 17; Zec 14 8). It is also the time of cold
(Jer 36 22; Am 315). The vb. “to winter” occurs
in Isa 18 6. Seth@w (NO) has the same meaning as
héreph (Cant 2 11). xeudv, cheimén, corresponds
to horeph as the rainy season, and the vb. rapayer-
udfw, paracheimdzd, signifies “to pass the winter”
(Acts 27 12), the noun from which is tapayepacta
paracheimasia (ib). See Szasons.


WINTER-HOUSE (HINT INS , bah ha-horeph
[Jer 36 22; Am 3 15]): See under SumMMeEerR-
HOUSE. The “‘winter-house’’ in Jer is that of King
Jehoiakim; mention is made of the fire burning in
the brazier.


WISDOM, wiz’dum:


1. Linguistic 6. Remainder of the NT
2. History . (1) James

3. Religious Basis (2) Paul |

4. Ideals 7. Hypostasis

5. Teaching of Christ LirERATURE


In RV the noun “wisdom” and its corresponding
adj. and vb. (‘‘be wise,” ‘‘act wisely,” etc) represent


a variety of Heb words: JR, bin
1. Lin- (N72, binah, and in ERV apn,
guistic tebhinah), 920, sakhal (02W, sékhel,


Sow, sekhel), 22, lébh (and in ERV
325 , labhabh), THON, tashiyah (and in ERV DPD,
tam), MAW, ‘ormah, IPB, pikkeh. None of these,
however, is of very frequent occurrence and by far
the most common group is the vb. BDI], hakham,
with the adj. 09%, hakham, and the nouns MA27} ,
hokhmah, T1027, hokhmoih, with something over
800 oceurrences in the OT (of which rather more
than half are in Job, Prov, and Eccl). Hokhmah,
accordingly, may be treated as the Heb equivalent
for the Eng. ‘‘wisdom,’”’ but none the less the two
words do not quite correspond. For hokhmah may
be used of simple technical skill (Hx 28 3; 35 25,
etc; cf Wisd 14 2; Sir 38 31; note that the EV
gives a false impression in such passages), of military
ability (Isa 10 13), of the intelligence of the lower
animals (Prov 30 24), of shrewdness applied to
vicious (2 § 18 8) or cruel (1 K 2 9 Heb) ends,
etc. Obviously no one Eng. word will cover all
these different uses, but the general meaning is
clear enough—‘‘the art of reaching one’s end by the
use of the right means” (Smend). Predominantly
the “wisdom” thought of is that which comes through
experience, and the “wise man’’ is at his best in old
age (Job 12 12; 15 10; Prov 16 31; Sir 6 34; 8 9;
25 3-6, etc; contrast Job 32 9; Eccl 4 13; Wisd 4
9; Sir 25 2). And in religion the ‘‘wise man”’ is he
who gives to the things of God the same acuteness
that other men give to worldly affairs (Lk 16 8).
He is distinguished from the prophets as not having
personal inspiration, from the priestly school as not


laying primary stress on the cultus, and from the
scribes as not devoted simply to the study of the
sacred writings. But, in the word by itself, a “wise
man’’ need not in any way be a religious man.

In the RV Apoc and NT the words “wisdom,” “wise,”
“act wisely,’ etc, are always tr? of vodds, sophés, or dpdvtuos,
phronimos, or of their cognates. For ‘‘wisdom,’’ however,
copia, sophia, isin almost every case the original word, the


sole exception in the NT being Lk 1 17 (dpévyacs, phré-
nésis). See also PRuDENCE.


(1) In the prophetic period, indeed, ‘‘wise’’ gen-
erally has an irreligious connotation. Israel was
fully sensible that her culture was
2. History beneath that of thesurrounding nations,
but thought of this as the reverse of a
defect. Intellectual power without moral control
was the very fruit of the forbidden tree (Gen 3 5),
and “wisdom” was essentially a heathen quality
(Isa 10 13; 19 12; 47 10; Ezk 28 3-5; Zec 9 2;
specifically Edomite in Jer 49 7; Ob ver 8; con-
trast Bar 3 22.23) that deserved only denunciation
(Isa 6 21; 29 14; Jer 4 22; 9 23: 18 18, etc).
Certainly at this time Israel was endeavoring to
acquire a culture of her own, and there is no reason
to question that Solomon had given it a powerful
stimulus (1 K 4 29-34). But the times were too
distracted and the moral problems too imperative
to allow the more spiritually-minded any oppor-
tunity to cultivate secular learning, so that ‘“‘wis-
dom” in Israel took on the unpleasant connotation
of the quality of the shrewd court counselors, with
their half-heathen advice (Isa 28 14-22, etc).
And the associations of the word with true religion
are very few (Dt 4 6; Jer 8 8), while Dt 32 6;
Jer 4 22; 8 9 have a satirical sound—‘what men
call “wisdom” is really folly!’ So, no matter how
much material may have gathered during this
period (see PROVERBS), it is to the post-exilic com-
munity that we are to look for the formation of a
body of Wisdom literature really associated with
Israel's religion.

(2) The factors that produced it were partly the
same as those that produced scribism (see Scrise).
Life in Pal was lived only on the sufferance of for-
eigners and must have been dreary in the extreme.
Under the firm hand of Persia there were no political
questions, and im later times the nation was too
weak to play any part in the conflicts between An-
tioch and Alexandria. Prophecy had about dis-
appeared, fulfilment of the Messianic hope seemed
too far off to affect thought deeply, and the condi-
tions were not yct ripe that. produced the later
flame of apocalyptic enthusiasm. Nor were there
vital religious problems within the nation, now that
the fight against idolatry had becn won and the
ritual reforms established. Artistic pursuits were
forbidden (cf esp. Wisd 16 4-6), and the Jewish
temperament was not of a kind that could produce
a speculative philosophy (note the sharp polemic
against metaphysics, etc, in Sir 3 21-24). It was
in this period, to be sure, that Jewish commercial
genius began to assert itself, but there was no sat-
isfaction in this for the more spiritually-minded (Sir
26 29). So, on the one hand, men were thrown
back on the records of the past (scribism), while on
the other the problems of religion and life were
studied through sharp observation of Nature and of
mankind. And the recorded results of the latter
method form the Wisdom literature.

(3) In this are included Job, Prov, and Eccl, with
certain Pss (notably 19, 37, 104, 107, 147, 148); in
the Apoc must be added Sir and Wisd, with part of
Bar; while of the other writings of the period parts
of Philo, 4 Macc, and the Ahikar legend belong
here also. How far foreign influence was at work it
is hard to say. Egypt had a Wisdom literature of
her own (see Ecyrt) that must have been known to


Wisdom


some degree in Pal, while Babylonia and Persia
could not have been entirely without effeet—but
no specific dependence can be shown in any of these
cases. For Greece the case is clearer, and Gr in-
fluence is obvious in Wisd, despite the particularistic
smugness of the author. But there was vitality
enough in Judaism to explain the whole movement
without recourse to outside influences, and, in any
case, it is most arbitrary and untrue to attribute all
the Wisdom speculation to Gr forces (as, e.g., does
Siegfried, HDB).

The following characteristics are typical of the

group: (1) The premises are universal. The writers

draw from life wherever found, ad-
3. Religious mitting that in some things Israel may
Basis learn from other nations. The Prov-

erbs of Lemuel are referred explicitly
to a non-Jewish author (Prov 31 1 RVm), and Sir
recommends foreign travel to his students (34 10.11;
39 4). Indeed, all the princes of the earth rule
through wisdom (Prov 8 16; ef Eccl 9 15). And
even some real knowledge of God can be obtained
by all men through the study of natural phenomena
(Ps 19 1; Sir 16 29—17 14; 42 15—43 33; Wisd
13 2.9; cf Rom 1 20).

(2) But some of the writers dissent here (Job 28
28; 11 7; Eccl 2 11; 8 16.17; 11 5; Wisd 9 18[?]).
And in any case this wisdom needs God’s explicit
grace for its cultivation (Sir 61 13-22; Wisd 7 7;
8 21), and when man trusts simply to his own attain-
ments he is bound to go wrong (Prov 3 5-7; 19 21;
21 30; 28 11; Sir 3 24; 6 2.3; 6 2; 10 12; Bar
3 15-28). True wisdom must center about God
(Prov 16 33; 19 20f), starting from Him (Prov 1 7;
9 10; Ps 111 10; Sir 21 11; Job 28 28) and ending
in Him (Prov 2 5); cf esp. the beautiful passage
Sir 1 14-20. But the religious attitude is far from
being the whole of Wisdom. The course is very
difficult (Prov 2 4f; 4 7; Sir 4 17; 14 22.23; Wisd
1 5; 17 1); continual attention must be given every
department of life, and man is never done learning
(Prov 9 9; Sir 6 18; Eccl 4 18).

(3) The attitude toward the written Law varies. In
Eccl, Job and Provitis hardly mentioned (Prov 28 7—9[ 7]:
29 18[?]). Wisd, as a special pamphlet against idolatry,
has little occasion for specific reference, hut its high esti-
mate of the Law is clear enough (2 12-15; 18 9). _ Sir,
esp., can find no terms high enough for the praise of the
Law (esp. chs 24, 86; cf{9 15; 21 11, etc), and hc identifies
the Law with Wisdom (24 23-25) and claims the prophets
as Wisdom teachers (44 3.4). et this perverse identi-
fication hetrays the fact that Sir's interest is not derived
from a real study of the Law; the Wisdom that was so
precious to him must be in the sacred books! Cf Bar 4 1
(rather more sincere).

(4) The attitude toward the temple-worship is much
the same. The rites are approved (Prov 3 9; Sir 35
4-8; 38 11; Sir seems to have an especial interest in the

riesthood, 7 29-33; 50 5-21), hut the writers clearly

fave no theory of sacrifice that they can utilize for prac-
tical purposes. Aud for sacrifice (and even prayer,
Prov 28 9) as a suhstitute for righteousness no condem-
nation is too strong (Prov 7_ 14; 15 8; 20 25; 21 3.27;
Sir 34 18-26; 35 1-3.12; Eccl 5 1).

(5) An outlook on life beyond the grave is notably
absent in the Wisdom literature. Wisd is the only
exception’ (3 1, etc), but Gr influence in Wisd is
perfectly certam. In Job there are expressions of
confidence (14 13-15; 19 25-29), but these do not
determine the main argument of the book. Prov
does not raise the question, while Eccl and Sir
categorically deny immortality (Eccl 9 2-10; Sir
14 16; 17 27.28; 30 4; note that RV in Sir 7 17;
48 11 is based on a glossed text; ef the Heb).
Even the Messianic hope of the nation is in the back-
ground in Prov (2 21.22 [?]), and it is altogether
absent in Job and Eccl. To Sir (86 19; 36 11-14;
47 22) and Wisd (3 8; 5 16-23) it is important,
however, but not even these works have anything
to say of a personal Messiah (Sir 47 22 [?]).

(6) That in all the literature the individual is


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3090


the center of interest need not be said. But this
individualism, when combined with the weak es-
chatology, brought dire confusion into the doctrme
of retribution (see Sin). Sir stands squarely by
the old doctrine of retribution in this life: if at no
other time, a man’s sins will be punished on_his
deathbed (1 13; 11 26). Neither Job nor Eccl,
however, are content with this solution. The latter
leaves the problem entirely unsolved (8 14, etc),
while the former commends it to God’s unsearchable
ways. ;
The basis of the Wisdom method may be de-
scribed then as that of a “natural” religion respect-

ing revelation, but not making much
4. Ideals use of it. So the ideal is a man who
believes in God and who endeavors to
live according to a prudence taught by observation
of this world’s laws, with due respect, however, to
Israel’s traditional observances.

(1) From many standpoints the resulting char-
acter is worthy of admiration. The man was in-
telligent, earnest, and hard-working (Prov has a
particular contempt for the “sluggard”’; and cf
Eccl 9 10). Lying and injustice are denounced
on almost every page of the literature, and unceasing
emphasis is lad on the necessity for benevolence
(Ps 37 21; 112 5.9; Job 22 7; 31 16-20; Prov
3 27.28: 14 31; 21 13; 22 9; Eccl 11 1; Sir4 1-
6; 7 34.35; 29 11-13: 40 24, etc). All of the
writers feel that life is worth the iving—at their
most pessimistic moments the writers of Job and Eccl
find attraction in the contemplation of the world.
In Prov and Sir the outlook is even buoyant, Sir in
especial being far from indifferent to the good things
of life (30 23-25; 31 27; cf Eccl 2 24 and contrast
Wisd 2 6-9).

(2) The faults of the Wisdom ideal are the faults
of the postulates. The man is always self-conscious
and self-centered. All intense enthusiasms are
repressed, as likely to prove entangling (Eccl 7 16.
17 is the most extreme case), and the individual is
always calculating (Sir 38 17), even among his
friends (Sir 6 13; Prov 26 17) and in his family
(Sir 33 19-23). Benevolence itself is to be exer-
cised cireumspectly (Prov 6 1-5; 20 16; Sir 12
5-7; 29 18), and Sir, in particular, is very far from
feeling an obligation to love all men (25 7; 27 24;
30 6; 50 25.26). So “right’’ and ‘‘wrong’”’ become
confused with “advantage” and “disadvantage.”
Not only is adultery wrong (Prov 2 17; Sir 23 23),
but the injured husband is a dangerous enemy
(Prov 6 9-11.14; 6 34.35; Sir 23 21). As a re-
sult the “moral perspective” is affected. With
some of the finest moral observations in Prov and
Sir are combined instructions as to table manners
(Prov 23 1-3; Sir 31 12-18) and merely humorous
observations (Prov 20 14), while such passages as
Prov 22 22-28 and Sir 41 17-24 contain extraor-
dinary conglomerations of disparate motives.

(3) So hope of earthly recompense becomes a very
explicit motive (Prov 3 10; 11 25, etc; Wisd 7
8-12 is the best statement on the other side). Even
though riches are nothing in themselves (Prov 10 2;
11 28; 23 4.5; 28 11; Eccl 6 13; Sir 11 19; 34
5-7; all the literature denounces the unrighteous
rich), yet Wisdom is to be desired as bringing not
only righteousness but riches also (Prov 8 21; 11
25; 13 18; Sir 4 15; 20 27.28; Wisd 6 21). This
same desire for advantage gives an unpleasant turn
to many of the precepts which otherwise would
touch the highest point; perhaps Prov 24 17.18 is
the most extreme case: ‘Rejoice not when thine
enemy falleth,.... lest Jeh.... turn away
his wrath from him” (!)

(4) But probably the most serious fault was that
the Wisdom method tended to produce a religious
aristocracy (Sir 6 22, etc). It was not enough that


3091


the heart and will should be right, for a long course
of almost technical training was needed (the “house
of instruction” in Sir 61 23 is probably the school;
cf Prov 9 4). The uninstructed or ‘‘simple”’ (Prov
1 22, ete) were grouped quite simply with the
“sinners”; knowledge was virtue and ignorance was
vice. Doubtless Wisdom cried in the streets (Prov
1 20.21; 8 1-13; 9 1-6, almost certainly a refer-
ence to the canvassing efforts of the teachers for
pupils), but only men of ability and leisure could
obey the call to learn. And despite all that is said
in praise of manual labor (Prov 12 11; 24 27; 28
19; Sir 7 15; 38 31.32.34), Sirach is merely frank
when he says explicitly (88 25-34) that Wisdom
cannot be for artisans (a carpenter as Messiah evi-
dently would have been unthinkable to Sir; Mk 6
3). Scribism was at work along the same lines of
development, and the final union of the Wisdom
method with the scribal produced a class who called
the common people accursed (Jn 7 49).
The statement of the methods and ideals of the
Wisdom school is also virtually a statement of Our
Lord’s attitude toward it and an ex-
6. Teaching planation of why much of His teaching
of Christ took the form it did. As to the uni-
versality of the premises He was at
one with the Wisdom writers, one great reason for
the universality of the appeal of His teaching.
Almost everything in the life of the time, from the
lily of the field to the king on his throne, contributed
its quota to His illustrations. And from the Wis-
dom method also the form of His teaching—the con-
cise, antithetical saying that sticks in the memory—
was derived to some degree. (Of all the sayings of
Christ, perhaps Lk 14 8-10—a quotation of Prov
25 6.7—comes nearest to the pure Wisdom type.)
In common with the Wisdom writers, also, is
the cheerful outlook, despite the continual pros-
pect of the Passion, and we must never forget
that all morbid asceticism was entirely foreign to
Him (Lk 7 34 || Mt 11.19). With the self-con-
scious, calculating product of the Wisdom method,
however, He had no patience. Give freely, give
as the Father giveth, without regard to self, in
no way seeking a reward, is the burden of His
teaching, and such a passage as Lk 6 27-38 seems
to have been aimed at the head of such writers as
Sir. The attack on the religious aristocracy is too
familiar to need recapitulation. Men by continual
exercise of worldly prudence could make themselves
as impervious to His teaching as by obstinate ad-
herence to a scribal tradition, while His message was
for all men on the sole basis of a desire for righteous-
ness on their part. This was the true Wisdom, fully
justified of her children (Lk 7 35; ef Mt 11 19),
while, as touching the other ‘‘Wisdom,” Christ
could give thanks that God had seen fit to hide His
mysteries from the wise and prudent and reveal
them unto “babes” (Lk 10 21 || Mt 11 25).
(1) The remainder of the NT, despite many
occurrences of the words ‘‘wise,”’ ‘“‘wisdom,” ete,
contains very little that is really rele-
6. Re- vant to the technical sense of the words.
mainder The one notable exception is Jas, which
ofthe NT has even been classed as ‘Wisdom
literature,’ and with some Justice.
For Jas has the same appeal to observation of
Nature (1 11; 3 3-6.11.12; 5 7, etc), the same
observation of human life (2 2.3.15.16; 4 13, etc),
the same antithetical form, and even the same
technical use of the word “wisdom” (15; 3 15-
17). The fiery moral zeal, however, is far above that
of the other Wisdom books, even above that of Job.
(2) St. Paul, on the other hand, belongs to an
entirely different class, that of intense religious
experience, seeking its premises in revelation. So
the Wisdom method is foreign to him and the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Wisdom


absence of Nature illustrations from his pages is
notorious (even Rom 11 17 is an artificially con-
structed figure). Only one passage calls for
special comment. The “wisdom” against which he
inveighs in 1 Cor 1-3 is not Jewish but Gr—
speculation in philosophy, with studied elegance in
rhetoric. Still, Jewish or Gr, the moral difficulty
was thesame. God’s message was obscured through
an overvaluation of human attainments, and so St.
Paul’s use of such OT passages as Isa 29 14; Job
6 13; Ps 94 11 Gn 1 Cor 119; 8 19.20) 1s en-
tirely just. Against this ‘wisdom’? St. Paul sets
the doctrine of the Cross, something that outraged
every human system but which, all the more, taught
man his entire dependence on God.

(3) Yet St. Paul had a “wisdom’’ of his own
(1 Cor 2 6), that he taught to Christians of mature
moral (not intellectual: 3 1-3) progress. Some
commentators would treat this wisdom as doctrinal
and find it in (say) Rom; more probably it is to
be connected with the mystical experiences of the
Christian whose life has become fully controlled by
the Spirit (1 Cor 2 10-13). For religious progress
is always accompanied by a higher insight that can
never be described satisfactorily to persons without
the same experience (2 14).

(1) One characteristic of the Wisdom writers
that proved of immense significance for later (esp.
Christian) theology was a love of rhe-
torical personification of Wisdom (Prov
1 20-33; 8 1—9 6; Sir 4 11-19; 6 23-
31; 14 20—16 10; 24; 61 13-21; Wisd
6 12—9 18; Bar 3 29-32). Such personifications
in themselves are not, of course, remarkable (cf
e.g. the treatment of “dove” in 1 Cor 13), but the
studied, somewhat artificial style of the Wisdom
writers carries out the personification with a curious
elaboration of details: _Wisdom builds her house,
marries her disciple, mingles wine, etc. The most
famous passage is Proy 8 22-31, however. The
Wisdom that is so useful to man was created before
man, before, indeed, the creation of the world. When
the world was formed she was in her childhood, and
while God formed the world she engaged in childish
play, under His shelter and to His delight. So ver
30 should be rendered, as the context makes clear
that ’mwn should be pointed amin, ‘‘sheltered,”’ and
not ’amén, ‘‘asa,master-workman.’”” And “Wisdom”
is a quality of man (8 31-36), not a quality of God.

(2) Indeed, “Wisdom” is an attribute rarely predi-
cated of God in the OT (1 K 3 28; Isa 10 13; 31 2;
Jer 10 12; 61 15; cf Dnl 5 11), even in the Wisdom
writers (Job § 12ff; 9 4; Ps 104 24; Prov 3 19).
Partly this reticence seems to he due to a feeling that
God's knowledge is hardly to he compared in kind to
man's, partly to the fact that to the earlier writers ‘‘ Wis-
dom” had a profane sound. Later works, however, have
less hesitation in this regard (e.g., Sir 42 21; Bar 3 32,
the MT pointing and LXX of Prov 8 30), so that the

ersonifications became personifications of 2 quality of
Bod The result was one of the factors that operated
to produce the doctrine of the ‘‘ Word" as it appeared in
the Palestinian form (see Locos).

(3) In the Apoc, however, the most advanced step is
taken in Wisd. Wisdom is the only-begotten_of God
(7 22), the effulgence of eternal light (7 26; cf He 1 3),
living with God (8 3) and sharing aa His throne (9 4).
She is the origin (or ‘“‘mother'’) of all creatures (7 12;
ef 8 6), continually active in penetrating (7 24), ordering
(8 1), and renewing (7 27) all things, while carrying
inspiration to all holy souls (7 23), esp. to Israel (10 17.
18). Here there Is no douht that the personification
has ceased to be rhetorical and has hecome real. Wis-
dom is thought of as a heavenly heing, not so distinctively
personal, perhaps, as an angel, hut none the less far
more than a mere rhetorical term, i.e. she is a “hypos-
tasis.”’

(4) Most of Wisd’s description is simply an expansion
of earlier Palestinian concepts, but it is evident that
other influence has been at work also and that that in-
finence was Greek. The writer of Wisd was touched

enuinely hy the Gr philosophy, and in 7 24,at any rate,
his “Wisdom” is the idgos spermatikéds of the Stoics,
with more than suspicions of Gr _ influence_ else-
where in the descriptions. This combination of Jewish


7. Hypos-
tasis


Wisdom Lit.
Wisd of Solomon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3092


and Gr thought was still further elahorated by Philo—
and still further confused. For Philo endeavored to
operate with the Wisdom doctrine in its Palestinian form,
the Wisdom doctrine into which Wisd had already in-
fused some Logos doctrine, and the Logos doctrine by
itself, without thoroughly understanding the discordant
character of his terms. The result is one of the most
obscure passages in Philo's system. Sometimes, as in
De Fug. §109, ch xx, Wisdom is the mother of the Logos,
as God is its Father (cf Cherub., §§49, 50, ch xiv), while,
again, the relation can be inverted almost in the same
context and the Logos appears as the source of Wisdom
(De Fug. §97, ch xviii). See Looos.

(5) Philo's influence was incalculable, and Wisdom, as
a heavenly power, plays an almost incredible réle in
the gnostic speculations of the 2d and 3d cents., the
gnostic work Pistts Sophia probably attaining the climax
of unreality. The orthodox Fathers, however, naturally
sought Wisdom within the Trinity, and Irenaeus made
an identification with the Holy Spirit (iv. 20,3). Ter-
tullian, on the other hand, identified Wisdom with the
Son (prohably following earlier precedent) in 4dv. Praz.,
7, and this identification attained general acceptation.
So Prov 8 22-30 hecame a locus classicus in the Christ-
ological controversies (an elaborate exposition in Atha-
nasius, Orat. ii.16-22), and persisted as a dogmatic
proof-text until a very modern period.

Literature The OT Theologies, particularly those
of Smend, ed 2 (1899), and Bertholet (1911). For the
intermediate period, GJV, III, ed 4 (1909), and Bousset,
Die Religion des Judentums, ed 2 (1906). Special works:
Toy, ‘‘ Wisdom Literature,’’ HB, IV_ (1903); Meinhold,
Die Weisheit Israels (1908); Friedlander, Griechische
Philosophie im AT (1904, to be used cautiously). On
Philo, cf_esp. Drummond, Philo Judaeus, II, 201-13
(1888). See also the arts. on the various books and cf
Locos; Pxito Jupats.

Burton Scorr Easton
WISDOM LITERATURE, lit’ér-a-tir. See pre-


ceding article.


WISDOM OF GOD (codla, sophia): Lk 11 49
reads: ‘Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I
will send unto them prophets and apostles; and
some of them they shall kill and persecute.” The
patristic and many later commentators, on the
basis of the parallel in Mt 23 34, took ‘wisdom of
God” here to be a self-designation of Christ—an
interpretation, however, that is obviously impossible.
Somewhat similar is the view (Meyer) that treats
the words as a Lukan designation of Christ, with
the assumption that Luke here remtroduces Christ
as the speaker in order to give solemnity to the
judgment pronounced. But this is_ ineredibly
awkward and has no parallel in the Lukan use for
even more solemn passages. Much simpler is the
interpretation (Hofmann, B. Weiss, Plummer) that
regards Christ as announcing here a decree formed
by God in the past. But it is the behavior of the
present generation that is in point (cf Lk 13 8.9;
20 18; altogether different is Lk 10 21). And
the circumstantial wording of what follows is in-
appropriate for such a decree, is without parallel
in Christ’s teaching, and implies rather a written
source. In the OT, however, no passage exists that
resembles this (Prov 1 20-31 [so Godet] is quite
out of the question). So many exegetes (Holtz-
mann, J. Weiss, Loisy, Harnack) find here a quota-
tion from some lost source that Our Lord approved
and that was familiar to His hearers. This is cer-
tainly the most natural explanation. Nor can it
be said to be impossible that Christ recognized
genuine prophetic inspiration in some writing that
was meant to have transitory value only and not
to be preserved for future generations. Perhaps
this bore the title “Wisdom of God’’ or represented
‘Wisdom’ as speaking, as in Prov 1 22-33.

Burron Scotr Easton
WISDOM OF JESUS. See Siracu.


WISDOM OF SOLOMON, THE:


I. Name
II. Canonicity
III. Contents
1. The Wisdom Section
2. The Historical Section
IV. Litsrary Form


V. Unity ano IntseRity
VI. Tsacuine
- Theology
. Anthropology
. Deontology
. Hamartiology
. Soteriology
6. Eschatology
VII. Arm
. AUTHOR
IX. Dars
1. Literary
2. Historical
3. Philosophical
. OrrGinaL LANGUAGE
XI. Uss or Wispom sy CuRisTIsN WRITERS
XII. Tsxt anp VERSIONS
1. Latin
2. Syriac
LITERATURE

LL. Name.—In the Gr MSS (B A &, etc) the book
is called ‘‘The Wisdom of Solomon” (Zopia Zarw-
paves, Sophia Salaménos, the form of the latter
word varying in the best MSS). In the Syr (Pesh)
its title is “The Book of the Great Wisdom of
Solomon.” Solomon was among the Jews and the
early Christians the patron of didactic, as David
was of lyrical, and Moses of religious-legal, literature,
and their names came to be associated with literary
compositions with which they had nothing to do.
We read in the OT of the wisdom of Solomon (1 K
3 7-14; of Sir 47 12-18 [14-19]), and the whole
of the Book of Prov is called by his name, though
he is at most the author of but a part. Solomon
speaks in the first person in this book (chs 6-9), as
he does in Eeel (1 12 ff), for that he 1s made the
speaker until the close of ch 9 is made certain by
7 1ff; 9 2ff. As long as he was thought to be
the composer of this book it continued to be called
“The Wisdom of Solomon” among the Jews and
the early Christians.

Influenced by the Gr thought and style of the book,
Jerome came to the conclusion that Solomon was not
its author and he accordingly altered its title to ‘‘The
Book of Wisdom” (Liber samientiae), and it is this desig-
nation that the book bears in the Vulg and the VSS
made from it, though in the Protestant trs (Ger., Eng.,
Welsh, etc) the title ‘‘The Wisdom of Solomon” is con-
tinued, as these follow the Gr VS and not the Lat.
Luther's title is ‘‘The Wisdom of Solomon to Tyrants”
(Die Wetsheit Salomos an die hee Epiphanius
and Athanasius quote the book under the name “‘All-
Virtuous Wisdom” (Ilavdperos Zodia, Pandretes Sophta),
a title by which Prov and Sir are also known in the writ-
ings of some of the Fathers.


Il. Canonicity.—In the MSS and edd of the Gr
Bible and in the Vulg, EV, etc, Wisd follows Prov,
Eccl and Cant, and is followed by Sir. Some of
the Fathers, believing the book to be by Solomon,
thought it Divinely inspired and therefore canoni-
cal; so Hippolytus, Cyprian, Ambrose, etc. Other
Fathers, though denying the Solomonian author-
ship of the book, yet accorded it canonical rank; so
Origen, Eusebius, Augustine, etc. On the other
hand there were some in the early church who re-
fused to acknowledge the book as in any way
authoritative in matters of doctrine. The Council
of Trent included it with the rest of the Protestant
Apoce (except 1 and 2 Esd and Pr Man) in the
Canon, so that the Romanist Bible includes, but
the Protestant Bible excludes, it.

I, Contents.—The book is made up of two main
parts so different as to suggest difference of author-
ship. (1) The wisdom section (1 1—11 4): In this
part the writer describes and commends Wisdom,
warning his readers against neglecting it. (2) The
historical section (11 5—19 22).

(1) Righteousness (i.e. Wisdom in operation) leads
to immortality, unrighteousness to death (ch 1).

(2) Contrasted fortunes of the wise (righteous) and
unwise (ungodly) (2 1—6 21).—(a) Sensual pleas-
ures issue in death while God intended all men
to live spiritually (ch 2); (6) the lot of the wise
(righteous) is a happy one. Their sufferings are


oR WN et


3093


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Wisdom Lit.


Wisd of Solomon


disciplmary and remedial; they shall live forever
and reign hereafter over the nations (Gentiles)


(3 1-9); (c) but the lot of the wicked


1, The and of their children is a miserable
Wisdom one; the wise (righteous) shall be happy
Section, though childless (3 10-19); (d) virtu-
1:1—11:4 ous childlessness secures immortality


before guilty parenthood (4 1-6); (e)
though the wise (righteous) die early, yet they have
rest in their death, and accomplish their life mission
in the allotted time (cf Enoch) (4 7-14); (f) the un-
godly (unwise) shall come to a wretched end: then
they shall see and envy the prosperity of the right-
eous. Though they shall pass tracelessly away, the
righteous shall rejoice in a life that is endless (4
15—5 23); (g) kings ought therefore to rule accord-
eke ioe and thus attain to immortality

(3) Wisdom.—Speaking in the name of Solomon,
the writer praises Wisdom and commends it to
kings (‘‘judges” = “rulers” in 6 1, is but a synonym)
(6 1—11 4). (a) All men come into the world
with the same universal need of Wisdom which leads
to true kingship and immortality (6 1-25); (6) I
(Solomon) sought Wisdom as the main thing and in
obtaining it had along with it every good thing, in-
cluding knowledge of every kind (7 1—8 21);
(c) the prayer which Solomon offered for Wisdom
(9 1-18); (d) how Wisdom defended the heroes of
Heb history, from the first man, Adam, to the Israel-
ites at the Red Sea and in the wilderness (10 1—

1 4).

In this second part of the hook Solomon no longer

speaks in the first person (as in chs 6-9), nor is Wisdom


once mentioned or for certain referred to,
though most writers see in this part the


2. The attempt of the author of 1 1—11 4 to
Historical exemp ify in concrete instances the work-
Section, ing of that Wisdom of which in the first


41:6—19:22 part he describes the nature and issues.
i alg (1) Contrasted treatment hy God (not
Wisdom) of the Israelites and their. foes
(11 5—12). By what things their foes were punished
they were henefited (11 5). (a) The Egyptians (11 5—
12 2): Water a boon to Israel, a hane to Eeypt (11 6-
14). The Egyptians punished by the animals they wor-
shipped (11 15-20), though there was a relenting on
God’s part that sinners might repent (11 2112.2). (b)
The Canaanites (12 3-27): The abominations of the
worship and the Divine punishment with the lessons this
last teaches.

(2) Idolatry descrihed and condemned (chs 13-15).
These chapters form a unity in themselves, a digression
from the historical survey closed with 12 27 and con-
tinued in 16 1—19. The digression may of course be
due to the allusion in 11_5—12 to the sins of the Egyp-
tians and Canaanites. Kinds of alice: (a) Nature-
worship (fire, wind, air, water, heavenly hodies), due
often to sincere desire to find out God (13 1-9); (b)
worship of idols in animal form, a much grosser sin (13
10-19); (c) God’s indignation against all forms of idolatry
(14 1-11); (d) origin of image-worship (14 15-21);
the father mourning for his deceased son makes an image
of him and then worships it (14 15); rulers are often
fiattered and then deified (14 16f); artists often make
images so attractive as to tempt men to regard them as
gods (14 18-21); (e) immoral results of idolatry: “The
worship of idols . .. . a heginning and cause and end
of every evil” (ver 27) (14 22-31); (/) Israel was free
from idolatry and in consequence enjoyed the Divine
favor (15 1-5); (g) the folly of idolatry: the image man
made less capable than man its maker and worshipper,
the Egyptians the worst offenders (15 6-19).

(3) In five different respects the fortunes of Egypt and
Israel in the past are contrasted, Nature using slmilar
means to punish the Egyptians and to reward the Israel-
ites (16—19 22), viz. in respect of the following: (a
animals, quail (vs 1-4) and fiery serpents (vs 5-14) (1
1-14); (b) fire and water, heat and cold (16 15-29); (c)
light and darkness (17 1—18 4); @) death (18 5-25);
(e) passage of the Red Sea (19 1-22).


IV. Literary Form.—There is not so much mani-
fest poetry in this book as in Sir, though there is a
large amount of genuine poetry characterized by
parallelism, but not by meter in the ordinary sense
of the term. In parts of the book, which must be
pronounced prose, parallelism is nevertheless often
found (see 10 1 ff). There are far fewer epigram-


matic sentences in Wisd than in Sir, but on the
other hand there is a far greater number of other
rhetorical devices, assonances (1 10; 4 2; 5 15;
7 18), alliterations (2 23; 6 12.18; 6 11; 12 15),
antitheses (13 18 f), etc. See for details Speaker's
Apoc (Farrar), I, 404 ff.

V. Unity and Integrity.—Nearly all writers on
the book believe it to be one homogeneous whole,
the work of one mind. They point for proof to the
fact that the whole book is a consistent whole di-
rected against the two evils, apostasy and idolatry;
that the language is from beginning to end uniform,
such as one writer would be likely to employ.

For a statement of contrary views and_a aes to them
see the Comm. of Grimm, pp. 9-15. Until about the
middle of the 18th cent. no doubt had been expressed
as regards the unity of the book. (1) Houbigant (Notae
crificae tn untversos NT libros, 1777, 169) divided the
hook into two parts: chs 1-9 written by Solomon in Heb,
chs 10-19 composed in Gr at a later time, perhaps by the
tr into Gr of chs 1-9. Against the Solomonian author-
ship see VIII, helow, and against a Heh original see X,
below. Doederlein adopted Houbigant’s division of the
hook, denying, however, the Solomonian authorship.
(2) Hichhorn (Hinleitung in das NT, 142 ff) divided the
book also into two parts: chs 1-1] and 11 2—19. He


held that the whole was composed in Gr by two different


writers or by the same writer at different times. (3)


Nachtigal (Das Buch der Weishett, 1799) went much
farther, holding that the book is nothing more than an
anthology, but he has had no followers in this. (4)
Bretschneider (De lib. Sap., 1804) ascribes the book to
three principal authors and to a final editor. 1—6 8 was
composed in Heb in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes (d.
164 BC) by a Palestinian Jew, though it is an excerpt
from a larger work; 6 9—10 is the work of an Alexan-
drian Jew, a contemporary of Our Lord; ch 11 was in-
serted by the final editor as seemingly necessary to con-
nect parts 2 and 3; chs 9 were written about the
same time hy a Jewish partisan of slender education and
narrow sympathies.

Summary.—Perhaps, on the whole, the argu-
ments in favor of the unity of the book outweigh
those against it. But the evidence is by no means
decisive. The Wisdom section (1 1—11 4) isa much
finer bit of writing than the rest of the book, and it
bears the general characteristics of the Wisdom
literature. Yet even within this larger unity chs
6-9 stand out from the rest, since only in them is
Solomon made to speak in the first person (cf Eccl
1 12 ff); but these four chapters agree with the rest
of the Wisdom section in other respects. Within
the historical section (11 5—19 22) chs 13-15 stand
together as if a separate treatise on idolatry (see
III, above), though if originally independent an
editor has logically joined ch 16 to ch 12; ef “for”
(yép, gdér), “etc” (13 1). Indeed the book in its
present form is made at least externally one, though
it is not absolutely certain whether or not this
external unity is due to editorial revision. Some
scholars have maintained that the book as it stands
is a torso (so Eichhorn, etc). Calmet infers this
from the fact that the historical sketch closes with
the entrance of the Israelites into Canaan. Others
say that the writer’s sketch was cut short by some
unforeseen event (Grotius, Eichhorn), or that the
remainder of the once complete work has been lost
in transmission (Heydenreich). But on the other
hand it must be remembered that the writer’s record
is limited by his purpose, and that the history of the
Egyptians supplies an admirable and adequate
illustration of the wickedness and calamitous results
of unfaithfulness to God and His law.

VI. Teaching.—In the treatment of this section
it is assumed with some hesitation that the book is
throughout the work of one man. The following
is a brief statement of the teaching of this book con-
cerning theology, anthropology, deontology, ha-
martiology, soteriology, and eschatology.

Theology in the strict sense, i.e. the doctrine about
God: God is incomparably powerful (11 21 f), omni-
present (17; 12 1) and all-loving (41 24). He
made the world out of formless matter (11 17, the


Wisd of Solomon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3094


doctrine of the Alexandrian Judaism). He did not
create the world out of nothing as the OT (Gen 1

1 ff) and even Sir teach (see Srracu,
1. Theol- Booxor,IV,1). The author’s highest
ogy conception of creation is the conversion
of chaos into cosmos. It is the order
and beauty of the universe that amaze the writer,
not the stupendous power required to make such a
universe out of nothing (11 20; 13 3). Though
God is said to be just (12 15), kind (4 13; 11 17-26;
12 13-16; 15 1; 16 7), and is even addressed as
Father (14 3), yet He is in a unique sense the
Favorer and Protector of Israel (16 2; 18 8; 19
22); yet according to 12 2-20 even the calamities
He hears up upon the foes of Israel were designed
to lead them to repentance (12 2-20), though in
chs 11f we are clearly taught that while the suffer-
ings of the Israelites were remedial, those of their
enemies were purely penal. The conception of God
in Wisd agrees on the whole with that of Alexandrian
Judaism (c 100 BC); i.e. it lays principal stress on
His transcendence, His infinite aloofness from man
and the material world. We have therefore in this
book the beginning of the doctrine of intermediaries
which issued in Philo’s Powers, the media through
which the Absolute One comes into definite relation
with men. nt

(1) Spirit of the Lord.—In Wisd as in the later
books of the OT (exilic and post-exilic), the expres-
sion “the Spirit of the Lord” denotes the person of
God. What God does is done by the Spirit. Thus
it is His Spirit that fills and sustains the world, that
observes all human actions (1 7f), that is present
everywhere (12 1). Wisdom does not hypostatize
“the Spirit of the Lord,” making it an intermediary
between God and His creatures, but the way is
prepared for this step.

(2) Wisdom.—Much that is said of the Spirit of
the Lord in this book is said of Wisdom, but much
more, and there is a much closer approach to
hypostatization in the case of Wisdom. At the
creation of the world Wisdom was with God (cf
Prov 8 22-31), sat by His throne, knew His
thoughts and was His associate (8 3; 9 4.9), made
all things, taught Solomon the Wisdom for which
he prayed (7 22); all powerful, seeing all things
(7 23), pervading all things (7 24), an effluence
of the glory of the Almighty (7 25); she teaches
sobriety, understanding, righteousness and courage
(8 7, the four cardinal virtues of the Stoic phi-
losophy). For detailed account of the conception
of Wisdom in this book see WispoM.

(3) The Logos.—In Philo the Logos is the inter-
mediary power next to Deity, but in Wisd the term
keeps to the OT sense, “word,” that by which God
addresses men. It never means more, though some
hold (Gfrérer, Philo, ete,I, 225 ff) that in Wisd 9
1f; 12.9; 16 12; 18 22, Logos has the technical
sense which it bears in Philo; but a careful exam-
ination of the passages shows that nothing more
than “word” is meant (see Locos). The only
other superhuman beings mentioned in the book are
the gods of the Gentiles which are distinctly de-
clared to be nonentities, the product of man’s folly
(14 13£), and the devil who is, however, but once
referred to as identical with the serpent of Gen 3.
The book does not once speak of a Canon of Scrip-
ture or of any Divine revelation to man in written
form, though it often quotes from the Pent and
occasionally from Isa and Pss, never, however,
naming them. Wisd is thus much more universal-
istic and in harmony with Wisdom literature than
Sir, which identifies Wisd with the Law and the
Prophets and has other distinctly Jewish features.

In its psychology Wisd follows the dichotomy of
Platonisni. Man has but two parts, soul and body
(14; 8 19f; 9 15), the word soul (yux%, psuché)


including the reason (vos, novs) and the spirit
(wvetya, pneima). Wisd 16 11 is the only passage
which seems to teach the doctrine of
2. Anthro- the trichotomy of man, but in reality
pology it does nothing of the kind, for the par-
allelism shows that by “soul” and
“spirit”? the same thingis meant. Philo teaches the
same doctrine (see Drummond, Philo, etc, I, 316 ff).
Man’s soul is breathed into the body (15 11; cf
Gen 27) and taken back again by God (16 8).
The writer adopts the Platonic theory of the pre-
existence of souls (8 20; cf 15 8.11.16), which in-
volves the belief in a kind of predestmation, for
the previous doings of the soul determine the kind
of body into which it enters. Solomon’s soul, being
good, entered an undefiled body (8 20). R. H.
Charles (Eschatology, etc, 254f) is hardly correct
when he says that according to Wisd (1 4, 9 15,
etc) matter is inherently sinful. This doctrine was
definitely taught by Philo, who accepted Heraclitus’
epigram, tGua ofue, séma séma, “The body is a
tomb.” So it issaid (12 10; 13 1) that man is by
nature evil, his wickedness being inborn. But if
he sins it is his own affair, for he is free (1 16; 6
6.18). The writer borrows two words from Gr
poetry and philosophy which appear to involve a
negation of human freedom, viz. dvdykn, andgké,
‘necessity,’ and dlkn, diké, “justice,” ‘avenging
justice.” The first blinds the eyes of the ungodly
(17 17), but the blindness is judicial, the result of a
course of evil (see 19 1-5). The second term is
used in Gr philosophy in the sense of nemesis, and
it has that sense in Wisd 1 8, etc. But throughout
this book it is assumed that punishment for sin is
deserved, since man is free. The author of Wisd
believes in a twofold division into good (wise) and
bad (ungodly), and, unlike the writers of the later
parts of the OT, he holds it possible for a person to
pass from one class into another. But does not
God, according to parts of Wisd, as of the OT,
appear to show undue favoritism to Israel and
neglect of other people? Thus Israel is ‘‘God’s
Son” (18 13), His children (sons, 12 19.21; 16
10.26), His sons and daughters (9 7). They are
His holy and elect ones (8 9; 4 15; andesp. 10 17;
18 1.5). But the Israelites were treated as they
were, not because they were Israelites, but because
they were morally better than the nations around
(see Drummond, op. cit., II, 207 ff).
Under the term ‘‘deontology"’ here, religious and ethi- ~


cal practice is included. (1) As might be expected in a
‘Wisdom book, little importance is attached


3. Deon- to the Law of Moses and its requirements.
. Though historical allusions are made to
tology the offering of sacrifices, the singing of


_ psalms and the taking upon themselves
of the obligation of the covenant_of the Law (18 9);
though, moreover, reference is rhade to the offering of
incense by Aaron (18 21), and Solomon is made to utter
the words ‘‘temple,” ‘‘altar,’’ ‘‘tabernacle’’ (9 8), yet
in other respects nothing is said of the temple and its
feasts, of the priesthood, of sacrifice, or of the laws of
clean and unclean. Yet the duty of worshipping the
one true God and Him only and the evil results of wor-
shipping idols are strongly and constantly insisted upon,
esp. in the second or historical part of the hook (11 5 to
end). (2) The cardinal virtues inculcated are those of
the Stoic philosophy, viz. prudence (ewdpoctvy, sd phro-
stéiné), common-sense (ppdrycts, phrénésis), justice (Sixao-
givy, dikaiosiné) and courage (avépeta, andreta), showing
eet en writer was influenced by the philosophy of the
reeks.


_ Asa historical fact, the writer adopts the account
in Gen 3 of the entrance of sin into the world. “By
the envy of the devil death [i.e. as the
connection proves, spiritual death]
entered into the world” (2 24). In
; _ , 27, however, sin is made to have
its root in idolatry, meaning perhaps that all sin
consists in not giving proper heed to the one true
God, and that the moral monstrosities of his time
were outgrowths of idolatrous worship. The free-


4. Hamar-
tiology


3095


dom of the will is taught explicitly or implicitly
throughout the book (see above VI, 2).

The book is silent as to a Messiah who shall
deliver His people. It is Wisdom that saves man:
“Because of her J shall have immor-
tality” (8 13); immortality lies in
kinship to Wisdom (8 17); all who give
heed to the commands of Wisdom
have the assurance of incorruption, and incorruption
brings men near to God (6 18f). The knowledge
of God’s power is the root of immortality (16 2).

The doctrine of individual immortality isexplicitly
taught in this book. Man (=all men) was created

for incorruption (2 23; 6 19; 12 1).
6. Escha- The righteous have the full hope of
tology ’ immortality (8 4) and shall live for-
ever (6 15). When the wicked die they
have no hope (3 18), since they suffer for their sins in
this present world as well asin that which is to come
(3 16.18). The doctrine of a resurrection of the
body is not taught. If the author accepted Philo’s
doctrine of the inherent sinfulness of matter (see
above VI, 2), as R. H. Charles holds, he could not
believe in a bodily resurrection. After death there
is to be a day of decision (d:d-yrwors, didgnésis, the
word used in Acts 25 21; see 3 18); there will be
an examination (éféracis, exétasis) into the counsels
of the ungodly. The sins of the wicked shall be
reckoned up (4 20), but the righteous man shall
stand in great boldness before the face of them that
afflicted him (5 1). The teaching of the book as
to the future of the righteous does not seem to be
consistent. According to 8 1 ff, the righteous pass
at death immediately into the bliss of God; but
the teaching of 4 20f is that the wicked and the
righteous shall be assembled in one place to receive
their sentence.

VH, Aim.—The writer’s purpose appears to have
been to recommend ito his fellow-countrymen in
Alexandria the claims of religion under the names
of Wisdom, Righteousness, etc, and to warn them
against falling into the idolatry of the Egyptians.
In addition to glorifying Wisdom, he gives an ironi-
cal account of the rise of idolatry, and he uses
strong language in pointing out the disastrous con-
sequences in this world and the next of a life away
from the true God (see above, III). The book is
ostensibly addressed to rulers, but they are men-
tioned only in 6 1-11.20-25, and the appeal of the
book is to men as such. In addressing rulers the
author uses a rhetorical device. It might be argued
that if rulers with their superior advantages need
such exhortations and warnings, how much more
ordinary men! re.

Plumptre (Ecclesiastes, 70) and Siegfried (HDB,
TV, 928) contend that the Solomon of this book is
made to answer the Solomon of Eccl. But_the
author does not show any acquaintance with Eccl,
and it is hardly likely that this last book was known
at the time in Alexandria, for though eomposed
about 200 BC, it was not put into Gr for a long time
afterward. Besides, there is nothing about idol-
atry in Eccl. The conclusion reached in the genu-
ine parts of this last book is a counsel of despair:
AP is vanity.” A reply to that book would seek
to show that life is worth living for the sake of the
present and the future. The Book of Wisd denoun-
cesidolatry in the most scathing language: how can
this and the like be a polemic against Eccl? :

Vill. Author.—The author was an Alexandrian
Jew, well read in the LXX whose phrases he often
uses, fairly acquainted with Gr philosophy as taught
at Alexandria and also with physical science as
known at the time (sce 7 17-20; 8 8). He was
beyond all doubt a Jew, for the views he advocates
are those of an enlightened but strong Judaism;
his interests are even narrowly Jewish (note the


5. Soteri-
ology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA  Wisd of Solomon


fiercely anti-gentile sentiments of 11 10-13.17-23),
and his style is largely tinged by the vocabulary and
the phraseology of the Gr VS of the Heb Scriptures.
That he was an Alexandrian or at least an Egyp
Jew is equally probable. No Palestinian could
have written the language of this work with its
thetorical devices (see above, IV), or have dis-
played the acquaintance which the book reveals
with Gr philosophy as modified by Jewish-Alexan-
drian thought.

Other views.—These include: (1) that Solomon is the
author: see above, II. No modern scholar takes this
view seriously, though singularly enough it has been
revived by D. 8. Margoliouth; (2) that Zerubbabel is
the author es . M. Faber); (3) that the author was one
of the translators of the L. ; (4) that the author be-
longed to the Therapeutae: so Gfrérer (Philo, II, 265),
Dihne (Philo, TI, 270); cf Jost (Geschichte des Juda-
ismus, I, niet This has been Inferred from 16 28, the
Therapeutae being, it is said, a Jewish sect which, like the
Zarathustrians, worshipped toward the rising sun. But
we know very little ahout this sect, and there is no de-
cisive evidence that it ever existed. If, however, Euse-
bius (H2#, II, 17) is right in saying that Philo's Thera-
peutae were Christians (the earliest Christian sect of Alex-
andria), itis clear that no member of this sect wrote Wisd,
for the book is wholly free from Christian influence; (5)
that Ben Sira is the author (Augustine); (6) that Apollos
is the author: so Noack (Der Ursprung des Christen-
thums, I, 222); Plumptre (Expos, I, 329 ff, 409 ff); see
summary of grounds in Speaker’s Apoc (Farrar), I,
413 ff; but the author must have been a Jew and he
wrote too early to allow of this hypothesis; (7) that
Philo is the author: thus Jerome writes (Praef. in lib.
Sol.): Nonnullt scriptorum hune esse Judaet Philonis
afirmant. This view was punperved by Luther and other
scholars; cf the Muratorian Fragment (in Zahn’s text)
in XI, below. But the teaching of this book repre-
sents an earlier stage of Alexandrian Jewish specula-
tion than that found in Philo’s works, and the allegorical
method of interpretation so rampant in the latter is
almost wholly absent from Wisd. (8) It bas been held
by some (Kirschhaum, Weisse, etc) that whoever the
author was he must have been a Christian, but the whole
trend and spirit of the béok prove the contrary.

IX. Date.—The book was probably composed
about 120-100 BC. The evidence is literary, his-
torical and philosophical. ;

The book must have been written after the LXX
VS of the Pent and Isa had been made, since the

author has evidently used this VS of
1. Literary both books and perhaps of the Pss as

well (cf 3 1 and Ps 31 5[6]; and also
15 15f and Ps 116 4-7 [=Ps 185 15-18]). Now
we know from Sir (Prol.) that the LXX of the Pent,
the Prophets and of at least a portion of the Writings
(Hagiographa) was completed by 132 BC, when the
younger Siracide finished his tr of Sir (see Siracu,
Boox or, VIII). It may therefore be inferred that
Wisd was written after 132 BC. Moreover, in 41
the author shows an acquaintance with Sir 16 1-4 in
Gr, for the pseudo-Sclomon does not seem to have
known Heb, or he would sometimes at least have
quoted from the Heb text. This confirms the con-
clusion drawn from the use of the LXX that this
book is at least as late as, say, 130 BC, and almost
certainly later. The book was composed earlier
than any of the NT writings, or some of the latter
would have been quoted or referred to. Moreover,
it may be assumed that the Gr Canon was com-
plete in the time of Our Lord, and thus included
Wisd as well as the rest of the OT Apoc. But see
International Journal of Apocrypha, October, 1913,
p. 77, art. by the present writer. It must have
taken a long time after writing for the book to gain
the respect which secured its canonization. A date
100 BC agrees with all the facts. ;

Wisd 3 1; 6 1; 6 5-9 imply that at the time of

writing the Jews addressed were suffering under the

lash of persecution, and we have the
2. His- resulting feeling of animosity against
torical the Egyptians, the persecuting power,
expressed in 11 16-19. Now we know
that the early Ptolemies treated the Jews with con-
sideration, and Ptolemy VII (Physcon, 145-117 BC)


Wisd of Solomon
Witch, Witchcraft


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3096


was the first to adopt a contrary policy toward the
Jews of Egypt, owing to the support they had given
to Cleopatra. Jos (C'Ap, II, 5) gives an account of
the vengeance which this king wreaked upon the
Jews of Alexandria at this time. Nevertheless, the
literary manner and the restrained spirit with which
these matters are referred to show that the writer is
describing a state of things which belongs to the
past, though to a recent past. A date about 100
BC would admirably suit the situation of the author
at the time of composition. :

The teaching of the book (see above, VI) belongs
to that stage in the development of Alexandrian

Judaism which existed about 100 BC.
3. Philo- | We have not in this book the allegori-
sophical zation characteristic of Philo (b. 20
BC, d. 40 AD), nor had his Logos-
doctrine as yet become a part of the creed of Alex-
andrian Jews.

X. Original Language.—Scholars are practically
agreed that the book was composed in Gr. D. 8.
Margoliouth attempted to prove a Heb original
(JRAS, 1890, 263-97; see reply by Freudenthal,
JQR, Ill, 722-53), but the evidence he offers has
convinced nobody.


(1) The Gr of Wisd is free, spontaneous and idiomatic.
There are a few Hebraisms, but only such as character-
ize Hel Grin general; Wisd is very different in this from
Sir which abounds with Hebraisms, due no doubt to tr
from a Heb original. (2) The rhetorical devices so com-
mon in the Gr of the book can be due only to the original
text; they could hardly occur in such profusion in a tr.
In addition to those mentioned above in IV, note the Gr
rhetorical figures chiasmus (1 1—4 8; 3 15) and sorites
(6 7-20). (8) The tr of Sirinto Heb before the discovery
of the Heb fragments had been often attempted and found
comparatively easy; but it is very difficult to put Wisd
into Heb because the style is so thoroughly Greek. (4) No
trace of a Heb original has thus far been found. What
Nachmanides saw was not the original Heb, but a tr in
Heb from the original text. Jerome (Praef. tn lib. Sol.)
says that though he had himself seen Sir in Heb, a Heh
text of Wisd was not to be found.

XI. Use of Wisd by Christian Writers.—Ilt has heen
thought that the following parts of the NT have been
influenced by Wisd: Lk 2 7 (cf Wisd 7 4); Lk 12 20 (cf
Wisd 15 8); Lk 9 31 (cf Wisd 3 2); Lk 19 44 (cf Wisd
37). The ‘Logos’’-doctrine of John (see Jn 1 1, etc)
has certainly a connection with the doctrine of Wisdom
in Wisd (see Gregg, Comm.,livff). Grafe (Theologische
Abhandlungen, Freiburg in B., 1892) endeavors to prove
that Paul made large use of Wisd (see also Sanday and
Headlam, Romans, 511, 267-69) ; but this has been denied;
see further Deane (Comm., 15 ff). The book was certainly
known to Clement of Rome, Tatian, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Clement of Alexandria and Hippolytus. The Muratorian
Fragment states the work to have been ** compored hy the
friends of Solomon in his honor" (11.69-71). Zahn (Gesch.
Kan., 11, 101, following a suggestion of Tregelles) prefers
to read ‘‘composed hy Philo in Solomon’s honor’’—an
easy Change in the Gr (philénosfor philon). Origen (Con.
Cel., v.29) calls it ‘‘the work entitled Wisdom of Solomon,”
so intimating doubt as to the authorship.


XII. Text and Versions.—The text in B, pointed
with collations in Swete’s OT in Gr, is on the whole
the best, though both & and C (which is incomplete)
have good texts, A being fairly trustworthy. The
text is found also in fair preservation in many
cursives.

The Vulg is identical with, but has slight vari-
ations from, the Old Lat. Lagarde (Mittheilungen,

243-86) gives the Lat VS of Sir and
1. Latin Wisd found in Cod. Amiaut. This last
is a literal rendering from the Greek.

The Syr (Pesh) VS found in the London Poly-
glot and in Lagarde (Lib. Apoc Syr) was made
immediately from the Gr, but appar-
enlly from the text in A, or in one
ike it.


LITERATURE.—Besides the works cited In the course
of the foregoing article and the geueral works (comms.,
etc) on the Apoc mentioned under AprocrypHa (q.Vv.),
the following are to be noted:

(1) Comms.: Bauermeister, Comm. in Sap. Sol. libr.,
1828: Grimm, Komm. tiber das Buch der Weishett, 1857,
also his excellent comm. in the Kurzgefasstes exegetisches
Handbuch, series 1860; J. H. Schmid, Das Buch der


2. Syriac


Wetshett: Uebersetzt und erkldért, 1857; Gutherlet, Das
Buch der Weisheit, 1874: W. J. Deane, The Book of


Wisd, Gr Vulg and AV with ‘Comm.’ (1881, full and
fairly scholarly); Speaker's Apoc (Farrar) is interesting
and often helpful; Siegfried’s ‘‘Intro’’ and ‘‘Comm.” in
Kautzsch's Die Apoc is slight, but also_often helpful;
The Wisd of Solomon by J. A. E. Gregg (RV with ‘‘Intro”
and ‘‘Comm.,’’ Cambridge Bible) is brief and popular,
but trustworthy; A.T.S.Goodrick, The Book of Wisdom,
1913 (admirable); S. Holmes (in the Oxford Apoc, with
Intro and Comm.).

(2) Of the dict. arts., that in EB (by C. H. Toy) is
perhaps the hest; that in HDB (Siegfried) is fair hut de-
ective.

(3) In addition to the works by Gfrérer and Déhne
discussing the philosophy of the hook, the following
works may be mentioned: Bruch, Wetsheits-Lehre der
Hebrder, 1851 (322-78); Zeller, Die Philosophie der
Griechen (1881), III, pt. 2, 271-74, 4th ed, 272-96,
Kithel, “ Die ethischen Grundansehauungen der Weisheit
Salomos,”’ in Theologische Studien und Kritiken, 1865,
690-722; Menzel, Der griechische Einfluss auf Prediger
und Weisheit Salomos, 1889, 39-70; Bois, Essai sur les
origines de la philosophie judéo-alezandrine, 1890, 211-
309, 337-412. The work by Drummond, often quoted,
has heen carefully done and is interestingly written
(Philo Judaeus, 1888, 2 vols; see I, 177-229).

For detailed bibliography see Schtirer, GJV‘, 1909,
Ill, 508 ff; HJ P, 1886, II, 3, pp. 236 f, is necessarily very


defective.
T. Wirron Davies
WISE, wiz, MAN. See Wispom.


WISE-MEN, wiz’men: In addition to the uses
of “wise” specified in the art. W1spom, the adj. is
employed occasionally as the technical description
of men who are adepts in magic, divination, etc
(e.g. in Gen 41 8; Ex 7 11; Est 1 13; Dnl 2 27;
5 15). Naturally, however, in the ancient world
the boundary between genuine knowledge and as-
trology, etc, was exceedingly vague, and it was
never denied that real knowledge could be gained
along lines that we know to be futile. So the initia-
tion of Moses into all the wisdom of the Egyptians
(Acts 7 22) or of Daniel into all the learning of the
Chaldaeans (Dnl 1 4) met with no disapproval.
These great men could be trusted to avoid the moral
and religious pitfalls of such pursuits. For the
ordinary Israelites, however, the uncompromising
prohibition of idolatry closed the door definitely to
all studies of this kind. See Astrotocy; Divi-
nation, etc. And for the Wise-men of Mt 2 see
Mac. Burron Scorr Easton


WISH, wish: The word appears both as a sub-
stantive and as a vb. in the OT, having a variety of
meanings: (1) The subst., 1 , peh, means “mouth”
and also “speech.”’ In this form it oceurs in Job
383 6m: “Behold, I am according to thy wish in
God’s stead.” Elihu here refers to Job’s expressed
desire for an umpire (9 33), and one who would
maintain his right with God (16 21). (2) The verb:
(a) FEM, haphée, “willing,” or “desirous” (Ps 40 14
AV); (0) ond, sha’al, “to ask,” “petition,” “sup-
plicate” (Job 31 30 AV); (c) another variation of
meaning is found in Ps 73 7 wherei 302, maskith,
“to imagine,” is tr? “wish’’: ‘They have more than
heart could wish’; (d) e¥xoum, eichomai, “to soli-
cit,” “to implore’ (Rom 9 3).

ARTHUR WaLwrn Evans

WIST, wist, WITTY, wit’i, WOT, wot: The vb.
“to wit” in AV is interchangeable with “to know,”
and is conjugated with a present “‘wot,” and a past
“wist.” This inflection is derived from more com-
plicated forms in the older Eng., and in post-Eliza-
bethan times has become quite obsolete. (But cf
the roots in “wisdom,” “witness.”) “Wit,” then,
is simply “knowledge,” and “witty” is “having
knowledge,” although the noun and the adj. have
become narrowly specialized in modern Eng. (cf
the similar evolution of “knowing,” in its use as
an _adj.). Even in Elizabethan Eng., however, the
indicative of “to wit’? was becoming displaced by


3097


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Wisd of Solomon
Witch, Witchcraft


“know,” and “wot” and “wist”’ together occur only
24+ in AV (not at all in Apoc). ERY has retained
all the NT examples, but in the OT has altered about
half the occurrences to “know,’’ but has followed
no discoverable rule in so doing (‘‘wot” retained only
in Josh 2 5). has changed to “know”
throughout (OT and NT). The inf. “to wit” is
still in use (chiefly in legal formulas) before an appo-
sition, and AV has introduced it rather frequently
to clarify a construction (Josh 17 1; 1 in 2 32,
etc), and RV has usually retained it (omitted in Josh
171; 2 Ch 4 12). In the other uses of this inf.
(Gen 24 21; Ex 2 4) it is replaced by “to know,”
while the very obsolete expression in 2 Cor 8 1, AV
‘We do you to wit” (i.e. “We cause you to know”;
see Do), has become in RV “We make known unto
you.

The noun ‘‘wit”’ is found in Ps 107 27, “at their
wits’ [AV “‘wit’s”] end,” for (V92T , hokhmah, “‘wis-
dom,” “technical skill’; cf RVm ‘All their wisdom
is swallowed up.” The meaning is “their skilled
seamanship cannot cope with the danger’’ (the
phrase is very commonly misapplied). ‘Wit’
occurs also 1 Esd 4 26 (d:dvoia, didnota, mind”);
2 Esd 5 9 (sensus, here “‘intelligence’’); Sir 31 20
(yux%, psuché, “‘soul,’’ with the force of “reason’’).

Witty is found in AV, RVm Prov 8 12, “witty
inventions” (VATA , mzimmah, “discretion” [so RV];
if “and’’ is not read in this verse, translate ‘“dis-
crete knowledge’). In Jth 11 23 occurs “witty
in thy words” (dya66s, agathés, “‘good,” here prob-
ably =‘“‘thou hast spoken sound sense”). Wisd 8 19
AV has “a witty child,’ RV “a child of parts,” m
“goodly” (eiduts, euphués, “well grown,” “of a good
disposition,” ‘‘clever’’). “‘Wittingly” occurs in Gen
48 14 el" , sakhal, “act intelligently’).

Burton Scott Easton

WITCH, wich, WITCHCRAFT, wich’kraft:

1. The Words, Their Meaning and Use

2. Biblical Usage e :
3. Common Elements in Witchcraft and Ancient Ori-
4,

L


ental Magic . ,
Rise, Spread and Persecution of Witchcraft


ITERATURE


The word “witch’’ seems to denote etymologically
“one that knows.” It is historically both mascu-
line and feminine; indeed the AS
1. Meaning form wicca, to which the Eng. word is
and Use of to be traced, is masc. alone. ‘‘Wiz-
the Words ard” is given as masc. for witch, but
it has in reality no connection with it.
Wright (English Dialect Dict., VII, 521) says he
never heard an uneducated person speak of wizard.
When this word is used by the people it denotes, he
says, a person who undoes the work of a witch.
Shakespeare often uses “witch” of a male (cf Cym-
beline, I, 6, 1. 166: “He is....a witch”). In
Wyclif’s tr of Acts 8 9 Simon Magus is called “‘a
witch” (“wicche’”’). Since the 13th cent. the word
‘witch’? has come more and more to denote a
woman who has formed a compact with the devil
or with evil spirits, by whose aid she is able to cause
all sorts of injury to living beings and to things.
The term “witchcraft” means in modern Eng. the
arts and practices of such women.
Since the ideas we attach to “witch” and “witch-
craft’? were unknown in Bible times, the words have
no right place in our Eng. Bible, and
2. Biblical this has been recognized to some ex-
Usage tent but not completely by the Re-
visers of 1884. The word “witch”
occurs twice in AV, viz. (1) in Ex 22 18, “Thou
shalt not suffer a witch [RV ‘‘a sorceress”’] to live”;
(2) in Dt 18 10, “ora witch” (RV “ora sorcerer”’).
The Heb word is in both cases the participle of the


vb. (aw, kishsh@ph), denoting “to practice the


magical art.” See Macrc, V, 2. In the first pas-
sage, however, the fem. ending (-Gh) is attached,
but this ending denotes also one of a class and (on
the contrary) a collection of units; see Kautzsch,
Heb Gram, § 122, s, t.


,. The phrase ‘‘the witch of Endor’’ occurs frequently
in literature, and esp. in common parlance, but it is not
found in the Eng. Bible. The expression has come
from the heading and summary of the AV, both often so
mnisleading. In 1 S 28, where alone the character is
spoken of, EV translates the Heb 'ésheth ba‘'dlath 'abh by
“a woman that hath a familiar spirit.’’ A literal render-
ing would be “a woman who is mistress of an ‘sbh or
ghost,’’ i.e. one able te compel the departed spirit to
return and to answer certain questions. This woman
was therefcre a necromancer, a species of diviner (see
Divination, (V; Envor, Witce or; FAMILiaR SPinir),
and not what the term ‘‘witch'’ imports.


The word “witchcraft” occurs thrice in AV. In
18 15 23, “the sin of witchcraft” should be as
in RVm, “the sin of divination,” the latter rep-
resenting the Heb word DOP, kesem, generally tr?
“divination”; see Divination, VII, 1.

The phrase “used witchcraft” (of Manasseh, 2 Ch
33 16) is properly rendered in RV “practised sor-
cery,” the Heb vb. ((W23, kishshéph) being that
whence the participles in Ex 22 18 and Dt 18 10, tr?
in AV “witch,” are derived (see above). The word
tr? in AV “witchcraft” in Gal 5 20 (Pappaxela,
pharmakeia) is the ordinary Gr one for ‘‘sorcery,”
and is so rendered in RV, though it means literally
the act of administering drugs and then of giving
magical potions. It naturally comes then to stand
for the magician’s art, as in the present passage and
also in Wisd 12 4; 18 13; and in the LXX of Isa
47 9, where it represents the Heb noun DNDwW>,
keshaphim, tr’ “sorceries’; cf the Heb vb. SW,
kishshéph; see above.

The pl. “‘witchcrafts’” (in AV and RY) stands for
the Heb noun just noticed (k*shaphim) in 2 K 9
22; Mic 5 12; Nah 3 4, but in all three passages a
proper rendering would be “sorceries” or “magical
arts.” ‘Witchcrafts” is inaccurate and misleading.

The vb. “bewitch” occurs in Acts 8 9.11 AV (of
Simon Magus bewitching the people) and in Gal 3
1 (“O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you?’’).
In the first context the Gr vb. is élornm, exis-
témi, which is properly rendered by the Revisers
“amazed”; in ver 18 the passive of the same vb.
is tr? “He was amazed” (AV “He wondered’). In
Gal 3 1, the vb. is Backalvw, baskaind, which is used
of a blinding effect of the evil eye and has perhaps
an occult reference, but it has nothing whatever to
do with “witch” or “witchcraft.”

Though the conceptions conveyed by the Eng.
word “witch” and its cognates were unknown to the

Hebrews of Bible times, yet the funda-
3. Common mental thought involved in such terms
Elements in was familiar enough to the ancient
Witchcraft Hebrews and to other nations of antiq-
and Ancient uity (Babylonians, Egyptians, etc),
Oriental viz. that there exists a class of persons
Magic called by us magicians, sorcerers, etc,

who have superhuman power over liv-
ing creatures including man, and also over Nature
and natural objects. This power is of two kinds:
(1) cosmic, (2) personal. For an explanation see
Maaic, II. It is in Assyr-Bab literature that we
have the completest account of magical doctrine
and practice. The words used in that literature
for the male and female magician are ashipu and
ashiptu, which correspond to the Heb m*khashshéph
and mkhashshephah in Dt 18 10 and Ex 22 18
(see 2, above) and are cognate to NWN, ’ashshaph
(see Dnl 1 20; 2 2.10, etc), which means a magi-
cian (RV “enchanter”’). Other Bab words are
kashshapu and kashshaptu, which in etymology and


Witch, Witchcraft THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3098


in sense agree with the Heb terms m*khashshéph
and m*khashshéphah mentioned above. But neither
in the Bab or Heb words is there the peculiar idea
of a witch, viz. one who traffics with malicious
spirits for malicious ends. Indeed the magician
was a source of good (male and female) as conceived
by the Babylonians, esp. the ashipu and ashiptu,
to the state and to individuals, as well as of evil,
and he was often therefore in the service of the
state as the guide of its policy. And the same
applies to the magician as the Hebrews regarded
him, though the true teachers and leaders in Israel
condemned magic and divination of every sort as
being radically opposed to the religion of Jeh (Dt
18 10f). Of course, if a Bab magician used his
art to the injury of others he was punished as
other criminals, and in case of the death of the
victim he was executed as a murderer. It is, how-
ever, noteworthy in its bearing on “witchcraft” that
the female magician or sorceress played a larger
part in ancient Babylonia than her male counter-
part, and the same is true of the Greeks and other
ancient people. This arose perhaps from the fact
that in primitive times men spent their time in
fighting and hunting; the cooking of the food and
the healing of the sick, wounded, etc, by magical
potions and otherwise, falling to the lot of the
woman who stayed at home. In the early history


of the Hebrews inspired women played a greater’


réle than in later time; cf Miriam (Ex 16 20f;
Nu 12); Deborah (Jgs 5 12); Huldah (2 K 22
14 ff). Note also the MAD TWN, 'ishshah hakha-
mah, or ‘wise woman” of 28 14 2ff; 20 16.


‘The first two sections of the CH are as follows: ‘‘1. If
aman has laid a curse [kispu=SDWD , k®shéphim] upon
{another} man and it is not justified, he that laid the
curse shall be put to death. 2. If a man bas put a spell
upon [another] man and it is not justified, he ugon whom
the spell is laid shall go to the holy river; into the holy
river shall he plunge. If the holy river overcome him
(ane he is drowned], the man who put the spell upon

im sball take possession of his house. If the holy river
declares him innocent and_he remains unharmed the
man who laid the spell shall he put to death. He that
plunged iuto the river shall take possession of the house
of him who laid the spell upon him.'’ Not a word is
said here of a female that weaves a spell, but probably
the word ‘‘man’’ in the Bab is to be taken as including
male and female (so Canon C. H. W. Johns iu a private
letter, dated December 22, 1912). ;

In the early and esp. in the mediaeval church, the
conception of the devil occupied a very important

place, and human beings were thought
4, Rise, to be under his dominion until he was
Spread and exorcised in baptism. | It is to this be-
Persecution lief that we owe the rise and spread of
of Witch- infant baptism. The unbaptized were
craft thought to be devil-possessed. The

belief in the existence of women magi-
cians had come down from hoary antiquity. It was
but a short step to ascribe the evil those women
wrought to the devil and his hosts. Then it was
natural to think that the devil would not grant such
extraordinary powers without some quid pro quo;
hence the witch (or wizard) was supposed to have
sold her (or his) soul to the devil, a proceeding that
would delight the heart of the great enemy of good
always on the alert to hinder the salvation of men;
ef the Faust legend. For the conditions believed to
be imposed by the devil upon all who would be in
league with him see A. Lehmann, Aberglaube und
Zauberei? (1908), 110 ff. ; oe

This idea of a covenant with the devil is wholly
absent from the early heathen conception of magic;
nor do we in the latter read of meetings at night
between the magicians and the demons with whom
they dealt, such as took place on the Witches’ Sab-
bath. The witches were believed to have sexual
commerce with devils and to be capable only of


inflicting evil, both thoughts alien to oriental and
therefore to Bib. magic.


The history and persecution and execution of women,
generally ignorant and innocent, supposed to have been
guilty of witchcraft, do not fall wit. the scope of this
article, but may be perused in innumerable works: see
“Literature” below. In Europe alone, not to mention
America (Salem, etc), Sprenger says that over nine
million suspected witches were put to death on the
flimsiest evidence; even if this estimate be too high the
actual number must have been enormous. The present
writer in_ his booklet, The Survival of the Evangelical
Faith (‘Essays for the Times," 1909), gives a brief ac-
count of the defence of the reality of witch power by
nearly all the Christian theologians of the 17th cent.
and by most of those living in the early 18th cent. (see
pp. 23 ff). See also Maaic, and Expos T, 1X, 157 ff.

Lirzrature.—lIn addition to the literature cited under
arts. Divination and Maarc (q.v.), the following works
may be mentioned (the books on witchcraft proper are
simply innumerable): Roginald Scot, The Discovery of
Witchcraft (aimed at preventing the persecution of
witches, 1584; republished London, 1886); reply to
the last work by James I of England: Daemonologie,
1597; Casaubon, On Credulity and Ineredulity ... .
A Treatise Proving Spirits, Wtiches and Supernatural
Operations, 1668; Joseph Glanrill, Saducismus Trium-
phatus: Full and Plain Evidences concerning Witches and
Apparitions (the last two books are by theologians who
class with ‘‘atheists’'—a vague word in those times for
unbelief—all such as doubt the power of witches and
deny the power of devils upon human life). For the
history of witchcraft and its persccutions see Howard
Williams, The Superstitions of Witchcraft, 1865, and
(brief but interesting and compact) Charles Mackay,
Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions (2 vols,
1851, 101-91). See also Sir W. Scott, Demonology and
Witcheraft, 1830; W. R. Halliday, Gr Divination: A
Study of Its Methods and Princtples, London, Macmillan
(important); and art. by_the present writer in Expos,
January, 1914, on ‘The Words Witch and Witchcraft
in History and in Literature.’’ For a full account of the
witch craze and persecution at Salem, near Boston,

S.A., see The Wonders of the Invisible World by Cot-
ton Mather, D.D., with a further account_by Increase
Ae D.D., and cf Demon Possession by J. L. Nevins,

LI: Witton Davies

WITHERED, with’érd (72), xabhél, “to fade
away,” “to be dried up”): (1) Used figuratively to
express leanness of soul, spiritual impotence, a low
condition of spiritual life, a lack of moral nourish-
ment: “My heart is smitten like grass, and wither-
eth” (Ps 102 4). The contrasting figure empha-
sizes this idea: ‘‘All my fountains are in thee” (87 7).
Also Ps 1 3, where the freshness and beauty of the
righteous man’s life are thus described: “And he
shall be like a tree planted by the streams of water,
.... whose leaf also doth not wither.” In the
NT &mpalvw, xéraind, “to wither,” is used to carry
out the same idea of moral decay, or malnutrition
of soul (Mt 18 6; 21 19). (2) “Wither” also had
a physiological meaning, expressing both in the OT
and in the NT the idea of bodily impotence, esp.,
though not exclusively, of the limbs. Jeroboam
was struck suddenly with paralysis of the arm, which
is said to have “dried up” (1 K 13 4-6); “probably
due to sudden hemorrhage affecting some part of
the brain, which may under certain circumstances
be only temporary” (HDB, i-vol, 599). “Their
skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered’? (Lam


4 8).

In the NT (Mt 1210; Mk 381; Lk 6 6)
“withered hand” was probably our modern “in-
fantile paralysis,” which may leave one or more
limbs shrunken and powerless without detriment to
the general health. ARTHUR WaLwyn Evans


WITHES, withs, withs, WITHS, withs, GREEN
(aqnm> DMN, ythdrim lahim, m “new bowstrings,”
AVin “new [moist] cords” [Jgs 16 7]; LXX vevpaé
bypd, neurd hugrd): The material with which Sam-
son was bound by Delilah (ver 8) was probably
some moist ‘‘gut” such as was used for bowstrings.
Cf DMNA, méthartm, “bowstrings” (Ps 21 12;
“in, yether, Job 30 11; Ps 11 2); lahim, tr4 “green,”
means “fresh,” “sappy” or “moist.”


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA we Witchcraft


nesses, as in the case of the purchase of property, or
a betrothal (Ruth 4 1-11, where we are told that the
ancient form of attestation was by a man drawing
off his shoe and giving it to his neighbor).

The Mosaic Law insisted on the absolute necessity
of witnesses in all cases which came before a judge,
esp. In criminal cases. Not only in criminal cases,
but in all cases, it was necessary to have at least
two witnesses to make good an accusation against a
person (Dt 17 6; 19 15; cf Nu 36 30; Mt 18 16;
Jn 8 17; 2 Cor 13 1; 1 Tim 6 19). According to
the Talm (P*sdhim 1130), if in a case of immorality
only one witness came forward to accuse anyone,
it was regarded as sinful on the part of that witness.

On the other hand, anyone who, being present at
the adjuration (Lev 5 1 RV), refused to come for-
ward as a witness when he had testimony to bear, was
considered to have sinned (Prov 29 24). Among
those not qualified to be witnesses were the near
relations of the accuser or the accused, friends and
enemies, gamesters, usurers, tax-gatherers, heathen,
slaves, women and those not of age (Sanhedhrin 3 3,
4; Ro’sh Ha-shanah 17; Babha’ Kammd 88a; ct
Ani, TV, viii, 15). No one could be a witness who
had been paid to render this service (Bekhérath 4 6).
In cases of capital punishment there was an elaborate
system of warning and cautioning witnesses. Each
witness had to be heard separately (Sanhedhrin 83
cf3 5). If they contradicted one another on impor-
tant points their witness was invalidated (Sanhedh-
rin 6).

No oath was required from witnesses. The
meaning of Lev 6 1 was.not that witnesses had to
take an oath, as some think; it describes the solemn
adjuration of the judge to all those with knowledge
of the case to come forward as witnesses (see OATH).
When a criminal was to be put to death, the wit-
nesses against him were to take the foremost share
in bringing about his death (Dt 17 7; cf Acts 7 58),
in order to prove their own belief in their testimony.
In the case of a person condemned to be stoned, all
the witnesses had to lay their hands on the head of
the condemned (Lev 24 14). “False witnessing”
was prohibited in the Decalogue (Ex 20 16);
against it the lex talionis was enforced, i.e. it was
done to the witness as he meant to do to the ac-
cused (Dt 19 16-21). The Sadducees held that
only when the falsely accused had been executed,
the false witnesses should be put to death; the
Pharisees, that false witnesses were liable to be
executed the moment the death sentence had been
passed on the falsely accused (Makkath 1 7). In
spite of prohibitions, false witnessing was a very
common crime among the people (Ps 27 12; 35 11;
Prov 6 19; 12 17; 14 5; 19 5; 24 28; Mt 26
60; Acts 6 13).

In Acts 22 20; Rev 2 13; 17 6 the word martus,
“witness,” seems to be beginning to acquire the
meaning of ‘martyr,’ as in AV, although RV
translates “witness” in the first two passages, re-
taining “martyr” only in the third with “witness”
in the m. For “Tabernacle of Witness” see Tan-
ERNACLE. ; PauL LEVERTOFF


WITNESS OF THE SPIRIT: This phrase arises
from the words of Rom 8 16: ‘The Spirit himself
beareth witness with our spirit, that we are


children of God.” With this may be grouped, as
illustrative, 1 Jn 5 10: “He that’ believeth on the
Son of God hath the witness in him.” In inter-
preting, we may approach the former passage
through the latter. ‘To the man who “believeth on
the Son of God,” so as to prove Him by reliance, He
becomes self-evidential in experience, verifying Him-
sclf to the believer as the Divine response to his
whole spiritual need. Thus believed on as the Son,

e awakens in the soul which He embraces the
filial attitude toward God, the ery, “Abba, Father.”
On the other side the Spirit, both in the written
Word (e.g. Jn 1 12) and in His secret converse with
the believer in the life of faith, assures him of the
paternal love toward him, as toward a “dear child,”’
(Eph 6 1) of the Father of his Lord. There is thus
a concurrent “witnessing.” The believer’s spirit
says, “Thou art my Father’; the Spirit says to the
believer’s spirit, “Thou art His child.’ We may
oe Rom & 5: “The love of God hath been
shed abroad in our hearts through the Holy Spirit.”

Hanpvizy Duneum

WITTY. See Wist, Wirry, Wor.


WIZARD, wiz’ard. See Astronocy, 1; Drvina-
Tion; Famiuiar Srrrir; Macic; Witce, WircH-
CRAFT.


WOLF, wadlf ([1] ANT, 2’2bh [Gen 49 27; Isa
116; 6525; Jer 56; Ezk 2227; Hab 1 8:
Zeph 3 3; also as proper name, Zeeb, prince of
Midian, Jgs 725; 83; Ps 8311]; cf Arab.

g e
55, dhi’b, colloquial 433, dhtb, or a0,
dib; “[2] Moxos, Likos [Mt 7 15; 10 16; Lk 10 3;


Wolf (Canis lupus).


Jn 10 12; Acts 20 29; Ecclus 13 17; cf 2 Esd
5 18, lupus]; [3] PMR, tyim, RV “wolves” [Isa
13 22; 34 14; Jer 50 39)):

While the wolf is surpassed in size by some dogs,
it is the fiercest member of the dog family (Canidae),
which includes among others the jackal and the fox.
Dogs, wolves and jackals are closely allied and will
breed together. There is no doubt that the first
dogs were domesticated wolves. While there arc
local varieties which some consider to be distinct
species, it is allowable to regard all the wolves of
both North America, Europe, and Northern Asia
(except the American coyote) as members of one
species, Canis lupus. The wolf of Syria and Pal is
large, light colored, and does not seem to hunt in
packs. Like other wolves it is nocturnal. In Pal
it is the special enemy of the sheep and goats. This
fact comes out in two of the seven passages cited
from the OT, in all from the NT, and in the two
from Apoc. In Gen 49 27 Benjamin is likened to
a ravening wolf. In Ezk 22 27, and in the similar
Zeph 3 3, the elders of Jerus are compared to
wolves. In Jer 5 6 it is a wolf that shall destroy


Woman


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3100


the people of Jerus, and in Hab 1 8 the horses of
the Chaldaeans ‘‘are swifter than leopards, and are
more fierce than the evening wolves.’ Babylon
and Edom (Isa 13 22; 34 14; Jer 60 39) are to
be the haunts of ’tyim (RV “wolves’’) and other wild
creatures. : :

The name of Zeeb, prince of Midian (Jgs 7 25;
8 3), has its parallel in the Arab. Dib or Dhtb, which
is a common name today. Such animal names are
frequently given to ward off the evil eye. See also
TorTEeMIsM. ALFRED Exry Day


WOMAN, wodm’an mB, ’ishshah, ‘‘a woman”


dees avd Me : ;
[fem. of WN , ish, ‘a man’’]; yuvy, guné, “a woman,”


“wife’’):
I. In tae Creative PLan
II. In OT Times
. Prominence of Women
Social Equality
. Marriage Laws
Inheritance
Domestic Duties
. Dress and_Ornaments
. Religious Devotion and Service
(1) In Idolatry aud False Religlon
(2) In Spiritual Religion
Ill. Inrer-TestamMentT HRa
Iv. In_NT Trims
1. Mary and Elisabeth .

. Jesus and Women

. In the Early Church

. Official Service es

. Widows

. Deaconesses

Y. Lazer Times

1. Changes in Character and Condition
2. Notable Examples of Christian Womanhood
3. Woman in the 20th Century

The generic term “man” includes woman. In the
narrative of the ereation (Gen 1 26.27) Adam is
a collective term for mankind. It may signify a
human being, male or female, or humauity entire.
“God said, Let us make man .. . . and let them”
(ver 26), the latter word “them” defining “man” in
the former elause. So in ver 27, “In the image of
God ereated he him; male and female created he
them,’’ “them” being synonymous with “him”’ (see
also ADAM; ANTHROPOLOGY).

I. In the Creative Plan.—Whatever interpreta-
tion the latest scholarship may give to the story of
woman’s formation from the rib of man (Gen 2
21-24), the passage indicates, most profoundly, the
inseparable unity and fellowship of her life with his.
Far more than being a mere assistant, “helper”
(WY, ‘eer, “help,” “helper,” Gen 2 18), she is
man’s complement, essential to the perfection of his
being. Without her he is not man in the generic
fulness of that term. Priority of creation may indi-
cate headship, but not, as theologians have so
uniformly affirmed, superiority, Dependence indi-
cates difference of function, not inferiority. Human
values are estimated in terms of the mental and
spiritual. Man and woman are endowed for equal-
ity, and are mutually interdependent. Physical
strength and prowess canuot be rated in the same
category with moral courage and the capacity to
endure ill-treatment, sorrow and pain; and in these
latter qualities) woman has always proved herself
the superior. Man’s historic treatment of woman,
due to his conceit, ignorance or moral perversion,
has taken her inferiority for granted, and has thus
necessitated it by her enslavement and degradation.
The narrative of the Fall (Gen 3) ascribes to woman
supremacy of influence, for through her stronger
personality man was led to disobedience of God’s
command. Her penalty for such ill-fated leader-
ship was that her husband should “rule over’ her
(Gen 3 16), not because of any inherent superiority
on his part, but because of her loss of prestige and
power through sin. In that act she forfeited the
respect and confidence which entitled her to equal-


NOUR CD


om ob


ity of influence in family affairs. Her recovery
from the curse of subjection was to come through
the afflictive suffering of maternity, for, as St. Paul
puts it, ‘‘she shall be saved [from the penalty of her
transgression] through her child-bearing’ (1 Tim
215)...


Sin, both in man and woman, has been universally
the cause of woman’s degradation. All history must he
interpreted in the light of man’s consequent mistaken
estimate of her endowments, worth and rightful place.
The ancient Hebrews never entirely lost the light of their
original revelation, and, more than any other oriental
race, held woman in high esteem, honor and affection.
Christianity completed the work of her restoration to
equality of opportunity and place. Wherever its teach-
ings and spirit prevail, she is made the loved companion,
confidante and adviser of her husband.


I. In OT Times.—Under the Heb system the
position of woman was in marked contrast with
her status in surrounding heathen na-


1. Promi- tions. Her liberties were greater, her
nence of employments more varied and impor-
Women tant, her social standing more respect-


ful and commanding. The Divine law
given on Sinai (Ex 20 12) required children to honor
the mother equally with the father. A similar es-
teem was accorded her in patriarchal times. Sarah
held a position of favor and authority in Abraham’s
household. Rebekah was not less influential than
Isaac, and was evidently the stronger personality.
The “beautiful” Rachel (Gen 29 17) won from Jacob
a love that accepted her as an equal in the com-
panionship and counsels of family life. Many Heb
women rose +0 eminence and national leadership.
Miriam and Deborah were each a prophetess and a
poetess. The former led bands of women in trium-
phant song and procession, celebrating the over-
throw of enemies (Ex 15 20); the latter, through
her dominating personality and prophetic power, be-
came the virtual judge of the nation and led armies
to victory. Her military general, Barak, refused to
advance against Sisera without her presence and
commanding influence (Jgs 48). Her ode of victory
indicates the intellectual endowment and culture of
her sex in that unsettled and formative era (Jgs 5).
No posen in Israel surpassed Hannah, the mother
of Samuel, in intelligence, beauty and fervor of
religious devotion. Her spiritual exaltation and
poetic gift found expression in one of the choicest
specimens of early Heb lyric poetry (1 S 2 1-10).
Other women eminent as prophetesses were:
Huldah, whose counsel was sought by high priest
and king (2 Ch 34 22; ef 2 K 22 14); Noadiah
(Neh 6 14); Anna (Lk 2 36). The power to
which woman could attain in Israel is illustrated
in the career of the wicked, merciless, murderous,
idolatrous Jezebel, self-styled prophetess (Rev 2
20). Evidence of woman’s eminence im the king-
doms of Judah and Israel is seen in the influence she
exercised as queen mother (1 K 16 13) and queen
(2 K 8 18); in the beautiful honor shown by King
Solomon to his mother, Bath-sheba (1 K 2 19); in
the filial devotion of the prophet Elisha (1 K 19
20); in the constant mention of the mother’s name
in the biographies of successive kings, making it
evident that she was considered the important and
determining factor in the life of her royal sons. Her
teaching and authority were sufficiently eminent
to find recognition in the proverbs of the nation:
“the law of thy mother’ (Prov 1 8; 6 20) was not
to be forsaken, while contempt for the same merited
the curse of God (Prov 19 26; 20 20; 30 11.17).
Additional evidence of woman’s social equality comes
from the fact that men and women feasted together
without restriction. Women shared in
2. Sacial the sacred meals and great annual feasts
Equali Dt 16 11.14); in wedding festivities (Jn
quality +® ; in the fellowship of the family meal
x (12.3). They could appear, as Sarah did
in the court of Egypt, unveiled (Gen 12 11.14). Re-


3101


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Woman


bekah (Gen 24 16; cf ver 65),
nah (1 S 1 13) appeared_in public and before suitors
with uncovered faces. The secluding veii was intro-
duced into Mohammedan and other_orientai iauds
through the influence of the Koran. The custom was
non-Jewish in origin, and the monuments make it evl-
dent _that it did not prevail, in early times, in Assyria
and Egypt. Even Greece and Rome, at the time of their
supreme culture, feli far below the Heb conception of
‘woman's preéminent worth. The greatest elienic
philosophers declared that it would radicaliy disorgan-
Ize the state for wives to claim equality with their hus-
bands. Aristotle cousldered women inferior belngs,
intermediate between freemen and slaves. Socrates and
Demosthenes heid them in like depreciation. Piato
advocated community of wives. Substantially the same
views prevalied in Rome. Distinguished men, like
Metullus and Cato, advocated marriage only as a public
duty. More honor was shown the courtesan than the
wife. Chasey and modesty, the cholce inheritance
of Heb womanhood, were toreign to the Gr conception
of morality, and disappeared from Rome when Gr cul-
ture and frivolity entered. The Greeks made the shame-
iess Phryne the modei of the goddess Aphrodite, and
lifted their hands to puulle prostitutes when they prayed
in their tempies. nder paven culture and heathen
darkness woman was univers: Subject to inferior and
degrading conditions. Every deciine in her status in
the Heb commonwealth was due to the incursion of foreign
influence. The lapses of Heb morality, esp. in the court
of Solomon and of subsequent kings, occurred through
the borrowing of idolatrous and heathen customs from
surrounding nations (1 K 11 1-8).


The Bible gives no sanction to dual or plural
marriages. The narrative in Gen 2 18-24 indi-
cates that monogamy was the Divine
3. Marriage ideal for man. The moral decline of
Laws the generations antedating the Flood
seems to have heen due, chiefly, to the
growing disregard of the sanctity of marriage.
Lamech’s taking of two wives (Gen 4 19) is the
first recorded infraction of the Divine ideal. By
Noah’s time polygamy had degenerated into pro-
miscuous inter-racial marriages of the most inces-
tuous and illicit kind (Gen 6 1-4; see Sons oF
Gop). The subsequent record ascribes marital
infidelity and corruption to sin, and affirms that the
destruction of the race by the Flood and the over-
throw of Sodom and Gomorrah were God’s specific
judgment on man’s immorality. The dual mar-
riages of the Patriarchs were due, chiefly, to the
desire for children, and are not to be traced to Di-
vine consent or approval. The laws of Moses
regarding chastity protected the sanctity of mar-
riage (see Marriace), and indicated a higher regard
for woman than prevailed in gentile or other Sem
races (Lev 18 6-20). They sought to safeguard
her from the sensual abominations prevalent among
the Egyptians and Canaanites (Lev 18). Kings
were forbidden to “multiply wives” (Dt 17 17).
Concubinage in Israel was an importation from
heathenism.

‘Divorce was originaliy intended to protect the sanctity
of wedlock by outlawing the offender and his moral
offence. Its free extension to inciude any marital infe-
licity met the stern rebuke of Jesus, who declared that
at the best it was a concession to human infirmity and
hardness of heart, and should be granted only in case of
adultery (Mt 5 32). See Divorce. | 5

eb women were granted a freedom in choosing a hus-
band not known elsewhere in the East (Gen 24 58).
Jewish tradition declares that a girl over 124 yeas of age
had the right to give herself in marriage. ows made
by a daughter, while under age, could be annulled by
the father (Nu 30 3-5) or by the hnsband (vs 6-16).
Whenever civil law made a concession to the customs of
surrounding nations, as in granting the father power to
sella daughter into bondage, it sought to surround her
with all possible protection (Dt 22 16 ff).


The Mosaic Law prescribed that the father’s
estate, in case there were no sons, should pass to
the daughters (Nu 27 1-8). They

4, Inherit- were not permitted, however, to alien-
ance ate the family inheritance by marrying
outside their own tribe (36 6-9).

Such alien marriages were permissible only when
the husband took the wife’s family name (Neh 7
63). Unmarried daughters, not provided for in the


Rachel (29 11), Han-


father’s will, were to be cared for by the eldest son
(Gen 31 14.15). The bride’s dowry, at marriage,
was intended as a substitute for her share in the
family estate. In rabbinical law, a century or
more before Christ, it took the form of a settlement
upon the wife and was considered obligatory. Pro-
vision for woman under the ancient Mosaic Law was
not inferior to her status under Eng. law regarding
landed estates.
Among the Hebrews, woman administered the
affairs of the home with a liberty and leadership
unknown to other oriental peoples.
5. Domestic Her domestic duties were more inde-
Duties pendent, varied and honorable. She
was not the slave or menial of her hus-
band. Her outdoor occupations were congenial,
healthful, extensive. She often tended the flocks
(Gen 29 6; Ex 2 16); spun the wool, and made
the clothing of the family (Ex 35 26; Prov 31 19;
18 2 19); contributed by her weaving and needle-
work to its income and support (Prov 31 14.24),
and to charity (Acts 9 39). Women ground the
grain (Mt 24 41); prepared the meals (Gen 18 6;
28 13 8; Jn_12 2); invited and received guests
(Jgs 4 18; 1 8 25 18 ff; 2 K 4 8-10); drew water
for household use (1S 911; Jn 4 7, for guests
and even for their camels (Gen 24 15-20). Heb
women enjoyed a freedom that corresponds favor-
ably with the larger liberties granted them in the
Christian era.
That women were fond of decorations and display In


ancient as in modern times is clear from the reproof
administered by the prophet for their


6. Dress haughtiness and excessive ornamentation
and Orna- (isa 8 16). He bids them ‘‘remove |the]

veil, strip off the train,”’ that they may be
mInents better able to ‘‘grind meai’’ and attend


to the other womanly duties of the home
(47 2). These prophetic reprogts do not necessarily
indicate generai conditions, but_exceptional tendencies
to extravagance and excess. The ordinary dress of
women was modest and simple, consisting of loose flow-
ing robes, similar to those worn by men, and still in vogue
among Orientals, chiefly the mantle, shawl and veli
(Ruth 3 15; Isa 3 22.23). The veil, however, was not
worn for seclusion, as among the Moslems. The exten-
sive wardrobe and jewelry of Heb women is suggested by
the catalogue given in Isa 3 18-24: anklets, cauls,
crescents, pendants, bracelets, mufflers, headtires, ankle
chains, sashes, perfume-boxes, amulets, rings, nose-
jewels, festival robes, mantles, shawls, satchels, hand-
mirrors, fine linen, turbans, veils. The elaborateness of
this ornamentation throws light on the apostle Peter's-
counsel to Christian women not to make their adornment
externai, e.g. the braiding of the hair, the wearing of
jewels of gold, the puting on of showy apparel, but
Se the apparel of a meek and quiet spirit (1 Pet 3

4).


Thereflections cast upon woman for her leadership

in the first transgression (Gen 3 6.13.16; 2 Cor 11

3; 1 Tim 2 14) do not indicate her

7. Religious rightful and subsequent place in the

Devotion religious life of mankind. As wife,

and Service mother, sister, she has heen preémi-

nently devout and spiritual. History

records, however, sad and striking exceptions to
this rule. . '

(1) Often woman’s religious intensity found ex-
pression in idolatry and the gross cults of heathen-
ism. That she everywhere participated freely in the
religious rites and customs of her people is evident
from the fact that women were often priestesses,
and were often deified. The other Sem religions
had female deities corresponding to the goddesses of
Greece and Rome. In the cult of Ishtar of Babylon
women were connected with the immoral rites of
temple-worship. The women of heathen nations in
the harem of Solomon (1 K 11 1) turned the heart
of the wise king to unaccountable folly in the wor-
ship of the Sidonian goddess Ashtoreth, and of
Chemosh and Molech, in turn the “abomination”
of Moab and Ammon (11 5-8). The fatal spell of
Maacah morally blighted the reigns of her husband,


Woman


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3102


son and grandson, until Asa the latter deposed her
as queen and destroyed the obscene image of Asherah
which she had set up (1 K 15 13). As “queen
mother” (gbhirah, “leader’’) she was equivalent to
the Turkish Sultana Valide.

Baal-worship was introduced into Israel by
Jezebel (1 K 16 31.32; 18 19; 2 K 9 22), and
into Judah by her daughter Athaliah (2 Ch 22 8;
24 7). The prominence of women in idolatry and
in the abominations of foreign religions is indicated
in the writings of the prophets (Jer 7 18; Ezk 8
14). Their malign influence appeared in the sor-
ceress and witch, condemned to death by the
Mosaic Law (Ex 22 18); yet continuing through
the nation’s entire history. Even kings consulted
them (1 S 28 7-14). The decline and overthrow
of Judah and Israel must be attributed, in large
measure, to the deleterious effect of wicked, worldly,
idolatrous women upon their religious life.

(2) The bright side of Heb history is an inspiring
contrast to this dark picture. Prior to the Chris-
tian era no more luminous names adorn the pages
of history than those of the devout and eminent
Heb women. Jochebed, the mother of Moses, left
upon him a religious impress so vital and enduring
as to safeguard him through youth and early man-
hood from the fascinating corruptions of Pharaoh’s
Egyp court (Ex 2 1-10; He 11 23-26). In Ruth,
the converted Moabitess, the royal ancestress of
David and of Jesus, we have an unrivaled example of
filial piety, moral beauty and self-sacrificing reli-
gious devotion (Ruth 1 15-18). The prayers and
piety of Hannah, taking effect in the spiritual power
of her son Samuel, penetrated, purified and vitalized
the religious life of the entire nation. Literature
contains no finer tribute to the domestic virtues and
spiritual qualities of woman than in the beautiful
poem dedicated to his gifted mother by King
Lemuel (Prov 31).


Women, as well as men, took upon themselves the
self-renouncing vow of the Nazirite (Nu 6 2), and
shared in offering sacrifices, as in the vow end sacrifice
of Manoah’s wife (Jgs 13 13.14); were granted the-
ophantes, e.g. Hegar (Gen 16,7; 21 17), Sarah (18 9.10),

anoah’s wife (Jgs 13 3—5.9); were even_permitted to
‘minister’ at the door of the sanctuary (Ex 38 8: 18S
2 22); rendered conspicuous service in national religious
songs and dances (Ex 15 20; Jgs 11 34; 1 S 18 6.7); in
the great choirs and_choruses and processionals of the
Temple (Ps 68 25; Ezr 265; Neb ¥ 67); in religious
mourning (Jer 9 17-20; Mk 6 38). They shared equally
with men in the great religious feasts, as is indicated by
the law requiring their attendance (Dt 12 18).

UI. Inter-Testament Era.—The women portrayed in
the apocryphal literature of the Jews reveal all the varied
characteristics of their sex so conspicuons in OT history:
devout piety, ardent patriotism, poetic fervor, political
intrigue, worldly ambition, and sometimes a strange
combination of these contradictory moral qualities.
Whether fictitious, or founded on fact, or historical, these
portrayals are true to the feminine life of that era.

Anna is a beautiful example of wifely devotion. By
her faith and hard toil she supported her husband Tobit,
after the loss of his property and in his blindness, until
ae an prosperity were both restored (Tob 1 9;

1-14).

Edna, wife of Raguel of Ecbatana and mother of
Saran, made her maternal love and piety conspicuous
In the blessing bestowed on Tobias on the occasion of his
marrlage to her danghter, who had hitherto been cursed
on the night of wedlock by the death of seven successive
husbands (7; 10 12).

Sarah, innocent of their death, which had been com-
passed by the evil spirit Asmodens, at last had the
reward of her falth in the joys of a happy marriage (Tob
10 10; 14 13).

Judith, a rich young widow, celebrated in Heb lore
as the savior of her nation, was devoutly and ardently

atriotic. When Nebuchadnezzar sent his general

olofernes with an army of 132,000 men to subjugate
the Jews, she felt called of God to be their deliverer.
Visiting Holofernes, she so captivated him with her
beauty and gifts that he made a banquet in her honor.
While he was excessively drunk with the wine of his own
bounty, she beheaded him in his tent. Tho Assyrians,
paralyzed by the_loss of their leader, easily fell a pre
to the armies of Israel. Judith celebrates her triump
In a song, akin in its triumphant joy, patriotic fervor


and religious zeal, to the ancient songs of Miriam and
Deborah (Jth 16 1-17). .
Susanna typifics the ideal of womanly virtue. The
daughter of righteous parents, wcll instructed in the
sacred Law, the wife of a rich and honorable man,
Joachim by name, she was richly blossed in position and
person. Exceptionally modest, devout and withal very
beautiful, she attracted the notice of two elders, who
were also judges, and who took occasion frequently to
visit Joachim’s house. She spurned their advances and
when falsely charged by them with the sin which she so
successfully resisted, she escapes the judgment bronght
against her, by the subtle skill of Daniel. As a result,
his fame and her innocence became widely known. See
Susanna, History or. | ee ie aay
Cleopatra, full of inhesited intrigue, is influential in the
counsels of kings. She married successively for political
power: murdered her eldest son Seleucus, by Demetrius,
and at last dies by the poison which she intended for her
younger son, Antiochus VIII. Her fatal influence is
a striking example of the perverted use of, woman’s
power (1 Macc 10 58; Jos, Ant, XIII, iv, 1; ix, 3).


IV. In NT Times.—A new era dawned for
woman with the advent of Christianity. The.
honor conferred upon Mary, as mother


1. Mary of Jesus, lifted her from her ‘low es-
and tate,” made after-generations call her
Elisabeth blessed (Lk 1 48), and carried its


benediction to the women of all sub-

sequent times. St. Luke’s narrative of the Na-
tivity (Lk 1, 2) has thrown about motherhood the
halo of a new sanctity, given mankind a more ex-
alted conception of woman’s character and mission,
and made the world’s literature the vehicle of the
same lofty reverence and regard. The two dis-
pensations were brought together in the persons of
Elisabeth and Mary: the former the mother of John
the Baptist, the last of the old order of prophets;
the latter the mother of the long-expected Messiah.
Both are illustrious examples of Spirit-guided and
Spirit-filled womanhood. The story of Mary’s
intellectual gifts, spiritual exaltation, purity and
beauty of character, and her training of her Divine
child, has been an inestimable contribution to
woman’s world-wide emancipation, and to the up-
lift and ennoblement of family life. To her poetic
inspiration, spiritual fervor and exalted thankful-
ness as expectant mother of the Messiah, the church
universal is indebted for its earliest and most ma-
jestic hymn, the Magnificat. In her the religious
teachings, prophetic hopes, and noblest ideals of
her race were epitomized. Jesus’ reverence for
woman and the new respect for her begotten by
His teaching were well grounded, on their human
side, in the qualities of His own mother. The fact
that He Himself was born of woman has been cited
0 her praise in the ecumenical creeds of Christen-

om.

From the first, women were responsive to His
teachings and devoted to His person. The sisters of
Lazarus, Mary and Martha, made their

2. Jesus home at Bethany, His dearest earthly
and Women refuge and resting-place. Women of
all ranks in society found in Him a

benefactor and friend, before unknown in all the
history of their sex. They accompanied Him, with
the Twelve, in His preaching tours from city to city
some, like Mary Magdalene, grateful because healed
of their moral infirmities (Lk 8 2); others, like
Joanna the wife of Chuzas, and Susanna, to minister
to His needs (8 3). Even those who were ostracized
by society were recognized by Him, on the basis
of immortal values, and restored to a womanhood
of virtue and Christian devotion (Lk 7 37-50).
Mothers had occasion to rejoice in His blessing their
children (Mk 10 13-16); and in His raising their
dead (Lk 7 12-15). Women followed Him on His
last journey from Galilee to Jerus; ministered to
Him on the way to Calvary (Mt 27 55.56); wit-
nessed His crucifixion (Lk 23 49); accompanied His
body to the sepulcher (Mt 27 61; Lk 28 55); pre-
pared spices and ointments for His burial (Lk 23


3103


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Woman


56); were first at the tomb on the morning of His
resurrection (Mt 28 1; Mk 16 1; Lk 24 1; Jn 20
1); and were the first to whom the risen Lord
appeared (Mt 28 9; Mk 16 9; Jn 20 14). Among
those thus faithful and favored were Mary Magda-
lene, Mary the mother of James and Joses, Salome
(Mt 27 56), Joanna and other unnamed women
(Lk 24 10). Women had the honor of being the first
to announce the fact of the resurrection to the chosen
disciples (Lk 24 9.10.22). They, including the
mother of Jesus, were among the 120 who continued
in prayer in the upper room and reccived the Pente-
costal enduement (Acts 1 14); they were among
the first Christian converts (8 12); suffered equally
with men in the early persecutions of the church
(9 2). The Jewish enemies of the new faith sought
their aid and influence in the persecutions raised
against Paul and Barnabas (13 50); while women of
equal rank among the Greeks became ardent and
intelligent believers (17 12). The fidelity of women
to Jesus during His three years’ ministry, and at the
cross and sepulcher, typifies their spiritual devotion
in the activities and enterprises of the church of the

20th century.
Women were prominent, from the first, in the
activities of the early church. Their faith and
prayers helped to make Pentecost


3. Inthe possible (Acts 1 14). They were emi-
Early nent, as in the case of Dorcas, in
Church charity and good deeds (9 36); fore-


most in prayer, like Mary the mother of
John, who assembled the disciples at her home to
pray for Peter’s deliverance (12 12). Priscilla is
equally gifted with her husband as an expounder
of “the way of God,” and instructor of Apollos
(18 26), and as Paul’s “fellow-worker in Christ”
(Rom 16 3). The daughters of Philip were proph-
etesses (Acts 21 8.9). The first convert in Kurope
was a woman, Lydia of Thyatira, whose hospitality
made a home for Paul and a meeting-place for the
infant church (16 14). Women, as truly as men,
were recipients of the charismatic gifts of Chris-
tianity. The apostolic grectings in the Epp. give
them a place of honor. The chnrch at Rome seems
to have been blessed with a goodly number of gifted
and consecrated women, inasmuch as Paul in the
closing salutations of his Epp. sends greetings to at
least eight prominent in Christian activity: Phoebe,
Prisca, Mary ‘‘who bestowed much labor on you,”
Tryphena and Tryphosa, Persis, Julia, and the
sister of Nereus (Rom 16 1.3.6.12.15). To no
women did the great apostle feel_himself more
deeply indebted than to Lois and Eunice, grand-
mother and mother of Timothy, whose “faith un-
feigned” and ceaseless instructions from the holy
Scriptures (2 Tim 1 5; 3 14.15) gave him the most
“beloved child” and assistant in his ministry. ‘Their
names have been conspicuous in Christian history
for maternal love, spiritual devotion and fidelity in
teaching the Word of God. See also CLavnia.
From the first, women held official positions of
influence in the church. Phoebe (Rom 16 1) was
evidently a deaconess, whom Paul
terms ‘a servant of the church,” “a
helper of many” and of himself also.
Those women who “labored with me
in the gospel” (Phil 4 3) undoubtedly participated
with him in preaching. Later on, the apostle used
his authority to revoke this privilege possibly
because some women had been offensively forward
in “usurping authority over the man” (1 Tim 2
12 AV). Even though he bases his argument for
woman’s keeping sileace in public worship on
Adam’s priority of creation and her priority m
transgression (2 13.14), modern. scholarship un-
hesitatingly affirms that his prohibition was appli-
cable only to the peculiar,conditions of his own time.


4, Official
Service


|


Her culture, grace, scholarship, ability, religious
devotion and spiritual enduement make it evident
that she is often as truly called of God to public
address and instruction as man. It is evident in
the NT and in the writings of the Apostolic Fathers
that women, through the agency of two ecclesias-
tical orders, were assigned official dutics in the con-
duct and ministrations of the early church.


Their existence as a distinct order is indicated in 1. Tim
5 9.10, where Paul directs Timothy as to the conditions
of ea aa No made should be
* “enrolled'’ (xaraddyw, <Katalégd, ‘‘cata-
5. Widows logued,”’ ‘‘registered’’) under 60 years of
age, or if more than once married. She
must be Bo well reported of for gocd works’’; a mother,
having “brought up children’; hospitable, having
“used hospitality to strangers'’; Christlike in loving serv-
ice, having ‘‘washed the saints’ feet.’” Chrysostom
and Tertullian make mention of this order. It bound
its members to the service of God for lite, and assigned
them ecclesiastical duties, e.g. the superintendence of
the rest of the women, and the charge of the widows and
orphans supported at public expense. Dean Alford (see
Comm. in loc.) says they ‘were vowed to perpetual widow-
hood, clad in a vestis vidualis [' widow’s garments’’], and
erdained by the laying on of hands. ‘This institution
was abolished by the eleventh Canon of the council of
Laodicea.’’

Other special duties, mentioned hy the Church Fathers,
Included prayer and fasting, visiting the sick, instruction
of women, preparing them for baptism, assisting in the
administration of this sacrament, and taking them the
communion. The spiritual nature of the office is indi-
cated by its cccupant being variously termed "the inter-
cessor of the church''; ‘' the keeper of the doocr,’’ at public
service; '‘the altar of God.’’ See Wipows.

Many of these duties were transferred, by the 3d cent.,
to the deaconesses, an order which in recent history has

been restored to its original importance and


. effectiveness. The women already referred
6. Deacon: to in Rom 16 1.6.12 were evidently of this
esses order, the term Scdxovos, didkonos, being


specifically applied to Phcebe, a deacon-
ess of the church at Cenchreae. The women cf 1 Tim
3 11, who were to serve ‘‘in like manner” as the “ dea-
cons” of ver 10, presumably held this office, as also the
“aged women” of Tit ='‘presbyters’’ [fem.],
mpeaButepar, presbiterat, 1 ‘Tim 2). Virgins as well as
widows were elected to this office, and the age of eligi-
bility was changed from 60 to 40 by the Council of Chal-
cedon. The order was suppressed in the Lat church in
the 6th cent., and in the Gr church in the 12th, because
of certain abuses that gradually became prevalent.
Owing, however, to its exceptional importance and value
it has been reinstated by nearly all branches of the
modern church, the Methodists esp. emphasizing its
spiritual efficiency. Special training schools and courses
in education now prepare candidates for thisoffice. Even
as early as the Puritan Reformatiou in England the Con-
gregationalists recognized this order of female workers in
their discipline. The spiritual value of woman’s ministry
in the lay and official work of the church is evidenced by
her leadership in all branches of ecclesiastical and mis~
sionary enterprise. This modern estimate of her capa-
bility and place revises the entire historic conception and
attitude of mankind. See Dzaconess.


V. Later Times.—Tertullian mentions the mod-
est garb worn by Christian women (De Cult. Fem.,
ii11) as indicating their conscious-

1. Changes ness of their new spiritual wealth and
in Character worthiness. They no longer needed
and the former splendor of outward adorn-
Condition ment, because clothed with the beauty
and simplicity of Christlike character.

They exchanged the temples, theaters, and festivals
of paganism for the home, labored with their hands,
cared for their husbands and children, graciously
dispensed Christian hospitality, nourished their
spiritual life in the worship, service and sacraments
of the church, and in loving ministries to the sick.
Their modesty and simplicity were a rebuke to and
reaction from the shameless extravagances and
immoralities of heathenism. That they were among
the most conspicuous examples of the transforming
power of Christianity is manifest from the admira-
tion and astonishment of the pagan Libanius who
exclaimed, ‘What women these Christians have!”
The social and legal status of woman instantly
improved when Christianity gained recognition in
the Empire. Her property rights as wife were es-


Woman
Worker


tablished by law, and her husband made subject to
accusation for marital infidelity. Her inferiority
subjection and servitude among all non-Jewish aud
non-Christian races, aucient and modern, are the
severest possible arraignment of man’s intelligence
and virtue. Natural prudence should have dis-
covered the necessity of a cultured and noble
motherhood im order to a fine grade of manhood.
Races that put blighting restrictions upon woman
consign themselves to perpetual inferiority, im-
potence and final overthrow. The decline of Islam
and the collapse of Turkey as a world-power are
late striking illustrations of this fundamental truth.

Woman's activity In the early church came to its


zenith in the 4th cent. The type of feminine character
roduced hy Christianity in that era is
2. Notable


indicated has notable examples as Em-
melia and Macrina, the mother and sister
Examples of of Basil; Anthusa, Nonna, Monica, re-


Christian palais Ne the outers apt Chest
regory Nazianzen and Augustine. Like
Womanhood the mothers of Jerome and Ambrose they


b gave luster to the womanhood of the early
Christian centuries by their accomplishments and emi-
nent piety. As defenders of the faith women stand side
by side with Ignatius and Polycarp in their capacity to
face death and endure the agonies of persecution. The
roll of martyrs is made luminous by the unrivaled purity,
undaunted heroism, unconquerable faith of such Chris-
tian maidens as Blandina, Potamiaena, Perpetua and
Felicitas, who, in their loyalty to Christ, shrank not from
the most fiendish tortures invented by the diabolical
cruelties and hatred of pagan Rome.

In the growing darkness of subsequent centuries
Women, as mothers, teachers, ahbesses, kept the light of
Christian faith and intelligence hurning in mediaeval
Europe. _ The mothers of St. Bernard and Peter the Ven-
erable witness to the conserving and creative power of
their devotion and faith. The apotheosis of the Virgin
Mother, though a grave mistake and a perversion of
Christianity by suhstituting her for the true object of
worship, nevertheless served, in opposition to pagan cul-
ture, to make the highest type of womanhood the ideal
of mediaeval greatness. he full glory of humanity
was represented in her. She became universally domi-
nant in religion. The best royalty of Europe was con-
verted through her influence. Poland and Russia were
added to European Christendom when their rulers
accepted the faith of their Christian wives. Clotilda's
conversion of Clovis made France Christian. The mar-
riage of Bertha,.another Christian princess of France, to
Ethelbert introduced Roman Christianity into England,
which hecame the established religion when Edwin, in
turn, was converted through the influence of his Chris-
tlan wife. The process culminated, in the 19th cent.,
in the long, prosperous, peaceful, Christian reign of Vic-
toria, England’s noblest sovereign.

The opening decades of the 20th cent. are witnessing
@ movement among women that is one of the most re-

markable phenomena in the history of man-


3. Woman kind. It is world-wide and spontaneous,
in the 20th and aims at nothing less than woman's
in the universal education and enfranchisement.
Century This new ideal, taking its rise in the teach-


ing of Jesus regarding the value of the
buman soul, is permeating every layer of society and
ali races and religions. Woman's desire for development
and self-expression, and better still for service, has given
birth to educational, social, eleemosynary, Missionary
organizations and institutions, internatlonal in scope and
uence. In75 years after Mary Lyon inaugurated the
higher education of woman at Mt. Holyoke College, in
1837, 60,000 women were students in the universities and
colleges of the United States; nearly 40,000 in the uni-
versities of Russia; and increasingly proportionate num-
bers In every higher institution of learning for women in
the world; 30,000 were giving instruction in the primary
and secondary schools of Japan. Even Moslem leaders
confessed that the historic subjection of woman to igno-
rance, inferiority, and servitude was the fatal mistake of
their religion and social system. The striking miracle
occurred when Parkes and China opened to her the here-
tofore permanently closed doors of education and social
opportunity.

This universal movement for woman's enlightenment
and emancipation is significantly synchronous with the
world-wide extenslon and success of Christian missions.
The freedom wherewith Christ did set us free includes
her complete liberation to equality of opportunity with
man. In mental endowment, In practical ability, in all
the higher ministries of life and even in statecraft, she
has proved herself the equal of man. Christianity
always tends to place woman side by side with man in
all the great achievements of education, art, literature,
the humanities, social service and missions. The entire
movement of modern society toward her perfect en-
tranchisement Is the distinct and inevitahle product of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3104


the teaching of Jesus. The growing desire of woman for
the right of suffrage, whether mistaken or not, is the
incidental outcome of this new emancipation. The
initia] stages of this evolutionary process are attended
by many abnormal desires, crudities of experiment and
conduct, but ultimately, under the guidance of the Spirit
of God and the Christian ideal, woman wil intelligently
adjust herself to her new opportunity and environment,
recognizing every God-ordained difference of function,
and every compiementary and codperative relation be-
tween the sexes. The result of this latest evolution of
Christianity will not only be a new womanhood for the
race hut, through her enlightenment, culture and spiritual
leadership, a new humanity.
Dwicutr M. Pratr


WONDER, wun’dér, WONDERFUL, wun'dér-
ful: The vb. “wonder” occurs only a few times in
the OT; ‘‘wonder” as noun is much more frequent,
and is chiefly the tr of the word MPA, maphéth, a
splendid or conspicuous work, a “miracle” (Ex 4
21; 11 9, etc), often conjoined with 'athéth, “‘signs”’
(Ex 738; Dt 6 22; 131.2; 3411; Neh 9 10,
etc). Other frequent words are N23, pala’, NOB ‘
pele’, a “marvel,” “miracle” (Ex 3 20; 15 11; Josh
3 5; Isa 9 6, m “wonderful counsellor,” etc). In
the NT the ordinary vb. is Gavydfw, thaumdzo, and
the most frequent noun is Tépas, ‘éras, a ‘‘marvel,”’
“portent,” answering in its meaning to Heb pala’.
As in the OT the “wonder” is chiefly a miraculous
work, so in the Gospels the feeling of wonder is
chiefly drawn out by the marvelous displays of
Christ’s power and wisdom (Mt 16 31; Mk 6 51;
Lk 4 22, etc).

Wonderful, that which excites or calls forth
wonder, is in the OT chiefly the tr of pala’ or pele’
(28 126; Ps 40 3; Isa 28 29, etc); in the NT
of thaumdsios (once, Mt 21 15).

For “wondered” in Lk 8 25; 11 14, RV has
“marvelled” (cf 9 43); in the OT also ‘“marvel-
lous” frequently for “wondrous,” etc (1 Ch 16 9;
Job 9 10; Ps 96 3; 106 2). W. L. Waker


WOOD, wodd. Sce Borany; Forzst; TREgEs.


WOOD OF EPHRAIM (2 § 18 6). See Epu-


RAM, Forest oF.


WOOF, woof (A717, ‘érebh, “mixture,” ‘woof”
[Lev 13 48 ff]). See Warp.


WOOL, wddl (VAX, gemer; prov, érion): Wool
and flax were the fibers most used by the ancient
weavers. Wool was used principally for the out-
side garments (Lev 13 48 ff; Prov 31 13; Ezk
34 3; Hos 2 5.9). Syrian wool is found on the
world’s markets today, but it is not rated as first
quality, partly because it is so contaminated with
thorns, straw and other foreign matter which be-
come eutangled with the wool while the sheep are
wandering over the barren, rocky mountain sides
in search of food. Extensive pastures are almost
unknown.

Two kinds of wool are sold: (1) That obtained
by shearing. This is removed from the animal as
far as possible in one piece or fleece usually without
previous washing. The fleeces are gathered in
bales and carried to a washing-place, which is usually
one of the stony river beds, with but a small stream
flowing through it during the summer. The river
bed is chosen because the rocks are clean and
free from little sticks or straw which would cling
to the washed wool. The purchaser of this washed
wool submits it to a further washing with soap,
ishnan (alkali plant), “soapwort,” or other cleans-
ing agent (see FuLLER), and then cards it before
spinning and weaving. The wool thus obtained is
nearly snow white. (2) The second supply of wool
is from the tanneries where the wool is removed
from the skins with slaked lime (see Tannina).


3105


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Woman
Worker


This is washed in many changes of water and used
for stuffing mattresses, quilts, etc, but not for
weaving.

Gideon used a fleece of wool to seek an omen
from God (Jgs 6 37). Mesha, king of Moab, sent
a large quantity of wool as a tribute to the king of
Israel (2 K 3 4).

Wool was forbidden to be woven with linen (Dt
22 11; cf Lev 19 19). Priests could not wear
woolen garments (Ezk 44 17). Wool dyed scarlet
with the kermes was used in the blood-covenant
ceremony (He 9 19; cf Lev 14; Nu 19 6).

The whiteness of wool was used for comparison
(1) with snow (Ps 147 16); (2) with sins forgiven
(Isa 1 18); (8) with hair (Dnl 7 9; Rev 1 14).

James A. Parco

WORD, wird: The commonest term in the OT
for “word” is \2°7 , dabhdr (also ‘‘matter,’”’ “‘thing’’);
in the NT Adyos, légos (“reason,”’ ‘‘discourse,”
“speech’”’); but also frequently pfyua, rhéma.
Rhéma is a “word” in itself considered; logos is a
spoken word, with reference generally to that which
is in the speaker’s mind. Some of the chief appli-
cations of the terms may thus be exhibited:

(1) We have the word of Jeh (or God; see
below) (a) as the revelation to the patriarch,
prophet, or inspired person (Gen 16 1; Ex 20 1;
Nu 22 38, etc); (6) as spoken forth by the prophet
(Ex 4 30; 341; 2K 71; Isa 110, etc). (2)
The word is often a commandment, sometimes
equivalent to “the Law’? (Ex 32 28; Nu 20 24;
Dt 66; Ps 106 8; 119 11.17; Isa 66 2, etc).
(3) As a promise and ground of hope (Ps 119 25.28.
38, etc; 130 5, etc). (4) As creative, upholding,
and preserving (Ps 33 6; cf Gen 1 3ff; Ps 147
15.18; He 13; 11 3; 2 Pet 3 5.7). (5) As per-
sonified (in Apoc, Wisd 18 15; Ecclus 1 5, RVm
“omitted by the best authorities’). (6) As per-
sonal (Jn 1 1). Logos in Philo and Gr-Jewish
philosophy meant both reason or thought and its
utterance, “the whole contents of the Divine world
of thought resting in the Nous of God, synonymous
with the inner life of God Himself and correspond-
ing to the légos endidthetos of the human soul; on
the other hand, it is the externalizing of this as
revelation corresponding to the légos epee
in which man’s thought finds expression” (Schultz).
Cf also the references to Creation by ‘the word of
God” and its personifications; see Locos; incar-
nated in Jesus Christ (Jn 1 14; 1 Jn 11.2; Rev
19 13, “His name is called, The Word of God,”
Ho Légos to% Theo). See Person or Curist.
(7) Cannot be broken, endureth forever (2 K 10 10;
Ps 119 89; Isa 40 8, etc). (8) A designation of
the gospel of Christ: sometimes simply ‘‘the word” ;
with Jesus “the word of the Kingdom” (Mt 13 19;
Mk 22; Acts 4 4.29.31, etc). In John’s Gospel
Jesus frequently speaks of His “word” and “works”
as containing the Divine revelation and require-
ments made through Him, which men are asked to
believe in, cherish and obey (Jn 6 24; 6 63.68,
etc); “the words of God” (in 3 34; 8 47; 14 10;
17 8.14, etc); His “word” (logos and rhéma) is to
be distinguished from lalid ere (cf Mt 26 73;
Mk 14 70), tr? “saying,” Jn 4 42 (ver 41, “Many
more believed because of his own word”’ [logos]; ver
42, “not because of thy saying” [alia], RV “speak-
ing’’); in the only other occurrence of Jalia in this
Gospel (8 43) Jesus uses it to distinguish the out-
ward expression from the inner meaning, “Why do ye
not understand my speech?” (/alia), “liven because
ye cannot hear my word” (legos). (9) ‘Words’ are
distinguished from “power” (1 Cor 4 20; 1 Thess
1 5); are contrasted with “deed” (Mal 2 17; 1 Cor
420; 1 Jn 3 18). (10) Paul refers to “unspeak-
able words” (drrhéta rhémata) which he heard in


Paradise (2 Cor 12 4), and to “words [logot] . . . .
which the Spirit teacheth” (1 Cor 2 18).

For “ word”’ RV has '’*commandment”’ (Nu 4 45, etc);
for “words,”’ things” (Jn 7% 9; 8 30; 9 22.40; 17 2
“sayings” (Jn 10 21; 12 47,48); for “enticing words,”’
‘persuasiveness of speech’’ (Col 2 4); _conversely,
word" for ‘‘commandment"” (Nu 24 13; 27 14; Josh
8 8, etc), with numerous other changes.

W. L. WaLKER


WORK, wirk, WORKS, wirks: ‘To work” in
the OT is usually the tr of MY, ‘asah, or of DIP


“F>


pa‘al (of the works both of God and of man), and
“work” (noun) is most frequently the tr of M2") ,
mattseh, or MIN? , méla’khah; in the NT of évepyéw,
energéd, épydtouat, ergézomai (and compound), with
Epyor, érgon (noun). The word “works” (érga) isa
favorite designation in Jn for the wonderful works
of Jesus (5 36; 10 38; 16 24, etc; “miracles” to
us, “works” to Him). ‘Works’ is used by Paul
and James, in a special sense, as denoting (with
Paul) those legal performances by means of which
men sought to be accepted of God, in contradis-
tinction to that faith in Christ through which
the sinner is justified apart from all legal works
(Rom 8 27; 4 2.6, etc; Gal 2 16; 3 2.5.10), ‘“‘work-
ing through love’ (Gal 6 6; 1 Thess 1 3), and is
fruitful in all truly ‘‘good works,” in which Christian
believers are expected to abound (2 Cor 9 8; Eph
2 10; Col 1 10; 2 Thess 2 17, etc). When James
speaks of being justified by ‘‘works” as well as by
“faith” (2 14-26), he has in view those works which
show faith to be real and vital. ‘‘Dead works” avail
nothing (cf He 9 14; 10 24). Judgment is accord-
ing to “works” (Mt 16 27, RV “deeds,” m “Gr
‘doing,’” prézis; Rom 2 6; 1 Pet 1 17, etc), the new
life being therein evidenced. A contrast between
‘faith’ and “good works” is never drawn in the NT.
See, further, JUSTIFICATION. W. L. WALKER


WORKER, wir’kér, WORKFELLOW, wirk’-
fel-d, WORKMAN, work’man (W711, hardsh, YP,
pa'al; tpyarns, ergdtés, cvvepyés, sunergés): “Worker”
(artificer) is the tr of hdarash, “to cut in’ (1 K
7 #14, “a worker in brass”), and of hdarash,
“artificer,”’ etc (1 Ch 22 15); “workers of stone,”’
rendered “workman,” ‘‘workmen” (Isa 40 20; 44
11; Jer 10 3.9, “‘artificer’; Hos 8 6); ‘dsah, “to
work,” is tr4 “workers” of iniquity (Ps 37 1, “them
that work unrighteousness”); ‘asah m‘la’khah, ‘‘to
do work” (2 K 12 14.15, “workmen,” “them that
did the work’; 1 Ch 22 15; 2 Ch 24 13, etc;
Ezr 3 9); ’an’shé mela’khah, ‘men of work” (1 Ch
25 1, “workmen,” “them that did the work’);
‘amél, “working,” “toiling” (Jgs 6 26, ‘put... .
her right hand to the workmen’s hammer”’); pd‘al,
“to act,” “do,” when tr4 “workers,” is joined with
“iniquity,” “workers of iniquity” (Job 31.3; 34
8.22; Ps 6 5; 6 8; 14 4, etc; Prov 10 29; 21 15);
ergatés, “worker,” is tr? “workman” (Mt 10 10,
“laborer”; 2 Tim 2 15; Acts 19 25), ‘workers’
(of iniquity) (Lk 18 27), ‘deceitful workers” (2
Cor 11 18), “evil workers” (Phil 3 2); duénamis,
“power,” is tr’ “[workers of] miracles” (1 Cor 12
29m, RV “powers”); sunergé6, “to work with”
(2 Cor 6 1, “working together with him”).

Workfellow is the tr of sunergos, ‘joint or fellow-
worker” (Rom 16 21; Col 4 11).

Workmaster occurs in Ecclus 38 27, as the tr of
architékton.

For “of [“with’] cunning work” (Ex 26 1.31;
28 6.15; 36 8.35; 39 3.8), ARV has “the work
of the skilful workman,” ERV “of the cunning
workman’; instead of “I was by him as one
brought up [with him]” (Prov 8 30), RV has
“| was by him as a master workman.”

W. L. WALKER


World


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3106


’ ine wirld (COSMOLOGICAL, koz-mé-loj’-
i-kal):


1. Terms and General Meaning

2. Hebrew Idea of the World

3. lts Extent

4. Origin of the World—Biblical and Contrasted Views

5. The Cosmogony of Gen 1—Comparison with Baby-
lonian and Other Cosmogonies

6. Gen 1 and Science

LITERATURE


_ The Hebrews had no proper word for “world”
in its wide sense of “universe.”? The nearest ap-
proach to such a meaning is in the


1. Terms phrase ‘“‘the heavens and the earth”
and (Gen 1 1, etc). Even this, in a physi-
General cal reference, does not convey the
Meaning modern idea, for the earth is still the


center with which heaven and the
heavenly bodies are connected as adjuncts. It is
here, however, to be remembered that to the Heb
mind the physical world was not the whole. Be-
yond were the heavens where God’s throne was,
peopled by innumerable spiritual intelligences,
whose hosts worshipped and obeyed Him (Gen 28
12; Ps 103 19-21, etc). Their conception of the
universe was thus enlarged, but the heavens, in this
sense, would not be included in the “world.” For
‘svorld,” in its terrestrial meaning, several Heb
words are used. The AV thus occasionally renders
the word ’ere¢, ‘“‘earth” (the rendering is retained
in RV in Isa 23 17; Jer 25 26; in Ps 22 27; Isa
62 11, it is changed to its proper meaning ‘‘earth’’);
‘alam, “age,” twice rendered ‘‘world’ in AV (Ps 73
12; Eccl 3 11), is changed in RV—in the latter
case into “eternity.’”’ The chief word for “world”
in the sense of the habitable earth, the abode of man,
with its fulness of created life, is tebhél—a poetical
term (1828; 28 22 16; Job 18 18; 34 13;
87 12; Ps 9 8; 18 15, etc)—answering to the Gr
oikouméné.

In the NT a frequent word for “world” is aién,
“age” (Mt 12 32; 13 22.39.40.49; 24 3; Mk 4 19;
Lk 16 8; Rom 12 2; He 1 2, etc). RV notes in
these cases ‘‘age” in m, and sometimes changes in
text into “of old” (thus ARV in Lk 1 70; Acts 3
21), ‘‘ages,” “times,” etc, according to the sense (cf
1 Cor 10 11; He 6 5; 9 26; 2 Tim 1 9; Tit 1 2,
etc). Most generally the Gr word used is késmos,
the ‘ordered world” (e.g. Mt 4 8; 6 14; 26 13;
Mk 8 36; Jn 19; 8 12; Acts 17 24; Rom 1 8.20,
etc). The wider sense of “all creation,” or “‘uni-
verse’ (see above on the OT), is expressed by such
phrases as pénta, “all things’ (Jn 1 3), pdsa hé
ktisis, ‘the whole creation” (Rom 8 22).

Two errors are to be avoided in framing a repre-
sentation of the Heb conception of the world. (1)

The attempt should not be made to
2. Hebrew find in the Bib. statements precise
Idea of the anticipations of modern scientific dis-
World coveries. The relations of the Bib.

teaching to scientific discovery are
considered below. Here it is enough to say that
the view taken of the world by Bib. writers is not
that of modern science, but deals with the world
simply as we know it—as it lies spread out to ordi-
nary vicw—and things are described in popular
language as they appear to sense, not as telescope,
microscope, and other appliances of modern knowl-
edge reveal their nature, laws and relations to us.
The end of the narration or description is through-
out religious, not theoretic. (2) On the other hand,
the error is to be avoided of forcing the language of
popular, often metaphorical and poetic, description
into the hard-and-fast forms of a cosmogony which
it is by no means intended by the writers to yield.
It is true that the Hebrews had no idea of our
modern Copernican astronomy, and thought of the
earth as a flat surface, surmounted by a vast ex-


panse of heaven, in which sun, moon and stars were
placed, and from whose reservoirs the rain de-
scended. But it is an exaggeration of all this to
speak, as is sometimes done, as if the Hebrews were
children who thought of the sky as a solid vault
(Gen 1 6-8; Job 87 18), | supported on pillars
(Job 26 11), and pierced with windows (Gen 7 11;
Isa 24 18), through which the rains came. ‘The
world is a solid expanse of earth, surrounded by
and resting on a world-ocean, and surmounted by a
rigid vault called the ‘firmament,’ above which the
waters of a heavenly ocean are spread” (Skinner).
The matter is carried farther when elaborate re-
semblances are sought between the Heb and Bab
cosmogonies (see below). Such representations,
though common, are misleading. Language is not
to be pressed in this prosaic, unelastic way. It is
forgotten that if the “firmament” or “heaven” is
sometimes spoken of as a solid vault, it is at other
times compared to a “curtain” stretched out (Ps
104 2; Isa 40 22), or a “scroll” that can be rolled
up (Isa 34 4); if “windows” of heaven are once or
twice mentioned, in many other places there is a
quite clear recognition that the rain comes from the
clouds in the air (Jgs 5 4; Job 36 28; Ps 77 17,
etc); if the earth is sometimes spoken of asa “circle’’
(Isa-40 22), at other times it has “corners” and
“ends” (Isa 11 12; Dt 33 17; Job 37 3; Ps 19
6, etc); if sun, moon and stars are figured as if
attached to the firmament—‘“‘fixed as nails,” as one
has put it—‘from which they might be said to drop
off” (Isa 14 12, etc), far more frequently the sun 1s
represented as pursuing his free, rejoicing course
around the heavens (Ps 19 5.6, etc), the moon as
“walking” in brightness (Job 31 26), etc. The
proper meaning of the word rd@ki*‘ is simply ‘‘ex-
panse,” and the pellucid vault of the heavens, in
which the clouds hung, and through which the sun
traveled, had probably for the Hebrews associations
not very different from what it has to the average
mind of today. The earth, itself composed of “dry
land” and “seas’”’ (Gen 1 9.10), the former with its
mountains, valleys and rivers, may have been con-
ceived of as encircled by an ocean—the circular
form being naturally suggested by the outline of the
horizon. A few passages convey the idea of depths
within or beneath, as well as around the solid earth
(Gen 7 11; Dt 33 13)—-a thought again suggested
by springs, wells, floods, and similar natural phe-
nomena—but there is no fixity in these representa-
tions. One place in Job (26 7) has the bold idea
of the earth as hung in free space—a near approach
to the modern conception.
The Ideas formed of the extent of the world were natu-
rally limited by the geographical knowledge of the
Hebrews, and expanded as that knowledge
3. Its Extent increased. At no time, however, was it so
. limited as might be supposed. The Tani
or Nations (q.v.) in Gen 10 shows a
wide knowledge of the different peoples of the world,
“after their tongues, in their lands, in their nations”
{vs 20.31). The outlook to the W. was bounded by
the Mediterranean (‘‘great sea,"’ Nu _84 6; Ezk 47 10,
etc), with its ‘‘islands’’ (Gen 10 5; Isa 11 11, etc), to
Tarshish (Spain?) in the extreme W. To the N. was
the great empire of the Hittites (Josh 1 4; 1 K 10 29,
etc). N. and K., across the desert, beyond Syria, lay
the famillar region of Mesopotamia (Aram-Naharaim,
Ps 60, title), with Ararat (Gen 8 4) still farther N.; and,
southward, in the Tigris-Euphrates valley, the ancient
and powerful empires of Assyria and Babylonia (Gen
2 14; 10 10.11), with Media and Elam (Gen 10 2.22),
ata later time Persia (Est 1 1),fartherE. TotheS.E.,
between the Red Sea and the Pers Gulf, lay the great
peninsula of Arabia, and to the W. of the Red Sea, ew.
of Canaan, the might. Egynt, Israel's never-forgotten
‘‘land of bondage” (Hx 20 2, etc). _S. of Egypt was
Ethiopia._Of more distant peoples, India is eae men-
tioned in Est 1 1; 8 9, but trade with it must have been
as early as the days of Solomon. On the dim horizon
are such peoples as Gomer (the Cimmerians, N. of the
Euxine, Gen 10 2; Ezk 38 6) and Magog (Gen 10 2;
Ezk 38 2, the Scythians [?]); probably even China is
Intended by ‘‘the land of Sinim"' in Isa 49 12. In the


3107


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


World


apocryphal books and the NT the geographical area is
perceptibly widened. Particularly do Asia Minor,

acedonia, Greece and Italy, with their islands, cities,
etc, come clearly into view. A list like that in Acts 2
9—11 of the representatives of peoples present at the day
of Pentecost gives a vivid glimpse of the extent of the
ene religious connection at this period (cf Acts §


From thefirst there has been abundant speculation
in religion and philosophy as to how the world came
to be—whether it was eternal, or had
4. Origin a commencement, and, if it began to
of World— be, how it originated. Theories were,
Biblical and as they are still, numberless and vari-
Contrasted ous. Some cosmogonies were purely
Views mythological (Bab, Hesiod); some were
materialistic (Democritus, Epicurus—
“concourse of atoms’’); some were demiurgic (Plato
in Timaeus—an eternal matter formed by a demi-
urge); some were emanational (Gnostics—result of
overflowing of fulness of Divine life in “aeons’”);
some were dualistic (Parsism, Manicheism—good
and evil principles in conflict); some imagined end-
less ‘‘cycles’’—alternate production and destruction
(Stoics, Buddhist kalpas); many were pantheistic
(Spinoza—an eternal “substance,” its “attributes”
necessarily determined in their “modes”; Hegel,
“absolute spirit,’”’ evolving by logical necessity);
some are pessimistic (Schopenhauer—the world the
result of an irrational act of ‘will’; hence necessarily
evil), etc.

In contrast with these conflicting, and often
foolish and irrational, theories, the Bib. doctrine
of the origin of the world stands alone and unique.
It is unique because the view of God on which it
rests is unique. According to the teaching of the
Bible, from its first page to its last, God is a free,
personal Spirit, one, omnipotent, holy, and the world
originates in a free act of His almighty will (Gen
11; Ps 33 9; He 11 3; Rev 4 11, etc), is con-
tinually upheld by His power, ruled by His provi-
dence, and is the sphere of the realization of His
purpose. As against theories of the eternity of
the world, accordingly, it declares that the world
had a beginning (Gen 1 1); as against dualism, it
declares that it is the product of one almighty will
(Dt 4 35; Isa 45 7; 1 Cor 8 6, etc); as against
the supposition of an eternal matter, it declares that
matter as well as form takes its origin from God
(Gen 1 1; He 11 3); as against pantheism and all
theories of necessary development, it affirms the
distinction of God from His world, His transcend-
ence over it as well as His immanence in it, and His
free action in creation (Eph 4 6; Rev 4 11); as
against pessimism, it declares the constitution, aim
and end of the world to be ae (Gen 1 31; Ps 33
5; Mt 5 45, etc). To the OT doctrine of the origin
of the world the NT adds the fuller determination
that the world was created through the agency of
the “Word” (Logos), or Son (Jn 1 3; Col 1 16,
17; He 1 2.3, etc).

No stronger proof could be afforded of the truth
and sublimity of the Bib. account of the origin of

things than is given by the comparison
&. Cosmog- of the narrative of creation in Gen 1—
ony of Gen 2 4, with the mythological cosmogonies
1—Compar- and theogonies found in other reli-
ison with gions. Of these the best known, up
Babylonian to the time of recent discoveries, were


and Other the Bab account of the creation pre-
Cosmog- served by Berosus, a priest of Babylon
onies in the 3d cent. BC, and the Theogony of


the Gr Hesiod (9th cent. BC). Hesiod’s
poem is a confused story of how from Chaos came
forth Earth, Tartarus (Hell), Eros (Love) and Ere-
bus (Night). Erebus gives birth to Aether (Day).
Earth produces the Heaven and the Sea. Earth
and Heaven, in turn, become the parents of the


elder gods and the Titans. Cronus, one of these
gods, begets Zeus. Zeus makes war on his father
Cronus, overthrows him, and thus becomes king
of the Olympian gods. The descent of these is then
traced. How far this fantastic theory, commencing
with Chaos, and from it generating Nature and
the gods, has itself an original affinity with Bab
conceptions, need not here be discussed. It hardly
surpasses in crudeness the late shape of the Bab
cosmogony furnished by Berosus. Here, too, Chaos
—“darkness and water’—is the beginning, and
therefrom are generated strange and peculiar forms,
men with wings and with two faces, or with heads
and horns of goats, bulls with human heads, dogs
with four bodies, etc. Over this welter a woman
presides, called Omorka. Belus appears, cuts the
Woman in twain, of one half of her makes the heavens,
and of the other the earth, sets the world in order,
finally makes one of the gods cut off his head, and
from the blood which flowed forth, mixed with earth,
forms intelligent man. That Berosus has not es-
sentially misrepresented the older Bab conceptions
is now made apparent through the recovery of the
Bab story itself.


In 1875 eorge Smlth discovered, among the tablets
In the Britlsh Museum brought from the grant library
of the Assyr king Assurbanipal (7th cent. BC), several
on which was inscribed the Chaldaean story of creation,
and next year published his work, The Chaldean Account
of Gen, The tablets, supplemented by other fragments,
have since been repeatedly tr¢ by_ other hands, the most
complete tr being that by L. W. King in his Seven Tab-
lets of Creation in the Babylonian and Assyrian Legends
concerning the Creation of the World. The story of these
tablets, still in many parts fragmentary, is now familiar
(see BaBprtoniaN ReEicion AND LiTERATURE). Here,
too, the origin of all things is from Chaos, the presiding
deitles of which are Apsu and Tiamat. The gods are
next called into being. Then follows a long mythological
description, occupying the first four tablets, of the war
of Marduk with Tiamat, the conflict issuing in the woman
being cut in two, and heaven being formed of one half
and earth of the other. The 5th tablet narrates the ap-
pointing of the constellations. The 6th seems to have
recorded the creation of man from the blood of Marduk.
This mythological epic is supposed by many scholars
to he the original of the sublime, orderly, monotheistic
account of the creation which stands at the commence-
ment of our Bible. The Bab story is (without proof)
supposed to have become naturalized in Israel, and there
purified and elevated in accordance with the higher ideas
of Israel's religion. We cannot subscribe to this view,
which seems to us loaded with internal and historical
improbabilities. Points of__resemblance are indeed
alleged, as in the use of the Heb word thém for ‘‘deep"
(Gen 1 2), cognate with Tiamat; the separation of
heaven and earth (Gen ] 6-8); the appointing of the
constellations (Gen_1 14-18), etc. But in the midst
of the pcan resemblances, how enormous are the con-
trasts, which all writers acknowledge! Gunkel, e.g.,
says, ‘Anyone who compares this ancient Bab myth
with Gen 1, will perceive at once hardiy anything else
than the infinite distance between them. There the
heathen gods, inflamed against each other in wild war-
fare, here the One, who speaks and it is done" (Israel und
Babylonien, 24). One can understand how these wild
polytheistic legends could arise from corruption of a
purer, simpler form, but not vice versa. The idea of a
“deep,"’ or chaos, must have preceded the fanciful and
elaborate creation of the woman-monster, Tiamat; the
distinction of sky and earth would go before the coarse
idea of the cutting of the woman in two; and so with the
other features of supposed resemblance. Professor Clay
has recently shown reason for challenging the whole idea
of the borrowing of these myths from Babylonia, and
declares that “it is unreasonable to assume that the
Heb ¢’hém is a modification of a Bab pattern. . .. . To
say, therefore, that the origin of the Marduk-Tiamat
myth is to be found in a Nippurian version, originally
known as Ellil-Tiamat, is utterly without foundation”
(Amurru, 50). Much more reasonably may we adopt
the hypothesis of Dillmann, Kittel, Hommel, Oettli, etc,
that the relation between these Bab legends and the Bib.
narratives is one of cognateness, and not_of derivation.
These traditions came down from a much older source
and are preserved by the Hebrews in their purer form
(see the writer’s POT, 402-9).


The superiority of the Gen cosmogony to those
of other peoples is generally admitted, but objec-
tion to it is taken in the name of modern science.
The narrative conflicts, it is said, with both modern
astronomy and modern geology; with the former, in


World
Wormwood


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3108


regarding the earth as the center of the universe,
and with the latter in its picture of the order and

stages of creation, and the time occu-
6. Gen 1 pied in the work (for a full statement
and Science of these alleged discrepancies, see Dr.

Driver’s Gen, Intro). On the general
question of the harmony of the Bible with science
it 1s Important that a right standpoint be adopted.
It has already been stated that it is no part of
the aim of the Bib. revelation to anticipate the
discoveries of 19th- and 20th-cent. science. The
world is taken as it is, and set in its relations
to God its Creator, without consideration of what
after-light science may throw on its inner consti-
tution, laws and methods of working. As Calvin,
with his usual good sense, in his comm. on Gen i
says, ‘‘Moses wrote in the popular style, which,
without instruction, all ordinary persons endowed
with common sense are able to understand... . .
He does not call us up to heaven; but only pro-
poses things that lie open before our eyes.” This of
liself disposes of the objection drawn from astron-
omy, for everywhere heaven and earth are spoken
of according to their natural appearances, and not
in the language of modern Copernican science. To
this hour we use the same language in speaking of
the sun rising and setting.

The further objection that modern knowledge
discredits the Bib. view by showing how small a
speck the world is in the infinitude of the universe
is really without force. Whatever the extent of the
universe, it remains the fact that on this little planet
life has effloresced into reason, and we have as yet
no ground in science for believing that anywhere
else it has ever done so (cf Dr. A. R. Wallace’s
striking book, Man’s Place in the Universe). Even
supposing that there are any number of inhabited
worlds, this does not detract from the soul’s value
in this world, or from God’s love in the salvation of
its sinful race. The objection drawn from geology,
though so much is sometimes made of it, is hardly
more formidable. It does not follow that, because
the Bible does not teach modern science, we are
justified in saying that it contradicts it. On the
contrary, it may be affirmed, so true is the stand-

oint of the author in this first chapter of Gen, so
Divine the illumination with which he is endowed,
so unerring his insight into the order of Nature,
that there is little in his description that even yet,
with our advanced knowledge, we need to change.
To quote words used elsewhere, ‘‘The dark watery
waste over which the Spirit broods with vivifying
power, the advent of light, the formation of an
atmosphere or sky capable of sustaining the clouds
above it, the settling of the great outlines of the
‘continents and seas, the clothing of the dry land
with abundant vegetation, the adjustment of the


earth’s relation to sun and moon as the visible rulers.


of its day and night, the production of the great sea-
monsters and reptile-like creatures and birds, the
peopling of the earth with four-footed beasts and
cattle, last. of all, the advent of man-—is there so
much of all this which science requires us to cancel?”
(Orr, Christian View of God and the World, 421).
Even in regard to the ‘“days’—the duration of
time involved—there is no insuperable difficulty.
The writer may well have intended symbolically
to represent the creation as a great week of work,
ending with the Creator’s Sabbath rest. In view,
however, of the fact that days of 24 hours do not
begin to run till the appointment of the sun on the
4th day (Gen 1 14), it seems more probable that
he did not intend to fix a precise length to his
creation ‘days.’ This is no new speculation.
Already Augustine asks, “Of what fashion these
days were it is exceeding hard or altogether impos-
sible to think, much more to speak” (De Civ. Dei,


xi.6, 7); and Thomas Aquinas in the Middle Ages
leaves the matter an open question. Neither does
this narrative, in tracing the origin of all things to
the creative word of God, conflict with anything
that may be discovered by science as to the actual
method of creation, e.g. in evolution. Science itself
is gradually coming to see the limits within which
the doctrine of evolution must be received, and,
kept within these limits, there is nothing in that
doctrine which brings it into conflict with the Bib.
representations (see ANTHROPOLOGY; CREATION;
Evotutton; also the writer’s works, God’s Image
in Man and Sin as a Problem of Today). Whatever
may be said of the outward form of the narrative,
one has only to look at the great ideas which the
first chapter of Gen is intended to teach to see
that it conveys those great truths on the origin and
ordering of things which are necessary as the basis
of a true religious view of the world, no matter to
what stage knowledge or science may attain. This
chapter, standing at the head of the Bible, lays the
foundation for all that follows in the Bib. view of the
relation of God to the world, and yields the ground
for our confidence that, as all things are created by
God and dependent on Him, so everything in Nature
and providence is at His disposal for the execution
of His purposes and the care and protection of His
people. The story of creation, therefore, remains
to all time of the highest religious value.


Literaturze.—See arts. ‘‘Earth’’ in Smith’s DB and
in EB. The other works mentioned above may be con-
sulted. A valuable extended discussion. of the word
‘Firmament’’ may be seen in Essay V of the older work,
Aids to Faith (London, Murray), 220-30.

James OrR

WORLD, END OF THE. See EscuatTo.ocy or


THE NT; Heavens, New.


WORLD (GENERAL): In AV this word represents
several originals, as follows: YTS, ’ere¢, “earth”;


nia) , hedhel, “‘the underworld”; i,
1. Original heledh, “lifetime,” “age”; D2, ‘alam,


Words “indefinite time,” “age”; DT, t2bhal,
‘Fertile earth’; v4, gé, “earth”; alwy,
aién, “age,” “indefinite time,” with frequent con-


notation of the contents of time, its influences and
powers; olxovzévn, oikouméné, “inhabited earth,”
the world of man considered im its area and distri-
bution; last, and most frequently, xécuos, késmos,
properly “order,” with the suggestion of beauty;
thence the material universe, as the great example
of such ‘order; then the moral universe, the total
system of intelligent creatures, perhaps sometimes
including angels (1 Cor 4 9), but as a rule human
beings only; then, in view of the fact of universal
human failure, humanity in its sinful aspect, the
spirit and forces of fallen humanity regarded as
antagonistic to God and to good, “all around us
which does not love God.”

Of the above terms, some need not detain us;
’ereg, ag the original to “world,” occurs only thrice,

hedhel, once, heledh, twice, ‘élam, twice
2. Remarks (including Eccl 3 11), gé, once. The

most important of the series, looking at
frequency of occurrence, are ¢ébhél, aidn, oikoumené,
kosmos. On these we briefly comment in order.

(1) Tébhél.—This, as the original to “world,”
occurs in 35 places, of which 15 are found in Pss and
9 in the first half of Isa. By derivation it has to do
with produce, fertility, but this cannot be said to
come out in usage. The word actually plays near!
the same part as “globe” with us, denoting man’s
material dwelling-place, as simply as possible, with-
out moral suggestions.

_ (2) Aién.—We have indicated above the special-
ity of this word. It is a time, with the suggestion
always of extension rather than limit (so that it


3109


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


World
Wormwood


lends itself to phrases denoting vast if not endless
extension, such as ‘‘to the aiéns of atdns,"’ rendered
“forever and ever,” or “world without end”). In
He 1 2; 11 13, it denotes the “aeons” of the
creative process. In numerous places, notably in
_ Mt, it refers to the ‘“dispensations’”’ of redemption,
the present ‘age’ of grace and, in distinction, the
“age” which is to succeed it—“‘that world, and the
resurrection” (Lk 20 35). Then, in view of the
moral contents of the present state of things, it
freely passes into the thought of forces and influ-
ences tending against faith and holiness, e.g., ‘““Be
not fashioned according to this world” (Rom 12 2).
In this connection the Evil Power is said to be “the
god of this world” (2 Cor 4 4).

(3) The word oikowmené occasionally means the
Rom empire, regarded as preéminently the region
of settled human life. So Lk 2 1; Acts 11 28, and
perhaps Rev 3 10, and other apocalyptic passages.
In He it is used mystically of the Empire of the
Messiah (1 6; 2 5).

(4) Kosmos.—We have remarked above on this
word, with its curious and suggestive history of
meanings. It may be enough here to add that that
history prepares us to find its reference varying by
subtle transitions, even in the same passage. See
eg. Jn 1 10, where ‘‘the world” appears first to
denote earth and man simply as the creation of ‘‘the
Word,” and then mankind as sinfully alienated from
their Creator. We are not surprised accordingly
to read on the one hand that “God . . . . loved the
world” (Jn 3 16), and on the other that the Chris-
tian must “not love the world” (1 Jn 2 15). The
reader will find the context a sure clue in all cases,
and the study will be pregnant of instruction.

Hanpitey DUNELM

WORM, wirm, SCARLET-WORM, skAr’let-
worm: (1) 924m, tla, NYPIM, sle'ah, NYDN,
folatath, WISH, tola‘ath, from V V2, tala‘; ef Arab.


3, tala, “to stretch the neck”; usually with


"0, shani, “bright” (cf Arab. sin » sand,
flash of lightning’’), the
term “70 nsdn, tola‘ath
shani being tr? “scarlet”
in EV; also im the same
sense the following:
MIDIM WW, sheni tla‘ath
(Lev 14 4), So5m, sala
(Isa 1 18, EV “crimson”’),
O70, shénim (Prov 31
21; Isa 1 18, EV “scar-
let”), "2U , shani (Gen 38
28; Josh 2 18; Cant 43);
also «éxxos, kékkos, and
xéxkivos, kékkinos (Mt 27
28; He 9 19; Rev 17 3.4;
18 12.16). (2) 701, rim-
méh, from y¥ OO, ra-
mam, “to putrefy” (Ex 16
20); cf Arab. nS , ramm, “to become carious” (of
bone). (3) 09, sds (only in Isa 61 8); ef Arab.
; , sts, “worm”; oys, sés, “moth” (Mt 6 19).
(4) ont, zonalim (Mic 7,17, AV “worms,” RV
“crawling things”), from ¥ MT, zahal, “to crawl.”
(5) oxdadnk, skdléx (Mk 9 48), oKxwdykbBpwros, skolé-
kébrotos, “eaten of worms” (Acts 12 23).
Besides the numerous passages, mostly in Ex,


referring to the tabernacle, where ddla‘ath, with
shani, is tr? “scarlet,” there are eight passages in


“


a


Scarlet Insect.


which it is tr’ “worm.’’ These denote worms which
occur in decaying organic matter or in sores (Ex 16
20; Isa 14 11; 66 24); or which are destructive
to plants (Dt 28 39; Jon 4 7); or the word is used
as a term of contempt or depreciation (Job 25 6;
Ps 22 6; Isa 41 14). Rimmdéh is used in the same
senses. It occurs with (dla‘ath as a synonym in
Ex 16 24; Job 26 6; Isa 1411. In Job 25 6, EV,
rendering both {dla‘ath and rimmah by ‘worm,”
’énosh and ’adham by “man,” and introducing twice
“that is a,” makes a painfully monotonous distich
out of the concise and elegant original, in which not
one word of the first part is repeated in the second.
Sds (Isa 51 8), EV “worm,” is the larva of the
clothes-moth. See Mors. In none of the cases
here considered are worms, properly so called, de-
noted, but various insect larvae which are commonly
called ‘worms,’ e.g. “silkworm,” ‘apple-worm,”
“meal-worm,” etc. These larvae are principally
those of Diptera or flies, Coleoptera or beetles, and
Lepidoptera or butterflies and moths.


Tola'ath shani, *'scarlet,"’ is the scarlet-worm, Cermes
vermilio, a scale-insect which feeds upon the oak, and
which is used for producing a red dye. It is called by
the Arabs dédeh, ‘a worm,” a word also used for various
insectlarvae. Itis also called kirmiz, whence ‘‘crimson"’
and the generic name Cermes. This scarlet-worm or
scale-insect is one of the family Coccidae of the order
Rhynchota or Hemiptera, The female is wingless and
adheres to its favorite plant by its long, sucking beak,
by which it extracts the sap on which it lives. After
once attaching itself it remains motionless, and when
dead its body shelters the eggs which have been deposited
beneath it. The males, which are smaller than the
females, pass through a complete metamorphosis and
develop wings. The dye is made from the dried bodies
of the females. Other species yielding red dyes are
Porphyrophora_ polonica and Coccus cacti. The last
nated is the Mexican cochineal insect which feeds on
the cactus and which largely supplanted the others after
the discovery of erica. Aniline dyes have in turn to
a great extent superseded these natural organic colors,
which, however, continue to be unsurpassed for some
purposes. See Coors.


ALFRED E1y Day


Wormwood (Artemisia absinthium).


WORMWOOD, wirm’wodd (7329, Zaténah [Dt
29 18; Prov 6 4; Jer 9 15; 23 15; Lam 3 15.19;
Am 5 7; 6 12, AV hemlock]; apuivOos, dpsinthos


Wormwood, Star
Worship


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3110


[Rev 8 11]): What the Heb la‘dénah may have been
is obscure; it is clear it was a bitter substance and
it is usually associated with ‘gall’; in LXX it is
variously tr4, but never by apsinthos, ‘“wormwood.”
Nevertheless all ancient tradition supports the EV
tr. The genus Artemisia (N.O. Composiiae), “worm-
wood,” has five species of shrubs or herbs found in
Pal (Post), any one of which may furnish a bitter
taste. The name is derived from the property of
Taany species acting as anthelmintics, while other
varictics arc used in the manufacture of absinthe.
; E. W. G. Masrerman

WORMWOOD, THE STAR: In Rev 8 11, the
name is figurative, given to a great star which, at the
sounding of the third angel’s trumpet, fell from
heaven upon the third part of the rivers and on the
fountains of the waters, turning them to a bitter-
ness of which many died. Wormwood is used of
bitter calamities (cf Lam 3 15), and may here indi-
cate some judgment, inflicted under a noted leader,
affecting chiefly the Internal sources of a country’s
prosperity. Older expositors, applying the earlier
trumpets to the downfall of the Rom empire, saw


in the star a symbol of the barbarian invasions of


See also Astronomy, I, 8.
JAMES ORR
WORSHIP, wir’ship (AS weorthscipe, wyrth-
scype, “honor,” from weorth, wurth, “worthy,”
“honorable,” and scipe, ‘‘ship’’):


Attila or Genseric.


3. NT Worship
4. Public Christian Worship
LITERATURE

Honor, reverence, homage, in thought, feeling, or
act, paid to men, angels, or other “‘spiritual’’ beings,
and figuratively to other entities, ideas, powers or
qualities, but specifically and supremely to Deity.

The principal OT word is MMW, shahah, “depress,”
“bow down,” “prostrate” (Hithpael), as in Ex 4

31, “bowed their heads and wor-
shipped”; so in 94 other places. The
context determines more or less clearly
whether the physical act or the volitional and emo-
tional idea is mtended. The word is applied to
acts of reverence to human superiors as well as
supernatural. RV renders it according to its physi-
cal aspect, as indicated by the context, “bowed
himself down’ (AV “worshipped,”’ Gen 24 52; ef
23 7; 27 29, etc).

Other words are: 0 , saghadh, “‘ prostrate,” occurring
in Isa 44 15.17.19; 46 6, but rendered (EV) ‘‘fall down.”
In Dnl 2 46; 3 5.6.7.10.15.18.28, it (Aram. "40, s*ghidh)
is “worship” (EV), 7 t associated with “falling down”
and 5 t with ‘‘serve.’’ say. ‘abhadh, ‘work,’ “‘labor,’’


“‘serve,’’ is rendered ‘‘ worship’ by EV in 2 K 10 19.21 ff:

“the worshippers [servants] of Baal.” In Isa 19 21 RV

has ‘‘ worship with sacrifice and oblation’’ (AV ‘“‘dosacri-

fice’). Isa 19 23 AV has ‘‘served,’’ RV “worship.”

wy, ‘dceabh, “carve,” ‘‘fabricate,” ‘‘fashion,’’ is once
okt


given ‘‘ worship,’ i.e. ‘‘ make [an object of] worship’’ (Jer
44 19, ARVm ‘‘portray’’).

The OT idea is therefore the reverential attitude
of mind or body or both, combined with the more
generic notions of religious adoration, obedience,
service.

The principal NT word (59 t) is rpockvvéw, pros-
kunéd, “‘kiss [the hand or the ground] toward,”
hence often in the oriental fashion bowing prostrate
upon the ground; accordingly, LXX uses it for the
Hithpael of shahah (hishtahdwah), “prostrate one-
self.’ It is to render homage to men, angels,
demons, the devil, the “beast,” idols, or to God. It
is rendered 16 t to Jesus as a beneficent superior;
at least 24 t to God or to Jesus as God. The root
idea of bodily prostration is much less prominent
than in the OT. It is always tr? “worship.”


1. Terms


Next in frequency is oéSonza, sébomat, ‘‘venerate,”
and its various cognates, ccSdgoua, sebdzomai, evocBéw,
eusebéd, ScogeBys, theosebés, s¢Bacna, sébasma. Its root
is oéBas, sébas, ‘‘fear,” but this primitive meaning is com-
pletely merged into ‘‘reverence,” ‘‘ hold in awe”: In
vain do they worship me” (Mt 15 9, etc). Aarpevu,
latredé, is ‘‘serve’’ (religiously), or ‘worship publicly,
‘“perform sacred services,” ‘‘offer gifts,’’ ‘worship God
in the observance of the rites instituted for His worship.’’
Itis tra‘‘ worship” in Acts 7 42; 24 14 AV, but “serve,
ARV: “serve the host of heaven,’ “‘serve I the God of
our fathers”; but both AV and ARV render Phil 3 3,
“worship by the Spirit of God,” and He 10 2, ‘the
worshippers,”’ the context in the first two heing general,
in the second two specific. In 2 Tim 1 3 and many
other cases both AV and RV give ‘“‘serve,”’ the meaning
not being confined to worship; but cf Lk 2 37 RV:
“worshipping [AV ‘‘served”’] with fastings and suppli-
cations.” Rom 1 25 gives both sebazomai and latreud
in their specific meanings: ‘‘ worshipped [venerated] and
served [religiously] the creature."’ é6fa, déwa, “‘glory
(Lk 14.10 AV: “Thou shalt have worship,’’ is a sur-
vival of an old Eng. use, rightly discarded in RV). 4pns-
xeia, thrésketa (Col 2 18), ‘‘a voluntary humility and
worshipping of the angels” (ARVm ‘‘an act of rever-
ence”’), has the root idea of trembling or fear, | Gepamciw,
therapetd, “serve,” ‘‘heal,” ‘‘tend” (Acts 17 25 AV:
‘*neither is worshipped by men’s hands’’), is “‘served’”
in RV, perhaps properly, but its close connection with
‘temples made with hands’? makes this questionable.
vewxdpos, nedkéros, ‘‘temple-sweepers,’’ ‘‘temple-keeper”
(Acts 19 35), hasits true meaning in RV, hut ‘“ worship-
per’’ is needed to complete the idea, in our modern idiom.

In the Apoc the usage is the same as in the NT, the
vbs. used heing, in the order of their frequency, proskuneé,
sebomat, thréskeud, and latreud.


The NT idea of worship is a combination of the
reverential attitude of mind and body, the general
ceremonial and religious service of God, the feeling
of awe, veneration, adoration; with the outward
and ceremonial aspects approaching, but not reach-
ing, the vanishing point. The total idca of worship,
however, both in the OT and NT, must be built up,
not from the words specifically so tr?, but also, and
chiefly, from the whole body of description of wor-
shipful feeling and action, whether of individuals
singly and privately, or of larger bodies engaged in
the public services of sanctuary, tabernacle, temple,
synagogue, upper room or meeting-place.

Space permits no discussion of the universality
of worship in some form, ranging from superstitious
fear or fetishism to the highest spiritual exercise .
of which man is capable; nor of the primary motive
of worship, whether from a desire to placate, in-
gratiate, or propitiate some higher power, or to
commune and share with him or it, or express in-
stinctive or purposed devotion to him. On the
face of the Bible narratives, the instinct of com-
munion, praise, adoring gratitude would seem to
be the earliest moving force (cf Gen 4 3.4, Cain,
Abel; Rom 1 18-25, the primitive knowledge of
God as perverted to creature-worship; Gen 8 20,
Noah’s altar; and Gen 12 7, Abram’s altar).
That pepilenen was an early element is indicated
probably by Abel’s offering from the flock, cer-
tainly by the whole system of sacrifice. Whatever
its origin, worship as developed in the OT is the
expression of the religious instinct in penitence,
prostration, adoration, and the uplift of holy joy
before the Creator.

In detail, OT worship was individual and private,
though not necessarily seerct, as with Eliezer (Gen

24 26f), the expression of personal
2. OT gratitude for the success of a mission,
Worship or with Moses (Ex 34 8), seeking God’s
p favor in intercessory prayer; it was
sometimes, again, though private, in closest associa-
tion with others, perhaps with a family significance
(Gen 8 20, Noah; Gen 12 7; 22 5, Abraham: “I
and the lad will go yonder; and . . . . worship’);
it was In company with the “great congregation,’
perhaps partly an individual matter, but gaining
blessing and force from the presence of others (Ps
42 4: “I went with thethrong . . . . keeping holy-
day’); and it was, as the national spirit developed,


3111


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Wormwood, Star


Worship


the expression of the national devotion (1 Ch 29 20:
“And all the assembly . . . . worshipped Jeh, and
the king”). In this public national worship the
truly devout Jew took his greatest delight, for in it
were inextricably interwoven together, his patriot-
ism, his sense of brotherhood, his feeling of soli-
darity, his personal pride and his personal piety.

The general public worship, esp. as developed in
the Temple services, consisted of: (1) Sacrificial
acts, either on extraordinary occasions, as at the
dedication of the Temple, etc, when the blood of the
offerings flowed in lavish profusion (2 Ch 7 5),
or in the regular morning and evening sacrifices,
or on the great annual days, like the Day of Atone-
ment. (2) Ceremonial acts and posture of reverence
or of adoration, or symbolizing the seeking and
receiving of the Divine favor, as when the high
priest returned from presenting incense offering in
the holy place, and the people received his bene-
diction with bowed heads, reverently standing (2
Ch 7 6), or the worshippers prostrated themselves
as the priests sounded the silver trumpets at the
conclusion of each section of the Levites’ chant. (3)
Praise by the official ministrants of the people or
both together, the second probably to a very limited
extent. This service of praise was either instru-
mental, silver ‘trumpets and cymbals and instru-
ments of music,” or it might be in vocal song, the
chant of the Levites (very likely the congregation
took part in some of the antiphonal psalms); or it
might be both vocal and instrumental, as in the
magnificent dedicatory service of Solomon (2 Ch
5 13), when ‘‘the trumpeters and singers were as
one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and
thanking Jeh.” Or it might be simply spoken:
“And all the people said, Amen, and praised Jeh”
(1 Ch 16 36). How fully and splendidly this
musical element of worship was developed among
the Hebrews the Book of Ps gives witness, as well
as the many notices in Ch (1 Ch 16, 16,25; 2 Ch
5, 29, 30, etc). It is a pity that our actual knowl-
edge of Heb music should be so limited. (4) Public
prayer, such as is described in Dt 26, at the dedi-
cation of the Temple (2 Ch 6, etc), or like Pss 60,
79, 80. Shorter forms, half praise, half prayer,
formed a part of the service in Christ’s time. (5)
The annual feasts, with their characteristic cere-
monies. See Passover; TABERNACLE, etc. Places
of worship are discussed under Avtar; Hic Piacs;
SancTuary; TABERNACLE; TEMPLE, ete.

In the NT we find three sorts of public worship,
the temple-worship upon OT lines, the synagogue-

worship, and the worship which grew
3. NT up in the Christian church out of the
Worship characteristic life of the new faith.

The synagogue-worship, developed hy
and after the exile, largely substituted the book for
the symbol, and thought for the sensuous or object
appeal; it was also essentially popular, homelike,
familiar, escaping from the exclusiveness of the
priestly service. It had four principal pee (1)
the recitation of the sh¢ma‘, composed of Di 6 4-9;
11 13-21, and Nu 15 37-41, and beginning, ‘Hear
[sh?ma‘], O Israel: Jeh our God is one Jeh”; (2)
prayers, possibly following some set form, perhaps
repeating some psalm; (3) the reading by male indi-
viduals of extracts from the Law and the Prophets
selected by the “ruler of the synagogue,” in later
years following the fixed order of a lectionary, as
may have been the case when Jesus “found the
place”; (4) the targum or condensed explanation in
the vernacular of the Scriptures read.

It ig questioned whether singing formed a part
of the service, but, considering the place of music
in Jewish religious life, and its subsequent large
place in Christian worship, it is hard to think of it
as absent from the synagogue.


Public Christian worship necessarily developed
along the lines of the synagogue and not the temple,
since the whole sacrificial and _cere-


4. Public monial system terminated for Chris-
Christian _tiamity with the life and death of Jesus.
Worship The perception of this, however, was


aA gradual, as was the break of Jewish
Christians with both synagogue and temple. Jesus
Himself held the temple in high honor, loved to
frequent it as His Father’s house, reverently ob-
served the feasts, and exhibited the characteristic
attitude of the devout but un-Pharisaic Israelite
toward the temple and its worship. Yet hy speak-
ing of Himself as “greater than the temple” (Mt
12 6) and by quoting Hos 6 6, “I desire good-
ness and not sacrifice,’ He indicated the relative
subordinateness of the temple and its whole system
of worship, and in His utterance to the woman of
Samaria He intimated the abolition both of the
whole idea of the central sanctuary and of the entire
ceremonial worship: ‘Neither in this mountain,
nor in Jerus, shall ye worship the Father”; ‘They
that worship him must worship in spirit and
truth” (Jn 4 21.24). His chief interest in the
temple seems to have been as a “house of prayer”
and an opportunity to reach and touch the people.
We cannot help feeling that with all His love for
the holy precincts, He must have turned with relief
from the stately, formal, distant ceremonial of the -
temple, partly relieved though it was by the genuine
religious passion of many worshippers, to the freer,
more vital, closer heart-worship of the synagogue,
loaded though that also was with form, tradition,
ritual and error. Here He was a regular and
reverent attendant and participant (Mk 1 21.39;
31; 62; Lk 66). Jesus did not Himself pre-
scribe public worship for His disciples, no doubt
assuming that instinct and practice, and His own
spirit and example, would bring it about sponta-
neously, but He did seek to guard their worship from
the merely outward and spectacular, and laid great,
emphasis on privacy and real “innerness” in it
(Mt 6 1-18, etc). Synagogue-worship was prob-
ably not abandoned with Pentecost, but private
brotherhood meetings, like that in the upper
chamber, and from house to house, were added.
The young church could hardly have “grown in
favor with the people,” if it had completely with-
drawn from the popular worship, either in temple or
synagogue, although no attendance on the latter is
ever mentioned. Possibly the Christians drew
themselves together in a synagogue of their own, as
did the different nationalities. The reference in
Jas: ‘if there come unto your synagogue” (2 2),
while not conclusive, since ‘‘synagogue’? may have
gained a Christian significance by this time, never-
theless, joined with the traditions concerning James’s
ascetic zeal and popular repute, argues against such
a complete separation early. N ecessarily with the
development into clearness of the Christian ideas,
and with the heightening persecution, together with
the hard industrial struggle of life, the observance
of the Jewish Sabhath in temple or synagogue, and
of the Christian’s Lord’s Day, grew incompatible.
Yet the full development of this must have heen
rather late in Paul’s life. Compare his missionary
tactics of beginning his work at the synagogue, and
his custom of observing as far as possible the Jewish
feasts (Acts 20 16; 1 Cor 16 8). Our notions of
the worship of the early church must he constructed
out of the scattered notices descriptive of different
stages in the history, and different churches present
different phases of development. The time was
clearly the Lord’s Day, both by the Jewish churches
(Jn 20 19.26) and by the Gr (Acts 20 7; 1 Cor
16 2). The daily meeting of Acts 2 46 was prob-
ably not continued, no mention occurriug later.


Worship
Wrest


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3112


There are no references to yearly Christian festivals,
though the wide observance in the sub-apostolic
period of the Jewish Passover, with references to the
death and resurrection of Jesus, and of Pentecost
to commemorate the gift of the Holy Spirit, argues
for their early use. The place was of course at
first in private houses, and the earliest form of
Christian church architecture developed from this
model rather than the later one of the basilica.
1 Cor gives rather full data for the worship in this
free and enthusiastic church. It appears that there
were two meetings, a public and a private. The
public worship was open, informal and missionary,
as well as edificatory. The unconverted, inquirers
and others, were expected to be present, and were
frequently converted in the mecting (1 Cor 14 24).
It resembled much more closely an evangelical
“prayer and conference meeting” of today than
our own formal church services. There is no men-
tion of official ministrants, though the meeting seems
to have been under some loose guidance. Any
male member was free to take part as the Spirit
might prompt, esp. in the line of his particular
“spiritual gift’? from God, although one individual
might have several, as Paul himself. Largely
developed on synagogue lines, but with a freedom
and spirit the latter must have greatly lacked, it was
composed of: (1) Prayer by several, each followed
by the congregational “Amen.” (2) Praise, con-
sisting of hymns composed by one or another of the
brethren, or coming down from the earlier days of
Christian, perhaps Jewish, history, like the Bene-
dictus, the Magnificat, the Nune dimittis, etc. Por-
tions of these newer hymns seem to be imbedded
here and there in the NT, as at Rev 5 9-13:
“Worthy art thou,” etc (cf Rev 16 3; 11 17, etc);
also: ‘“He who was manifested in the flesh, Justified
in the spirit, Seen of angels, Preached among the
nations, Believed on in the world, Received up in
glory” (1 Tim 3 16). Praise also might take the
form of individual testimony, not in metrical form
(1 Cor 14 16). (3) Reading of the Scripture must
have followed, according to the synagogue model.
Paul presupposes an acquaintance with the OT
Scriptures and the facts of Jesus’ life, death, resur-
rection. Instructions to read certain epp. in the
churches indicate the same. (4) Instruction, as in
1 Cor 2 7; 6 5, teaching for edification. (These
passages, however, may not have this specific ref-
erence.) (5) Prophesying, when men, believed by
themselves and by the church to he specially taught
by the Holy Spirit, gave utterance to His message.
At Corinth these crowded on one another, so that
Paul had to command them to speak one at a time.
(6) Following this, as some believe, came the “speak-
ing with tongues,” perhaps fervent and ejaculatory
prayers ‘‘so rugged and disjointed that the audience
for the most part could not understand” until some-
one interpreted. The speaking with tongues, how-
ever, comprised praise as well as prayer (1 Cor 14
16), and the whole subject is enshrouded in mystery.
Sec Tonauss, Girt or. (7) The meeting closed
with the benediction and with the “kiss of peace.”

The “private service’? may have followed the
other, but seems more likely to have been in the
evening, the other in the morning. The disciples
met in one place and ate together a meal of their
own providing, the agdépé, or love feast, symbolizing
their union and fellowship, preceded or followed by
prayers (Did., x), and perhaps interspersed by
hymns. Then followed the ‘‘Lord’s Supper’’ itself,
according to the directions of the apostle (1 Cor
11 23-28).

How far “ Christian worship'’ was ‘'Christian'’ in the
sense of being directly addressed to Christ, is not easily


answered. We must not read into their mental content
the fully developed Christology of later centuries, but


it is hard to believe that those who had before them
Thomas’ adoring exclamation, ‘‘ My Lord and my God!
the saying of the first martyr, ‘‘Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit,” the dictum of the great apostle, ‘Who, existing
in the form of God,” the utterances of He, ‘And let all
the angels of God worship him,” ‘Thy throne, O God,
is forever and forever,” and, later, the prologue of Jn,
and the ascriptions of praise in the Apocalypse, could
have failed to bow down in spirit before Jesus Christ,
to make known their requests through Him, and to lift
up their adoration in song to Him, as according to Pliny's
witness, 112 AD, ‘they sing a hymn to Christ as God.
The absolutely interchangeable way in which Paul, for
instance, applies ‘Lord’ in one_breath to the Father,
to the OT Jeh, and to Jesus Christ (Rom 10 11.13;
14 4.6.8.11.12, etc) clearly indicates that while God the
Father was, as He must be, the ultimate and_principal
object of worship, the heart and thought of God’s NT
people also rested with adoring love on Him who is
“worthy .... to receive the power and riches and
wisdom, and might, and glory, and honor and blessing."
The angel of the Apocalypse would not permit the adora-
tion of the_seer (Rev 22 9), but Jesus accepts. the
homage of Thomas, and in the Fourth Gospel declares
it the duty of all to ‘honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father’? (Jn 5 23).


The classical passages for Christian worship are
Jn 4 23.24, culminating in (m): ‘God is spirit: and
they that worship him must worship in spirit and
truth,” and Phil 3 3, “who worship by the Spirit
of God.” These define its inner essence, and bar
out all ceremonial or deputed worship whatever,
except as the former is, what the latter can never
be, the genuine and vital expression of inner love
and devotion. Anything that really stimulates
and expresses the worshipful spirit is 80 far forth a
legitimate aid to worship, but never a substitute for
it, and is harmful if it displaces it. Much, perhaps
most, stately public worship is as significant to God
and man as the clack of a Thibetan prayer-mill.
The texts cited also make of worship something far
deeper than the hnman emotion or surrender of will;
it is the response of God’s Spirit in us to that Spirit
in Him, whereby we answer “‘Abba, Father,” decp
calling unto deep. Its object is not ingratiation,
which is unnecessary, nor propitiation, which hag
been made “‘once for all,” nor in any way “serving”
the God who ‘needeth not to be worshipped with
men’s hands’ (Acts 17 25), but it is the loving at-
tempt to pay our unpayable debt of love, the ex-
pression of devoted hearts, “renderfing] as bullocks
the offering of our lips” (Hos 14 2). For detail it
is not a physical act or material offering, but an
attitude of mind: ‘Thesacrifices of God are a broken
spirit”; “sacrifices of praise, with which God is well
pleased”; not the service of form in an outward
sanctuary, the presentation of slain animals, but the
service of love in a life: “Present your bodies a living
sacrifice’; not material sacrifices, but spiritual: your
rational “service”; not the service about an altar of
stone or wood, but about the sanctuary of human
life and need; for this is true religion (‘‘service,”
“svorship,” thrésketa), “to visit the fatherless and
widows in their affliction’’; not the splendor of shin-
ing robes or the sounding music of trumpets or
organs, but the worshipping glory of holy lives; in
real fact, “‘hallowing Thy name,” ‘and keeping one-
self unspotted from the world.” The public worship
of God in the presence of His people is a necessity
of the Christian life, but in spiritual Christianity
the ceremonial and outward approaches, if it does
not quite reach, the vanishing point.


Lirsratvrs.—BDB; Thayer’s NT Lexicon s.v.; arts.
on ‘‘Praise,"’** Worship,"’'’Temple,”’ “Church,” “Prayer,”
in HDB, DB, New Sch-Herz, DCG; comms. on Pss, Ch,
Cor, Weizsicker, The Apostolic Age of the Church, IL;
Pfleiderer, Das Urchristenthum (ET); Léoning, Gemeinde-
verfassung des Urchristenthums; Edersheim, The Temple,
Its Ministry and Service, as They Were atthe Time of Jesus
Christ, and Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah; Hort,
The Christian Ecclesia; Lindsay, Church and the Ministry
tn the Early Centuries; McGiffert, A History of Chris-
tianity in the Apostolic Age.

Purmie WENDELL CRANNELL


WORSHIP, IMAGE. See Imaczs.


3113


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Worship
Wrest


WORSHIPPER, wir’ship~r.
Kerrnprs; WorsHiP.


WORTHIES, wir'thiz (""38 , ’addir, “majestic,”
“noble” [cf Jgs 5 13, etc]): In Nah 2 5,AV “He
shall recount his worthies” (m “gallants’”’), ERV
“He remembereth his worthies,” ARV ‘‘He remem-
bereth his nobles.” As MT stands, the Assyr king
hurriedly summons his commanders to repel the as-
sault, but the passage is obscure and the text quite
possibly in need of emendation.


WOT. See Wisi, Wrrry, Wor.


WRATH, rath, rdth, rath (ANGER) (08, ’aph,
from 928, ’énaph, “to snort,” “to be angry”; épyt,
orgé, Gvpss, thuméds, dpyitonat, orgizomai): Desig-
nates various degrees of feeling, such as sadness
(Ps 86 4), a frown or turning away of the face in
grief or anger (2 Ch 26 19; Jer 3 12), indignation
(Ps 38 3), bitterness (Jgs 18 25), fury (Est 1 12),
full of anger (Gen 4 5; Jn 7 23), snorting mad
(Gen 27 45; Mt 2 16).

Wrath is used with reference to both God and
man. When used of God it is to be understood
that there is the complete absence of
that caprice and unethical quality
so prominent in the anger attributed
to the gods of the heathen and to man.
The Divine wrath is to be regarded as the natural
expression of the Divine nature, which is absolute
holiness, manifesting itself against the wilful, high-
handed, deliberate, inexcusable sin and iniquity of
mankind. God’s wrath is always regarded in the
Scripture as the just, proper, and natural expression
of His holiness and righteousness which must
always, under all circumstances, and at all costs
be maintained. It is therefore a righteous indig-
nation and compatible with the holy and righteous
nature of God (Nu 11 1-10; Dt 29 27; 28 6 7;
Isa 6 25; 42 25; Jer 446; Ps 79 6). The ele-
ment of love and compassion is always closely con-
nected with God’s anger; if we rightly estimate the
Divine anger we must unhesitatingly pronounce it
to be but the expression and measure of that love
(cf Jer 10 24; Ezk 23; Am 3 2).

Wrath, when used of man, is the exhibition of an
enraged sinful nature and is therefore always inex-

cusable (Gen 4 5.6; 49 7; Prov 19 19;
2. Human Job 6 2; Lk 4 28; 2 Cor 12 10; Gal
Wrath 6 20; Eph 4 31; Col 3 8). It ts for

this reason that man is forbidden to
allow anger to display itself in his life. He is not
to “give place unto wrath’ (Rom 12 19 m), nor
must he allow “the sun to go down upon his wrath”
(Eph 4 26). He must not be angry with his brother
(Mt 6 22), but seek agreement with him lest the
judgment that will necessarily fall upon the wrathful
be meted out to him (Mt 6 25.26). Particularly is
the manifestation of an angry spirit prohibited in
the training and bringing up of a family (Eph 6 4;
Col 3 19). Anger, at all times, is prohibited (Nu
18 5; Ps 37 8; Rom 12 19; Gal 5 19; Eph 4 26;
Jas 1 19.20). ;

Wrath or anger, as pertaining to God, is very

much more prominent in the OT than in the NT.

This is to be accounted for probably
3. Divine because the NT magnifies the grace
Wrath Con- and love of God as contrasted with His
sistent with wrath; at least love is more proml-
Love nent than wrath in the revelation and

teaching of Christ and His apostles.
Nevertheless, it must not be thought that the ele-
ment of wrath, as a quality of the Divine nature,
is by any means overlooked in the NT because of
the prominent place there given to love. On the


See TEMPLE


1. Divine
Wrath


contrary, the wrath of God is intensified because of
the more wonderful manifestation of His grace,
mercy and love in the gift of His Son Jesus Christ
as the Saviour of the world. Gad is not love only:
He is also righteous; yea, “Our God is a consuming
fire” (He 12 29); “It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God” (He 10 31). No
effeminate, sentimental view of the Fatherhood of
God or of His mercy and loving-kindness can ex-
clude the manifestation of His just, righteous and
holy anger against sin and the sinner because of his
transgression (1 Pet 117; He 10 29). One thing
only can save the sinner from the outpouring of
God’s righteous anger against sin in the day of
visitation, namely, faith in the Lord Jesus Christ
as the Divinely appointed Redeemer of the world
(Jn 3 36; Rom 1 16-18; 5 9). Nor should the
sinner think that the postponement or the omission
(or seeming omission) of the visitation of God’s
wrath against sin in the present means the total
abolition of it in the future. Postponement is not
abolition; indeed, the sinner, who continually rejects
Jesus Christ and the salvation which God has pro-


16.17; 16 19; 19 15).


God’s anger while slow. and not easily aroused (Ps
103 8; Isa 48 9; Jon 4 2; Nah 1 3), is to he dreaded
; 76 7; 90 11: Mt 10 28); is not to be pro-
voked ae 7 19; 1 Cor 10 22); when visited, in the
resent life, should he borne with submission (2 8 24 17;
am 3 39.43; Mie 79); prayer showd he earnestly
made for deliverance from it (Ps 39 10; 80.4; Dnl 9
16; Hab 3 2); it showd he the means of leading man to
repentance (Isa 42 24.25; Jer 4 8).

Certain specific things are said esp. to arouse God’s
anger: continual provoeation (Nu 82 14), unbelief
(Ps 78 21.22: He 3 18.19), impenitence (Isa_9 13.14;
Rom 2 5), apostasy (He 10 26.27), idolatry (Dt 32 19.
20.22: 2 K 2217: Jer 44 3). sin in God's people (Ps
89 30-32; Isa 47 6), and it is manifested esp. against
oP eate of the gospel of Jesus Christ (Ps 2 2.3.5;
1 Thess 2 16).

There is a sense, however, in which anger is the
duty of man; he is to “hate evil” (Ps 97 10). It

is not enough that God’s people should
4. Right- love righteousness, they ‘must also be
eous and angry with sin (not the sinner). A
Unrighteous man who is incapable of being angry
Anger at sin is at the same time thereby ad-

judged to be incapable of having a
real love for righteousness. So there is a sense in
which a man may be said to “be . . . . angry, and
sin not” (Eph 4 26). Anger at the sin and un-
righteousness of men, and because their sin is
grievous to God, may be called a “righteous indig-
nation.” Such an indignation is attributed to
Jesus when it is said that He ‘looked round about
on them with anger, being grieved at the harden-
ing of their heart” (Mk 3 5). When anger arises
because of this condition, it is sinless, but when
anger arises because of wounded or aggrieved per-
sonality or feelings, it is sinful and punishable.
Anger, while very likely to become sinful, is not
really sinful in itself.

We have illustrations in the Scriptures of wrath or ©


anger that is justifiable: Jesus (Mk 3 5), Jacob (Gen
: Lev 10 16; Nu 16


WREST, rest: Found in AV and RV 3 + in the
writings of Moses, viz. Ex 23 2.6; Dt 16 19. In


Wrestling
Writing


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3114


all three places it refers to twisting, or turning aside,
or perverting judgment or justice. In Dt 24 17
RV has ‘wrest’? where AV has “pervert.”

In Ps 66 5 (ARY, ‘acabh); 2 Pet 3 16 (orpeBrbu,
strebl66), it refers to the word or words of God in the
Scriptures. In the Pss the servant of God, who
speaks in God’s name, complains that the enemies
“wrest,” misinterpret, misapply and pervert his
words. In Pet it is the ignorant and unstedfast
who so pervert and misuse some of the difficult
words of Paul, and they do it to their own destruc-
tion——a most earnest warning against carelessness
and conscienceless indifference in interpreting
Scripture. G. H. Gpreerpine


WRESTLING, res‘ling (PAN , ’abhak; w4dn, pale).
See Games II, 3, (i); Jacos; Napuran.


WRINELE, rin’k’] (OP, kamat, “to lay hold
on”; putts, rhutis, “a wrinkle”): In Job 16 8, RV
substitutes, “Thou hast laid fast hold on me” (m
“shrivelled me up”) for AV “Thou hast filled me
with wrinkles.” In Eph 5 27, St. Paul’s figurative
reference to the church as a bride, ‘not having spot
or wrinkle,” is indicative of the perennial youth and
attractiveness of the church.


WRITING, rii’ing:
I. Genera
1. Definition


2. Inward Writing
3. Outward Writing

II. Tue Sympous
1. Object Writing
2. Image Writing
3. Picture Writing
4. Mnemonic Writing
5. Phonetic Writing

Ill. Merrzeops

IV. InstrRuMENTS
Maverrars

Clay

Stone

. Lead

. Bronze

. Gold and Silver


5 Bones and Skins
Vellum
. Papyrus
Paper
11. Ink

VI. Forms

1, The Roll

2. The Codex
WRITING

1. Writers

2. The Writing Art
History

1. Mythological Origins

2. Earliest Use

8. Biblical History
LitvER ATURE

I. General.—Writing is the art of recording

thought, and recording is the making of permanent
symbols. Concept, expression and
record are three_states of the same
work or word. Harlicst: mankind ex-
pressed itself by gesture or voice and
recorded in memory, but at a very early stage man
began to fecl the need of objective aids to memory
and the need of transmitting a message to a distance
or of leaving such a message for the use of others
when he should be away or dead. For these pur-
poses, in the course of time, he has invented many
symbols, made in various ways, out of every ima-
* ginable material. These symbols, fixed in some
substance, inward or outward, are writing as distin-
guished from oral specch, gesture language, or other
unrecording forms of expression. In the widest
sense writing thus includes, not only penmanship or
chirography, but epigraphy, typography, phonog-
raphy, photography, cinematography, and many
other kinds of writing as well as mnemonic object
writing and inward writing.


ei
DOOM ENA G9 po


VII.


VIII.


1. Defini-
tion


Writing has to do primarily with the symbols, but
as these symbols cannot exist without being in some
substance, and as they are often modified as to their
form by the materials of which they are made or the
instruments used in making, the history of writing
has to do, not only with the signs, symbols or char-
acters themselves, but with the material out of
which they are made and the instruments and
methods by which they are made. :

The fact that memory is a real record is well
known in modern psychology, which talks much of

inward speech and inward writing.
2. Inward By inward writing is commonly meant
Writing the inward image or counterpart of

visual or tangible handwriting as dis-
tinguished from the inward records of the sound of
words, but the term fairly belongs to all mward
word records. Of these permanent records two chief
classes may be distinguished: sense records, whether
the sense impression was by eye, ear, finger-tip or
muscle, and motor records or images formed in the
mind with reference tc the motion of the hand or
other organs of expression. Both sense records
and motor records include the counterparts of every
imaginable kind of outward handwriting.

We meet this inward writing in the Bible in the
writing upon the tablets of the heart (Prov 3 3;
73; Jer 17.1; 2 Cor 3 3), which is thus not a
mere figure of speech but a proper description of
that effort to fix in memory which some effect by
means of sound symbols and some by the sight
symbols of ordinary handwriting.

It has also its interesting and important bearing
on questions of mspiration and revelation where
the prophet “hears” a voice (Ex 19 19; Nu_7 89;
Rev 19 1.2) or “‘sees’” a vision (2 K 6 17; Isa 6;
Am 7 1-9) or even sees handwriting (Rev 17 5).
This handwriting not only seems ‘Teal’ but is real,
whether caused by external sound or vision or inter-
nal human or superhuman action.

Outward writing includes many kinds of symbols
produced in various ways in many kinds of material.

The commonest kind is alphabetical
3. Outward handwriting with pen and ink on paper,
Writing but alphabetic symbols are not the

only symbols, the hand is not the only
means of producing symbols, the pen is not the only
instrument, and ink and paper are far from being
the only materials.

The ordinary ways of human expression are voice and
gesture. Corresponding to these there is an oral writing
and a gesture writing. For the recording of vocal sounds
various methods have been invented: direct carving or
molding in wax or other material, or translating into
light vibrations and recording these by photograph or
kymograph. Both phonographic and photographic
records of sounds are strictly oral writing.

The record of gestures by making pictures of them
forms a large fraction of primitive picture writing (e.g.
the picture of a man with weapon poised to throw) and
the modern cinematography of pantomime is simply a
perfected form of this primitive picture writing.

Handwriting is simply hand gesture with a. mechanical
device for leaving a permanent record of its motion by a
trail of ink or incision. In the evolution of expression
the imitation of human action tends to reduce itself to
sign language, where both arms and the whole body are
used, and then to more and more conventionalized hand
gesture, This hand gesture, refined, condensed and
adapted to mechanical conditions, and provided with
pencil, chisel, or pen and ink, is handwriting. Its nature


is precisely analogous to that of the self-registering ther-
mometer or kymograph.


Nearly all the great body of existing written docu-
ments, save for the relatively few modern phono-
graphic, kymographic and other visible speech
records, is handwritten, the symbols being produced,
selected, arranged, or at least pointed out, by the
hand. Even the so-called phonetic writing, as
usually understood, is not sound record but consists
of hand-gesture symbols for sounds.


3115


—_——»


Hf. The Symbols.—Among the many kinds of
outward signs used in writing the best known
are the so-called Phoen alphabet and its many
derivatives, including the usual modern alphabets.
Other well-known varieties are the wedge system
of Assyria and Babylonia, the hieroglyphic systems
of Egypt and Mexico, the Chinese characters,
stenographic systems, the Morse code, the Braille
system, the abacus, the notched stick, the knotted
cord, wampum and twig bundles. These, however,
by no means exhaust the list of signs which have
been used for record or message purposes; e.g.
colored flags for signaling, pebbles, cairns, pillars,
flowers, trees, fishes, insects, animals and parts of
animals, human beings, and images of all these
things, have all served as record symbols in writing.

The various symbols may be grouped as objects
and images, each of these classes divided again into
pictorial or representative signs and mnemonic or
conventional signs, mnemonic signs again divided
into ideographic and phonetic, and phonetic again
into verbal, syllabic (consonantal), and alphabetic.
This may be represented graphically as follows:

(A) Oxssects
(1) Pictorial
(2) Conventional (Mnemonic)
(a) Ideographic (Eye Images)
(b) Phonetic (Ear Images)
(a) Verba,
(8) Sylabic
onsonanta,
7” (C tal)
) Alphabetic
(B) Imaczs
(1) Pictorial
(2) Conventional (Mnemonic)
(a) Ideographic
(b) Phonetic
(2) Verbal.
B) papas
(y) (Consonantal)
(8) Alphabetic

Objects may be whole objects (a man) or char-
acteristic parts (human head, arm, leg) or samples
(feather or piece of fur). The objects may be natu-
ral objects or artificial objects designed for another
purpose (arrow), or objects designed esp. to be used
as writing symbols (colored flags). Images include
images of all these objects and any imaginary images
which may have been invented for writing purposes.

Pictorial or representative signs are distinguished from
mnemonic or conventional signs by the fact that in
themselves they suggest the thing meant, while the others
require agreement beforehand as to what they shall
mean. The fact, however, that the symbol is a picture
of something does not make it pictorial or the writing
picture writing. Itis pictorial, not because itis a picture,

ut because it pictures something. The fact, e.g., that
a certain symbol may be recognized as an ox does not
make of this a pictograph. If it stands for or means an
ox, it is a pictograph; if it stands for ‘‘ divinity,” it may
be called an ideograph, or if it stands for the letter a it
is phonetic, a phonogram.

The key to the evolution of writing symbols is to
be found in a law of economy. Object writing un-
doubtedly came first, but man early learned that
the image of an object would serve as well for record
purposes and was much more convenient to handle.
True picture writing followed. The same law of
economy led to each of the other steps from pictorial
to alphabetic, and may be traced in the history of
each kind and part. Every alphabet exhibits it.
The history of writing is in brief a history of short-
hand. It begins with the whole object or image,
passes to the characteristic part, reduces this to the
fewest possible strokes which retain likeness, con-
ventionalizes these strokes, and then, giving up all
pretense of likeness to the original symbol, and
frankly mnemonic, if continues the process of ab-
breviation until the whole ox has become the letter
“a” or perhaps a single dot in some system of
stenography. :

Object writing is not common in the phonetic stage,
but even this is found, e.g., in alphabetical flags for


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Wrestling
Writing


ship signaling. The actual historical cvolution of
writing seems to have heen object, image-picture, ideo-
gram, phonogram, syllable, consonant, letter. All of
these stages have some echoes at least in the Bible,
although even the syllabic stage seems to have heen
alrcady passed at the time of Moses. The Heb OT as
a whole stands for the consonantal stage and the Gr NT
for the complete alphabetic—still the climax of hand-
writing, unless the evolution of mathematical symbols,
which is a very elaborate evolution of ideographic hand-
writing, is so regarded.


Although probably not even a single sentence of
the Heb Bible was written in ideographic, picture,
or object handwriting, many documents which are
used or quoted by Bib. writers were written by these
methods, and all of them are repeatedly implied.
In a number of cases full exegesis requires a knowl-
edge of their nature and history. A certain number
of scholars now believe that the Pent was originally
written in cuneiform, after the analogy of the cir-
cumstances shown by the Am Tab. In this case of
course there would still be traces both of the syllabic
and ideographic, but the theory is improbable.

The most primitive writing was naturally pic-
torial object writing. When the hunter first brought

home his quarry, this had in it most of
1. Object the essential elements of modern hand-
Writing writing. Those who remained at
home read in the actual bodies the
most essential record of the trip. When, further,
the hunter brought back useless quarry to evidence
his tale of prowess, the whole essence of handwriting
was involved. This was whole-object record, but
object. abbreviations soon followed. Man_ early
learned that skins represented whole animals (the
determinative for “‘quadruped”’ in Egyp is a hide),
and that a reindeer’s head or antlers, or any char-
acteristic part, served the simple purpose of record
just as well as the whole object, and this method of
record survives in a modern hunting-lodge. The
bounty on wolves’ scalps and the expression “so
many head of cattle’ are similar survivals. In
war, men returning hung the dead bodies of their
enemies irom the prows of their triumphal ships or
from the walls of the city, and, in peace, from the
gibbet, as object lessons. They soon learned,
however, that a head would serve all practical pur-
poses as well as a whole body, and the inhabitants
of Borneo today practise their discovery. Then
they discovered that a scalp was just as character-
istic and more portable, and the scalp belt of the
American Indian is the result. The ancient Egyp-
tians counted the dead by “‘hands”’ carried away as
trophies. Both objects and images tend thus to
pass from the whole object to a characteristic part,
then to the smallest characteristic part: from the
tiger’s carcase or stuffed tiger to the tiger’s claw
or its picture. The next or mnemonic step was
taken when the simplest characteristic part was ex-
changed for a pebble, a twig, a notched stick, a knot,
or any other object or image of an object which
does not in itself suggest a tiger.

The pictorial object writing had an evolution of
its own and reached a certain degree of complexity
in elaborate personal adornment, in sympathetic
magic, the medicine bag, the prayer stick, pillars,
meteoric stones, etc, for worship, collections of
liturgical objects, fetishes, votive offerings, trophies,
etc.

It reached a still higher order of complexity when
it passed into the mnemonic stage represented by
the abacus, the knotted cord, the notched stick, the
wampum, etc. The knotted cord may be recog-
nized in the earliest hieroglyphic signs, is found still
among primitive people, and its most famous ex-
ample is the Peruvian quipu. It still survives in
the cardinal’s hat and the custom of knotting a
handkerchief for mnemonic purposes. It is found
in the Bible in a peculiarly clear statement in the


Writing


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3116


mnemonic “fringes” of Nu 15 37-41 (cf Dt 22 12).
The notched stick is equally old, as seen in the
Australian message stick, and its best-known
modern example is the tally of the British Exchequer.
The abacus and the rosary are practically the lineal
descendants of the pebble heap which has a con-


step may perhaps be seen in the account of _the
leopard-tooth necklace of an African chief described
by Frobenius. In itself this was merely a complex
trophy record—the tribal record of leopards slain.
When, however, the chief took for his own necklace
the actual trophy which some members of the tribe


Messace Sticxs.


crete modern counterpart in the counting with
pebbles by Italian shepherd boys. It is possible
that the notched message stick has its echo in Jgs
5 14 (military scribe’s staff); Nu 17 1-10 (Aaron’s
inscribed rod), and all scepters (rods of authority)
and herald’s wands.

It was a very long step in the history of hand-
writing from object to image, from the trophy record
to the trophy image record. The nature of this


had won, while the hunter made a wooden model of
the tooth which served him as trophy, this facsimile

tooth became an image record. This
2. Image same step from object to image is most
Writing familiar in the history of votive offer-
ings, where the model is substituted
for the object, the miniature model for the model,
and finally a simple written inscription takes the
place of the model. Itis seen again in sympathetic


3117


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Writing


magic when little wax or clay images are vicariously
buried or drowned, standing for the person to be
injured, and taking the place of sample parts, such
as the lock of hair or nail-parings, etc, which
are used in like manner by still more primitive
peoples.


It was another long step in the evolution of sym-
bols when it occurred to man that objects worn for
record could be represented by paint
3. Picture upon the body. The origin of written
Writing characters is often sought in the prac-
tice of tattooing, but whatever truth
there may be in this must be carried back one step,
for it is generally agreed and must naturally have
been the fact that body painting preceded tattooing,
which is a device for making the record permanent.
The transition from the object trophy to the image
on the skin might easily have come from the object
causing a pressure mark on the skin. There is good
reason to believe that the wearing of trophies was
the first use of record keeping.

It is of course not proved that body ornaments
or body marks are the original of image writing or
that trophies are the earliest writing, nor yet that
models of trophies or votive offerings were the first
step in image writing. It may be that the first
images were natural objects recognized as resem-
bling other objects. The Zufii Indians used for their
chief fetishes natural rock forms. The first step
may have been some slight modification of natural
stone forms into greater resemblance, such as is
suggested by the slightly modified sculptures of the
French-Spanish caves. Or again the tracks of ani-
mals in clay may have suggested the artificial pro-
duction of these tracks or other marks, and the de-
velopment of pottery and pottery marks may have
been the main line of evolution. The Chinese trace
the origin of their symbols to bird tracks. Or again
smear marks of earth or firebrand or blood may have
suggested marks on stone, and the marked pebbles
of the Pyrenean caves may have reference to this.
Or yet again the marks on the animals in the Pyre-
nean caves may have been ownership marks and
point back to a branding of marks or a primitive
tattooing by scarification.


Whatever the exact point or motive for the image
record may have been, and however the transition
was made, the idea once established had an extensive
development which is best illustrated by the picture
writing of the American Indians, though perhaps to
be found in the Bushmen drawings, petroglyphs, and
picture writing the world over. It is almost historic
in the Sumerian and the Egyptian, whose phonetic
symbols are pictographic in origin at least and whose
determinatives are true pictographs.

The transition from pictorial to conventional or
mnemonic takes place when the sign ceases to sug-

gest the meaning directly, even after
4. Mnemon- explanation. This happens in two
ic Writing ways: (1) when an object or image

stands for something not directly re-
lated to that naturally suggested eg., when a
stuffed fox stands for a certain man because it is his
totem, or an ox’s head stands for divinity or for
the sound “‘a,” or when the picture of a goose stands


Jewish Mnemonic Fringes, 9th Century BC.


for ‘son’ in the Egyp because the sounds of the two
words are the same; (2) when by the natural proc-
ess of shorthanding the object or image has been
reduced beyond the point of recognition. Histori-
cally the letter a is ox (or goat?); actually it means
a certain sound. .

When this unrecognizable or conventional sign
is intended to suggest. a visual image it is called an
ideogram, when an ear picture, a phonogram. Any-
body looking casually over a lot of Egyp_hiero-
glyphies can pick out kings’ names because of the
oval line or cartouche in which they are inclosed.


Writing


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA :


3118


This cartouche is ideographic. On the other hand
the pictures of a sun, two chicks, and a cerastes
within the cartouche have nothing to do with any of
these objects, but stand for the sounds kufu—who
is the person commonly known as Cheops. This
is phonetic.


Hieroglyphic Writing.
(Berlin Museum 822.)


Both old Bab and Egyp show signs of picture
origin, but the earliest Bab is mainly ideographic,
and both developed soon into the mixed stage of
phonetic writing with determinatives.

Phonetic writing seems to have developed out of
the fact that in all languages the same sound often

has many different meanings. In
5. Phonetic Eng. “goose” may mean the fowl or
Writing the tailor’s goose. In Egyp the sound

sa or s, with a smooth breathing, means
“goose” or “son,” and the picture of a goose means
either.

Whether the word-sign is an ideogram or a phono-
gram is a matter of psychology. Many modern
readers even glimpse a word as a whole and jump to
the visual image without thinking of sounds at all.
To them it is an ideogram. Others, however, have
to spell out the sounds, even moving their lips to
correspond. ‘To them as to the writer it is a phono-
gram. The same was true of the ancient picture or
ideographic sign. The word-sign was ideogram or
phonogram according to intention or to perception.

With the transition to syllabic writing, record
became chiefly phonetic. The transition was made
apparently by an entirely natural evolution from
the practice of using the same word-sign for several
different objects having the same sound, and it pro-


ceeded by the way of rebus, as shown in Mexican
and Egyp hieroglyphics.

‘ Syllabic writing implies a symbol for every mono-
syllable. It was a great step therefore when it was
discovered that the number of sounds was small and
could be represented by individual symbols, as com-
pound words could by syllable signs. At first only
consonants were written. In the Sem languages
vowels were at first not written at all—possibly they
were not even recognized, and one might use any
vowel with a particular combination of consonants.
However that may be, what many prefer to call
consonantal writing seems to have existed for 2,000
years before the vowels were recognized and regu-
larly introduced into the Phoen alphabet. It is at
this stage that alphabetic writing, as usually reck-
oned, began. See ALPHABET.

Phonetic consonantal writing has now been in
use some 5,000 years and strict alphabetic writing
some 3,000 years, almost to the exclusion of other
forms. The characters in use today in several
hundred alphabets are probably the historical de-
scendants, with accumulation of slight changes
through environment, of characters existing from
near the beginning.

Alongside the development of the historic system of
symbols, there has heen, still within the field of alphabetic
writing for the most part, a parallel line with multitudes
of shorthand and cryptographic systems. An equally
great multitude of code systems are in effect phonetic
words or sentences and cryptographically or otherwise
used for cahle or telegraph, diplomatic letters, criminal
correspondence and other secret purposes.

. Ill. Methods.—Roughly speaking, the ways of
making symbols, apart from the selection of the
ready-made, may be reduced to two which corre-
spond to art in the round or in three dimensions


Morning Star


V
Belly of Sling
| |
{| | |
| Ba


frrigation Ditch Great River


x »<


footprint of Road, Mountain Pass
runner


Vagina
or Betty of Sling


Streeé


2K


Wide Gapin the
Mountains


Word-Signs Used by Tewa Indians.


and art in the flat or in two dimensions. The former
appeals to eye or touch, affording a contrast by ele-
vation or depression, while the latter produces the
same effect by contrasting colors on a flat surface.
Written symbols in three dimensions are pro-
duced either by cutting or by pressure. In the case
of hard material superfluous matter is removed by
sculpture, engraving or die cutting. In the case
of plastic or malleable material, it is modeled,
molded, hammered or stamped into the required
form. To the first form belongs the bulk of stone
inscriptions, ancient metal inscriptions, scratched


3119


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Writing


graffiti, wax tablets, etc, to the later clay tablets,
votive figurines, seal impressions, hammered inscrip-
tions, minted coins, also molded inscriptions, coins
and medals, ete. Several of the Heb and Gr words
for writing imply cutting (hakak, hGrat, harash, ete;
grdphd). i

Symbols in two dimensions are produced either
by drawing or printing, both of which methods con-
sist in the applying of some soft or liquid material
to a material of a contrasting color or cutting from
thin material and laying on. Drawing applies the
material in a continuous or interrupted line of paint,
charcoal, colored chalk, graphite, ink or other ma-
terial. Its characteristic product is the manuscript.
This laying on is implied, as some think (Blau, 151),
in the commonest Heb word for writing (kathabh).
Tattooing (Dt 14 1; Lev 19 28, etc), embroidery
(embroidered symbolic figures, Ex 28 33.34) and
weaving belong in this class (embroidered words
in Pal Talm 20a, qt. Blau, 165).

Printing consists in laying the contrasting color
on by means of stencil or pressure, forming symbols
in two dimensions at one stroke. Perhaps the most
primitive form of printing is that of the pintadoes,
by which the savage impresses war paint or other
ceremonial forms on his face and hody. Branding
also belongs in this class (Gal 6 17, figuratively;
3 Macc 2 19; branding on the forehead, CH, § 127;
branding a slave, CH, §§ 226, 227).

These processes of cutting, molding, drawing and
printing roughly correspond with inscriptions, coins,
medals, seals, manuscripts, and printed documents
—epigraphy, numismatics, sigillography, chirog-
raphy, typography.

IV. Instraments.—The commonest instruments
of ancient writing were the pen, brush and style.
Other instruments are: the various tools for model-
ing, molds, stencils, dies, stamps, needles, engraving
tools, compass, instruments for erasure, for the
ruling of lines, vessels for ink or water, etc. Several
of these are mentioned and others are implied in the
Bible. The chisel which cuts and the stylus which
scratches are both called stylus or simply the “iron”
(the iron pen). The graving tool of Ex 32 4, the
iron pen of Job 19 24, the pen of Isa 8 1, the pen
of iron of Jer 17 1, and, with less reason, the pencil
of Isa 44 18, are all commonly interpreted as stilus
or style, but they are sometimes at least cutting
rather than scratching tools. References to wooden
tablets also imply the style, and references to clay
tablets either the style proper or a similar instru-
ment for pressure marks. The point of a diamond
in Jer 17 1, whether it is joined with the pen of iron
or not, seems to refer to the use of corundum in the
engraving of precious stones. The passages which
refer to blotting out (see helow) or writing on papy-
rus (see below) or refer to an ink-horn or ink (see
respective articles) imply a pen or brush rather than
style, and presumably the writing of the NT im-
plied in general a reed pen. The wide house
“painted with vermilion” (Jer 22 14) implies the
brush, but there is no direct: evidence of its use in
writing in the Bible itself. The existing ostraca
from Ahab’s palace are, however, done with the
brush. The pencil (seredh) mentioned in Isa 44
13 certainly means some instrument for shaping,
but is variously tr? as “‘line’” (AV), “red ochre”
(RVm), and even “‘stilus,” or “line-marking stilus”
(paragraphis Aq.). The compass, often referred
to in classical times, is found in Isa 44 13. The
line ruler (paragraphis), referred to by Aquila (Isa
44 13), and the simple plummet as well were prob-
ably used, as in later times, for marking lines. The
needle is referred to in late Heb and needlework in
the Bible (see III, above). The ink-horn or water
vessel for moistenmng the dry inks is implied im all
papyrus or leather writing (see INx, INK-HoRN).


The Heb term tr! “weight of lead’’ in Zec 6 8,
and “talent of lead” is precisely equivalent to the
Gr term for the circular plate of lead (kuklomélib-
dos) used for ruling lines, but something heavier
than the ruling lead seems meant.

Erasure or blotting out is called for in Nu 6 23,


Modern Egyptian Writing Materials.


and often figuratively (Ex 32 32.33; Rev 3 5, etc).
If writing was on papyrus, this would call for the
sponge rather than the penknife as an eraser, but
the latter, which is used for erasure or for making
reed pens, is referred to in Jer 836 23. For erasing
waxed surfaces the blunt end of the style was used
certainly as early as the NT times. Systematic
erasure when vellum was scarce produced the
palimpsest.

V. Materials.—The materials used in writing
include almost every imaginable substance, mineral,
vegetable, and animal: gold, silver, copper, bronze,
clay, marble, granite, precious gems, leaves, bark,
wooden planks, many vegetable complexes, antlers,
shoulder-blades, and all sorts of bones of animals,
and esp. skins. The commonest are stone, clay,
metal, papyrus, paper,and leather, including vellum,
and all of these except paper are mentioned in the
Bible. Paper too must be reckoned with in textual
criticism, and it was its invention which, perhaps
more even than the discovery of printing with mov-
able type, made possible the enormous multiplication
of copies of the Bible in recent times.

Whatever may be the fact as to the first material
used for record purposes, the earliest actual records

now existing in large quantities are
1. Clay chiefly on clay or stone, and, on the
whole, clay records seem to antedate
and surpass in quantity stone inscriptions for the
earliest historical period. After making all allow-
ances for differences in dating and accepting latest
dates, there is an immense quantity of clay records
written before 2500 BC and still existing. About
1400 or 1500 BC the clay tablet was in common use
from Crete to the extreme East and all over Pal,
everywhere, in short, but Egypt, and it seems per-
haps to have been the material for foreign diplo-
matic communications, even in Egypt. Hundreds
of thousands of these tablets have been dug up, and
undoubtedly millions are in existence, dug or undug.
These are chiefly of Mesopotamia. The most
famous of these tablets were for a long time of the
later period from the library of Ashurbanipal at
Nineveh. See Liprary or Nineves. Recently,
however, those from Tell el-Amama in Egypt,
Boghaz-keui in the Hittite country, and a few from
Pal itself vie with these in interest. Most of these
tablets are written on both sides and in columns
ruled in lines. They measure from an inch to a
foot and a half in length and are about two-thirds
as wide as they are long. Many of these tablets,
the so-called “case tablets,” are surrounded with
another layer of clay with a docketing inscription.
See TaBLets. Other clay forms are the potsherd-


Writing


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3120


ostraca, now being dug up in considerable quanti-
ties in Pal. Ezekiel (4 1) and perhaps Jeremiah

(17 13) refer to this material. See OsTRAcA.
Stones were used for record before image writing
was invented—as cairns, pillars, pebbles, etc.
Many of the early and primitive image


2. Stone records are on the walls of caves or on
cliffs (Bushmen, American Indians,
etc). Sometimes these are sculptured, sometimes


Letter from the Governor of Jerusalem about 1375 BC.


made by charcoal, paint, etc. The durability
rather than the more extensive use of stone makes
of these documents the richest source for our know]-
edge of ancient times. Besides natural stone ob-
jects, stone pillars, obelisks, statues, etc, stone-wall
tablets, the sides of houses and other large or fixed
surfaces, there are portable stone-chip ostraca and
prepared tablets (tablets of stone, Ex 24 12; 31
18). These latter might be written on both sides
(Ex 32 15). Job seems to refer to stone inscrip-
tions (19 24). The famous trilingual inscription of
Behistun which gave Rawlinson the key to the
Assyrian was on a cliff and refers to King Darius
(Rawlinson, Life, 58 ff, 142 ff). Two of the most
famous of stone inscriptions are the Rosetta Stone,
which gave the key to the Egyp hieroglyphics, and
the Moabite Stone (W. H. Bennett, Moabite Stone,
London, 1911), and both have some bearing on
Jewish history. An esp. interesting and suggestive
stone inscription is the Annals of Thutmose III of
Egypt, about 1500 BC, inscribed on the walls of the
temple at Karnak. This gives a long account of
campaigns in Syria and Pal (Breasted, Ancient
Records of Egypt, 163-217). The Siloam Inscrip-
tion, and in general all the recently discovered in-


scriptions of Pal, have their more or less important
bearings on Bib. history (Lidzbarski, Handb. and
Ephem.). Moses provided (Dt 27 2-8) for writing
the Law on stone (or plaster), and Joshua executed
the work (Josh 8 21.32). . ;
Another form of record on stone is the engraving
of gems, which is referred to in Ex 28 9.11.21; 39
6.14, etc, and possibly Zec 3 9.
One of the commonest materials, on account of
the ease of engraving, probably, islead. Used more
or less for inscriptions proper, it is also
3. Lead used for diplomatic records and even
literary works. It was very commonly
used for charms in all nations, and is referred to in
Job (19 24), where it perhaps more likely means a
rock inscription filled with lead, rather than actual
leaden tablets. For the text of Ps 80 on lead see
Gardthausen, p. 26. Submergence curses were usu-
ally of lead, but that of Jer 51 62 seems to have
been of papyrus or paper (cf W.S. Fox in Am. Jour.
of Phil., XXXII, 1912, 303-4).


ALI ASPIAIFIA AEBS -AIPIA


gt 42 prtaprabora ray toy epg aye
Agee ip parsage meaty


174 Dy hacia rey a A aan Aiea ee RAL ye ASE
DV AFTIAN ETSI PSAT AVA T G 198
BB AW TAO A As Aaa yt x


Siloam Inscription. Writing at Jerusalem at the
Time of Hezekiah.


Bronze was used for several centuries BC, at least
for inscribed votive offerings, for public records set
up in the treasuries of the temples and
for portable tablets such as the military
diplomas. In the time of the Macca-
bees public records were engraved on such tablets
and set up in the temple at Jerus (1 Macc 14 27).
There were doubtless many such at the time when
Jesus Christ taught there.

Gold and silver as writing material are most,
commonly and characteristically used in coins and

medals. References to money, mostly
5. Gold and silver money, are numerous in the OT,
Silver but these are not certainly coins with

alphabetic inscriptions. In NT times
coins were so inscribed, and in one case at least
the writing upon it is referred to—‘‘Whose is this
image and superscription?” (Mt 22 20). Theactual
inscription and the actual form of its letters are
known from extant specimens of the denarius of the
period. See Money.

The use of the precious metals for ordinary in-
scriptional purposes was, however, frequent in
antiquity, and the fact that rather few such inscrip-
tions have survived is probably due to the value of
the metal for other purposes. The Hittite treaty of
Khetasar or Hattusil engraved on silver and sent
to the king of Egypt, has long been known from the
Egyp monuments (tr m Breasted, Ancient Records
of Egypt, ITI, 165-74), and recently fragments of
the Hittite version of this treaty have been dis-
covered at Boghaz-keui (Winckler, M DOG, XXXV,
12 ff). This has very close relations to Bib. history,
whether it was made before or after the Exodus.
The famous Orphic gold tablets (Harrison, ‘‘Orphic
Tablets,” in Prolegomena to the Study of Gr Religion,
573-600, 660-74) have a bearing on a comparative
study of Bib. doctrine. Direct reference to en-
graving on gold is found in the account of the in-
scription on the high priest’s miter (Ex 28 36).
Writing on the horns of the altar is referred to in
Jer 17 1, and these horns too were of gold (Ex 30
3). Queen Helena of Adiabene is said to have pre-
sented an inscribed gold tablet to the temple at
Jerus (Blau, 67). The golden shrines of Ptolemy V


4. Bronze


3121


—with their inscribed golden phylacteries—are
mentioned on the Rosetta Stone.

_ Silver, and more esp. gold, have also heen very exten-
sively used for the laying on of contrasting colors, either
furnishing the background or more often the material
laid on. The history of chrysography is a long and full
one (Gardthausen, 1, 214-17; Blau, 13, 159-63). The
standard copy of the OT at Jerus, which was loaned to
Alexandria, was apparently in gold letters (Jos, Ant, XII,
li, 10) pee SEePpTuaGinT), and many of the famous Bib.
MSS of the Middle Ages were written wholly or in part
with gold, elther lald on as gold leaf or dissolved and
used as an ink or paint (Gardthausen, 216).


Leaves of trees were early used for charms and
writing. Some of the representations of writing
on the Egyp monuments show the
6. Wood goddess of writing inscribing the leaves
of growing trees. Jewish tradition
(Tésephid’ Gitlin 2 3-5; Mish Gitlin 2 3, ete, qt.
Blau, 16) names many kinds of leaves on which a
bill of divorcement (Dt 24 1.3) might or might not
be written. Reference to the use of leaves is found
in early Gr, Lat and Arab. sources—and they are
still used in the East.

Bark also has often been used: both liber in Lat
and ‘“‘book” in Eng., according to some, are thought
to refer to the bark of the lime or beech tree, and
birch bark was a common writing material among
the American Indians. It is in the form of wrought
wood, staves, planks or tablets, however, that wood
was chiefly known in historical times. These wood
tablets were used in all early periods and among
all nations, esp. for memorandum accounts and
children’s exercises. Sometimes the writing was di-
rectly on the wood, and sometimes on wood coated
with wax or with chalk. See TasLets. Writing
on staves is referred to in Nu 17 2. Mk 15 26
seems perhaps to imply that the “superscription”
of the cross was on wood, unless Jn 19 19 contra-
dicts this.

Woven linen as a writing substance had some
fame in antiquity (libri lintet), and many other
fibers which have been used for woven or embroid-
ered writing are, broadly speaking, of wood. So
too, in fact, when linen or wood is pulped and made
into paper, the material is still wood. Most modern
writing and printing is thus on wood. See 10,
below.

Diogenes Laertius (vii.174) tells that Cleanthes
wrote on the shoulder-blades of oxen, but he was

preceded by the cave-dwellers of the


7. Bones Neolithic age, who wrote on reindeer
and Skins horns and bones of many kinds (Déche-

lette, Arch. préhist., 1908, 125, 220-37,
et passim). Ivory has often been used and was a


favorite material for tablets in classical times. The
LXX translates “ivory work’ of Cant 5 14 as
“ivory tablets.’? Horns are given in late Heb
(Tésephia’ , qt. Blau, 16) as a possible material for
writing. ‘They have been used at all times and are
well illustrated in modern times by the inscribed
powder horns.

The hides of living animals have served for brand-
ing, and living human skin for painting, branding
and tattooing extensively in all lands and all times.
The literature of ceremonial painting and tattooing
is very extensive, and the branding of slaves was
common in many lands. See PrintTINnG.

The use of skins prepared for writing on one side
(leather) was early and general, dating back as far
at least as the LVth Dynasty of Egypt. The Annals
of Thutmose III in Pal were written on rolls of
leather. Its use was common also in Persia (Dio-
dorus ii.32; Herod. v.58; Strabo xv.1), and it was
a natural universal material. It has been much
used by modern American Indians. It was the
usual material of early Heb books, and the official
copies at least of the OT books seem always to have


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Writing


been written on this material (Blau, 14-16), and
are so, indeed, even to the present day.
Vellum is simply a fine quality of leather prepared
for writing on both sides. The autographs of the
NT were most likely written on papy-
8. Vellum rus, rather than leather or vellum, but
most of the earliest codices and all,
until recent discoveries, were on this material, while


“pAoeVaye


eetesims dp titles


Signs of the Cave-Dwellers.


very few of the long list of MSS on which the NT
text is founded are on any other material. This
material is referred to as parchment by St. Paul
(2 Tim 4 13). Almost every kind of skin (leather
or vellum) bas been used for writing, including snake
skin and human skin. The palimpsest is second-
hand or erased vellum, written upon again. See
PARCHMENT; PARCHMENTS.


u


Te rmat 5, rs
hee eee SAN if acl
Papyrus Marsh with Boat (Bulrushes and Boat of


Bulrushes).


Papyrus was not only the chief of the vegetable
materials of antiquity, but it has perhaps the long-
est record of characteristic general

9. Papyrus use of anything except stone. The
papyrus was made from a reed culti-

vated chiefly in Egypt, but having a variety found
also in Syria, according to Theophrastus. The


Writing


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3122


papyrus reed grows in the marshes and in stagnant
pools; is at best about the thickness of one’s arm,
and grows to the height of at most from 12 to 15
feet. It was probably a pool of these papyrus reeds
(‘flags’) in which Moses was hidden (Ex 3 3), and
the ark of bulrushes was evidently a small boat or
chest made from papyrus reeds, as many of the
ET a were. These boats are referred to in
sa .


_Papyrus was made by slicing the reed and laying the
pieces crosswise, moistening with sticky water, and press-
ing or pounding together. The breadth of the manu-
factured article varied from 5 in., and under, to 9} in.,
or even to a foot or a foot anda half. The earliest Egyp
papyrus ran from 6 to 14 in. Egyp papyri run to 80,
90 and _ even 135 ft. in length, but the later papyri are
generally from 1 to 10 ft. long. ‘The use of papyrus dates
from before 2700 BC at latest.


Many Bible fragments important for textual
criticism have been discovered in Egypt in late
years. These, together with the light which other
papyri throw on Hellenistic Gr and various paleo-
graphical and historical problems, make the study
of papyri, which has been erected into an inde-
pendent science, one of very great importance as
to Bib. history and Bib. criticism (cf Mitteis u.
Wilecken, Grundztige . . . . d. Papyruskunde, Leip-
zig, 1912, 2 vols in 4). It has been argued from Jer
36 23 that the book which the king cut up section
by section and threw on the fire was papyrus. This
argument is vigorously opposed by Blau (14, 15),
but the fact of the use of papyrus seems to be
confirmed by the tale that the Romans wrapped
the Jewish school children in their study rolls and
burned them (Ta‘dnith 69a, qt. Blau, 41). Leather
would have been poor burning material in either
case. Certainly “papyrus” is freely used by the
LXX translators and the word biblion is (correctly)
tr? by Jerome (Tob 7 14) by charta. It is referred
to in 2 Jn ver 12, “paper and ink,” as the natural
material for letter-writmg. See Papyrus, Papyrt.

The introduction of paper was from Western
Asia, possibly in the 8th cent., and it began to be

used in Europe commonly from the
10. Paper 18th cent. While few Western MSS
of any importance are on paper, many
of the Eastern are. It was the invention of paper,
in large measure, which made possible the immense
development iu the multiplication of books, since the
invention of printing, and the enormous number of
Bibles now in existence.

Of the many materials used in order to lay one

contrasting color on another, the flowing substances,

paint and ink, are commonest. In
11. Ink general throughout antiquity the ink
was dry ink and moistened when need-
ed for writing. Quite early, however, the liquid
inks were formed with the use of gall nut or acid,
and many recipes and formulas used during the
Middle Ages are preserved. See Inx, INK-HORN.
The reading of a palimpsest often depends on the
kind of ink originally used and the possibility of
reviving by reagents.

VI. Forms.—The best known ancient forms of
written documents are the tablet or sheet, the roll,
the diploma and the codex. These may be ana-
lyzed into one-face documents and many-faced
documents—page documents and leaf documents.
The roll, the diploma and the usual folding tablet
or pleated document are forms of the one-page
document, while the codex or bound book (Eng.
““vyolume’’) is the typical leaf document. The roll
is the typical form of the OT, the codex of the NT,
extant MSS.

A book as regards its material form consists of a
single limited surface suited for writing, or a suc-
cession of such surfaces. This single surface may
be the face of a cliff or house wall, a broken piece of


pottery, a leaf, a sheet of lead, papyrus, vellum or
paper, a tablet of clay, stone or wood, a cylinder,
prism, cone, pyramid, obelisk, statue or any one of
the thousands of inscribed objects found among
votive offerings. The typical form is the flat surface
to which the term “tablet’’ or ‘‘sheet’’ is applied,
and which is called “page” or “leaf”? according as
one or both snrfaces are in mind.

These single flat leaves are characteristically quad-
rilateral, but may be of any shape (circular, oval, heart-
shaped, etc) or of any thickness, from the paper of an
Oxford Bible or equally thin gold foil up to slabs of stoue
many inches thick.

‘When the document to be written is long and the sheet
becomes too large for convenient handling, space may
be gained by writing on both sides or by maki still
larger and either folding or rolling, on the one hand, or
breaking or cntting up into a series of smaller shcets, on
the other. This folding or rolling of the large sheet sur-
vives still in folded or rolled maps and the folded or
rolled documents (diplomas) of mediaeval and modern
archives. The use of the tablet series for long works
instead of one overgrown tablet was early—quite likely
as early as the time of actual writing on real *‘leaves.”’

These smaller tablets or sheets were at first, it
would seem, kept together by numbering (cf
Daiatzko, Ant. Buchw., 127), catchwords, tying in
a bundle, or gathering in a small box (capsa). This
has indeed its analogy with the mnemonic twig
bundle of object writmg. The Pent gets its name
from the five rolls in a box, jar, or basket (Blau, 65;
Birt, Buchrolle, 22).

The next step in the evolution of book forms was
taken when the various leaves or sheets were fast-
ened to each other in succession, being strung,
pasted or binged together.

The stringing together is as early and primitive
as the leopard-tooth trophy necklace of the African
chief or the shell and tooth necklaces of quaternary
Europe (Déchelette, Arch., 208-9). It was perhaps
used with annual tablets in the first dynasties of
Egypt and is found in oriental palm-leaf books
today.

The roll consists normally of a series of one-sur-
face sheets pasted or sewed together. Even when

made into a roll before writing upon,
1. The Roll the fiction of imdividual tablets was

maintained in the columns (deleths,
Jer 36 23=“doors’). It was the typical book
form of antiquity. It was commonly of leather,
vellum, papyrus, and sometimes of linen. It might
rarely be as much as 185 ft. long X 14 ft. wide for
papyrus, and leather rolls might be wider still. It
was the form traditionally used by the Hebrews,
and was undoubtedly the form used by Our Lord
in the synagogue. It is still used in the synagogue.
It was possibly the form in which the NT books
also were written, but this is much more doubtful.

The roll form is founded on the one-surface tab-
let, and, as a matter of fact, neither leather nor
papyrus was well suited to take ink on the back;
it developed from the sewing together of skins and
the pasting together of sheets of papyrus. Althongh
papyrus is found written on both sides, it is in gen-
eral not the same document on the back, but the old
has been destroyed and utilized as waste paper.
This writimg on both sides of theroll (opisthography)
is referred to in Ezk 2 10 (Rev & 1), where the
roll is written within and without.

Wood and metal tablets, not being flexible, could
not be rolled, but were hinged and became diptychs,

triptychs, polyptychs. The typical
2. The method of hinging these tablets in
Codex Rom times was not the codex or
; modern book form proper, where all
are hinged by the same edge, but a folding form
based on a series of one-surface tablets hinged suc-
cessively so as to form a chain (Gardthausen, Gr
Pal, I, 129, fig. 12). They were strictly folding
tablets, folding like an aecordion, as in some Far


3123


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Writing


Eastern MSS of recent times.
ing was used but rarely.


It is commonly said that it was this folding or hinged
wooden tablet which produced the codex of the Latins
and the ‘‘book’’ of modern Germanic races. Some,
however, prefer to trace the origin to the folded docu-
ment. The wood or waxed tablet was commonly used
ln antiquity for letters, but even more commonly the
sheet of papyrus or vellum. It is quite natural to fold
such:a sheet once to protect the writing. Whether this
was suggested by the diptych, or vice versa, the form of
a modern sheet of note paper was early introduced.
Hither the diptych or the folded single sheet may have
suggested the codex.

Whether the first codices were wood and metal or
papyrus and vellum, the hinging at one edge, which Is
the characteristic, is closely connected with the double-
(or multiple-) face tablet. With suitable material the
slmplest way of providing space, if the tablet is too
small, is to turn over and finish on the back. The clay
tablets lend themselves readily to writing on both sides,
but not to hinging. It developed, however, to a certain
degree the multiple-face idea by use of prisms, pyramids,
hexagonal and other cylinders, hut it was early forced
into the numbered series of moderate-sized tablets.

Wood and metal tablets would be hinged, but the
wood tablets were too hulky and metal tahlets too heavy
for long works, and the ring method of joining actually
led away from the book to the pleated form. Papyrus
and leather, however, while they might be used (as they
were used) as single tablets were thin enough to allow of
a long work in a single codex. They soon developed,
therefore, perhaps through the folded sheet, into the
codex proper and the modern bound book. The codex,
as Thompson remarks, was destined to be the recipient
of Christian literature, as the papyrus roll had been
the basis of the pagan literature, and there is some evi-
dence to show that the form was, historically, actually
developed for the purposes of the Christian writings, and
in papyrus, while the pagan, papyri continued to he in
roll form. Since the invention of the codex is placed at
the end of the ist cent., and the earliest codices were
esp. the NT writings, there is a certain possibility that
at least the historical introduction of the codex was in
the NT hooks, and that its invention comes perhaps
from combining the NT epistles on papyrus into a vol-
ume. In the West at least the roll is, however, the pre-
vailing form of the NT until the 3d or 4th cent. (Birt,
Buchrolle, passim).


VII. Writing.—The chief Heb words for the pro-
fessional “‘writer’’ are s6phér and shdtér, both akin to
Assyr words for “writing” and used
1. Writers also for kindred officers. The word
sdphér seems closely connected with the
sépher, “book,” and with the idea of numbering.
This official is a military, mustering or enrolling
officer (Jgs 5 14; 2 Ch 26 11; 2 K 26 19), a
numbering or census officer for military purposes or
for taxation (Isa 33 18)—and a royal secretary
(28 8 17).

The shdtér appears as a herald (Dt 20 5.8; Josh
110; 3 2), as overseer of the brick-making in
Egypt, and as overseer of the outward business of
Israel (1 Ch 26 29). He is associated with the
elders (Nu 11 16; Dt 29 10 [Heb 9]; 31 28; Josh
8 33; 23 2; 24 1) or with the judges (Josh 8 33;
23 2; 24 1; Dt 16 18).


The modern hing-


Scribes with Utensils.


The two terms are often, however, used together as
of parallel and distinct offices (2 Ch 26 11; 34 13).
If any such distinction can be made, it would seem that
the séphér was originally the military scribe and the
shatér the civil scribe, but it is better to say that they are
“evidently . . . . synonymous terms and could be used
of any subordinate office which required ability to write’
(Cheyne in ZB). There seem to have been at least 70
of these officers at the time of the Exodus, and by infer-
ence many more (Nu 11 16), and 6,000 Levites alone
in the time of David (1 Ch 23 4) were ‘' writers.’


Another kind of professional scribe was the tiph-


‘times and in Jos.


gar (Jer 61 27, “marshal”; Nah 3 17m), or tablet
writer, a word apparently directly borrowed from
the Assyr. This too seems to be a real synonym for
both of the other words. In brief, therefore, all
three terms mean scribe in the Egyp or Assyr sense,
where the writer was an official and the official
necessarily a writer.

Still another word, rendered in RV as “magi-
cians,” is rendered in its margin as “sacred scribe’
(hartom). This word being derived from the stilus
recalls the close connection between the written
charm and magic. None of these words in the OT
refers directly to the professional copyist of later
times whose business was the multiplication of
copies.

Sayce argues from the name Kiriath-sepher that
there was a university for scribes at this place, and
according to 1 Ch (2 55) there were Kenite families
of professional scribes at Jabez.

The professional scribe, writing as an amanuen-
sis, is represented by Baruch (Jer 36 4) and Tertius
(Rom 16 22), and the calligraphist by Ezra (Ezr
7 6). In later times the scribe stood for the man of
learning in general and esp. for the lawyer.

It would seem that Moses expected that kings
should write with their own hands (Dt 17 18; 31
24), and the various letters of David (2 8 11 15),
Jezebel (1 K 21 9), the king of Aram (2 K 6 5),
Jehu (2 K 10 2.6), Jeremiah (ch 29), Elijah (2 Ch
21 12-15), the letters of the Canaanite and Hittite
princes to one another in the Am Tab and Boghaz-
keui tablets, etc, while they may sometimes have
been the work ‘of secretaries, were undoubtedly
often by the author. For the prevalence of hand-
writing in Bib. times and places see Lisrary. Its
prevalence in OT times may be compared perhaps
to the ratio of college graduates in modern life. In
NT times the ratio was probably much greater, and
it appears not only that Zacharias, the priest, and
the educated St. Paul and St. Luke could write,
but even the poorer apostles and the carpenter’s
Son. It is assumed that all of a certain rich man’s
debtors could write (Lk 16 7). This general liter-
acy was due to the remarkable public-school system
of the Jews in their synagogues, which some good
Jewish scholars (Klostermann, qt. Krauss, Talmud.
Archaeol., III, 336, n.1) trace as far back as Isaiah.
In Vespasian’s time it is said there were in Jerus
alone 480 synagogues each with its school, and the
law that there must be primary schools in every city
dates at latest (63-65 AD) from this time and more
likely from 130 BC. The compulsory public-school
law of Simeon ben Setach (c 70 BC), although it
has been labeled mythical, is nevertheless entirely
credible, in view of the facts as they appear in NT
The tale that there were in
Bether, after the fall of Jerus had crowded full this
seat of learning, “400 synagogues each with 400
teachers and 400 pupils,” carries fiction on its face,
but there is little doubt that there were public
schools long before this in nearly every town of Pal
and compulsory education from the age of 6 or 7 (cf
Krauss, III, ch xii, “Schule,” 119-239, 336-58).

Writing in the Heb as in Sem languages in general
except Ethiopic is from right to left and in Gr from

left to right as in modern western
2. The usage. On the one hand, however,
Writing Art some Sabaean inscriptions and, on the

other hand, a number of early Gr in-
scriptions are written alternately, or boustrophedon,
and suggest the transition from Sem to western style.
The earlier Gr MSS did not separate the words, and
it is inferred from text corruptions that the earliest
Heb writing did not. As early as the Mesha and
Siloam inscriptions, the dot was used to separate
words, and the vertical stroke for the end of a sen-
tence. Vowel points were introduced somewhere


Writing


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3124


from the 5th to the 8th cent. AD by the Massoretes,
but are not allowed even now in the synagogue rolls.
Some of the inscriptions employ the Palestinian or
Tiberian system of vowel points, and others the
Bab (above the line). Accents indicate not only
stress but intonation and other relations. Very
soon after Ezra’s day, and before the LXX tr, the
matter of writing the Bib. books had become one
of very great care, the stipulations and the rules
for careful correction by the authorized text being
very strict (Blau, 185-87). The MSS were written
in columns (doors), and a space between columns,
books, ete, was prescribed, as also the width of the
column. All books were ruled. Omitted words
must be interlined above. The margins were fre-
quently used for commentaries. For size, writing
on the back, etc, see above, and for the use of ab-
breviations, reading, punctuation, etc, see Blau,
Gardthausen, Thompson, the Introductions to
textual criticism and the arts. on textual criticism

in this Encyclopaedia.
VII. History of Biblical Handwriting.—Mytho-
logically speaking the history of handwriting dates
from the beginning when the Word


1. Mytho- created the heavens. The firmament
logical is a series of heavenly tablets, the hand-~
Origins writing of God, as conceived by the


tablet-using Babylonians, or a scroll
in the thought of prophets, the NT writers, and the
rabbis. Whether the idea that “the heavens de-
clare the glory of God,” etc (Ps 19 1-4), refers to
this notion or not, it was one extensively developed
and practised in the science of astrology. In any
event the doctrine of the Creator-Word reaches deep
into the psychology of writing as a tangible record
of invisible words or ideas, and this philosophizing
stretches some 3,000 years or so back of the Chris-
tian era.


For writing among the gods in the mythologies of
non-Bib. religions, see Book; Liprary.


When and why the very simplest kind of writing
began to be used has been the Subject of much con-
jecture. The Hnc Brit (XVI, 445)
2. Earliest suggests that “the earliest use... .
Use of inscribed or written signs was for
important religious and political trans-
actions kept by priests in temples,” but the memo-
rial pillar is older than the temple, and the economic
or social record is perhaps older than the sacred,
although this is Jess clear. Three things seem
rather probable: (1) that the first records were
number records, (2) that they concerned economic
matters—although it is not excluded that the occa-
sion for first recording economic matters was reli-
gious, (3) that they were not used memorially for
Important transactions, but rather as utilitarian
or business records. :


The original mnemonic record was probably a number
record. The Heb words for ‘‘book’’ and ‘‘word’’ both
seem to mean a setting down of one thing after another,
and various words in various other languages point in the
same direction. as do also in a general way the nature
of the primitive situation and the evidences of history.
Many of the oldest records are concerned with numbers
of animals. Immense quantities of very old Sumerian
records are slay. such lists, and the still earlier cave
drawings (whether they have numbers or not) are at
least drawings of animals. Oue use of the primitive
quipu was for recording sales of different kiuds of animals
at market, and the twig bundle and notched records are
in general either pure number records or mnemonic
records with a number base. What these animal records
were for is another matter. If they were records of
ownership for mere tally purposes (a natural] enough pur-
pose, carrying back even to hunting trophies) the use
was purely economic, but as a matter of fact the early
Bab lists seem generally to have been temple records,
and even the cave records are commonly thought to be
associated with religion. The early Egyp lists too have
religious associations, and the somewhat later records
are largely concerned with endowment of temples or at
least temple lists of offerings—votive offerings or sac-


rifices. This points perhaps to a religious origin and
possibly leads back to the very first felt need of records
for a tithing for religious purposes. * But it may equally
lead to the sharing of spoils socially rather than reli-
giously, although the history of the common meal and
sacrifice shared by worshippers points to a very early
religious sanction for the problem of equitable sharing
of spoils, and it may have been precisely at this point


Rwetpezter—
BFAGe roms ar
Baka EE RSS 5
Shi dw eeu See
Pin @ rod Fes oa
yesuin We ee ee
Swe Upp BOA SE ALAS FF
is Fe? de oat “LISS Lv,
a 1 e2t & SaaS
7 4 & a4 = JO us
4 a Sa fic ZteR
MZ Mt We ‘on ROF ES
wz 4 Fate
we: wl 5 =I AR Le & ae
1 at SE 6k Bite
772 2 & Wea Saa

a.
L009 4&= be
Oo


Common Egyptian Writing in the Time of Abraham.


and for this purpose that number record was invented.
However that may be, the evidence seems to point to a
number-record origin even back of the cave drawings
(which are said to be chiefly of domestic rather than wild
animals) at a period variously figured as from 6,000 or
8,000 years ago, more or less, to millions of years ago.

The psendepigraphic books of the OT variously

represent writing as invented and first practised by

Jeh, Adam, Cain, or Seth. Taking
3. Biblical the Bib. narrative as it stands, the ear-
History lest. allusion to true writing is the sign

of Cain (Gen 4 15), if mdeed this
refers to a body mark, and particularly if it has
analogy with the ‘mark upon the forehead’? of the
Book of Rev (17 5; cf 13 16; 14 1) and the tattoo
marks of ownership or tribal marks of primitive
tribes, as is thought by many.

The setting of the rainbow as a permanent sign
(Gen 9 12-17) for a permanent covenant is quite
in line with the recognized mnemonic writing.
Noah’s building of an altar had the same character
if it was built for a permanent memorial. More
obviously akin to this primitive form of writing was,
however, the dedication of a memorial altar or pillar
as a memorial of a particular event in a particular
place, as in Jacob’s pillar (Gen 28 18.22),

For perhaps 2,000 years before Abraham, image
writing had been practised in both Babylonia and
Egypt, and for more than 1,000 years a very highly
developed ideograpbic and phonetic writing had
been in use. There were millions of cuneiform
documents existing in collections large and small
in Babylonia when he was there, and equal quanti-
ties of hieroglyphic and hieratic papyri, leather
and skin documents in Egypt when he visited it.
See Boox; Lisrary; Hammurast, Cons or.


3125


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Writing


Abraham himself presumably used cuneiform
writing closely parallel to the writing on Ham-
murabi’s statue. A similar script was presumably
also used by his Hittite allies. In Egypt he met
with the hieroglyphics on the monuments, but for
business and common use the so-called hieratic
cursive forms were already developed toward, if
not well into, the decided changes of the middle
hieratic period (c 2030-1788 BC; cf Méller, Hierat.
Palaeog., V1, 1909, 3, etc). It is a question whether
the boundary heap, which Laban “called” the heap
of witness in Aram. and Jacob by the same name
in Heb, was inscribed or not, but, if inscribed, both
faces or lines of the bilingual inscription were pre-
sumably in cuneiform characters. The cuneiform
remained, probably continuously, the prevailing
script of Syria and Pal until about 1300 BC, and
until, some time well before 1000, the old Sem alpha-
bet began to be employed.

The question of the relation of the writing in
Mosaic times and in the time of the Judges to the
cuneiform or the hieratic on the one side and the
alphabet on the other is too much mixed up with
the question of the Pent to allow of much dogmatiz-
ing. Some scholars are convinced that the Pent
was written in cuneiform characters if not in the
Bab language. The old Sem-Gr, ‘Phoenician,”


alphabet was, however, probably worked out in the
Palestinian region between 1400 and 1100 BC
(wherever the Hebrews may have been at this time),
and it remained the Heb writing until the introduc-
See ALPHABET,


tion of the square characters.


— ee te
«Common Egyptian Writing during the Bondage.


At the beginning of the Christian era there had
been a long period of the use of Gr among the edu-
cated, and long before the NT was written there
was a large body of Palestinian-Gr and Egyp-Gr
literature. Latin for a time also had been used,
more or less, officially, but the Aram., development
of whose forms may be well traced from about 500


BC in the inscriptions and in the Elephantine
papyri, was the prevailing popular writmmg. Gr
remained long the language of the educated world.
It was after 135 AD that R. Simeon ben Gamaliel
was said to have had 500 students in Heb (New
Heb) and 500 in Gr (Krauss, III, 203).


Kho \s
mnsbanvy
MHOENAAAAOFENHEETIO


CERVICIBNUSASTIDEXRAOLL


Three Writings in Common Use in Palestine in Gospel
Times: First, Aramaic; Second, Greek; Third, Latin.


Latin, Gr, and Aram. (New Heb) characters were
all needed for the inscription on the cross. Heb
had at this time certainly passed into the square
form long enough ago to have had yodh pass into
proverb as the smallest letter (jot) of the alphabet
(Mt 6 18). Through the abundance of recent
papyrus and inscriptional discoveries, it is now
possible to trace the history of the varying forms of
the bookhand and cursive Gr letters, and even of the
Latin letters, for several centuries on either side of
the year of Our Lord and up to the time of the
longer known manuscripts (see works of Gardthausen
and Thompson). One may get in this way a good
idea of how the most famous of all trilingual in-
scriptions may have looked as to its handwriting—
how in fact it probably did look, jotted down as
memorandum by Pilate, and how transcribed on the
cross, assuming that Pilate wrote the Rom cursive
(Thompson, facs. 106 [AD 41], 321), and the clerks
a fair epigraphic or rather for this purpose perhaps
bookhand Greek (Thompson, facs. 8 [AD 1], 123;
Latin, facs. 88 [AD 79], 276). See Titi.

LitERstuRE.—General: Edward Clodd, Stary of the
Alphabet, New York, 1912 (popniar); Fritz Specht, Die
Schrift u. ihre Entwicklung, 3. Ausg., Berlin, 1909 (popu-
lar); I. Taylor, History af the Alphabet, London, 1899,
2 vols, 8vo; . Wuttke, Geschichte der Schrift, Leipzig,
1874-75 (rich and comprehensive on primitive writing);
Philippe Berger, Histoire de l'écriture dans lantiquité,
2d ed, Paris, 1892; Karl Faulmann, Iilustrirte Geschichte
der Schrift, Wien, 1880 (uncritical but comprehensive
and very useful for illus.); W. M. Flinders Petrie, The
Farmation af the Alphabet, 1912.

Primitive: Leo Frobenius, The Childhood of. Man,
Philadelphia, 1908 (casual but useful See roestion of
primitive examples); Frederick Webb odge,_ed.,
Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, Wash-
ington, 1907-10, 2 vols (dictionary form); G. a lery
Smithsonian Inst. Reparts, [V (1882-83), 3-256, X (188
89), 1-822; M. Beuchat, Manuel d'archéologie américaine,
Paris, 1912; M. H. Kingsley, Travels in West Africa,
London, 1897; R. E. Dennet, At the Back of the Black
Man's Mind, 1906; A. W. Howitt, Native Tribes of
South-East Australia, London, 1904 (esp. ch xi); E. C.
Richardson, The Beginnings af Libraries, London and
Princeton, 1914. :

Mediterranean: Déchelette, Archéologie préhistarique.
1908; Arthur J. Evans, Scripta Minoa, Oxford, 1909;
Angelo Mosso, The Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization,
London, 1910.

Hebrew, Greek and Latin: Frederic G. Kenyon, Our
Bible and the Ancient MSS, 3d ed, London, 1898; George
Milligan, The NT Documents, 1913, Ludwig Blau, Stu-
dien zum althebrdiachen Buchwesen, Strassburg, 1902
(scholarly; first rank); Leopold Loew, Graphische Requi-
siten und Erzeugnisse bei den Juden, Leipzig, 1870-71, 2

ts.: Samuel Krauss, Talmudische Archdologie, Leipzig,
916—12, 3 vols, III, 131-239, 300ff (full critical notes
and references); Mark Lidzbarski, Handbuch d. nord-
semitischen Epigraphik, 1902-8 (also Ephemeris); Alvin


Xanthicus
Young Men


Sylvester Zerbe, Antiquity of Heb Writing and Literature,
Cleveland, 1911 (controversial); V. Gardthausen, Griech-
ische Palaeographie, 2d ed, Leipzig, 1911-13, 2 vols
(remarkable for comprehensiveness, exhaustive biblio-
graphic reference and critical scholarship); Sir Edward
Maunde Thompson, An Intro to Gr and Lat Palaeography,
Oxford, 1912 (expansion of his Handbook with greatly
improved facsimiles, better treatment of papyri and a
good working bibliography of palaeography); F. G.
Kenyon, The Palacography of Gr Papyri, Oxford, 1899,
8vo; Ludwig Mitteis and Ulrich Wilcken, Grundziige
und Chrestomathie der Papyruskunde, Leipzig, 1912, 2
vols in 4 (Encyclopaedia of the subject); Theodor Birt,
Das antike Buchwesen, Berlin, 1882; idem, Die Buchrolle
in der Kunst, Leipzig, 1907 (of first usefulness, esp. in
matter of illus. and refs.); E. S. Roberts, Gr Epigraphy,
pt. I, “The Archaic Inscriptions and the Gr Alpbabet,"’
Cambridge, 1887, 8vo; Karl Dziatzko, Untersuchungen
tiber ausgewdhlte Kapitel des antiken Buchwesens, Leip-


XANTHICUS, zan’thi-kus (Gavéucés, Xanthi-
kés): The name of a month which occurs in 2 Macc
11 30.33.38. It corresponds to Nisan (April) of the
Jewish calendar. See CaLENDAR; TIME; YEAR.


XERXES, zérks’éz: The name is an attempt to
transliterate into Gr (&étys, Xérxés) the Pers
Khshayarsha. The same word in unpointed Heb
took the form ’hshwrsh, probably pronounced
‘dhshdwarash, but at a later time it was wrongly
vocalized so as to produce ’éhashwérdsh (DINIWNN),
whence “‘Ahasuerus” in EV.

Xerxes was king of Persia in 485-465 BC. The


YARN, yarn. See Liven; Sprvnine; WEAVING.
YEA, ya (8%, ’aph, “also,” “moreover,” ‘yea”
[1 S 21 5 AV; 24 11, etc], 04, gam, “also,” “like-
wise,” “moreover,” “yea” [2 K 2 3;
16 3, etc], ">, kt, “inasmuch,” “cer-
tainly,” “doubtless,” ‘yea’? [Ps 102
13; 106 12, etc]): Each of these words
occurs frequently, esp. the first two.
In the NT we have: val, nai, “verily,” “yea,”
the usual particle of affirmation (Mt 5 37; 9 28,
etc); dé, dé, “however,” “‘on the other
2.Inthe hand” (Lk 2 35; Acts 20 34 AV, etc);
NT add4, alld, “however,” “but” (Lk 24
22 AV; Rom 8 31 AV, etc); «al, kai,
“also,” “besides,” “yea” (Acts 3 16; 7 43 AV, etc).
Christ forbids the employment of any affirmation
stronger than the solemn repetition of the first
mentioned (Mt 5 37). Frank E, Hirscu


YEAR, yér (FU, shdnah, Aram. 12U, shenah, “‘a
return” [of the sun], like the Gr éwaurtés, eniauids;
Ba", yamim, “days,” is also used for “year,” and
the Gr hpépar, h@mérai, corresponds to it [Josh 13 1;
Lk 1 7.18]; ras, éos, is also employed frequently
in the NT; for the difference between efos and
eniautos, see Grimm-Thayer, s.v.): The Heb year
was solar, although the month was lunar, the adjust-
ment being made in intercalation. See AstRoNomy;
TIME.


 e


YEARS, SEVENTY. See Seventy YEARS.
YELLOW, yel’6. See Coxors.


YODH, yd, yith (): The 10th letter of the
Heb alphabet; transliterated in this Encyclopaedia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3126


zig, 1900; Ernest Christian Wilbelm Wattenbach, Das
Schriftwesen im Muttelalter, Leipzig, 1896 (has an im-
mense mass of original quotations of authorities). Oe
Sources for latest literature: W. Weinberger, ‘' Beitrige
zur Handschriftenkunde,'' Sitzungsber. Akad. Wien, 159,
161 (1908-9), pp. 79-195; Zentralblatt f. Bibliothekswesen,
Leipzig Guonthly) ; Hortzschansky, Bibliographie des
.... Buchwesens (annual cumulation of the Zentralblatt
material). i
For inward writing see modern general psychologies
and the books and articles in Rand's bibliographical
supplement to Baldwin's Dict. of Psychology. For con-
tinuation literature see the Psychological Indez. For
various aspects of writing consult also books on general
Bib. archaeology (e.g. Nowack and Benzinger), general
Intros, and arts. on “Alphabet,” “Book,” ‘Library.’
‘Manuscripts,’ ‘Textual Criticism,” and otber special
topics in this or other Bib. and general encyclopaedias.
E. C. RicHarpson


first part of his reign was marked by the famous
campaign into Greece, beginning in 488. After the
defeat at Salamis in 480 Xerxes himself withdrew
from the expedition and it was finally discontinued
in the next year. During the remainder of his
reign, Xerxes seems to have spent a listless exist-
ence, absorbed in intrigues of the harem, and leaving
the government to be carried on by his ministers
and favorites (often slaves). He was finally mur-
dered by his vizier and left an unenviable reputation
for caprice and cruelty.

For the various Bib. references see AHASUERUS.

Burton Scotr Easton


as y. It came also to be used for the number 10.
See Jop, and for name, etc, see ALPHABET.


YOKE, yok: ‘

(1) The usual word is 549, ‘sl (Gen 27 40, etc),
less commonly the (apparently later) form MTA,
motah (Isa 68 6, etc; in Nah 1 13 DIA, mat),
which RV in Jer 27, 28 translates “bar” (a most
needless and obscuring change). The Gr in Apoc


a a


Yoke of Ancient Plow.


1, 2. Back and front of yoke. 3. Shoulder pieces. 4, 4. Matting to prevent
friction of shoulders.


(Sir 28 19, etc) and in the NT (Mit 11 29 f, etc)
is invariably gvyés, zugés. Egyp monuments show
a yoke that consisted of a straight bar fastened to
the foreheads of the cattle at the root of the horns,
and such yokes were no doubt used in Pal also;
but the more usual form was one that rested on the
neck (Gen 27 40, etc). It was provided with
straight “bars” (mototh in Lev 26 13; Ezk 34 27)
projecting downward, against, which the shoulders:


3127


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Xanthicus
Young Men


of the oxen pressed, and it was held in position b
thongs or “bonds” (mésérath in Jer 2 20; 5 5; 27 2;
30 8; ’dghuddath in Isa 58 6, “bands’’), fastened
under the animals’ throats. Such yokes could of
course be of any weight (1 K 12 4 ff), depending
on the nature of the work to be done, but the use of
‘“Gron yokes’? (Dt 28 48; Jer 28 13f) must have
been very rare, if, indeed, the phrase is anything
more than a figure of speech.

What is meant by ‘' the yoke on their jaws" in Hos 11
4 is quite obscure. Possibly a horse's bit is meant; pos-
sibly the phrase is a condensed form for ‘‘the yoke that


revents their feeding''; possibly the text is corrupt.
ee JAW.


The figurative use of “yoke” in the sense of “‘servi-
tude” is intensely obvious (cf esp. Jer 27, 28).
Attention needs to be called only to Lam 3 27,
where ‘‘disciplining sorrow” is meant, and to Jer
6 5, where the phrase is a figure for ‘‘the law of
God.” This last use became popular with the


Lydia, Epaphroditus, each of whom had in one way
or another some connection with Philippi.


(2) Renan has suggested that yoke-felow means
Lydia (Acts 16 14.15.40), and that she had been married
to Paul. But the fact that the adj. gnésies, ‘‘ true,”’

ualifying ‘‘yoke-fellow” is masc. and not fem. shows
that it is not a woman but a man who is refcrred to.
Renan's suggestion is an unworthy one, and is quite
devoid of proof. It is a mere fanciful and unsupported
creatlon of the Frenchman's brain. Renan’s idea is a
modification of an opinion which is as old as Clement of
Alexandria, that Paul here referred to his own wife.
But this conjecture is contradicted by the statement of
oe pete himself, that he had not a wife (1 Cor 7 8;


(8) There is still another way of interpreting
“yoke-fellow,” and probably it is the right one.
Some expositors take the word as a proper name.
Among these Westcott and Hort print “Sunzuge,” in
the margin. In favor of this interpretation there is
much to be said, esp. the fact that the word is found
in the very midst of the names of other persons.


Prowine In Syzi4 WITH YOKES oF OXEN,


_ Jews at a‘later period and it is found, e.g. in Apoc
Bar 41 3; Ps Sol 7 9; 17 32; Ab, iii.7, and_in
this sense the phrase is employed by Christ in Mt
11 29f. “My yoke” here means “the service of
God as I teach it” (the common interpretation,
“the sorrows that I bear,” is utterly irrelevant)
and the emphasis is on “my.” The contrast is not
between “yoke” and “no yoke,’ but between “my
teaching” (light yoke) and “the current scribal
teaching” (heavy yoke).

(2) “Yoke” in the sense of “a pair of oxen” is
Tak , cemedh (1 & 11 7, etc), or Sebyos, zetigos (Lk
14 19).

See also UNEQUAL; YOKE-FELLOW.

Burton Scotr Easton

YOKE-FELLOW, yik’fel-6 (civivyos, sinzugos,
“yoked together”): The word is used by Gr writers
of those united by any bond, such as marriage,
relationship, office, labor, study or business; hence a
yoke-fellow, consort, comrade, colleague or partner.

(1) In the NT it occurs once only (Phil 4 3):
“I beseech thee also, true yoke-fellow.”’ Most
interpreters hold that Paul here addresses some
particular but unnamed person, who had formerly
been associated with him in the work of the gospel
in Philippi. Many guesses have been made in
regard to the identity of the unnamed “yoke-
fellow,’’ and these names have been suggested: Luke,


The names of Euodia and Syntyche are mentioned
immediately before, and that of Clement follows
immediately after the true yoke-fellow. The mean-
ing therefore is probably, “I beseech thee also, true
Synzygos,” ie. I beseech thee, who art a genuine
Synzygos, a colleague rightly so called, a colleague
in fact as wellasin name. It is obvious to compare
the way in which the apostle plays upon the name
Onesimus, in Philem ver 11.
Joun RUTHERFURD

YOUNG, yung, MEN, YOUNG WOMEN (1173,
bahtir, Ji, naar; veavias, neanias, veavioxos,
neantskos): “Young man” is generally in the OT
the tr of bahar, from bahar, “to prove,” “to choose,”
and of na‘ar (lit. “boy,” but used sometimes also
of a girl). The former term denotes a young man,
no longer a mere youth, but liable to military
service (Dt 32 25; Jgs 1410; 18816; 2K
8 12, etc). In Nu 11 28, AV “Joshua... . the
servant of Moses, one of his young men” (b%hurtm),
RV renders “one of his chosen men,” m “from his
youth.” Na‘ar is frequently used (sing. and pl.)
of soldiers (18 1416; 214; 25589; 251
5.6.15, etc). Abraham’s “young men” (n*‘drim)
were “trained servants,” “trained men,” warriors
(Gen 14 24; cf ver 14 RV). The word is often
in the OT trd “servant”: thus in RV for AV
“young man,” “young men” (Gen 187; 2 K 4


Zaanaim
Zadok


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3128


22; 1 K 20 14 RVm). In the NT, the ordinary
words for “young man” are neanias (Acts 7 58;
20 9; 23 17.18.22) and neaniskos (Mt 19 20.22;
Mk 14 51, etc). “Young men” in Acts 5 6 is
nedteroi, comparative of néos, ‘‘young,” recent; the
fem. of the latter word is ‘young women” in Tit


ZAANAIM, za-a-na’im. See ZAANANNIM.


ZAANAN, za’a-nan (j:2%, ca‘indn; Zevvade,
Sennadr): A place named by Micah in the She-
phelah of Judah (1 11). In this sentence the prophet
makes verbal play with the name, as if it were de-
rived from ydca’, ‘to go forth”: “The inhabitant
{m “inhabitress’] of ¢a’éndn is not come forth”
(ydg’Gh). The place is not identified. It is prob-
ably the same as ZENAN.


place is intended in the two passages. It was a
place on the southern border of the territory of
Naphtali (Josh), and near it the tent of Heber the
Kenite was pitched (Jgs). The absence of the art.
before ’él6n shows that the b¢ is not the preposition
before z, but the first letter of the name, which ac-
cordingly should be read ‘‘Bezaanannim.” We
should naturally look for it near Adami and Nekeb.
This agrees also with the indications in Jgs, if the
direction of Sisera’s flight suggested in Meroz (q.v.)
is correct. The Kadesh, then, of Jgs 4 11 may be
represented by the ruin Kadish on the western
shore of the Sea of Galilee; and in the name Khirbet
Begstim, about 3 miles N.E. of Tabor, there is per-
haps an echo of Bezaanannim. W. Ewine


ZAAVAN, aza’a-van (JT, za‘dwan, meaning
unknown): A Horite descendant of Seir (Gen 36
27; 1 Ch 1 42). In 1 Ch Lue. has Zavdv, Zaudn
=Sam JI, i.e. Zaw‘dn, from a root meaning ‘‘to
tremble,” “fear” (see 11, BDB). AV has “Zavan”
in 1 Ch.


ZABAD, 2a/bad (727, zabhadh, perhaps a con-
traction for [1] zbhadhyah, “‘Jeh has given,” i.e.
Zebadiah; or (2] zabhdi'el, “El [God] is my gift”
[HPN, 222 f]; ZaBé8[r], Zabéd[t], with many vari-
ants):

(1) A Jerahmeelite (1 Ch 2 36.37), son of Nathan
(see NaTHan, IV).

(2) An Ephraimite, son of Tahath (1 Ch 7 21).

(3) Son of Ahlai (1 Ch 11 41) and one of David’s
mighty men (the name is wanting in2 5 23 24-29).

(4) Son of Shimeath the Ammonitess (2 Ch 24
26); he was one of the murderers of King Joash of
Judah; called ‘“Jozacar” in 2 K 12 21 (Heb ver
22). Perhaps the name in Ch should be Zacar
(137 , 2akhar).

(5) Name of three men who had married foreign
wives: (a) son of Zattu (Ezr 10 27)=“Sabathus”
of 1 Esd 9 28; (6) son of Hashum (Ezr 10 33)=
“Sabanneus” of 1
10 43)='‘‘Zabadeas” of 1 Esd 9 35.

Davip Francis Roperts


Esd 9 33; (c) son of Nebo (Har |


Z


24, and nedterai is “younger women” (RV _
“widows”’) in 1 Tim 5 14. In both the OT and

the NT young men are earnestly exhorted to wis-
dom and sober-mindedness (Prov 1 8.9; Eccl 11


9; 12 1.13.14; Tit 2 6, “discreet”; cf Wisd 9

11), ete. W. L. WALKER
ZABADAEANS, zab-a-dé’anz (ZoafPafato., Za-

badatoi; AV Zabadeans; Oesterley, in Charles,


Apoc, I, 112, prefers, on what seems insufficient evi-
dence, to read “‘Gabadeans”; Jos [Ant, XIII, v, 10]
by an obvious error has ‘‘Nabateans’’): According
to 1 Mace 12 31, an Arabian tribe, defeated and
spoiled by Jonathan after his victory in Hamath
and before he came to Damascus. There is an
ez-Zebedint about 25 miles N.W. of Damascus (now
a station on the railway to Beirfit), on the eastern
slope of the Anti-Lebanon range. This town may
very well have preserved the name of the Zaba-
daeans, and its situation accords nicely with Jona-
than’s movements in 1 Mace 12
Burton Scott Easton
ZABADAIAS, zab-a-da’yas. AV=RV ZaBapEas


(q.v.)


ZABADEAS, zab-a-dé’as (ZaBaSalas, Zabadatas,;
AV Zabadaias): One of the sons of Nooma who put
away their foreign wives (1 Esd 9 35)=“‘Zabad”
of Ezr 10 43.


ZABBAI, zab’i-i, zab’i ("BI, zabbay, meaning
unknown; ZaBet, Zaboit):

(1) One of those who had married foreign wives
(Ezr 10 28)=“Jozabdus” of 1 Esd 9 29.

(2) Father of Baruch (Neh 3 20). The Kré has
"DT, zakkay=“Zaccai”’ of Ezr 2 9; Neh 7 14.


ZABBUD, zab’ud (TiAl, zabbiidh, meaning un-
certain; Ezr 8 14, where K*°vé is zakkur and K*thibh
is zdbhidh=“Zabud’; 1 Esd 8 40 has “Istal-
carus’’): A companion of Ezra on his journey from
Babylon to Jerus.


ZABDEUS, zab-dé’us (ZaPéatos, Zabdatos):
1 Esd 9 21=“Zebadiah” of Ezr 10 20.


ZABDI, zab’di ("T31, zabhdi, perhaps “[a] gift
of Jeh” or “my gift” =NT ‘‘Zebedee’”’):

(1) An ancestor of Achan (Josh 7 1.17.18).
Some LXX MSS and 1 Ch 2 6 have “Zimri” (“Y9T,
zimrt); “the confusion of 3 [b] and 2 [m] is phonetic,
of ‘Tt [d] and " [rj graphic” (Curtis, Chron., 86). See
Zimrt (3).

(2) A Benjamite, son of Shimei (1 Ch 8 19), and
possibly a descendant of Ehud (Curtis).

(3) “The Shiphmite,”’ one of David’s officers who
had charge of the wine-cellars (1 Ch 27 27). LXX
B has Zaxpel, Zachret (probably Zichri).

(4) An ancestor of Mattaniah (Neh 11 17). Luce.
and 1 Ch 9 15 have ‘‘Zichri.”” See Zrcuarr, I, 2.

Davin Francis RoBerts

ZABDIEL, zab’di-el (SIRT, zabhdv’él, “my
gift is El (God]”; ZaBSiAA, Zabdiél):

(1) Father of Jashobeam (1 Ch 27 2), or rather
Ishbaal (Curtis, Chron., 290 f).

(2) An overseer of the priests (Neh 11 14).

(3) An Arabian who beheaded Alexander Balas
and sent his head to Ptolemy (1 Macc 11 17).


In


ZABUD, 2za’bud (TOT, zabhidh, “bestowed’’):
_ (1) Ason of Nathan (the prophet, probably) said
in K to be chief minister to Solomon and also the


3129


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zaanaim
Zadok


king’s friend (1 K 4 5; 1 Ch 2 36). ARVm has
“priest” for ‘‘chief minister.’ Benzinger (Kurz.

and-Comm., 18) holds that “this expression is a
marginal gloss here,” while Kittel (Handkomm., 31)
holds it to be genuine, though it is wanting in LXX.
Some suggest J>O, sdkhén (sec Sursna) for TID,
k6hén. The expression ‘‘king’s friend” (cf 2 S 15
37; 16 16) is, says Kittel, an old Can. title, found
also in the Am Tab.

(2) See Zaccur, (4); Priusts anp Levirss.

Davip Francis RosEerts

ZABULON, zab’t-lon (ZaBovddv, Zaboulén): Gr

form of “Zebulun” of Mt 4 13.16; Rev 7 8 AV.


ZACCAI, zak’&-i, zak’l. See Zappa, (2).


ZACCHAEUS, 2za-ké’us (Zaxxatos, Zakchatos,
from "31, zakkay, “pure’’):

(1) A publican with whom Jesus lodged during
His stay m Jericho (Lk 19 1-10). He is not men-
tioned.in the other Gospels. Being a chief publican,
or overseer, among the tax-gatherers, Zacchaeus had
additional opportunity, by farming the taxes, of
increasing that wealth for which his class was
famous. Yet his mind was not entirely engrossed
by material considerations, for he joined the throng
which gathered to see Jesus on His entrance into the
city. Of little stature, he was unable either to see
over or to make his way through the press, and
therefore scaled a sycomore tree. There he was
singled out by Jesus, who said to him, ‘“Zac-
chaeus, make haste, and come down; for to-day I
must abide at thy house” (ver 5). The offer thus
frankly made by Jesus was accepted eagerly and
gladly by Zacchaeus; and the murmurings of the
crowd marred the happiness of neither. How com-
pletely the new birth was accomplished in Zacchaeus
is testified by his vow to give half of his goods to
the poor, and to make fourfold restitution where he
had wrongfully exacted. The incident reveals the
Christian truth that just as the publican Zacchaeus
was regarded by the rest of the Jews as a sinner and
renegade who was unworthy to be numbered among
the sons of Abraham, and was yet chosen by Our
Lord to be His host, so the social outcast of modern
life is still a son of God, within whose heart the spirit
of Christ is longing to make its abode. “For the
Son of man came to seek and to save that which
was lost” (ver 10).

(2) An officer of Judas Maccabaeus (2 Mace 10
19).


(3) A Zacchaeus is mentioned in the Clementine
’ Homilies (ii.63) as having heen a companion of St.
Peter and appointed bishop of Caesarea.

(4) According to the Gospel of the Childhood, by
Thomas, Zacchaeus was also the name of the teacher of
the boy Jesus.

C. M. Kerr

ZACCUR, zak’ur (W131, zakkir, perhaps “‘ven-
triloquist” [Gray, Nu, 137]): ;

(1) Father of Shammua the Reubenite spy (Nu
13 4)


(2) A Simeonite (1 Ch 4 26); AV “Zacchur.”

(3) Levites: (a) a Merarite (1 Ch 24 27); (0)
a “gon” of Asaph (1 Ch 25 2.10; Neh 12 35);
(c) Neh 10 12 (Heb ver 13), and probably the same
asin Neh 13 13, father of Hanan.

(4) A marginal reading in Ezr 8 14 for Zabbud
where Kethibh is really “Zabud”; see ZABBUD.

(5) Son of Imri and one of the builders of Jerus
(Neh 8 2). Davip Francis RoBEeRts

ZACCHUR, zak’ur. See Zaccur.

ZACHARIAH, zak-a-ri’a (Zaxaplas, Zacharias;
AV Zacharias):


(1) The son of Barachiah, who, Jesus says, was
slain between the temple and the altar (Mt 23 35;
Lk 11 51). The allusion seems to be to the murder
of Zechariah, the son of Jehoiada (2 Ch 24 20 ff).
In this case “‘Barachiah” would seem to be a gloss
which has crept into the text through confusion
with the name of the father of the prophet Zechariah,
BERECHIAH (q.v.).

(2) See ZecHARIAH.


ZACHARIAS, zak-a-ri’as (Zaxaplas, Zacharias):

(1) One of the “rulers of the temple’ at the time
of Josiah’s Passover .(1 Esd 1 8)=“Zechariah” of
2 Ch 36 8. .

(2) One of the “holy singers’? at Josiah’s Pass-
over (1 Esd 1 15); the name stands in place of
‘“Heman” in 2 Ch 36 15.

(3) In 1 Esd 6 1; 7 3=the prophet Zechariah.

(4) One of the sons of Pharos who returned with
Ezra at the head of his family (1 Esd 8 30)=
rouse of Ezr 8 3, and perhaps identical with
(5) One. of the ‘men of understanding” with
whom Ezra consulted when he discovered the ab-
sence of priests and Levites (1 Esd 8 44) =‘‘Zecha-
riah” of Ezr 8 16, and perhaps identical with (6).

(6) Zacharias (om. in AV), who stood on Ezra’s
left hand as he expounded the Law (1 Esd 9 44)=
“Zechariah” of Neh 8 4.

(7) One of the sons of Babi who went up at the
head of his family with Ezra (1 Esd 8 37)=
“Zechariah” of Ezr 8 11.

(8) One of the sons of Elam who had taken
fas wives (1 Esd 9 27)=‘‘Zechariah” of Ezr


26.

(9) The father of Joseph, one of the “leaders of
the people” under Judas (1 Mace 5 18.56).

(10) AV=RV ‘“Zaraias” (1 Esd 6 8).

(11) AV=RV “Zachariah” of Mt 23 35.

8S. ANGus

ZACHARIAS (Zayaplas, Zacharias): Father of
John the Baptist (Lk 1 5, etc). He was a priest
of the course of ABlJAH (q.v.), of blameless life,
who in his old age was still childless. But on one
occasion when it was the turn of the course of
Abijah to minister in the temple (see TEMpLs),
Zacharias was chosen by lot to burn incense. While
engaged in this duty he was visited by Gabriel, who
announced to him that he should become the father
of the precursor of the Messiah. Zacharias received
the promise incredulously and was punished by
being stricken dumb. When, however, the child
was born and Zacharias had obeyed the injunction
of Gabriel by insisting on the name John, his powers
of speech returned to him. According to Lk 1
67-79, Zacharias was the author of the hymn Bene-
dictus, which describes God’s deliverance of Israel
in language drawn entirely from the OT, and which
is unaffected by the later Christian realization that
the Kingdom is also for Gentiles.

Elisabeth, his wife, was of the daughters of Aaron
(Lk 1 5) and kinswoman of the Virgin (1 36; the
relationship is altogether obscure). According to
1 42-45, she was one of those who shared in the
secret of the Annunciation. A few MSS in Lk 1
46 ascribe the Magnificat to her, but this seems
certainly erroneous. See esp. Zahn, Evangelium des
Lucas, 98-101 and 745-751 (1913).

Burton Scotr Easron

ZACHARY, zak’a-ri (Lat Zacharias): AV and RV
in 2 Esd 1 40=the prophet Zechariah.


ZACHER, 24’/kér.


ZADOK, 24’dok (p'IY, once PT, cadhok [1 K
1 26], similar to PZ, caddzk, and p'1E, cadduk,


See ZECHER.


| post-Bib., meaning justus, “righteous”; LAX Dabo,


Zadok
Zamoth


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3130


Sadék): Cheyne in EB suggests that Z. was a modi-
fication of a gentilic name, that of the Zidkites in
the Negeb, who probably derived their appellation
from PIX, ¢dk, a secondary title of the god they
worshipped. At the same time Cheyne admits
that cultivated Israelites may have interpreted
Zadok as meaning “just,” “righteous”—a much
more credible supposition.

(1) Z. the son of Ahitub (2 8 8 17)—not of
Ahitub the ancestor of Ahimelech (1 S 14 3) and
of Abiathar, his son (1 8 22 20).

(2) Z. father of Jerusha, mother of Jotham, and wife
of Uzziah king of Judah (2 K 15 33; 2 Ch 27 1).

(3) Z. the son of Ahitub and father of Shallum (1 Ch
6 12) or Meshullam (Neh 11 11), and the ancestor of
Ezra (7 1.2).

4) Z. the son of Baana, 4 wall-builder in the time of
Nehemiah (Neh 3 4), and probably one of the signatories
to the covenant made by the princes, priests and Levites
of Israel (Neh 10 21)—in both places his name occurring
immediately after that of Meshezabel.

(5) Z. the son of Immer, and, like the preceding, a
repairer of the wall (Neh 8 29).

(6) Z. a scribe in the time of Nehemiah (13 13).
Whether this was the same as either of the two preceding
cannot be determined.


The first of these filled a larger place in OT history
than either of the others; and to him accordingly
the following paragraphs refer. They set forth the
accounts given of him first in 5 and K and next in
Ch; after which they state and criticize the critical
theory concerning him.

(1) In these older sources Z. first appears in
David's reign, after Israel and Judah were united

under him, as joint occupant with
1.InS Ahimelech of the high priest’s office,
and K his name taking precedence of that. of

his colleague Ahimelech, the son of
Abiathar (2 8 8 17).

(2) On David's flight from Jerus, occasioned by
Absalom’s rebellion, Zadok and Abiathar (now the
joint high priest), accompanied by the whole body
of the Levites, followed the king across the Kidron,
bearing the Ark of the Covenant, which, however,
they were directed to carry back to the city, taking
with them their two sons, Ahimaaz the son of Zadok,
and Jonathan the son of Abiathar, to act as spies
upon the conduct of the rebels and send information
to the king (2 S 15 24-36; 17 15.17-21).

(3) On the death of Absalom, Z. and Abiathar
were employed by David as intermediaries between
himself and the elders of Judah to consult about his
return to the city, which through their assistance
was successfully brought about (2 8 19 11).

(4) When, toward the end of David’s life, Adoni-
jah the son of Haggith, and therefore the crown
prince, put forward his claim to the throne of all
Israel, taking counsel with Joab and Abiathar, Z.
along with Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan
the prophet, espoused the cause of Solomon, Bath-
sheba’s son, and acting on David’s instructions
anointed him as king in Gihon (1 K 1 8.26.32-45).

(5) Accordingly, when Solomon found himself
established on the throne, he put Z. in the room of
Abiathar, ie. made him sole high priest, while re-
taining Abiathar in the priestly office, though
deposed from a position of coérdmate authority
with Z. (1 K 2 26.27.35; 4 4).

(1) As in the earlier sources so in these, Z.’s
father was Ahitub and his son Ahimaaz—the in-

formation being added that they were
2.InCh all descendants from Aaron through
Eleazar (1 Ch 6 50-53).

(2) Among the warriors who came to Hebron to
turn the kingdom of Saul to David was “Z., a young
man mighty of valor,’ who was followed by 22 cap-
tains of his father’s house (1 Ch 12 26-28).

(3) Along with Abiathar and the Levites, Z. was
directed by David to bring up the Ark from the


house of Obed-edom to the tent pitched for it on
Mt. Zion, when Z. was appointed to officiate at
Gibeon, while Abiathar, it is presumed, ministered in
Jerus (1 Ch 15 11; 16 39). .

(4) Toward the end of David’s reign Z. and
Abimelech the son of Abiathar acted as priests, Z.
as before having precedence (1 Ch 18 16).

(5) To them was committed by the aged king
the task of arranging the priests and Levites accord-
ing to their several duties, it being intimated by
the narrator that Z. was of the sons of Eleazar, and
Ahimelech (in 18 16, named Abiathar; see above)
of the sons of Ithamar (1 Ch 24 3). In ver 6
Ahimelech is called the son of Abiathar, while in 18
16, Abiathar’s son is Abimelech—which suggests
that the letters b and A were interchangeable in the
name of Abiathar’s sons.

(6) When Solomon was anointed king, Z. was
anointed (sole) priest (1 Ch 29 22).

Obviously a large measure of agreement exists
between the two narratives. Yet some points
demand explanation.

(1) The seeming discrepancy be-
tween the statements in the earlier
sources, that Z.’s colleague in the high

priest’s office is first named Ahimelech
(28 817) and afterward Abiathar (2 8 15 24),
should occasion little perplexity. Either Ahimelech
and Abiathar were one and the same person—not
an unlikely supposition (see above); or, what is
more probable, Abiathar was Ahimelech’s son and
had succeeded to his father’s office.

(2) Z.’3 appearance as a young soldier among the
captains who brought David to Jerus (assuming
that Z. the soldier was Z. the priest, which is not
absolutely certain) need create no difficulty, if Z.
was not then of age to succeed his father in the
priestly office. The earlier sources do not make Z.
an acting priest till after David’s accession to the
throne of all Israel.

(3) Neither should it prove an insoluble problem
to explain how, soon after David’s accession to the
throne of Judah and Israel, Z. should be found en-
gaged along with Abiathar in bringing up the Ark
to Mt. Zion, as by this time Z. had obviously entered
on the high-priestly office, either im succession to
or as colleague of his father.

(4) That Z. was left to officiate at Gibeon ‘where
the tabernacle was, while Abiathar was selected to
exercise office in the capital, in no way conflicts with
the earlier account and seems reasonable as a dis-
tribution of official duties. Why 2%. was sent to
Gibeon, where the tabernacle was, and not kept at-
Jerus whither the Ark had been brought, he being
always named before Abiathar and probably looked
upon as the principal high priest, may have had its
reason either in the fact that the king regarded
Gibeon as the central sanctuary for national wor-
ship, the tabernacle being there (Solomon obviously
did; see 2 Ch 1 3), and therefore as the proper
place for the principal high priest; or in the fact that
Z. was younger than Abiathar and therefore less
fitted than his older colleague to be at court, as an
adviser to the king.

(5) That toward the end of David’s reign, not
Abiathar, but his son Ahimelech (or Abimelech),
should be introduced as joint high priest with Z.
will not be surprising, if Abiathar was by this time
an old man, as his father was at the beginning of
David’s reign. That grandfather and grandson
should have the same name is as likely to have been
common then as it is today.

(6) That Z. should have been appointed sole high
priest on Solomon’s accession (1 Ch 29 22) is not
inconsistent with the statement (1 K 4 4) that
under Sclomon Z. and Abiathar were priests.


3. Harmony
of the
Accounts


3131


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zadok
Zamoth


Abiathar might still be recognized as a priest or
even as a high priest, though no longer acting as
such. The act of deposition may have affected his
son Ahimelech as well, and if both father and son
were degraded, perhaps this was only to the extent
of excluding them from the chief dignity of high
priest.

The higher criticism holds: (1) that the Z. of David’s


reign was not really an Aaronite descended from
Eleazar through Ahituh, who was not


4. The Z.'s father but Ahimelech’s (Gray in
oe #B, art. ‘“‘Ahitnb’’), but an adventurer,
Higher a soldier of fortune who had climbed up
Critical into the priest's office, though by what
Theory meaus is not known (Wellhausen, GJ, 145);


(2) that up till Z.'s Sp DeSeanCe the priest-
hood had been in Ithamar’s line, though,
according tothe insertion by a later writer in the text of
18 2 (see vs 27 ff), in Eli’s day it was predicted that it
should pass from Eli's house and be given to another;
(3) that when Abiathar or Ahimelech or hoth were deposed
and Z. instituted sole high priest hy Solomon, this ficti-
tious prophecy was fulfilled—though in reality there
was neither prophecy nor fulfilment; (4) that during the
exile Ezekiel in his sketch of the vision-temple Toure.
sented the Zadokites as the only legitimate priests, while
the others of the line of A. were degraded to he Levites;
(5) that in order to establish the legitimacy of _Z. the
writer of P invented his Aarenic descent through Eleazar
aud inserted the fictitious prophecy in 1 8.

(1) This theory proceeds upon the assumption, not
that the Chronicler was a post-exilic writer (which is
admitted), but that he deliherately and
purposely idealized and to that extent falsi-

ed t.


. Criticism
5. Criticis he past history of his people by ascrib-


of This ing to them a faithful adherence tc the
Theory Levitical institutions of the PC, which,


according to this theory, were not then in
existence—in other words by representing the religious
institutions and cbservances of his own age as having
existed in the nation from the beginning. Were this
theory established a4 well-accredited facts, it would
doubiless require to be accepted; hut the chief, if not
the only, support it has is derived from a previous recon-
struction of the sacred text in accordance with the theory
it is called on to uphold.

(2) That the father of Z. was not Ahituh, a priest of
the line of Eleazar, is arrived at by declaring the text in

8 17 to have been intentionally corrupted, pre-
sumably by a late R, the original form of the verse hay-
ing heen, according to criticism (Wellhausen, 7'BS, 176 f):
*‘ Ahiathar the son of Ahimelech, the son of Ahitub, aud
Z. were priests.’’ Butif this was the original form of the
words it is not easy tc explain why they should have been
so completely turned round as to say the opposite, viz.
that Ahimelech was the son of Ahiathar, and that
Ahitub was the father of Z., when in reality he was the
father of Ahimelech. If, as Cornill admits (Hinl, 116),
the Chronicler worked ‘with good, old historical ma-
terial,'' it is not credible that he made it say the opposite
of what it meant.

(3) If Z. was not originally a priest, but only a military
adventurer, why should David have made him a priest at
all? Wellhausen says (GJ, 20) that when David came
to the throne he ‘attached importance to having as
priests the heirs of the old family who had served the
Ark at Shiloh.” But if so, he had Abiathar of the line
of Ithamar at hand, and did not need to go to the army for
a priest. It, however, it be urged that in making Z. a

riest he gave him an inferior rank to Abiathar, and sent
im to Gibeon where the tabernacle was, why should
both sources so persistently place Z. before Ahbiathar ?

(4) If Z. was originally a soldier not connetted_with
the priesthood, and only hecame a priest after David
came to Jerus, why should the earlier source have omitted
to record this, when no reason existed, so far as one can
discover, why it should have been left out? And why
should the priestly disposed Chronicler have incorporated
this in his narrative when all his inclinations should have
moved him to omit it, more esp. when he was intending
to invent (according Hg the aiucal theory) for the young
warrior an Aaronite descen’ ;

(5) That the prediction of the fall of Eli’s house (1 8
9 27-36) was inserted hy a late writer to justify its super-
session by the line of Z. has no foundation except the pre-
supposition that prediction is impossible, which fair-
minded criticism cannot admit. The occurrence of the
word “anointed,” it is contended, presupposes the
monarchy. This, however, it only predicts; and at the
most, as Driver sees (Intro, 164), cannot Saeki the fic-
titious character of the prophecy, hut merely that it has
been “recast by the narrator and colored by the associa-
tions with ween ne pimeelt is familiar’; and even this
is entirely hypothetical.

(6) Ezekial’s reference to Z.’s descendants as the only
legitimate priests in the yin does not prove
that Z. himself was a soldier who climbed up into the
priesthood. Even if the critical interpretation of the
vision-temple were correct, it in no way affects the per-


sonality of Z., and certainly does not disprove his origin
conan with the priesthood or his descent fon
leazar.


T. WHITELAW

ZAHAM, za’/ham (OMT, zdham, meaning uncer-
tain; LXX A, Zadkdp, Zaldm, B, ‘Poodddp, Rhoolldm):
A son of King Rehoboam (2 Ch 11 19).

ZAIN, zé’in. See Zayin.

ZAIR, z2a’ir (WYY, ca'tr; Zeadp, Zeidr): When
he invaded Edom, we are told that Joram passed
over to Zair and all his chariots with him (2 K 8
21). In the parallel passage (2 Ch 21 9), “with
his captains” (1! OY, ‘wn sarayw) takes the place
of “to Zair” (IN°9E , ¢a‘trah), probably a copyist’s
corruption. The place has not been identified.
Some have thought that Mt. Seir is intended; others
that it means the town of Zoar. Conder suggested
ez-Zuweirah, 8.E. of the Dead Sea. If Zoar lay in
this direction, it is the way by which an invading
army might enter Edom.


ZALAPH, 24’laf (oy, c@laph, “‘caper-plant’’):
Father of Hanun, one of the repairers of the wall
(Neh 3 30).


ZALMON, zal’mon (jrabz , galmén; Zedrpav,

rage bpos "Eppav, é6ros Ermén; AV Salmon [Ps
4]):

(1) From the slopes of Mt. Zalmon, Abimelech
and his followers gathered the wood with which they
burned down ‘‘the stronghold of the house of El-
berith,”’ which may have been the citadel of Shechem
(Jgs 9 46). The mountain therefore was not far
from the city; but no name resembling this has
yet been recovered in Mt. Ephraim. It is just
possible that in the modern Arab. name of Mt. Ebal,
es-Stlémiyeh, there may be an echo of Zalmon. It
is precisely to this mountain, esp. to the western
slopes, that one would expect Abimelech and his
people to go for the purpose in view. The name
occurs again in Ps 68 14, a passage of admitted
difficulty. Snow in Pal is mainly associated with
Mt. Hermon, where it may be seen nearly all the
year round; hence doubtless the Gr reading “Mt.
Hermon” in Jgs. But snow is well known among
the uplands in winter; and the Psalmist may simply
have meant that the kings were scattered like snow-
flakes in the wind on Mt. Zalmon. We need not
therefore look to Bashan or elsewhere for the moun-
tain. The locality is fixed by the narrative in Jgs.

(2) One of David’s heroes (2 § 23 28). See

LAI. W. Ewina


ZALMONAR, zal-mo‘na (MA>%, calmanah,
“gloomy”): A desert camp of the Israelites, the
first after Mt. Hor (Nu 33 41.42). The name
“suggests some gloomy valley leading up to the
Edomite plateau.” See Wanperines or IsRaE..


ZALMUNNAH, zal-mun’a.
MUNNA.


ZAMBIS, zam’bis: AV=RV Zaman (q.v.).


ZAMBRI, zam’bri (B, ZopBpel, Zambret, A, Zap-
Bpls, Zambris; AV Zambis, from Aldine ZapBls,
Zambis) : ;

(1) One of the sons of Ezora who put away their
foreign wives (1 Esd 9 34)=“‘Amariah” of Ezr 10


42,
(2) AV=RV “Zimri” of 1 Macc 2 26.
ZAMOTH, 24’moth, 24’moth (Zaps0, Zamoth):


The head of a family, some members of which
married foreign wives (1 Esd 9 28)=“Zattu” of


See ZEBAH AND ZAL-


Zamzummim
Zebah, Zalmunna


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3132


Ezr 10 27; called ‘“Zathui’ in 1 Esd 6 12 and
‘“Zathoes” (AV “Zatboe’’) in 8 82.


ZAMZUMMIM, zam-zum’im (O’ATAT, zam-
zummim): A race of giants who inhabited the region
E. of the Jordan afterward occupied by the on-
ites who displaced them. They are identified with
the Rephaim (Dt 2 20). They may be the same
as the Zuzim mentioned in connection with the
Rephaim in Gen 14 5. See Repwaim.


ZANOAH, za-nd’a (DT, zand*h; B, Tava,
Tanb, A, Zavd, Zand):

(1) A town in the Judaean Shephelah, grouped
with Eshtaol, Zorah and Ashnah (Josh 16 34).
The Jews reoccupied the place after the exile (Neh
11 30). Here it is named between Jarmuth and
Adullam. The inhabitants assisted in rebuilding
the walls of Jerus, repairing the valley gate (Neh 3
13). Onom places it at Zanna, in the district of
Eleutheropolis on the Jerusroad. It is represented
by the modern Zanu‘a, about 10 miles N. of Beit
Jibrin (Eleutheropolis).

(2) (B, Zaxavaciy, Zakanaeim, A, Zavd, Zand):
A place in the mountains (Josh 15 56) of which
Jekuthiel was the ‘father’ or founder (1 Ch 4 18).
It may be identified with Zenda, a ruined site on a
bill about 12 miles 8. of Hebron. W. Ewina


ZAPHENATH-PANEAH, zaf-é’natb-pa-né’a,
ZAPHNATH-PAANEAH, zaf’nath-pa-a-né’a (N2D¥
TTD , caphenath pa‘dneh; Egyp Zoph-ent-pa-ankh;
LXX D, Wev@opdavayx, Psonthomphanéch, “the
one who furnishes the nourishment of life,” i.e.
the chief steward of the realm): The name given
Joseph by the Egyp king by whom he was promoted,
probably the Hyksos king Aphophis (Gen 41 45).
See JosEPH.


ZAPHON, 2za‘fon (j1PX, caphon; B, Yadav,
Saphan, A, Zabdv, Saphén): A city on the E. of
the Jordan in the territory of Gad (Josh 13 27).
It is named again in Jgs 12 1 as the place where the
elders of Gilead gathered to meet with Jephthah
(caphGnah should be tr4 “to Zaphon,” not “north-
ward’’). It must have lain well to the N. of Gad.
According to the Talm Amathus represented
Zaphon (Neubauer, Géog. du Talm, 249). Here sat
one of the Synedria created by Gabinius (Ant,
XIV, v, 4). ft was a position of great strength
(BJ, I, iv, 2). Onom places it 21 Rom miles 8. of
Pella. This is the modern Tell ’Améateh, on the
south bank of Wéddy er-Rujeib, 15 miles 8. of Pella,
and nearly 5 miles N. of the Jabbok. Buhl (GAP,
259) objects to the identification that Tell ’Amateh
corresponds to the Asophon of Jos (Ant, XIII,
xii, 5). But this objection does not seem well
founded. Ewina


ZARA, 28'ra (Zapé, Zard): AV (Mt 1 3)=Gr
form of ZERAH (q.V.).


ZARACES, zar’a-séz: AV=RV ZarakeEs (q.v.).
ZARAH, 24’ra.


ZARAIAS, za-ra’yas, za-ri’as (Zapalas, Zaraias):

(1) One of the leaders in the Return along with
Zerubbabel (1 Esd 6 8)=“Seraiah” of Ezr 2 2
and ‘‘Azariah” of Neh 7 7=AV ZacwHarias (q.v.).

(2) An ancestor of Ezra in 1 Esd 8 2 (omitted
in B and Swete)=“Zerahiah” of Ezr 74 and
apparently =“‘Arna” of 2 Esd 1 2.

(3) The father of Eliaonias, the leader of the sons
of Phaath Moab under Ezra (1 Esd 8 31)=
‘“Zerahiah” of Ezr 8 4.


See Zerag, (1).


(4) One of “the sons of Saphatias’’ who went up
with Ezra (1 Esd 8 34)=‘Zebadiah” of Ezr 8 8.


ZARAKES, zar’a-kéz (A and Fritzsche, Zapdxns,
Zardkés, B and Swete, Zdpros, Zdrios; Vulg
Zaracelem; AV Zaraces): Occurs in the difficult
passage, 1 Esd 1 38, as the equivalent of Jehoahaz
(2 K 28 34) and Joahaz (2 Ch 36 4), the brother
of Eliakim (Jehoiakim or Joakim [q.v.]). Accord-
ing to 1 Esd 1 38, Joakim apparently apprehended
his brother, Zarakes, and brought him up out of
Egypt, whither he must have been previously taken
by Necoh, whereas 2 K and 2 Ch only state that
Necoh took Joahaz (Zarakes) to Egypt.


ZARDEUS, zar-dé’us (A, ZapSalas, Zardatas,
B, Swete and Fritzsche, Zepadlas, Zeralias; AV
Sardeus): One of the sons of Zamoth who had
married “strange wives’ (1 Esd 9 28)=“‘Aziza”
of Ezr 10 27.


ZAREAH, zi’/ré-a, za-ré’a (TX, cor‘ah): AV
in Neh 11 29 for Zoran (q.v.).

ZAREATHITES, za-ré’a-thits. See ZoRATHITES.

ZARED, za'red (TT, zdredh [in panse]). See
ZERED.


ZAREPHATH, zar’éfath (MDW, carephath;
Zdperta, Sérepta): The Sidonian town in which
Ehjah was entertained by a widow after he left the
brook Cherith (1 K 17 9 ff). Obadiah referstoit as _
a Can. (probably meaning Phoen) town (ver 20). It
appears in the Gr form Sarepta in Lk 4 26 (AY),
and is said to be in the land of Sidon. Jos (Ant,
VIII, xiii, 2) says it was not “far from Sidon and
Tyre, for it lay between them.” Onom (s.v.
‘“Sarefta’”’) places it on the public road, i.e. the
road along the seashore. It can be no other than
the modern Sarafend, about 13 miles N. of Tyre,
on the spur of the mountain which divides the plain
of Tyre from that of Sidon.

The site of the ancient town is marked by the ruins on
the shore to the S. of the modern village, about 8 miles to
the 8. of Sidon, which extend along the shore for a mile
ormore. They are in two distinct groups, one on a head-
land to the W. of a fountain called ‘Ain el-Kantara,
which js not far from the shore. Here was the ancient
barbor which still affords shelter for small craft. The
other group of ruins is to the 8., and consists of columns,
sarcophagi and marble slabs, indicating a city of con-
siderable importance. The modern village of Sarafend
was built some time after the 12th cent., since at the
time of the Crusades the town was still on the shore.


It is conjectured that the Syrophoenician woman
mentioned in Lk 4 26 was an inhabitant of Z., and
it is possible that Our Lord visited the place in His
journey to the region as narrated in Mk 7 24-81,
for it is said that he “came through Sidon unto the
sea of Galilee.”

The place has been identified by some with Mis-
rephoth-maim of Josh 11 8 and 13 6, but the latter
passage would indicate that Misrephoth-maim was
at the limit of the territory of the Sidonians, which
Z. was not in the days of Joshua. See MisrEPHors-
MAIM; SIDON.

Originally Sidonian, the town passed to the
Tyrians after the invasion of Shalmaneser IV, 722
BC. It fell to Sennacherib 701 BC. The Wely,
or shrine bearing the name of el-Khudr, the saint in
whom St. George is blended with Elijah, stands near
the shore. Probably here the Crusaders erected a
chapel on what they believed to be the site of the
widow’s house. W. Ewina


ZARETAN, zar’é-tan (JAX, cdrtthan): AV Josh
3 16 for ZARETHAN (q.v.). :


3133


ZARETHAN, zar’é-than (JX, ¢arthan): A
city, according to Josh 3 16 (omitted, however, by
LXX) near Adam, which is probably to be identified
with Tell Démieh at the mouth of the Jabbok. In
1 K 4 12 it is mentioned in connection with Beth-
shean and said to be ‘beneath Jezreel.”” In 1 K
7 46, this is said to be at ‘the ford of Adamah,”
according to the reading of some, but according to
the Massoretic text, ‘in the clay ground between
Succoth and Zarethan,’’ where the bronze castings
for the temple were made by Solomon’s artificers.
In 2 Ch 4 17, the name appears as Zeredah, which
in 1 K 11 26 is said to have been the birthplace of
Jeroboam, son of Nebat. In Jgs 7 22, Gibeon is
said to have pursued the Midianites “‘as far as Beth-
shittah toward Zererah,” which is probably a mis-
reading for Zeredah, arising from the similarity of
the Heb letters ddleth and résh. The place has not
been positively identified. From the suggestion
that the name means “the great [or lofty] rock,”
it has without sufficient reason been supposed that
it designates the conspicuous peak of Kurn Surtabheh,
which projects from the mountains of Ephraim into
the valley of the Jordan opposite the mouth of the
Jabbok. GrEoRGE FREDERICK WRIGHT


ZARETH-SHAHAR, zfa’reth-sha’har (™)¥
WIWT , cereth ha-shahar). See ZERETH-SHAHAR.

ZARHITES, zar’hits. See Zerag, (1), (4).

ZARTANAH, zfr-tana, zar'té-ni (TN,
cartthandh): AV in 1K 4 12 for “Zarethan.”
The form is Zarethan with Hé locale.


ZARTHAN, zir’than (JOY, ¢ar’than): AV in
1 K 7 46 for ZARETHAN (q.Vv.).


ZATHOES, zath’é-éz, za-thd’éz (Za@ofs, Zathoés;
AV Zathoe): Name of a family, part of which re-
turned with Ezra (1 Esd 8 32), not found in the
Heb of Ezr 8 5; probably identical with ‘“Zattu”
of Ezr 2 8; Neh 7 13, many of which family went
up with Zerubbabel, and so called also ‘“Zathui’
(1 Esd 6 12). See Zarrv.


ZATHUI, za-thi’t (ZabGovi, Zaththout, LXX B,
Zarév, Zaton): In 1 Esd 6 12=“Zattu” in Ear 2
8; Neh 10 14. In 1 Esd 9 28 the same name is
“Zamoth.”


ZATTHO, zat’thi: In Neh 10 14; RV Zartu
(q.v.).


ZATTU, zat’h (NUT, zattd’, meaning unknown):
Head of a large family that returned with Zerub-
babel to Jerus from Babylon (Ezr 2 8; 10 27; Neh
7 13; 10 14 [15]). According to Ezr 10 27, some
of his sons had married foreign wives, and Zattu is
named in Neh 10 14 as one of the chiefs who signed
Nehemiah’s covenant. LXX A also adds the name
before that of Shecaniah in Ezr 8 5, and so we
should read, “And of the sons of Zattu, Shecaniah
... 2: 80 1 Esd 8 32 has Za6oys, Zathoés. AV
bas “Zatthu” in Neh 10 14.


ZAVAN, za’van. See Zsavan.


ZAYIN, zA’yin (1): The 7th letter of the Heb
alphabet; transliterated in this Encyclopaedia as
z. It came also to be used for the number 7. For
name, etc, see ALPHABET.


ZAZA, 1a’za (NTT, 242d’, meaning unknown;
LXX B, ’Ofap, Ozdm, A,’Otatd, Ozazd): A Jerahme-
elite (L Ch 2 33).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zamzummim
Zebah, Zalmunna


ZEALOT, zel’ut, ZEALOTS, zel’uts: Simon, one of
the apostles, was called ‘‘the Zealot’? (Zndwrys,
Zélotés, from (ndrdbw, zél60 “to rival,” “emulate,” “‘be
jealous,” “admire,” ‘desire greatly,” Lk 6 15; Acts
1 13, AV “‘Zelotes’”). In Mt 10 4 and Mk 3 18 he
is called “the Cananaean” (so RV correctly; not
“the Canaanite,” as AV says, following inferior
MSS), 6 Kavavaios, ho Kananaios. From the time of
the Maccabees there existed among the Jews a party
who professed great zeal for the observance of the
“law.” According to Jos (BJ, IV, iti, 9; v, 1; VII,
viii, 1) they resorted to violence and assassination in
their hatred of the foreigner, beg at many points
similar to the Chinese Boxers. It is not improbable
that the ‘‘Assassins” (see Assassins) of Acts 21 38
were identical, or at least closely associated, with
this body of “Zealots,” to which we must conclude
that Simon had belonged before he became one of
the Twelve. See, further, Simon THE ZEALOT.

Wititiam Arthur HEImDEL

ZEBADIAH, zeb-a-di’a ((1] WW T37 , 2bhadhyahti,
[2] W131 , z*bhadhyah, ‘“Jeh has bestowed’’; the form
[1] is the Heb name in [1], [a], [b], [2], below; the
form [2] in the rest. Some MSS have “Zechariah”
in [1], [a], (6), [3]; cf ZaBp1; Zasprev):

(1) Levites: (a) a Korahite doorkeeper of David’s
reign (1 Ch 26 2); (b) one of the Levites sent by
ene ane to teach the Térah in Judah (2

h 17 8).

(2) Son of Ishmael (2 Ch 19 11); “ruler of the
house of Judah in all the king’s [Jehoshaphat’s]
matters,” i.e. judge in civil cases, the ‘‘controversies”’
of ver 8.

(3) Benjamites, perhaps descended from Ehud
(see Curtis, Chron., 158 ff): (a) In 1 Ch 8 15; (0)
in ver 17, where the name may be a dittography
from ver 15.

(4) A Benjamite recruit of David at Ziklag (1
Ch 12 7 [Heb ver 8]).

(5) One of David’s army officers, son and succes-
sor of Asahel (1 Ch 27 7).

(6) One of those who returned from Babylon to
Jerus with Ezra (Ezr 8 8)=“‘Zaraias” of 1 Esd 8


(7) One of those who had married foreign wives

(Ezr 10 20)=“Zabdeus” of 1 Esd 9 21.
Davin Francis RosBErts

ZEBAH, 2@’ba (M37, zebhah, ‘‘victim”’), AND
ZALMUNNA, zal-mun’a (aNeY, calmunna‘, ‘“pro-
tection refused’): Two Midianite kings or chiefs
whom Gideon slew (Jgs 8 4-21; Ps 83 11 [Heb
ver 12]). The name zebhah (ZéBee, Zébee) is very
much like that of 2° ébh (ZB, Zéb, ‘“Zeeb” in LXX).
Moore (Jgs, 220) says that ¢almunnd' is probably
“a genuine Midianite name’; Néldeke conjectured


that it contains that of a deity (D>%, ¢[allm), and


a compound form sry, glmshzbh, is found in
an inscription from Teima, a place E. of the Midi-
anite capital (CIS, II, cxili f).

The narrative of Jgs § 4-21 is not to be connected
with that of 8 1-3. ‘Budde (Kurzer Hand-Comm. z. AT,
XXID would join 8 4 to6 34; Moore (ICC) following
Budde’s earlier work (1890) would connect it with a part
of 7 22b, describing the direction of the flight, while
Nowack (Hand-Komm.) regards the battle of 8 11 as
the same as that of 7 11 ff; he then takes the latter

art of § 11 to refer to the place of the camp at night.
Phere are many difficulties in forming a natural connec-
tion for the verses. It may be noted that in 8 13f
Gideon is not ‘‘ the least in my father’s house,” as he rep-
resents himself to he in 6 15.


The whole section tells of a daring raid made by
Gideon upon the Midianites. Some of his own kin
had been slain by Midianite hordes at Ophrah (8
18 f), and, stirred by this, Gideon went in hot pur-
suit with 300 men (ver 4). He requested provisions
for his men from the people of Succoth and Penuel,
but was refused this. He then went on and caught


Zebaim
Zechariah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3134


the Midianites unawares at Karkor (ver 10) and
captured their two chiefs. He then had his revenge
on the two towns, and returned probably to his
home with the two notable prisoners. These he
determined to slay to avenge the death of his own
kinsmen, and called upon his eldest son to perform
this solemn public duty that he owed to the dead.
His son, apparently only a boy, hesitated, and he
did the deed himself. W. R. Smith (Lectures on
the Rel. of the Sem.,2d ed, 417, n.) compares with
this call to Gideon’s son the choice of young men
or lads as sacrificers in Ex 24 5, and says that the
Saracens also charged lads with the execution of
their captives.

The narrative reminds one of David’s romantic
life in 1 § 25, 27, 30. It is throughout a character-
istic picture of the life of the early Hebrews in Pal,
for whom it was a sacred duty to avenge the dead.
It affords a splendid illustration of what is meant
by the spirit of Jeh coming upon, or rather “clothing
itself with” (RVm) Gideon (6 34); cf also Saul’s
call to action (1 S 11 1-11), and also Jgs 19f.

Davin Francis ROBERTS

ZEBAIM, zé-ha’/im. See PocHERETH-HAZZEBAIM.


ZEBEDEE, zeb’é&dé (“I3T, zibhdi, “the gift
of God”; ZeBeSaios, Zebedatos): The father of the
apostles James and John (Mk 1 19) and a fisher-
man on the Sea of Galilee (Mk 1 20), the husband
of Salome (Mt 27 56; cf Mk 16 1). See Jamzs,
Son or ZEBEDEE; SALOME.


ZEBIDAH, zé-bi'da, zeb’i-da (VHT, ie. THT,
zbhudhah, Keré, whence AV “Zebudah,’’ whereas
Kethibh is WPT, zbhidhah; the Keré means ‘“‘be-
stowed” and is the fem. of Zabud): Daughter of
Pedaiah of Rumah, and mother of King Jehoiakim
of Judah (2 K 23 36). LXX Bhas, however, "Iedna
Ouydrynp ‘Edet\ éx Kpovpd, Tella thugdtér Hdeil ek
Kroumd, A, Hleddap 0. HleddiAd éx ‘Pund, Hieldéph
th. Eieddild ek Rhumé. In 2 Ch 36 5 MT lacks
these names, but LXX B has Zexwpd 0 Nupetov éx
‘Pad, Zechord th. Néreiou ek Rhamd; here the name
of the king’s mother=Heb M7121 , z*kharah, due to
a confusion of 2 with 2 (& and b) and "\ with 7
(r and d), and thus we find support for the K*ré
ebhadhah (‘“‘Zebudah,” in’ 2 K 23 36 AV). Luc.
has confused the names here with those of 2 K 24
18, and has as there, “Amital, the daughter of Jere-
miah of Libnah.” Davip Francis Roperrs


ZEBINA, 2é-bi’na (NAT, 2°bhind’, “bought’”):
One of those who had married foreign wives (Ezr
10 43); the name is not in 1 Esd 9 35, and is
omitted by LXX A in Ezr.


ZEBOIIM, z&boi’im (D°2Y, ebhoyim; LXX
uniformly ZePole}tp, Sebdlelim; AV Zeboim): One
of the cities in the Vale of Siddim, destroyed with
Sodom and Gomorrah. It is always mentioned
next to Admah (Gen 10 19; 14 2.8; Dt 29 23;
Hos 11 8). Itis not to be confounded with Zehoim
mentioned in 1 S 18 18 and Neh 11 34. The site
has not been positively identified, but must be de-
termined by the general questions connected with
the Vale of Siddim. See Smp1m, VaLE or.


ZEBOIM, zé-bo'im ((1] DV3X, ebho'tm,; UePoelp,
Sebdeim [Neh 11 34]; [2] DOPANT 7B, gé ha-ge-
bhe'im; Toi rhv Zapelv, Gat tén Samein [1 8 13
18]):

(1) A Benjamite town mentioned as between
Happ (q.v.) and Nepauart (q.v.), and therefore in
the maritime plain near Lydda; the site is lost (Neh
11 34). (2) The Valley of Zehoim, “the valley of


hyenas,’’ one of three companies of the Philistines
left their camp at Michmash and “turned the way
of the border that looketh down upon the valley of
Zehoim toward the wilderness” (18 13 18).
There are several valleys with names derived from
the hyena, so common in these parts. There is a
small branch valley called Shakked dab‘a, “ravine
of the hyenas,” N. of the Wddy kelt (Grove), a
Wady abu dab‘a, ‘valley of the father of hyenas,”
which joins the Wédy kelt from the 8S. (Marti), and
a large and well-known Wéddy dab‘a, “valley of hy-
enas,”’ which runs parallel with the Wddy kelt, some
3 miles farther S., and ends at the Dead Sea. The
first of these, which apparently leads to Mukhmas
itself, seems the most probable. See Conder’s
Handbook, 241. E. W. G. MastTERMAN


ZEBUDAH, zé-biida.


ZEBUL, 2@’bul (221, zbhul, perhaps “exalted”;
ZeBotrA, Zeboiil): In Jgs 9 26ff. He is called in
ver 30 sar ha-‘ir, “the ruler of the city,’’ a phrase tr?
“the governor of the city” in 1 K 22 26=2 Ch
18 25; 2K 238; 2 Ch 348; he was ‘“com-
mandant of the town” of Shechem. In ver 28 he
is referred to as the pakidh, “officer,” or, more cor-
rectly, “deputy” of Abimelech. This verse is a
little difficult, but if we read “served” for “serve
ye,” it becomes fairly clear in meaning. With
Moore (Jgs, 255 ff) we may translate it thus: ‘‘Who
is Ahimelech? and who is Shechem, that we should
serve him [i.e. Abimelech]? Did not the son of
Jerubbaal and Zebul his deputy [formerly] serve the
people of Hamor [the father of Shechem]? Why
then should we serve him [Abimelech]?” This is
also the way Budde (Kurzer Hand-Comm. z. AT,
75) takes the verse. And further in ver 29 for “and
he said” many read with LXX “then would I
say.”

The position of Zebul is here that of a deputy to
Abimelech, who lived in Arumah (ver 41). When
Gaal came to Shechem, a newcomer with a band of
men, he seized the opportunity at a vintage feast
to attack Abimelech and express a desire to lead a
revolt against him (vs 26-29). Zebul heard these
words and reported the matter to his master, ad-
vising him to make a sudden rush upon the city
(vs 30-33). This Abimelech does, and Gaal, on
noticing the troops, tells Zebul, who turns upon him
and bids him make good his bragging words. Gaal
is thus forced to go out and fight Abimelech, and is
defeated (vs 3440).


See ZesipauH.


If this be the correct interpretation of the narrative
so far, it is fairly simple and clear. Some, however,
maintain that the words of Gaal about Zebul in ver 28
are meant as an insult to the governor of the cicy; this
is the view of Wellhausen (Compos., 353f, n.) and
Nowack (Handkomm.; ef also his Archdologie, I, 304,
308, for the meaning of sar). Zehulis, according to them,
head_of the Shechemite community, and ellhausen
and Kittel (Hist of Heb, II, 85) helieve him to have had
something to do with the revolt of 9 23-25. For tho
latter view there is no proof; possibly Zebul was the head
of the community of Shechem, but as he was a subject of
Abimelech, who was the king or prince ef Shechem,
there could not be much sting in calling him the '‘ deputy”
of his master.

The questions that arise from vs 41 ff need only be
referred to bere. Many critics have seen in 9 22-45
mere than one seurce. Moore groups the verses thus:
(1) vs 22-23.25.42 ff as due te E, with ver 24 from
RIJE, (2) vs 26-41 due toJ. It is doubtful if the division
is as clear as this. There seem however to be parallels:
(1) The plans of Ahimelech in vs 34-40 are very similar
te those in 42 ff. (2) Ver 41b seems to give in short
what we find related in vs 34-40. (3) LXX in 9 31
has suggested te many that we should read there, ‘‘and
he sent messengers unto Ahimelechin Arumah,'' instead of
reading ‘‘craftily.""_ We would thus have a parallel to
ver 41a. It may be suggested therefore that if the
account be double (and it is strange that Ahimelech
should again attack the city by almost the same metheds
as before, when the revolters had been already got rid
of), the narratives would he in this order:


3135


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zebaim
Zechariah


Introductory, 9 23-25; then vs 26-29.30 common to
both, and so possibly part of vs 31 and 32 f. Then we
have two accounts of the event: (a) vs 31 (part).34—40;
(b) vs 41-45, followed hy vs 46 ff.


Davip Francis RoBErts
ZEBULONITE, zeb’t-lon-it. See ZeBULUNITES.


ZEBULUN, zeb’t-lun (JI9921, zbhilin, also
written FAI and pat; the first form occurs
only in Jgs 1 30; the other two are frequent, and
are used interchangeably; ZaPovdev, Zaboulén): In
Gen 30 20 Leah exclaims, ‘‘God hath endowed me
with a good dowry,” which suggests a derivation
of Zebulun from zaébhadh, ‘to bestow,” the 7 (d)
being replaced by (1). Again she says, ‘Now will
my husband dwell with me [or “honor me”]: and
she called his name Zebulun’’; the derivation being
from zabhal, ‘‘to exalt” or “honor” (OZ, s.v.).

Zebulun was the 10th son of Jacob, the 6th borne
to him by Leah in Paddan-aram. Nothing is
known of this patriarch’s life, save in so far as it
coincides with that of his brethren. Tg Pseudojon
says that he first of the five brethren was presented
to Pharaoh by Joseph, when Israel and his house
arrived in Egypt (Gen 47 2). Three sons, Sered
Elon and Jahleel, were born to him in Canaan, and
these became the ancestors of the three main divi-
sions of the tribe (Gen 46 14).

The position of the tribe of Zebulun in the wilder-
ness was with the standard of the camp of Judah on
the east side of the tabernacle (Nu 2 7). This
camp moved foremost on the march (ver 9). At
the first census Zebulun numbered 57,400 men of
war (1 80), the prince of the tribe being Eliab, son
of Helon (ver 9). At the second census the men of
war numbered 60,500 (Nu 26 27); see, however,
Numsers. Among the spies Zebulun was ‘repre-
sented by Gaddiel son of Sodi (18 10). To assist
in the division of the land Elizaphan son of Parnach
was chosen (84 25). At Shechem Zebulun, the
descendants of Leah’s youngest son, stood along
with Reuben, whose disgrace carried with it that of
his tribe, and the descendants of the sons of the
handmaids, over against the other six, who traced
their descent to Rachel and Leah (Dt 27 13). At
the second division of territory the lot of Zebulun
came up third, and assigned to him a beautifully
diversified stretch of country in the N. The area of
his possession is in general clear enough, but it is
impossible to define the boundaries exactly (Josh
19 10-16). It “marched” with Naphtali on_the
E. and S§.E., and with Asher on the W. and N.W.
The line ran northward from Mt. Tabor, keeping
on the heights W. of the Sea of Galilee, on to
Kefr ‘Anan (Hannathon). It turned westward
along the base of the mountain, and reached the
border of Asher, probably by the vale of ‘Abilin.
It then Tested southward to the Kishon oppo-
site Tell Kaimin (Jokneam). As the plain belonged
to Issachar, the south border would skirt its north-
ern edge, terminating again at Tabor, probably
near Debiriyeh (Daberath), which belonged to Is-
sachar (21 28).

i i i i served
Bane eee en ae eo teres into couekt with the
sea, and so is in apparent contradiction with Gen 49 13,
and also with Jos (Ant, V,i, 22; BJ, IIT, iii, 1), who says
the lot of Zebulun included the land which “‘lay as far
as the Lake of Gennesareth, and that which helonged
to Carmel and the sea.”” Perhaps, however, the limits
changed from time to time. So far as the words in Gen
49 13 are concerned, Delitzsch thinks they do not neces-
sarily imply actual contact with the sea; but only that
his position should enable him to profit by maritimo
trade. This it certainly did; the great caravan route,
via maris, passing through his territory. Thus he could
“suck the treasures of the sea.’' See also Tasor,
Mount. Within the boundaries thus roughly indicated
were all varieties of mountain and plain, rough upland
country, shady wood and fruitful valley. What is said
of the territory of Naphtali applies generally to this.


Olive groves and vineyards are plentiful. Good harvests


are § e e ri
Chu Ving eMec euler ye ke
Elon the Zebulunite was the only leader given
by the tribe to Israel of whom we have any record
(Jgs 12 11 f); but the people were brave and skilful
in war, furnishing, according to the Song of Deborah,
“{them] that handle the marshal’s staff’ (6 14).
The tribe sent 50,000 single-hearted warriors, capa-
ble and well equipped, to David at Hebron (1 Ch
12 33). From their rich land they brought stores
of provisions (ver 40). Over Zebulun in David’s
time was Ishmaiah, son of Obadiah (27 19). Al-
though they had fallen away, Hezekiah proved that
many of them were capable of warm response to the
appeal of religious duty and privilege (2 Ch 30
10£.18 ff). They are not eaten but it is probable
that Zebulun suffered along with Naphtali in the
invasion of Tiglath-pileser (2 K 15 29). In later
days the men from these breczy uplands lent
strength and enterprise to the Jewish armies. Jota-
pata (Tell Jifat), the scene of Josephus’ heroic de-
fence, was in Zebulun. So was Sepphoris (Seffari-
yeh), which was for a time the capital of Galilee
(Ani, XVUL, ii, 1; BJ, VIL; ILL, ii, 4). Nazareth,
the home of our Saviour’s boyhood, is sheltered
among its lower hills. W. Ewrne


ZEBULUNITES, zeb’t-lun-its Cuban, ha-
zbhilont; ZaBovdev, Zaboulén): Members of the
tribe of Zebulun (Nu 26 27; Jgs 12 11f).


ZECHARIAH, zek-a-ri’a (M721, zkharyaha,
or M27, zkharyah; LXX Zayaplals], Zacha-
rta[s]): A very common nameinthe OT. The form,
esp. the longer form, of the name would suggest for
its meaning, ‘‘Jeh remembers” or “‘Jeh is renowned,”
and the name was doubtless understood in this sense
in later times. But the analogies with Zaccur,
ZECHER, ZIcHRI (q.v.), etc, make some original
ethnic derivation probable.

(1) King of Israel, son of Jeroboam II (AV
“Zachariah”). See next article.

(2) The grandfather of King Hezekiah, through
Hezekiah’s mother Abi (2 K 18 2, AV “Zachariah”
|| 2 Ch 29 1).

(3) A contemporary of Isaiah, taken by Isaiah
as a trustworthy witness in the matter of the sign
Maher-shalal-hash-baz (Isa 8 1). As his father’s
name was Jeberechiah, some support seems to be
offered to the theories of those who would make
him the author of certain portions of Zec. But see
ZECHARIAH, Book oF.

(4) A Reubenite of the time of Israel’s captivity
(1 Ch 5 7).

(5) A Benjamite, living in Gideon (1 Ch 9 37;
called ‘“Zecher’ in 8 31). He was the brother of
Kish and hence the uncle of Saul.

(6) A Manassite of Gilead, at the time of David
(1 Ch 27 21).

(7) The third son of Jehoshaphat (2 Ch 21 2).
He was slain by Jehoram (ver 4).

(8) A “prince”? whom Jehoshaphat sent to
“teach” in the cities of Judah (2 Ch 17 7). As
this “teaching” was in connection with the estab-
lishing of the Law, Zechariah was primarily a judge.

(9) A prophet who was influential in the early
days of Uzziah (2 Ch 26 5). He is characterized
as ha-mébh in bir’ ath (b:yir’ath[?]) ha &léhim, which
phrase is usnally understood to mean that he had
instructed (RVm) the king in the fear of God. As
long as he lived the king profited by his instruction
and advice.

The following eight are all Levites:

(10) A doorkeeper at the time of David, who was
made a singer “of the second degree’’ (1 Ch 15 18;


Zechariah
Zechariah, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3136


the text is confused). He was a player on a “psal-
tery’ (ver 20) and took part in the thanksgiving
when the Ark was brought to Jerus (16 5).

(11) A son of Isshiah (1 Ch 24 25).

(12) A son of Meshelemiah, a “porter of the door
of the tent of meeting” at the time of David (1 Ch
9 21; 26 2.14). In 26 14 called ‘‘a discreet coun-
sellor.””

(13) A son of Hosah, a Merarite, also at David’s
time (1 Ch 26 11).

(14) The father of the prophet, JamazrEu (q.v.)
(2 Ch 20 14).

(15) A son of Asaph, who assisted in the purifi-
oor of the Temple at the time of Hezekiah (2 Ch

9 13).

(16) A Kohathite, who assisted in the repair of
the Temple at the time of Josiah (2 Ch 34 12).

(17) A son of Jonathan, an Asaphite, one of the
musicians at the dedication of the wall at the time
of Nehemiah (Neh 12 35).

The following are all priests:
18°28 A trumpeter at the time of David (1 Ch

(19) A son of Jehoiada, at the time of Joash. He
rebuked the people publicly for their apostasy, and
was stoned by them, Joash consenting to their
act (2 Ch 24 20-22). As 2 Ch is the last book in
the Heb OT, Zechariah was regarded as the last of
the OT martyrs, and hence is coupled with Abel
(the first martyr) in Mt 23 35 || Lk 11 51. The
words “‘son of Barachiah’’ in Mt are due to confusing
this Zechariah with the prophet. See ZacHariau.

(20) One of the “rulers of the house of God” at
the time of Josiah (2 Ch 36 8).

(21) A son of Pashhur, 242 of whose descendants
as “chiefs of fathers’ houses” dwelt in Jerus at the
time of Nehemiah (Neh 11 13).

(22) A trumpeter at the dedication of the wall
at the time of Nehemiah (Neh 12 41).

(23) The prophet (Ezr 6 1; 6 14; Neh 12 16;
Zec 11.7; 71.8; 1 Esd 61; 73). See Zecu-
ARIAH, Book oF.

The following are all returned exiles or are men-
tioned only as ancestors of such:

(24) A son of Parosh (Ezr 8 3; 1 Esd 8 30 has
“Zacharias” here and elsewhere).

(25) Ason of Bebai (Ezr 8 11; 1 Esd 8 37).
(26) One of the “chief men” dispatched by Ezra
to bring priests from Casiphia (Ezr 8 16; 1 Esd 8
44). Doubtless the same as (24) or (25), above.

(27) One of the persons who stood by Ezra at
the reading of the Law (Neh 8 4; 1 Esd 9 44);
almost certainly identical with (26).

(28) A son of Elam, who had taken a foreign
wife (Ezr 10 26; 1 Esd 9 27).

(29) A son of Amariah, a Judahite, the ancestor
of certain persons dwelling in Jerus (Neh 11 4).

(30) A son of “the Shilonite,” the ancestor of
certain persons dwelling in Jerus (Neh 11 5).

Burton Scorr Easton

ZECHARIAH (21, ekharyah, WN3T,
ekharyaha, ‘“Jeh has remembered” [2 K 14 29;
15 8-12]; Zaxaplas, Zacharias; AV Zachariah):
Son of Jeroboam II, and 14th king of Israel. He
was the 4th of the line of Jehu, and reigned six
months. Zechariah succeeded to a splendid in-
heritance, as he was king, not only of the ten tribes
of Israel, but of the Syrian state of Damascus, which
his father had subdued. In the unusual wealth and
dignity of this position lay his peril. Also there
were two dark shadows falling across his path,
though both probably unseen by him. One was
the promise to Jehu, as the reward of his destroying
the worship of Baal in Israel, that his sons should
sit on the throne of Israel to the 4th generation (2 K
10 30; 15 12). Zechariah was Jehu’s great-great-


grandson. The other was the word of Amos to the
priest of Bethel: “Then said the Lord... . I will
rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword”
(Am 7 8.9).

The only brief notice of Zechariah personal to
himself is that he gave his support to the worship
of the calves, since Jeroboam I established the
religion of the state. He hardly had time, however,
to.identify himself with this or any institution before
he was publicly assassinated by Shallum, the son of
Jabesh (he “smote him before the people’). - The
prophet Hosea was then alive, and there is probably
allusion to this crime when, addressing Ephraim, he
says: “Where is thy king, that he may save thee
in all thy cities? . . . . I have given thee a king in
mine anger, and have taken him away in my wrath”
(Hos 13 10.11; ef 1 4).

There has long been difficulty with the chronology
of this period. Archbishop Ussher assumed an
interregnum of 11 years between the death of Jero-
boam II and Zechariah’s accession. This is ac-
cepted as probable by a recent writer, who sees “at
least 10 years of incessant conflict between rival
claimants to the throne on Jeroboam’s death”’ (see
art. “Zechariah” in HDB, IV). It seems more
likely that there is error in certain of the synchro-
nisms. The year of Zechariah’s accession was prob-
ably 759 BC (some put it later), and the 6 months of
his reign, with that given to Shallum, may be in-
cluded in the 10 years of Menahem, who followed
them (2 K 16 17). See CuronoLoey or THE OT.

W. Ssaw CaLpEcotTr


ZECHARIAH, BOOK OF:


1. The Prophet
2. His Times and Mission
3. Contents and Analysis
4, The Critical Question Involved
5. The Unity of the Book
6. Conclusion
LitERATURE
Few books of the OT are as difficult of interpre-
tation as the Book of Zechariah; no other book is
as Messianic. Jewish expositors like Abarbanel
and yarchi, and Christian expositors such as Jerome,
are forced to concede that they have failed “to
find their hands” in the exposition of it, and that
in their investigations they passed from one laby-
rinth to another, and from one cloud into another,
until they lost themselves in trying to discover the
prophet’s meaning. The scope of Zechariah’s
vision and the profundity of his thought are almost
without a parallel. In the present writer’s judg-
ment, his book is the most Messianic, the most truly
apocalyptic and eschatological, of all the writings
of the OT.
Zechariah was the son of Berechiah, and the
grandson of Iddo (Zec 11.7). The same Iddo
seems to be mentioned among the
1. The priests who returned from exile under
Prophet Zerubbabel and Joshua in the year
536 BC (Neh 12 4; Ezr 2 2). If so,
Zechariah was a priest as well as a prophet, and pre-
sumably a young man when he began to preach.
Tradition, on the contrary, declares that he was
well advanced in years. He apparently survived
Haggai, his contemporary (Ezr 5 1; 6 14). He
was a poet as well asa prophet. Nothing is known
of hisend. The Tg says he died a martyr.
The earliest date in his book is the 2d year (520
BC) of the reign of Darius Hystaspis, and the latest,
the 4th year of the same king’s reign
2. His (1.1.7; 71). Though these are the
Times and only dates given in his writings, it is
Mission possible of course that he may have
continued active for several additional
years. Otherwise, he preached barely two years.
The conditions under which he labored were similar


3137


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zechariah
Zechariah, Book af


to those in Haggai’s times. Indeed,- Haggai had
begun to preach just two months before Zechariah
was called. At that time there were upheavals and
commotions in different parts of the Pers empire,
esp. in the N.E. Jeremiah’s prophecies regarding
the domination of Babylon for 70 years had been
fulfilled (Jer 15 11; 29 10). The returned cap-
tives were becoming disheartened and depressed
because Jeh had not made it possible to restore Zion
and rebuild the temple. The foundations of the
latter had been already laid, but as yet there was no
superstructure (Ezr 3 8-10; Zec 1 16). The altar
of burnt offermg was set up upon its oid site, but
as yet there were no priests worthy to officiate in
the ritual of sacrifice (Ezr 3 2.3; Zec 3 3). The
people had fallen into apathy, and needed to be
aroused to their opportunity. Haggai had given
them rea] initiative, for within 24 days after he
began to preach the people began to work (Hag 1
1.15). It was left for Zechariah to bring the task
of temple-building to completion. This Zechariah
did successfully;
mission and work.

The prophecies of Zechariah naturally fall into
two parts, chs 1-8 and 9-14, both of which begin
with the present and look forward
into the distant future. (1) Chs 1-8,
consisting of three distinct messages
delivered on three different occasions:
(a) 1 1-6, an introduction, delivered
in the 8th month of the 2d year of Darius Hystaspis
(520 BC). These words, having been spoken three
months before the prophecies which follow, are ob-
viously a general Eromugtion: They are decidedly
spiritual and strike the keynote of the entire col-
lection. In them the prophet issues one of the
strongest and most intensely spiritual calls to
_repentance to be found in the OT. (6) 1 7—6 15,
a series of eight night visions, followed by a corona-
tion scene, all delivered on the 24th day of the 11th
month of the same 2d year of Darius (520 BC), or
exactly two months after the corner stone of the
temple had been laid (Hag 2 18; Zec 1 7). These
visions were intended to encourage the people to
rebuild God’s house. They are eight in number,
and teach severally the following lessons:

(a) The vision of the horses (1 7-17), teaching
God’s special care for and interest in his people:
“My house shall be built’’ (ver 16). (8) The four
horns and four smiths (1 18-21), teaching that
Tsrael’s foes have finally been destroyed; in fact
that they have destroyed themselves. ‘There is no
longer, therefore, any opposition to building God’s
honse. i


3. Contents


an
Analysis


(y) The man with a measuring line (ch 2),
teaching that God will re-people, protect and dwell
jn Jerus as soon as the sacred edifice has been built.
The city itself will expand till it becomes a great
metropolis without walls; Jeh will be a wall of fire
round abont it. (8) Joshua, the high priest, clad
in filthy garments, and bearing the sins both of him-
self and the people (ch 3); but cleansed, continued
and made typical of the Messiah-Branch to come.
(ec) The candelabrum and the two olive trees (ch 4),
teaching that the visible must give place to the
spiritual, and that, through “the two sons of oil,”
Zerubbabel the layman, and Joshua the priest_(ver
14), the light of God’s church will continue to born
with ever-flaming brightness. For it is “not by
might” but by Jeh’s Spirit, ie. by Divine life and
animation, by Divine vigor and vivacity, by Di-
vine disposition and courage, by Divine executive
ability and technical skill, that God’s house shall
be built and supplied with spiritual life (ver 6).
(©) The flying roll (6 1-4), teaching that when the
temple is built and God’s law is taught the land shall
be purified from outward wickedness. (7) The
Ephah (65 5-11); wickedness personified is borne


this, indeed, was his primary


l


away back to the land of Shinar, teaching that when
the temple is rebuilt wickedness shall be actually
removed from the land. (@) The four chariots
(6 1-8), teaching that God’s protecting providence
will be over His sanctuary, and that His people,
purified from sin, shall rest secure in Him. These
eight visions are followed by a coronation scene,
in which Joshua the high priest is crowned and made
typical of the Messiah-Priest-King, whose name is
Branch (6 9-15). (c) Chs 7, 8, Zechariah’s answer
to the Bethel deputation concerning fasting; de-
livered on the 4th day of the 9th month of the 4th
year of Darius (518 BC). The Jews bad been
accustomed to fast on the anniversaries of the
following four great outstanding events in the his-
tory of their capital: (@) when Nebuchadnezzar
took Jerus, in the 4th month (Jer 52 6); (8) when
the Temple was burned in the 5th month (Jer 52
12); (y) when Gedaliah was murdered in the 7th
month (Jer 41 2); and (6) when the siege of Jerus
was begon in the 10th month (2 K 26 1).

There are four sections to the prophet’s answer
divided by the slightly varying formula, ‘““The word
of Jeh came unto me” (7 4.8; 8 1.18), and teaching:
(a) Fasting affects only yourselves; God requires
obedience (7 4-7). (6) Look at the lesson from
your fathers; they forsook justice and compassion
and God punished them (7 8-14). (c) Jeh is now


| waiting to return to Jerus to save His people in


truth and holiness. In the future, instead of a
curse God will send blessing, instead of evil, good
(8 1-17). (d) In fact, your fasts shall be changed
into festivals, and many nations shall in that day
seek Jeh of hosts in Jerus (8 18-23).

(2) Chs 9-14, consisting of two oracles, without
dates; (a) chs 9-11, an oracle of promise to the new
theocracy. This section contains promises of a
land in which to dwell, a return from exile, victory
over a hostile world-power, temporal blessings and
national strength, closing with a parable of judg-
ment brought on by Israel’s rejection of Jeh as their
shepherd; thus Judah and Ephraim restored,
united and made victorious over their enemies, are
promised a land and a king (ch 9); Israel shall be
saved and strengthened (ch 10); Israel shall be
punished for rejecting the shepherding care of Jeh
(ch 11); (6) chs 12-14, an oracle describing the
victories of the new theocracy, and the coming day
of Jeh. This section is strongly eschatological,
presenting three distinct apocalyptic pictures: thus,
how Jerus shall be besieged by her enemies, but
saved by Jeh (ch 12); how a remnant of Israel
porified and refined shall be saved (ch 13); closing
with a grand apocalyptic vision of jadgment and
redemption—the nations streaming up to Jerus to
keep the joyous Feast of Tabernacles, and every-
thing in that day becoming holy to Jeh.

There are two opposing schools of criticism in
regard to the origin of chs 9-14; one holds what is
known as the preéxilic hypothesis,
according to which chs 9-14 were
written before the downfall of Jerus;
more specifically, that chs 9-11 and
13 7-9 spring from the 8th cent.
BC, having been composed perhaps by Zechariah,
the son of Jeberechiah mentioned in Isa 8 2;
whereas chs 12-14, excepting 13 7-9, were com-
posed by some unknown contemporary of Jeremiah
in the 7th cent. BC. On the other hand, there are
also those who advocate a late post-Zecharian origin
for chs 9-14, somewhere about the 3d cent. BC.
The latter hypothesis is today the more popolar.
Over against these the traditional view, of course, is
that Zechariah, near the close of the 6th cent.,
wrote the entire book ascribed to him. Only chs
9-14 are in dispute. No one doubts the genuine-
ness of chs 1-8. .


4. Critical
Question
Involved


Zechariah, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3138


The following are the main arguments of those who
advocate a preéxilic origin for these oracles: (1) 11 8,
“And I cut off the three shepherds in one month.”
These ‘three shepherds’’ are identified with_certain
kings who reigned but a short time each in the Northern
Kingdom; for example, Zechariah, Shallum and Mena-
hem (2 K 16 8-14). But the difficulty with this argu-
ment is that they were not cut off “in one month”;
Menahem, on the contrary, reigned 10 years in Samaria
(2 K 15 17). (2) 12 11-14, which speaks of ‘‘a great
mourning in Jerus, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in
the valley of Megiddon,”’ is claimed to fix the date of
chs 12-14. Josiah fell in the valley of Megiddo
(2 K 23 29; 2 Ch 35 22). But surely the mourning
of Judah for Josiah might have been remembered for a
century, from 609 BC till 518 BC. (3) 14 5, referring
to the ‘‘earthquake”’ in the days of Uzziah, is another
passage fastened upon to prove the preéxilic origin of
these prophecies. But the earthquake which is here
alluded to took place at least a century and a half before
the date assigned for the composition of ch 14. And
surely if an earthquake can he alluded to by an author
150 years after it occurs, Zechariah, who lived less than
a century later, might have alluded to it also. (4) A
much stronger argument in favor of a preéxilic origin of
these prophecies is the names given to the theocracy,
e.g. ‘‘Ephraim"’ and ''Jerusalem’’ (9 10), ‘‘ Judah” and
“Ephraim” (9 13), ‘‘house of Judah” and ‘‘house of
Joseph”? (10 6), ‘‘ Judah and Israel" (11 14), implying
that the kingdoms of Israel and Judah are still standing.
But subsequent to the captivity the Jews ever regarded
themselves as representatives of the 12 trihes, as is ob-
vious from their offering 12 sacrifices (Ezr 6 17; 8 35).
Moreover, old names_ such as ‘‘Israel’’ and ‘‘Judah’’
long survived (cf Jer 31 27-31; Zec 8 13). (5) 14 10,
which defines the area occupied by Judah as extending
“from Geba to Rimmon,” which corresponds, it is
alleged, with the conditions which prevailed just prior to
the captivity. But it satisfles equally well the con-
ditions after the exile in Zechariah’s own time. (6)
Again, it is argued that the national sins, the prevailing
sins, idolatry, teraphim and false prophecy (10 2;
13 2-6), are those of preéxilic times. But the same
sins persisted in the post-exilic congregation (Neh 6
7-14; Mal 2 11; 3 5), and there is no special emphasis
laid wpon them here. (7) Finally, itis argued that the
enemies of Israel mentioned in chs 9-14 are those of pre-
exilic times, Assyria and Egypt (10 10.11), Syria, Phoeni-
cia and Philistia (9 1-7). But forms of expression are
slow in changing: the name ‘Assyrians'’ occurs in Lam
5 6, and ‘‘Assyria’’ is employed instead of ‘‘Persia’’
in Ezr 6 22. Jeremiah prophesied against Damascus
and Hamath long after their loss of independence
(49 23-27). After the exile, the Philis resisted Israel’s
return (Neh 4 7.8). In short all these nations were
Israel’s hereditary foes, and, therefore, judgments pro-
nounced against them were always in place. Further-
more, it may he said in general that there are reasons
for thinking that, in both halves of the Book of Zec, the
exile is represented as an event of the past, and that the
restoration from exile hoth of Ephraim and Judah, though
incomplete, has already begun. This is unquestionably
true of chs 1-8 (1 12; 2 6-12; 6 10; 75; 8 7.8). The
exile is treated as a fact. It is almost equally true of
chs 9-14 (cf 9 8.11; 10 6.8-10). Moreover, it may with
justice be claimed that the alleged authors of chs 9-14
dissociate themselves from any definitely named person
or any specific event known to be preéxilic. God alone
is described as Ruler of His people. The only king men-
tioned is the Messiah-King (9 9.10; 149). The
“house of David’? mentioned in 12 7-12; 13 1, is never
descrihed as in possession of the throne. It is David's
‘*house,’”” and not any earthly ruler in it, of which the
prophet speaks. Further, there are passages, indeed,
in chs 9-14 which, if preéxilic in origin, would have heen
ohscure and even misleading to a people confronted by the
catastrophes of 722 and 586 BC. No specific enemy is
alluded to. No definite army is named as approaching.
Instead of Assyria, Javan is painted as the opposing
enemy of the theocracy (9 13), and even she is not yet
raised up or even threatening. On the other hand, in chs
12-14, it is not the Chaldaeans under Nebuchadnezzar,
but ‘‘all nations,”’ who are described as coming up against
Jerus (12 2.8; 142). Moreover, victory and not defeat
is promised (9 8.14.16; 12 4.7.8). The preéxilic proph-
ets Amos, Hosea and Jeremiah held out no such hopes.
These oracles, however, promise even Gary ee prosperity
and abundance (917; 10 1.8.12; 12 8; 142 :
and they exhort the people to rejoice rather than to fear
(9 9; 10 7); while in 14 16-19 all nations are repre-
sented as going up to Jerus to keep the Feast of Taher-
nacles, which was the most joyous feast of the Heh calen-
dar. All this is quite the opposite of what the preéxilic
prophets (who are known to have heen preéxilic) actually
prophesied. In Zec 9-14, there is sounded forth not one
clear note of alarm or warning; judgment rather gives
place to hope, warning to encouragement, threatening
to joy and gladness, all of which is most inconsistent with
the idea that these chapters are of preéxilic origin. On
the other hand, they are perfectly consistent with the
conditlons and promises of post-exilic times.


The other hypothesis remaining to be discussed
is that known as the post-Zecharian. This may be
said to represent the prevailing critical view at the
present time. But it, like the preéxilic hypothesis,
is based upon a too literalistic and mechanical view
of prophecy. Those, like Stade, Wellhausen,
Kuenen, Marti, Kautzsch, Cornill, Cheyne, Driver,
Kuiper, Echardt and Mitchell, who advocate this
view, employ the same critical methods as those
whose views we have just discussed, but arrive at
diametrically opposite conclusions. Indeed, no
two critics agree as to the historical circumstances
which produced these oracles. Most are of the
opinion, however, that these chapters were com-
posed during the Gr period, i.e. after 333 BC. In
examining the arguments urged by the representa-
tives of this schoo] special caution is needed in dis-
tinguishing between the grounds advanced in sup-
port of a post-exilic and those which argue a post-
Zecharian date. The former we may for the most
part accept, as Zechariah was himself a post-exilic
prophet; the latter we must first examine. In
favor of a very late or Grecian origin for chs 9-14,
the chief and all-important passage, and the one
upon which more emphasis is placed than upon all
others together, is 9 13, ‘For Ihave bent Judah for
me, I have filled the bow with Ephraim; and I will
stir up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece,
and will make thee as the sword of a mighty man.”’
Kuiper in summing up throws the whole weight of
his argument in favor of a Gr date on this verse.
Wellhausen makes it decide the date of these
prophecies; while Stade declares that the announce-
ment of the “sons of Javan” is alone sufficient to
prove that these prophecies are after 333 BC. Two
things are esp. emphasized by critics in connection
with this important passage: (1) that the sons of
Javan are the world-power of the author’s day,
viz. the Gr-Maccabean world-power; and (2) that
they are the enemies of Zion. But in opposition
to these claims it should be observed (1) that the
sons of Javan are but one of several world-powers
within the range of the prophet’s horizon (9 1-7,
Syria, Phoenicia, Philistia; 12 2f; 14 2f, all
nations; and 10 10.11, Assyria and Egypt); and
(2) that the Greeks under Alexander were not the
enemies of Zion, and did not fight against the Jews,
but against the Persians. Assuming the genuine-
ness of the passage (9 13), the following consid-
erations point to the Pers period as its probable
historical background: (a) The prophecy would be
vague and meaningless if uttered after the invasion
of Alexander. (b) The passage does not describe
a victory for the sons of Javan, but rather a defeat.
(c) It is introduced by an appeal to those still in
exile to return, which would have been quite mean-
ingless after Alexander’s conquest. (d) In short,
9 13-17, as a whole, is not a picture of actual war,
but rather an apocalyptic vision of the struggle of
Israel with the world-power of the West, hence its
indefiniteness and figurative language.

Furthermore, it mustnot be forgotten thatin Zecharlah's
own day the Greeks were rapidly becoming a menacing
world-power. In the first 3 years (521-519 BC) of
Darius’ reign, 12 different revolts took place, principally
in the N. and E. But, in 518, Darius was compelled to
move westward at the head of his royal armies; Darius’
visit to Peypt in 517 BC was cut short by the disturh-
ances of the Greeks (cf Wiedemann, Gesch., 236). Inthe
year 516 BC the Greeks of the Hellespont and Boone
with the island of Samos, were made to suhmit to Pers
rule. The next year (515 BC), Darius Jed an expedition
apuiney the Scythians across the Danuhe, the failure of
which encouraged the Ionians subsequently to revolt.
In 500 BC the reat Ionian revolt actually took place.
In 499 BC Sardis, the most important stronghold for
Persia in Asia Minor, was burned hy the Athenians. In
490 BC Marathon was fought and Persia was conquered.
In 480 BC Xerxes was defeated at Salamis. But it is


unnecessary to sketch the rise of Javan further. Enough
has heen related to show that already in the relgn of


3139


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Zechariah, Bookof


Darius Hystaspis—ln whose reign Zechariah is known to
have lived and prophesied—the sons of Greece were a ris-
ing world-power, and a threatening world-power. This is
all realiy that is required hy the passage. The sons of
Javan were but one of Israel’s enemies in Zechariah's
day; but they were of such importance that victory over
them carried with it momentous Messianic interests.
The language of ch 9 is vague, and, in our judgment, too
vague and too Indefinite to have been uttered after
Marathon (490 bere or even after the burning of Sardis
(500 BC); for, in that case, the author would have heen
Influenced more hy Greece and less by the movements and
commotions of the nations.


Other arguments advanced by the post-Zecharian
school are: (1) 14 9, “‘And Jeh shall be King over
all the earth: in that day shall Jeh be one, and
his name one.” To Stade this passage contains a
polemic against the conditions in Gr times when all
gods were conceived of as only different representa-
tions of one and the same god. But, on the con-
trary, the post-exilic congregation was as truly a
theocracy in the days of Darius Hystaspis as in the
period subsequent to Alexander’s conquest. The
Jewish colony of the Restoration was a religious sect,
not a political organization. Zechariah often pic-
tures the close relation of Jeh to His people (2 10-
13; 8 3.23), and the author of chs 9-14 describes
similar conditions. The “yearning for a fuller
theocracy,” which Cheyne (Bampton Lectures, 120)
discovers in Zec 9-14, is thoroughly consistent with
the yearning of a struggling congregation in a land
of forsaken idols shortly after the return from exile.
(2) 12 2b, interpreted to mean that “Judah also,
forced by the enemy, shall be in the siege against
Jerus,” is a proof, it is alleged, that the children of
the Diaspora had served as soldiers. The verse,
accordingly, is said to be a description of the hostile
relations which actually existed between Jerus and
Judah in the beginning of the Maccabean struggle.
The validity of these claims, however, is vitiated
by a correct exegesis of the passage in hand. The
text is apparently corrupt. In order to obtain a
subject for “shall be,” the preposition before Judah
had better bestricken out,asintheTg. Thepassage
then tr4 reads, ‘‘And Judah also shall be in the siege
against Jerus.” But this is ambiguous. It may
mean that Judah shall fight against Jerus, or 1t may
mean that Judah, too, shall be besieged. The latter
is obviously the true meaning of the passage, as ver
7 indicates. For, as one nation might besiege
Jerus (a city), so all nations, coming up are prac-
tically going to besiege Judah. The LXX_ favors
this interpretation; likewise the Coptic VS; and
Zee 14 14. Wellhausen frankly concedes that “no
characteristic of the prophecy under discussion in
reality agrees with the conditions of the Maccabean
time. The Maccabees were not the Jews of the
lowland, and they did not join themselves with the
heathen out of hatred to the city of Jerus, in order
finally to fall treacherously upon their companions
in war. There is not the slightest hint in our pas-
sage of religious persecution; that alone decides,
and hence the most important sign of Maccabean
times is wanting.” (3) 10 10.11, which mentions
‘Reypt” and “Assyria” (and which, strange to say,
is also one of the strongest proofs in support of the
preéxilic hypothesis), 1s singularly enough inter-
preted to refer respectively to the Ptolemies of
Egypt and the Seleucidae of Syria. But this is
quite impossible, and esp. so in view of the promi-
pence which is given to Egypt in 14 19, which points
to Pers rather than Gr conditions; for then Egypt,
in consequence of her perpetual efforts to throw off
the Pers yoke, was naturally brought under the
observation of the Jews in Pal, who repeatedly beheld
the Pers armies passing on their way to the valley
of the Nile.

(4) Still another argument advanced in favor of a


late post-Zecharian date for these oracles is that from
language and style: Aramaisms, scriptio plena, the pre-


. prophecies are so very hrief.


ponderance of the shorter form of the personal pronoun

I,” the Heb ending 6n, the frequent use of the nota
accusativi, esp. with suffixes, the omission of the article,
the use of the inflnitive absolute, and the clumsy diction
and weary repetition of these prophecies are polnted
to as evidence of their orlgin in Grecian times. But in
opposition to these claims, it may he remarked in general
that their force is greatly weakened hy two considerations:
(a) the fact that the author of chs 9-14 depends so largely
on older prophecies for his thoughts, and cousequently
more or less for his language; and _(b) the fact that these
; There is no mode of
reasoning so treacherous as that from language and style.
(For the technical discussion of this point, see the present
writer’s The Prophecies of Zechariah, 54-59.)


_ Among the further objections made to the genu-
ineness of chs 9-14, and consequently to the unity
of the book, the following are the chief:


5. The (1) There are no “visions’’ in these
Unity of oracles as in chs 1-6. But there are
the Book __ none either in chs 7, 8, and yet these


latter are not denied to Zechariah.
As a matter of fact, however, visions do actually
oecur in chs 9-14, only of a historico-parabolic
(11 4-17) and eschatological character (9 13-17;
chs 12, 14). (2) There are ‘no dates,’ as in
11.7; 71. But dates are seldom attached to
“oracles’’ (Isa 13 1; 161; Nahi1i1; Habi 1;
Mal 11). There is but one instance in the entire
OT (Isa 14 28m); whereas “visions” are frequently
dated. (3) There is “no Satan.’ But Satan is
never mentioned elsewhere in any prophetic book
of the OT. (4) There is “no interpreting angel”
in chs 9-14. But “oracles’’ need no interpreting
angel. On the other hand, “the Angel of Jeh” is
mentioned in both parts (3 1 ff; 12 8), a fact which
is far more noteworthy. (5) Proper names are
wanting in chs 9-14, e.g. Zerubbabel and Joshua.
But neither do these names occur in chs 7, 8. _ (6)
The sins alluded to are different, e.g. theft and false
swearing in 5 3.4; while in 10 2 seeking teraphim
and in 13 2ff false prophecy are named. But
these sins may have existed side by side. What is
far more noteworthy, in both parts the prophet
declares that_all these evils shall be taken away and
removed out of the land (3 9; 5 9-11; 13 1.2).
(7) The Messianic pictures are different, e.g. in chs
1-8 the Messiah is spoken of as Branch-Priest (3
8.9; 6 12.13); whereas in chs 9-14, as King (9
9.10). But in 6 18 it is expressly stated that the
Branch-Priest “shall sit and rule upon his throne.”
Of far greater moment is the picture of the nations
coming to Zion to worship Jeh. This remarkable
picture recurs in all the different sections of the
book (6 12.13.15; 8 20-23; 12 6; 14 16-19).

On the other hand, the following are some of the
arguments which favor the genuineness of these
disputed chapters: (1) The fundamental ideas of
both parts are the same. By this we mean that the
deeper we go the nearer we approach unity. As
Dr. G. A. Smith argues against Graetz, who di-
vides Hos 1-3 from Hos 4-14, ‘in both parts there
are the same religious principles and the same urgent
and jealous temper’; the same is equally true of
Zec 1-8 and Zec 9-14. Certain similarities are
esp. noteworthy, e.g. (a) an unusually deep, spiritual
tone pervades the entire book. The call to a true
repentance, first sounded forth in the introduction
(1 1-7), is developed more and more throughout
the entire 14 chs; thus, in the sanctifying of
Joshua (3 4), in the message to Zerubbabel, “not
by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit” (4 6),
in the conditions of future blessing (6 15), in the
answer to the Bethel deputation (7 5-9; 8 16 ff);
and in chs 9-14, in the consecration of the remnant
of the Philis (9 7), in the blessings to Ephraim (10
12), in the baptism of grace upon Jerus (12 10), in
the fountain for sin (13 1), in the worship of Jeh
(13 9), in the living waters going forth from Jerus
(14 8), and in the dedication of everything as holy


Zechariah, Book of
Zedekiah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3140


unto the Lord (14 20.21). The tone which tempers
these prophecies is an extraordinarily deep and
spiritual one throughout. And this argument
cannot be set aside by rejecting wholesale certain
passages as later interpolations, as is done by
Mitchell (ICC, 242-44). (6) There is a similar
attitude of hope and expectation m both parts.
This is esp. important. For example, () the
return of the whole nation is a prevailing idea of,
happiness in both parts (2 6.10; 8 7.8; 9 12; 10
6.7). )} The expectation that Jerus shall be m-
habited (1 16.17; 24; 8 3.8; 126; 14 10.11),
(vy) and that the temple shall be built and become
the center of the nation’s religions life (1 16.17;
3 7; 6 15; 7 2.3; 9 8; 14 20.21). (8) Messianic
hope is peculiarly strong in both (8 8.9; 6 12.13;
9 9.10; 11 12.13; 12 10; 13 1.7-9). (ec) Peaceand
prosperity are expected (1 17; 3 10; 6 13; 8 12.19;
9 10.12-17; 10 1.7.8.10.12; 12 8; 14 11.16-19).
(¢) The idea of God’s providence as extending to
the whole earth (1 14-17; 2 9.12; 4 10; 6 5; 9 1.
8.14; 10 3.5.9.12; 12 2-48; 13 7; 14 3.9). Again,
(c) the prophet’s attitude toward Judah is the same
in both parts. It is an attitnde of supreme regard
for Judah’s interests, making them second only to
the capital (2 2.4.16; 8 19; 1 12; 8 13.15; 12 2;
14 14; 10 3; 12 4.6.7; 14 21; 9 9.138; 10 6; 11 14;
14 5). The prophet’s attitude toward the nations,
the enemies of the theocracy, is the same in both
parts. The whole assembled world are the enemies
of Israel. But though they have scattered Judah,
Israel and Jerus (1 11), and are still coming up to
besiege Jerus (12 2; 14 2), yet they shall be jomed
to the Lord in that day (2 11) and worship Jeh like
the Jews (8 20-23; 14 16-19). Theseareallstriking
instances of similarity in the fundamental ideas of
the two parts of the book.

(2) There are peculiarities of thought common to
both parts: e.g. (a) the habit of dwelling on the same
thought (2 1.45.11; 6 12.18; 8 4.5; 8 21.22;
11 8; || 13 3; 14 5.16.18.19); (6) the habit of ex-
panding one fundamental thought into a series of
clauses (6 18; 9 5.7; 1.17; 3 8.9; 12 4); (c) the
habit of referring to a thought already introduced:
eg. to the “Branch” (3 8; 6 12); “eyes” (3 9;
4 10); measuring “line” (1 16; 2 5.6); choosing
Jerus (1 17; 2 12; 3 2); removing iniquity (3 9;
6 3ff; 13 2); measurements (6 2; 14 10); colors
of horses (1 8; 6 2.6); the idea of Israel as a
“flock” (9 16; 10 2; 11 4f; 13 7); idols (10 2;
13 2); shepherds (11 3ff; 137); and of “all
nations” (11 10; 12 3ff; 14 2ff); Mitchell in
attempting to answer this argument has failed
ntterly to grasp the point ([CC, 243); (d) the use
made of the cardmal number “two”; thus, two
olive trees (4 3); two women (5 9); two mountains
(6 1); two staves (1L 7); two parts (14 2.4); with
which compare 6 13; 9 12; 14 8; (e) the resort
in each part of the book to symbolic actions
as a mode of instruction; e.g. the coronation scene
in 6 9-15, and the breaking of the two staves in
11 4-14.

(3) Certain peculiarities of diction and style favor
unity of authorship; e.g. the phrase “no man passed
through nor returned” (7 14; 9 8) never occurs
elsewhere in the OT. The author’s preference for
and frequent use of vocatives (2 7.10; 3 2.8; 4 7;
9 9.13; 11 1.2; 18 7); and esp. the frequent alter-
nation of the scriptio plena and the scriptio defectiva
orthography in the Heb (cf 1 2.5 with 1 4.6 and
8 14; 211 with 6 7; 111 with 77; 9 5 with 10
5.11; and 10 4 with 9 9).

Accordingly, we conclude, (1) that chs 9-14 are
of post-exilic origin; (2) that they are not, however,
late post-exilic; (3) that they had their origin in the
period just before the completion of the temple, 516
BC, and (4) that they were probably composed by


Zechariah himself. This conclusion is based upon
the text taken as a whole, without an arbitrary dis-
section of the prophecies in the inter-
ests of a false theory. Mitchell ICC,
258-59), after eliminating numerous
individual passages, arrives at the con-
clusion that chs 9-14 were written by four. differ-
ent writers; (1) 9 1-10, soon after 333 BC; (2) 9
11—11 3, about 247-222 BC; (3) 11 4-17 and 13
7-9, between 217 and 204 BC; and (4) 12 1—18 6
and ch 14, about the same time. Tradition points
to a saner and securer conclusion, that these oracles
were written by Zechariah himself; which in turn
is corroborated by internal evidence, as has been
shown above. One wonders why these oracles,
written so late in Israel’s history, should have
been appended by the collectors of the Canon
to the genuine prophecies of Zechariah, if, as is
alleged, that prophet had nothing whatever to do
with them!


Literature.—(l) Those who defend the untty of the
book: C. H. H. Wright, Zechariah and His Prophecies
(Bampton Lectures), London, 1879; G. L. Robinson,
The Prophecies of Zec, with Special Reference to the
Origin and Date of Chs 9-14, Leipzig Dissertation,
reprinted from AJSL, XII, 1896; W. H. Lowe, Heb
Student's Comm. on Zec, Heb and LX X, London, 1882;
Cc. J. Bredenkamp, Der Prophet Sach., Erklart, 1879;
Marcus Dods, The Post-Exilian Prophets: Hag., Zech.,
Mal. (‘‘Handhook for Bib. Classes''), Edinburgh, 1879;
E. B. Pusey, Minor Prophets, 1877; W. Drake, ‘‘Comm.
on Zec” (Speaker's Comm.), 1876; T. W. Chambers,
“The Book of Zec'’ (Lange's Bible Work), 1874; A.
Van Hoonacker, in Revue Biblique, 1902, 161 ff; idem,
Les douze petits prophétes, 1908; Wm. Moeller, art.
‘*Zechariah" in The Illustrated Bible Dict., edited by W.
C. Piercy, 1908.

(2) Those who advocate a preéxtlic origin for chs 9-14:
Hitzig-Steiner, Die zwélf kleinen Propheten, 1881; Samuel
Davidson, An Intro to the OT, 1862-63; W. Pressel,
Commentar zu den Schriften der Propheten Haggat, Sacharja
und Maleachi, 1870; C. A. Bruston, Histoire critique dela
littérature prophétique des Hébreuz, 1881; Samuel Sharpe,
History of the Heb Nation, Literature and Chronology,
1882; C. von Orelli, Das Buch Ezechiel u. die zwélf
kleinen Propheten, 1888; Ferd. Montet, Etude critique sur
la date assignable aux stx derniers chapttres de Zac, 1882;
H. L. Strack, Hinleitung in das AT, 1895; F. W. Farrar,
Minor Prophets, in'' Men of the Bihle"’ series.

(3) Those who advocate a post-Zecharian origin for chs
9-14: B. Stade, '' Deuterozacharja, eine krit. Studie,”
In ZATW, 1881-82; T. K. Cheyne, *‘The Date of Zec
9-14,"’ in JQR,1,1889; C. H. Cornill, Hinlettung in das
AT, 1891; _S. R. Driver, Intro to the Literature of the OT,
; J. Welihausen, Die kleinen Propheten wbersetzt,
1893; N. I. Rubinkam, The Second Part of the Book of
Zec, 1892; Karl Marti, Der Prophet Sacharja, 1892; A. F.
Kirkpatrick, Doctrine of the Prophets, 1892; R. Eckardt,
“Der Sprachgehrauch von Zach 9-14,’’ ZATW, 1893,
76-109; A. K. Kuiper, Zacharja_ 9-14; eine _exegetisch-
critische Studie, 1894; J. W. Rothstein, Die Nacht-
gesichte des Sacharja, 1910; G. A. Smith in Expositor’s
Bible, 1896-97; S. R. Driver in the New Century Bible;
H. G. Mitchell, 7CC, 1912.


6. Conclu-
sion


Grorcs L. Rosinson
ZECHER, zé@’kér (451, zdkher, pausal form for
QI, zekher, “memorial”; AV Zacher): In 1 Ch 8
31= “Zechariah” of 1 Ch 9 37. See Zecuaniay, (5).


ZECHRIAS, zek-ri’as (B, Zexplas, Zechrias, A
and Fritzsche, "Efeptas, Hzerias; AV Ezerias): An
ancestor of Ezra (1 Esd 8 1)=‘‘Azariah” of Ear
7 1.


ZEDAD, zédad (NTI, ¢dhadhah, only found
with Hé locale; Sam MIN, ¢vradhah; LXX Zapa-
Sax, Saraddk, Zabahdn, Sadadék, Bad8dx, Sadddk):
A town or district named in Nu 34 8; Ezk 47
15 as on the ideal northern boundary of Israel.
The uncertainty of the reading has led to two
different identifications bemg proposed. The form
“Zerad” was accepted by von Kasteren, and his
identification was Khirbet Serada in the Merj ‘Ayun,
W. of the Hasbany branch of the Jordan and N. of
‘Abil. This identification, however, would compel
us to draw the ideal boundary along the Qasmiyeh
valley and thence eastward to Hermon, and that


3141


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Zechariah, Book of


Zedekiah


is much too far S. If with Dillmann, Wetzstein,
Muehlau and others we read “‘Zedad,” then it is
clearly identical with Sadad, a village on the road
between Ribleh and Karyetain. It has been ob-
jected that Sadad is too far to the E.; but here, as
in the tribal boundaries also, the references are
rather to the district or lands possessed than to
their central town or village. W. M. Curis


ZEDECHIAS, zed-é-ki’as: 1 Esd 1 46 AV=RV
“Sedekias.”


ZEDEKIAH, zed-é-ki’a (WUPTR, ¢idhkiyaha,
TPP IE , cidhkiyah, “Jeh my righteousness’; Debe-
nid, Sedekid, DeSexlas, Sedekias):

(1) The son of Chenaanab (1 K 22 11.24; 2 Ch
18 10.23). Zedekiah was apparently the leader
and spokesman of the 400 prophets attached to the
court in Samaria whom Ahab summoned in response
to Jehoshaphat’s request that a prophet of Jeh
should be consulted concerning the projected cam-
paign against Ramoth-gilead. In order the better
to impress his audience Zedekiah produced iron
horns, and said to Ahab, ‘With these shalt thou
push the Syrians, until they be consumed.” He
also endeavored to weaken the influence of Micaiah
ben Imlah upon the kings by asking ironically,
“Which way went the Spirit of Jeh from me to
speak unto thee?”

In Jos (Ant, VIII, xv, 4) there is an interesting re-
arrangement and embellishment of the Bih. narrative.
There Zedekiah is represented as arguing that since
Micaiah contradicts Elijah’s prediction as to the place of
Ahab's death, he must he regarded as a false prophet.
Then, smiting his opponent, he prayed that if he were
in the wrong his right hand might forthwith be withered.
Ahab, seeing that no harm hefell the hand that had smit-
ten Micaiah, was convinced; whereupon Zedekiah com-
pies his triumph by the incident of the horns mentioned
above.

(2) The son of Maaseiah (Jer 29 21-23). A
false prophet who, in association with another,
Ahab by name, prophesied among the exiles in
Babylon, and foretold an early return from cap-
tivity. Jeremiah sternly denounced them, not only
for their false and reckless predictions, but also for
their foul and adulterous lives, and declared that
their fate at the hands of Nebuchadnezzar should
become proverbial in Israel.

(3) The son of Hananiah (Jer 36 12). One of
the princes of Judah before whom Jeremiah’s roll
was read in the 5th year of Jehoiakim.

(4) One of the officials who sealed the renewed
covenant (Neh 10 1, AV “Zid-kijah”). The fact
that his name is coupled with Nehemiah’s suggests
that he was a person of importance. But nothing
further is known of him.

(5) The last king of Judah (see following art.).

Joun A. LEEs

ZEDEKIAH (Hp, cidhktyahi, “Jeh my
righteousness’; name changed from Mattaniah
(MIN, mattanyah, “gift of Jeh’; Zedexlas, Sede-
khas):

I. Sources ror His Reion anv TIME

1. Annalistic

II. eR a caiartin or THE Last Kino or Jupan
. The Situation

. The Paryenu Temper

. Inconsistencies

. Character of the King

. His Fate
. Doom of the Nation

The last king of Judah, uncle and successor of
Jehoiachin; reigned 11 years, from 597 to 586, and
was carried captive to Babylon.

L. Sources for His Reign and Time.—Neither of
the accounts in 2 K 24 18—25 7 and 2 Ch 36
11-21 refers, as is the usual custom, to state annals;


COR Whe


these ran out with the reign of Jehoiakim. The
history in 2 K is purely scribal and annalistic in

tone; 2 Ch, esp. as it goes on to the
1. Annal- captivity, is more fervid and homiletic.
istic Both have a common prophetic origin;
aoa and indeed the last chapter of Jer (62),
which is put as an appendix to the book of his
propheey, tells the story of the reign and subsequent
ae much as does 2 K, but in somewhat fuller

etail.


Two prophets are watching with keen eyes the progress
of this reign, hoth with the poignant sense that the end of
the tudecan, Bete fe neat Serer

join Jerus and Ezekiel, one of the captives
2. Prophetic in the Geportadon with Jehoiachin, in
Bahylon. ates are supplied with the
propuccies of both: Jeremiah’s n ered from the
eginning of the reign and not consecutive: Ezekiel'’s
numbered from the beginning of the first captivity, and
so coinciding with Jeremiah's. From these ‘dated
prophecies the principal ideas are to be formed of the real
inwardness of the time and the character of the adminis- .
tration. The rophetic passages identifiable with this
reign, counted by its years, are: Jer 24, after the deporta-
tion of Jehoiachin pe ems inferior classes left
with Zedekiah (ct Ezk 11 15; 17 12-14); Jer 27-29,
beginning of reign—false hopes of return of captives and
futile diplomacies with neighboring nations; Jer. 51 59,
4th year—Z.'s visit to Babylon; zk 4-7, 5th year—
symbolic prophecies of the coming end of Judah; Ezk
8-12, 6th year—quasi-clairvoyant view of the idolatrous
corrupilons in Jerus; Ezk 17 11-21, same year—Z.'s
treacherous intrigues with Egypt; Ezk 21 18-23, 7th
year—Nehuchadnezzar costing a divination to deter-
mine his invasion of Judah; Jer 21, undated but soon
after—deputation from the king to the prophet inquiring
Jeh’s purpose; Jer 34 1-7, undated—the prophet's
word to the king while Nebuchadnezzar’s invasion is still
among the cities of the land; Ezk 24 1.2, 9th year—
telepathic awareness of the beginning of the siege, syn-
chronistic with Jer 39 1-10; 2 K 25 1-7; Jer 37, 38,
undated, but soon after—prophecies connected with the
temporary raising of the siege and the false faith of the
ruling classes, Jer 32, 10th year—Jeremiah's redemption
of his Anathoth property in the midst of siege, and the
good presage of the act; Jer 39, 11th year—annalistic
account of the hreaching of the city wall and the flight
and eventual fate of the king. A year and a half later
Ezekiel (33 21.22) hears the news from a fugitive.


Il, The Administration of the Last King of
Jadah.—When Nebuchadnezzar took away Jehoia-
chin, and with him all the men of weight
1. The and character (see under JEHO1ACHIN),
Situation his object was plain: to leave a people
so broken in resources and spirit that
they would not be moved to rebellion (see Ezk 17
14). But this measure of his effected a segmenta-
tion of the nation which the prophets immediately
recognized as virtually separating out their spiritual
“remnant” to go to Babylon, while the worldly and
inferior grades remained in Jerus. These aresharply
distinguished from each other by Jeremiah in his
parable of the Figs (ch 24), published soon after the
first deportation. The people that were left were
probably of the same sort that Zephaniah described
a few years before, those who had ‘‘settled on their
lees” (1 12), a godless and inert element in religion
and state. Their religious disposition is portrayed
by Ezekiel in Z.’s 6th year, in his clairvoyant vision
of the uncouth temple rites, as it were a cesspool of
idolatry, maintained under the pretext that Jeh
had forsaken the land (see Ezk 8). Clearly these
were not of the prophetic stamp. It was over such
an inferior grade of people that Z. was appointed
to a thankless and tragic reign.


For a people so raw and inexperienced in administra-


tion the prophets recognized one clear duty: to keep
the oath which they had given to Nebu-

2. The chadneazar (sco Ezk 17 14-16). But
‘ they acted like men intoxicated with new
Parvenu power; their accession to property and
Temper unwonted position turned their heads.


Soon after the heginning of the reign we
find Jeremiah giving emphatic warning both to his nation
and the ambassadors of neighboring nations against a
rehellious coalition (Jer 27 mistakenly dated in the 4th
year of Jehoiakim; cf vs 3.12); he has also an encounter
with prophets who, in contradiction of his consistent


Zedekiah
Zenas


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3142


message, predict the speedy restoration of Jehoiachin and
the temple vessels. ‘he king's visit to Babylon (Jer 51
59) was prohably made to clear himself of complicity in
treasonable plots. Their evil genius, Egypt, however,
is busy with the too headstrong upstart rulers; and about
the middle of the reign Z. breaks his covenant with his
over-lord and, relying on Egypt, embarks on rebellion.
The prophetic view of this movement is, that it is a
moral outrage; it is hreaking a sworn word (Ezk 17 15—
19), and thus falsifying the truth of Jeh.

This act of rebellion against the king of Babylon

was not the only despite done to ‘‘Jeh’s oath.” Its

immediate effect, of course, was to
3. Incon- precipitate the invasion of the Chal-
sistencies daean forces, apparently from Riblah
on the Orontes, where for several years
Nebuchadnezzar had his headquarters. Ezk has
a striking description of his approach, halting to
determine by arrow divination whether to proceed
against Judah or Ammon (21 18-23). Before lay-
ing siege to Jerus, however, he seems to have spent
some time reducing outlying fortresses (cf Jer 34
1-7); and during the suspense of this time the king
sent a deputation to Jeremiah to inquire whether
Jeh would not do “according to all his wondrous
works,” evidently hoping for some such miraculous
deliverance as had taken place in the time of Sen-
nacherib (Jer 21 1ff). Theprophet gives his uniform
answer, that the city must fall; advising the house
of David also to “execute justice and righteousness.”
Setting about this counsel as if they would bribe
Jeh’s favor, the king then entered into an agreement
with his people to free all their Hebrew bond-slaves
(Jer 34 8-10), and sent back a deputation to the
prophet entreating his intercession (Jer 37 3), as if,
having bribed Jeh, they might work some kind of a
charm on the Divine will. Nebuchadnezzar had
meanwhile invested the city; but just then the Egyp
army approached to aid Judah, and the Bab king
raised the siege long enough to drive the Egyptians
back to their own land; at which, judging that
Jeh had interfered as of old, the people caused their
slaves to return to their bondage (34 11). This
treachery called forth a trenchant prophecy from
Jeremiah, predicting not only the speedy return of
the Chaldaean army (Jer 37 6-10), but the cap-
tivity of the king and the destruction of the city
(Jer 34 17-22). It was during this temporary
cessation of the siege that Jeremiah, attempting to
go to Anathoth to redeem his family property, was
seized on the pretext of deserting to the enemy, and
put in prison (37 11-15).

During the siege, which was soon resumed, Z.’s

character, on its good and bad sides, was revealed
- through his frequent contact with the
4, Character prophet Jeremiah. The latter was
of the King a prisoner most of the time; and the
indignities which he suffered, and
which the king heedlessly allowed, show how the
prophet’s word and office had fallen in respect: (cf
the treatment he received, Jer 26 16-19 with 37
15; 38 6). The king, however, was not arrogant
and heartless like his brother Jehoiakim; he was
weak and without consistent principles; besides, he
was rather helpless and timid in the hands of his
headstrong officials (cf 38 5.24-26). His regard for
the word of prophecy was rather superstitious than
religious: while the prophet’s message and counsel
were uniformly consistent, he could not bring him-
self to follow the will of Jeh, and seemed to think
that Jeh could somehow be persuaded to change
his plans (see Jer 37 17; 38 14-16). His position
was an exceedingly difficult one; but even so, he
had not the firmness, the wisdom, the consistency
for it.

In his siege of the city Nebuchadnezzar depended
mainly on starving it into surrender; and we can-
not withhold a measure of admiration for a body
of defenders who, in spite of the steadily decreasing


food supply and the ravages of pestilence, held
the city for a year and a half. During this time
Jeremiah’s counsel was well known: the
5. His Fate counsel of surrender, and the promise
that so they could save their lives
(Jer 21 9; 38 2). It was for this, indeed, that he
was imprisoned, on the plea that he ‘“‘weakened the
hands” of the defenders; and it was due to the
mercy of a foreign slave that he did not suffer death
(38 7-9). At length in the llth year of Z.’s reign,
just as the supply of food in the city was exhausted,
the Chaldaean army effected a breach in the wall,
and the king of Babylon with his high officials came
in and sat im the middle gate. Z. and his men of
war, seeing this, fled by night, taking the ill-advised
route by the road to Jericho; were pursued and
captured in the plains of the Jordan; and Z. was
brought before the king of Babylon at Riblah.
After putting to death Z.’s sons and the nobles of
Judah before his eyes, the king of Babylon then
put out the eyes of Z. and carried him captive to
Babylon, where, it is uncertain how long after, he
died. Jeremiah had prophesied that he would die
in peace and have a state mourning (Jer 34 4.5);
Ezekiel’s prophecy of his doom is enigmatic: “T
will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chal-
deans; yet shall he not see it, though he shall die
there’ (Ezk 12 13).
The cruelly devised humiliation of the king was
only an episode in the tragic doom of the city and
nation. Nebuchadnezzar was not
6. Doom of minded to leave so stubborn and
the Nation treacherous a fortress on hi8 path of
conquest toward Egypt. A month
after the event at Riblah his deputy, Nebuzaradan,
entered upon the reduction of the city: burning the
temple and all the principal houses, breaking down
the walls, carrying away the temple treasures still
unpillaged, including the bronze work which was
broken into scrap metal, and deporting the people
who were left after the desperate resistance and
those who had voluntarily surrendered. The re-
ligious and state officials were taken to Riblah and
put to death. “So,” the historian concludes,
“Judah was carried away captive out of his land”
(Jer 62 27). This was in 586 BC. This, however,
was ouly the political date of the Bab exile, the
retributive limit for those leavings of Israel who
for 11 years had played an insincere game of admin-
istration and failed. The prophetic date, from which
Ezekiel reckons the years of exile, and from which the
prophetic eye is kept on the fortunes and character
of the people who are to be redeemed, was 597, when
Jehoiachin’s long imprisonment began and when
the flower of Israel, transplanted to a foreign home,
began its term of submission to the word and will
of Jeh. It was this saving element in Israel who
still had a recognized king and a promised future.
By both Jeremiah and Ezekiel, Z. was regarded not
as Jeh’s anointed but as the one whom Nebuchad-
nezzar ‘had made king” (Jer 37 1; Ezk 17 16),
“the king that sitteth upon the throne of David”
(Jer 29 16). The real last king of Judah was
Jehoiachin; Ezekiel’s title for Z. is “prince” (Ezk
12 10). JoHN FRANKLIN GENUNG


ZEEB, 2@’eb, z@b. See OREB anv ZEEB.


ZELA, ZELAH, 20’la (9>Y, calat [2 S 24 14):
A city in the territory of Benjamin (Josh 18 28;
LXX here omits). Here was the burying-place of
the family of Saul, whither the bones of the king
and of Jonathan were brought for burial (2 S 21
14; LXX here reads en té pleurd, translating ¢éa',
“side”’). The place is not identified. It may be
the Zilu of the Am Tah.


3143


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zedekiah
Zenas


ZELEK, 2@'lek (Pex, ¢elek, meaning unknown):
An Ammonite, one of David’s mighty men (2 8
23 37; 1 Ch 11 39).


ZELOPHEHAD, 2#-l0’fé-had (INDY , ¢‘loph-
hddh, meaning unknown): Head of a Manassite
family who died without male issue (Nu 26 33;
27.1.7; 3626.10.11; Josh 17 3; 1 Ch 7 15).
His daughters came to Moses and Eleazar and suc-
cessfully pleaded for a possession for themselves
(Nu 27 1 ff). This became the occasion for a law
providing that in the case of a man dying without
sons, the inheritance was to pass to his daughters
if he had any. A further request is made (Nu 36
2 ff) by the heads of the Gileadite houses that the
women who were given this right of inheritance
should be compelled to marry members of their own
tribe, so that the tribe may not lose them and their
property. This is granted and becomes law among
the Hebrews.

Gray says (ICC on Nu 26 33) that the ‘‘daughters’’
of Zelophehad are towns or clans.

Davin Francis Ropers

ZELOTES, 2é-lo’téz (Znrorts, Zéldtés). See
SIMON THE ZEALOT; ZEALOT, ZEALOTS.


ZELZAH, zel’za (ME2¥, celcah; a&ddopevous
peydda, halloménous megdla): A place where Samuel
told Saul he would meet two men with news that
the asses were found. Its position is defined as
“by Rachel’s sepulchre, in the border of Benjamin”
(18 10 2). It has been thought that the place of
meeting was sufficiently indicated without the word
bcelcah, which is tr‘ “at Zelzah,’’ and that this can-
not therefore be a place-name. The LXX “leaping
mightily” or “in great haste’ (Ewald) points to a
different text. Whether the Gr can be so tr‘ is also
a question, as megala does not elsewhere occur as
an advb. Some corruption of the text is probable.
The border of Benjamin may be roughly determined,
but the tomb of Rachel is now unknown. No name
like Zelzah has been recovered in the district.
Smith (‘“Samuel,” (CC, ad loc.) suggests that we
should read “Zela” for “Zelzah’’ (95%, ¢éla‘, for


mx, celeah). W. Ewine


ZEMARAIM, zem-a-ra’/im (OTV2R, cmdrayim;
B, Zapd, Sard, A, Zeppip, Semrim): A city in the
territory of Benjamin. 1t is named between Beth-
arabah and Bethel (Josh 18 22), and is probably
to be sought E. of the latter city. It is usual to
identify it with es-Samra, a ruin about 4 miles N.
of Jericho. Mt. Zemaraim probably derived its
name from the city, and must be sought in the
neighborhood, On this height, which is said to be
in Mt. Ephraim, Abijah, king of Judah, stood when
making his appeal to the men of Israel under Jero-
boam (2 Ch 13 4). If the identification with es-
Samra is correct, this hill must be in the uplands
to the W., es-Samra being on the floor of the valley.
Dillmann (Josh, ad loc.) thinks Zemaraim cannot
beso far E. of Bethel, but may be found somewhere
to the 8. of that town. EwiIne


ZEMARITE, zem’a-rit (VERT, ha-gemart;
6 Sapapaios, ho Samaratos): A Can. people named
in Gen 10 18; 1 Ch 1 16. The occurrence of the
name between Arvadite and Hamathite gives a hint
as to locality. A place called Sumur is mentioned
in the Am Tab along with Arvad. Thename prob-
ably survives in that of Sumra, a village on the
seacoast between Tripolis and Ruwad, about 13
miles N. of Nahr el-Kebtr. We may with some cer-
tainty identify this modern village with the site of
the town from which the inhabitants were named


“Temarites.””


‘juris peritus.


ZEMIRAH, zé-mi’ra (T)AT, emiréh, meaning
uncertain; LXX B, ’Apaplas, Amarias, A, Zapa-
plas, Zamarias; AV Zemira): A descendant of Ben-
jamin (1 Ch 7 8), but more probably of Zebulun
(Curtis, Chron., 145 ff).


ZENAN, zé‘nan. See Zaanan.


ZENAS, zé’nas (Zyvas, Zénds [Tit 3 13]; the
name in full would probably be Zenodorus, lit.
meaning “the gift of Zeus”): Paul calls

1. A Jewish Zenas “the lawyer.”’ The meaning of


Lawyer this is, that, previous to his becoming
a Christian, he had been a Jewish
lawyer. The lawyers were that class of Jewish


teachers who were specially learned in the Mosaic
Law, and who interpreted that Law, and taught it
to the people.


They are met with again and again in the Gospels,
where they frequently came into contact with Christ,
usually in a manner hostile to Him. For example, ‘A
certain lawyer stood up and made trial of him, sayi: 5
Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?’’ CL
10 25). Our Lord replied to him on his own ground,
asking, ‘‘ What is written tn the law ? how readest thou?"
Regarding this class of teachers as a whole, it is recorded
that ‘‘the Pharisees and lawyers rejected for themselves
the counsel of God"’ (Lk 7 3 The term nomikés,
‘‘lawyer,’’ applied to Zenas, is in the Gospels varied by
nomodiddskalos, ‘‘a teacher of the law,"' and by gram-
mates, ‘‘a scribe": all three terms describe the same
persons. Before his conversion to Christ, Zenas had been
ap lawyer, one of the recognized expounders of the Law of

oses.

A different view of Zenas’ occupation is taken by Zahn
(Intro to the NT, II, 54), who says that in itself nomikos
could denote a rabbi, quoting Ambrosiaster, ‘‘Because
Zenas bad been of this profession in the synagogue,
Paul calls him by this name."’ But Zahn gives his own
opinion that “since the Jewish scribe who became a
Christian, by that very act separated himself from the
rabbinic body, and since the retention of rabbinic
methods and ways of thinking was anything but a recom-
mendation in Paul's eyes (1 Tim 1 7), Zenas is here
characterized, not as legis (Mosatcae), doctor, but as
The word denotes not an office, but usu-
ally the practical lawyer, through whose assistance
e.g. a will is made, or a lawsuit carried on. Plutarch
applies this name to the renowned jurist Mucius Scae-
vola."'


The ordinary meaning seems preferable, which
sees in Zenas one who previous to his conversion
had been a Jewish rabbi.

It is not certain where Paul was when he wrote
the Ep. to Titus. But he directs Titus to come to

him to Nicopolis, where he had resolved


2. Paul’s to spend the ensuing winter. And
Wishes he adds the injunction that he desires
regarding him to “bring Zenas the lawyer and
Zenas Apollos’’—Paul’s old friend from Alex-


andria—with him ‘‘on their journey
diligently, that nothing be wanting unto them”
(AV). This may mean that Paul wished to have
Zenas and Apollos with him at Nicopolis; but, on
the other hand, it may not have this meaning. For
the AV in translating “bring” isin error. The word
signifies, as given in RV, “set forward” on their
journey, that is, furnish them with all that they
need for the journey. But even supposing Paul is
not instructing Titus to bring Zenas and Apollos
to Nicopolis—though this is perhaps what he means
—yet it is most interesting to find these two friends
of the apostle mentioned in this particular way, and
esp. at a time so near to the close of his life. Paul
was unselfish as ever, solicitous that Zenas and
Apollos be comfortably provided for on their in-
tended journey. He is full of affectionate regard
for them, interested in their welfare at every step;
while he himself is far distant in another country,
he remembers them with tender and sympathetic
friendship. Doubtless the two friends reciprocated
his affection. : ,
Nothing more is known of Zenas than is contained
in this passage. Joun RUTHERFURD


Zend-Avesta
Zeph, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3144


ZEND-AVESTA, zend-a-ves’ta.
RELIGION; ZOROASTRIANISM.


ZEPHANIAH, zef-a-ni’a (WIDE, cphanyah,
WVMIDE , ¢*phanyahi, “Jeh hath treasured”):

(1) The prophet. See ZepHanian, Book or,

(2) A Levite or priest (1 Ch 6 36 [Heb 6 21)),
called in some genealogies ‘Uriel’ (1 Ch 6 24;
15 5.11).

(3) Judaean father or fathers of various con-
temporaries of Zechariah, the prophet (Zec 6
10.14).

(4) A priest, the second in rank in the days of
Jeremiah. He was a leader of the “patriotic”
party which opposed Jeremiah. Nevertheless, he
was sent to the prophet as a messenger of King
Zedekiah when Nebuchadnezzar was about to
attack the city (Jer 21 1) and at other crises (Jer
87 3; cf 29 25.29; 2 K 25 18). That he continued
to adhere to the policy of resistance against Bab
authority is indicated by the fact that he was among
the leaders of Israel taken by Nebuzaradan before
the king of Babylon, and killed at Riblah (2 K 25
18 || Jer 52 24). NarHan Isaacs


ZEPHANIAH, APOCALYPSE OF: A (probably)
Jewish apocryphal work of this name is mentioned
in the Stichometry of Nicephorus and another list
practically identical with this; a quotation from it is
also preserved by Clement of Alexandria (Strom., v.
11.77). Dr. Charles thinks this indicates a Chris-
tian revision (Hnc Brit, II, art. ‘‘Apocalypse’’);
others suppose it to point to a Christian, rather than
a Jewish, origin. See Schiirer, HJP, div II, vol IL,
pp. 126-27, 132; GJV4, III, 367-69.


ZEPHANIAH, BOOK OF:


I. THE AUTHOR


See PERSIAN


II. Time


1.
2. Political Situation
3. Morai and Religious Conditions
III. Boor
1. Contents
2. Integrity
IV. TxeacHine
1. The Day of Jehovah
2. Universalism
3. Messianic Prophecy
LITERATURE
L The Author.—The name ‘‘Zephaniah” (MDX ,
¢°phanyah; Zogovias, Sophonias), which is borne
by three other men mentioned in the
OT, means “Jeh hides,” or “Jeh has
hidden” or “treasured.” “It sug-
gests,” says G. A. Smith, “the prophet’s birth in
the killing time of Manasseh” (2 K 21 16).
The ancestry of the prophet is carried back four
generations (1 1), which is unusual in the OT (cf Isa
11; Hos 1 1); hence it is thought,
2. Ancestry not without reason (Eiselen, Minor
Prophets, 505), that the last-mentioned
ancestor, Hezekiah, must have been a prominent
man—indeed, no other than King Hezekiah of
Judah, the contemporary of Isaiah and Micah. If
Zephaniah was of royal blood, his condemnation of
the royal princes (1 8) becomes of great interest.
In a similar manner did Isaiah, who in all prob-
ability was of royal blood, condemn without hesita-
tion the shortcomings and vices of the rulers and
the court. An ancient tradition declares that Z.
was of the tribe of Simeon, which would make it
impossible for him to be of royal blood; but the
origin and value of this tradition are uncertain.
Zephaniah lived in Judah; that he lived in Jerus
is made probable by the statement in 1 4, “TI will


1. Name


cut off... . from this place,’ as well as by his
intimate knowledge of the topography of the city
(110.11). For how long he continued
3. Life his prophetic activity we do not know,
but it is not improbable that, as in the
case of Amos, his public activity was short, and
that, after delivering his message of judgment in
connection with a great political crisis, he retired
to private life, though his interest in reforms may
have continued (2 K 23 2). :

Il. Time.—The title (1 1) places the prophetic
activity of Zephaniah somewhere within the reign

of Josiah, that is, between 639 and 608
1. Date BC. Most scholars accept this state-
ment as historically correct. The most
important exception is E. Koenig (Hinl, 252 ff),
who places it in the decade following the death
of Josiah. Koenig’s arguments are altogether in-
conclusive, while all the internal evidence points
toward the reign of Josiah as the period of Zepha-
niah’s activity. Can the ministry of the prophet,
be more definitely located within the 31 years of
Josiah? The latter’s reign falls naturally into two
parts, separated by the great reform of 621. Does
the work of Zephaniah belong to the earlier or the
later period?

The more important arguments in favor of the later
period are: (a) Dt 28 29.30 is quoted in Zeph 1] 13.15.17,
in a manner which shows that the former hook was
well known, hut, according to the modern view, the
Deuteronomic Code was not known until 621, hecause
it was lost (2 K 22 8). (b) The ‘remnant of Baal”
(1 4) points to a period when much of the Baal-worship
had been removed, which means subsequent to 621.
(c) The condemnation of the ‘‘king’s sons” (1 8) pre-
supposes that at the time of the utterance they had
reached the age of moral responsibility; this again points
to the later period. These arguments are inconclusive:
(a) The resemhlances hetween Dt and Zeph are of such a
general character that dependence of either passage on
the other is improhahle. (b) The expression in 1 4
hears an interpretation which made its use quite appro-
priate before 621 (Hiselen, Minor Prophets, 508). (c)
‘King's sons'’ may he equivalent to ‘‘royal princes,”
referring not to Josiah's children at all. The last two
ohjections lose all force if the LX X readings are accepted
(1 4, ‘‘names of Baal'’; 1 8, ‘house of the king’’)

On the other hand, there are, several considera-
tions pointing to the earlier date: (a) The youth of
the kmg would make it easy for the royal princes
to go to the excesses condemned in 1 8.9. (6) The
idolatrous practices condemned by Zephaniah (1
3-5) are precisely those abolished in 621. (c) The
temper described in 1 12 is explicable before 621
and after the death of Josiah in 608, but not between
621 and 608, when religious enthusiasm was wide-
spread. (d) Only the earlier part of Josiah’s reign
furnishes a suitable occasion for the prophecy.
Evidently at the time of its delivery an enemy was
threatening the borders of Judah and of the sur-
rounding nations. But the only foes of Judah during
the latter part of the 7th cent. meeting all the con-
ditions are the Scythians, who swept over Western
Asia about 625 BC. At the time the prophecy was
delivered their advance against Egypt seems to
have been still in the future, but imminent (1 14);
hence the prophet’s activity may be placed between
6380 and 625, perhaps in 626. If this date is cor-
rect, Zephaniah and Jeremiah began their minis-
tries in the same year.

Little can be said about the political conditions
in Judah during the reign of Josiah, because the

Bib. books are silent concerning them.
2. Political Josiah seems to have remained loyal
Situation to his Assyr lord to the very end, even

when the latter’s prestige had begun
to wane, and this loyalty cost him his life (2 K
23 29). As already suggested, the advance of the
Scythians furnished the occasion of the prophecy.
Many questions concerning these Scythians remain
still unanswered, but this much is clear, that they


3145


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


were a non-Sem race of barbarians, which swept in
great hordes over Western Asia during the 7th cent.
BC (see Scyrutans). The prophet looked upon
the Scythians as the executioners of the Divine
judgment upon his sinful countrymen and upon
the surrounding nations; and he saw in the coming
of the mysterious host the harbinger of the day
of Jeh.

The Book of Zeph, the early discourses of Jer,
and 2 K 21-23 furnish a vivid picture of the social,


moral, and religious conditions in
3. Moral Judah at the time Zephaniah prophe-
and Reli- sied. Social injustice and moral cor-
gious Con- ruption were widespread (3 1.3.7).
ditions Luxury and extravagance might be


seen on every hand; fortunes were
heaped up by oppressing the poor (1 8.9). The
religious situation was equally bad. The reac-
tion under Manasseh came near making an end of
Jeh-worship (2 K 21). Amon followed in the foot-
steps of his father, and the outlook was exceedingly
dark when Josiah came to the throne. Fortunately
the young king came under prophetic influence
from the beginning, and soon undertook a religious
reform, which reached its culmination in the 18th
year of his reign. When Zephaniah preached, this
reform was still in the future. The Baalim were
still worshipped, and the high places were flourish-
ing (1 4); the hosts of heaven were adored upon the
housetops (1 5); a half-hearted Jeh-worship, which
in reality was idolatry, was widespread (1 5); great
multitudes had turned entirely from following Jeh
(1 6). When the cruel Manasseh was allowed to
sit undisturbed upon the throne for more than 50
years, many grew skeptical and questioned whether
Jeh was taking any interest in the affairs of the
nation; they began to say in their hearts, “Jeh
will not do good, neither will he do evil” (4 12).
Conditions could hardly be otherwise, when the
religious leaders had become misleaders (3 4). ‘The
few who, amid the general corruption, remained
faithful would be insufficient to avert the awful
judgment upon the nation, though they themselves
might be “hid in the day of Jeh’s anger” (2 3).
I. The Book.—The Book of Zeph falls naturally
into two parts of unequal length. The first part
(1 2—3 8) contains, almost exclusively,
1. Contents denunciations and threats; the second
3 9-20), a promise of salvation and
glorification. The prophecy opens with the an-
nouncement of a world judgment (1 2.3), which
will be particularly severe upon Judah and Jerus,
because of idolatry (vs 4-6). The ungodly nobles
will suffer most, because they are the leaders in crime
(vs 8.9). The judgment is imminent (ver 7); when
it arrives there will be wailing on every hand (vs 10.
11). No one will escape, even the indifferent skep-
tics will be aroused (vs 12.13). In the closing verses
of ch 1, the imminence and terribleness of the day
of Jeh are emphasized, from which there can be no
escape, because Jeh has determined to make a “‘ter-
rible end of all them that dwell in the land” (vs 14-
18). A way of escape is offered to the meek ; if
they seek Jeh, they may be “hid in the day of Jeh”
(2 1-3). Zeph 2 4-15 contains threats upon 5 na~
tions, Philistia (vs 4-7), Moab and Ammon (vs 8-
11), Ethiopia (ver 12), Assyria (vs 13-15). In31
the prophet turns once moreto Jerus. Leaders, both
civil and religious, and people are hopelessly cor-
rupt (vs 1-4), and continue so in spite of Jeh’s many
attempts to win the city back to purity (vs 5-7);
hence the judgment which will involve all nations
has become inevitable (ver 8). A remnant of the
nations and of Judah will escape and find rest and
peace in Jeh (vs 9-13). The closing section (vs 14-
20) pictures the joy and exaltation of the redeemed
daughter of Zion.


Zend-Avesta
Zeph, Book of


The authenticity of every verse in chs 2 and 8, and
of several verses in ch 1, has been questioned by
__ one or more scholars, but the passages
2. Integrity rejected or questioned with greatest
persistency are 2 1-3.4-15 (esp. vs 8-
11); 3 9.10.14-20. The principal objection to 2
1-3 is the presence in 2 3 of the expressions “meek
of the earth,” and “seek meekness.”’ It is claimed
that “meek” and “meekness’’ as religious terms are
post-exilic. There can be no question that the
words occur more frequently in post-exilic psalms
and proverbs than in preéxilic writings, but it
cannot be proved, or even shown to be probable,
that the words might not have been used in Zepha-
niah’s day (cf Ex 10 3; Nu 12 3; Isa 2 9ff; Mic
6 8). A second objection is seen in the difference
of tone between these verses and ch 1. The latter,
from beginning to end, speaks of the terrors of
judgment; 2 1-3 weakens this by offering a way
of escape. But surely, judgment cannot have been
the last word of the prophets; in their thought,
judgment always serves a disciplinary purpose.
They are accustomed to offer hope to a remnant.
Hence 2 1-3 seems to form the necessary comple-
tion of ch 1.


_ The objections against 2 4-15 as a whole are eavally
inconclusive. For vs 13-15, a date preceding the fall
of Nineveh seems most suitable. The threat against
Philistia (vs 4-7) also is quite intelligible in the days of
Zephaniah, for the Scythians passed right through the
Phili territory. If Ethiopia stands for Egypt, ver 12
can easily be accounted for as coming from Zephaniah,
for the enemies who were going along the Mediterranean
coast must inevitably reach Beypt. But if it is insisted
upon that the reference is to Ethiopia proper, again no
difficulty exists, for in speaking of a world judgment
Zephaniah might mention Ethiopia as the representative
of the far south. Against vs 8-11 the following objec-
tions are raised: (a) Moab and Ammon were far removed
from the route taken by the Scythians. (b) The ‘‘re-
proaches” of 2 8.10 presuppose the destruction of Jerus
(Ezk 25 3.6.8). (c) The attitude of the prophet toward
Judah (vs 9.10) is the exact opposite of that expressed in
ch 1. (d) The kings meter, which predominates in the
rest of the section, is absent from vs 8-11. (e) Ver 12 is
the natural continuation of ver 9. These five arguments
are by no means conclusive: (¢) The prophet is announ-
cing a world judgment. Could this be executed by the
Scythians if they confined themselves to the territory
along the Mediterranean Sea? (b) Is it true that the
“reproaches” of 2 8.10 presuppose the destruction of
Jerus? (c) The promises in 7.8-10 are only to a
remnant, which presupposes a judgment such as is an-
nounced in ch 1. (d) Have we a right to demand con-
sistency in the use of a certain meter in oratory, and, if
so, may not the apparent inconsistency be due to cor-
ruption of the text, or to a later expansion of an authentic
oracle? (e) Vs 8-11 can be said to interrupt the thought
only if it is assumed that the proples meant to enumerate
the nations in the order in which the Scythians naturally
would reach their territory. From Philistia they would
naturally pass to Egypt. But is this assumption war-
ranted ? hile the objections against the entire para-
graph are inconclusive, it cannot be denied that ver 12
seems the natural continuation of ver 9, and since vs
10 and 11 differ in other respects from those preceding,
suspicion of the originality of these two verses cannot be
suppressed.


Zeph 3 1-8 isso similar to ch 1 that its originality
cannot be seriously questioned, but vs 1-8 carry with
them vs 9-13, which describe the purifying effects
of the judgment announced in vs 1-8. ‘The present
text of ver 10 may be corrupt, but if properly
emended there remains insufficient reason for ques-
tioning vs 10 and 11. The authenticity of 3 14-20
is more doubtful than that of any other section of
Zeph. The buoyant tone of the passage forms a
marked contrast to the somber, quiet strain of vs
11-13; the judgments upon Judah appear to be in
the past; vs 18-20 seem to presuppose a scattering
of the people of Judah, while the purifying judgment
of vs 11-13 falls upon the people in their own land;
hence there is much justice in Davidson’s remark
that “the historical situation presupposed is that of
Jsa 40 ff.’ Qn the other hand, it must be borne
in mind that the passage is highly poetic, that it
presents an ideal picture of the future, in the drawing


Zephath
Zerubbabel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3146


of which imagination must have played some part, | Edom. LXX has Zw¢dp, Sdphdér, which Skinner


and it may be difficult to assert that the composi-
tion of this poem was entirely beyond the power of
Zephaniah’s enlightened imagination. But while
the bare possibility of Zephaniah’s authorship may
be admitted, it is not impossible that 3 14-20 con-
tains a “new song from God,” added to the utter-
ances of Zephaniah at a period subsequent to the
fall of Jerus.

IV. Teaching.—Theteaching of Zephaniah closely
resembles that of the earlier prophetic books. Jeh
is the God of the universe, a God of righteousness
and holiness, who expects of His worshippers a life
in accord with His will. Israel are His chosen people,
but on account of rebellion they must suffer severe
punishment. Wholesale conversion seems out of
the question, but a remnant may escape, to be
exalted among the nations. He adds little, but
attempts with much moral and spiritual fervor to
impress upon his contemporaries the fundamental
truths of the religion of Jeh. Only a few points
deserve special mention.

Earlier prophets had spoken of the day of Jeh;
Amos (5 18-20) had described it in language similar

to that employed by Zephaniah; but
1. The Day the latter surpasses all his predecessors
of Jehovah in the emphasis he places upon this

terrible manifestation of Jeh (see
EscuatoLtocy or THE OT). His entire teaching
centers around this day; and in the Book of Zeph
we find the germs of the apocalyptic visions which
become so common in later prophecies of an escha-
tological character. Concerning this day he says
(a) that it is a day of terror (1 15), (6) it is immi-
nent (1 14), (c) it is a judgment for sin (1 17), (d)
it falls upon all creation (1 2.3; 2 4-15; 3 8),
(e) it is accompanied by great convulsions in Nature
(1 15), (f) a remnant of redeemed Hebrews and
foreigners will escape from its terrors (2 3; 3 9-18).

The vision of the book is world-wide. The ter-
rors of the day of Jeh will fall upon all. In thesame
manner from all nations converts will
be won to Jeh (8 9.10). These will
not be compelled to come to Jerus
to worship Jeh (Isa 2 2; Mic 4 1);
they may worship Him “every one from his place”
(2 11), which is a step in the direction of the utter-
ance of Jesus in Jn 4 21.

The Messianic King is not mentioned hy Zephaniah.


Though he draws a suhlime picture of the glories of the
Messianic age (8 14-20), there is not a


2. Univer-
salism


3. Mes- word concerning the person of the Mes-
sant sianic King. Whatever is done is accom-

Sante plished by Jeh Himself.

Prophecy Lirzraturs.—Comms. on the Minor


Prophets by Ewald, Pusey, Keil, Orelli,

G. A. Smith (Ezpositor's Bible); Driver (New Cent.);

Hiselen; A.B. Davidson, Comm. on Nah, Hab, and Zeph

(Cambridge Bible); _A. F. Kirkpatrick, Doctrine_of the

Prophets; Eiselen, Prophecy and the Prophets; F. W.

Farrar, ‘‘ Minor Prophets,'' Men of the Bible; 8. R. Driver,
LOT; HDB, art. ‘‘Zeph, Book of’'; EB, art. ‘‘Zeph."
F. C. E1iseten


ZEPHATH, zé’fath. See Hormag.


ZEPHATHAH, zef’a-tha, VALLEY OF (84
MINDY , g2’¢°phathah; LXX xara Poppav, katd borrdn,
reading M31DX , ¢*phndh, instead of MINDY, ¢-pha-
thah): This is the place where Asa met and defeated
the Ethiopians under Zerah (2 Ch 14 10). Itissaid
to be at Mareshah. No name resembling this has
been recovered there. Possibly, therefore, the LXX
rendering is right, “in the ravine to the N. of Mare-
shah.”” In that case the battle may have been
fought in Wédy el-‘Afranj.


ZEPHI, zé'fi, ZEPHO, zé'fo (D2, ¢¢phi, perhaps
“gaze,” or “gazing,” in 1 Ch 1 36; IDX, ¢ephé,
the same meaning in Gen 36 11.15): A duke of


(Gen, 481) says may be the original of Job’s kind
friend. In Gen 36 43 LXX has Zagwel, Zaphdet
(="2¥, ie. Zepho), for Iram. Skinner holds it
probable that the two names, Zepho and Iram, were
In the original text, thus making the number 12
(cf Lagarde, Sept.-Stud., II, 10, 1. 178; 37, 1. 270;
Nestle, Margin., 12). Luc. has Zwodp, Sdphdr, in
Gen 36 11.15; Zergouyj, Sepphoué, in 1 Ch 1 87,
and Ledwly, Saphoin, in Gen 36 43.
Davin Francis RoBERTS
ZEPHON, zé’fon.


See ZrpHion.

ZEPHONITES, zé'fon-its, 2é-f0/nits ("71DET,
ha-c*phori; 6 Zadbwvl, ho Saphont, A omits): A
family of Gadites descended from Zephon (Nu 26
15), who is called “Ziphion” in Gen 46 16.


ZER, zér, zer (1X, cér; in LXX the verse[Josh 19
35] reads wal at méAas Terxfpers tTav Tuplov, «.7.A.,
kat hai péleis teichéreis ton Turion, which implies a
Heb text with DMO, ha-curim, “Tyrians’”’; this
must be an error): One of the fortified cities in
Naphtali, named between Ziddim (Hattin) and
Hammath (el-Hammeh, 8. of Tiberias). If the text
is correct, it must have lain on the slopes W. of the
Sea of Galilee. It is not identified.


ZERAH, zé’ra (VY, zerah, meaning uncertain):

(1) In Gen 38 30; 46 12; Nu 26 20; Josh 7 1.
18.24; 22 20; 1 Ch 2 4.6; 9 6; Neh 11 24; Mt
1 3, younger twin-son of Judah and Tamar, and an
ancestor of Achan. In Nu 26 20; Josh 7 17f he
is the head of the Zerahites (also 1 Ch 27 11.13).
AV has “Zarah” in Gen 38 30; 46 12, and “Zar-
hites” for ‘“Zerahites’”’ in Nu, Joshand 1 Ch. See
Curtis (Chron., 84 f) for identification of Ezrahite
with Zerahite.

(2) Edomites: (a) an Edomite chief (Gen 36
13.17; 1 Ch 1 87); (6) father of an Edomite king
(Gen 36 33; 1 Ch 1 44).

(3) Levites: (a) 1 Ch 6 21 (Heb ver 6); (8)
1 Ch 6 41 (Heb ver 26).

(4) Head of the Zerahites (Nu 26 13, AV ‘‘Zar-
hites’; 1 Ch 4 24). In Nu 26 13=“Zohar’” of
Gen 46 10; Ex 6 15. See Zouar, (2).

(5) Cushite king (2 Ch 14 9). See next art.

Daviv Francis RoBerts

ZERAH (THE ETHIOPIAN) (W350 TI, zerah
ha-kisht [2 Ch 14 9]; Zdape, Zére): A generation
ago the entire story of Zerah’s conquest of Asa,
coming as it did from a late source (2 Ch 14 9-15),
was regarded as “apocryphal”: “If the incredi-
bilities are deducted nothing at all is left’? (Well-
hausen, Prolegomena to the History of Israel, 207,
208); but most modern scholars, while accepting
certain textual mistakes and making allowance for
customary oriental hyperbole in description, accept
this as an honest historical narrative, “nothing”
in the Egyp inscriptions being “inconsistent” with
it (Nicol in BD; and ef Sayce, HCM, 362-64). The
name “‘Zerah’’ is a “very likely corruption’ of ‘“Usar-
kon” (U-Serak-on), which it closely resemhles (see
Petrie, Egypt and Israel, 74), and most writers now
identify Zerah with Usarkon II, though the Egyp
records of this particular era are deficient and some
competent scholars still hold to Usarkon I (Wiede-
mann, Petrie, McCurdy, etc). The publication
by Naville (1891) of an inscription in which Usar-
kon IT claims to have invaded “Lower and Upper
Palestine’ seemed to favor this Pharaoh as the
victor over Asa; but the chronological question is
difficult (Eighth Memoir of the Egyp Exploration
Fund, 51). The title “the Cushite”’ (Heb) is hard
to understand. There are several explanations


3147


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zephath
Zerubbabel


possible. (1) Wiedemann holds that this may refer
to a real Ethiopian prince, who, though unrecorded
in the monuments, may have been reigning at the
Asa era. There is so little known from this era
“that it_is not beyond the bounds of probability
for an Ethiopian invader to have made himself
master of the Nile Valley for a time” (Geschichte
von Alt-Aegypten, 155). (2) Recently it has been
the fashion to refer this term ‘‘Cushite” to some
unknown ruler in South or North Arabia (Winckler,
Cheyne, etc). The term “Cushite” permits this,
for although it ordinarily corresponds to Erutopta
(q.v.), yet sometimes it designates the tract of Arabia
which must be passed over in order to reach Ethiopia
(Jeremias, The OT inthe Light of Ancient East, 1,280)
or perhaps a much larger district (see BD; EB;
Hommel, AHT; Winckler, KAT, etc). This view
however, is forced to explain the geographical and
racial terms in the narrative differently from the
ordinary Bib. usage (see Cheyne, #B). Dr. W.M
Flinders Petrie points out that, according to the
natural sense of the narrative, this army must have
been Egyp, for (a) after the defeat it fled toward
Egypt, not eastward toward Arabia; (b) the cities
around Gerar (probably Egyp towns on the frontier
of Pal), toward which they naturally fled when
defeated, were plundered; (c) the invaders were
Cushim and Lubim (Libyans), and this could only
be the case in an Egyp army; (¢d) Mareshah is a
well-known town close to the Egyp frontier (Hist of
Egypt, 111, 242-43; cf K6nig, Funf neue arab. Land-
schafisnamen im AT, 53-57). (3) One of the Usar-
kons might be called a “Cushite” in an anticipatory
sense, since in the next dynasty (XXIII) Egypt
was ruled by Ethiopian kings.
Campen M. CoBERN

ZERAHIAH, zer-a-hi’a (MTN, zerahyah, “Jeh
hath risen” or “come forth’; LXX Zapau, Zaraid,
with variants):

(1) A priest of the line of Eleazar (1 Ch 6 6.51;
Ezr 7 4).

(2) A head of a family, who returned with Ezra
from Babylon (Ezr 8 4).


ZERAHITES, zé@ra-hits COMIN, ha-zarhi;
B, 6 Zapal, ho Zarat, A, 6 Zapael, ho Zaraei; AV
Zarhites) :

(1) A family of Simeonites (Nu 26 13).

(2) Descendants of Zerah, son of Judah (Nu 26
20). To this family Achan belonged (Josh 7 17),
as did also two of David’s captains (1 Ch 27 11.13).


ZERED, zé’red (T11, zeredh; B, Zaper, Zdret, A,
Zépe, Zére; AV Zared[Nu 21 12]): This is the nahal
or “torrent valley” given as the place where Israel
encamped before they reached the Arnon (Nu 21
12). In Dt 2 13f, the crossing of the brook Zered
marks the end of the 38 years’ desert wanderings.
It has often been identified with Wédy el-‘Ahsa,
which runs up from the southeastern corner of the
Dead Sea. A fatal objection to this is that the
host had entered the wilderness to the E. of Moab
before they crossed the Zered (Nu 21 11), while
Wédy el-‘Ahsé must have formed the southern
boundary of Moab. We may conclude with cer-
tainty that one of the confluents of Wady Kerak
is intended, but which, it is impossible_now to
say. W. Ewine


ZEREDAH, zer’é-da, ZEREDATH, zer’é-dath,
ZEREDATHA, zer-é-da'tha, ZERERAH, zer’é-ra,
ZERERATH, zer’é-rath. See ZARETHAN.


ZERESH, zé’resh (WIT, zeresh, “gold,” from the
Pers; Zwodpa, Sdséra): The wife of Haman (Est
5 10.14; 6 13), the vizier of Xerxes.


ZERETH, zé'reth (7%, ¢gereth, meaning un-
known): A Judahite (1 Ch 4 7).


ZERETH-SHAHAR, zé'reth-shi/hir (7%
“IWIN, cereth ha-shahar; B, DepeS kal Delwv, Sereda
kat Seién, A, Sap0 nal udp, Sdrth kai Sidr): A
town in the territory of Reuben, “in the mount of
the valley,” named with Kiriathaim and Sibmah
(Josh 13 19). Perhaps in the name Hammat es-
Sara, attaching to the hot springs near Machaerus,
there may be some echo of the ancient name; but
no identification is possible.


ZERI, 281i (OE , ¢*r?, meaning unknown): ‘‘Son”
of Jeduthun, and a temple musician (1 Ch 25 3)=
dae of ver 11, which should be read here. See

ZRI.


ZEROR, zé’ror (TANY, ¢*rér, meaning unknown;
LXX ’Apé, Aréd, Luc., Zapé, Sard): An ancestor
of Kish and King Saul (1 S 9 1). See Zur, (2).


ZERUAH, 2zé@-ro0’a (VY, c*ri‘ak, perhaps
“leprous’’): Mother of King Jeroboam J (1 K 11
26), LXX, B and Luc. omit the name in 11 26, but
the long LXX after MT of 12 24 reads (ver 246):
“And there was a man of the hill-country of Ephraim,
a servant of Solomon, and his name was Jeroboam,
and the name of his mother was Sareisa [LXX
Zepacd, Sareisd] a harlot.’ See ZARETHAN.


ZERUBBABEL, ze-rub’a-bel (SADT, zrub-
babhel, probably a transliteration of the Bab name
Zeru-Babili, ‘seed of Babylon’’; Zopo-
BaBeA, Zorobdbel): Is commonly called
the son of Shealtiel (Ezr 3 2.8; 5 2;
Neh 12 1; Hag 1 1.12.14; Mt 1 12; Lk 3 27); but
in 1 Ch 3 19 he is called the son of Pedaiah, the
brother apparently of Shealtiel (Salathiel) and the
son or grandson of Jeconiah. It is probable that
Shealtiel had no children and adopted Zerubbabel;
or that Zerubbabel was his levirate son; or that,
Shealtiel being childless, Zerubbabel succeeded to
the rights of sonship as being the next of kin.

Whatever may have been his blood relationship
to Jeconiah, the Scriptures teach that Zerubbabel

was his legal successor, of the 3d or
2. Family 4th generation. According to 1 Ch
3 19, he had one daughter, Shelomith,
and seven sons, Meshullam, Hananiah, Hashubah,
Ohel, Berechiah, Hasadiah and Jushab-hesed. In
Mt 1 13 he is said to have been the father of Abiud
(i.e. Abi-hud). As it is the custom in Arabia
today to give a man a new name when his first son
is born, so it may have been, in this case, that
Meshullam was the father of Hud, and that his
name was changed to Abiud as soon as his son was
named Hud. In Lk 8 27, the son of Zerubbabel
is called Rhesa. This is doubtless the title of the
head of the captivity, the résh g*lutha’, and would
be appropriate as a title of Meshullam in his ca-
acity as the official representative of the captive
Ree That Zerubbabel is said in the NT to be the
gon of Shealtiel the son of Neri instead of Jeconiah
may be accounted for on the supposition that
Shealtiel was the legal heir or adopted son of Jeco-
niah, who according to Jer 36 30 was apparently
to die childless.

It. has been shown in the article ou Sheshbazzar
that he and Zerubbabel may possibly have been the
same person and that the name may
have been Shamash-ban (or bun)-
zer-Babili-usur. It seems more prob-
able, however, that Sheshbazzar, the
prince of Judah, was governor under
Cyrus and that Zerubbabel was governor under


1. Name


3. Relation
to Shesh-
bazzar


3148


7a THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA
Darius. The former, according to Ezr 1 8 and | epithet of Zeus, Zeus Olympius being to the Gr


5 14-16, laid the foundations, and the latter com-
pleted the building of the temple (Ear 2 2.68; 4 2;
Hag 1 14; Zec 4 9).

All that is known certainly about Zerubbabel is
found in the canonical books of Zec, Hag and

Ezr-Neh. According to these he and
4. History Jeshua, the high priest, led up a band
of captives from Babylon to Jerus and
began rebuilding the temple in the second year of
Darius Hystaspis. They first constructed the altar
of burnt offerings, and afterward built a temple,
usually called the Second Temple, much inferior in
beauty tothatofSolomon. According to Josand the
apocryphal Book of Ezr (1 Esd 3,4), Zerubbabel
was a friend of Darius Hystaspis, having success-
fully competed before him in a contest whose object
was to determine what was the strongest thing in
the world—wine, kings, women, or truth. Zerub-
babel, having demonstrated that truth was the
mightiest of all, was called the king’s “cousin,” and
was granted by him permission to go up to Jerus
and to build the temple. Zerubbabel was also
made a governor of Jerus, and performed also the
duties of the tirshatha, an official who was probably
the Pers collector of taxes. See TirsHatua.
R. Dick Witson

ZERUIAH, zé-r06-1'a, zé-r00’ya (TIN, e*rityah,
MI, geruyah [258 141; 16 10], meaning un-
certain; Zapovla, Sarouia): In 28 2 18; 17 25;
1 Ch 2 16, and elsewhere where the names Joab,
Abishai, occur. According to 1 Ch 2 16 a sister of
David and mother of Joab, Abishai and Asahel, the
two former being always referred to as sons of Zeru-
iah. This latter fact is explained by some as point-
ing to a type of marriage by which the children
helonged to their mother’s clan (cf Abimelech, Jgs
8 31; 9 1 ff); by others as being due to her hushand’s
early death; and again as a proof of the mother in
this case being the stronger personality. Either of
the last two reasons may be the correct one, and
plenty of parallels from the village names of hoys
today can be produced to illustrate both explana-
tions. According to 2 8 2 32, her hushand was
buried at Bethlehem. In 2 § 17 25, ‘‘Abigal the
daughter of Nahash” is said to be her sister. See
ABIGAIL. Davip Francis Roserts


ZETHAM, zé’tham (DMT, zéhdm, meaning un-
known): A Gershonite Levite (1 Ch 23 8; 26 22).
In the second passage Curtis holds that ‘the sons of
Jehieli” isa gloss; he points the MT to read “breth-
ren” instead of “brother,” and so has “‘Jehiel [ver
22] and his brethren, Zetham and Joel, were over the


treasures.”


ZETHAN, zé’than (jf), zéhan, perhaps “olive
tree’): A Benjamite (1 Ch 7 10), but Curtis holds
that he is a Zebulunite (Chron., 145 ff).


ZETHAR, zé’thir (WT, zéthar; Oppert, Est, 25,
compares Pers zaitar, ‘conqueror’; see BDB; LXX
*ApParaté, Abatazd): A eunuch of Ahasuerus (Est
1 10).


ZEUS, zis (Zets, Zetis, RVm; RV and AV
Jupiter): The supreme god of Hellenic theology,
“king of gods and of men.” In 168 BC Antiochus
Epiphanes, “who on God’s altars danced,” bent
upon the thorough Hellenization of Judaea and
Jerus, sent ‘‘an old man of Athens’ (or ‘“‘Geron an
Athenian,’ RVm) to pollute the sanctuary in the
temple at Jerus and to call it by the name of Jupiter
Olympius, and that at Gerizim by the name of
Jupiter Xenius (2 Mace 6 1 ff). Olympius, from
Mt. Olympus, the home of the gods, is the favorite


world what Jupiter Capitolinus was to the Rom.
The same Antiochus commenced the splendid
temple of Zeus Olympius, finished under Hadrian.
Zeus is also frequently styled Xenius or “Protector
of strangers” (Juppiter hospitalis) in classical liter-
ature. The epithet is here applied because the
people of Gerizim—the Samaritans—were hospi-
table, probably an ironical statement of the author
(cf Lk 9 52f). Zeus is also in Acts 14 12f RVm
for JupITErR (q.v.). S. ANcus


ZIA, zi’a (9°, zi2*, meaning uncertain): A Gad-
ite, possibly the name of a Gadite clan (1 Ch 6 18).


ZIBA, zi’ba (ND, cibha’, NAY, cibha’ [2 8
16 4a], meaning unknown;, ZeBa, Seibd): A former
servant or probably dependent of Saul’s house (2 8
9 1ff), who was brought to David when the king
inquired if there was not a member of Saul’s family
that he could show kindness to (cf David’s oath to
Jonathanin1 § 20 14ff). Z. tells David of Mephib-
osheth (Meribbaal), Jonathan’s son, who is there-
upon taken to the king from Lodebar, E. of the
Jordan, and given Saul’s estate. Z. is also bidden
to till the land and bring in its produce, and “‘it
shall be food for thy master’s son,”’ according to
MT in 25S 9 10d; but LXX and Luc. have a better
reading, ‘‘thy master’s household.’?’ Mephibosheth
himself is to eat at David’s table. Z. is to he as-
sisted in this by his sons and servants; he had 15
sons and 20 servants (9 10).

When David has to leave Jerus at the time of
Absalom’s revolt, Z. (2 8 16 1-4) takes two asses
for members of the king’s household to ride on, and
200 loaves and 100 clusters of raisins as provisions
for the youths. When asked where Mephibosheth
is, he accuses his master of remaining behind pur-
posely in hopes that his father’s kingdom would be
restored to him. David then confers upon Z. his
master’s estate.

After Absalom’s death, David sets out to return
to Jerus from Mahanaim, E. of Jordan. Z. with
his sons and servants, as we are told in a parenthesis
in2 § 19 17.18a (Heb vs 18.19a), by means of a
ferry-boat goes backward and forward over Jordan,
and thus enables the king’s household to cross.
But he has wrongly accused his master of treacher-
ous lukewarmness toward David, for Mephibosheth
meets the king on his return journey to Jerus (2 S
19 24-30 [Heb vs 25-31]) with signs of grief. When
he is asked why he had not joined the king at the
time of the latter’s flight, he answers that Z. de-
ceived him, “for thy servant said to him, Saddle me
[so read in ver 26 (Heb ver 27) with LXX and Syr
for MT ‘TI will have saddled me’) the ass.” He
then accuses Z. of falsehood, and David divides the
estate between the two, although Mephibosheth is
quite willing that Z. should retain the whole of it.

Davin Francis Roserts

ZIBEON, zib’é-on (WAX, gibh‘on, “hyena”;
HPN, 95; ZePeydv, Sebegdn): A Horite chief (Gen
36 2.14.20.24.29; 1 Ch 1 38.40); he is called the
“Hivite’ in Gen 36 2 where “Horite” should be
read with vs 20.29. In Gen 36 2.14 Anah is said
to be “the daughter of Zibeon,” whereas LXX, Sam,
Syr, Luc. have “the son of Z.”; cf 1 Ch 1 38.40,
where also Anah is Z.’s son. ;


ZIBIA, zib’i-a (WAX, cibhya’, perhaps “gazelle”):
A Benjamite (1 Ch 8 9).


ZIBIAH, zib’i-a (WAL, cibhyah, probably
“gazelle’’): A woman of Beersheba, mother of
King Jehoash (Joash) of Judah (2 K 12 1 [Heb ver
2]; 2 Ch 24 1, BA ’Afid, Abid).


3149


ZICHRI, zik’ri (WT , zikhri, meaning uncertain):

(1) Levites: (a) grandson of Kohath (Ex 6 21,
where some AV edd read wrongly ‘‘Zithri’); (6)
an Asaphite (1 Ch 9 15), called “‘Zabdi”’ in Neh
1117, where LXX A has Zexpl, Zechri=Zichri,
but LXX B other names; see Zaspl, (4); (¢) a
descendant of Eliezer (1 Ch 26 25).

(2) Benjamites: (a2) 1 Ch 8 19; (6) 1 Ch 8 23;
(c) 1 Ch 8 27; (d) Neh 11 9.

(3) Father of Eliezer, who was one of David’s
tribal princes (1 Ch 27 16).

(4) Father of Amasiah, ‘who willingly offered
himself unto Jeh” (2 Ch 17 16).

(5) Father of Elishaphat, a captain in Jehoiada’s
time (2 Ch 23 1). 2

(6) “A mighty man of Ephraim,” who when
fighting under Pekah slew the son of Ahaz, the king
of Judah (2 Ch 28 7).

(7) A priest in the days of Joiakim (Neh 12 17);
the section, vs 14-21, is omitted by LXX B, with
the exception of “of Maluchi’ (ver 14); Luc. has
Zaxapias, Zacharias. Davin Francis Ropers


ZIDDIM, zid’im (O"AEO, ha-ciddim; B, Tov
Tuplwv, ttn Turién, A omits): A fortified city in
Naphtali (Josh 19 35), probably represented by
the modern Hatfin, about 5 miles N.W. of Tiberias,
in the opening of the gorge that breaks down sea~-
ward N. of Kuriin Hattin, the traditional Mount of
Beatitudes.

ZID-KIJAH, zid-ki’ja. See ZEpEKIAH, 5.

ZIDON, zi’don, ZIDONIANS, zi-d6’ni-anz. See
Sipon, SIDONIANS.


ZIF, zif. See Ziv.


ZIHA, 2i/ha (NIME, ciha’, RIX, otha’ [Neh 7 46],
meaning unknown): An overseer of Nethinim (Neh
11 21) who are called (Ezr 2 48; Neh 7 46) “the
children [or sons] of Ziha.” LXX BA omits Neh
11 20f, LXX has Za, Sidl, Luc., Baal, Siaat;
in 7 46 LXX B, 2nd, Séd, A, Olad, Oiad, Luc.,
Dovdal, Soulai; in Ezr 243 LXX B, Zovéd,
Southid, A, Zovad, Souad, Luc., Zovdsael, Souddaet.


ZIKLAG, zik’lag (PX, cikelagh, IPR, cikelagh
[2 S 1 1], SPN, ctklagh [1 Ch 12 1.20); usually
in LXX Dexeddn, Sekeldk, or Dinedkay, Sikeldg):
A town assigned (Josh 19 5; 1 Ch 4 30) to
Simeon, but in Josh 15 31 named, between Hor-
nah and Madmannah, as one of the cities of the
Negeb of Judah, “toward the border of Edom.”
It is said (1 8 27 6) to have remained a royal city.
In Neh 11 28 it is in the list of towns reinhabited
by the returning children of Judah. Its chief asso-
ciations are with David. Achish the Phili king of
Gath gave it to David as a residence (1 8 27 61;
1 Ch 12 1.20); it was raided by the Amalekites,
on whom David took vengeance and so recovered his
property (1 S 30 14.26); here the messenger who
came to announce Saul’s death was slain (2 811;
4 10).

The site of this important place is not yet fixed with
certainty; Conder proposed Zuheilika, a ruin 11 miles
8.8.E. of Gaza, and 4 miles N. of Wady es-Sheri'é, which
roay be the ‘Brook Besor”’ (1 S 80 9.10.21); Rowland
(1842) proposed ‘Aslij, a heap of ruins 8. of Beersheba
and 7 miles to the E. of Bered. Neither site is entirely
satisfactory. See Williams, Holy City, I, 463-68; BR,
Il, 201, PHF, 288, Sh XX.

E. W. G. MastermMan

ZILLAH, zil’a (9%, gillah; Beddé, Sella): One
of Lamech’s wives (Gen 4 19.22.23). The name
is perhaps connected with ¢él, “shadow.”


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zeruiah
Zimri


ZILLETHAI, zil’é-thi, zil-@’tha-i (MDX, ¢ill*thay,
meaning uncertain; AV Zilthai):

(i) A Benjamite (1 Ch 8 20).

(2) A Manassite who joined David at Ziklag
(1 Ch 12 20 [Heb ver 21}).


ZILPAH, zil’pa (riper, zilpdh, meaning uncer-
tain; ZedAbd, Zelphd): The ancestress of Gad and
Asher (Gen 30 10.12; 35 26; 46 18), a slave girl
of Leah’s, given her by Laban (29 24; 30 9). In
Ezk 48 the Zilpah tribes have the 5th division
toward the south of Pal and the 6th to the north,
a slightly more favorable position than that of the
Bilhah tribes.


ZILTHAI, zil’thi, zil'thé-i. See ZiLeraal.


ZIMMAH, zim’a (TAT, zimmah, perhaps ‘“de-
vice,” ‘“plan’’): A Gershonite Levite (1 Ch 6 20
(Heb ver 5]; alsoin 6 42 [Heb ver 27]; 2 Ch 29 12),
See Curtis, Chron., 180, 134 ff.


ZIMRAN, zim’ran (jYOT, zimran, from VOT,
zemer, “wild sheep” ‘or “wild goat,” the ending -dn
being gentilic; Skinner, Gen, 350): Son of Abraham
and Keturah (Gen 26 2; 1 Ch 1 32). The various
MSS of the LXX give the name in different forms,
e.g. in Gen A*, ZeBpdv, Zebrdn, &, Leupdv, Zemrdn,
Al, ZeuBpdu, Zembrdm, Ds, LouSpdy, Zombrdn, and
Lue., Zeupdy, Zemrdn; in Ch, B has ZeuBpdv, Zem-
brdn, A, Zeupdr, Zemrdn, Luc., Zeupdvy, Zemrdn (cf
Brooke and McLean’s ed of the LX-X for Gen).

Hence some have connected the name with Zabram
of Ptol. vi.7.5, W. of Mecca; others with the Zamareni
of Pliny (Ant. vi.158) in the interior of Arabia; but
according to Skinner and E. Meyer (see Gunkel, Gen',
261) these would be too far south. ‘urtis (Chron., 72)
says the name is probably to be identified with the
'Zimri” of Jer 25 25. It would then be the name of a


clan, with the mountain sheep or goat as its totem. See
TormMisM.


Davip Francis RoBERTSs

ZIMRI, zim’ri (AT, zimri, “wild sheep” or
“wild goat’; in 1 Mace AV ZapBpl, Zambri, &,
ZapBpel, Zambret):

(1) A Simeonite prince (Nu 26 14; 1 Macc 2
26), slain by Phinehas, Aaron’s grandson. Nu 25
1-5 records how the Israelites, while they were at
Shittim, began to consort with Moabite women and
“they fie. the Moabite women] called the people
unto the sacrifices of their gods” (ver 2), 1.e. as
explained by ver 5 to take part in the immoral rites
of the god Baal-peor. Moses is bidden to have the
offenders punished. The next paragraph (vs 6-9)
relates how the people engage in public mourning;
but while they do this Zimri brings in among his
brethren a Midianitess. Phinehas sees this and
goes after Zimri into the kubbah, where he slays the
two together, and thus the plague is stayed (vs 6-9).

The connection between these two paragraphs is dif-
ficult; Moabite women are mentioned in the first, a
Midianitess in the second; the plague of vs 8f is not
previously referred to, although it seems clear that the
plague is the cause of the weeping in ver 6. The sequel,
vs 16-18, makes the second paragraph have something
to Bee Baal-peor. Critics assign vs 1-5 to JE, vs
6- A


It seems, however, that the two accounts refer to
similar circumstances. This is evident if the mean~
ing of kubbah in ver 8 be as the Vulg renders it,
lupinar, “a house of ill-repute.” The difficulty is
that the word only occurs here in the OT, but it
has that meaning in New Heb (see Gray, Nu, 385 j
BDB, however, translates it “a large vaulted tent.’
While one narrative says the women were Moabit-
esses and the other Midianitesses, the latter section
presupposes something like the account in the
former; and the point is that Zimri, at the very
time that the rest of the people publicly mourned


Zimri
Zion


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3150


because of a plague that was due to their own deal-
ings with foreign women, brought a Midianite
woman among the people, possibly to be his wife,
for he was a prince or chief, and she was the daughter
of a Midianite chief. It may be urged that if this
be the case, there was nothing wrong in it; but
according to Heb ideas there was, and we only need
to remember the evil influence of such marriages
as those entered into by Solomon, or esp. that of
Ahab with Jezebel, to see at any rate a Heb justi-
fication for Zimri’s death.

Nu $1 describes the extermination of the Midianites
at the hidding of Moses. All the males are slain by the
Israelites (ver 7), hut the women are spared. Moses is
angry at this: ‘‘Have ye saved all the women alive?
Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the
counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against Jeh in the
matter of Peor, and so the plague was among the congre-
gation of Jeh’’ (vs 15f). Here we find, although the
chapter is a Midhrash (see Gray, Nu, 417 ff), that the
Hehrews themselves connected the two events of ch 25,
hut in addition the name of Balaam is also introduced,
as again in ver 8, where he is said to have been slain along
with the kings of Midian. See further Dt 4 3, and
DEeers note on the verse. See Baaut-psor; BaLaam;

EOR,


(2) A king of Israel (1 K 16 8-20).
article.

(3) A Judahite “son” of Zerah (1 Ch 2 6)=
“Zabdi” of Josh 7 1.17 f. See Zapont, (1).

(4) A Benjamite, descendant of King Saul (1 Ch
8 36; 9 42).

(5) In Jer 25 25, where “all the kings of Zimri”’
are mentioned along with those of Arabia (ver 24)
and Elam and the Medes. The name is as yet un-
identified, although thought to be that of a people
called Zimeran (q.v.) in Gen 25 2.

Davip Francis Roserts

ZIMRI (VT, zimri; LXX ZapBeel, Zambret,
ZapBel, Zambri): The 5th king of Israel, but
who occupied the throne only seven days (1 K 16
9-20). Zimri had been captain of half the chariots
under Elah, and, as it seems, made use of his posi-
tion to conspire against his master. The occasion
for his crime was furnished by the absence of the
army, which, under the direction of Omri, was en-
gaged in the siege of the Phili town Gibbethon.
While Elah was in a drunken debauch in the house
of his steward Arza, who may have been an accom-
plice in the plot, he was foully murdered by Zimri,
who ascended the throne and put the remnant of
Elah’s family to death, thus fulfilling the prophecy
of Jehu concerning the house of Baasha. However,
the conspiracy lacked the support of the people,
for word of the crime no sooner reached Gibbethon,
than the army raised Omri to the throne of Israel.
Omri at once hastened to Tirzah and captured the
place, which as it seems offered little resistance.
Zimri resolved to die as king, and accordingly set
fire to the palace with his own hands, and perished
in the flames that he had kindled. Thus came to an
ignominious end the short reign which remained
as a blot even upon the blood-stained record of the
deeds of violence that ushered in the change of
dynasties in the Northern Kingdom, for the foul
crime was abhorred even among arch plotters.
When Jehu entered Jezreel he was met with Jeze-
bel’s bitter taunt, “Is it peace, thou Zimri, thy
master’s murderer?’ (2 K 9 31). The historian
too, in the closing formula of the reign, specially
mentions “his treason that he wrought.”

S. K. Mosiman


See special


ZIN, zin (JX, gin; Bly, Sin):

(1) A town in the extreme S. of Judah, on the
line separating that province from Edom, named
between the ascent of Akrabbim and Kadesh-
barnea (Nu 34 4; Josh 15 3). It must have lain
somewhere between Wéddy el-Fikra (the ascent of


Akrabbim?) and ‘Ain Kadis (Kadesh-barnea); but
the site has not been recovered. ei
(2) The Wilderness of Zin is the tract deriving
its name from the town (Nu 34 3). It is identi-
fied with the wilderness of Kadesh in Nu 33 36;
while in other places Kadesh is said to be in the
wilderness of Zin (Nu 201; 27 14; Dt 82 51).
We may take it that the two names refer to the
same region. The spies, who set out from Kadesh-
barnea, explored the land from the wilderness of
Zin northward (Nu 18 21; ef 32 8). It bordered
with Judah “at the uttermost part of the south”
(Josh 15 1). In this wilderness Moses committed
the offence which cost him his hope of entering the
promised land (Nu 27 14; Dt 32 51). It is
identical with the uplands lying to the N. and N.W.
of the wilderness of Paran, now occupied by the
‘Azazimeh Arabs. W. Ewine


ZINA, zi’na.


ZION, zi’on (Fx, ctyon; Zrdv, Sidn):


Meaning of the Word |

. The Zion of the Jebusites

Zion of the Prophets

Zion in Later Poetical Writings
Omission of Name hy Some Writers
The Name ‘‘Zion’’ in Christian Times
LiteRaTURE i

A name applied to Jerus, or to certain parts of

it, at least since the time of David. Nothing certain

is known of the meaning. Gesenius
1. Meaning and others have derived it from a Heb
of the Word root MX, ¢ahah, “to be dry”; De-

litzsch from MX , giwwah, “to set up,”
and Wetzstein from JZ, ¢in, “to protect.” Ge-
senius finds a more hopeful suggestion in the Arab.
equivalent sthw, the Arab. sahwat signifying
“vidge of a mountain” or “citadel,” which at any
rate suitably applies to what we know to have been
the original Zion (cf Smith, HGHTL, s.v.). ;

Considerable confusion has been caused in the
past by the want of clear understanding regarding
the different sites which have respectively heen
called “Zion” during the centuries. It will make
matters clearer if we take the application of the
name: in David’s time; in the early Prophets, etc;
in late poetical writings and in the Apocrypha; and
in Christian times.

Jerus (in the form Uru-sa-lim) is the oldest name
we know for this city; it goes back at least 400

years before David. In 2S 6 6-9,
2. The Zion “The king and his men went to Jerus
of the against the Jebusites. .... Never-
Jebusites theless David took the stronghold of

Zion; the same is the city of David
....And David dwelt in the stronghold, and
called it the city of David.” It is evident that
Zion was the name of the citadel of the Jebusite
city of Jerus. That this citadel and incidentally
the then city of Jerus around it were on the long
ridge running 8. of the Temple (called the south-
eastern hill in the art. Jzrvsazem, ITI, [8] [q.v.]) is
now accepted by almost all modern scholars, mamly
on the folowing grounds:

(1) The near proximity of the site to the only
known spring, now the “Virgin’s Fount,” once called
Ginon (q.v.). From our knowledge of other an-
cient sites all over Pal, as well as on grounds of
common-sense, it is hardly possible to believe that
the early inhabitants of this site with such an abun-
dant source at their very doors could have made any
other spot their headquarters.

(2) The suitability of the site for defence—The
sites suited for settlement in early Can. times were
all, if we may judge from a number of them now
known, of this nature—a rocky spur isolated on


See ZIzau.


Out Go Roles


3151


three sides by steep valleys, and, in many sites, pro-
tected at the end where they jom the main moun-
tain ridge by either a valley or a rocky spur.

(3) The size of the ridge, though very small to our
modern ideas, is far more in keeping with what we
know of fortified towns of that period than such an
area as presented by the southwestern hill—the
traditional site of Zion. Mr. Macalister found by
actual excavation that the great walls of Gezer,
which must have been contemporaneous with the
Jebusite Jerus, measured approximately 4,500 ft.
in circumference. G. A. Smith has calculated that
a line of wall carried along the known and inferred
scarps around the edge of this southeastern hill
would have an approximate circumference of 4,250
ft. The suitability of the site to a fortified city
like Gezer, Megiddo, Soco, and other sites which


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zimri
Zion


(traditional Zion) to the Temple is to go down.
(b) Hezekiah constructed the well-known Siloam
tunnel from Gihon to the Pool of Siloam. He is
described (2 Ch 32 30) as bringing the waters of
Gihon “straight down on the west side of the city
of David.” (c) Manasseh (2 Ch 33 14) built “an
outer wall to the city of David, on the west side of
Gihon, in the valley” (i.e. nahal—the name of the
Kedron valley).

Zion, renamed the City of David, then originally
was on this eastern ridge. But the name did not


stay there. It would almost seem as
3. Zion if the name was extended to the
of the Temple site when the ark was carried
Prophets _ there, for in the preéxilic Prophets the


references to Zion all appear to have re-
ferred to the Temple Hill. To quote afew examples:


Stores or Zion—Tyror@on Vatuey av Rieut.


have been excavated, strikes anyone familiar with
these places. ;

(4) The archaeological remains on these hills
found by Warren and Professor Guthe, and more
particularly in the recent excavations of Captain
Parker (see JERUSALEM), show without doubt that
this was the earliest settlement in pre-Israelite times.
Extensive curves and rock-cuttings, cave-dwellings
and tombs, and enormous quantities of early ““Amor-
ite’ (what may be popularly called “Jebusite”)
pottery show that the spot must have been in-
habited many centuries before the time of David.
The reverse is equally true; on no other part of the
Jerus site has any quantity of such early pottery
been found. ;

(5) The Bible evidence that Zion originally occu-
pied this site is clear. It will be found more in
detail under the heading “City of David” in the
art. JERUSALEM, IV, (5), but three points may be
mentioned here: (a2) The Ark of the Covenant was
brought up out of the city of David to the Temple
(K81; 2 Ch 5 2), and Pharaoh’s daughter
“came up out of the city of David unto her house
which Solomon had built for her’’—adjacent to the
Temple (1 K 9 24). This expression “up” could
not be used of any other hill than of the lower-lying
eastern ridge; to go from the southwestern hill


“And Jeh will create over the whole habitation of
mount Zion, and over her assemblies, a cloud and
smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by


Citadel of Zion.


night” (Isa 4 5); ‘“Jeh of hosts, who dwelleth in
mount Zion” (Isa 8 18); ‘Let us go up to Zion
unto Jeh our God” (Jer 31 6); “Jeh will reign over
them in mount Zion” (Mic 4 7). All these, and
numbers more, clearly show that at that time Zion
was the Temple Hill.


Zion
Zoan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3152


In many of the later writings, particularly poetical
references, Zion appears to be the equivalent of Jerus;
either in parallelism (Ps 102 21; Am 1 2;

4, Zion in Mic 3 10.12; Zec 1 14.17; 8 3; Zeph 3 16)
Later Poeti or alone (Jer 3 14; Lam 5 11); even here
ater F O€U- many of the references will do equally well
cal Writings for the Temple Hill. The term ‘‘Daughter
and Apocry- of Zion" is applied to the captive Jews
pha (Lam 4 22), but in other references to the


people of Jerus (Isa 1 8; 52 2; Jer 4 31,
7 ete). hen we come to the Apocrypha,
in 2 Esd there are several references in which Zion is used


Stairway in Ancient Wall—Modern Zion.


for the captive people of Judah (2 40; 3 2.31; 10 20.39.

44), but “Mount Zion” in this and other books (e.g. 1

pasee 4 37.60; 5 54; 6 48.62, etc) is always the Temple
1.


It has been pointed out as a curious and unaccountahle
exception that in Ezk as well asin Ch, Ezr and Neh, there
is 20 eR of raaaen secon beta preston

‘sat reference to David's capture of the Jebusite

5. Omission fort. "The references in the other Prophets


of Name and the Pss are so copious that there must
by Some be some religious reason for this. The
Writers Chronicler (2 Ch $ 1), too, alone refers to


the Teme as on Mount Moriah. Itis also
noticeable that only in these hooks (2 Ch
27 3; 33 14; Neh 3 26f; 11 21) does the name ‘‘Ophel”’
appear as a designation of a part of the southeastern bill,
whieh apparently might equally fitly have heen termed
Zion. See OrneL. Jos never uses the name ‘‘Zion” nor
does it occur in the NT, except in two quotations (He
12 22; Rev 14 I).


Among the earlier Christian writers who mention
“Zion,” Origen used it as equivalent to the Temple
Hill, but in the 4th cent. writers com-


6. The mence to localize it up the southern part
Name of the western hill. It was a period
“Zion” in when Bib. topography was settled in
Christian a very arbitrary manner, without any
Times scientific or critical examination of the


evidence, and this tradition once estab-
lished remained, like many such traditions, undis-
puted until very recent years. To Rev. W. F. Birch
belongs much of the credit for the promulgation of
the newer views which now receive the adherence


of almost every living authority on the topography
of Jerus.


Lirerature.—See esp. ch vi in Smith's Jerusalem;
for a defence of ihe older view see Kuemmel. Materialien


2. Topog. des alt. Jerus.
‘ E. W. G. MastermMan

ZIOR, ai’or (WHY, ct'or; Bdp0, Sdrth, or Zap,
Siér): A town in the hill country of Judah (Josh
15 54); probably Si‘air, 43 miles N.N.E. of Hebron
where the Mukam ‘Aisa (Tomb of Esau) is now
shown. It is a considerable village surrounded by
cultivated land; a spring exists in the neighbor-
hood; there are rock-cut tombs showing it 1s an
ancient site (PEF, III, 309, Sh XXT).


ZIPH, zif ("1 , ziph; ’OtelB, Ozetb, or Zip, Ziph):

(1) A town in the hill country of Judah, men-
tioned along with Maon, Carmel and Jutah (Josh
15 55). It is chiefly celebrated in connection with
the earlier history of David: “David... . re-
mained in the hill-country in the wilderness of
Ziph” (1 § 23 14.15.24; 26 2); the Ziphites (1 8
23 19; 26 1; cf Ps 54 title) sought to betray him
to Saul, but David escaped. Ziph was fortified by
Rehoboam (2 Ch 11 8). The name also occurs in
1 Ch 2 42; 4.16. In connection with this last (cf
ver 23) it is noticeable that Ziph is one of the four
uames occurring on the Heb stamped jar handles
with the added 7" , la-melekh, ‘to the king.”

The site is Tell Zif, 4 miles 8.E. of Hebron, a
conspicuous hill 2,882 ft. above sea-level; there are
cisterns and, to the E., some ruins (PEF, III, 312,
315).

(2) A town in the Negeb of Judah (Josh 15 24),
site unknown. E. W. G. MastermMan


ZIPH (O°7, diph, meaning unknown):
5 (1) A grandson of Caleb (1 Ch 2 42); LXX Zel¢g,
eiph.


(2) A son of Jehallelel (1 Ch 4 16). In LXX
Cod. A reads Z:gal, Ziphat, but B has the totally
different form ’Apnaxel, Améachei.


ZIPHAH, zi’fa (DT, zt%phadh, a fem. form of
“Ziph’’): A Judahite, “son” of Jeballelel. The
name being fem. may be a dittography of the pre-
vious Ziph (1 Ch 4 16).


ZIPHIMS, zif’imz: In title of Ps 64 AV for RV
ZIPHITES (q.Vv.).


ZIPHION, zif'i-on (JPY, ciphyon, “gaze” [?]
[BDB]): A “son” of Gad (Gen 46 16)=‘“‘Zephon”’
of Nu 26 15. See Zarpuon; ZEPHONITES.


ZIPHITES, zif’its. See Zipu.
ZIPHRON, zif'ron. See Sipraim.


ZIPPOR, zip’or ax , Suppor; in Nu 22 4; 23
18; “BX, ¢ippor, “bird,” “swallow” [HPN, 94]):
Father of Balak, king of Moab (Nu 22 2.10.16;
Josh 24 9; Jgs 11 25).


ZIPPORAH, zi-pé'ra, zip'd-ra (AEE, cippdrah;
Lempdpa, Sepphdra): The Midianite wife of Moses,
daughter of Jethro, also called Hobab, and prob-
ably granddaughter of Reuel, a priest of Midian at
the time Moses fled from Egypt, later succeeded
at his death by Jethro, or Hobab (Ex 2 21.22;
4 25.26; 18 2-6).

Whether or not Z. was the ‘“Cushite woman”
(Nu 12 1) is a much-mooted question. There is
little ground for anything more than speculation
on the subject. The use of the words, “Cushite
woman” in the mouth of Aaron and Miriam may


3153


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zion
Zoan


have been merely a deseription of Z. and intended
to be opprobrious, or they may have been ethnic
in character and intended to denote another woman
whom Moses had married, as suggested by Ewald
(Gesch. des Volkes Israel, II, 252). The former view
seems the more probable. The association of
Midian and Cushan by Habakkuk (8 7) more than
700 years afterward may hardly be adduced to
prove like close relationship between these peoples
in the days of Moses. M. G. Kyrie


ZITHRI, zith’ri. See Siruni.


ZIV, ziv (iT, ziw; AV Zif): The 2d month of the
old Heb calendar, corresponding to Iyyar of the
Jewish reckoning in later times. It is mentioned
inl K 6 1.87. See CaLEnparR.


Z1Z, 2ziz, ASCENT OF (P20 moon , madlzh
ha-ci¢; “Aoaé, Hasaé,‘Aovwrd, Hasisd): A pass in
the wilderness of Judaea (2 Ch 20 16) leading from
Hazazon-tamar (En-gedi, ver 2). This is generally
identified with Wady Hasasa, a valley by which the
ancient road from En-gedi runs toward Jerus. At
any rate, an echo of the ancient name survives here:
possibly the actual ascent was the present steep pass
fom En-gedi to the plateau above. See PEF, Sh


ZIZA, 2i’za (NTT, 272d’, probably a childish redu-
plicated abbreviation or a term of endearment
Oe Chron., 369, quoting Néldeke in £B, III
3294]):

(1) A Simeonite chief (1 Ch 4 37).

(2) A-son of King Rehoboam, his mother being a
daughter or granddaughter of Absalom (2 Ch 11 20).

(3) A probable reading for ZizaH (q.v.).


ZIZAH, zi’za (AMT, 2izah; see Ziza): A Ger-
shonite Levite (1 Ch 23 11); in ver 10 the name is
“Zina? (RT, 2ind’), while LXX and Vulg have
“Ziza” (Zité, Zizd) in both verses, and one Heb MS
has z7z@’ in ver 10. We should then probably read
ztea@’ in both verses, ie. “Ziza.”


ZOAN, 26’an (j27%, ¢a‘an; Tavls, Tants):

. Situation

OT Notices

Early History

Hyksos Monuments

Hyksos Population

. Hyksos Age

. Description of Site

The name is supposed to mean “migration” (Arab.

tsan). The site is the only one connected with the
history of Israel in Egypt, before the

1. Situation exodus, which is certainly fixed, being
identified with the present village of

Sén at the old mouth of the Bubastic branch of the

Nile, about 18 miles S.E. of Damietta. It should be

remembered that the foreshore of the Delta is con-

tinually moving northward, in consequence of the

deposit of the Nile mud, and that the Nile mouths

are much farther N. than they were even in the time

of the geographer Ptolemy. Thus in the times of

Jacob, and of Moses, Zoan probably lay at the

mouth of the Bubastic branch, and was a harbor,

Lake Menzaleh and the lagoons near Pelusium

having been subsequently formed.

The city is only once noticed in the Pent (Nu 13


NOCUP DN


22), as having been built seven years after Hebron,

which existed in the time of Abraham.
2. OT Zoan was certainly a very ancient
Notices town, since monuments of the VIth


yp Dynasty have been found at the
site. It has been thought that Zoar on the border
of Egypt (Gen 18 10) is a clerical error for Zoan,
but the LXX reading (Zégora) does not favor this


view, and the place intended is prohably the fortress
Zar, or Zor, often mentioned in Egyp texts as lying


on the eastern borders of the Delta. Zoan is no-
ticed in the Prophets (Isa 19 11.13; 30 4; Ezk
30 14), and its “princes” are naturally mentioned
by Isaiah, since the capital of the XXIIId Egyp
Dynasty (about 800 to. 700 BC) was at this city.
In Ps 78 12.43 the “field [or pastoral plain] of Zoan”
is noticed as though equivalent to the land of
GosHEN (q.v.).
Zoan was the capital of the Hyksos rulers, or
“shepherd kings,’ in whose time Jacob came Into
Egypt, and their monuments have
3. Early been found at the site, which favors
History the conclusion that its plain was that
j ‘land of Rameses” (Gen 47 11; Ex
12 87; see Raamses) where the Hebrews had pos-
sessions under Joseph. It is probably the site of
Avaris, which lay on the Bubastic channel according
to Jos quoting Manetho (CAp, I, xiv), and which
was rebuilt by the first of the Hyksos kings, named
Salatis; for Avaris is supposed (Brugsch, Geog., I,
86-90, 278-80) to represent the Egyp name ot the
city Ha-uar-t, which means ‘‘the city of movement”
(or “flight”’), thus being equivalent to the Sem Zoan
or “migration.” It appears that, from very early
times, the pastoral peoples of Edom and Pal were
admitted into this region. The famous picture of
the Amu, who bring their families on donkeys to
Egypt, and offer the Sinaitic ibex as a present, is
found at Beni Hasan in a tomb as old as the time
of Usertasen II of the XIIth Dynasty, before the
Hyksos age. A similar immigration of shepherds
(see Prrnom) from Aduma (or Edom) is also re-
corded in the time of Menepthah, or more than four
centuries after the expulsion of the Hyksos by the
XVIIIth, or Theban, Dynasty.
Besides the name of Pepi of the VIth Dynasty,
found by Burton at Zoan, and many texts of the
XIIth Dynasty, a cartouche of Apepi
4. Hyksos (one of the Hyksos kings) was found
Monuments by Mariette on the arm of a statue
apparently of older origin, and a sphinx
also bears the name of Khian, supposed to have
been an early Hyksos ruler. The Hyksos type,
with broad cheek bones and a prominent nose,
unlike the features.of the native Egyptians, has
been regarded by Virchow and Sir W. Flower as
Turanian, both at Zoan and at Bubastis; which
agrees with the fact that Apepi is recorded to have
worshipped no Egyp gods, but only Set (or Sutekh),
who was also adored by Syrian Mongols (see Hir-
vires). At Bubastis this deity is called “Set of
Rameses,’”’ which may indicate the identity of Zoan
with the city Rameses.
In the 14th cent. BC the city was rebuilt b:


IJ, and was then known as Pa-Ramessu. The Hyksos
rulers had held it for 500 years according


Rameses


6. Hyksos to Mauetho, and were expelled after 1700
 HyXs' BC. George the Syncellus (Chronographia,
Population about 800 AD) believed that Apepi (or


Apophis) was the Pharaoh under whom
Joseph came to Egypt, but there seems to have been -
ynore than one Hyksos king of the name, the latest being
a contemporary of Ra-Sekenen of the XIIIth Dynasty,
shortly before 1700 BC. Manetho says that some sup-
osed the Hyksos to be Arahs, and the population of
Zoan under their rule was probably a mixture of Sem and
Mongolic races, just as in Syria and Bahylonia in the
same ages. According to Brugsch (Hist of Egypt, II,
233), this population was known as Men or Meni, and
came from Assyria E. of Ruten or Syria. This perhaps
connects them with the Minyans of Matiene, who were
a Mongolic race. This statement occurs in the great
table of nations, on the walls of the Edfu temple.
The Hyksos age corresponds chronologically with that
of the Ist Dynasty of Babylon, and thus with tho age
of the Heb patriarchs Abraham and Jacob
6. Hyksos —a time when, the power of Babylon was
ray: suprane in Syria and Pal. It is very natu-
Age ral, therefore, that, like other Sem tribes
even earlier, these patriarchs should have
been well received in the Delta by the Hyksos Pharaohs,


Zoar
Zodlogy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3154


the XVIIIth Egyp Dynasty, took the town of Avaris
and expelled the Asiatics, he should also have oppressed
the Hebrews, and that this should he intended when we
read (Ex 1 8) that ‘‘there arose a new king over Egypt,
who knew not Joseph." The exodus, according to the
OT dates, occurred in the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty
(see Exopvus) when Israel left Goshen. The later date
advocated by some scholars, in the reign of Menepthah
of the XIXth Dynasty, hardly agrees with the monu-
mental notice of the immigration of Edomites into the
Delta in his reign, which has been mentioned above;
and in his time Egypt was being invaded by tribes from
the N. of Asia,


Zoan, as described by Rev. G. J. Chester (Mem.
Survey W. Pal, Special Papers, 1881, 92-96), is now
only a small hamlet of mud huts in a
7. Descrip- sandy waste, W. of the huge mounds
tion of Site of its ancient temple; but, besides the
black granite sphinx, and other statues
of the Hyksos age, a red sandstone figure of Rameses
II and obelisks of granite have been excavated, one
representing this king adoring the gods; while the
names of Amen, Tum and Mut appear as those of
the deities worshipped, in a beautiful chapel in the
temple, carved in red sandstone, and belonging to
the same age of prosperity in Zoan.
f ; C. R. Conner

ZOAR, zd’ar (PX, AP, cd'ar; LXX usually
Znyde, Ségor, Zéyopa, Zégora): The name of the
city to which Lot escaped from Sodom (Gen 19
20-23.30), previously mentioned in 18 10; 14 2.8,
where its former name is said to have been Bela.
In 19 22, its name is said to have been given because
of its littleness, which also seems to have accounted
for its being spared. The location of Zoar has much
to do with that of the cities of the Plain or Valley of
Siddim, with which it is always connected. In Dt
34 3, Moses is said to have viewed “the Plain of the
valley of Jericho the city of palm trees, unto Zoar,”’
while in Isa 15 5 and Jer 48 4 (where the LXX
reads unto “Zoar,” instead of “her little ones’’) it
is said to be a city of Moab. The traditional loca-
tion of the place is at the south end of the Dead
Sea. Jos says (BJ, IV, viii, 4) that the Dead Sea
extended ‘as far as Zoar of Arabia,” while in Ant,
I, xi, 4, he states that the place was still called Zoar.
Eusebius (Onom, 261) locates the Dead Sea between
Jericho and Zoar, and speaks of the remnants of
the ancient fertility as still visible. Ptolemy (v.
17.5) regards it as belonging to Arabia Petraea.
The Arabian geographers mention it under the name
Zughar, Sughar, situated 1° 8. of Jericho, in a hot
and unhealthful valley at the end of the Dead Sea,
and speak of it as an important station on the trade
route between Akkabah and Jericho. The Cru-
saders mention “Segor’” as situated in the midst
of palm trees. The place has not been definitely
identified by modern explorers, but from Gen 19
19-30 we infer that it was in the plain and not in
the mountain. If we fix upon the south end of the
Dead Sea as the Vale of Siddim, a very natural place
for Zoar and one which agrees with all the tradi-
tions would be at the base of the mountains of
Moab, E. of Wédy Ghurundel, where there is still
a well-watered oasis several miles long and 2 or 3
wide, which is probably but a remnant of a fertile
plain once extending out over a considerable portion
of the shallow south end of the Dead Sea when, as
shown elsewhere (see Deap Sra), the water level
was considerably lower than now.

Robinson would locate it on the northeast corner of
el-Lisdn on the horders of the river Kerak, but this was
done entirely on theoretical grounds which would he met
as well in the place just indicated, and which is generally
fixed upon by the writers who regard the Vale of Siddim
as at the south end of the Dead Sea. Conder, who
vigorously maintains that the Vale of Siddim is at the
north end of the Dead Sea, looks favorahly npon the
theory of Rev. W. H. Birch that the place is represented


by the present Tell Shaghur, a white rocky mound at the
foot of the Moab Mountains, a mile E. of Beth-haram


and equally natural that, when Aahmes, the founder of


(Tell er-Rameh), 7 miles N.E. of the mouth of the Jordan,
a locality remarkable for its stone monuments and well-
supplied springs, but he acknowledges that the name is
more like the Christian Segor than the original Zoar.
Georcr FrepeRick WRIGHT

ZOBAH, 26’ba (MDZ, cdbhah; Bova, Soubd):
The name is derived by Halévy from z2habhah as
referring to its supplies of “bright yellow” brass;
but this word might be more appropriately used to
contrast its cornfields with white Lebanon. Zobah
was an Aramaean kingdom of which we have the
first notice in Saul’s wars (1 8 14 47).

(1) David’s first war—When David sought to
extend his boundary to the Euphrates, he came into
contact with its king Hadadezer, and a great batile
was fought in which David took many prisoners.
Damascus, however, came to the rescue and fresh
resistance was made, but a complete rout followed
and great spoil fell to the victor, as well as access
to the rich copper mines of Tebah and Berothai.
Toi, king of Hamath, who had suffered in war with
Hadadezer, now sent his son on an embassy with
greetings and gifts to David (2 S 8 3-12; 1 Ch
18 3-12). See Ps 60, title.

(2) David’s second war—During David’s Am-
monite war, the enemy was strengthened by alliance
with Zobah, Maacah and Beth-rehob, and Israel
was attacked from both N. and S. at the same time.
The northern confederation was defeated by Joab,
but Hadadezer again gathered an army, including
levies from beyond the Euphrates. These, under
Shobach the captain of the host, were met by David
in person at Helam, and a great slaughter ensued,
Shobach himself being among the slain (2 8 10
6-19, AV ‘Zoba”; 1 Ch 19 3-19). Rezon, son
of Eliada, now broke away from Hadadezer and,
getting possession of Damascus, set up a kingdom
hostile to Israel (1 K 11 23-25). Solomon seems
(2 Ch 8 3) to have invaded and subdued Hamath-
zobah, but the text, esp. LXX, is obscure.

(8) Geographical position.—We can now consider
the vexed question of the situation and extent of
Aram-zobah. (See Syria, 4, [10].) In addition to
the OT references we have the Assyr name lists. In
these Subiti is placed between Kui and Zemar, and,
where it is otherwise referred to, a position is implied
between Hamath and Damascus. It would thus lie
along the eastern slopes of Anti-Lebanon extending
thence to the desert, and in the north it may have at
times included Emesa (modern Homs) around which
Néldeke would locate it. Damascus was probably
a tributary state till seized by Rezon. Winckler
would identify it with another Subiti, a place in
the Hauran mentioned by Assurbanipal on the
Rassam Cylinder vii, lines 110-12. This latter
may be the native place of Igal, one of David’s
“thirty” (2 8 23 36), who is named among eastern
Israelites.

The kingdom of Zobah in addition to its mineral
wealth must have been rich in vineyards and fruit-
ful fields, and its conquest must have added greatly
to the wealth and power of Israel’s king.

W. M. Curistie

ZOBEBAH, 26-bé’ba (DIN, ha-cdbhébhah,
meaning uncertain): A Judahite name with the
article prefixed (1 Ch 4 8); some would read
“Jabez”’ instead as in ver 9.


ZOHAR, zo’har (WUE, cdhar, meaning uncertain):
oO Father of Ephron the Hittite (Gen 28 8;
9


(2) Son” of Simeon (Gen 46 10; Ex 6 15)=
“Zerah” of Nu 26 18; 1 Ch 4 24; see Zeran, 4.

(3) In 1 Ch 4 7, where Keré is “and ¢éhar”
ie Kethibh, yichar, RV “Izhar,” AV wrongly
“Jezoar.”


3155


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zoar
Zodlogy


ZOHELETH, z6’hé-leth, THE STONE OF (728


noni, *ebhen ha-zoheleth, “serpent’sstone’’): “And
Adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fatlings by the
stone of Zoheleth, which is beside En-rogel” (1 K
19). Evidently this was a sacred stone—probably
a maceébhah such as marked a Can. sanctuary.
A source of “living water’ has always in the Sem
world been a sacred place; even today at most such
places, e.g. at Bir Byydb, the modern representa-
tive of En-rogel, there is a mihrab and a platform
for prayer. The stone has disappeared, but it is
‘thought that an echo of the name survives in ez-
Zehweéleh, the name of a rocky outcrop in the village
of Siloam. Because the name is particularly asso-
ciated with an ascent taken by the woman coming
from the Virgin’s Fount, to which it is adjacent,
some authorities have argued that this, the Virgin’s
Fount, must be En-rogel; on this see EN-RoGEL;
Ginon. Against this view, as far as ez-Zehwéleh
is concerned, we may note: (1) It is by no means
certain that the modern Arab. name—which is
used for similar rocky spots in other places—is
really derived from the Heb; (2) the name is now
applied to quite different objects, in the Heb to a
stone, in the Arab. to a rocky outcrop; (3) the name
is not confined to this outcrop near the Virgin’s
Fount alone, but applies, according to at least some
of the fellahin of Siloam, to the ridge along the whole
village site; and (4) even if all the above were dis-
proved, names are so frequently transferred from
one locality to another in Pal that no argument can
be based on a name alone.
E. W. G. MastermMan

ZOHETH, zo’heth (NNW, zohéeth, meaning un-
known): A Judahite (1 Ch 4 20). The name after
“Ben-zoheth”’ at the end of the verse has fallen out.
See BEN-ZOHETH.


ZOOLOGY, 26-ol’6-ji: A systematic list of the
animals of the Bible includes representatives of the
principal orders of mammals, birds and reptiles, and
not a few of the lower animals. For further notices
of animals in the following list, see the articles
referring to them:


Mammals:
Primates: Ape :
TREEGTIVORA Hedgehog. Move (q.v.) not found in
al
Crinoprgena: Bat
CAHNIVORA:


(a) Felidoe, Cat, Lion, Leopard
(b) Hyoenidae, Hyena
(c) Saas Dog (incl. Greyhound), Fox, Jackal,


(o)
(d) Mustelidae, Ferret, Badger, Marten (s.v. Cat)
e) Ursidee, Bear
UNGULATA: r
(a) Odd-toed; Horse, Ass, Mule, Rhinoceros
(b) Even-toed non-ruminants: Swine, Hippopota-
mus (Behemoth)
(c) Ruminants: i 3 :
(1) Bovidee, Domestic Cattle, Wild Ox or Uni-
corn, Domestic Sheep, Domestic Goat,
Sinaitic Ibex (s.v. qos Persian Wild
Goat (s.v. Cuamois), Gazelle, Arabian Oryx
(s.v. ANTELOPE), Chamois
(2) Cervidae, Roe Deer, Fallow Deer, Red Deer
(s.v. DEER)
(3) Camelidee, Camel
Pnoposcipea: Elephant
Hyracoipea: Coney
Sirenia: Dugong (S.v. BADGER) |
Cetacgea: Whale, Dolphin, Porpoise :
Ropentia: Mouse, Mole-Rat (s.v. Move), Porcupine,
Hare
Birds: :
Passenes: Sparrow, Swallow, Raven, Hoopoe, Night-
Hawk
Raptrorss: Great Owl, Little Owl, Horned Owl, Eagle,
ulture, Gier-Eagle, Osprey, Kite, Glede, Hawk,
Falcon
Co.tumBaz: Dove, Turtle-Dove |
GawuurnaE: Cock, Partridge, Quail, Peacock
GRALLATORES: Crane, Heron, Stork
Srecanopopes: Pelican, Cormorant
Ratiraz: Ostrich


. ibex, and the Pers wild goat are common.


Reptiles:
Rocop11L1A: Crocodile (Leviathan)
CxHExLonia: Tortoise
Opurp1a: Serpent, Fiery Serpent, Adder, Asp, Viper
S.V. SEREEN). aie .
ACEHTILIA: Lizard, Great Lizard, Gecko, Chameleon,
Land Crocodile, Sand Lizard (s.v. Lizarp)
Amphibians:
rog
Fishes:
Fish (in general)
Mollusks:
Snail, Murex (Purple)
Insects:
Hymenoprera: Ant, Bee, Hornct
Leripoprena: Clothes-Moth (s.v. Motu), Silk-Worm,
Worm (Larva)
SIPHONAPTERA: Flea
Diptera: Fly
Ruyncnota: Louse, Scarlet-Worm
Ontuoprena: Grasshopper, Locust
(s.v. INsEctTs)
Arachnida:
Spider, Scorpion
Coelenterata:
Coral
Porifera:
Sponge


Some interesting problems arise in connection
with the lists of clean and unclean animals in Lev
and Dt. The list of clean animals in Dt 14 4-5
is as follows:


Hes AV RV THISTHAM
1. shor ec... Ox Ox Ox
2. s&h

kesabhim.| Sheep Sheep Sheep
3. séh ‘izzim| Goat Goat Goat
4. ’ayyal. Hart Hart Red deer
5. g@bhi. Roebuck Gazelle Gazelle
6. yahmur Fallow deer | Roebuck Bubale
7. 'akké Wild goat Wild goat Ibex
8. dishén Wepate Pygarg Addax
9, #'6...... Wild ox Antelope Oryx
10. zemer, Chamois Chamois Barbary

sheep


Probably the most valuable modern work on Bible
animals is Tristram’s Natural History of the Bible,
published in 1867 and to a great extent followed in
RV and in articles in various Bib. encyclopaedias.
In the table given above, RV really differs from
Tristram only in 6, 8 and 10. Hart is the male of
the red deer, the ibex is a kind of wild goat, and
the oryxis a kind of antelope. The first three in the
table are domestic animals whose identification is not
questioned. The other seven are presumably wild
animals, regarding every one of which there is
more or less uncertainty. ’Akk6, dishén and zemer
occur only in this passage, °’6 only here and in Isa
61 20. ’Ayyal occurs 22 t, ¢°bhi 16 t, yahmur only
twice. The problem is to find seven ruminant mam-
mals to correspond to these names. The camel (ver
7) is excluded as unclean. The gazelle, the Sinaitic
The roe
deer was fairly common in Carmel and Southern
Lebanon 20 years ago, but is now nearly or quite
extinct. The fallow deer exists in Mesopotamia,
and Tristram says that he saw it in Galilee, though
the writer is inclined to question the accuracy of the
observation. The oryx is fairly common in North-
western Arabia, approaching the limits of Edom.
Here, then, are six animals, the gazelle, ibex, Pers
wild goat, roe deer, fallow deer, and oryx, whose
existence 1n or near Pal is undisputed.


The bubale, addax and Barbary sheep of Tristram’s
list are North African species which the writer believes
do not range as far E. as Egypt, and which he believes
should therefore be excluded. In Asia Minor are found
the red deer, the chamois and the Armenian wild sheep,
but there is no proof that any of these ever ranged as far
S.as Pal. The bison exists in the Caucasus, and the wild
OX, urus or aurochs, seems to be depicted in Assyr sculp-
tures. The buffalo is found in Pal, but is believed to
have been introduced since Bible times, The Tartarian
roe is named Cervus pygargus, and there is a South African
antelope named Bubalis pygargus, but the pygarg of EV


Zodlogy
Zoroastrianism


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3156


has noreal existence. The word means ‘“ white-rumped,”
and might apply to various deer and antelopes.


_To complete the list of seven we are therefore
driven to one of the following: the red deer, the
chamois, the Armenian wild sheep, the bison and the
aurochs, no one of which has a very good claim to be
included. The writer considers that the roe, which
has been the commonest deer of Pal, is the ’ayyal


wk
(cf Arab. dot , atyil, deer’). Cebhi is very near


to Arab. en gabi, “gazelle,” and, with its 16


occurrences in the OT, may well be that. common
animal, There is reason to think that yahmir is the
name of a deer, and the writer prefers to apply it to
the fallow deer of Mesopotamia, as being more likely
to have inhabited Pal than the red deer of Asia
Minor. There is little evidence regarding ‘akko,
which occurs only here. The etymology is uncertain.
LXX has 7payédagos, tragélaphos, “goat-stag.”” Tg
and Syr VSS, according to BDB, have ibex. Ya‘al
(Job 39 1; Ps 104 18; 1 8 24 2), EV “wild goat,”
is quite certainly the ibex, but it is possible that
’akkd may be another name for the same animal, ya‘él
not occurring in this list. In BDB dishén is derived
from ¥ WI, dish, “to tread,” and is considered
to be a kind of wild goat. Since we have assigned
*akkod to the ibex, we may then assign this name to
the other wild goat of the country, the Pers wild
goat orpasang. T’6disin RV antelope and in LXX
Bput, érux, “oryx.’’ This is a possible identifica-
tion which suits also Isa 51 20, and does not pre-
clude the possibility that the r’ém, AV “unicorn,”
RV “wild-ox,”’ may also be the oryx. The oryx is
known to the Arabs under at least three names, the
en)


commonest of which, eased ye , bakr el-wahsh,


means “‘wild-ox.”” Under Cuamois, the writer sug-
gests that zemer may be the pasang or Pers wild
goat, which is figured in that article. There is
httle to choose in the assignment of the names, but
as dishdn has here been provisionally assigned to
the pasang, nothing better is left for zemer than
the “chamois” of EV, the claims of which are
referred to above.

The list of unclean animals is considered in the
art. on Lizarp.


Prophecies of the desolation of Bahylon and Edom in
Isa 18 21.22; 34 11-15 contain names of animals, some
of which present ‘apparently insuperable difficulties.
See under JacxaLrand Satyr. The Book of Job contains
some remarkable references to animals, esp. in chs 39,
40, 41: to the wild goat, the wild ass, the wild ox, the
ostrich, the horse, the hawk, the hehemoth and the
leviathan. u ;

Prov 30 contains some curious allusions to natural
history:
“|... Things which are too wonderful forme ....


The way of an eagle in the air;
The way cof a serpent upon a rock [see Factz; Way];


There are four things which are little upon the earth,
But they are exceeding wise:

The ants are a pecple not strong,

Yet they provide their food in the summer;

The conies are but a feeble folk,

Yet they make their houses in the rocks;

The locusts have no king,

Yet go they forth all of them hy bands;

The lizard taketh hold with her hands,

Yet is she in kings’ palaces.


There are three things which are stately in their march,
Yea, four which are stately in going:

The lion, which is mightiest among beasts,

And turneth not away for any;

The greyhound; the he-goat alsa;

And the king against whom there is no rising up."


An interesting grouping is found in the prophecy in
Isa 11 6-8 (cf 65 25): ‘‘And the wolf shall dwell with
the lamh, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid;
and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together;
and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the


bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together;
and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the suck-
ing child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned
child shall pnt his hand’ on the adder’s den.”


The fauna of Pal is mainly European and Asiatic,
but resembles in some important points the fauna
of Africa. The, Syrian coney is not found. else-
where and its only near allies are the conies of
Africa. The gazelle and oryx belong to the group
of antelopes which is esp. African. The lion and
leopard range throughout Africa and Southwest
Asia. The ostrich is found outside of Africa only
in Arabia. Some of the smaller birds, as for in-
stance the sun-bird, have their nearest allies in
Africa, The fish of the Sea of Tiberias and the
Jordan present important resemblances to African
fishes. The same is true of some of the butterflies
of Pal. Allying the fauna of Pal with that of
Europe and North Asia may be noted the deer,
bear, wolf, fox, hare and others. The ibex ‘and
Pers wild goat constitute links with central. Asia,
which is regarded as the center of distribution of the
goat tribe.

The fauna of Pal has undoubtedly changed since
Bible times. Lions have disappeared, bears and
leopards have become scarce, the roe deer has nearly
or quite disappeared within recent years. It is
doubtful whether the aurochs, the chamois and the
red deer were ever found in Pal, but if so they are
entirely gone. The buffalo has been introduced
and has become common in some regions. Domes-
tic cats, common now, were perhaps not indig-
enous to ancient Palestine. In prehistoric times,
or it may be before the advent of man, the glacial
period had an influence upon the fauna of this
country, traces of which still persist. On the sum-
mits of Lebanon are found two species of butterfly,
Pieris callidice, found also in Siberia, and Vanessa
urticae, common in Europe. When the glacial
period came on, these butterflies with a host of other
creatures were driven down from the N. When
the cold receded northward they moved back again,
except for these, and perhaps others smce become
extinct, which found the congenial cold in ascending
the mountains where they became isolated. Syria
and Pal were never covered with a sheet of ice, but
the famous cedar grove of Lebanon stands on the
terminal moraine of what was once an extensive
glacier. Aurrep Exy Day


ZOPHAH, zo'fa (MDW, ¢dphah, meaning un-
certain): An Asherite (1 Ch 7 35.36).


ZOPHAI, 26’fi, 20’fa-i CDIL, cophay, meaning
uncertain): In 1 Ch 6 26 (Heb ver 11)=Zuph,
Keré of ver 35 (Heb ver 20), and 1811. See
Zupw, (1).


ZOPHAR, zo’far (IDX, ADI, cdphar, meaning
doubtful, supposed from root meaning ‘‘to leap”;
Zoddp, Sdphir): One of the three friends of Job
who, hearing of his affliction, make an appointment
together to visit and comfort him. He is from the
tribe of Naamah, a tribe and place otherwise un-
known, for as all the other friends and Job himself
are from lands outside of Pal, it is not likely that
this place was identical with Naamah in the W. of
Judah (Josh 15 41). He speaks but twice (chs 11,
20); by his silence the 3d time the writer seems to
intimate that with Bildad’s 3d speech (ch 25; see
under Bitpap) the friends’ arguments are exhausted.
He is the most impetuous and dogmatic of the three
(cf 11 2.3; 20 2.3); stung ‘to passionate response
by Job’s presumption in maintaining that he is
wronged and is seeking light from God. His words
are in a key of intensity amounting to reckless ex-
aggeration. He is the first to accuse Job directly


3157


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Zodlogy
Zoroastrianism


of wickedness; averring indeed that his punishment
is too good for him (11 6); he rebukes Job’s impious
presumption in trying to find out the unsearchable
secrets of God (11 7-12); and yet, like the rest of
the friends, promises peace and restoration on con-
dition of penitence and putting away iniquity (11
13-19). Even from this promise, however, he
reverts to the fearful peril of the wicked (ver 20);
and in his 2d speech, outdoing the others, he presses
their lurid description of the wicked man’s woes to
the extreme (20 5-29), and calls forth a straight
contradiction from Job, who, not in wrath, but
in dismay, is constrained by loyalty to truth to
acknowledge things as they are. Zophar seems
designed to represent the wrong-headedness of the
odium theologicum. JoHN FRANKLIN GENUNG


ZOPHIM, zo’fim, THE FIELD OF (O°DE OTD,
sdhéh cophim; els dypod cxomdy, eis agro sko-
pidn): The place on the top of Pisgah to which
Balak took Balaam, whence only a part of the host
of Israel could be seen (Nu 23 id). Perhaps we
should simply translate “field of watchers.’”” Conder
draws attention to the name Tal‘at es-Sufa attached
to an ascent leading up to the ridge of Neba from
the N. Here possibly is a survival of the old name.
For Ramathaim-zophim see Ramau.


ZORAH, 2d’ra (UY, gor’ah; Zepad, Sarad):
A city on the border of Dan, between Eshtaol and
Ir-shemesh (Josh 19 41); the birthplace of Samson
(Jgs 18 2.25); near here too he was buried (Jgs
16 31); from here some Danites went to spy out
the land (Jgs 18 2.11). In Josh 16 33 it is, with
Eshtaol, allotted to Judah, and after the captivity
it was reinhabited by the ‘‘children of Judah” (Neh
11 29, AV “Zareah’”). It was one of the cities forti-
fied by Rehoboam (2 Ch 11 10). It is probable
that it is mentioned under the name Tsarkha along
with Aialuna (Aijalon; 2 Ch 11 10) in the Am
Tab (No. 265, Petrie) as attacked by the Khabiri.

It is the modern Sur‘a, near the summit of a lofty
hill on the north side of the Wédy es-Surar (Vale of
Sorek). The summit itself is occupied by the
Mukém Nebi Samit, overhung by a lofty palm, and
there are many remains of ancient tombs, cisterns,
wine presses, etc, around. From here Eshi‘a
(Eshtaol), ‘Ain Shems (Beth-shemesh) and Tibnah
(Timnah) are all visible. See PEF, III, 158, Sh
XVII. E. W. G. MasterMan


ZORATHITES, 2d'rath-its CNPIW, gor‘ath7;
Lapadator, Sarathatot [1 Ch 2 53, AV _“Zareath-
ites], B, 6 Apadel, ho Arathet, A, 6 Zapadl, ho
Saratht [4 2]): The inhabitants of Zorah, who are
said to be descended from Kiriath-jearim families.


ZOREAH, 20’ré-a (IZ, cor‘ah): AV of Josh
15 33 for Zorag (q.v.).


ZORITES, z0’rits CI, cord; B, 6 “Hoapeel,
ho Hésarset, A, 6 ‘Hoapost, ho Hésaraci): In 1 Ch
2 54 for “Zorites” we should probably read Zor-
atuites (q.v.). These formed a half of the inhabit-
ants of MANAHATH (q.V.).


ZOROASTRIANISM, z6-r6-as'tri-an-iz’m:


I. History
Sources
II. Rexation to IsraeL
. Influence on Occident
. Popular Judaism
. Possible Theological Influence
. Angelology and Demonology
. Eschatology
. Messiah
Ethics


NOP WN


8. Summary
LirtERATURE


I. History.—The sacred book of the Persians, the
Avesta, is a work of which only a small part has sur-
vived. Tradition tells that the Avestan
MSS have suffered one partial and two
total destructions (at the hands of Tu-
ranians, Macedonians, and Mohammedans, respec-
tively), and what remains seems to be based on a
collection of passages derived from oral tradition
and arranged for liturgical purposes at the time of
the first Sassanians (after 226 AD). None the less,
a portion (the Gathas) of the present work certainly
contains material from Zoroaster himself and much
of the remainder of the Avesta is pre-Christian,
although some portions are later. Outside of the
Avesta there is an extensive literature written in
Pahlavi. Most of this in its final form belongs to
the 9th Christian cent., or to an even later date,
but in it there is embodied much very early matter.
Unfortunately criticism of these sources is as yet in
a very embryonic condition. The Gr historians,
esp. Plutarch and Strabo, are naturally of great
importance, but the chief Gr work (that of Theo-
pompus) is lost.

For a general account of Zoroastrianism, see
Prrstan REuIGIon.

Hf. Relation to Israel.—Zoroastrianism was an
active, missionary religion that has exerted a pro-

found influence on the world’s thought,
1. Influence all the more because in the West (at
on Occident any rate) Ahura Mazda was not at

all a jealous god, and Mazdeism was
always quite ready to enter into syncretism with
other systems. But this syncretistic tendency
makes the task of the historian very delicate. None
of the three great streams that swept from Persia
over the West—Mithraism, Gnosticism, and Mani-
cheism—contained much more than a Mazdean
nucleus, and the extrication of Mazdean from other
(esp. older Magian and Bab) elements is frequently
impossible. Yet the motive force came from Zoro-
aster, and long before the Christian era ‘“Magi” were
everywhere (as early as 139 BC they were expelled
from Rome; ef Ran-mac; Brancu). Often, doubt-
less, charlatans, they none the less brought teach-
ings that effected a far-reaching modification of
popular views and produced an influence on so basic
a writer as Plato himself.

Within the period 538-332 BC (that Cyrus was

a Zoroastrian seems now established) Israel was
under the rule of Mazdeans, and Maz-
2. Popular dean influence on at least the popular
Judaism conceptions was inevitable. It ap-
__ pears clearly in such works as Tob
(Expos T, XI, 257 ff), and Hystaspis (GJV, ed 4, III,
592-95), in many Talmudic passages (Z2DM G, XXI,
552-91), certain customs of the Essenes, various
anti-demoniac charms (see Exorcism; Sorcery),
and, perhaps, in the feast of Purim. And the stress
laid on the prophetic ability of the Magi in Mt 2
1-12 is certainly not without significance. But the
important question is the existence or extent of
Mazdean influence on the formal Jewish religion.

As a matter of fact, after Israel’s contact with

Persia the following elements, all known to Maz-

deism, appear, and apparently for the
3. Possible first time: (1) a formal angelology,
Theological with six (or seven) archangels at the
Influence head of the developed hierarchy; (2)

these angels not mere companions of
God but His intermediaries, established (often) over
special domains; (3) in the philosophical religion, a
corresponding doctrine of hypostases; (4) asa result,
aremoter conception of God; (5) adeveloped demon-
ology; (6) the conception of a supreme head (Satan)
over the powers of evil; (7) the doctrine of immor-
tality; (8) rewards or punishments for the soul im-
mediately after death; (9) a schematic eschatology,


Sources


Zoroastrianism
Zuzim


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


3158


esp. as regards chronological systems; (10) a super-
human Messiah; (11) bodily resurrection; (12) a
rationalized, legalistic conception of God’s moral

demands.
In this list Mazdean influence may be taken as
certain in points (1), (2), (5), (6). Of course belief
in angels and (still more) in demons


4. Angel- had always existed in Israel, and a
ology and tendency to classification is a natural
Demon- product of increased culture. But
ology the thoroughness and rapidity of the


process and the general acceptance of
its principles show something more than cultural
growth (cf the influence of pseudo-Dionysius on
Christianity). In particular, the doctrine of pa-
trons (angelic or demoniac) seems to find no ex-
pression in the preéxilic religion. Nor was the
incorporation into a single being, not only of phases,
but of the whole power of evil, a necessary growth
from the earlier religion; the contrast between
28 24 land1 Ch 21 1 showsasharp alteration in
viewpoint. On the other hand, the dualism that
Abriman was to explain produced no effect on Israel,
and God remained the Creator of all things, even
of Satan. See Satan; ANTIcHRIST. (8) presents
a problem that still needs proper analysis. The
Zoroastrian abstractions may well have stimulated
Jewish speculation. But the influence of Gr
thought can certainly not be ignored, and a ration-
alizing process applied to the angelology would
account for the purely Jewish growth of the con-
cepts. (4) is bound up to some degree with the
above, and presents the most unpleasant feature
of the later Judaism. Sharply counter to prophetic
and pre-prophetic teaching, it was modified by the
still later Talmudism. Its inconsistency with the
teaching of Christ needs no comment. In part,
however, it may well have been due to the general
‘4ranscendentalizing’ tendencies of the intermedi-
ate period. See Gon; SaivaTion.
It is possible, similarly, to understand the ad-
vanced Jewish eschatology as an elaboration and
refinement of the genuinely prophetic
5. Escha- Day of Jeh concepts, without postu-
tology lating foreign influence. In particular,
a doctrine of immortality was inevi-
table in Judaism, and the Jewish premises were of a
sort that made a resurrection belief necessary. The
presence of similar beliefs in Mazdeism may have
hastened the process and helped determine the
specific form, and for certain details direct borrowing
is quite likely (cf the twelve periods of world-history
in Apoc Abraham 29; Syr Bar 53 ff; 2 Esd 14).
But too much stress cannot be laid on details. The
extant Pers apocalypses are all very late, and liter-
ary (if not religious) influence on them from Chris-
tian and Jewish sources seems inevitable (for the
Bahman Yast it is certain). Nor could the effect
of the Mazdean eschatology have been very thor-
ough. Of its two most cardinal doctrines, the
Chinvat Bridge is absent from Judaism, and the
molten-metal ordeal is referred to only in the vaguest
terms, if at all. Indeed, the very fact that certain
doctrines were identified with the “heathen” may
well have deterred Jewish acceptance. See Parou-
g14; RESURRECTION.
Similarly, the Messiah, as future king, was fixed
in Jewish belief, and His elevation to celestial posi-
tion was an inevitable step in the general
6. Messiah refining process. The Pers Saoshyant
doctrine may well have helped, and
the appearance of the Messiah “from... . the
sea” in 2 Esd 18 3 certainly recalls the Maz-
dean appearance from a lake. But Saoshyant is
not a celestial figure. He has no existence before
his final appearance (or birth) and he comes from
earth, not from heaven. The Jewish Son of man—


Messiah—on the other hand, is a purely celestial
figure and (even in 2 Esd 18) existed from (or
before) creation. The birth of Saoshyant from the
seed of Zoroaster and that of the (non-celestial)
Messiah from the seed of David have no connection
whatever. See Mussrtan; Son or Man.
Not much can be made of the parallel in legalism.
Nearly every religion has gone through a similar legalistic
state. The practical eudemonistic out-
7. Ethi look of such works as Prov and Sir (see
. CS Wispom) doubtless have analogies in
Mazdeism, and the comfortable union of
religion and the good things of the present life among the
Persians may well have had an effect on certain of the
Jews, esp. as the Persians preserved a good ethical stand-
ard. But only a part of Judaism was eudemonistic, and
Mazdean and Jewish casuistry are based on entircly
distinct principles.
Summarizing, about the most that can be asserted
for Mazdean influence is that it left its mark on the
angelology and démonology and that
8. Sum- it possibly contributed certain escha-
mary tological details. Apart from this, it
may well have helped determine the
development of elements already present in Israel’s
faith. On the common people (esp. the more super-
stitious) its influence was considerably greater.
But there is nothing in the formal theology of
Judaism that can be described as “‘borrowed”’ from
Mazdean teachings.

Nots.—There is almost certainly no reference to
Mazdean dualism in Isa 45 7.

LiteRaAtuRE.—The Avesta is in SBE, IV, 23, 31, but
the Gathas are best studied in L. H. Mills, The Géthes of
Zarathushtra (1900); Pahlavi texts in SBE, V, 18, 24,
37, 47._ The best presentation of Mazdeism is in Saus-
saye’s Lehrbuch der Religionsgeschichte, II, 162—233 (by
Ed. Lehmann); cf the arts. “Zoroastrianism” in #B
(Geldner and Cheyne) and HDB (J. H. Moulton, excel-
lent); on the relation to Judaism, Stave, Uber den
Finfluss des Parsismus auf das Judenthum (1898); Séder-
blom, La vie future d'aprés le Mazdéisme (An. Mus. Gui-
met, 1901, needs checking); Béklen, Die Verwandtschaft
der jud.-chr. mit der parsischen Eschatologie (1902, good
material but very uncritical); L. H. Mills, Our Own
Religion in Ancient Persia (1912, theory se a de-
velopment; Mazdeism rather idealized); J. H. Moulton,
Early Zoroastrianism (1913) and _arts. by T. K. Cheyne,
Expos T, II, 202, 224, 248; and J. H. Moulton, Expos T,
IX, 352. For details cf Clemen, Religionsgeschichtliche
Erklarung des NT (1909, E'T, Primitive Christianity and
Its non-Jewish Sources); Bousset, Religion des Judenthums
(ed 2, 1906); Ofenbarung Johannis (1906); Hauptprobleme
der Gnosis (1907, indispensable).

: Burton Scorr Easton

,ZOROBABEL, 26-rob’a-bel, 25-r6’ba-bel (Zopo-
BaBeA, Zorobdbel): In AV; Gr form of “Zerub-
babel,” thus RV (Mt 1 12.13; Lk 3 27).

ZORZELLEUS, zér-zel’é-us (A, ZopteAdA€os, Zor-
zelléos, B [and Swete], PanfeASaios, Phaézeldatos,
Fritzsche, BepfeAAatos, Berzellaios; AV Berzelus;
RVm ‘‘Phaezeldaeus”): The father of Augia, the
wife of Jaddus, head of a family that ‘usurped
the office of the priesthood” in the return under
Zerubbabel (1 Esd 6 38); ‘‘Barzillai’”’ of Ezr 2 61;
Neh 7 63. See Baraiiat.


ZUAR, zii’ar, 260’ar (AW3X, ¢a'ar, “little one”; |
Lwydp, Sdgér): Father of Nethanel (Nu 1 8; 2 5;
7 oe ; 10 15), who was head of the tribe of Is-
sachar.


ZUPH, auf (3X, ¢aph, “honeycomb”):

(1) According to 1 § 1 1b; 1 Ch 6 35 (Heb ver
20) =‘‘Zophai” of 1 Ch 6 26 (11), an ancestor of
Elkanah and Samuel. But Budde and Wellhausen
take it to be an adj., and so read "DAZ, gaphi, in 1S
1 1b: “Tohu a Zuphite, an Ephraimite.” It should
probably be read also in ver la: “Now there was
a certain man of the Ramathites, a Zuphite of the
hill-country of Ephraim,” as the Heb construction
in the first part of the verse is otherwise unnatural.
LXX A has Zodr, Soup, Luc., Zovd, Soviph, in 18


3159


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 0roastrianism


1 1b; 1 Ch 6 26 (11), B, Zovgel, Souphet, A, Luc.,
Lougl, Souphi; 6 35 (20), BA, Bove, Sovph, Luc.,
Zovgt, Souphi, Kethibh, 1%, giph.

(2) LXX BA, Zep, Seiph, Luc., Zipd, Siphd,
“the land of Zuph,” a district in Benjamin, near its
northern border (1 S 9 5).

Davip Francis RoBerts

ZUR, zar (WZ, cdr, “rock’’):

(1) A prince or chief (Nu 25 15; 31 8) of Midian,
father of the woman slain with Zimri by Phinchas.
Josh 18 21 describes him as one of the princes of
Sihon, but the reference there is regarded asa gloss.

(2) An inhabitant of Gibeon (1 Ch 8 30; 9 36),
to be connected probably, according to Curtis, with
“Zeror” of 1 § 9 1.


ZURIEL, 2i’ri-el ON, eur?’ al, “my rock is El
[God]’’): Prince of the house of Merari (Nu 3 35).


The word gir, ‘‘rock,’’ occurs also in the compound
names Elizur (1 5), Zurishaddai (1 6, etc) and Pedahzur
(1 10). Gray, Nu, 6, says that a Sabaean name Sari-


‘addana is found in an inscription said to be of the 8th
cent. BC, or somewhat oarlier (Hommel, Ancient Heb
Tradition, 320), and at Re bargir, in a Zinjirli in-
scription of the 8th cent. BC (Panammu Inscr., |. 1),
and that possihly the OT place-name ‘‘ Beth-zur”’ should
Be ended (Josh 15 58; 1 Ch 2 45; 2 Ch 117: Neh


Davin Francis Roserts
ZURISHAD DAI, ai-ri-shad’4-i, zil-ri-shad’i
CIWAL , curishadday, “my rock is Shadday’’):
Father of Shelumiel the head of the tribe of Simeon
(Nu 1 6; 2 12; 7 36.41; 10 19). See Gop, Names
or, II, 8; Zurie..


ZUZIM, zi’zim (OT, zdzim; evn ioyupa, éthne
ischurd, “strong nations.’’ So Jerome in Quaest.
Hebr.: gentes fortes): A people conquered by Chedor-
laomer (Gen 14 5). They dwelt in Ham, a region
not otherwise known but, from the connection, in-
ferred to be E. of the Jordan. It may also be
inferred that they were a race of giants. They
were perhaps to be identified with the Zamzummim.


INDEXES


TO THE


INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


I. ConrripuTfors . . . . . . . . 2. 4 «8168
Il. Gmeweran Inpex. . .. .. . . . . . . 8171.
III. Scrrpturn Texts . .: .... . . . . . 8407
IV. Hesrew anp Aramaic Worps .. . . . . . 8448
V. Gremxk Worps ...... . . . . .  . +8502
VI. Iuuusrrations . .. .. . . . . . «8507


VII Maps... . 2. 3528


INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS


NAMES OF AUTHORS AND TITLES OF THEIR PRINCIPAL ARTICLES


ALEXANDER, Rev. ArcuiBaLp, B.D., M.A., D.D.,
Clergyman of United Free Church of Scotland;
Late Lecturer on Christian Ethies in United Free
College, Glasgow.

Creed (Creeds), Ethics, Logos.


ALLEN, Grorce H., Pa.D., Editor of the “Forum
Conche, or Fuero De Cuenca, the Mediaeval
Charter and By-laws of the City of Cuenca,
Spain’; Grand Rapids, Michigan.

Army (Roman), Italy, Procurator, Province,
Roman Law, Rome, and other articles.


AnpeErson, Rev. Frepericx Lincouy, M.A., D.D.,
Professor of New Testament Interpretation, New-
ton Theological Institution, Newton Centre,
Massachusetts.

Temptation of Christ, Washing of Feet.


Awncus, Rev. 8., M.A., Pa.D., Professor of New
Testament Theology and Church History in St.
Andrew’s College, University of Sydney, Aus-
tralia.

Nabataeans, Nanaea, Nero, Nicanor, Onias,
Ptolemy, Roman Empire and Christianity,
Tiberius, Tryphon, Vulgate, and other articles.


Armstrone, Witiiam P., M.A., Professor of New
Testament Literature and Excgesis in Princeton
Theological Seminary, Princeton, New Jersey.

Chronology of the New Testament.


Bangs, Epcar J., Pa.D., Formerly Professor of
Ancient History in Robert College, Constanti-
nople, Turkey, and Field Director of the Baby-
lonian Expedition of the University of Chicago;
Author of various publications; Greenfield,
Massachusetts.

Asia (Roman Province), Assos, Colossae, Diana
(Artemis), Halicarnassus, Hierapolis, Pam-
phylia, Perga, Phrygia, Seven Churches (sepa-
rate articles), Sherghat (Asshur), Troas, and
other articles.


Baur, Rev. WituraM, Professor of Church History,
Eden Seminary, St. Louis, Missouri.
Balaam, Ishmael, Jubilee Year, Prince, Queen
Mother, Reign, Ruler, Sabbatical Year, and
other articles.


Baustin, Rev. Davin H., D.D., Dean and Professor
of Historical and Practical Theology, Hamma
Divinity School, Wittenberg College, Springfield,
Ohi


io.
Gospel, Preacher (Preaching).


Bavincx, Herman, D.Tu., Professor of Dogmatic
Theology at the Free University in Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. :

Death, Fall (The).


Brecuzr, the late Rev. Wituis Jupson, M.A.
D.D., Formerly Professor of Hebrew Language
aud Literature in Auburn Theological Seminary;
Author and Writer for various publications;
Auburn, New York. ; *

Abaddon, Abarim, Abi, Abiathar, Abijah,
Achor, Adullam, Ahimelech, Chronicles (Books
of), Ecclesiastes, Korah, Korahites, and many
other articles.


Berry, Grorce Ricker, D.D., Pu.D., Professor of
Semitic Languages in Colgate University, Ham-
ilton, New York.

Covenant in the Old Testament, and other
articles.


Berteripce, Rev. WALTER R., M.A., D.D., Pro-
fessor of Hebrew and Old Testament Inter-
pretation in the Rochester Theological Seminary,
Rochester, New York. 4

Creditor, Glory, Gods (Strange), Preparation
(The), and other articles.


Bevan, Rev. Luzwetyn D., LL.B., D.D., Prin-
cipal of Parkin College, Adelaide, Kent Town,
Australia.

Christ (Exaltation of), Christ (Offices of),
Intercession, Intercession of Christ, Lamb of
God, Prayers of Jesus.


Bisnor, Rev. WituiaMm S8,, M.A., D.D., Formerly
Professor of Dogmatic Theology, University of
the South at Sewanee, Tennessee; East Orange,
New Jersey.

Baptismal Regeneration (Anglican Standpoint).


Boyp, Rey. James Oscar, B.D., Pa.D., Assistant
Professor of Oriental and Old Testament Liter-
ature in Princeton Theological Seminary, Prince-
ton, New Jersey.

Abraham, Arabic Language, Isaac, Jacob,
Laban, Lot, Rebekah, Sarah, and other articles.


Bresuicu, ARTHUR Louris, B.D., Pa.D., President
of Baldwin-Wallace College and Nast Theo-
logical Seminary, Berea, Ohio.

Amariah, Baasha, Bacchides, Bathsheba,
Damage, Desire, Goel, Hallelujah, Ishbosheth,
and many shorter articles.


Catprcott, Rev. W. Suaw, M.R.A.8., Member
of the Wesleyan Conferences of Great Britain
and South Africa; Bournemouth, England.

Ahaz, Altar, Amaziah, Athaliah, Jehoash,
Jeroboam JI, Tabernacle (Historical), Temple
(Historical), and other articles.


CaLpeR, WiLu1aM M., M.A., Professor of Greek
and Lecturer in Christian Epigraphy in_ the
University of Manchester, Manchester, Eng-
land.

Antioch of Pisidia, Asia Minor, Cauda, Crete,
Derbe, Iconium, Lycaonia, Lystra, Phoenix,
Pisidia.

Carver, Wituiam Owen, M.A., D.D., Tu.D.,
LL.D., Professor of Comparative Religion and
Missions, and Associate Professor of New
Testament Interpretation, in the Southern Bap-
tist Theological Seminary, Louisville, Kentucky.

Atonement, Keys (Power of), Propitiation,
Truth, and a few shorter articles.


Caverno, Rev. Cuarues, M.A., D.D., LL.D.,
Author and retired Clergyman of the Congre-
gational Church; Lombard, Hlinois.

Beauty, Divorce in NT, Family, Polygamy,
Purity.


3163


3164


INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS


Curistiz, Rev. Witusam M., Missionary to Jews,
Glasgow, and Examiner in Turkish, Glasgow
University, Glasgow, Scotland.

Hamath, Inn, Nazirite, Seleucia, Syria, Zobah,
and other articles.


Cuiay, ALBERT T., Pu.D., LL.D., Laffan Professor
of Assyriology and Babylonian Literature, Yale
University, and Curator of the Babylonian Col-
lection, New Haven, Connecticut.

Ashurbanipal, Babel (Babylon), Babylonia,
Esar-haddon, Sargon, Sennacherib, Ur of the
Chaldees.


CuipPINGcER, WaLtTeR GiILLaNn, B.A., D.D., Presi-
dent of Otterbein University, and Lecturer on
Psychology and Education, Westerville, Ohio.

Blood, Dream (Dreamer), Ecce Homo, Friend
(Friendship), Obedience, Rab-mag, Rab-saris,
Rabshakeh, and a few other short articles.


Cosprrn, Rev. Campen M., D.D., Pu.D., Professor
of English Bible and Philosophy of Religion in
Allegheny College, Meadville, Pennsylvania.

Alexandria, Calf (Golden), Ethiopia, Idolatry,
Images, Palestine (Recent Exploration),
Tahpanhes, Zerah (The Ethiopian).


Conon, Rassr Samuet §., B.A., Zion Temple,
Chicago, Illinois.
Alliance, Aner, Aran, Ashhur, Ass, Barak,
Ben-ammi.


Conner, the late Cot. Ctaunr Reienier, LL.D.,
M.R.A.S., Cheltenham, England.
Baal-zephon, Etham, Exodus (The), Goshen,
Hittites, Migdol, Palestine, Pithom, Punon,
Raamses, Shur, Sinai, Succoth, Wanderings of
Israel, Zoan.


Corron, Rev. Jesse L., D.D., Professor of Old
Testament Exegesis in the Presbyterian Theo-
logical Seminary, Louisville, Kentucky.

Hiram, Hobab, and other articles.


Cowan, Rev. Henry, D.D., Professor of Church
History in the University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen,
Scotland.

Literature (Sub-apostolic Christian).


CrRANNELL, Rev. Portier Wennett, D.D., Presi-
dent of Kansas City Baptist Theological Semi-
nary, and Professor of Homiletics and Pastoral
Theology, Kansas City, Kansas.

Clean, Cleanse, Defilement, Excommunication,
Father, Genealogy, Hallow (Hallowed), Obe-
dience of Christ, Worship, and other articles.


Cricuton, Rev. James, B.D., M.A., Minister of
the United Free Church, Chapelhall, Airdrie,
Scotland.

Gedaliah, Gehazi, Hagar, Jair, Jareb, Jethro,
Messiah, Sons of God (OT), and other articles.


Dav, W. H. T., Professor, Concordia Theological
Seminary (Dogmatics, English Bible); Editor
“The Theological Quarterly,” St. Louis, Missouri.

Baptism (Lutheran Doctrine), Baptismal Re-
generation, Lord’s Supper.


Daviss, Rev. T. Wirron, B.A., D.D., Pu.D.,,
Professor of Semitic Languages in the University
College at Bangor, North Wales.

Apocrypha and the Books of, Divination,
Magic, Poetry (Hebrew), Witchcraft, and
other articles.


Davies, Rev. Wituiam Watter, M.A., Pa.D.,
Professor of Hebrew, Ohio Wesleyan University,
Delaware, Ohio.

Absalom, Asa, Attitudes, Azariah, Divorce
in OT, Nabal, Nahash, and a number of shorter
articles.


Davis, Rev. Joun D., D.D., Px.D., LL.D., Pro-
fessor of Oriental and Old Testament Literature,
Princeton Theological Seminary, Princeton, New
Jersey.

Antediluvian Patriarchs, Names (Proper).


Day, Atrren Evy, M.A., M.Sc., Professor of
Natural Sciences in the Syrian Protestant College,
Beirut, Syria.

Geology, Natural Features, Zodlogy, and a
large number of articles on related subjects.


DzMent, Rev. Brron H., Tu.D., D.D., Professor
Sunday School Pedagogy, Southern Baptist
Theological Seminary, Louisville, Kentucky.

Repentance, Teaching, and other articles.


Dicxrz, Arcuiparn CamppeLL, M.A., FSA,
A.RIB.A., Architect and Assistant Secretary
of Palestine Exploration Fund; London, Eng-
land.

Arch, Architecture, Building, Cistern, City,
House, Ledge, Lodge, Loft.


Dickiz, Rev. Joun, M.A., Professor of Systematic
Theology and New Testament Language and
Exegesis in Knox College, Dunedin, New Zealand.

Christian, Christianity (in Principle and
Essence).


Dootan, Rev. Leonarn W., B.A., Ta.D., Pastor
of First Baptist Church, Bowling Green, Ken-
tucky.

Ornament, Superstition, and other articles.


Doser, Rev. Henry E., M.A., D.D., LLD.,
Professor of Church History in the Presbyterian
Seminary of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky.

Asmoneans, Between the Testaments, Bishop
(General), Cross, Herod, Lord’s Supper (His-
torical), Nazarene, Strange Fire, and other
articles.


Downer, Bensamin Reno, B.A., Professor of
Hebrew and Old Testament, Kansas City Theo-
logical Seminary, Kansas City, Kansas.

Cupbearer, Cushion, Dish, Door, Hangings,
Hearth, Home, and other articles.


Dunetm, Hanptey. (See Moule, H. C. G.)


Dunean, Davin Roserts, M.A., LL.D., Author;
Des Moines, Iowa.
Evil, Evil One, Evil Thing, Transgression,
Trespass, Wickedness.


Eacer, Rev. Gzorce B., M.A., D.D., LL.D., Pro-
fessor of Biblical Introduction and_ Pastoral
Theology in the Southern Baptist Theological
Seminary, Louisville, Kentucky.

Ablution, Abomination, Abstinence, Alms
and Almsgiving, Anointing, Banking, Ban-
quet, Barber, Basin, Basket, Beard, Bed,
Bread, Burial, Buying, Cremation, Dress,
Embalming, Marriage, Meals, and numerous
other articles.


Easton, Rev. Burron,Scott, D.D., Pa.D., Pro-
fessor of New Testament Exegesis, Western
Theological Seminary, Chicago, Ilinois. Assist-
ant to the Managing Editor in the preparation of
this Encyclopacdia.

American Revised Version, Apostolic Age,
Criticism (Graf-Wellhausen Hy pothesis), Grace,
Hope, Hospitality, Kenosis, Judgment (Last),
Parousia, Pauline Theology, Resurrection,
Salvation, Saviour, Tongues (Gift of), Tongues
(Confusion of), Tools, Trade, Versions (Georg-
jan, Gothic, Slavonic), Wine, Wisdom, Zoroas-
trianism; numerous briefer articles.


INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS


3165


Epwarps, Rev. Davin Miatt, M.A., Professor of
Doctrinal Theology and Philosophy of Religion
at the Memorial College (Congregational),
Brecon, South Wales.

Adoration, Affection, Affliction, Ananias,
Annas, Drink (Strong), Image, Iniquity, Joy,
Mediation (Mediator), Mystery, Ordination,
Raea, Savor, Seal, and other articles.


Eisecen, Rev. Frepmerick C., D.D., Pu.D., Pro-
fessor of Semitic Languages and Old Testament
Exegesis, Garrett Biblical Institute, Evanston,
Illinois.

Habakkuk, Nahum (Book of),
(Book of), and other articles.


Estas, Rev. Daviw Foster, M.A., D.D., Pro-
fessor of New Testament Interpretation, Colgate
University, Hamilton, New York.

Covenant (in NT), Priesthood (in NT), and
other articles.


Evans, Rev. Arraur Watwyn, Lately Pastor of
First Congregational Church, Springfield, Ohio.
Daysman, Immanuel, Triumph, and other
articles.


Evans, Morris O., D.D., Px.D., Minister of
Lawrence Street Congregational Church, Cin-
cinnati, Ohio; Formerly Lecturer on English
Bible and Literature at the Independent College,
Bangor, North Wales. Managing Editor of this
Encyclopaedia.

Abel, Abolish, Accord, Adam (Books of), All,
Anem, Aristobulus, Asiarch, Bank, Beholding,
Bloody, Doxology, Gulf, Totemism, and
numerous other signed and unsigned articles.


Evans, Rev. Witsaiam, D.D., Lecturer and Asso-
ciate Dean of the Bible Institute of Los Angeles,
California.

Covetousness, Debt, Extortion, Forerunner,
Lying, Poverty, Sons of God (in NT), Wealth,
and other articles.


Ewine, Rev. WituiaM, M.A., D.D., Minister of
Grange United Free Church, Edinburgh, Scotland.
Bashan, Bethsaida, Capernaum, Decapolis,
Edom, Galilee, Gennesaret (Land of), Gilead,
Hermon, Judah, Kenites, Midian, Peraea,
Pisgah, Samaria, Shephelah, Tiberias, Trachoni-
tis, and a large number of other articles (mainly
topographical).

Farrsangs, Artuur, Ps.D., Lirt.D., Director
of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massa-
chusetts.

Greece (Religion in Ancient).

Farmer, Jonzs Hucuus, B.A., LL.D., Dean in
Theology and Professor of New Testament and
Patristic Greek, McMaster University, Toronto,
Canada.

Mark (John), Mark (Gospel of).


Farr, F. K., D.D., Professor of New Testament
Exegesis and Introduction, Lane Seminary,
Cincinnati, Ohio.

Adam in OT and Apocrypha, Cain, Elijah, and
other articles.

Fautxwer, Rev. Joun Aurrev, M.A., D.D., Pro-
fessor of Historical Theology, Drew Theological
Seminary, Madison, New Jersey.

Justification.

Finpiay, Rev. Apam Fyre, M.A., Minister of

Bristo United Free Church, Edinburgh, Scotland.
Apocryphal Acts.

Finpuay, Rev. Gzorcs Gitnanpvers, M.A., D.D.,
Professor of New Testament Exegesis and
Classics at Headingley College, Leeds, England.

Galatians (Epistle to).


Zephaniah


Fiztcusr, Lazarus, M.A., Pu.D., LL.D., F.RS.,
Director Natural History Departments of the
British Museum, London, 8.W., England.

Stones (Precious).


Forrester, Rev. Evprep Joun, B.A., D.D., Head
of the Department of the Bible and Lecturer in
American History, Mercer University, Macon,
Georgia.

Church Government, Esau, Innocence, Jeal-
ousy, Reverence, and other articles.


Fortuns, Pror. A.W., B.D., M.A., Department of
New Testament in the College of the Bible,
Lexington, Kentucky.

Alphaeus, Babylon in NT, Children of Israel,
Deutero-canonical Books, Eve in NT, and
other articles.


Fuuton, A. S., M.A., Assistant in the Department
of Oriental Printed Books and MSS, British
Museum, London.

Havilah, Kedar, Nebaioth, Ophir, and other
articles.


Geven, Rev. Aurrep 8., M.A., D.D., Professor
of Old Testament Languages and Literature and
of Comparative Religion at the Wesleyan College,
Richmond, Surrey, England.

Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, and the Books
corresponding to those names.


Grenune, Rev. Joun Franxun, D.D., L.H.D.,
Pu.D., Professor of Literary and Biblical Inter-
pretation, Amherst College, Amherst, Massa-
chusetts.

Adam in OT, Hezekiah and all succeeding
kings of Judah, Job, Job (Book of), Proverb,
Proverbs (Book of), and other articles.


GERBERDING, Rev. G. H., M.A., D.D., Professor
of Practical Theology in the Theological Seminary
of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, Maywood,
Illinois.

Catechist (Catechumen), Rehearse,
Train, and several brief articles.


Search,


Goopsrrep, Epcar J., Pu.D., Associate Professor
of Biblical and Patristic Greek, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Ostraca, Papyrus.


Grant, Rev. ALExanper C., M.A., Missionary of
the United Free Church of Scotland, Rajputana,
India.

Eber, Elder (in NT), Eli, and a few brief
articles.


Gray, Rev. James M., D.D., Minister in the
Reformed Episcopal Church, Dean of Moody
Bible Institute, Chicago, Illinois.

Bless, Desired of All Nations, Evangelist,
Experience, Peter (Simon), and other articles.


Gumuey, Rev. Henry Ritzer, Jr.. M.A., D.D.,
Rector of St. James’ Church, Chaplain to the
Bishop of Pennsylvania, Downington, Penn-
sylvania. 3

Lord’s Supper (Eucharist).


Harry, JosepH Epwarp, Pu.D., Professor of
Greek, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati,
Ohio. 2

Achaia, Almost, Antiochus I-VII, Areopagus,
Athens, Corinth, Dionysus (Bacchus), Patmos,
Searching the Scriptures, and other articles.


Haves, Doremus Atmy, Pu.D., 8.T.D., LL.D.,
Professor of New Testament Interpretation,
The Graduate School of Theology, Garrett Bibli-
cal Institute, Evanston, Illinois.

James (Epistle of), Philippians (Epistle to).


3166


INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS


Herme.r, Wituiam Arruur, M.A., Pxs.D., Pro- |


fessor of Greek Language and Literature, Wes-

leyan University, Middletown, Connecticut.
Colony, Government, Greece (Graecia), Hel-
lenism (Hellenist), Mediterranean Sea, Senate
(Senator), and other articles.


Hirscu, Rev. Frank E., M.A., D.D., LL.D.,
Formerly President Charles City College, Charles
City, Iowa; Pastor of Dayton’s Bluff (Ger.)
Methodist Episcopal Church, St. Paul, Minne-
sota.

Courts (Judicial), Crimes, Inheritance, Law
(Judicial), Lawyer, Punishments, Scribes,
Tribute, and numerous other articles.


Hopes, Rev. Caspar Wistar, Px.D., Assistant
Professor of Systematic Theology, Princeton
Theological Seminary, Princeton, New Jersey.

Faithfulness, Foreknowledge, Imputation,
Unchangeableness.


Houcu, Rev. Lynn Harortp, B.A., D.D., Pro-
fessor of Historical Theology, Garrett Biblical
Institute, Evanston, Illinois.

Servant of Jehovah (the Lord).


Hovey, Rev. Grorcs Rics, M.A., D.D., Presi-
dent of Virginia Union University, and Professor
of Theology, Richmond, Virginia.

Doorkeeper, Firepan, Flagon, Hadad, and
other articles.


Hunter, Rev. 8S. F., M.A., B.D., Minister of St.
Stephen’s Presbyterian Church, Ipswich, Queens-
land, and Lecturer in Old Testament Language
and Exegesis in Emmanuel College, Brisbane,
within the University of Queensland, Queens-
land, Australia.

Ahava, Array, Asunder, Bar-Jesus, Bethabara,
Eleazar, Epaphras, Lydia, Philip (Evangelist),
and a large number of the shorter articles.


Hourcutson, Joun, M.A., LL.D., Rector Emeritus
of the High School of Glasgow, Scotland.
English Versions of the Bible, Apocryphal
and Other Early Gospels, and numerous other
articles.


Isaacs, Mrs. Evia Davis, M.A., Cincinnati, Ohio.
Family Relationships (part), Feasts and Fasts,
Fringes, Gershon (Gershonites), Linen, Sham-
gar, and other articles. a


Isaacs, Naraan, LL.B., M.A., Px.D., Professor of
Law, University of Cincinnati and Cincinnati
Law School, Cincinnati, Ohio. Assistant Editor
of this Encyclopaedia in the Hebrew Language.

Family Relationships (part), Gallery, Order,
Passover, Primogeniture, Rahab, Sceptre, Urim
and Thummim, and other articles.


Iveracu, Rev. James, M.A., D.D., Principal and
Professor of New Testament Language and Liter-
ature in the United Free Church College, Aberdeen,
Scotland.

Gospels (The Synoptic), John (The Apostle),
John (Gospel of).


Jacoss, Rev. Henry E., D.D., LL.D., Author and


Editor of Commentaries, etc; Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
Absolution, Andronicus, Appeal, Barnabas,


Brethren of the Lord, Chastening (Chastise-


ment), Community of Goods, Confession,
Heresy, Temperance, and numerous other
articles.


Joy, Aurrep H., Pu.B., M.A., F.R.A.S., Professor
of Astronomy and Director of the Observatory,
Syrian Protestant College, Beirut, Syria.

Cloud, Dew, Earthquake, Heat, Mirage, Rain,
Snow, Weather, and similar articles.


Kaiser, Lewis, Professor of Old Testament and Life
of Christ in the German Department of Rochester
Theological Seminary, Rochester, New York.

Book of Life, Cruelty, and other articles.


Karp, Rev. Jacos W., M.A., D.D., Pastor of First
English Lutheran Church, Cincinnati, Ohio.
Aeon, Atheism, Benediction, Boy, and other
articles.


Kerr, Rey. Coun M., B.Sc., B.D., M.A., Pa.D.,
Minister of Church of Scotland at Kettins,
Coupar Angus, Scotland; Formerly Professor
of Political Philosophy in Scottish Churches
College, Calcutta.

Biographical articles on Andrew, Bartholomew,
Caiaphas, Gamaliel, Judas Iscariot, Nicodemus,
Thomas, and others.


Kinsexia, Arruur James, M.A., Instructor in
Greek, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
Assistant Editor of this Encyclopaedia in the
Greek Language.

Demetrius, Samos,
articles.


Kwupson, Rev. Atpert C., D.D., Pa.D., Professor
of Hebrew and Old Testament Exegesis in Boston
University School of Theology, Boston, Massa-
chusetts.

Judges (Period of).


Kurtz, Rev. Dante. Wesster, M.A., D.D.,
President of McPherson College, McPherson,
Kansas.

Lord’s Supper (according to the Church of
the Brethren, otherwise called Dunkers),
Trine (Triune) Immersion, Washing of Feet.


Kyte, Rev. Pror. Metvin Grove, D.D., LL.D.,
Permanent Lecturer ou Biblical Archaeology
in Xenia Theological Seminary; Archaeological
Editor of the Sunday School Times, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.

Archaeology and Criticism, Ir-ha-heres, Joseph,
Moses, Nile, On (Heliopolis), Pharaoh, Plagues
of Egypt, Tell el-Amarna Tablets, and other
articles.


Lamaert, Rev. J. C., M.A., D.D., Minister of the
United Free Church of Scotland, Braeheads,
Fenwick, Scotland.

Agape, Apostle, Beatitudes, Church, Healing
(Gifts of), Holiness, Praise, Prayer, Sacra-
ments, Spiritual Gifts.


Law, Rev. Rosert, M.A., D.D., Professor of New
Testament Literature, Knox College, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Elect Lady, Johannine Theology, John (Epis-
tles of).


Lxss, Rev. Joun A., Pastor of St. James’ Congre-
gational Church, Hamilton, Scotland.
Magog, Michael, Michal, Miriam, Naaman,
Nadab, Nethinim, and many other articles.


Lrevertorr, Pau, B.D., Professor of Old Testa-
ment and Talmudic Literature at Institutum
Delitzschianum at Leipzig, Germany.

First-fruits, Judge, Oath, Proselyte, Sanhedrin,
Synagogue, Tithe, Vow, Witness.


Lewis, Cuaries Sirs, B.A., B.D., Professor of
New Testament in the Western Theological
Seminary, Chicago, Illinois.

Colossians (Epistle to), Ephesians (Epistle to),
Philemon (Epistle to).


Lewis, Rev. Tuomas, B.D., M.A., Principal of
Memorial College (Congregational), Brecon,
South Wales.

Blindness (Judicial), Curse, Fasting, Nursing,
Ordinance, Prison, and other articles.


Samothrace, and other


INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS


3167


Linnsay, Rev. James, B.Sc., M.A., D.D., F.R.S.L.,
F.R.S.E., F.G.8., M.R.A.8., Theological and
Philosophic Author; Irvine, Scotland.

Anthropomorphism, Biblical Theology, Crea-
tion, Creature, Eternal, Eternity, Predesti-
nation.


Linpsay, the late Rev. Toomas M., M.A., D.D.,
LL.D., Principal and Professor of Church His-
tory in United Free Church College, Glasgow,
Scotland.

Baptism (Non-Immersionist View), Ministry.


Lrrrman, Enno, Px.D., Professor of Semitic Phi-
lology in the University of Géttingen, Germany.
Ethiopic Language.


Loneacre, Linpsay B., B.D., Pa.D., Professor,
Department of Old Testament, Iliff School of
Theology, University Park, Colorado.

Nehushtan.


Lotz, Wituzetm, D.Tu., Pa.D., Professor of The-
ology in the University of Erlangen, Erlangen,
Germany.

Ark of the Covenant, and other articles.


Lownpses, Rev. Artaur, D.D., 8.T.D., LL.D.,
Secretary of Christian Unity Foundation, New
York City, New York.

Bishop (Anglican View).


Luzrine, Heinrich Lupwie Emit, Px.D., Pro-
fessor of Dogmatic Theology and New Testament
Greek in the Martin Theological Seminary of the
Methodist Episcopal Church, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany.

Contributor of articles on the various parts of
the body, and other subjects.


Macauister, ALexanpur, M.D., M.A., D.Sc.,
LL.D., F.R.S., F.S.A., Professor of Anatomy
in Cambridge University, ‘Cambridge, England.

Balm, Blindness, Diseases, Healing, Leprosy,
Longevity, Medicine, and other articles of a
similar character.


Mack, Rev. Epwarp, M.A., D.D., McCormick Pro-
fessor of Old Testament Interpretation, Union
Theological Seminary, Richmond, Virginia. As-
sistant to the Managing Editor in the preparation
of this Encyclopaedia.

Aaron, Chronology of OT, Covenant (Book of),
God (Names of), Presbyter, Semites (Semitic
Religion), and other articles.


MactiarEen, Joun J., D.C.L., LL.D., Justice of
Court of Appeal, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Jesus Christ (Arrest and Trial of).


Marais, Joaannes J., B.A., D.D., Senior_Pro-
fessor of Theological Seminary of the Dutch
Reformed Church at Stellenbosch, Capetown,
South Africa.

Anthropology, Heart, Mind, Psychology, Soul,
Spirit.

Marcous, Max L., Pa.D., Professor of Biblical
Philology, Dropsie College, Philadelphia, Penn-
sylvania.

Abner, Caleb, Cherubim, College, Dagon,
Dark Sayings, Deborah, and other articles.


Masterman, Ernest W. G., M.D., F.RCS.,
F.R.G.S., Medical Superintendent of the English
Mission Hospital, Jerusalem, and Honorable
Secretary for Jerusalem and Palestine, for the
Palestine Exploration Fund; Jerusalem, Syria.

Botany, Jerusalem, and a large number of
articles on botanical, topographical, and other
subjects.


Maunopsr, E. Warrsr, F.R.AS., for forty years
Superintendent of the Solar Department of the
Royal Observatory, Greenwich, London, England.

Astrology, Astronomy, and other articles.


McA.uster, Rev. J. Gray, B.A., D.D., Professor
of Biblical Introduction, English Bible and
Biblical Theology, Presbyterian Theological
Seminary of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky.

Hodesh, Hodevah, Hodiah, and other articles.


M’Cata, Rev. Arcurpayp, B.A., LL.D., Principal
and Theological Tutor, Pastors’ College, London,
S.E., England.

Covenant (The New), King (Christ as), Law
in the New Testament, and other articles.


McConnett, Francis J.. D.D., Pa.D., LL.D.,
Bishop of the Methodist Episcopal Church,
Denver, Colorado.

Redeemer (Redemption), Righteousness, Sin.


McGtorauin, Rev. Wituiam Josnpu, M.A., D.D.,
Pu.D., LL.D., Professor of Church History in
Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, Louis-
ville, Kentucky.

Bondage, Sacrifice (Human), Servant.


McPresters, Rev. Wittiam Marce.ivs, D.D.,
LL.D., Professor of Old Testament Literature
and Exegesis, Columbia Theological Seminary
(Presbyterian), Columbia, South Carolina.

Pere Simple, Sluggard, Theocracy, Trans-
ation.


Mryrr, Rev. Henry H., M.A. D.D., Editor
Sunday School Publications for the Methodist
Episcopal Church; Secretary Commission on
Christian Education of the Federal Council of
Churches of Christ in America; Member Gesell-
schaft fiir wissenschaftliche Paedagogik (Ger-
many); Cincinnati, Ohio, and New York City,
New York.

Education.


Miuiar, Rev. James, B.D., Minister of Church

of Scotland, at New Cumnock, Ayrshire, Scotland.

Amen, Asaph, Hymn, Instruments of Music,
Musie, Song, and related articles.


Miuuer, Rev. Russert Bensamin, M.A., B.D.,
Pu.D., Professor of Biblical Literature, Ohio
Wesleyan University, Delaware, Ohio.

Communion, John the Baptist, Lord’s Prayer,
Sermon on the Mount, and other articles.


Mo.ier, Pastor WILHELM, Pastor Licentiat der
Theologie, Wittenberg, Bz. Halle, Germany.
Atonement (Day of), Azazel, Exodus (Book of),
Ezekiel, Genesis, Leviticus.


MoorrHeap, the late Rev. Wituam G., D.D.,
LL.D., Professor in the Xenia Theological Sem-
inary, President of the Faculty, Chair of Biblical
Theology, Xenia, Ohio.

Jude, Millennium (Premillennial View), 1 Peter,
2 Peter, Priest, Priesthood, Tongues of Fire,
Type.

Morro, Wiuuiam Cuaries, B.D., M.A., Px.D.,
Head of Ministerial Department and Reeves
Memorial Chair of Biblical Literature, Butler
College, Indianapolis, Indiana.

Body (Spiritual), Forgiveness, Lawgiver, Way.


Mosman, Samvgt K., M.A., B.D., Pu.D., Presi-
dent Bluffton College, Instructor m Old Testa-
ment Languages and Interpretation, Blnffton,
Ohio.

Ahab, Ahaziah, Elah, Jehoram (Joram), Je-
hoshaphat, Jeroboam I, Omri, Rehoboam,
Zimri.


3168


Mocts, Rr. Rev. Hanpitry Carr Gtyn, D.D.,
Bishop of Durham, England.
Elect, Election, Faith, Perseverance, Romans
(Epistle to), Sinlessness, Unbelief, Unbeliever,
Witness of the Spirit, World (General).


Motuins, E. Y., D.D., LL.D., President Southern
Baptist Theological Seminary, Louisville, Ken-
tucky. Assistant Editor of this Encyclopaedia.

Advocate, Baptism of the Holy Spirit, Com-
forter, Holy Spirit, Paraclete.


Nicot, Rr. Rev. Toomas, D.D., Professor of Di-
vinity and Biblical Criticism in the University of
Aberdeen; Moderator of the Grand Assembly
of the Church of Scotland; Aberdeen, Scotland.

Armor (Arms), Army, Ben-hadad, Captivity,
Chemosh, Dispersion (The), Latin Version
(The Old), Ships and Boats, Syriac Versions,
War (Warfare), and other articles.


Noetsen, Joan L., D.D., LL.D., Bishop of Metho-
dist Episcopal Church, Kilchberg bei Ziirich,
Switzerland. Assistant Editor of this Encyclo-
paedia.

Conversion, Regeneration.


Oxo, Apotrs &., Librarian, Hebrew Union College,

Cincinnati, Ohio.
Commentaries (Hebrew).

OrExLu, the late Conrap von, PH.D., Doctor of
Theology, Professor in Ordinary of Old Testament
and History of Religion at the University of
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Israel (History of the People), Israel (Religion
of), Jeremiah, Lamentations (Book of), Micah,
Prophecy (Prophets).


Orr, the late Rev. James, M.A., D.D., Professor of
Apologetics and Theology at Theological College
of United Free Church, Glasgow, Scotland.
Editor-in-Chief of this Encyclopaedia.

Apostles’ Creed, Apostolic Fathers, Baptismal
Regeneration, Bible (The), Caesar, Candle-
stick (Golden), Christianity (Historical and
Doetrmal), Christa (False), Commentaries,
Concordance, Criticism of the Bible, Endor
(Witch of), Eschatology of the OT, Father
(God The), God (Image of), Hands (Impo-
sition of), Hell, Immortality, Infinite (Infini-
tude), Jesus Christ, Knowledge, Man of Sin,
Moses (Song of), Prison (Spirits in), Punish-
ment (Everlasting), Revelation of John, Ser-
pent Worship, Seventy Weeks, Synagogue
(The Great), Tabernacle (A. Structure and
History), Temple (A. Structure and History),
Unquenchable Fire, World (Cosmological),
and hundreds of short articles.


Patcn, James A., B.S., Professor of Chemistry in
the Syrian Protestant College, Beirut, Syria.
Agriculture, Brick, Brimstone, Colors, Crafts,
Dyeing, Embroidery, Fishing, Fuller, Gardener,
Metallurgy, Oil, Pottery, Shepherd, Weaving,
and other articles.


Paetrig, Wittiam Matrusew Furnpers, D.C.L.,
Pa.D., Lirt.D., LL.D., F.R.S., F.B.A., Hon.
(Scot.), Hon. A.RIBA. M.R.LA,,
M. Amer. Phil. Soc., Edwards Professor of
Egyptology, University College, London, England.
Egypt, Memphis.

PincHes, THEOPHILUS GoLprings, LL.D., M.R.AS.,
Lecturer in Assyrian at University College, Lon-
don, and Liverpool Institute of Archaeology;
late of the Department of Egyptian and Assyrian
Antiquities, British Museum, London, England.

Africa, Amraphel, Arioch, Babel (Babylon),
Cyrus, Elam (Elamites), Hammurabi, Nineveh,
Table of Nations, and several other articles.


INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS


Pouiarp, Rev. Epwarp Bacsy, M.A., D.D., Pa.D.,
Professor of Homiletics, Crozer Theological
Seminary, Chester, Pennsylvania. f

Familiar, Maid, Rabbi, Self-surrender, Tribu-
lation, Usury, and other articles.


Porter, H., Pu.D., Professor Emeritus of History
and Psychology in the Syrian Protestant College,
Beirut, Syria. ne :

Easter, Money, Parthians, Phoenicia, Scythians,
Sidon, Syrians, Tammuz, Time, Tyre, Weights
and Measures, and other articles.


Pratt, Rev. Dwicut Mauiory, M.A., D.D., Min-
ister of the Walnut Hills Congregational Church,
Cincinnati, Ohio. ¥

Agony, Apostasy, Beloved, Bishop (Congre-
gational View), Catholic Epistles, Enchant-
ment, Epistle, Spiritual, Spirituality, Woman,
and other articles.


Prescott, W. W., M.A., Editor of the Protestant
Magazine, Washington, District of Columbia.
Sabbath (from the Standpoint of Seventh-day
Adventists).


Press, 8. D., Professor of Practical Theology and
Systematic Theology, Eden Theological Seminary,
St. Louis, Missouri.

King (Kingdom), Rachel, Stephanas, Stephen.


Rarrery, Wittiam Epwarp, B.D., M.A., Px.D.,
Professor of Religious Pedagogy and Sociology,
Kansas City Baptist Theological Seminary,
Kansas City, Kansas. ;

Crown, Ish-sechel, Lust, Market, Merchandise,
Service, Slavery, Traffic, Treasure (Treasury),
Wages, Wares, and other articles.


Rat, Rev. Harris Franxuin, D.D., Pu.D., Pro-
fessor of Systematic Theology, Garrett Biblical
Institute, Evanston, Illinois.

Guilt, Guiltless, Guilty, Justice, Sanctification.


Ramsay, Sir Wituiam M., D.D., D.C.L., LL.D.,
Lirt.D., Formerly Professor of Humanity, Uni-
versity of Aberdeen; Edinburgh, Scotland.

Galatia.


Rees, Rev. THomas, M.A., Principal and Professor
of Theology, Independent College (Congrega-
tional), Bangor, North Wales.

Adoption, Authority (in Religion), Beelzebub,
Blasphemy, Commandment (New), Doctrine,
Dogma, Epicureans, God, Hebrews (Epistle to),
Philosophy, Stoics, and other articles.


Reeve, Rev. James Jostag, B.A., B.D., Tu.D.,
Formerly Professor of Hebrew and Cognate Lan-
guages and Old Testament Theology in the
Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary at
Fort Worth, Texas; Chicago, Illinois.

Elisha, Gods, Gog, Goliath, Life, Priest (High),
Sacrifice in OT, Tree of Life, and other articles.


RicHarpson, Ernest Cusuine, Px.D., Librarian
of Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.
Alphabet, Book, Dictionaries, Ink, Ink-horn,
Libraries, Manuscripts, Print (Printing), Roll
(Scroll), Tablet, Writing, and other articles.


Riaes, Rev. James &., D.D., Professor of New
Testament Theology and Literature, Auburn
Theological Seminary, Auburn, New York.

Canon of the New Testament.


Rosserts, Rev. Davip Francis, B.A., B.D., Min-
ister of Maenofferen Calvinistic Methodist
Church, Blaenau Ffestiniog, North Wales.

Boaz, Javan, Jerahmeecl, Jeshurun, Jesse,
Jezebel, Joab, Joash, Melehizedek, Nathan,
Old Prophet, Qucen of Sheba, Zimri, and
numerous short articles.


INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS


Roserrson, Rev. A. T., M.A., D.D., LL.D., Pro-
fessor of New Testament Interpretation, Southern
Pay Theological Seminary, Louisville, Ken-
tucky.

Acts of the Apostles, Baptism (The Baptist
Interpretation), Language of the New Testa-
ment (Greek), Latin, Luke (The Evangelist),
Luke (Gospel of), Paul.


Rosertson, Rey. James, M.A., D.D., LL.D.,
Emeritus Professor of Hebrew and Semitic Lan-
guages at the University of Glasgow, Scotland.

Amos, Hosea, Joel.


Rosinson, Rev. Georce L., M.A., D.D., Ps.D.,
LL.D., Professor of Biblical Literature and
English Bible in the McCormick Theological
Seminary, Chicago, Illinois.

Canon of Old Testament, Deuteronomy,
Haggai, Isaiah, Malachi, Samson.


Rocers, RopertT Wituam, Pa.D., Lirr.D., LL.D.,
Professor of Hebrew and Old Testament Exegesis,
Drew Theological Seminary, Madison, New
Jersey.

Babylonia and Assyria (Religion of).


Rutz, Rev. U. Z., now retired from benefice in
diocese of Winchester; ordained in 1864 in
diocese of Newfoundland; Forest Road, Worth-
ing, England.

Law in the Old Testament.


RuTeERFURD, Joun, B.D., M.A., Minister of Moor-
park United Free Church, Renfrew, Scotland.
Caesar’s Household, Faithful Sayings, Gnosti-
cism, Laocdiceans (Epistle to), Onesiphorus,
Pastoral Epistles, Persecution, Praetorian
Guard, Rudiments, Timothy, Titus, Tychicus,
and other articles.


Samper, Rev. Joun Ricwarp, B.A., D.D., LL.D.,
Professor of Old Testament Interpretation in the
Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, Louis-
ville, Kentucky.

Ephod, Jonah, Jonah (Book of), Obadiah,
Obadiah (Book of), Psalms (Book of), Sabbath,
Song of Songs, Ten Commandments, and
other articles.


Saycs, Rev. Arcaipacp Henry, D.D., Lrrr.D.,
LL.D., Professor of Assyriology in University of
Oxford, Oxford, England.

Amorites, Anakim, Asherah, Ashtoreth, Assyria,
Atargatis, Baal, Canaan (Canaanites), Gir-
gashite, Hivite, Moahite Stone, Nmeveh
(Library of), Perizzite, and other articles.


Scnenx, Rev. Caanizs E., D.D., Superintendent,
Cincinnati District, Methodist Episcopal Church,
Cincinnati, Ohio.

Earnest, Gideon, Jael, Moon, Poetry (New
Testament), Prophesyings (False), Sisera, and
other articles.


Scuopvr, Rev. Gzorce Henry, D.D., Ps.D.,
Professor in College and Theological Depart-
ments of Capital University, Columbus, Ohio.

Allegory, Interpretation, Matthew, Matthew
(Gospel of), Parable.


Saaw, Rev. R. Dyxes, M.A, D.D., Formerly
Minister of Hope Park United Free Church,
Edinburgh; General Secrctary to the Presby-
terian Alliance; Edinburgh, Scotland.

1 and 2 Corinthians.


Srrrerty, CHaries Fremont, 8.T.D., Pa.D.,
Professor of Biblical Literature in Drew The-
ological Seminary, Madison, New Jersey. j

Text and Manuscripts of the New Testament.


3169


Suita, W. Taytor, B.A., Private Student and
Graduate of University of Manchester; Seven-
oaks, England.

Acrostic, Agrapha, Games, Logia, Number.


StaLxer, Rev. James, M.A., D.D., Professor of
Church History, United Free Church College,
Aberdeen, Scotland.

Accountahility, Conscience, Ethics of Jesus,
Kingdom of God (of Heaven), Son of God,
Son of Man. ‘


.Stearns, Wauiace Nexrson, B.D., Pu.D., Pro-


fessor of Biblical History and Literature, Fargo
College, Fargo, North Dakota.
Child (Children), Elder (in the OT), Gad
(“Fortune’’), Kings (Books of), and other
articles.


Srrexe, the late Rev. Danret, D.D., Author and
Educator; First President of Syracuse Univer-
sity; Milton, Massachusetts.

Sanctification (Wesleyan Doctrine).


Srrack, Hermann L., D.D., Pa.D., Professor of
Old Testament Exegesis and Semitic Languages,
Berlin University, Berlin, Germany.

Talmud.


SrraTTon-PorTEeR, GENE, Author and Illustrator;
Special Writer on Birds and Nature; Rome City,
Indiana.

The Birds of the Bible (under the various titles),
Cage, Feathers, Fowler, Gin, Nest, Snare, Trap,
Wings.


Sruart, Rev. Caartzes M., M.A., D.D., Lrrt.D.,
LL.D., President, Garrett Biblical Institute,
Evanston, Illinois.

Shame, Sign, Tempt, Temptation, Trans-
figuration, Vision.


Sweet, Louis Marruews, M.A., §:T.D., Pro-_
fessor of Christian Theology and Apologetics,
Bible Teachers’ Training School, New York City,
New York.

Accommodation, Demon (Demoniac), Gene-
alogy of Jesus Christ, Mary, Quotations (New
Testament), Satan, Tax (Taxing), Virgin-
birth (of Jesus Christ), and other articles.


Taacxrray, Henry St. Joun, M.A., Civil Servant,
and Author of various works; Bucks, England.


Septuagint.


Tuomas, Rev. WituiamM Henry GRIFFITH, D.D.,
Professor of Old Testament Literature and
Exegesis, Wycliffe College, Toronto, Canada.

Adam in the New Testament, Ascension,
Resurrection of Jesus Christ.


Tomson, the late Rev. Cuanzes H., M.A., United
Free Church of Scotland Missionary to the Jews
at Constantinople; Glasgow, Scotland.

Antioch in Syria, Berothah, Damascus, and
other articles.


Tromson, Rev. J. E. H., M.A. D.D., Retired
Missionary; Edinburgh, Scotland.
Alexander the Great, Antichrist, Apocalyptic
Literature, Aramaic Language, Ehionism,
Essenes, Pentateuch (Samaritan), Pharisees,
Raphael, Sadducees, Targum.


Trrrert, Rev. Witeur F., M.A., D.D., §.T.D..
LL.D., Dean of the Theological Faculty and Pro-
fessor of Systematic Theology in Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee.


Providence,


3170


INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS


TispaLL, Rev. W. St. Crarr, D.D., Formerly
C.M.S. Missionary in India and Persia; Vicar
of St. George the Martyr’s, Deal, Kent, England.

Armenia, Armenian (Aryan) Religion, Com-
parative Religion, Coptic Versions, Medes,
Persia, Persian Religion (Ancient), and other
articles.


Top, Marcus Niesuur, M.A., Fellow and Assistant
Tutor of Oriel College, Oxford, and University
Lecturer in Greek Epigraphy, Oxford, England.

Cyprus, Macedonia, Philippi, Tarsus, Thessa-
lonica, and other articles.


TREVER, Rev. Grorcre Henry, M.A., D.D., Pu.D.,
Professor of New Testament Exegesis and Chris-
tian Doctrine, Gammon Theological Seminary,
Atlanta, Georgia.

Burden, Care, Citizenship, Cornelius, Day-
spring, Lazarus, and other articles.


Umspacu, the late Rev. 8. L., D.D., noted for his
extensive travels in Europe, Asia and Africa;
Naperville, Illinois.

Shallum (1st article), and several short articles.


Unenap, Arruur, Pu.D., Professor of Oriental
Philology at the University of Jena, Jena,
Germany.

Hammurabi (Code of).


Urnqunart, Rev. Joun, Author; Editor of the
“Bible Investigator and Inquirer”; Member of
the Victoria Institute; Melbourne, Australia.

Esther, Esther (Book of), Hadassah, Haman,
Mordecai, Vashti, Zeresh.


Van Petr, Rev. J. R., B.A., 8.T.B., Pa.D., Pro-
fessor of Philosophy and Biblical Literature,
Cornell College, Mt. Vernon, Iowa.

Bath Kol, Chemarim, Discrepancies (Biblical),
Doom, Duke, and other articles.


Vos, Rev. Grernarpus, D.D., Pu.D., Charles T.
Haley Professor of Biblical Theology, Princeton
Theological Seminary, Princeton, New Jersey.

Eschatology of New Testament, Hades,
Heavens (New) and Earth (New), Lake of Fire,
Ommnipotence, Omnipresence, Omniscience, and
other articles.


Wace, Very Rev. Henry, D.D., Dean of Canter-
bury, Canterbury, England.
Miracle.


Waker, Rev. Roxrun Hoven, Pu.D., Jeffers
Professor of the English Bible, Ohio Wesleyan
University, Delaware, Ohio.

1 and 2 Thessalonians.


Waker, Rev. W. L., D.D., Congregational Min-
ister (Retired); Glasgow, Scotland.
Compassion, Creature (Living), Duty, End,
Fear, Fervent, Figure, Fool (Folly), Gesture,
Good (Chief), Humility, Mercy, Name, Person
(Personality), Reason, Substance, Will (Voli-
tion), and a large number of short articles.


Watiace, Rev. Henry, Pastor of Parkhead Con-
gregational Church, Glasgow, Scotland.
Hilkiah, Ichabod, Mephibosheth, Merab,
Merari, Meshech, Phinehas, and other bio-
graphical articles.


Warrietp, Rev. Bensamin Brecxinrwapr, D.D.,
LL.D., Lirr.D., Professor of Didactic and
Polemic Theology, Theological Seminary of the
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. at Princeton,
New Jersey. ;

Godhead, Inspiration, Person of Christ,
Revelation, Trinity.


Wess, Rev. Ropert Avexanper, B.A., D.D.,
LL.D., Professor of Apologetics and Systematic
Theology, Presbyterian Theological Seminary of
Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky.

Man (Natural), Man (New).


Weir, Rev. Tuomas Hunter, B.D., M.A.,
M.B.A.S., Lecturer on Arabic in the University
of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland.

Arabia, Arabic Versions, Ethiopic Versions,
Israel (Kingdom of), Judah (Kingdom of),
Languages of the Old Testament, Saul, Solo-
mon, Text of the Old Testament, and other
articles.


Wentey, Rozperr Marx, M.A., Pu.D., D8c.,
LL.D., Lirr.D., D.C.L. Professor of Philosophy
in the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.

Josephus (Flavius), Philo (Judaeus).


Wuits, Rev. Grorce Epwarp, M.A., D.D., Mis-
sionary of the American Board; President of
Anatolia College, Marsovan, Turkey.

Asia Minor (Archaeology of), Cappadocia,
Cilicia, Pontus. :


Wurretaw, Rev. Tuomas, M.A., D.D., Minister
of King Street United Free Church, Kilmarnock,
Scotland.

Ithamar, Numbers (Book of), Tabernacle (in
Criticism), Temple (in Criticism), Zadok.


Wiener, Harotp M., M.A., LL.B., Barrister at
Law; London, England.
Agrarian Laws, Altar (A. Critical), Hexateuch,
Levitical Cities, Pentateuch, Priests and Levites,
Sanctuary, Stranger and Sojourner (in OT),
and other articles.


Winuiams, Cuarues B., M.A., B.D., Pu.D., Pro-
fessor in the Chair of New Testament Greek and
New Testament Theology, Southwestern Baptist
Theological Seminary, Fort Worth, Texas.

Sacrifice in the New Testament, Satan (Syna-
gogue of), Tradition, Uncleanness, and other
articles.


Winson, Rev. J. Macartnry, B.D., M.A., Min-
ister of United Presbyterian Church, New
Glasgow, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Angels, Apocryphal Epistles, Birthright, Chief
Seats, Pilate (Pontius).


Witson, Rev. Rozert Dick, M.A., Pu.D., Pro-
fessor of Semitic Philology and Old Testament
Introduction, Princeton, New Jersey.

Arsaces, . Daniel, Daniel (Book of), Ezra,
Nebuchadnezzar, Nehemiah, Tirshatha, Zerub-
babel, and other articles.


Wotr, Rassi Horace J., Bachelor of Hebrew
Literature, M.A., Associate Rabbi of _Berith
Kodish Congregation, Rochester, New York.

Afternoon, Day and Night, Samgar-nebo,
Segub, Shaphan, Sheshach, Tubal, Tubal-
cain, and numerous brief articles.


Wricst, Rev. Grorcs Freprricx, M.A., D.D.,
LL.D., F.G.S.A., Professor Emeritus in Oberlin
College, Oberlin, Ohio.

Antediluvians, Arabah, Cities of the Plain,
Dead Sea, Deluge of Noah, Eden, Euphrates,
Jordan, Jordan Valley, Paradise, Tigris, and
other articles.


Zenos, Rev. Anprew C., D.D., LL.D., Professor
of Historical Theology, McCormick Theological
Seminary, Chicago, I]linois.

Evolution.


GENERAL INDEX


Ae bicd bh pcteton Jae tees 19; 90° (Richardson); 105°
(Richardson)
Aalar (Allar).......... 15; 97>
Aaronee A222. elie Oe 1 (Mack)
Elder............... p
Hamilyde acid ene s oF 13
ef Moses ............ 2083 (Kyle)
Moses’ assistant... ... 1s
Priest. .cedisekes oe yb
Priestly succession... .2*
Rebellion............ yp
Rod of. ..........0... 2° (Mack)
ef Priest .......... 2439* (Moorehead)
Aaronites............. 2 (Beecher)
Ab (father). ........... 2» (Beecher)
ef Abba ............ 4° (Harry)
CRAB ietan cian osieenies 6> (Beecher)
Ab (month)........... 2b
Abacuc............... oa
Abaddon (Heb)........ 2> (Beecher)
ef Apollyon ......... 2015 (Sweet)
Abadiase: <ice eutcwawas's 33
Abagarus.............. 3
ef Abgar ............ 6> (Breslich)
Abagtha..............3°
Abana
ef Amana........... 1138 (C. H. Thomson)
ef Pharpar .......... 2365»
Abanahe:eoiccc.25.ee act 3
ef Abilene .......... 112 (C. H. Thomson)
ef Amana ........... 113* (C. H. Thomson)
Abarim............... 3> (Beecher)
AD ASE? Slo ies sco dua inel heaters 3> (Hirsch)
Abbater. tonne ea oe 8 40
ANDDAy oso neat ee aot 4* (Harry)
ef Ab (father) ....... 2> (Beecher)
Abdali teen ne eae as 4a
Abdéellrrien ese cen ae 4a
A Dis hides elses tete 4° (Beecher)
Abdiass deh i aeatth oes 4a
ef Obadiah .......... 2173 (Sampey)
Abdiel\vucic. cau acta ees 4a
Abdon (person)........ 42 (Beecher)
ef Samson .......... 2675" (Robinson)
Abdon (place)......... 4> (Beecher)
Abednego............- 4> (R. D. Wilson)
cf Shadrach .........2746* (R. D. Wilson)
Abel (person).......... 52 (M. O. Evans)
And Gain ........... 539° (Farr)
NT references........ 5


cf Sacrifice... ....... 2638" (Reeve)
Shepherd and worship-


Abel (place)... ........ 5b
Abel-beth-maacah......5° (Beecher)
cf Abel-maim........6*
Abel-cheramim......... 5>
Ch Rati es oe 2406" (Day)
Abel-maim............ 63
cf Abel-beth-maacah. .5> (Beecher)
Abel-meholah.......... 6* (Beecher)
cf Meholathite...... .20282
Abel-mizraim.......... 6* (Beecher)
Abel-shittim........... 62 (Beecher)
AB eR icchc se ey ne wees ed 6
Ch BBO2 xn cuisenwetciaee 890>
Abgare situ ester a 6» (Breslich)
ef Abagarus......... 33
Abgarus
ef Abagarus......... 3°
ADHOR &. candtan dosed a alee 6> (Breslich)
cf Abomination ...... 15> (Eager)
Abi (father)...........6° (Beecher)
cf Ab (father) .......2> (Beecher)
ef Abijah ............10* (Beecher)
Compounds of ....... 7
Abi (mame). ........... 6>
Abia, Abiah........... 7
ef Abijah ........... 10° (Beecher)
Abi-albon.. 0... 0.00... 7> (Beecher)
cf Abiel ............ ge
Abiasaph.............. 7> (Beecher)
Abiathar.............. 7> (Beecher) ; 85* (Beecher)
cf Ahimelech ........ 85* (Beecher)
cf Ahitub ...........86> (Beecher)
Biblical record of..... 7
Critical opinion...... 8
cf David').... Meave eas 790° (Weir)
ef Ephod ...........962" (Sampey)
cf Priest, High....... 2441 (Reeve)
ef Zadok ...........- 3129» (Whitelaw)
ABIDE ores ok Weaseare ie 9* (Beecher); 541° (Por-
ter)
ef Calendar .........541» (Porter)
A Dida inet hana pete: 9a
Abidab yt osc tne vets ge
Abid ane svecovs soe eens 92
A Did eee d ese ail 9* (Pratt)
Abicliociy Sccasstonte fe ga
ef Abi-albon ........ 7
Abiezer’. ccd ete 92 (Beecher)
CELCZOT kes Aa de A ee 1448>
ef Jeezer ............ 15744
Abiezrite
ef Abiezer .......... 9* (Beecher)


3171


3172


GENERAL INDEX


-|
Abigail, Abigal......... 9° (Mack) Abner ants Aa: ae ales 14% (Margolis); 13*
ef Abraham ......... 18* (Boyd) cf Joab ............. 1677 (Roberts)

ef Jesse ..........0., 16238 (Roberts) Abode

ef Zeruiah .......... 3148* (Roberts) cf Abide............ 92 (Pratt)
BS Oe oe saekea 10° (Mack) CUT ae eee 15* (M. O. Evans)
Abby Paar tad Naan te es 10° Abomination........... 15° (Eager)
Abihud . pins ean 10° Abhor? .3h.chuticckes 6» (Breslich)

ef Abiud ............ 13° Birds of. ............ 16° (Stratton-Porter)
Abijah. epbtacs Ua tees 10° (Beecher) cE Alonuaitiou a 158 Uoneey)

CE ies eae se ef Birds, Unclean . .477 (Reeve)

ey ay ee Ne agar aa ed Clean and unclean ani-

ef Ahiah ............ 83° Gite es 16°

ef Ahitub ........... 86> (Beecher) GE desolition «... ..<. 16h Celinseh)

Problems in connection Antiochus Epiph-

BAUD ceca seo a0 Ye eee one a 17%; 159 (Harry)

Record of reign...... 10° Histeriéal Backs

ef Zacharias ......... 3129 (Easton) oun es 170
Abijam (Abijah)....... 10° (Beecher) ef Jupiter ......... 1781° (Easton)
Abila Suppression of wor-

ef Abilene .......... 112 (C. H. Thomson) ship poe eae 17
Abilene............... 11° (C. H. Thomson) Peres ta Daniele. 16h

ef Abanah .......... 3° (C. H. Thomson) rT ee ae 1121 (Eager)

Ohly NAR ees Leer) Titeests a ee 15
abilicy Said Tk Naam aes and Dy a Unclean foods... ..... 16+
Abimael.............. 11° (Beecher) es eee 15°

‘ ae
Abimelech pitied yee a or 36 AOUad Abuadande:

BE ets oo Mes) Abundant........... 17> (Van Pelt)

OF Gaal i. sean oh 1150° Asut ie
Abinadab............. 125 (Beecher) re, de aie aig ea ie

Andithe Ark. 42.¢ 243* (Lotz) Dea vette ese ees a < ee

ef Ben-abinadab ..... 4348 ial ....-......
Abinoam.............. 19» oe Sen cee 12» (Beecher)
Abitam tie avant oe: 12> (Beecher) 4 :

of Koral sien ee 1816® (Beecher) A ef Apoc Literature. ae (J. E. H. Thomson)
ADIPODS bain 6 Sa ake 12 PCCD sae pik olen e toe es

ef Abiram .......... 12° (Beecher) Character. serie uae 20°
IAD seit Bees. oie ee Fee: 13> Conditions of life..... 194
Abishag 2), anc das 12° (Beecher) aaa and ee

ef Abraham .........18" (Boyd) aa a nena ee

ISH AT i.e eae ean 138 (Mack); 15% (Mar- | ZANUIDOL........-. ee
pace eK saa oe Family of, in Genesis. .12079 (MOller)

ef Jesse ..........04- 1623* (Roberts) es of story ae aoe
Abishalom............. ii ee ea 1 ON UY es tn ae etre

ef Absalom ......... 23° (W. W. Davies) eee vite e cere eee al (Boyd)

ISH 8. Ale eee a WB SMILE ee
Se a dltnane hint Os 13° Bt LOR Praha had 19308 (Boyd)
Abissei i 13 ef Machpelah........ 1959* (Masterman)
Wee oon, ee 13 cf Mamre........... 19738 (Masterman)
iene. °°, Myth and saga....... 22

rureniees b Name 18%

f Abisue ........... We Name ee
Abital Ba ica ead 138 NT references........ 212
Abitub.............005 13 ef Palestine.......... 2210* (Conder)

ef Ahitub........... 86° (Beecher) Period of wandering. . .18%
Abid ett eee ln eae 13° Religion and morality 208

ef Abihud ........... 10% Religious — significance

ef Genealogy ........ 1183 (Crannell) eae Seaa nese ee ae
AbDj@Ct.2 tires nie Siac 13 esidences.......... fe
Ablettesra che, hated 13 Sacrifice of.......... 198
Ablution.............. 13> (Eager) ef Sarah............ 2691" (Boyd)

Attitude of Jesus..... 146 ef Semites, Semitic

Biblical references. . . .13 Religion........... 2717" (Mack)

Ceremonies of........ 140 ef Table of Nations. . .2899> (Pinches)


GENERAL INDEX 3173
Fel
Abraham’s Bosom...... 225 (Orr) Accept, Acceptable..... 27> (Pratt)
cf Eschatology of OT .972° (Orr) cf Respect of Persons 2561 (Easton)
Ch Gli’ te oh aan 1310> (M. O. Evans) Acceptance...........- 27> (Prati)
ef Hades at OE 1315* (Vos) ACCEBS. 2... cece eee 27> (Pratt)
ef Paradise .......... 2246* (Wright) Accho (Acco).......... 28° (Porter)
ef Sheol ............2761* (Orr) NOC, hive ho Meet ie 284 (Porter)
Abram Biblical references. .. .28*
ef Abraham ......... 18" (Boyd) Historye: hn varges 28%
Abrech................ 22> (Mack) Ptolemais........... 288; 24994
Abroad...............22% (Jacobs) cf Sea, The Great... .2707 (Ewing)
Scattered Accommodation........ 28> (Sweet)
ef Dispersion ...... 855° (Nicol) Allegory............ 29>; 97 (Schodde)
Abronah.............. 230 ef Babylonia ........ 358> (Clay)
Abealomieu-ceore ofan 23° (W. W. Davies); 794» | Christ’s method. ..... 338
(Weir) cf Demon........... 827 (Sweet)
David's flight........ 23> Interpretation....... 298; 14894 (Schodde)
Death and tomb ..... 23> Kenosis............. 17928 (Easton)
Vixile oe eae 23" Prophecy and fulfil-
GED OAD. 2. catet aaltetonne 1678 (Roberts) ment........+.... 30°
Rebellion............ 238 Quotations in NT... .30*; 2516+ (Sweet)
ef Tamar ........... 2907 (Orr) ‘i Revelation.......... 29%; 2573 (Warfield)
Tomb of............ 248 ccomplish...........- 33°
ef Jerusalem....... 1612* (Masterman) Accord, According, Ac-
Absalom (Apoc).......24# cordingly............ 33> (M. O. Evans)
Absalon (Absalom, ef Deed ............ 817" (Edwards)
Apne erik: catia sake 248 A CCOSRte kx ctv sa esiiee wrist 332
Absolution............ 24° (Jacobs) one Accountability oar
ef Forgiveness ....... 1132 (Morro) ee : d teats Wea wha hice ee Be :
ef Keys, Power of ....1794% (Carver) De ey ae
of Remission ........ 2557 (Jacobs) oF yee Seca CP aen is)
hanen 24> (EB ) Accuser....-..-0.e0005 35° (W. W. Davies)
DCC Sais ae pata ager Aceldama (Akeldama).. .89° (Masterman)
Ascetics............. 25% ‘Aéhing
Chala at A eos Anson 35% (Harry)
Degrees of........... man Achaicus.............. 35>
ef Essenes . cttee ees 997> (J. E. A. ‘Thomson) EGR Kee one 710° (Harry)
ef Fast, Fasting ...... 1099* (T. Lewis) Ach 356 (Beech
§ Food 1121» (Eager) CHAN GAs hed na oie eet Stee (Beecher)
: eS a eb te ane onb ef Achor ...........- 37 (Beecher)
acct ee, ne j ok SP OChiation ss es 21788
ractice and teaching Achar (Achan)......... 35> (Beecher)
of apostles......... 26> Ach: 368
Publis taste Sab Chane sch Sages i Gdaks
A Ce eee age ae ob Achbor:.:: S055) ee tee® 36° (Beecher)
BU Orgs BiG Xie Son yaneh Achiacharus..........- 36°
ef Temperance ....... 2929 (Jacobs) cf Nasbas..........- 21208 (Angus)
Abubus........-----5- 26° Achias..........020055 36"
Abundance, Abundant . .17' (Van Pelt) TNA i ee 36+
Abuse... .....-..+-55. 26° ACHIORS 2 tigre Ap ae MES 36
AB VSB 35, cottciedn eh aces 26° (T. Lewis); 314> Achipha...........000: 362
ef Astronomy ....... 300° (Maunder) ef Hakupha......... 1321»
ef Pit ....--.....6-- 2401 (T. Lewis) Achish.............--- 36° (Mack); 11>
Abyssinia Achitob..........-.055 36>
ef Ethiopia ......... 10318 (Cobern) ef Ahitub........... 86> (Beecher)
ACACIA tes hanectee yo: 273 (Masterman) Achmetha............. 36> (Tisdall)
cf Mulberry Trees. . . .2093 (Masterman) Acho (Acco)..........- 284 (Porter)
Acatan Achor tice Acct as wtune 378 (Beecher) ; 35h
ef Akatan ........... 88> (Beecher)
Accaba............55- 27» Achsa.....-.--.6-00005 379
ef Hagabah ......... 13162 Achsah...........0005 37° (Beecher)
Accad, Accadians Achshaph............- 37%
ef Agabus ........... 69° (Edwards) Achzibeetaes is estat 37> (Mack; Porter)
cf Babylonia ........ 365 (Clay) Acipha (Achipha)....... 36
Accaron. \..¢fosia eh: 27> Acitho, Acithoh........376; 86 (Beecher)
ef Ekron ...........- 916° (Porter) Acknowledge.......... 37>


3174


GENERAL INDEX


Acquaint, Acquaintance. 37° (Jacobs)


Acrac toni im ah Sl B28) 388
ef Jerusalem ......... 1595 (Masterman)
Acrabattene (Akrabat-
GING) bee tye cena 895
Acrabbim............. 38°
ef Akrabbim ........ 89s
Acre (Acco)........... 28 (Porter)
ACLOES ace nisi es 38* (Beecher)
Acrostic............0.. 38% (Smith)
ef Alphabet .........105* (Richardson)
Acts, Apocryphal....... 183° (A. F. Findlay)
Acts of Andrew...... 192
Acts of John.........191°
Acts of Paul......... 1885
Acts of Peter........ 1902
Acts of Thomas...... 193°
Authorship.......... 187
Ecelesiastical testi~
mony............. 1862
Extra-canonical...... 184s


False and heretical... .184°

General characteristics 184*
Influence............ 187»

cf Literature, Sub-apos.1896° (Cowan)
Meaning of apocry-


phal: ¢ eile = eee 183
Origin. . Peart A BOF
ef Publius .......... 25015 (Kerr)
Relationship of differ-
ent acts........... 1874
“Secret... 0... .0..00. 1842
Sources............. 185»
ef Thaddaeus........ 29642 (Kerr)
Valuoesn Vou ethaue's 1872
As history ........1878
As records of early
Christianity...... 1878
Acts of the Apostles... .. 39% (A. T. Robertson);
466 (Orr)
Analysis............46"
Author. cose ceeccnnes 415
Canonicity..... 41>
Chronology.......... 44a
Daten. aco coe ne: 41>
Historical worth... ...44>


cf Luke, Evangelist. . .1935° (A. T. Robertson)
cf Luke, Gospel of... .1937 (A. T. Robertson)
ef Mediation, Mediator 2022 (Edwards)
Banlieue wre eee 418; 420; 42; 43a; 462
Purposes. s0 orien é 45>

Relation to Ep. of Paul 43°

Relation to Josephus. . 41°


Sources.............428
Speeches............ 42>
exten caw} ge eet se 398
TUtletssce je eek GRE EES 39"
NINE 3 Bcc ayiewndl os eee 408
“We sections...... 408; 418


Acts of Pilate
ef Apocryphal Gospels 195° (Hutchison)
Acts.of Solomon........ 483


Acua (Acud)........... 48
A CUD ede essere acu mate 482
Acud oh Seite foo eek 488; 898
Adal ci tciatreces ¢ccehek 364» (Clay)
Adad (Hadad).........1313 (Hovey)
Adadah............00. 489
Adadrimmon..........48°

cf Hadadrimmon..... 13149 (Ewing)
Adahic Meese a tee ee 48» (Beecher)
Adaiah.............04. 48> (Beecher)
Adalia................48°
Adam, Books of........ 542 (M. O. Evans); 1778


(J. E. H. Thomson);
178> (T. W. Davies)


Adam, City of......... 54® (Wright)
Adam and the Fall..... 10922 (Bavinck)
Family.............. 1095
ef Woman .......... 31008 (Pratt)
Adam in NT........... 52 (Thomas)
ef Adam in OT and
ADOC iiss ac eteeas 48> (Farr)


ef Adam in OT (Evo-
lutionary Interpreta-


HON) i. ee. Sa ae 49> (Genung)
Adam in OT and Apoc. .48° (Farr)
ef Balls. plas ques 1092+ (Bavinck)
CES ete: os nese 2798 (McConnell)


Usual interpretation ..48° (Farr); 53° (Thomas);
139" (Davis)
Adam in OT (Evolution-
ary Interpretation). ..49> (Genung)


ef Eve in OT......... 10402 (Genung)
CheMal 2.828. sofas 10928 (Bavinck) |
Adamah..............548
Adamant.............- 542 (Day)
cf Stones, Precious . . .2856# (Fletcher)
AG ami. nook oe Abas, 4 54
Adami-nekeb.......... 54 (Beecher)
Adan (Addan).........54°
Adapa, Story of........373> (Rogers)
AGATE Ge Bee Sela d pet 54°
Adar
ef Addar............ 558
Adarsa (Adasa)........ 54
Adasar su kinstunt-. dasiite: 54°
Adbeel...... anit <tc 54>
DNs (6 ae eee ea 54> (M. O. Evans)
ef Impart ........... 1461°
ef Supply ........... 2871» (Easton)
P20 (0: | ine ee ar ag 54°
Addars. foci: ine SiuaceraeeOD®
ChAT See tca 238°
Addertrer 320.5 ote sagen 553 (Day)
cf Serpent - 4. sas. 2736" (Day)
AGG ys. cue gine hice ees 55%
Addicts. 28s ses. 0c Seales 55°
Add Osis i eet ee 55%
CHITAGG: ee Nok o. Serences 1447> (Crannell)
Addon (Addan)........54®
AGUS oo. Sen ides cd atv ge 55*
A Gere Ri cat et ie Math ad 55>


GENERAL INDEX 3175


Adiabene.............. 55> (Beecher)
Adidaepcne seo i) hi ees 55>

ef Hadid ............ 1315°
Adiellne oun een eed 55> (8. F. Hunter)
Adina tices este e 55 (Beecher)

ef Adinu............ 568
Adina iach. cuneate: 55>
ACINOM tases wees Pees 56° (Beecher)
AGINe tins oe Pelac 56

CRAGIN he dues es 55> (Beecher)
Adinus (Iadinus)....... 14465
Adithaim.............. 56
Adjuration............56* (Pratt)

ef Oath... 0.0... 2172> (Levertoff)
Adlaiict crisp ce tieon ke 568
Admah............... 56> (Wright)

ef Shinab ........... 2771" (Wolf)

ef Vale of Sid?im ... .27849 (Wright)
Admatha.............. 56
Admin (Arni).......... 258>
Administer, Administra-

AOI eee et hag Marts 56> (Pratt)
Admiration............ 56> (Pratt)
ys bi: ene ee eee ee 56°
Adnghise. so. cs coeds 57%
dO anc ter avers aM ery 57° (Eager)
AONE ese 8 2 SS 574

cf God, Names of . ...1264> (Mack)
Adonibezek............ 578
Adonijah.............. 57° (Beecher)
Adonikam............. 58°
Adoniram............. 58* (Beecher)

ef Hadoram (Joram). .1316* (Hovey)
Adonis?) tists 58°

ef Tammuz ......... 2908 (Porter)
Adonizedek............ 58° (Mack)

ef Jerusalem ........ 1613" (Masterman)
Adoption.............. 58* (Rees)


ef Children of God . . .608* (Rees)
Christian experience . .59*


As God’sact ........ 59>

Legal idea........... 58>

Paul’s doctrine....... 58>
Ador, Adora........... 60
Adoraim.............- 602
Adoram (Hadoram).. ...1316* (Hovey)

ef JeroboamI....... 1593+ (Mosiman)
Adoration............. 602 (Edwards)

of Attitudes ......... 330> (W. W. Davies)

CfsKigs: ieee elke: 1813> (W. L. Walker)
Adornsn 3a) Ge tie 61> (Kapp)

ef Dress ............875> (Hager)
Adra (Arad)........... 221 (Beecher)
Adrammelech, Anamme-

lechy ee tievetae sees 61> (Beecher); 129°

ChGOdS sad nates 1270 (Reeve)

ef Sharezer .......... 2750* (Hiselen)
Adramyttium.......... 62* (Banks)
Adtlantct Soe ins i ees 622 (Allen)
Adriel................62


Adullam.............. 32> (Beccher)

ef Hereth ........... 1377° (Masterman)

ef Odollam .......... 2178
Adullamite............ 635
Adultery..............63* (Margolis)

ef Crimes ........... 745° (Hirsch)

cf Divorce in NT and

OD Arde eh es 865? (Caverno); 8635 (W.
W. Davies)

ef Family ........... 1094» (Caverno)

ef Jealousy..........1572> (Forrester)
Adummim............. 64° (Beecher)
Advantage............64>
Advent.

ef Millennium .......2052> (Moorehead)

ef Parousia .......... 22499 (Easton)

ef Person of Christ... .2343° (Warfield)

Prophecy of.........832> (Gray)
Advent, Second

In Didache.......... 1899> (Cowan)
Adventure............. 648
Adversary............. 64> (T. Lewis)
Adversity.............64> (Pratt)
Advertise............. 64
Advice, Advise, Advise-

ment...............65 (Breslich)
Advocate.............. 65* (Mullins)

cf Comforter ........679* (Mullins)

ef Holy Spirit ....... 14062 (Mullins)

ef Paraclete .........2245° (Mullins)
Adytum............... 65

cf Temple .......... 2930* (Caldecott; Orr)
Aed tas) rc iets s eee: 653
Aelia

ef Jerusalem ........ 1595» (Masterman)
AGNOAS sie eben 65; 240% (Dosker)
ACNON:.. .Arfaet el ones 65> (Ewing)

ef Salim ............ 2663* (Ewing)
AGODA See uae tS 65> (Kapp)

cf Gnosticism ....... 1240° (Rutherfurd)
AcsOra... 2... eee ee 65
Affect, Affection... .....65° (Edwards)

cf Passion ........... 2255 (Easton)
APNE 8 eee reat 66° (W. W. Davies)

ef Family ........... 1094> (Caverno)

ef Marriage .........1996> (Eager)
Affirm, Affirmatives..... 66* (Hirsch)
Affliction. ............. 66° (Edwards)

Endurance of........67°

Meaning and purpose. 66>

ef Providence ........2476> (Tillett)

Source..........-.. 66+
Affright.....0.....0005 63"
Afootins acxcare esd te 638"
ALOTOs ecco. steuiea stones 68+
Atreshe sahcecica ag eee oS 688 (Edwards)
APC a oe ec Ps soe ser 68* (Pinches)

ef Cush ............767% (Pinches)

ef Ethiopia ......... 10312 (Cobern)

ef Mizraim .......... 2069 (Kyle)
After, Afterwards.......68> (Jacobs)


3176 GENERAL INDEX


Afternoon............. 68> (Wolf)

CEB AY Sn ucen zeta hee 797° (Gerberding)
ABAD AG 3 Codi ticee ee wen 698

ef Accaba ........... 27>
Agabusis cn 2escsctig ode. 69° (Edwards)
Agader eres iaieetank 695

ef Accad ............ 365° (Clay)
AGB oe Ar kien 69% (Mack)
Agagite........2...... 69° (Wolf)

ef Purim ............ 2507° (Mack)
ABS. Oy) Avea teas une wi 69>

Born again

cf Regeneration. . . .2546 (Nuelsen)

Against o.sece seks 69> (Jacobs)
Aa Dee iinet heen 69> (Lambert)

ef Lord’s Supper ..... 1928> (Kurtz)
Apart not). 8b Seale 70°
Agarenes.............. 70°

ef Hagrites .......... 1319" (Mack)
Agate

ef Stones, Precious . . .2856* (Fletcher)
AG Or Ses eer travers: 70? (W. L. Walker)

ef Everlasting ....... 10412 (Orr)
Age, Old Age.......... 71s (W. L. Walker)

Regard for.......... 713
AGeG beni s. ccd ote chee eh 71>
Ages, Rock of......... 71%
Apgabaici escaciw eno 71; 27>
Aggaeus............... 71
Agia (Apoc) ........... 71°

ef Hattil............ 13438>
AgOne Medi deans 71>
IN PONY ads ia i a ees 71> (Pratt)

Mental............. 728

Physical............ 728

Spiritual............ 72°
Agrapha.............. 72° (Smith)

ef Logia ............ 1910* (Smith)
Agrarian Laws......... 74° (Wiener)


ef Levitical Cities ....1869" (Wiener)
ef Priests and Levites 2446> (Wiener)


AOC in Ome a eS 75° (Kapp)

Agriculture. ........... 75° (Patch)
ef Blasting .......... 486 (Patch)
ef Furrow ........... 1150* (Patch)
ef Gleaning ......... 1234> (Patch)
ef Harrow .......... 1341 (Patch)
ef Harvest .......... 1341> (Patch)
ef Husbandry ....... 1442> (Patch)
cf Irrigation ......... 1492» (Patch)
Challe ones need 20522 (Patch)
ef Reaping .......... 25348 (Patch)
ef Seed ............. 2712> (Easton)
ef Sheaf............ 27523 (Patch)
ef Sheep ............ 2756> (Day)
ef Stubble .......... 2867
ef Threshing ........ 2975 (Patch)
ef Tools ............ 2998> (Easton)
ef Vine.............3049 (Masterman)
ef Weaving ......... 30778 (Patch)


ef Wheel ............ 3082» (Easton)


Agriculture—continwed

cf Winepress ........ 3086* (Easton)
Agrippa (Herod)....... 1378 (Dosker)
Agrippina

ef Nero ..........-.. 2135* (Angus)
A DUC re ihn nen ie iene 78° (Macalister)

ef Fever ............ 1107 (Macalister)
ABUT Se Gkicse eteenten’ 78° (Genung)

ef Jakeh ............ 1559» (Crichton)


ef Proverbs, Book of. .2471> (Genung)
Ah


CHANIA a totes 83>
Ah, Aha .............. 788 (Mack); 13118
PAT a Biegre sactiveete ttyl ete a 78> (Mosiman)

And archaeology..... 808; 2945

And Benhadad....... 779» (C. H. Thomson)

Building operations. . .79>

Death of............ 802

And Elijah .......... 79»

Foreign policy....... 73>

ef Israel, History of the

Peoples. o:cssee ss 15215 (Orelli)

ef Jehoshaphat .......1582" (Mosiman)

ef Jezebel ........... 1675> (Roberts)

‘Military career....... 79»

Moabite Stone ...... 2071 (Sayce)

Murder of Naboth... .79°

Reign of............ 78>

Religious policy...... 798
Ahab and Zedekiah..... 80 (S. F. Hunter)
Abarabsqo.ic.cccsne eee 80°; 86% (Beecher)
Aharhel............... 80>
Ahasai (Ahzai)......... 87
Ahasbai............... 80%
Ahasuerus............. 80> (R. D. Wilson)

ef Xerxes ........... 31262 (Easton)
Ahavar Visi ocemintte ne te 812 (S. F. Hunter)
ANG sone took seni aes 81° (Caldecott)

cf Dial of Ahaz ......841° (Maunder)

Fall of Damascus... . .82°

Isaiah’s tablet....... 81>
Ahaziah............... 82> (Mosiman)


cf Chronology of OT. .635° (Mack)
Eighth king of Israel. .82>


cf Jehoahaz ......... 1575° (Genung)
Sixth king of Judah . .83*
Abb ativesd son cntiteatcna tact 83>
Aber yen e4 scared 83>
ef Ahiram .......... 86 (Beecher)
ANG ALIS hse te. asses ws 83>; 6°
ef Abijah ........... 10° (Beecher)
ef Names, Proper .. . .2113* (Davis)
Abiahy cs.) oshoncvaian 83>
Ahiam................ 83>
ATMAT old se ve owe eed 83
Ahiezer............... 83>
Ahihud............... 83>
Abijaliniyc iy aceece ath oe 83> (Beecher)
ef Ahimelech........ 85°
Abikame Sorcecikesa an 84" (Beecher)
ef Uriah ............ 3040° (Easton)


GENERAL INDEX


Ahilud................ 84>
Ahimaaz.............. 84> (Beecher)
Ahiman............... 84> (Beecher)
Ahimelech............. 85° (Beecher)
ef Ahijah ........... 83> (Beecher)
ef Abiathar ......... 7> (Beecher)
ef Ahitub ........... 86> (Beecher)
Ahimoth.............. 85?
Ahinadab............. 85>
Ahinoam.............. 85> (Beecher)
ANG) och ston dnnes® aoe 85> (Beecher)
ef Ostraca .......... 2202» (Goodspeed)
Abniva 02. .ekelneceakcns 864
Ahiram............... 86* (Beecher); 80>
ef Aher ............. 83>
CEB 455.50 eee 916"
Ahiramite............. 86>
Ahisamach............ 868
Ahishahar............. 862
Ahishar............... 86°
Ahithophel............ 86* (Beecher)
Ahitobi oc ae en eck eed 86>
Ahitubicc.sc bs ove eieces 86> (Beecher)
ef Abiathar ......... 7» (Beecher)
ef Abitub........... 13
ef Acitho........... 37>
ef Ahijah ........... 83> (Beecher)
ef Ahimelech ........ 85* (Beecher)
Abla bse wie. oo ae ie 875
AbMai he oe Sones 878
Ahoahe nics cca skcte a eed 878
Ahohite:icsts.csree ne 87
Aholah (Oholah)....... 21814
Aholiab (Oholiab)...... 2181
Aholibah (Oholibah). ...2181* (W. W. Davies)
Aholibamah  (Oholiba-
MAN) eee si eee aaieverers 2181
Ahumai.............-- 878
Ahura Mazda (Persian
Religion)............ 23322 (Tisdall)
Ahuzzam.........-..6- 873
Ahuzzath............- 87
WANZAL & sie « scenes Soe 87>
Mes Sia ss did ae ae 1a EE 87> (Mack)
AR hears ck Poecge were eee 883
Miath eis vaca qekes aone ne 888; 87>
Aide irae lek hye Bice 88 (Pratt)
Aid Biss eae eave 55>
ef Hadid ............ 1815>
ATaiih Acs cate heats ae 88°; 87>
Aijalon............-5- 88" (Mack)
Aijeleth Hash-shahar
ef Song ............. 2830> (Millar)
Ail eo bran ae SS 882
PNTM Neu dts often um Sees 88>
AIDS oo elated bur HERES 88> (W. W. Davies)
ef Ayin.........-65: 3428 (W. W. Davies)
AGT ess bitten reer ts soe Se 88> (T. Lewis)
AMUBS SS ie. ees 8 88>
Ajah pints, Vetere otah em 88>


3177


cf Beeroth Bene-jaakan
Akatan i) secede

ef Hakkatan ........
Akeldama.............

ef Hinnom, Valley of,
Akkad, Akkadians


Akra
ef Jerusalem.........


Alammelech...........-
ef Allammelech ......
Alamoth


ef Alphabet ........
Aleppo

cf Beroea ...........
Alexander............-

ef Hymenaeus.......
Alexander Balas........
Alexander the Great....


In Asia Minor........
ef Macedonia........
Alexandria............
Alexandrian Judaism
Christian church in...


ef Septuagint ........
ef Trade ..........-.
University of........
Alexandrian Library... .
Alexandrians..........
Algum, Almug.........


888 (Mack)


424>


89" (Masterman)
1393> (Masterman)


2094» (Millar)
89> (W. W. Davies)


. -98>


90* (Richardson)


.103> (Richardson)


440° (Ewing)

90* (Rutherfurd)

1444* (Rutherfurd)

91 (Fortune); 1141

91> (J. E. H. Thomson);
456> (Dosker)

274> (Calder)

19578 (Tod)

93° (Cobern)


.857 (Nicol)


95»

94>

93»

27238 (Thackeray)
3002 (Easton)
95

456> (Dosker)


96> (Masterman)
97"


3178


GENERAL INDEX


ef Pentateuch .......
Allammelech...........
Allariaeeee ioe rites


Allegiance.............
Allegory..............
cf Accommodation .. .
ef Fable............
Alleluia (Hallelujah)....
Allemeth..............


Allon-bacuth ..........


ef Bethel ...........
ef Candlestick, Golden
ef Flourish ..........


Alms, Alms-giving......

Of-POOrs sioties Papier
Almug (Algum) ........
Alnathan..............


Alpha and Omega.......
Alpbabet...... Bett eaet
ef Acrostic ..........
ef Gadhe ...........
CHO ele een Aare dns


ef Phoenicia .........


97» (Jacobs)

975 (Pratt)

97> (M. O. Evans)
2309 (Wiener)


976 (Schodde)
29> (Sweet)
1085* (Easton)
1323* (Breslich)


98> (Cohon)
727% (Berry)


99>
99» (Edwards)


100° (Masterman)
443> (Ewing)

553% (Orr)

11203 (W. L. Walker)
100°

100° (Harry)


1086 (W. L. Walker) .


101> (Eager)
2420° (W. L. Walker)


103° (Harry)
103° (Richardson)
38: (Smith)


2389* (Porter)


Alphabet—continued


Gi Reésh:s hoes ete 25612
ef Samech .......... 26745
ef Shin, Sin.......... 27718
CL PaWats Acts cities ne 3 29182
cf Teth. . o.hek Sees 2950°
ef Text of OT ....... 2958" (Weir)
cf Waw ........-.65- 3075»
ef Writing .......... 3118 (Richardson)
ChYodhe sd. cee 3126
CUZAYV ID 2.0m slits wierieees 31339
Alphaeus............-. 106° (Fortune)
cf Clopas ........... 669° -(Jacobs)
ef Mary (wife of
Clopas)........... 2001> (Sweet)
ASO scih.o sities sean Boece 106
Altaneus (Maltanneus). .1972>
Altar tcecere Sees 106° (Wiener)
OPALaz Soa ved ae 1098
Of burnt offering. ....110°
ef Horns of Altar. . .1422 (Caldecott)
of Tabernacle... ...2889 (Caldecott; Orr)
cf Temple, Herod’s .2937* (Caldecott; Orr)
Critical... .......... 106° (Wiener)
Of Gezer............ 1105
Hebrew altars........1079
Horned altar........ 108%
Chom: 22205 e8e8 14228 (Easton)
cf Horns of Altar... 1422 (Caldecott)
Idolatrous altars .....109°
Of incense .......... 109»
cf Holy Place...... 1405 (Caldecott)
cf Horns of Altar. . .1422 (Caldecott)
ef Incense ........ 1466> (Orr)
cf Mercy-seat...... 2036 (Caldecott)
At Taanach........ 1108
ef Tabernacle...... 2891 (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Table of Shew-
bread’ 2.22% ee: 2767» (Caldecott)
Of Joshua........... 108
cf High Place...... 1390 (Easton)
ef Ledge ............ 1864
ef Mercy-seat........ 2036" (Caldecott)
Patriarchal altars... ..110°
ef Pentateuch ..... 2309> (Wiener)
Post-exilic altar... ... 109
Pre-Mosaic altar..... 107%
Pre-tabernacle altars. .110>
cf Sacrifice .......... 2646" (Reeve)
ef Sanctuary ........ 2686 (Wiener)
ef Staves ........... 2850* (Caldecott)
cf Tabernacle........ 2889° (Caldecott; Orr)
Tabernacle altar... ...108°
ef Asylum ........ 316° (Wiener)
cf Table of Shew-
bread ns a A nee 2767> (Caldecott)
ef Temple........... 2938 (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Tongs ............ 2994
ef Uriah ............ 3039 (Easton)
In worship .......... 110 (Caldecoit)


ef Worship......... 3111 (Crannell)


GENERAL INDEX


Altashheth, Altaschith
ef Psalms, Book of... .2487* (Sampey)


Of SONG see cites 2830> (Millar)
Altogether............. 112° (Pratt)

ef Almost ........... 100° (Harry)
Alushyrer x decihete a bai sects 112

ef Wanderings of Israel 3064* (Conder)
Bl vais och eextecna Seka 112
Alvaniude. xs see eatin 112
AMWAY. oceans 112
Amads cs thi dines eens 112°
Amadatha, Amadathus

cf Hammedatha..:...13825>
Amain..............0. 112
ATIVAN Ts toc cin LR. hates 112»
Amalek, Amalekite..... 112> (Porter); 2179

ef Joshua ........... 17435 (Geden)

ef Mount of Amale-

kitésinhvce- cede ees 2092»

Amam..........-....- 1138
ATMAT 8 isto dents atanti ee 113

ef Nasbas...........- 21202 (Angus)
Amana; isc fisecves css 1132 (C. H. Thomson)

ef Abanah........... 33 (C. H. Thomson)
Amariah...........--- 113° (Breslich)
AMATIOS epee ete ede ties 113°
Amarna, Tell el-......- 2925> (Kyle)

ef Archaeology and

Criticism.........- 226 (Kyle)


Canaanite civilization .2927*
Cuneiform writing... .2926*
Diplomatic correspond-


ENCE ek Ghat eit eats 2927>
Discovery..........- 2925>
Egyptian rule, but

Babylonian lan-

PUAGEs oe lk ee 2927»
Geographical value . . .2926°
cf Heberites ........- 1354°
ef Hebrew ........-- 1355" (Orr)
Historical value...... 2926»
cf Jerusalem......... 1613> (Masterman)
ef Libraries ......... 1882° (Richardson)
cf Melchizedek....... 2028> (Roberts)
ef Moses .........--- 2083» (Kyle)
Names. scivea saci teie 2925»
ef Palestine, Recent

Exploration ....... 2223* (Cobern)


Philological value... . .2926"
Physical character... .2726*
Problem of the Habiri 2927°


Proper names. ...... .2926%

ef Sidon ......-..--- 2785» (Porter)

Verification of Biblical

statements........ 2926>

Aiiasa is cea eeGee sais 113° (Wolf)

cf Joab .......-..2-- 1678* (Roberts)
AMASAl eu dees es ee 1149
Amashsai............- 1149
Amasiah........--...-114%


Amath, Amathis (Ha-


3179
I Amatheis (Ematheis)....9408
Amazed.............-- 1145 (Pratt)
Amaziah.............. 114° (Caldecott)
Ambassador........... 115* (Pratt)
ef Concordance ...... 696> (Orr)
Ambassage............ 115
Amber
cf Stones, Precious... .2856° (Fletcher)
Ambitious............. 115
Ambushescccank covers: 115%
Ambushment.......... 115> (Nicol)
AION ioe shen ne dis. eat ses 115 (Millar)
Amerce...........000- 115°
American Revised Ver-
BION used tort atts 116° (Easton)
ef English Versions . . .951> (Hutchison)
Amethyst
cf Stones, Precious . . .2856° (Fletcher)
AMD Scheer ene & 116°
Amiable............4. 116° (M. O. Evans)
cf Tabernacle ....... 2887» (Caldecott; Orr)
Aminadab............. 116
AMISe%es Ah eee san 4 116°
Amittai............... 1175
Armmah (fog. et ees 117
ef Gibeath .......... 1225> (Ewing)
Ammen 23 sect oP otal LEO
Ammidioi............. 117
Ammiel............... 1178 (Mack)
| Ammihud.........2.0- 117° (Mack)
Ammihur.............117#; 117°
Amminadab..........- 117’ (T. Lewis)
Amminadib............ 117
Ammishaddai.......... 1178
Ammizabad........... 117°
Ammon, Ammonites... .117 (Porter)
ef Jephthah .........1587* (Schenk)
Namie =:2-20ecueiee 4 117%
Religion............- 118+
War with Jotham.....1754* (Caldecott)
Ammonitess...........118
AMMNOM eo es cA eke 118"
ef Tamar ..........- 2907> (Orr)
ATO ohne Giessen ake isles 118
ATNONG ef scgdee cee ARE: 118° (Genung)
ef Josiah .........-.. 1752" (Genung)
Amorites......-....005 119° (Sayce); 446>
cf Mount of Amorites 2092>
AMOS nee faisseraxit ee 120° (J. Robertson)
Book of. .........+5- 122
Contents, analysis of. .122*
Da teres lcneadtot ceattse 3 121»
cf Israel, Religion of. .1538> (Orelli)
cf Jeroboam II....... 1594» (Caldecott)
Mission...........-. 121»
NAMES sraitig patentee 1205
Native place......... 120°
Personal history.....- 120
Preparation......... 121°
cf Tekoa .........-.- 29242 (Masterman)
Amos (Lk 3 25)........ 125
MOD hiss Sele eee 125°


3180 GENERAL INDEX
Poe po Se


Amphipolis............ 125> (Tod) ANer igs Se rey Skee 132 (Cohon)
AmMpllassc. 64 eaten ach ee 125° Aner (place)..........- 132>
Ampliatus............. 125» Anethothite (Anatho-
AYOYAM 25 ots Fhe 125° (Mack) thite)ernctiveheenet 130°
Amramites............1268 Anetothite (Anathothite) 130°
Amraphel............. 126 (Pinches) ; 366* (Clay) | Angel................- 132° (J. M. Wilson)

ef Arioch ........ ...-2418 (Pinches) Tne ND isscasst anette’ 134

cf Chedorlaomer ..... 599* (Pinches) ef Abaddon........ 2 (Beecher)

ef Eri-aku........... 969 (Pinches) ef Apollyon........ 201> (Sweet)

cf Hammurabi... ....13268 (Pinches) ef Host of Heaven. .1433° (Orr)

cf Pentateuch ....... 23058 (Wiener) cf Jesus Christ..... 16332 (Orr)

Chebid ali. Sacetees e sn 2980* (Pinches) cf Mediation ... .. .2020 (Edwards)
Amulet............... 126° (T. W. Davies) * ef Principality ..... 2454» (Heidel)

ef Charm ........... 597> (T. W. Davies) Reality of......... 1358

cf Magic, Magician. . . 19635 (T. W. Davies) Teachings of Jesus. .134>

ef Nose-jewels ....... 2156* (Pollard) In OW co iter a 133¢
PATO ZI204 oi dehat an are seh eae 1288 Angel Gabriel...... 133>; 1151 (Orr)
AMAD Shapers itve tse ates 128 Angel of Jehovah. . . 133°
Ansel dig vateeets 1288 Archangel......... 1334
ADS So cee leashes ins 1288 (Wolf) ' of Cherub ........- 603
Anaharath............ 128 ef Demon......... 827> (Sweet)
Analahe sas. dueweestncas 128 ef Satan .......... 2693> (Sweet)
Anak (Anakim)........ 128 (Sayce) Angel of God
Anakim............2.-. 128> (Sayce) ef Angel ............ 132> (J. M. Wilson)

cf Rephaim ......... 2559 (Porter) Angel of Jehovah
Anamim.............. 129 cf Angel ............ 133° (J. M. Wilson)

ef Table of Nations. . .2898° (Pinches) Angels of the Seven
Anammelech........... 129 (Wolf) Churches............ 135° (Banks)

ef Adrammelech..... 61> (Beecher) An gerd Sos si ek eectene 135° (Farr) «
AT ane aoe eae tears 1294 : ChMUTy eek SS ees 1150°
Anant. sos eo iewaeiecne 129 cf Wrath ........... 31138 (W. Evans)
Ananiah.............. 1298 ANGIE. ek. ek cake 135
An anlage. pie a5 Vise ees 129 (Edwards) Angling............... 136°

ef Hananiah ........ 1333° (Reeve) cf Fishing ........... 1116 (Patch)

ef Sapphira......... 2690° Anglo-Saxon Versions
Ananias (Apoc)........ 130 (Edwards) ef English Versions . . .945° (Hutchison)
Ananiel............... 130° Anguish............... 1368 (Pratt)
Amniathy, cates iatra a: 130° ANIA Ye receauetels Senet 1368
Anathema............. 130 (T. Lewis) ANIM a, 2h. oS ice Sis eras 136" (Masterman)

ef Accursed ......... 34> (T. Lewis) Animal... Secu ete 136°
Anathoth.............180> (Ewing) Animal Foods.......... 1123 (Eager)

cf Jeremiah ......... 15889 (Orelli) Animism
Anathothite........... 130° cf Israel, Religion of . . 1532 (Orelli)
Anaxagoras Anise or Dill........... 1363 (Masterman)

ef Logos ............ 19128 (Alexander) Ankle su seen k oo ot 136°
Ancestors.............130° Anklet, Ankle-chain....136° (Eager)
Anchor ADNAN so ied Race eae 136° (Pratt)

cf Ships and Boats... .27778 (Nicol) Annaas............... 1376
Ancient............... 130> (T. Lewis); 1318 INTTAS chad sano ea 1378 (Edwards)
Ancient of Days........180 ef Jesus Christ, Arrest .1670° (Maclaren)
Ancients............-- 1318 (T. Lewis) ef Priest, High....... 2441> (Reeve)
Ancle (Ankle)......... 1368 LATING as tates cee cote vere ao 137%
Andrew..........0000+ 131° (Carr) Annul, Disannul....... 1375 (Hirsch)

In apocryphal lit..... 131 Annunciation, The

Character........... 1328 ef Jesus Christ....... 1631» (Orr)

cf James, Son of ANNUS):.-ieein Pe cts eek 137%

Zebedee..........- 1560 (Kerr) Annuus............004 13882

ef Matthias......... 2012° (Kerr) AMOI bie ox aediia 138" (Kapp)

TiN cee dae Se 131° Anointing............. 138° (Eager)

ef Philip ............ 23689 (Kerr) ef Oil, Anointing ..... 21838 (Orr)
Andronicus............ 132° (Jacobs) ef Ointment ......... 21838 (Patch)


ATOM or tsses abv ala nennads 1325 USCS coke Sencha Ses 1388


GENERAL INDEX 3181


Anro Mainyus (Ahriman)
ef Persian Religion .. .2333* (Tisdall)


Answer..............- 138 (Gerberding)
Answerable............ 139°
ATE Meth oN ot cite teats 1395 (Day)


Antediluvian Patriarchs .139° (Davis)
ef Chronology of OT. .635* (Mack)
ef Patriarch ......... 2264* (Orr)

Antediluvians......... 143" (Wright)
ef Deluge of Noah... .821> (Wright)


ef Giants ...........1224> (Orr)
Chelate: 3. a Phen 1888 (Reeve)
ef Noah............21539 (Wright)
ef Patriarch ..... . 2864" (Orr)


cf Sons of God (OT). .2835* (Crichton)


Antelope.............. 143> (Day)
ef Wild-ox .......... 3084» (Day)
Anthedon............. 144
Anthothijah...........144>
Anthropology.......... 144> (Marais)


Antiquity of man.....1518
Evolutionary theory. .148*; 1043* (Zenos)
ef God, Image of..... 12645 (Orr)
Nature of man....... 1456
Origin of man........ 146
Primitive and’ present
conditions of man...150; 635° (Mack)


Unity of race........ 147
ef Woman.......... 3100 (Pratt)
ef World, Cosmologi-

Cale aise diert 31068 (Orr)
Anthropomorphism..... 152> (J. Lindsay)
Antichrist............. 154° (J. E. H. Thomson)

In apocalyptic writ-
MNGBSs zeae ch Acteeeectes 155
ef Johannine The-
OlOBY Soe seni hen ek 1705» (Law)
ef Man of Sin....... 1976° (Orr)
Mediaeval views...... 156
In NT and OT....... 154
ef Parousia.......... 2249 (Easton)


In patristic writings. . 155°
Post-reformation views 156*


ef Zoroastrianism..... 31578 (Easton)
Antilegomena

ef Bible ............ 459> (Orr)

ef Canon of NT...... 563° (Riggs)

ef Deutero-canonical

Bookss 23224 eau te 834 (Fortune)

Anti-Libanus (Lebanon) 1862 (Wright)
Antimony

ef Color ..........4. 674> (Patch)
Antinomianism

In1 John ........... 1713" (Law)
Antioch of Pisidia...... 156> (Calder)

ef Galatia ........... 1154* (Ramsay)

ef Pisidia ..........-24006 (Calder)
Antioch in Syria........ 157 (C. H. Thomson)

ef Lystra ...........1944 (Calder)


ef Trade ........-6-5 3002 (Easton)


Antiochians........... 158* (Pratt)
Antiochis.............. 158»
Antiochus............. 158>

ef Tryphon......... 3027° (Angus)
Antiochus I............ 1585 (Harry)

ef Seleucus.......... 2715* (Hutchison)
Antiochus II........... 158" (Harry)
Antiochus ITI

cf Maccabaeus....... 1946> (Hutchison)
Antiochus IV (Epiph-

anes). ..-...... 600 159» (Harry) ; 158» (Pratt) ;


456° (Dosker) ; 558°
ef Abomination of


Desolation ........ 17« (Hirsch)
ef Jerusalem....... 1617" (Masterman)

And the Maccabees . .1946' (Hutchison)
Antiochus V........... 159 (Harry)
Antiochus VI.......... 159> (Harry)
Antiochus VII.........160° (Harry)
Antipas... ....... 0000. 1608

ef Herod............. 1378 (Dosker)
Antipater............. 160°
Antipatris............. 160° (Ewing)
Antiquity... 0.6... ee 160
Antonia

ef Jerusalem ........ 1602 (Masterman)
Antothijah (Anthothijah)144>
Antothite....... wig pie 160°
ANU or eae eae 370° (Rogers)
ANUbeeee e520 ware eee 160°
Anus (Annus)......... 137
Annville Aste Uedivs nauceees 160* (Patch)
ADACES oslo Masi es tacos 160
APAMOsmcd lina ee antes 160°

ef Bartacus ......... 4065

ef Illustrious ........1449>
Apart. caccascivuewnakes 160° (Pratt)
APG Ark oRae cae See at 160 (Day)
Apelles............ 0006 160° (8S. F. Hunter)
Aphaerema............ 161°
Apharsathchites, Aphar-

sachites...........4. 161% (Wolf)
Apharsites............. 161°
‘Aphekiic: 20 shane 161° (Ewing)
Aphekah.............. 161>
Apherema (Aphaerema). 161°
Apherra....... 2... s ee 161
A phigh e.: ssi. 5a ioe) 161»
Aphiks ignites 161>
Aphrah (Bethleaphrah)..449>
Aphses

ef Happizzez ........13365
Apocalypse .

ef Apocalyptic Lit....161* (J. E. H. Thomson)

Of Baruch .......... 166> (J. E. H. Thomson)

Book of Jubilees...... 1732

ef Revelation of John. 2582» (Orr)
Apocalypses

Relation of Essenes to 1003 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Apocalyptic

ef Jesus Christ....... 1630° (Orr)

cf Messiah .......... 2041 (Crichton)


3182 GENERAL INDEX


Apocalyptic Literature. .161> (J. E. H. Thomson)


Antichrist in......... 155
ef Israel, Religion of. .1541% (Orelli)
ef Jesus Christ....... 1627 (Orr)
Judaism and Hellen-

ASIN eo hee then eden 162°
Legendary testaments 1732
ef Messiah .......... 20428 (Crichton)
ef Paradise .......... 22469 (Wright)
Political influences... .162>
ef Prophecy ......... 2464* (Orelli)
Psalmic pseudepig-

Taphas oho. ae ence 174
Pseudonymity....... 1632


Relation to prophecy. . 162°
ef Revelation of John. 2582» (Orr)


CHROME oo 548 ees cee 2620° (Allen)
Sibylline oracles...... 178
Testaments.......... 175+


Typical apocalypses. . .164>


Apocrypha............178> (T. W. Davies); 457»
(Dosker); 9518 (Hutch-


ison)
Books included in... . 182»


Date of apocryphal
writings........... 183+

Doctrine in early Greek :
philosophy........ 179> +

ef Hozai............ 1439* (McAllister)

JUGIGN cocoa 182; 1838


ef Judith, Book of. . ..1778> (T. W. Davies)
ef Maccabees, Books of .1948* (T. W. Davies)
Original languages of .183*


Original meanings... . 1794
Classical .......... 179°
Hellenistic......... 179°
Tn Nios Sees ace 179»
Patristic.......... 179»

ef Palestine.........-. 2220* (Conder)


References to, in Jude 1770* (Moorehead)
ef Tobit, Book of..... 2990> (T. W. Davies)
Wsage rnc were Mee ee de 179»

Early Christian... .180*

In eastern church . .180*


By reformers ...... 181>
In western church. .181>
Apocryphal Acts....... 183> (A. F. Findlay)
Acts of Andrew...... 192
Acts of John......... 191>
Acts of Paul......... 188>
Acts of Peter........ 1902
Acts of Thomas...... 193%
Authorship.......... 1878
Ecclesiastical testi-
TOOUY <6 eset eee 1864
Among eastern wri-
LOLs ee hes 186"
Ecclesiastical con-
demnation ... .186°
Photius......... 1868
Among western wri-
TOTS vteseers fee oc bs 1868


Apoeryphal Acts—continued


Extra-canonical...... 1842
False and heretical... .184*
General _characteris-
TES Ss ek gee 1848
Infiuence............ 187


ef Literature, Sub-apos 1896 (Cowan)
Meaning of apocryphal 183>


Origine. fcc elec en 185°
ef Publius........... 2501 (Kerr)
Relationship of differ-
ent acts........... 1878
Secret..........000- 184*
Sources............. 185»
Canonical acts..... 185>
Romances of travel . 185°
Traditions......... 185°
ef Thaddaeus........ 29642 (Kerr)
Valte sie oie ions Glos 1878
Ashistory......... 1878
As records of early
Christianity...... 187


Apocryphal Epistles.....194> (J. M. Wilson)
cf Laodiceans, Ep. to. .1837* (Rutherfurd)
Letter attributed


To our Lord....... 194>
To;Paul cate: sewiss 195%
To Peter.......... 195°
Apocryphal Gospels... . .195* (Hutchison)
Descent of Jesus..... .200*
Early gospels ........ 195>
ef Hebrews, Gospel ac-
cording to......... 1362» (Nicol)
Heretical gospels... .. 197


Of Barnabas and
Bartholomew... . .198#
Of the Ebionites. .. . 197°
Of the Egyptians... 197%
Of Marcion........197>
Of Peter........... 197>
Of Twelve Apostles . 198+
Introductory history. .195>
Apocryphal gospels .196*
Canonical gospels . .195>


Early gospels ...... 195>
Gospel according to
Hebrews ........ 196>
ef Jesus Christ... ....1634* (Orr)
ef Literature, Sub-apos 1896 (Cowan)
cf Philip ............ 23688 (Kerr)


ef Pilate, Pontius ... .2398* (J. M. Wilson)
Supplementary or
legendary gospels... 198+


Acts of Pilate...... 200+
Arabic Gospel of
Childhood....... 199»


Descent of Jesus into
Lower World..... 2008
Gospel of Infancy... 1994
Gospel of Joseph. . .199*
Gospel of the
Nativity ........1988


GENERAL INDEX


Apocryphal Gospels—continued
Supplementary or legendary gospels—continued

Gospel of Nativity

of Mary......... 198>
Gospel of Nicodemus 200*
Gospel of the Passion 200%
Gospel of Pseudo-

Matthew ........ 198>
Gospel of Thomas . . 199
Other fabrications. . 200°
Passing of Mary... .199
Protevangelium of


JANES eit enced oe 1988

ef Thomas .......... 2973 (Kerr)
Apollonia............. 200° (Tod)
Apollonius............. 200° (Hutchison)

ef Gennaeus ......... 1214

ef Menestheus ....... 20335

ef Thrasaeus ........ 2975>
Apollophanes.......... 201°
APOWOSh hob eh en ee 2018 (Kerr)


ef Ep. to Hebrews. . . .1358>
ef Pastoral Epistles .. .2260* (Rutherfurd)


Apollyon.............. 201 (Sweet); 2° (Beecher)

NT usage ........... 201

OT background ...... 2015
Apostasy, Apostate. .... 202 (Pratt)

ef Idolatry .......... 1447 (Cobern)
Apostles. ............. 202 (Lambert)

Apostles in Didache.. . 203

Apostleship, the...... 203>

Call of apostles... ...1636 (Orr)

ef Jesus Christ....... 16428 (Orr)

Pail: wis, tecceheate eet 2035

ef Spiritual Gifts . ... 2843* (Lambert)

Twelve, the ......... 202» .

Wider circle of....... 203
Apostles’ Creed........ 204 (Orr); 742 (Alex-

ander)

POrms 3.) scaceetow eae eo 204

History............- 205%

Modern controversies .206*

Origin y-3 3.5 icen eS as 205°

Structure............ 205°

ef Virgin-birth....... 30572 (Sweet)
Apostles, Gospel of the

Twelve

ef Apocryphal Gospels 195* (Hutchison)
Apostolic Age.........- 206° (Easton)

Hellenism........... 207

Jerusalem ehurch .. . . 206°

Judaists............- 2078

Mission............- 206

NT canon .......... 563° (Riggs)

Relations with Rome. . 207% ‘

Spiritual gifts....... 28439 (Lambert)
Apostolic Church Ordi-

nances

ef Didache. .......- 387 (A. T. Robertson)
Apostolic Constitutions

cf Didache .......... 387» (A. T. Robertson)


Apostolic Council ...... 207


3183
Apostolic Fathers...... 207>
Epistles of
ef Literature, Sub-
ADOS) auras haa 1896» (Cowan)
Apothecary............ 207%
ef Perfumer......... 2321> (Patch)
Appaim............... 207%
Apparel............... 207 (Pratt)
Apparently............ 207
Apparition. ........... 207%
Appeal iste cs scaccn agen 2088 (Jacobs)
Appear............... 208+ (Pratt)
Appearance............ 208>
Appearmg............. 208»
Appease.......... 0000. 208»
Appertain............. 208»
Appetite... ............ 208 (S. F. Hunter)
Apphia............0.. 208>
Apphus............... 209% (Wolf)
Appii Forum.......... 209 (Allen)
cf Market .......... 1995> (Raffety)
Apple, Apple-tree....... 209° (Masterman); 1123°
(Eager)
ef Beth-tappuah ..... 453> (Masterman)
ef Tappuah.........2909* (Ewing)
Apple of the Eye....... 209> (W. L. Walker)
Apples of Sodom. ..... .210* (W. L. Walker)
A pplyer eta cian eae 210°
Appoint.............. 210° (Hirsch)
Apprehend............ 210°
ef Comprehend ...... 695> (Pratt)
Approve...........44- 210° (Jacobs)
Apron oc..5:0 4 ee on eae 210 (Eager)
A ptiss aa Gees 210°
Aqueducts............. 6598 (A. C. Dickie)
cf Jericho ........... 1592> (Wright)
Aquila... isi hechesre: 2115 (Kapp)
And Priscilla
cf Ep. to Hebrews. . 1358* (Rees)
ef Septuagint......... 2725» (Thackeray)
Ar, Ar of Moab........ 211+ (Ewing)
ef Gad, Valley of..... 1152> (Ewing)
ALA ir. MR eee Ua lita: 211>
Arab, Arabians (Arabia) 213 (Weir)
Avabah-e.o oc... ieaee 211° (Wright)
Geology of region... . .2128
ef Gomorrah ........ 12778 (Wright)
History. ........-25- 213°
ef Jordan ........... 1732 (Wright)
ef Jordan Valley ..... 1735* (Wright)
cf Lebanon.......... 1863 (Wright)
cf Plain’ Sos ee neers 2406> (Day)
ef Siddim........... 2784° (Wright)
ef Sodom ........-.. 2821> (Wright)


ef Wanderings of Israel 3065* (Conder)
Arabattine (Akrabattine) 89°


Arablare:cicsds efoto s es 213° (Weir)
Flora and fauna..... 216%
Inhabitants.......... 2178
Name and situation... 214
Physical features... .. 214
Political divisions... ..215°
Religion........-.--- 218


3184


GENERAL INDEX


Arabian

ef Arabia ........... 213> (Weir)
Arabic Gospel of the

Infancy :

ef Apocryphal Gospels 195* (Hutchison
Arabic History of Joseph

the Carpenter


ef Apocryphal Gos-
pels avsivachas. Pete an, 195* (Hutchison)

Arabic Language....... 2202 (Boyd)
Arabic Versions........ 2215 (Weir)
Aradige, Aci haetnie er 221> (Beecher)
Aradus sai 6 3s 45 088 eee 221»
AT ene. or tose it Set et 8 os 221>
ATATN 6-8 Ene es ann eee 2228

ef Paddan-aram...... 2206° (Christie)

ef Syria ............2880% (Christie)
Aramaeans, Arameans.. . 222
Aramaic

ef Laban ........... 1819* (Boyd)

ef Languages of OT... 1835> (Weir)

ef Seveneh ..........- 27445

CE SYTMECs ces ws eewss 2883
Aramaic Lauguage..... 222% (J. E. H. Thomson)

Biblical evidences... . .222


Comparison of Biblical
with Assouan Ara-


Comparison of Biblical
with Sinjirli Ara-

Dialects, Aramaic... . .222>

Early Scriptural no-


Elephantine papyri. . .224*
Grammatical construc-
TIONS eens ee 2232


ef Language of NT. ..1826> (A. T. Robertson)

ef Languages of OT ..1832* (Weir)

Seript, Aramaic...... 222»

Cf Syriaenn bat feng 2883"
Aramaic Versions

ef Targums......... 29108 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Aram-dammesek ....... 224>

CPSyrias G2 2 se aes 2880» (Christie)
Aramitess............. 224»
Aram-maacah

ef Syria ............ 2880" (Christie)
Aram-uaharaim

ef Syria... . 2... 2880° (Christic)
Aram-rehob

CRSYTA nto etek 2880> (Christie)
Aram-zobah

ef Syria... 6. ee, 2880° (Christie)
ATAT AN 25 choke Oo oer oe he 224> (Cohon)
Ararat (Ararah, Ararath) 224> (Wright)
ATathes: <A bocce 225> (Harry)
Araunah, the Jebusite. . .225°

ef Jerusalem......... 1601 (Masterman)
Arbaeic beni 4 ont we 220e.


Arba, City of


ef Hebron .......... 1365* (Masterman)
Arbathite..........-.. 225°
Arbattain £5. .csecvae spelt 225> (Ewing)
AT De late fre ita nccncnen ons 225> (Ewing)

cf Beth-arbel........ 443° (Ewing)
ATDIt@hsl ks eles eat 226
Arbonai.............-5 226°
ATCHs ere Phe poi scene 226°
Archaeology

ef Inscription. ....... 1473
Archaeology of Asia

Minoritcen. ayers: 2778 (White)


Byzantine period. .... 281
Early influences from
Mesopotamia...... 2778
First milleanium BC, . 280*
Hittite art, second mil-


lennium BC ....... 278

ef Hittites......... 1395> (Conder)
Romans in Asia Minor 281*

ef Pontus ......... 24182 (White)
Seljukian Turks...... 282"
Tablets of third mil-

lennium BC....... 277°

Archaeology and Criti-

CISM. < caps yeu 226° (Kyle)
Function...........- 228°
History...........-- 2298


ef Table of Nations. . .2898% (Pinches)
ef Tell el-Amarna.. .. .2927 (Kyle)


Archangel (Angel)...... 132° (J. M. Wilson)
Archelaus...........-.- 233°

ef Herod ............ 1378 (Dosker)
Archery. ...........--- 233> (Eager)

cf Shaft... 4. cee cee 2746
Archevite............. 233°
Archi (Archites)........ 238° (Wolf)
Archippus............. 233°
Architecture. .......... 2342 (A. C. Dickie)

ef Building .......... 5278 (A. C. Dickie)

OF Citys eucs cece aheaes 6628 (A. C. Dickie)

Estimates........... 2348

ef Fortification ...... 1136 (Nicol)

Herodian work....... 238%

ef House ............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)

ORTEWS: vote eed eee 234°

Maccabean work... . . 237

ef Mason ........... 2007%

Painted tombs at Ma-

MISSA ceKucie Asean 237°
Plans is pic vescstln ce be sek 234
Solomon’s temple and
palace. 2. cPagnes e5 234»

Synagogues.......... 238%

Temple of Onias......237%

ef Temple........... 2930° (Caldecott; Orr)
Archites............... 238> (Wolf)

ef Ataroth .......... 317° (Ewing)
Archives.... 0.0.0.2... 238>
Arcturus... ......-.... 238°


Arcturus (Great Bear). . .
ATO EE eae on meh airs


Arelites (Areli).........
Areopagite

ef Dionysius.........
Areopagus............-
Areopolis....... Sanath
ATS Aosta avieaee ae


Fe ee nay


ef Iduel
ef Jerusalem.........
Aright! 22: ¢agt. Schade


Aristeas
ef Septuagint
Aristobulus...........-
ef Asmoneans........
ef Hyrcanus
ef Maccabaeus.......
Aristotle
ef Logos
Arithmetic
ef Number


ef Lacedaemonians . .

ef Oniares

ef Sparta
Ark

ef Libraries
Ark of Bulrushes.......

cf Moses
Ark of the Covenant...

Contents of........--


History of.......----
cf Holy of Holies....
At Kiriath-jearim....
ef Mercy-seat, The ..
Names of........---
Pentateuch........--
Removal by David ..
Significance of.......


GENERAL INDEX


313%
238
55%

238
238
238
238?
238>


8508 (Harry)

238> (Harry)

239>

239»

240+ (Dosker)

240* (Wolf); 240 (Ewing)
2180 (Orr)

3001> (Ewing)

2414

627> (Orr)


. .225° (Harry)


2418

2418

240° (Wolf)

241° (Beecher)
1448>

1596 (Masterman)
2418

2414 (S. F. Hunter)
2414 (Pinches)
1326® (Pinches)
2980" (Pinches)
241

241 (S. F. Hunter)


27232 (Thackeray)
241> (M. O. Evans)
283 (Dosker)
1445>

19468 (Hutchison)
1017® (Alexander)
1912> (Alexander)


2157> (Smith)
2428


.1819> (Hutchison)


2195?
2839 (Orr)


1883 (Richardson)
242° (Kyle)
20848 (Kyle)


.242> (Lotz); 12* (Beeche>)


244%
243»
245°


. 14052 (Caldecott)
. 18125 (Masterman)
.2036* (Caldecott)


244>
242


.794* (Weir)


3185
Ark of the Covenant—continued
cf Tabernacle........ 2890"; 2892 (Caldecott;
Orr)
ef Temple........... 2933 (Caldecott; Orr)
Ark of Noah. .......... 246° (Wright)
ef Deluge ........... 821> (Wright)
et Noah csc enced 2153 (Wright)
Ark of Testimony -
ef Ark of the Covenant .242> (Lotz)
ATkiteseesscs ss Be oes 246> (Porter)
ADIN seat Noes eee 246» (8. F. Hunter)
Armageddon........... 246
ef Megiddo......... 2027 (Ewing)
Armenia..............246> (Tisdall)
ATYATN Sk ios sees 248>
ef Togarmah ........ 2993° (Pinches)
Turanian ........... 247
Armenian Language. . . .250° (Tisdall)
Armenian Religion . : . . .249 (Tisdall)
Armenian Versions of
Bible® files inss 249> (Tisdall)
Ancient............. 249»
Modern............. 250°
cf Versions, Georgian .3048* (Easton)
Armhole.............. 250> (W. W. Davies)
Armileti. cc polis veka 250° (Eager)
APMONI 6 Meee cee 2518
ef Mephibosheth ..... 2033> (Wallace)
Armor, Arms.......... 251° (Nicol)
Datteiyer cnn evaicks 789»
Defensive weapons... .252
ef Gorget ........... 1279» (Nicol)
ef Habergeon ..... .. 1313
Ta NA 6 oe 2g a a 251%
TntOW > cas eo be ch cee OL
Offensive weapons... .251>
ef Rod ............-2596" (Orr)
ef Shaft ............2746
Armor-bearer.......... 2548 (Nicol)
ATMOTY 3 cence tes 254» (Nicol)
ATIMY vise soi ete lds 254° (Nicol); 2512 (Nicol)
Early monarchy of
Istaelsn ound ies: 2558
In the field.......... 256"
First. campaign of his-
POLY tore nate atta aes 254>
Israelites in wilder-
NESS... eee ee  254P
Israelitish tribes after
conquest .......... 255%
TON Ay ech ie giegt ns 2578
Organization of He-
brew army........ 256
ef Rankss tei sa 2530"
ef Rearward.........2534>
From Solomon onward 256°
ef War ............. 3069 (Nicol)
Army, Roman......... 2572 (Allen); 382 (Nicol)
Allusions in NT......2584
ef Julius ............ 1780»
Organization......... 2578
ATE is baz ova blade 258>


3186 GENERAL INDEX


Amanicares os cui aca g (258?
ATG Arey Sead asa et 258>
AMON 5 ie iaen ook eos 259° (Ewing)
Arod, Arodi, Arodites. . . 259%
ATOCL? 8, Sciehiads hema: 2599 (Ewing)
Aroerite............... 259
Aromat ai) eet oo 259»
Arpachshad (Arphaxad) . 259°

ef Semites.......... 27174 (Mack)
Arpadrs cc iat tac bess 259> (S. F. Hunter)
Arphaxad............. 259>
ATT AYE x be Sect a cenabe 259> (S. F. Hunter)
Arrest and Trial of Jesus

CHLIStiri Sais Ge ergs _. .1668> (Maclaren)
ATTIVE fotos gti a teed « 259» ;
Arrogancy............. 260
Arrow

ef Archery .......... 233> (Hager)

ef Armor ........... 2512 (Nicol)
Arrows, Divination by.. .331°
Arrowsnake........... 260°

cf Owl 2 i eee 2205 (Stratton-Porter)

ef Serpent .......... 2736* (Day)
ATSECES a cou tae 260° (R. D. Wilson)
Arsareth (Arzareth).....261>
Arsiphurith............ 260°
Artaxerxes............ 260" (R. D. Wilson)
Artemas . 2.260
Artemis

cf Diana ............ 842> (Banks)
Artificer

cf Crafts.........0... 7348 (Patch)
Artillery. ............. 261%
Artisan

ef Crafts ............ 7342 (Patch)
Arts

ef Crafts ........... 734% (Patch)
Arubboth............. 2615
Arumah............... 2618
Arvad, Arvadites....... 2612 (Porter)

ef Aradus ........... 221

ef Island ........... -,15112 (Day)
APRA hols hoe idan ete ok 261
Arzareth........0.000.. 261>
AS2 ese ee waltile ig gett: 261»
ABA eas in Cette 2615 (W. W. Davies)
ASA CI1AS 86250 cc idee 2625

ef Hasadiah.......... 13422
Asael (Asiel)........... 282>
Asahel ic. cae Seta cithate cies 262* (Beecher)
Asahiah............... 262
Asalalis oc c5s4 Se otens 262> (W. W. Davies)
ABAIE 206 en cepa hen acre 262
Asaph................262 (Millar)

ef Music ............ 2094> (Millar)

cf Psalms, Book of... .2490" (Sampey)
ABAD Ai Ao cjoiedese otter eee 263"
Asaramel.............. 263" (Wolf)
Asareel, Asarel......... 2632


Asarelah (Asharelah).. . .267%
Asbasareth(Asbacaphath)263*
ef Ashurbanipal...... 271%; 367> (Clay)


Ascalomisss 2uiene a3 See 263

cf Ashkelon ......... 269° (Porter)
Ascend.........0.0.005 263 (Farr)
Ascension............. 263 (Thomas);

(Bevan)

In the Acts ......... 263°

In the Gospels ...... 263>

In the Hebrews...... 264*

Of Isaiah ........... 170° (J. BE. H. Thomson)

cf Jesus Christ....... 1666® (Orr)

In Johannine writings 264>

NT teachings........ 264

In Pauline Epistles... 264?

In Petrine Epistles .. .264+

Problems. ........... 2654

Relation to Christ... .265

Teaching for Chris-

TANS ess late titel 265°

ASCOMG Se eis ay cae 266° (Farr)
Ascetics

ef Abstinence........25" (Eager)
Aschenaz (Ashkenaz).. . .269>
(ABOAS fen. os Sv teee Be 266>

ef Isshijah ..........1542
Asebebias............. 266>

cf Sarabias (Apoc)... . 26905

cf Sherebiah ........ 2764> (Wolf)
Asebias..............- ‘266°
Asenath............... 266% (Boyd)
Aseria cnn Buse ok arte 266°
Aserer (Serar).......... 2732
ASH igh tees hens Phe 2665 (Masterman)
Ash (Bear)

cf Astronomy ........ 300° (Maunder)
Ashamed. ............. 2672 (Pratt)

cf Shame ........... 2748 (Stuart)
Ashan................267%
Asharelah............. 2679
Ashbea..........000-. 267°
Ashbel, Ashbelite....... 267 (Wolf)
ASHAOD sigcaseety ches 267° (Porter)
Ashdodites............ 267>
Ashdoth Pisgah........268%

ef Pisgah ........... 24002 (Ewing)
Ashert sy? ek hoes, eS atans 268" (Ewing)

ef Galilee ........... 1163+ (Ewing)

CEH Azores eevee cers 1347> (Ewing)
Ashérahe-ois32 o...5.Ab se 268 (Sayce)

ef Gezer ............ 1223 (Masterman)

ChGOd ica ee Mid 1256* (Rees)

Ch Gods s..5.25-45-4-48 tae 1271* (Reeve)

cf High Place........ 1390* (Easton)
Asherim

ef Semites........... 2717" (Mack)
Asherites.............. 2698
Aphess ss teeny thee 269 (Eager)

cf Heifer, Red........1867> (Easton)
ABI eters each cen See 269 (Cohon)
Ashima veces eee e es 269 (Sayce)

ef Gods ............. 1271 (Reeve)
Ashkelon.............. 269» (Porter)
Ashkelonites........... 269»


GENERAL INDEX


Ashkenaz............. 269
cf Table of Nations .. .2898 (Pinches)
Ashnah............ «270° (Masterman)
Ashpenaz............,270* (R. D. Wilson)
Ashriel (Asriel)......... 2879
Ashtaroth, Ashteroth-
karnain, Beesh-
terabe cen. fees 2708 (Ewing)
ef Ashtoreth ........ 270° (Sayce)
ef Philistines ........ 2377" (Conder)
Ashterathite........... 270°
Ashteroth-karnaim ..... 270; 2709 (Ewing)
Ashtoreth............. 270° (Sayce) ; 2708 (Ewing)
ef Gods 2c cces ass 12715 (Reeve)
ef Harlot ........... 1339 (Eager)
ef Palestine, Recent
Exploration....... 2233 (Cobern)
ef Phoenicia ......... 2386" (Porter); 23895
(Porter)
ef Semites .......... 27179 (Mack)
Ashur (Ashhur)........ 269 (Cohon)
Ashurbanipal.......... 271 (Clay); 3675 (Clay)
Ashurites.............. 2728
Ashvath.............. 2728
ASIA PE Mes caso us oh ebe nee 272 (Banks)
ef Lydia ............ 1943+ (Banks)
Asia Minmor............ 272» (Calder)
Christianity in... ....276>
Country............ 2738
First century AD... .275>
History.............2749
Asia Minor, Archaeology
Oley ec Niak a inet 277 (White)
Byzantine period..... 2815
Early influences from
Mesopotamia...... 277
First millennium BC. .2807
ef Hittites ........ 1395 (Conder)
Romansin Asia Minor 281°
ef Pontus ......... 2413" (White)
Seljukian Turks...... 282
Tablets of third mil-
lennium BC....... 277
Aslarchia24 Ataf nsetee 2828 (M. O. Evans)
Asibias.............0-5 282°
Asideitioat..8: cpt et 2828
Aslelee’ oda edtecee es 282
Asipha..........-..- 2825; 13.43%
Asli seth Sra on mania ites 282> (Kapp)
ef Amiss ...........- 1165
cf Prayer ......2430° (Lambert)
Askelon............05 282
Asleepe i.e. ees hc 282> (Pratt)
Asmodaeus.........--. 283° (Hutchison)
Asmoneans............283* (Dosker)
ef Aristobulus........ 242° (M. O. Evans)
Decadence of Macca-
bean House........ 285»
ef Government....... 1289° (Heidel)
ef Greece, Sons of ... .1305*
ef Hasmoneans...... 1527» (Weir)


ef John ...........-- 1706> (Hutchison)


3187

Asmoneans—continued

John Hyrcanus...... .285

Jonathan............ 2845

Judas Maccabaeus.. . .283>

cf Maccabaeus .. .. .1946" (Hutchison); 1947
(T. W. Davies)
Mattathias.......... 283
ef Mattathias...... 20085 (Angus)

ef Palestine .........2220> (Conder)

cf Pharisees ......... 2361s (J. E. H. Thomson)

Simon.............. 285%
Asn aling ce Arusha oe 286>
Asnapper (Ashurbanipal) 271; 3675 (Clay)
Asochis, Plain of

cf Cana of Galilee .. . .5486 (Ewing)
ASOUIS euieiatt entity fic 2865
(ABD veigtindea teen ties 2 eatin, 286 (Day)

ef Adder ............ 55° (Day)
Aspalathus............286"
Aspatha..........6005. 2865
Asphalt

cf Slime ............2817 (Day)
Asphar, The Pool....... 286 (Ewing)
Aspharasus...........- 2865
Weriel enn s sate nem 2878
[Nes M Gyo corte nek, 2872 (Cohon)

ef Horse... .c.c eee 1423° (Day)
Assalimoth (Salimoth).. .2663>
Assamiag.............. 288%
Assaphioth............ 2882
Assarion

cf Farthing ......... 1098>
Assassination.......... 288" (Hirsch)

ef Crimes ........... 746 (Hirsch)
Assassins... ......000.. 2884 (S. F. Hunter)

ef Felix Antonius... ..1105% (Kerr)

ef Murderers ........2094* (Nicol)

cf Thief fey. ere 2972" (Easton)

cf Zealot ............ 3133 (Heidel)
Assault. oi. settee cs 2885
ASBAV 8 2s Pats deanna 288> (Nicol)
Assemblies, Masters of. .2885 (8. F. Hunter)

ef Asuppim......... 316

cf Master ........... 20075 (W. L. Walker)
Assembly............. 289° (Kapp)

ef Church ........... 650 (Lambert)

cf Congregation ...... 700° (Wiener)
Assembly, Solemn

cf Congregation. ..... 700 (Wiener)

cf Feasts and Fasts. . . 11038 (E. D. Isaacs)
INSSen bie: Peete ae oS :2898
Assessor... 1.2... cee 289% (Eager)

ef Tax, Taxing....... 2918* (Sweet)
Asseurus.. 06.6... . 000s 80 (R. D. Wilson)
Asshur, Assur

ef Assyria ........... 290% (Sayce)
Asshurim.....: aid MeeeS 289°
Assideans

ef Hasidaeans........ 1342’ (Hutchison)
Assiduous.............2895
(ASSIGN. Wat rewre ts gets 289»
IAGSIPiatigs en - tact beanie 289>


3188 GENERAL INDEX


Associate.............. 289»
PASSOS Des cn Piclieice ee ae 289° (Banks)
Assuage.............0. 2902
Assumption of Moses... .161> (J. E. H. Thomson)
Assur
ef Asur............. 316
Assurance............. 290" (Pratt)
Assurbanipal
ef Ashurbanipal...... 271» (Clay); 3675 (Clay)
Assyria...............290° (Sayce)
AT ice on detec 291%
Chrouology.......... 2933
Climate and pro-
ductions.......... 290°
Early history........ 290°
ef Amorites........ 1193 (Sayce)
Excavations......... 293%
ef Sherghat........ 2764® (Banks)
Furniture, pottery aud
embroidery........292*
Geography.......... 290%
Government and army 292
FIStory < ee eis eceie: 293»
Ashurbanipal...... 294
Fall of empire...... 294
Older empire...... 293°
Second empire..... 2944
Tiglath-pileser..... 2948
ef Inscription. .......14735
Language, literature,
science............ 2928
ef Nineveh, Library
5) Cer, een te eno 2151" (Sayce)
Mechanics........... 2918
cf Menahem......... 2031» (Caldecott)
ct Pekahy 44 caike Syd 2295 (Caldecott)
ef Phoenicia ......... 2390° (Porter)
Population.......... 2914
ef Rab-saris ......... 2522 (Clippinger)
Religion............ 292
ef Babylonia....... 358° (Clay)
ef Babylonia, Re-
ligion of......... 368° (Rogers)
cf Semites .......... 2717 (Mack)
cf Shalmaneser...... 2747> (Nicol)
cf Sherghat, or
Asshur............ 2764 (Banks)
cf Ships and Boats... .2775> (Nicol)
Trade and Law...... 2914
ef Amraphel....... 126° (Pinches)
Ch Dye oe os 3031» (Porter)
Assyria and Babylonia,
Religion of .......... 368° (Rogers)
Assyrian and Babylonian
Libraries
cf Nineveh, Library of .2151% (Sayce)
Assyrian Captivity...... 2747 (Nicol)
Assyrians............. 295°
cf Israel, History of. . .15228 (Orelli)
ABladiit ho) ite wkicaseee ce 295°
ef Azgad ............ 344>
cf Sadas ............ 26588


Astaroth (Ashtaroth)....270" (Ewing)
Astarte, Astoreth (Ash-


taroth) oss. en Ya 270° (Ewing)
ef Images ........... 1452 (Cobern)
Astathin oconacsnsag natsten 295>
ef Aggad ............ 3446
Astonished, Astonied.. . .295% (Pratt)
Astonishment.......... 295»
ASU jira rina aise 295» (Pratt)
Astrologers."........... 2978
Astrology............. 295 (Maunder);
(T. W. Davies)
Astrologers.......... 2978
Chiun worship....... 298
Divination.......... 296
ef Familiar .......... 10948 (Pollard)
ef Fortune .......... 11418
ef Gad, God of Good
Duk cn seen aeienk 1152 (Stearns)
Gadh and Meni...... 2998
ef Golden Calf... ....1275
“Looking in the liver”’. 296
ef Liver........... 1905® (Luering)
ef Lucifer ........... 1934»
cf Magi............ 19622 (‘Tisdall)
Mazzaloth........... 298%
ef Meni............. 20332
ef Moloch........... 2075"
Monthly prognosti-
CALORS 2.84 see iene cn 297
ef Moon ............ 2081 (Schenk)
ef Rephan..........25603
Saturn or Moloch wor-
SHIP! 4.4 hey 298"
ef Calf, Golden... . .542 (Cobern)
Soothsaying......... 2962
Stargazers........... 297°
Systemsof.......... 2992
ef Week ............ 3078
cf Wise Men ........ 3096> (Easton)
Astronomy............ 300° (Maunder)
ef Abyss ............ 26° (T. Lewis)
Cherubim........... 310°
Constellations........ 309
ef Day-star......... 8002 (Maunder)
Destruction, city of... .302*
Eclipses............. 303°; 310
Falling stars......... 3082
ef Feasts, Seasons
LOM teen eh ee 1104>
ef Golden Number... .1275*
Great Bear.......... 313°
cf Heavens, Phy-
BIC og Ses doe andes noch 1352
cf Host of Heaven... .1483> (Orr)
ef Leviathan......... 18684 (Day) |
ef Magi............ 1962+ (Tisdall)
ef Mazzaroth ........ 20139
cf Merodach......... 2036»
ef Month ........... 2081 (Porter)
Moone ine cites naka 303°


860°


GENERAL INDEX


3189


Astronomy—continued


Morning stars........ 308"
ef Nimrod .......... 2147 (Mack)
CRINOLtH es oe aw eae 2155* (Day)
Ordinances of the
heaven............ 3012
QOrION ss 3 eae Ae eae 312+
Physiography........ 3148
Pleiades............. 311>
ef Rahab ........... 2525> (N. Isaacs)
cf Sabbaths ......... 26345
cf Sabbatical ........ 2634> (Baur)
Seasons............. 3048
cf Seasons ........ 2710> (Joy)


cf Serpent, Crooked. . .2738>
Signs of Zodiac
cf South, Chambers


AtiONG.) Sis oi atecned oe


History of
ef Holy of Holies...
Legal enactments. .
ef Leviticus.......
cf Mercy-seat
ef Propitiation
Significance of
And forgiveness
ef Imputation
cf Lamb of God
Love as secret of.....


CEA Oe eee hee 2838» ef Mediation eee
Dine veri 306» of Obedience of Christ.
Sun... .-- 2. esse eee 301° cf Pauline Theology...
CH TIMES. 2 eee keen te 2982 (Porter) ef Propitiation.......
ef Tires, Round...... 2986" cf Reconcile .........
Wandering stars... .. 308° ef Salvation .........
CE Weele ioe eee 3078 Atroth-beth-joab ......
ef Wormwood, The Sic ah i eee De at

Star cscs: 3110" (Orr) iol anoptane ne
CE Year isa kas 2: 3126 Rigel heen recs

Astyages.............. 316" (Harry) se ee. hs
Asundér ic vaccines gens 316" (8. F. Hunter) pets ied AO
Pak Pe Ore ee ef Pampbylia ........
fee (Ae Tee ai tL TER EM 316> (Wi Atbalusies oh ce oh aati s
eee iy cea DNR CYJEnee) Attend, Attendance... ..
ef Homicide ......... 14184 (Levertoff) Pee are
Asyneritus............. 3178 A eee PRN BCs
Atad (Abel-mizraim)....6* (Beecher) of Tirshatha es ee ; i
Atar it wiecatiee bietcen out Adis oe A thatins
eee panes cf Tirshatha.........
Atargatis, Atergatis..... 3179 (Sayce) ate Tyeien ee
Atarothes ceevrosar i8 317° (Ewing) es re TAREE
ALOT Ti den settee alent Bigeye pec oe ee
Aterezaias............- 317 Attitudes. . beret eens
A betaine see. tc ce ated cree 317° ef Adoration terete
Athach _.317> Bowing............-
ATSIAN: Seicis os Vcceas 317 ef Gesture ..........
Athaliah..............317 (Caldecott) Kneeling... ....----:
ef Jehoash .....-.... 1575> (Caldecott) ef Knee, Kneel.....
ef Jehoiada ......... 15783 (Roberts) Prostration......-..-
ef Judah, Kgd. of... .1760* (Weir) Standing............
Athanasian Creed... ... 743+ (Alexander) Attus (Hattush).......-
Atharias Audience eecielcasotinaecetige te
ef Tirshatha ........ 2986 (R. D. Wilson) Augla.... +... ee eee ees
Atharim.............- 318> Augurs’ Oak. Strasse
ef Hormah........... 1422° (Ewing) ef Divination ........
Atheism..........-..5- 318" (Kapp) ef Meonenim ........
ef Creation ......... 7382 (J. Lindsay) AMBUTY seeiag ass cetoans Ges
CEGOd tire Ase ee 1250* (Rees) ome ie ie ny:
Athenians..........--- 319> mong the Hebrews. .
ef Athens ........... 319> (Harry) Among the Romans...
Athenobius...........- 319> ef Astrology SER Src
Athens ingen ore a ie 319> (Harry) cf Divination ........
Churchin........... 1903> (Cowan) Augustan Band........
ef Unknown God..... 3037 (Haston) ef Army, Roman.....


321° (Carver); 6276 (Orr)
324> (Miller)
1207 (Méller)


1405+ (Caldecott)
324


.1876° (Maller)


2036° (Caldecott)
24679 (Carver)
3268

11358

14624 (Hodge)
1823* (Bevan)
1698> (Law)
2018 (Edwards)
2175> (Crannell)
2291» (Easton)
24672 (Carver)
2536 (M’Caig)
2669 (Easton)


328° (Hirsch)
328° (Banks)
2236 (Banks)


2986> (R. D. Wilson)
328° (Eager)

875> (Eager)

3299 (W. W. Davies)
60° (Edwards)


3312 (T. W. Davies)
8608 (T. W. Davies)


3314 (T. W. Davies)
331>

331

3315

2962 (Maunder)

860° (T. W. Davies)
2582 (Allen); 3825 (Nicol)
2574 (Allen)


3190 GENERAL INDEX


Augustus. ............. 332° (Hutchison) al Azaelus...............3423
ef Emperor ......... 941> Azal (Azel)..........-- 344
Aul (Awl)............. 341+ Azaligh 22 soo. cacee et 3424
AUDtieccd n-ce ee et 332 Aganiahi.s si:..cc ecu 3428
ef Relationships, Azaphion (Assaphioth) . .288°
Family........... 2554* (N.and E. D. Isaacs) | Azara (Asara)......... 2632
Auranitis (Hauran).... . 13442 (Ewing) Azarael (Azarel)........342*
Austere. ........-..005 322 (Pratt) Azaraias...........00- 3428
Author..........-..0-5 333 (Edwards) ef Seraiah ........... 27328 (Wolf)
Authority, in General Azareel (Azarel)........ 3423
ef Authority, in Re- Azarel........... een 3428
ligion............. 333 (Rees) ef Uzziel ............ 3044» (Roberts)
ef Truth ............ 3025* (Carver) Azariah........6...00. 3428 (W. W. Davies)
Authority, in Religion. . .833* (Rees) ef Oded ............ 2178> (Roberts)
Biblical references. . . .334> AZATIOS ohio te es eS 324»
Biblical teaching. .... 335° Prayer of...........- 787> (R. D. Wilson)
NT teaching....... 336" ef Saraias ........... 2691»
ef Doctrine...... 866> (Rees) AGaru... ccc cc cee 342»
OT teaching....... 335» Raz ve ter ea eck eae 342»
Classification of theo- Azazel................342% (Méller)
TICS Pt XS ee eeh ests 338° ef Night-monster..... 2144» (Sweet)
Ecclesiastical doctrine . 337 Agaziaher 7 cows Se eee 3448
Absolutism........ 338" Azbasareh (Asbasareth). 263*
Logos. .........0.. 337° Azbasareth (Asbasareth).263*
Reformation princi- ADDU ee trols tets ieee 3448
ples..........-. 3382 Agekah. oo... 00. ...000. 3448 (Masterman)
Skepticism........ 338" ADC id cies aes 344°
Generalidea......... 333> ATOM cae. Ot eh Mea ee 3446
Authorized Version..... 4693 (Orr) Azephurith (Arsiphurith) 260°
ef English Versions. . .945> (Hutchison) AzetaS........ccc0euee 344b
Auxilia, Roman........ 257> (Allen) Agpadn. 3 pei viewed 344
Ava (Avva)........05. 340° BTL bo eet es cu Sees 344>
Avail icine e 340° Aziells concn koh enaretertte 344>
AVAraNit 2... co ecla eee 3408 CAL Were eee aera ree 344>
AVED Pee eh erste ents hs 340° Azmaveth (person)..... 344>
Avenge, Avenger....... 340° (Breslich) Azmaveth (place)...... 345%
cf Goel... 2.2.2.0... 1272> (Breslich) RGNTON core: Wh aode ok 345
ef Revenge .......... 25878 (Breslich) Aznoth-tabor .......... 345%
AVETSE (Se feseg oie os 340° INGOR Meine! tae chines: 345+
Avesta WAZOLUS «2 Sites ble times aie 345"
ef Persian Religion . . .2331> (Tisdall) Nariel toh dt, sma 3452
Avim (Avva)........-- 340° Agrikam.............. 3452
Avims (Avvim)........340 (Sayce) Maibalien cen eceee <bean 345
Avites (Avvim)........340 (Sayce) Azur (Azaur).......... 345»
Avithten atts ee passat as 340° Asuran (Azaru)........342
AVOIN oso eat atet snes 340° Aaah ek eke, we: 345
Avouch........-....-. 340° Cf Gana coc sed 1178 (Porter)
AVN Gergen Hoke + eae 340° ROGAN estos en as 345
Avvim, Avites......... 340° (Sayce) AQBUr. occ cccccecece cee 345>
IN WEI sett fecuncch tetas 340°
A WaAKG? a cccsciicct nes 340° (Pratt) Baal cic 3 esac cage ce 345° (Sayce); 346> (Pratt)
Away with............ 341% Attributes........... 3455
GN SEN Reaction oe 3415 (Edwards) ef Baalath-beer...... 3473
Aw lix Ruancane. coca dees 3412 -ef Beelzebub ........ 423 (Rees)
cf Bore ..........0-- 5042 (T. Lewis) Forms of. ........... 3462
ef Tools ............2998 (Easton) ef Gezer ............ 12248 (Masterman)
Ax, Axhead............ 3415 (Patch) CEGOdS) 5 cece ccc ee 1271* (Reeve)
ef Tools ............2998> (Easton) ef Jezebel ........... 1675 (Roberts)
Axle, Axle-tree Name and character. .345*
of Wheel.......-.... 3082 (Easton) ef Phoenicia ......... 2389° (Porter)
PAYING dated in bes 3428 (W. W. Davies) ef Semites, Semitic


Azael.. occ ccc eee 3428 Religion........... 27172 (Mack)


GENERAL INDEX


Baal—continued
Temples of..........
Worship............

Baalah............2055


GE Baal vos pien ete’
Baale-judah

ef Kiriath-jearim.....
Baal-gad..............
Baal-hamon

ef Baal .............
Baal-hanan ..........
Baal-hazor ............


cRpaaiste ee


ef Baal .............
Ch Aims et hah ens
Baal-perazim ..........
ef Perazim, Mount ..
Baalsamus...........-
Baal-shalishah .........
Baal-tamar ...........
Baalzebub...........--
CheBaals.2 ieee Bek
ef Gods .........-..


Baani (Apoc)
ef Maani...........
Baanias
ef Banneas (Apoc). .


ef Zimri.........-0-


Babel, Babylon (topo-
graphical)..........-
Babel, Babylon........
ef Calah ........----
Date of foundation...
Descriptions of ruins. .
Hanging gardens... ..


2193° (Kyle)
3478
346° (Sayce)


1811» (Masterman)
347%


346° (Sayce)


347%


347%


. .847>


346> (Sayce)
347


345: (Sayce)
347°
347> (Ewing)


346° (Sayce)
3149> (Roberts)
347° (Masterman)


. 23208


347»

347> (Ewing)
3482

348*

346> (Sayce)

12712 (Reeve)
3482 (Conder)
3482

3482

3482


1945»


3848


1946* (Lees)

348¢ (Breslich); 261°
916" (Mosiman)
3150* (Mosiman)
348> (Rees)


3492 (Clay)
3502 (Pinches)
539° (Pinches)
350%; 355>
352

3514; 3542


Location, plan and


temple ...........


350°


Babel, Babylon—continued
Modern explorations. .352>
Nebuchadrezzar’s ac-


COUNT: ae eS 351>
Palace and walls
(Ctesias).......... 3518
Palaces: 5 ss. tad 8 ses 351; 353>
ef Shinar ........... 2772> (Pinches)
Temple of Belus......351
Temple restored ..... 352°


cf Babel, Tower of. .355> (Pinches)
cf Tongues, Con-


fusion of.......... 2994> (Easton)
Babel, Tower of........ 355° (Pinches)
Babylonian _ descrip-
PON eesiee cose ears 3562

cf Calah: : s.es-.¢ ade: 539> (Pinches)

Herodotus’ description 357*

Location............ 355>

ef Shinar ........... 2772» (Pinches)

cf Tongues, Con-
fusion of.......... 2994 (Easton)

Walk through Baby-
lone eee” 354

Walls and gates...... 350°

Work of Nebuchadrez-

FAL Sas hae areata 361>
Works of Semiramis
and Nitocris. ......350°
Bablencsdicewee ted asso 358
Babylonin NT........ 358 (Fortune)
Babylon in OT
ef Babel, Babylon... .350* (Pinches)
Babylonia............. 358 (Clay)

Accommodation...... 33¢ (Sweet)

Architecture......... 361°
cf Babel, Babylon . .351> (Pinches)

SATUS. crseertcaa Gt aasheets te 3625
Lapidist’s work... . 3627
Metal work ....... 3622
Sculpture......... 3622

Babylonian Dynasty. .367¢
Ashurbanipal....... 367>
Esarhaddon........ 367%
Nabopolassar...... 367>
Sennacherib....... 367%

Cassite Dynasty...... 366"

City kingdoms. ......364°

Excavations and tab-
letset. ttc cme vate 359%

First dynasty of
Babylon.......... 365>
Hammurabi....... 3667

ef Gods ............- 1270> (Reeve)

Inhabitants.......... 360°
Semites...........360*
Sumerians......... 360"

cf Inscription... .....1473*

Isin Dynasty.......- 3665
Nebuchadrezzar I . .3665

Language.........-.8619


3191


3192


GENERAL INDEX :


Babylonia—continued


Libraries............ 363°
Ashurbanipal...... 363
At Nippur......... 3632
At Sippar......... 363"

Literature........... 362>


ef Ashurbanipal.. . .271>
ef Babylonia and As-


(Clay)


syria, Religion of .368 (Rogers)


ef Code of Ham-


Monotheism an im-
possible concep-


murabi.......... 13275 (Ungnad)
cf Tell el-Amarna . .2925> (Kyle)
Names, personal..... 363>
Neo-Babylonian Em-
PIG sn Gare 367>
ef Captivity....... 572» (Nicol)
Evil-Merodach..... 367
Nabonidus........ 367
Nabopolassar...... 367%
Nebuchadregzar IT..367>
Persianrule.......... 3688
Cambyses......... 3688
Cyrisiiee Sisk: 3688
Sealand Dynasty..... 366
ef Semites, Semitic
Religion........... 27178 (Mack)
Writing............. 3615
Babylonia and Assyria,
Religion of.......... 368> (Rogers)
Astral theory of the
universe .......... 3748
History............. 369
Major aud minor
deities .......... 369>


tIONE I ke 370°
Hymns and prayers . .372°
Life after death...... 373°
Magis oief scne ata ca 373?
Maqlu............ 373%
Shurpu........... 373"
ef Merodach......... 2036>
Myths and epics ..... 373


Adapa, story of .. . .3873>
Deluge, story of... .3874*
Gilgames, story of. .3748


ef Nebo ............ 2126>
ef Nergal ........... 21345
ef Nimrod .......... 2147> (Mack)
ef Nisroch.......... 2153
' Pantheon........... 370°
ANU caiodte eoxt Oks 370°
Asshur............ 3728
] OP eee ee a ee 370>
Mn lil enone tak Seen 370°
Ishtar 2-3. nc4ales 371
Marduk........... 371
Nabi... ccheescgtee 37 1>
Nergal............ 371b
Ninib............. 3722
Rammon,.........- 3725


Babylonia and Assyria, Religion of—continued
Pantheon—continued


Shamash.......... 3718
Sintesaceorens ake 371
Tammuz........-- 3729
Relations with  reli-
gion of Israel....... 375"
ef World, Cosmologi-
(C1: H Ene necaee eats vee gee? 3107> (Orr)
Babylonian Captivity. . .375°
ef Captivity ......... 569» (Nicol)
Babylonians........... 375°
ef Jeremiah ......... 1589> (Orelli)


Babylonish Garment... .375°
Babylonish Mantle..... 375» (Beecher)


BaGaere cerca tcle cies 375° (Beecher)
Bacchides...........-- 375> (Breslich)

ef Alcimus.......... 89> (Mack)

ef Maccabees (Jona-

than, Judas)....... 1947 (Hutchison)

cf Nicanor ..........2141* (Angus)
Bacchurus..........-.- 3762
Bacchus..........-..-- 376% (Rees)

ef Abomination of

Desolation........ 17> (Hirsch)

ef Dionysia ......... 850% (Harry)
Bacenor........--+.+5: 3765
Bachrite

ef Becher ........... 4218
Back, Back Parts.......376* (M. O. Evans)
Backbite.............. 3765

Backbiters........... 376°

Backbiting.......... 3765
Backside

CE Back sigs cia ete 376° (M. O. Evans)
Backslide.............376°

ef Apostasy .........2028 (Pratt)

Backslider........... 376°
Badger.........----06 376° (Day)

ef Porpoise.......... 24225

ef Sealskin .......... 2709»
Baéanel x. deg aaendgeh aa es 377%

ef Maon............ 1984 (Ewing)
Batic aoe ix. tay deomnars 377 (Eager)

ef Scrip ...........-. 2705
Baggage............-. 377 (M. O. Evans)
BagOry oh ios deel 378
Baga ii 6)ssesecatiutee alse’ 378"

ef Judith ...........1778%
Bagoliter hoe sea keene 378%
Baharumite, Barhumite. 3788
Bahurim.............. 378 (Ewing)

ef Olives, Mount of. . .2186° (Masterman)
Baiterus.............. 3789
Bajith (Bayith)........ 378%
Bakbakkar............ 378°
Bakbuk............... 3788
Bakbukiah............ 378"
Bakemeats............ 378

ef Bread ............ 514> (Hager)


ef Food ...........-- 1121 (Eager)


GENERAL INDEX 3193


Baking
ef Bread ............ 514> (Eager)
Baking Pan
ef Bread ............ 514> (Eager)
ChePan tS 0 seers et 2237 (Betteridge)
Balaaimin cates gens 378 (Baur)
cf Ep. of Jude ....... 1770* (Moorehead)
ef Zimri............ 3149> (Roberts)
Balac
ef Balak ............ 379
Baladan............... 379> (R. D. Wilson)
Balalie chs. air eens 379>
Balak se tees aye ctoe een 379°
ef Balaam .......... 378> (Baur)
Balamon.............. 379°
Balance............... 379> (Hager)
ef Seales............. 2701* (Luering)
cf Weights and Measures 3079* (Porter)
Balancings............ 3805
Balasamus
ef Baalsamus........ 347>
Bald Locust
ef Locust ........... 1907 (Day)
Baldness.............. 380> (Kapp)
(6) 2 S I hh ee ea ee 13202 (Luering)
ef Shaving .......... 27515 (Orr)
Ball ssernnct etek east dacs 3818
cf Games ........... 1168> (Smith)
Balmees seg fos tee hat 3812 (Macalister)
Balm of Gilead.......- 3812 (Masterman)
ef Gilead ........... 1230° (Ewing)
Balnuus.....-....-.6-- 3812
Balsam...........+--- 381> (Macalister)
ef Balm ..........-- 3812 (Macalister)
ef Myrrh .........-- 2102 (Masterman)
Baltasar..........-.-..381> (Breslich)
Bamah..........-.-++- 381>
Bamoth, Bamoth-Baal.. 381>
ef High Place........ 1390* (Easton)
Batt ies conses rt tes abet 382°
Banaias.......--5+006- 3823
Baiidss, si fiswevvnae aces 382? (Rees; Nicol)
Augustan Band...... 382>; 358+ (Allen)
Italian Band......... 382; 358> (Allen)
ef Julius........---- 1780°
Bands, Beauty and..... 4212
Bands of Rudder......- 2624
BAT 4 css tes esnvssksieee tale A 382> (Breslich)
ef Mani......-..--- 1981>
Banias (person).....-.- 383


Banias (place)
cf Caesarea Philippi . .536* (Ewing)


Banid (Banias)......-- 383?
Banishment
ef Punishments ...... 2504> (Hirsch)
Banke tocnucate anc tees 3832 (M. O. Evans)
Bank, Banking.......-- 383 (Eager)
Allusions and interpre-
tations...-....---- 3842
Among Hebrews...... 383°
Historical........--- 3832


In NT times........- 383°


Bannaia (Sabanneus)... .2629>


Bannas...............384*
Banneas.............. 3845
Banner............... 384 (Eager)
Bannuse sis. s¢ncels cen 384>
Banquet.............. 384 (Eager)
Ancient Hebrew cus-
TOMS ne Pee eeeton 384>
Christ’s teaching and
practice........... 385
Marriage feast... .... 385%
cf Meals, Meal-time.. .2015* (Eager)
Banuas (Bannas)....... 3842
Baptism
ef Barnabas, Ep. of... 1902? (Cowan)
In Didache.......... 18992 (Cowan)
ef Holy Spirit ...... .1406* (Mullins)
Influence of Greek re-
ligion on.......... 1304> (Fairbanks)
cf Jesus Christ....... 1635 (Orr)
ef John the Baptist...1709 (Miller); 1710*
(Miller)
ef Sacraments ....... 26362 (Lambert)
CE SOA: sink ohne eer 2709> (Edwards)


cf Trine Immersion. . .3011> (Kurtz)
Baptism (Baptist Inter-


pretation) ........... 385> (A. T. Robertson)
Infant baptism....... 388?
Meaning............ 385°

Baptismal regenera-

TOT esis es 387°; 397* (Orr; Bishop;
Dau)

Didache........... 3875

Greek usage....... 386>

NT usage......... 386°

Proselyte baptism .. 386*

Terminology....... 385>
Obligation........... 388>

Baptism (Lutheran Doc-

ELINE oe eee 3942 (Dau)
Difficulties.......... 396+


Baptism for the dead 3978; 399° (Rees)
Baptism of John... .896°
Genuineness of rec-

OLS 2 eck wee ehe 396+
Infant baptism..... 396>
Paul and baptism... .3978
Use of formula in


NT times........ 396
Was baptism a new

ordinance........ 396

Ordinance..........- 394>


Biblical history... . .895>
Scriptural teaching. .394°
Trinity in formula. .395>
Types of baptism . .395°
Origin and application .394*
Baptism (Non-Immer-
sionist View)..-..--- 388> (T. M. Lindsay)
Christian baptism .. . .389>
Administration of


3194


GENERAL INDEX


Baptism (Non-Immersionist View)—continued


Christian baptism—continued
Affusion........... 390°
Aspersion......... 390°


Baptism for dead. . .3927; 399° (Rees)
Baptism of infants .391>


Immersion........ 390+
Who may perform
baptism. ........ 3919


Doctrine of baptism .
Infant baptism..... 393°
Formula of baptism. . . 392
Pre-Christian baptism 389°
Baptism of John... .3897
Pagan practice..... 389>
Proselyte baptism . .389*


Scriptural names..... 389
Baptism for the Dead. . .399* (Rees); 3974 (Dau)
Modern views........ 399>
Patristic evidence... . .399
Paul’s argument... . . .399
Baptism of Fire........ 399> (Kapp)
cheBireys sarees. 11126 (W. L. Walker)
Baptism of the Holy
Spirit hoot maces 399% (Mullins)
Biblical references. . . .399>
Finality............- 400°
Relation to other bap-
LISIAS! OR ce tene nae 401>
Significance.......... 400+
OT teachings...... 4008
Viewpoint of ascend-
ing Christ....... 400»
Viewpoint of dis-
Ciplesis ise. atest 5 400°
Baptism, Infant........ 391» (T. M. Lindsay)
Baptismal Regeneration .3979 (Orr; Bishop; Dau)
General view........ 3972 (Orr)


High-church doctrine. .397> (Bishop)
Lutheran doctrine... .398* (Dau)


Baptist

ef John the Baptist. ..1708% (Miller)
Bar ite teculote dhe tein esti 401> (Hirsch)

CEDOOR wie ch cee 869% (Downer)

CRG ATE io icc deo 1175 (Easton)

ef House............ 1434 (A. C. Dickie)
Bar (prefix)........... 401>; 433» (Breslich)

ef Son, Sons ......... 2826° (Betteridge)
Barabbas............. 402* (Rees)

ef Jesus Christ, Arrest . 1673* (Maclaren)

Of Thiel: hoes 2s ion 8 2972 (Easton)
Barachel.............. 402»

GFBUg ee aS 535° (Wolf)

Chain. a Steen es 2527> (Wolf)
Barachiah............. 402>
Barachias (Barachiah).. . 402°
Barale:oeheu deh dcte tests 402» (Cohon); 814* (Mar-.

golis)

ef Bedan ........... 4238
Barbarian, Barbarous. . .402> (Rees)
Barber...c.s.i.c ceva. 403° (Eager)

GE HAI 5 cece ees 1320 (Luering)


Barchus............... 403°

Bar-cochba...........- 6292 (Orr)

Bareroot ieee Seek 403° (Eager)
Ancient eustom...... 404


Priests on duty.......
Barhumite (Baharumite) 378*


Barahiect..icz.aheattioes 404»
Bar-Jesus.........-655 404» (S. F. Hunter)
ef Magic ............ 19633 (T. W. Davies)
Bar-Jonah............. 404> (Edwards)
Barkos'ecc3 3 ised eect 404»
Barley... ........ 00005 405° (Masterman); 1122+
(Eager)
ef Jealousy .......... 1572» (Forrester)
cf Weights and Meas-
UPres? sees SPU 3079 (Porter)
Barns sctc seat nt ened ae 405" (M. O. Evans)
ef Agriculture . .75° (Patch)
ef Garner ........... 1175°
Barnabas.............- 405” (Jacobs)
In Galatians ........1161> (G. G. Findlay)
ef Joseph ........... 1736> (S. F. Hunter)


Relations with Silas. .
Barnabas, Epistle of
ef Apocryphal Epis-
lessee oa ete SO 194> (J. M. Wilson)
ef Literature, Sub-apos 1901 (Cowan)
Barnabas, Gospel of
ef Apocryphal Gospels. 195 (Hutchison)


.2790* (Kerr)


Barodises vec dade 4064

Barrels, ce Sek Sate k 406° (Hager)
cf House ............- 1434> (A. C. Dickie)
ef Pitcher ........... 2401>

Barren, Barrenness..... 406" (Rees) :


Barsabas, Barsabbas
cf Joseph Barsabbas . .1740* (Kerr)
cf Judas Barsabbas. . .1765* (8. F. Hunter)


Bartacus’..000% ees 2o6ibe 406>
ef Apame ........... 160
ef Illustrious ........1449>
Bartholomew.......... 406° (Kerr)
cf Nathanael ........ 2121 (Kerr)


Bartholomew, Gospel of
cf Apocryphal Gospels. 1952 (Hutchison)


cf Bartholomew...... 406° (Kerr)
Bartimaeus............ 406° (Rees)
Baruchit ie totes. aA ge 4078 (T. W. Davies)
ef Jeremiah .........15908 (Orelli)


Baruch, Apocalypse of ..166° (J. E. H. Thomson);
161° (J. E. H. Thomson)


Analysis..........44 167%
Authorship.......... 166>
Date re uch ene ge 168+
cf Eschatology of OT. .972° (Orr)
ChHOpe 2. ees ace 1419 (Easton)
Language........... 167°
Relation to 2 Esdras. .168°

' Structure........0... 167

Baruch, Book of........ 407+ (T. W. Davies)
Contents............ 407

Confession and
prayer .......... 407°


GENERAL INDEX 3195


Baruch, Book of—continued
Contents—continued
Dependence of wis-


GOMes Aine Pulses 4083
Historical introduc-
1) (0) | eee ear «407»


Praise of wisdom. . . 408+
Words of cheer to
Israel... 0.2.2... 408»
Dates of authorship.. . 409
Linguistic analysis. .. .409*


Greek section...... 409+
Hehrew section... . .409*
Versions............ 4105
Arabic... ......... 410>
ati tts dsc secon 410°
Syriaesaciwiawaas 410%
Barzillai.............. 410 (Rees)
ef Jaddus........... 1557
ef Zorzelleus ........ 3158»
Basaloth.............. 410°
Baseama.............. 410>
Base ters itswnced Seta eee 410> (Rees)
Basemath, Bashemath,
_Basmath............ 4114 (Breslich)
ef Mahalath......... 1965» (Orr)
Bashan erates ca cates 4119 (Ewing)
ef Gilead ........... 1230% (Ewing)
ef Hauran .......... 13449 (Ewing)
ChiOg es. mais te # 2180 (Orr)


Bashan-havvoth-jair .. .1345* (Ewing)
Bashan, Mount of


ef Hauran.......... 13449 (Ewing)
Bashemath (Basemath)..411 (Breslich)
Basilisk. .............. 411» (Day)

ef Adder ............ 558 (Day)

cf Cockatrice ........ 672» (Day)

cf Serpents .......... 7363 (Day)
Basimes< Vag gnersuyeicees 365% (Clay)
Basin, Bason.........-. 412° (ager)

CheBowl cic ails vsce sors 511» (Eager)
Basket: nz. pos ey 412» (Hager)
Basmath (Basemath)....411% (Breslich)
Bason, Basin..........- 412 (Eager)
Bassai (Bassa)........- 413
Bastai (Basthai)....... 414
Bastard..........2--65 413> (Rees)
Basthai.............5- 4148
Babee hee aera ee inet wlase 414° (Day)
Batanaea...........+-- 414s


Bath (liquid measure) . . .414* (Porter)
ef Weights and Meas-
UPS ecteeoes, eng’ 3079* (Porter)
Bath, Bathing......... 4148 (Eager)
Bathing for health... .415°
Ceremonial _ purifica-


TOD. eee eS 4153
Greek vs. Semite ideas. 4157
cf Ahsolution ...... 24 (Jacobs)
Public baths......... 414»
Bath Kol.......--6020¢ 415 (Van Pelt)


ef Sound.........-- 2838 (Easton)


Bath-rabbim, Gate of. ..416* (Ewing)


Bathsheba............. 416° (Breslich)

ef Adonijah.......... 578 (Beecher)

ef Ammiel........... 1178 (Mack)

cf Bathshua......... 416

ef David............ 790° (Weir)
» Ch Wham Seg. ease os 9295

ef Nathan........... 2120 (Roherts)

efSolomon.......... 28228 (Weir)

ef Uriah, Urijah...... 3039» (Easton)
Bathshua.............416P

cf Bathsheba ........ 416° (Breslich)

cf Shua, Shuah ...... 2781
Bath-zacharias (Beth-

zacharias) ..........- 4548
Battering Ram

cf Siege ............. 27868 (Nicol)
Battle

CiWar wiscaaiesares 3069> (Nicol)
Battle-axe

cf Arms (Offensive) . . .251> (Nicol)
Battle-how ............ 416> (Eager)

ef Archery .......... 233 (Hager)

ef Armor .........-. 2518 (Nicol)
Battlement

cf Fortification ...... 1136 (Nicol)

ef House ............1484> (A. C. Dickie)
Bavvai (Bavai)......... 416>

ef Binnui........... 474> (Wolf)
Bay ;

ef Colors ........... 675° (Patch)
Bayern cade 416
Bayithy 30%. weee teen: 416>

Ch-Beth: ocd tis 441>
Bay Tree...........-- 4174
Bazlith, Bazluth....... 4174
Bdellium.............. 4174 (Orr)
Beach. .....--....0005 4178
Beacon.......-.-.0-005 4178
Bealiah .............. 4174
Bealoth...........2.+- 417

cf Baalah...........3479 (Masterman)
Beata ie: vial ee oe Boe 4178 (A. C. Dickie)

ef Architecture....... 234 (A. C. Dickie)

ef House ........--.. 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Bean (Baean).........-. 3778
Gans txts vencies cease ete 82 417 (Masterman)
Beart iente ac ae rete eee 417 (Day)
Bear, The (Arcturus)... .417°

ef Astronomy........ 313° (Maunder)
Bear, Born............ 4188

cf Regeneration. ..... 2546 (Nuelsen)
Bear, Borne...........- 418 (M. O. Evans)
Beard vecsa-cp eee ina 418 (Eager)
Beast es cee oie en we 418» (Day)

cf Wild Beast ....... 3084* (Day)
Beast Fight

ef Games ........... 1168 (Smith)
Beaten Gold

cf Gold ..........6.- 1274s (Patch)
Beaten Oil...........- 21835


3196 GENERAL INDEX


Beating ‘
ef Punishments ....... 2504 (Hirsch)
Beatitudes............ 4198 (Lambert)


Comparison of Mat-
thew and Luke..... 4198


ef Jesus Christ. ...... 1642 (Orr)

Number............ 419>

Origin of name....... 419"

ef Sermon on

Mount............ 27345 (Miller)

Beautiful Gate

cf Temple .......... 2930° (Caldecott; Orr)
Beauty ixnccs asians ees 420" (Caverno)


Aesthetics in nature.. .421
Aesthetics in Scripture 420°


Beauty and Bands......4218
Bebaiad 2c thins teen ee 4214
Because.............-. 4215
Becher...............- 4218

Ch Béréd i304 aii eee < 439>
Bechorath (Becorath).. .421>
Beck, Beckon.......... 421>
Become.............-- 4216
Becorath.............. 421>
Bectileth.............. 421>
Bed, Bedchamber, Bed-

stead nora Aie wae ete 421> (Eager)

ef Couch ........... 7235 (M. O. Evans)

Early forms......... 421>

NT terms........... 422

OT terms..........- 422
Bedads tesserae 423°
Bed ani. ctuevad estas 4235
Bedchamber

CHBED ol eis an cele: 421> (Eager)
Bedeiah............... 4238

ef Pedias ........... 22958
Bedstead

cf Bed .............421> (Eager)
Bees Ae eta cgi Be 4238 (Day)
Beef

ef Cattle ........0.. 583° (Day); 1123> (Hager)
Beeliada........-..-.. 423

cf Eliada ........... 928>
Beelsarus..........-... 423»
Beeltethmus........... 423

cf Rathumus ........ 2533
Beelzebub............. 423° (Rees)

CP Baalndec oo. 3s gaia 346° (Sayce)

ef Jesus Christ ....... 1644 (Orr)
Beets Pete c Seek eee uk ss 4248
Béeraten ciao ebeek 4248
Beerah.............--- 4245
Beer-elim............. 4248
Beenie serine: ee teh 4248
Beer-lahai-roi..........4242 (8S. F. Hunter)
Beeroth............0.. 424° (Ewing)


Beeroth Bene-jaakan. . .424>
ef Wanderings of
Israel oe heen ted id 3064* (Conder)


Beerothite (Beeroth)....424* (Ewing)


Beersheba............- 424> (Masterman)


Location. ........-.- 424»

Meaning of name.... .424°

Modern Beersheba... .424>

Sacred shrine.......-424>

cf Shibah .........-- 2767>
Beeshterah (Ashtaroth) .270° (Ewing)
Beetle is. Siccard cacanune 425° (Day)

cf Locust ........... 19078 (Day)
Beeves

cf Cattle ...........- 583> (Day)
Before....... 425°


Beg, Beggar, Begging. . . 425" (Eager)
Begging denounced in
Jewish literature .. .425> ©


Begging in Israel. .... 4257

In gospel age.......- 425

Modern practice...... 426°

Professional beggars.. .425>
Beggarly..........---5 426° (Kapp)
Beep Misen yi tnd eee 426° (Jacobs)
Beginning............. 426° (Kapp)

ef Eternity .......... 10112 (J. Lindsay)

ef Time ...........- 2981> (Porter)
Begotten. ...........-. 426> (Rees)

cf First begotten ..... 1113 (Rees)

cf Only begotten ..... 2196" (Rees)
Beguile........-.-.4.. 426° (Kapp)

cf Deceive .......... 816° (Farr)

ef Delusion ......... 826* (Edwards)
Behalfs ccc. 6 pean oeke 426> (Jacobs)
Behavior.............. 426° (Pratt)
Beheading

cf Punishments ......2504 (Hirsch)
Behemoth.............- 4274 (Day)
Beholding............. 4272 (M. O. Evans)
Behoove...........--. 427»
Beirut (Berytus)....... 440° (Porter)

ef Sidon ............ 2786° (Porter)
Bekai.s eens een 427>

cf Weights and Meas-

MUPES Se Seccniass eterna? 3079* (Porter)

Bel (Baal)............. 427

cf Babylonia, Religion

(0) Uren NS chorea arate 368> (Rogers)


Bel and the Dragon... . .427° (T. W. Davies)
Author, place, date. . .4305


Canonicity and au-
thenticity......... 4318

cf Daniel, Book of... .787 (R. D. Wilson)

Namen. oo. 428


Original language... . .429>
cf Song of Three


Children.......... 2834° (T. W. Davies)
Story of Bel......... 4288
Story of Dragon... .. .428>
cf Susanna, History

Olt pats ee Tce 2872> (T. W. Davies)
Teaching............ 430 ;
Textual authorities.. .429°

Bela °

Cf Boars. concede’ 3154* (Wright)


GENERAL INDEX


Bela, Belah............ 431 (Breslich) | Benhadad—continued
Belaites............... 431> Benhadad I—continued
Beélehetics. sees cree PPa es 4315 (Kapp) Shortsightedness of
Belemus Bae ntac te ots NA 4315 ASA ty Ron, 436°
Belialies. 3s o i eet ieee 431 (Orr) Syria founded...... 436°
ef Antichrist ......... 154° (J. E. H. Thomson) Syria and Judah... .4362
ef Man of Sin........ 1976+ (Orr) cf Hadadezer (Had-
Beli@nise es ce eek 4328 arezer).......... 1314® (Nicol)
Belief ef Tabrimmon ..... 29022
ef Faith ............1087' (Dunelm) Benhadad IT......... 4368
Believers............-- 432% (Rees) Alliance with Ahab . 437%
Bellow cent e, Mayenne’ 432° (Miller) Alliance broken off. . 4378
Bellows............... 432° And Elisha ....... 437%
ef Crafts ........... 734° (Patch) Expeditions against
ef Refiner, Refining. . .2545* (Patch) Paraeli 5.35.5. 436»
Belly cee ho i 432> (Hirsch) Monumental records 437%
Belmaim.............. 432 Murder of Ben-
Belmen, Belmon (Bel- hadad.......... 437
maim)..............482> Siege of Samaria... .437*
Belomancy Benhadad III........ 437>
ef Augury ..... aes 3312 (T. W. Davies) Assyrians overcome
Beloved............... 432> (Pratt) Syria... 0.02... 437»
Belshazzar............. 433° (R. D. Wilson) Contemporaries. . . .437®
And Daniel ......... 783° (R. D. Wilson) Recuperation of
ef Persians .......... 2336" (Tisdall) Israel... 2.2.0... 4376
Belt Ben-hail .............. 438
ef Armor ............ 254* (Nicol) Ben-hanan ............ 438"
Belteshazzar ..........- 433> Ben-hesed ............438
Belus, Temple of Ben-hur Sakura: 4384
ef Babel ............ 350° (Pinches) Beninu Fete eee ees 438°
Ben (mame)........... 434 Bon-jaakan (Bene-
Ben (prefix)...........483> (Breslich) jaakan) gee cal Coe gee 424° R
ef Son, Sons ......... 2826° (Betteridge) Benjamin. Sie ic ear ras 438° (Ewing)
Ben-abimadab......... 4344 ihe patriarch ....... push
E Trib@iews cian. tates 4388
ef Abinadab ......... 128 (Beecher) 2
‘ ; History........... 438>
Benaiah.............-- 434s (Breslich) Number 4380
ef Mamdai.......... 1972> PR lls esha
; osition........... 438>
ef Naidus ........... 21115 TeGey oreo 438
Ben Ammi............484% (Cohon) Benjamin, Gate of
Bench 24.2 kene 434> (Hager) Ape amiisa levis oe coe 1603"
ef Seat ............-2710> (Cotton) Benjamite............. 439%
Ben-deker ............ 434 Benge See 4398
Beneath............065 434> Rat ONL eon heutonee ee 4398
Bene-berak ........... 434? Benzoheth............. 439°
Benediction............ 434> (Kapp) METohotl ee cee 31558
Apostolic benediction .435* Beon
cf Blessing .......... 487> (Gray) ef Baal-meon......... 3475 (Ewing)
Family practice...... 435° BOOP eine tte ee ened 4397
Privilege of Aaronites .435° BOP eicyas eter has ORNS 439%
ef Salutation ........2665* (Pollard) Beracah (person)....... 439°
Benefactor............485> (Jacobs) Beracah (valley)....... 439° (Masterman)
Benefit. ..........0005 435» (Hirsch) ef Jehoshaphat, Val-
Bene-jaakan léysole eas a8 15832 (Masterman)
ef Beeroth Bene- Berachiah (Berechiah).. .439%
jaakan ocactie et. 424b Beraiah.......... 0.05. 439°
Benevolence..........- 435 Berea (Beroea)........ 440° (Ewing)
Ben-geber..........--- 435 Bereave, Bereaver, Bereft439* (Breslich)
ef Geber-..........-. 1180 (Downer) Berechiah............- 4392
Benhadad...........+- 435> (Nicol); 779> (C. H. ef Zachariah ........ 31298
Thomson) Bered (person)......... 4398; 4214
Benhadad I......... 436 Bered (place).........- 439> (Masterman)


3197


3198 GENERAL INDEX


Berenice (Bernice)... ... 440° (Dosker)
Beritee Crk cen as eet: 439>
Beriah, Beriites...... ..439
Ber ites icc Meech Ancatied 440%
Berith (Baal-berith) ... .3478
Bernice wen. cig eaes 4408 (Dosker)
Berodach-Baladan
ef Baladan .......... 379» (R. D. Wilson)
Beroea.............00. 4409 (Ewing)
Beroth (Beeroth)....... 4249 (Ewing)
Berothah.............. 440> (C. H. Thomson)
ef Hethlon .......... 1384> (Christie)
cf Zobah ............ 3154» (Christie)
Berothite (Beerothite).. .424* (Ewing)
Berries.........-...04. 440>
Beryl
cf Stones, Precious... .2856@ (Fletcher)
Berytus............... 440> (Porter)
Berzelus (Zorzelleus). . . .8158°
Besar o22- oS che aes tre te 441
Bésethy finds Mitte 4415 (Kapp)
Beside................ 4415 (Kapp)
Besiege :
ef Siege... 0.0.0.0... 2786 (Nicol)
Besodeiah............. 441
BeSOmt since ttnat.caes 441
Besor, The Brook...... 4414
BeStitycicss desry oases eds 441> (Pratt)
Bestead sei sanvccyie vee 441>
Bestiality............. 746° (Hirsch)
Bestowi 2 sce intone 441>
Betah
cf Tibhath .......... 2980 (Christie)
Betanes- sericea auieaues 441>
Betetccc. sant te acne eee 441>
Bethea ht nase ires 441>
ef Alphabet .........103> (Richardson)
ef Bayith ........... 416»
Beth (prefix).......... 441> (Hirsch)
Bethabara............. 442« (8. F. Hunter)
cf Bethany .......... 442> (Masterman)
Beth-anath............ 442»
Beth-anoth............ 442b
Bethany.............. 442> (Masterman)
Beth-arabah .......... 4438

ef Bethabara ........ 4424 (8. F. Hunter)
Betharam (Beth-haram) . 4464 (Ewing)
Beth-arbel ............ 443° (Ewing)

ef Arbela............ 225> (Iuwing)

cf Shalman ......... 2747> (Hiselen)
Bethasmoth........... 4438

ef Azgmaveth ........ 3454
Beth-aven............. 4438
Beth-azmaveth (Azma-

Veth yeti gce Owais oe 345
Beth-baal-mecn (Baal-

MEON)) 2 Awa eh aed 347> (Ewing)
Beth-barah............ 4438 (S. F. Hunter)

cf Bethabara ........ 442° (S. F. Hunter)
Bethbasi.............. 443 (5. F. Hunter)
Beth-birl............. 443>


Beth-car...........00- 443> (Masterman)
ef Beth-haccherem... . 445° (Masterman)
Beth-dagon ........... 443> (Ewing)
Beth-diblathaim .......443>
cf Moabite Stone. ....2071 (Sayce)
Beth-eden
ef Eden ..........-- 897> (Wright)
Bethel............--.- 443> (Ewing)
cf Almond .......... 1002 (Masterman)
HLISLOLYis oo cates ake ey 4448
cf House of God ..... 14388 (Orr)
Name and location... .448>
Sanctuary........... 444
Bethelite..........-..- 444b
Cf Hie] ing vs eevee nt 1389" (Stearns)
Bethel, Mount.........444>
Beth-emek ............ 444b
Bether.........--. 0005 444> (Orr)
cf Malobathron ...... 1972>
Bethesda ............-- 444> (Masterman)
ef Gihon ............ 1228> (Masterman)
ef Jerusalem ........ 1597 (Masterman); 1608!
(Masterman)
cf Jesus Christ .......16415 (Orr)
cf Sheep Gate ....... 2758"
cf Sheep Market ..... 2758
Beth-ezel ............. 445>
cf Agel... 2... ....00. 344>
Beth-gader ........... 445»
Beth-gamul ........... 445»
Beth-gilgal ............ 445p
cf Gallim............ 1167> (Masterman)
Beth-haccherem ....... 445> (Masterman)
cf Beth-car.......... 443> (Masterman)
Beth-haggan ...... 1. 445
ef Garden-house...... 11758
Beth-hanan, Elon-beth-
hanan
ef Elon.............. 9394
Beth-haram ........... 446° (Ewing)
Beth-haran ........... 4468
Beth-hoglah ........... 446+ (Wright)
cf Dead Sea ......... 8012 (Wright)
Beth-horon ........... 446° (Masterman)
Ancient and modern
LOWDS Ss occa sat ee 4465


ef Jashar, Book of... .1570* (Orr)
cf Judah, Territory


OL ae cee 1763* (Masterman)
Pass of the Beth-
horons............ 446»


Beth-horon, Battle of .. .446> (Maunder)
Astronomical relations 448°


Moon stayed...... .448#

Sun was silent... ...448
Book of Jashar....... 4489
Chronicle and poem

compared......... 448>
Date of events....... 4494


Jehovah jought for
Israels... 2a a. 448


GENERAL INDEX


Beth-horon, Battle of—continued
Joshua and the Hivites 446%


Bethink............... 4499
Beth-jeshimoth ........ 449 (Ewing)
Beth-le‘aphrah........ 449 (Porter)
Beth-lebaoth........... 449gb
ef Beth-biri.......... 443
ef Lebaoth .......... 18645
Bethlehem............ 449> (Masterman)
Bethlehem Judah... . .449>
Christian era ...... 450°
David the Bethle-
hemite.......... 4508
Early history....... 449»
ef Ephrath ........ 964" (Masterman)


Later Bible history .450°
Bethlehem of Zebulun 4502


ef Jesus Christ....... 1632» (Orr)
ef Joseph, Husband of
Marys wcces a7 17415 (Kerr)

Bethlehem, Star of

ef Jesus Christ....... 16338 (Orr)

ef Star of the Magi. . .28484 (Maunder)
Bethlehemite.......... 4505
Beth-lomon............ 450
Beth-maacah (Abel-

beth-maacah)........ 5> (Beecher)
Beth-marcaboth........ 450 (Masterman)
Beth-meon...........- 450°
Beth-merhak.......... 450>
Beth-milcah (Milcah). . .20512
Beth-millo (Millo)......2055* (Masterman)
Beth-nimrah .......... 450> (Wright)

ef Leopard .........- 1866" (Day)

ef Nimrah.......... 21479 (Ewing)
Beth-palet (Beth-pelet) . .450°
Beth-pazzez........-.- 450
Beth-pelet............ 450°
Beth-peor............. 451° (Ewing)
Bethphage...........- 4519 (Masterman)


ef Olives, Mount of. . .2185> (Masterman)
Beth-phelet (Beth-pelet) 450>


Beth-rapha..........-- 4518
Beth-rehob...........- 451» (C. H. Thomson)
Bethsaida........-.--- 451> (Ewing)

Of Galilee........-.. 451»

Juliag ss. eo. ce hese 452

Were there two?..... 4528


Bethsamos (Bethasmoth)443*
Beth-shean, Beth-shan. .452> (Ewing)


Beth-shemesh ........- 453 (Kyle)

In Egypt.......-..-- 453»

ef Ir-shemesh........ 14938

Of Issachar..........453°

Of Judah............453

Of Naphtali.........- 453»

ef Sun-worship....... 2870> (Orr)
Beth-shemite.......... 4535
Beth-shittah .......... 453


Bethsura, Bethsuron. .. .453>


Beth-tappuah ......... 453> (Masterman)
Bethuel (person)....... 4535 (Hirsch)
Bethuel (place)........ 4548

Bethul

cf Bethuel .......... 454"

ef Chesil ............ 6055
Bethulia...........00- 454* (Ewing)
Beth-zacharias......... 4548
Beth-zur.............. 4549 (Masterman)

ef Jerusalem ........ 1613° (Masterman)

ef Judah, Territory of 17635 (Masterman)
Betimes............... 454 (Kinsella)

ef Morning......... 2082» (Porter)
Betolion.............. 4546
Betomesthaim, Betomas-

than. fe oi ie sce 454»
Betonim.............. 454
Betray. ............05. 454> (Rees)
Betrayers.............454>
Betroth..............- 454>
Betrothal

ef Marriage ......... 1997> (Eager)
Between the Testaments .455* (Dosker)

Contemporaneous his-

GOLDY Wenz ieee nen eee 455°
ASIA Atay dn alien tans 455>
Bey pbiciscits s scescds% 4559
Greece............ 455
Rome............- 455>
Historical develop-
MENS. es ce ns wns 455
Alexandrian period .4568
Egyptian period... .4565
Maccabean period. . 4578
Persian period...... 4568
Roman period...... 4578
Syrian period...... 456>
Internal developments.457*
Literary activity... .457%
Parties: 669 ton cio 4583
Preparation for
Christianity...... 458
Spiritual conditions .458*

cf Maccabaeus, Mac-

cabees.........--- 1946* (Hutchison)

Period in general..... 455°
Beulah: casos. 2 4588 458»

Bewalles cj. ste nant 458>

ef Grief ue. sna bees 1305 (W. L. Walker)
Bewitch............055 458° (Kapp)

ef Divination ........ 8602 (T. W. Davies)

ef Evil Eye .........1042 (Luering)

ef Magic............ 19632 (T. W. Davies)

ef Superstition .......2871* (Doolan)
Bewray, Bewrayer...... 4599 (Kinsella)
Beyond........----+.- 4595 (Hirsch)
Bezaanannim (Zaanan-

MIM) oder aeareoare ues 3128" (Ewing)
Began nese sien ween 459»
Bezalel..........0-.00- 459> (Farr)

ef Sesthel ........... 2743
Bez os Gace ce aes 459


3199


3200 GENERAL INDEX


Reger ery sh. aes 2) 459»
ef Refuge, Cities of .2545° (Ewing)
Bezethi: sei agate vice 459>
ef Jerusalem ........ 1595> (Masterman)
Bezetha............... 459b
ef Jerusalem ........ 1600° (Masterman)
Biatas es cseeaaceacaee 8% 459»
ef Phalias........... 2358>
Bible, The............. 459» (Orr)
Authorized and Revised
Versions........... 4698
cf American Revised
Version......... 1162 (Easton)
Compass and divisions 4618
Apocrypha........ 4623
Hebrew OT—Jo-
sephus.......... 461
Nabe ceaeek eoeean 462
cf Canon of NT. .563° (Riggs)
Septuagint......... 461»
Mulgate sto. tte 462
ef Vulgate ...... 3058> (Angus)
cf Gospels, Synoptic. . 1281» (Iverach)
Languages........... 460»
ORIN Foe. ee anes 460>
ORO TD isceatateanets 460°
Literary origin of NT. 465»
Canonicity......... 467
ef Canon of NT. .563* (Riggs)
Epistles........... 466


cf Captivity Ep. . .466® (Orr)

cf Catholic Ep... .4674 (Orr)

cf Pastoral Ep... .2258> (Rutherfurd)
Gospels and Acts. . .465>
Prophecy.......... 4672

cf Apocalyptic


Literature. ..... 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)


Literary origin of OT
Age of David and


Solomon........ 4632
Canonicity........ 462

cf Canon of OT. .554* (Robinson)
Daniel............464%


Exilian and post-
exilian periods... .464
Josiah’srcformation 464


Judges...........- 463°
Mosaicage........ 463
Newer criticism .. . .464*
Patriarchal age... . .463
Prophecy.......... 463
Wisdom literature. .463>
Names: ic.caceusis ate 460*
Bible............. 460
NCR ore sets eee a aes 460
OD secs sar henner: 460>


Other designations. .460°
cf Revised Versions. 951> (Hutchison)


Bible, The—continued
Unity and spiritual
purpose—inspiration467>
Historical influence . 468°
cf Versions, Geor-
gian, Gothic,
Slavonic...... 3048+ (Easton)
Inspiration ........ 4688
ef Inspiration... .1473* (Warfield)
Purpose of grace... .468*


Waltyer ec hoks Leeks 467>
Bible, Criticism of...... 748> (Orr)
Bible, The Geneva...... 949° (Hutchison)
Bible, The Great........ 949° (Hutchison)
Biblical Discrepancies. . .852> (Van Pelt)
Biblical Mythology. ..... 231* (Kyle)
Biblical Theology....... 469» (J. Lindsay)
Divisions. ........... 471
Divergent views on
OW ie oe She Seats 471»


Law and prophecy. .472*
Mosaism, place of . . 472?
Prophetism and Ju-
daism..........- 4728
Religious develop-
ment of Israel .. .472*


Effect of criticism.. .471>
NT theology, 19th


century ......... 470%
OT theology in later
centuries........ 4708


Patristic and scho-
lastic periods... . .470
Scientific develop-


Place and methods. . 470
Relation to dog-


matics.......... 469>

BIGHT ket ne oi cieye teens 472»
Beery Sone keno: Tae oes 472»
Bidden................ 472»
Bide iss fy s2ks oes ee nes 472
BIG AT est Seats aie eae 472»
lene Meet tein? duets 472> (Eager)
Big tha: finte coceee: anys 473%
Bigthan, Bigthana...... 473%
Big Vals 2 erg dsc oh cle tere 4734
Bikath-aven ........... 473%

ef Aven ............ 340

ef Eden............. 897> (Wright)
Bildad Sis. sash ein eee 473> (Genung)

cf Shua, Shuah...... 27815

ef Shuhite .......... 2781>

cf Zophar ........... 3156 (Genung)
Bile@ame ss vicky eectoa ve 473»

ef Tbleam ........... 1446+ (Ewing)
Bilgah, Bilgai.......... 473
Bilhah (person)........ 474%
Bilhah (place)......... 4744
Bulla’ eee hore es 4748


GENERAL INDEX


Bill, Bond
Bill of Divorcement


Bind, Bound...........
ef Authority
ef Forgiveness


Bird-catcher
ef Fowler


474> (Kapp)
333* (Rees)


1143° (Stratton-Porter)
475° (Stratton-Porter)


cf Abomination, Birds


OL eine Pee Ge ates 16° (Stratton-Porter)
Of Bible............. 4762
Early mention...... 4769
Sacrifice.......... 476>
Meaning of word..... 475%
Natural history....... 475*
Earliest traces... ... 475
Food, blood, etc... .476#
Structure.......... 4758
Of prey............. 4778 (Stratton-Porter)
Unclean............. 16° (Stratton-Porter) ; 477%
(Reeve)
Birshainte sisscd sche ep in 477
Birth gen eeme eked: 477> (Eager)
ef Jesus Christ ....... 1632 (Orr)
ef Travail ........... 30072 (Macalister)
ef Virgin-birth....... 30522 (Sweet)
Birth, New
ef Regeneration ...... 2546> (Nuelsen)
Birth, Virgin........... 3052* (Sweet)
Birthday.............. 4789 (Eager)
ef Calendar ......°.. 541» (Porter)
ef Jesus Christ....... 1632 (Orr)
Birthright............. 478 (J. M. Wilson)
ef Family ........... 1094 (Caverno)
ef First-born ........- 1113 (T. Lewis)
Che ia een ee 1369" (Easton)
ef Inheritance . .1468° (Hirsch)
ef Isaac...........-- 14942 (Boyd)


ef Patrimony
ef Primogeniture
Birth-stool...........-
ef Stool


Bishop (general)
Later developments .
ef Ministry..........
ef Overseer...:......


22649 (Mack)
2452> (N. Isaacs)


478° (Dosker)


4798


Use in Septuagint and


classic Greek.......
Bishop (Anglican view)..
Bishops and deacons. .
Bishops and presbyters


479> (Lowndes)
481»
481>


Bishop (Anglican view)—continued
Clement of Rome... ..481°


Didache............. 4810
Early church officers. .479>
Apostles........... 479>
Bishops........... 4808
Deacons.......... 4806
Elders or presbyters 480*
Evangelists........ 480"
Prophets.......... 479b
Teachers.......... 4803
Episcopacy, definition
OP ee Mae Rts 479
Of NT............480°
Ignatian Ep.......... 481>
Reformation......... 481°
Bishop (Congregational
VIEW) oo dotee s Racin ees 482° (Pratt)
Election............. 4820
NT church.......... 482
Restoration of primi-
tive ideals......... 482
Bishoprick............ 482>; 478> (Dosker)


Bishops’ Bible
ef English Versions . . .945>° (Hutchison)


Bismaya

ef Shinar ........... 2771 (Pinches)
Bit and Bridle.........482 (W. L. Walker)
Bithiah............... 483 (Hirsch)

ef Mered ........... 2036 (Wallace)
Bithron............... 4838
Bithynia.............. 483 (White)

ef Haven ........... 1344 (Day)

ef Pontus ........... 24189 (White)
Bithynian Immigrations

to Asia Minor........274> (Calder)
Bitter, Bitterness....... 483> (Hirsch)
Bitter Herbs........... 4849 (Masterman)

Of Mer ociad cet ee ee 1375* (Masterman)
Bittern............... 484 (Stratton-Porter)


ef Hedgehog
ef Porcupine ...


.... 2421 (Day)


ef Serpent .......... 2738 (Day)
Bitterness............. 483> (Hirsch)
Bitterness, Water of

ef Adultery ......... 63" (Margolis)
Bitter Water

ef Adultery .........63 (Margolis)

ef Marah ........... 1984
Bitumen

ef Mortar ........... 2083+ (Orr)

ef Slime ............ 2817 (Day)
Biziothiah............. 485°
Biztha ech. va acea eee 485+
Black

ef Colors ........... 674° (Patch)
Blackness............. 485 (Pratt)
Black Obelisk

ef Jehu ...... eee eee. 1586 (Caldecott)
Blaingig. taco eee: 485° (Macalister)
Blasphemy............ 485 (Rees)


ef Forgiveness 1132> (Morro)


3201


3202 GENERAL INDEX


Blasphemy—continued Blot ee Se i Rei Oates 490 (Kaiser)
ef Holy Spirit ....... 1406* (Mullins) cf Book of Life ...... 503° (Kaiser)
ef Jesus Christ....... 1644> cf Book of Remem-

Unpardonable sin... . .485> brance............ 503>

Blast sees even nk 4868 (M. O. Evans) cf Forgiveness ....... 1132> (Morro)

Blast, Blasting......... 486° (Patch) Blo Win xesoctheg seat udev 490> (Hirsch)
ef Agriculture ....... 77 (Patch) Blue
ef Mildew ~......... 2051" (Masterman) ef Colors ..........- 674° (Patch)

Blasttisn a2 esac aeeess 486° (S. F. Hunter) Boanerges............. 491° (Kerr)

Blazes) ces estece thiacten 486> ef James, Son of Zebe-

Blemish. .............. 486> (Luering) dee... ss... eee 1560 (Kerr) .
ef Spot, Spotted ..... 2846> (Macalister) Sh aol (Dey)

Bless ciciats 5 te toes nse 487 (Gray) B of Swine ............ ae (Day)
ef Benediction ....... 434> (Kapp) i 491° (Hirsch)

Boasts eikic aise acess 4912

Blessed............04. 4878 (Gray) yak
ef Beatitudes ........ 419 (Lambert) ef Ships and Boats. . .2774* (Nicol)

Blessedness............ 4878 (Gray)

Blesai G Boagenc ec aka es 4918 (Roberts)
eth Cries: ae ene) | And Jachin.......... 1547 (Caldecott)
of Heredity .........1876* (Easton) CErDeeee. nf satu 1623° (Roberts)
ef priests and Levites 2452> (Wiener) ef Temple .......... 2932 (Caldecott; Orr)

Blessing, Cup of........ 487° Boccas.......-2-020005 491>
of Cup Se eatin te eae 766° (Jacobs) . Bochern..........--065 491»

Blessing, Valley of Bochum ek cuecacer ten 4g1b
ef Beracah .......... 439" (Masterman) + Wl PBody etn tetas Sie 1 eevee 491> (Hirsch; Marais;

Blindfold.............. 487» Pratt)

Blinding Figurative........... 493° (Pratt)
ef Punishments ...... 2504> (Hirsch) General............. 492= (Marais)

Blindness............. 487> (Macalister) Body and sin....... 492>
ef Tender ........... 2947% (Easton) First sin.......... 492>

Blindness, Judicial... ... 488 (T. Lewis) NT references... .. .492

Bloodiae 4.8 sabi keane 488> (Clippinger) OT references...... 4928
Hebrew and OT cus- Other meanings... . 492+

Ente ened in eat 8 489 cf Member .......... 2030* (Luering)
cf Cireumcision ....656° (T. Lewis) Philological Senge hares 491° (Hirsch)
cf Duet sees 2507 (Caverno) ef Resurrection ee re 25629 (Easton)
: ef Spiritual Body..... 28438
NT teachings........ 4898
Body of Death......... 493° (Dosker)
cf Atonement...... 627> (Orr) Bodyevard 493°
Primitive ideas ...... 488> Body of Heaven........493°
cf Revenge, Re- : Body, Spiritual........ 493> (Morro)
MED SCR Syne aes 2587* (Breslich) ef Psychology ....... 2494> (Marais)
ef Wine ............. 3086 (Easton) Bohan eee ene: A94a

Blood and Water....... 489° (Luering) Boil (noun)............ 494? (Macalister)
ef Jesus Christ. ..... .1663% (Orr) ef Plagues of Egypt. . .2405* (Kyle)
Physiological _—_ expla- - Boil (verb)............ 4942 (W. L. Walker)

nation............ 4 Boldness.............- 494> (Kapp)

Blood, Avenger of Bolled........-..-.0-- 494b
ef Avenger ba 3 ane 340° (Breslich) Bolster................ 494> (Hager)

Bloodguiltiness......... 4902 Bolte eis hs eee 494> (M. O. Evans)

Blood, Issue of Bond :
ef Bloody Flux....... 490° (Macalister) ef Band ............ 382° (Nicol; Rees)

Blood Revenge ef Bill, Bond bide ne Steals 4748 (Eager)
cf Avenger .......... 3408 (Breslich) ef Chain ............ 589% (Fortune)

Bloodshedding......... 4908 Bee sePhidind Sa shat ae ee

Bloodthirsty........... 490" ef Slavery .......... 15° (Raffety)

Bloody...........-..4- 490+ (M. O. Evans) Bondmaid............. 495° (McGlothlin)

Bloody Flux........... 490° (Macalister) ef Slavery .......... 28159 (Raffety)

Bloody Sweat.......... 490> (Macalister) Bondman............. 4952 (McGlothlin)

Bloom, Blossom Bondservant........... 4958


cf Flowers....... *...1120> (Masterman) Bone, Bones........... 495» (Luering)


GENERAL INDEX 3203


‘Bonnet ...........000. 495>


cf Dress ............ 875» (Eager)
ef Mitre ............ 2067> (T. Lewis)
Book gisr eet ak 495> (Richardson)
Book collections...... 502
Definitions.......... 4968
Early history in Bible
lands.............5088
Higher criticism...... 5005
Inward books........ 4965
ef Libraries ......... 1882® (Richardson)
Literary criticism... . . 500
Manuscripts......... 4988; 1984@ (Richardson)
Diplomatics....... 498
Epigraphy......... 498>
ef Alphabet ..... 103 (Richardson)
ef Table ........ 28985 (Easton)
ef Weight ....... 30792 (Porter)
ef Writing ...... 3114* (Richardson)
Numismatics......... 498>
ef Money ......... 2076 (Porter)
Oral transmission... . . 497>
Part played in OT. . 498"
Vedas xii.) toes 497>
Origin of new forms. . .501°
Paleography........- 498
CGAPrinte 2 2.) oceneeh ss 2455* (Richardson)
Printed books........ 4995
Publication. ......... 496>
Mechanical copies . . 497°
Personal copies ... .497>
Survival............ 501>
Textual criticisms... . .500#
ef Text of NT ..... 2950 (Sitterly)
cf Text of OT...... 2957> (Weir)
Variations..........- 499>
ef Writing........... 3114® (Richardson)
Book of Abraham
cf Apocalyptic Litera-
PUTO ssh ose eaee ks 161 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Book of Covenant
ef Law in OT ....... 1852* (Rule)
cf Moses ........... 20908 (Kyle)
Book of the Dead
ef Libraries ......... 1882> (Richardson)
Book of Enoch......... 164° (J. E. H. Thomson)
Book of Jubilees
ef Apocalyptic Litera-
UPC. hy eacued oats 166> (J. E. H. Thomson)
ef Apocrypha........ 178 (T. W. Davies)


Book of Lamentations
cf Languages of OT. . . 1836" (Weir)


Book of Life..........- 503° (Kaiser); 490°
cf Apocalyptic Litera-
PUTO wien Mee as 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)


Book of Noah
cf Apocalyptic Litera-
tUPC wd Syne coe ae 161 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Book of Ob
ef Judah, Kingdom of .1762> (Weir)
Book of Remembrance. . 503>


Books of Adam........ 548 (M. O. Evans); 1775
(J. E. H. Thomson) ; 178°
(T. W. Davies)
cf Apocalyptic Litera-
GUIE I Aci dc choot ney 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)
BOOte ty. chia ivan 503
Booth .2...5 hice: 503> (T. Lewis)


Booths, Feast of
cf Feasts and Fasts...1103* (E. D. Isaacs)


Booty secede hess 503> (W. L. Walker)
cf Prey ............. 24398 (W. L. Walker)
Boog Ss eee: oiaiaid ts oad 503>
Bor-ashan ............ 503>
Border, Borders. ....... 503> (Hirsch)
ef Hem ............. 1374" (Eager)
ef Quarter ..........25138
Borderer.............. 5048
BORG init ae, na hess 5048 (T. Lewis)
Borez
ef Michmash ........ 2048" (Ewing)
Borith® seston wen ch ee 504®
1310) 9.4 renee ee ee aS 4188
Born Again
ef Regeneration...... 2546> (Nuelsen)
Borne sheeted ines 418"
Borrowing............ 504® (Eager)
Boscath (Bozkath)...... 512
Bosom sos sabes sees 504> (Hirsch)
Bosom, Abraham’s..... 22> (Orr)
Bosor 222s ec 2b ee 504>
Bosora... 12... cece e eee 504 (Ewing)
Bossi-ti es ey at esata 505*
Botany: sie3 ss Vane 505* (Masterman)


Fertility and climate in
modern and ancient
Palestine.......... 505>
Decrease in rainfall . 506
Destruction of for-


BUS eae ype 5068
Vegetation of Bibli-
cal times........ 506>
ef Flowers ..........1120° (Masterman)
ef Forest .........-. 1132* (Masterman)
ef Judah, Territory of. . 1764" (Masterman)
ef Myrrh ........... 2102> (Masterman)
Palestinian flora...... 505
General character-
istics... 2.6.6... 5058


Modern plants... .. 5054
Plant zone in Holy


Jordan valley...... 508

Lebanon and Anti-
Lebanon flora... .509%

Plains and moun-


tains... 02.60... 5078
Steppe or desert
zones...........509%


ef Thorns, Thistles . . .2974* (Masterman)
Botch
ef Boil .............494* (Macalister)


GENERAL INDEX


Bottle... eres an canhes .509> (Eager)

ef Pitcher ........5.. 2401»

of Tearss:. noe et 2923» (Macalister)

CE Vessel oon, atone 3049: (Easton)
Bottom. .............. 510° (M. O. Evans)
Bottomless............ 5112
Bough

ef Branch ........... 513° (Masterman)
Bought (of asling)..... 5112
Bought....... ase

ef Buying ........... 533° (Hager)
Bound

ef Bind wae aia: 474> (Kapp)
Bounds............... 5118


Bountifulness, Bounty
Bow
cf Archery
Bow and Arrows....
Bow, Bowing
ef Adoration


...511% (Kaiser)


Ce ett 8 233> (Hager)
...2528 (Nicol)


. 60 (Edwards); 330 (W.
W. Davies)


Bowels. ivcvie’ ates 511s (Luering)
Bowing............... 511°
Bowls i eae 511> (Eager)

ef Pommel .......... 24188
Bowman.............. 512* (Eager)

ef Archery .......... 233° (Eager)
Bowshot.............. 5128
Boxe teks Geo yee ge 5128
Boxing

ef Games ...........1168> (Smith)
Box-tree .............. 5128 (Masterman)
BOY heed ett te tek es 512 (Kapp)

ef Child ............ 606% (Stearns)

ef Family ........... 1094» (Caverno)

CHSONM 2G ke ees 28268 (Betteridge)


rapes ac nae Sateen
Braided, Braiding... .
cf Embroidery
ef Plaiting
Bramble
cf Thorns, Thistles.


cf Nose


Branding
ef Punishments
Brasen


ef Brass..........


. 512° (Ewing)
. .27208 (Ewing)


. 512» (Ewing)
. .2713> (Ewing)


. 6135 (Masterman)
. .2155> (Luering)


...3157% (Easton)


_ 2504» (Hirsch)


. .5149 (Patch) ; 7362 (Patch)


Brass, Brazen.......... 5144 (Patch); 736% (Patch)
ef Steel ............. 2850°

Bravery... 0.0.00... eee 514

Brawler............... 514 (Kaiser)

Bray.................514® (M. O. Evans)


ef Mortar ........... 20832 (Orr)
BYaZentsielg cn yaa 41 tee 5149 (Patch); 736° (Patch)
Brazen Altar
cf Temple........... 29334 (Caldecott; Orr)
Brazen Sea
ef Knop ............ 1815
ef Temple .......... 29309 (Caldecott; Orr)
Brazen Serpent........ 2736 (Day)
ef Images ........... 1455@ (Cobern)
ef Moses ........-... 20888 (Kyle)
BTCACH Ma loltatoten sews 514° (Hirsch)
Breach of Covenant
ef Crimes ........... 7464 (Hirsch)
Breach of Ritual
cf Crimes ........... 746° (Hirsch)
Breach of Trust........ 30253
Breads. etccnthaeienies 514> (Eager)
Bread-making........515
Baking............ 515
Forms of loaves. .. .516?
Grinding.......... 515°
Kneading......... 515»
OVENS fio) ccc ecd Sas 515»
Dietary preéminence
Ole raetceN orca me oe 5158
GE Hood Gtz<5..220..28 ks 1121> (Eager)
ef Hospitality ....... 1432" (Easton)
ef Leaven ........... 18622 (Hager)
Materials........... 515
Barley............ 5154
Kinds of flour...... 515
Wheat. ........... 5158
ef Meals ............ 2013> (Eager)


Sanctity of bread..... 516°
Symbolism of bread... 517


Bréadths sc Siok 5178
Break weeic ck cna ee tet 517 (Hirsch)
Break Asunder......... 316° (8. F. Hunter)
Break of Day......... 517

ef Dawn ............ 797> (Porter)
Breaspae eet faut ARS 517% (Hirsch)

ef Sacrifice in OT . . . .26388 (Reeve)
Breastplate............ 253

CfsArmor 2.225520 ak 2514 (Nicol)


ef Priests and Levites .2452* (Wiener)


PRCSta shri nates 517» (T. Lewis)
Breath, Breathe, Breath-

A 12 abe ee gd eee 518" (Van Pelt)

ef Spirit... 2.0.0.2... 2841» (Marais)
Breeches.............. 518° (Wolf)
Breed. .........-...... 518 (Hirsch)
Brethren

ef Brother .......... 525° (Pratt)


Brethren of the Lord... .518" (Jacobs)
ef James, Brother of
the Lord.......... 15612 (Kerr)


GENERAL INDEX


Brethren of the Lord—continued
ef James, Son of


Alphaeus.......... 1561 (Kerr)
ef James, Son of Zebe-
CeCe eaneuneaes ts 15602 (Kerr)
ef Joses 6... ee. 1743"
ef Jude ............. 1767
ef Simon (brother of
JESUS) os aloes ook. 27952 (S. F. Hunter)
Briberyiacud ie. bck 520° (Kaiser)
ef Crimes ........... 745° (Hirsch)
ef Justice .. 0.0.0.2... 1781 (Rall)
ef Punishments ...... 2504> (Hirsch)
Bricks 46 4.4573 0844 Sombie 520° (Patch)
ef Pottery .......... 2423> (Patch)
Brick-kiln............. 5228
Bride
ef Marriage ......... 1996" (Eager)
Bride-chamber......... 5228
ef Chamber ......... 591 (Berry)
ef Marriage ......... 1996 (Eager)
Bride-chamber, Sons of
thes eee ees 5228
Bridegroom, Bridegroom,
Friend of
ef Marriage .........1996 (Eager)
Bridges ky niveianees 522° (Hirsch)
Bridle


ef Bit and Bridle..... 482> (W. L. Walker)
Brier
ef Thorns, Thistles. . .29748 (Masterman)


Brigandine

ef Armor, Arms...... 2514 (Nicol)

cf Coat of Mail ...... 253° (Nicol)
Brightness...........-. 5222
Brits eee eaatetl act 5222
Brimstone............. 522 (Patch)
Bring? in cad aaa 522> (Hirsch)
Brink. ..... odlagg teelinn area 523°
Broadiix5 ie sees 5238 (Kaiser)

CROIY. cece 6628 (A. C. Dickie)

CHGAtE mal eels otes 1175> (Easton)
Broad Place

Chi City ak coke eiene: 6622 (A. C. Dickie)
Broidered............- 523

ef Braided .......... 513

ef Embroidery ....... 9402 (Patch)
Broken. ..........-+5- 523° (Hirsch)

ef Break ............ 5172 (Hirsch)
Brokenfooted......... 523>
Brokenhanded......... 523>
Brokenhearted......... 523
Brooch. pists aac Soeaes 523>

ef Bracelet .......... 512 (Hager)

CRing ce, weeks 2594@ (Crannell)
Brook. ...............523 (Day)

ef River ...........: 2595 (Day)

ef Stream .........-. 2866 (Day)

ef Vale .............3045? (Day)

cf Watercourse ...... 3074» (Day)


ef Willows, The Brook
Obs iene ane Paes 3085>


Brook of Egypt, The... .523 (Kyle)


ef Shihor ........... 27685 (Kyle)
BrOOmMs sents ies ees oes 525° (Estes)

ef Juniper .......... 17812 (Masterman)
Brothas ffi g5 octets 525* (Eager)

of Food ......... 0066 1121» (Eager)
Brother............... 525° (Pratt)

cf Relationships, Fam-

Uyeda weceencenscaker 2554 (N. and E. D. Isaacs)

Brotherhood........... 525°


Brother-in-Law
cf Relationships, Fam-


ily.............,..2554°(N. and E. D. Isaacs)
Brotherly.............525> (Pratt)
Brotherly Kindness,
THO VCS 2% Btreciis cote 525> (Rees)
Between Christians. . .525»
Moralidea.......... 525>
Stoic teaching........ 525*
Brother’s Wife. ........526° (Hirsch)
Brow} i iaeee ached eee 526
Brown
ef Colors ........... 674 (Patch)
Bruise, Bruised........ 526° (Kinsella)
Bruit: Srey ebro odes he aa 526°
Brute, Brutish......... 526% (Kapp)
Bubastis
of Pi-beseth.......... 2394» (Kyle)
Bucket. 0.0.0... 00 00008 526
Buckle... ccs... oes 526°
Buckler..............- 526>
cf Armor, Arms...... 2514 (Nicol)
Bud :
ef Flowers..........1120 (Masterman)
Buffalo
cf Cattle ............ 583> (Day)
Buffets! i eay a asda 527 (Kaiser)
Bugean ecccis ei ee es 5278 é
Build, Building......... 5272 (A. C. Dickie)
cf Architecture....... 2342 (A. C. Dickie)
Early building condi-
tions.............5278
ef Fortification....... 1136» (Nicol)
Foundations......... 5278
ef House ..........-- 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Masonry...........- 527°; 20079
Modern methods..... 527>
Builder... 0... 0.00000: 527> (W. L. Walker)
Buk kits eos cide pape wals 528
Bukkiah..............528
ef Bakbukiah........ 3784
Bul, cncnckteer negate 5288


cf Calendar ........
Bull, Bullock


.541> (Porter)


cf Cattle ............ 583% (Day)
Bull, Wild

cf Antelope .........143> (Day)

ef Cattle ............ 583» (Day)
Bulls, Jeroboam’s

ef Calf, Golden ...... 542 (Cobern)
Bulrush

ef Reed: ers ciaeriates 25444 (Masterman)


3206


GENERAL INDEX


Bulrushes, Ark of....... 242° (Kyle)
Bulwark.............. 5284
ef Fortification ...... 1136 (Nicol)
Buna 2k eens Arcot 5288
Bunchy 4. nce See nes 5284
Bandle ys. cs. gece ee 5288 (Van Pelt)
Bunn 8 a acinth aces 528) (Wolf)
Burden............... 528> (Trever)
ef Oracle ........... 21985 (Easton)
Burglary
ef Crimes ........... 7466 (Hirsch)
Burials nn6 Seed 3 5299 (Eager)
Burial procession. .... 5308
Coffins unknown... .530*
Dirge songs........ 531>
Professional mourn-
OTB cists evevege cet se 530°
Custom of immediate
burial............. 5298


Kane oh bes csth ea ee 529>
Persons...........529°
Time.............529%

Failure of burial a
calamity.......... 531>
GIAVES Piao i2e, ck ee 530°
Dug in the earth. . . 530
Family tombs...... 530°
Mourning at grave. .5315
Sealed stones...... 5315
Marking burial places. 531
Preparations......... 529>
Ceremony......... 529>
Jewish and _ other
customs......... 530°
ef Sepulchre ......... 27328
ef Shroud ..7.......- 27818
ef Spice............ 2840* (Masterman)
Buriers cco ie tana 5328
Burn, Burning........- 532°
ef Punishments ...... 2504 (Hirsch)
Burnt Offering
ef Sacrifice .......... 26438 (Reeve)


Burnt Sacrifice
ef Sacrifice .......... 2643 (Reeve)
Burst Asunder........ 316° (S. F. Hunter)


Bush engsi. ced otlew edocs 5322 (Masterman)
Bush, Burning......... 532» (Kyle)

ef Moses............ 2085° (Kyle)

ef Plagues of Egypt.. .2403* (Kyle)
Bushel?s 20. ons0t ee 532°
Bushy isch cites sees 533*
Business.............. 533° (Kinsella)
Busybody............- 533* (Dosker)
Butler................ 533° (Pollard)
Butter

ef Food ............-. 1121> (Hager)


Buying 2.60. sees eas 533° (Eager)
In the earliest periods
and among nomads. 533
Open air markets..... 535%


ar


Buying—continued
Oriental buying... . ,.534*
Shops and bazaars... .534


Buz, Buzi, Buzite....... 535° (Wolf)
Bye AU SOs a hie Mac re 535°
By and By............ 535°
Byblus

ef Gebal ............ 1180* (Porter)
Bypaths (Byway)...-.... 535
Byssus

ef Linen ............ 1894* (E. D. Isaacs)
BYWAY bi seu taeu sae 535
Byword............56% 535>
Cab (Kab)...........4. 1788»
Cabbon...........6... 536°

ef Machbena ........ 1959>
Cabinet yee. ete 536%
Cabul Biceiice cd tras 536: (Ewing)
Caddis

ef Gaddis ........... 11538
Cades

ef Kedesh ........... 17918
Cades-barne (Kadesh-

barnea) ......-....-- 1788> (S. F. Hunter)
Cadhesnn. itenoee ees aes 5368

ef Alphabet ......... 103° (Rickardson)
Caesars: face sek 3 caer sabe 5368
Caesarea..........050. 536° (Ewing)


ef Ships and Boats. ..2774* (Nicol)
ef Transfiguration,


Mount of.......... 3006" (Ewing)
Caesarea Philippi
ef Jesus Christ....... 1648> (Orr)
ef Jordan ........... 17338 (Wright)


Caesar’s Household. .... 5379 (Rutherfurd)


Cage eh ad at aes 538% (Stratton-Porter)
Caiaphas.............- 538° (Kerr)

cf Jesus Christ, Arrest

and Trial of....... 1670* (Maclaren)

ef Priest, High....... 2441» (Reeve)
Cains ei eds arenes 538> (Farr)

ef Criticism of Bible. .748> (Orr) . :

ef Inspiration........ 14738 (Warfield)

ef Kenites.......... 1792 (Ewing)
Caiman. aspen Sok eats 839>
Cake

ef Bread ............ 514> (Eager)
Calahxoceaieiad o2hntee 539° (Pinches)

ef Babel ............ 350° (Pinches)


ef Babel, Tower of . . .355° (Pinches)
cf Babylon in the NT .358 (Fortune)


ef Resen............ 25615 (Pinches)
Calamity.............. 540° (Pratt)
Calamolalus........... 5415
Calamus

ef Reed ............. 25449 (Masterman)
Calcol ir. io Mane 5415
Caldron. ...0ce0enc eas: 5415 (Berry)
Caleb asiaat ohateas 5418 (Margolis)

cf Moses ............ 2088" (Kyle)
Caleb-ephrathah....... 541


GENERAL INDEX


Calendar..............
Ch AbIb nice nt
CLL Y.Val tec uica setae
ef Kislev ...........
ef Month ...........
ef Nisan ............
ef Shebat ...........
ef Sivan ............
ef Tammuz..........
ef Tebeth...........
ef Third ............
ef Time ............


CLSZAV: wits! cL hee Ba


ef Cattle ............
ef Gods (golden).....
Calf, Golden...........
ef Astrology .........
ef Idolatry ..........
ef Images ...........
ef Israel, History of. .
ef Moses .........-...


Calker


Calneh (Calno)........-
Calphi

ef Chalphi..........
Calvary

ef Golgotha ........
Calves of the Lips......


Calvin
ef Lord’s Supper.....


- ef Horse ........----
ef Needle ..........-
cf Swift Beasts ......

Camel’s Hair..........


Camp
ef War... eee
Cana of Galilee........
Canaan, Canaanites.....
ef Fortification ......


541 (Porter)
9* (Beecher)
1545»


2924


542 (Day)
583> (Day)
1271 (Reeve)
542 (Cobern)
295> (Maunder)
1447» (Cobern)
1452 (Cobern)


.1520> (Orelli)


2087' (Kyle)


14528 (Cobern)
545> (Edwards)


. 27742 (Nicol)


545° (Trever)
545>

546* (Pinches)
2772» (Pinches)
546>


.591>


.1275° (Masterman)


546” (T. Lewis)


1926» (Dosker)
546> (R. D. Wilson)
5476 (Day)

14238 (Day)

2129> (Patch)


548° (Patch)
3077* (Patch)


3069" (Nicol)
5486 (Ewing)
549° (Sayce)
1136° (Nicol)


Invasion of, archaeo-


logical theory.....

ef Traffic...........-
Canaanitess

ef Bathshua ........-


232 (Kyle)
30045 (Raffety)


552° (Kyle)
2866 (Day)


Cananaean
ef Simon ............


Candlestick, The Golden.
ef Almond ..........


Canon, NT............
ef Gospels, Synoptic ..
cf Matthew, Gospel of .

Canon, OT............
cf Synagogue,


Canticles
ef Song of Songs ....
Caperberry..........-
ef Food .............
Capernaum............
cf Galilee, Sea of... ..
‘ef Palestine .........
ef Palestine, Recent
Exploration........
Caph (Kaph)........-
Capharsalama.........
Caphenatha


Caphthorim...........
Caphtor, Caphtorim. . .
Cappadocia............
Captain. .........5-60-
ef Army, Roman.....
ef Augustan Band...
ef Guard ..........
Captive... 0... ee eee
ef Captivity.........-
cf War oc ei ee eee
Captivity.........-.--
Northern Kingdom. .
ef Seventy Years.....
Southern Kingdom...
Captivity Epistles. ....
ef Philemon .........
Car
ef Palanquin ........
Carabasion........-..-


3207


552 (Eager)

2887> (Caldecott; Orr)
553° (Orr)

100° (Masterman)
1815¢

18258 (Porter)

2891 (Caldecott; Orr)
2938» (Caldecott; Orr)


25449 (Masterman)


553> (Fortune)

563* (Riggs); 467 (Orr)
1281> (Iverach)

2009» (Schodde)

554*® (Robinson)


The


2879> (Orr)


Apocryphal


195> (Hutchison)
566* (Sampey)


2831* (Sampey)
566> (Masterman)
1124 (Eager)
566 (Ewing)
11658 (Ewing)
2221» (Conder)


2229» (Cobern)


.1789>


5676


594b
568"; 602»


. -2400*


568


. 568" (Ewing)


568* (White)
568° (Nicol)
2578 (Allen)


. 2589 (Allen)
.1307° (Nicol)


569° (Farr)
569° (Nicol)


.8069° (Nicol)


569° (Nicol)


570%


2744


571
.466° (Orr)


2366° (C. S. Lewis)


3208 GENERAL INDEX


Caravan..............5765 (T. Lewis) Castor and Pollux
Caravansary cf Astronomy ....... 300> (Maunder)
CHINN. gi sho ices eee eae 14702 (Christie) ef Dioscuri .......... 8515 (Maunder)
Carbuncle Catan eee coi ates 582° (Hutchison)
ef Stones, Precious . . .2856+ (Fletcher) a ef Zodlogy .......... 3155 (Day)
Carcass: «6 te ee 576> atechist, Catechumen .582> (Gerberding)
Carcass (Carcase)...... 5765 (Stearns) ef Education ........ 900> (Meyer)
Carchemish............ 576° (Pinches) ef Gospels, Synoptic. .1283% ([verach)
of Pharaoh-necoh.. . . .2360% (Nicol) cf Mark, Gospel of .. .1991> (Farmer)
Care eee ara 577» (Trever) ef Spiritual Gifts. .... 2843 (Lambert)
Careah (Kareah)....... 17908 cf Teacher .......... 2921" (DeMent)
Careful, Carefulness Caterpillar............ 5832
Ch Care. ce tatacn: 577° (Trever) ef Canker-worm ..... 553°
Carefully.............. 578* (Trever) cf Locust ........... 1907° (Day)
Careless, Carelessly.... . 578» (Trever) Catholic Epistles....... 583° (Pratt)
Caren ted. ie. ake 578» of Bible, The........ 467 (Orr)
Carlie. force ork tee 578> (Banks) ae bey span ttns sh gir rg ae (Day)
Carites........0...00.. 578? BLU C ysyeoradnches seen ay
Casieninne (Carmee ef Antelope ......... me (Day)
DIANS) 53.300, age cecdetes 5802 (Hutchison) of Beast ............ oe (Day)
Carme (Charme)....... 5982 of Calf ............. 542 itey)
Carmel sci eanh are ane 579° (Ewing) ef Sheep eee 2756” (Day)
Galina ee ee 579» ef Wild-ox ..........38084 (Day)
ef Hezro, Hezrai..... 1388 pres nee ere Bags (Cole)
: b Cattle reoie eee ug ts 584> (Luering)
Carmelitess............ 579 Z z
; ef Liver ............ 1905> (Luering)
Carmibes a ttf aah 579» (Wolf)
‘ : Gaus: occa ibeues ¥ 585° (Stearns)
Carmonians........... 580" (Hutchison) C
AUSEWAY.. 2... eee eee 585° (Stearns)
Carnaim .............. 580"
- Cave tee Mia 8 eaa.ce darks s 585* (Day)
Carnal. viet oes 580" (Trever) cf Adullam..........62° (Beecher)
ef Man, Natural..... 19742 (Webb) £D 829» (Day)
Gane (Caen) go" Chen ssois05 cutie (Day
a aie yee Py S penn cf Machpelah........1959 (Masterman)
Bae. Sao Pant aH R08 ef Makkedah......... 19699 (Ewing)
pts Sa ye oS ates 581> (Patch Cease? ei wat aaa 5862 (Pratt)
CES MATL eat tT ‘ (Patch) Cedar eras wei et 5862 (Masterman); 509>
ef Crafts ............ 734° (Patch) (Masterman)
ef Tools ..........-. es (Easton) ef Heifer, Red ....... 1367> (Easton)
Carpus bastion 580> (Dosker) Céedars‘of Lebanon... 5868 ‘
Carriage... ........04. 580° (Patch) ef Lebanon.......... 18633 (Wright)
Oarry ned, sane eioeie 580° (Fortune) Cedron (Kidron)....... 17988
Carshena Pees veneees 580> Ceilan (Kilan).........17986
ef Prince ..../...... 2453 (Baur) Ceiled, Ceiling......... 5874 (Berry)
Cart. So ee ee eon 581° (Patch) Celebrate.............. 587° (Pratt)
Carving. ......--...6.. 581» (Patch) Celestial. .........0... 587> (Pratt)
ef Crafts ............ 7348 (Patch) (G1 | Fh oa ee re 587° (Berry)
Casdim (Chesed)....... 6058 (Sampey) Celo-Syria
Casestes 2: steko de: 581» ef Coele-Syria........ 672> (Ewing)
Casement Cenchreae............. 587>
ef House ............ 1434® (A. C. Dickie) Gandebnes Mell ee 587b
Casiphia.............. 581> Genser 2. Yeo ee 587 (T. Lewis)
Casluhim............. 581> ef Firepan ..........1113* (Hovey)
ef Philistines ........2376 (Conder) ef Incense........... 1466> (Orr)
Casphon (Casphor)..... 581> Census
Casphor®..20..54 4 ss... at 581> cf Chronology of NT. .645* (Armstrong)
ef Ashtoreth........ 270° (Sayce) ef David ............ 790° (Weir)
Caspin (Caspis) Centurion............. 5888 (Nicol)
ef Casphor .......... 581> ef Augustan Band. .. .258° (Allen)
Cassia ie. 582° (Masterman) Cephas
Castine 4 vo ccuwatee nae 582s (Jacobs) ef Peter ............2348> (Gray)
Castanets.............582 (Fortune) Ceras (Keras).......... 17938
Castaway............. 5825 Cereals
Castle ef Food............. 1122s (Eager)


ef Fortification....... 1136 (Nicol) | of Meals ............ 2013> (Eager)


GENERAL INDEX


3209


Cerinthus
cf John, 1 Ep. of..... 1714* (Law)
Certain, Certainly, Cer-


taMby see oe eos 588° (Stearns)
Certify a Sat Sic enews 588>
Cetab (Ketah)......... 1793P
Chabiri

ef Tell el-Amarna.. . . .2927 (Kyle)
Chabrisy oss rthees 588>
Chadias............... 588
Chaereas.............. 588>
Chale. i nie emi oo 588b
Chath eoeinle dasa cs 588° (Patch)

ef Agriculture........ 7 (Patch)

ef Rolling Thing...... 2597>

ef Straw ............ 2866> (Patch)
Chain tno ae csseh eect 589* (Fortune)

ef Fetter ............ 1107

ef Punishments ...... 2504» (Hirsch)
Chair

ef Seat ............. 2710° (Cotton)
Chalcedony

ef Stones, Precious . . .28562 (Fletcher)
Chalcol (Calcol)........ 5412
Chaldeii. ass. caren oe 589> (Pinches)

ef Babylonia ........ 358° (Clay)

ef Shinar ........... 2771" (Pinches)
Chalkols v.65 4. 4as3 4003 5418
Chalkstone............5919 (Day)

CE Cla yes coh ose 6672 (Day)

ef Lime............. 1893> (Day)

ef Slime ............ 2817> (Day)
Challenge............. 5912
Chalphi.............-- 591
Chamher, Roof Chamber. 591> (Berry)
Chamhering...........591>
Chamberlain........... 591° (Pollard)
Chambers in the Heavens

ef Astronomy ....... 300° (Maunder)

ef Dial of Ahaz ...... 841" (Maunder)
Chambers of Imagery . .592°

ef Images ........... 14522 (Cobern)
Chambers in South

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)

cf South, Chambers of .2838>
Chameleon............592 (Day)

cf Ferret ...........- 1106 (Day)

cf Land-crocodile..... 1826» (Day)

of Lizard ........... 1906" (Day)

of Mole ............- 2074 (Day)

cf Pelican ........... 2297 (Stratton-Porter)

cf Swan ............2874> (Stratton-Porter)
Chamois............+- 5926 (Day)

ef Goat ..........45. 1249* (Day)
Champaign.......-..-- 592> (Day)

ef Arahah ........... 211» (Wright)

cf Natural Features. . 2122° (Day)

ef Vale occ. sce ead 3045° (Day)
Champion.......-.---. 5934
Chanaan


ef Canaan .........- 5492 (Sayce)


Change............


Change of Raiment .


cf Dress .........
Changer.......


cf Bank, Banking...
ef Money-changers . .


.. 693° (Trever)
...1152® (Stearns)
...1836> (W. L. Walker)
.. 20838

.. .693> (Stearns)

.. 093° (Pratt)


.. .875> (Eager)
. 094
. 883% (Eager)
. 2080° (Pollard)


Channel............... 594 (Day)

ef Brook ............ 523° (Day)

ef River ............ 2595 (Day)

ef Stream ........... 2866» (Day)
Chants s tect ae 594
Chanuneus............ 594
Chapels... sysee eer eee 594>
Chaphenatha.......... 594
Chapiter
. ef Architecture ...... 2342 (A. C. Dickie)
Chapman............. 594>

ef Trade ............ 30022 (Easton)
Ghaptisct: ica ae ses 594»
Chapters

cf Text of the OT ... .2963> (Weir)
Charaathalan.......... 594>
Characa (Charax)......594®
Charashim

ef Ge-harashim....... 11828
Gharaxs < 220 a2 les oad 594»
Charchemish  (Carche-

MISH) * Aes sede oe hea 576° (Pinches) -
Charchus

ef Barchus .......... 403»
Charea...........0000% 594»

ef Harsha ........... 13416
Charge, Chargeable. .... 594> (M. O. Evans)
Chargers oo. fos sies 595° (Estes)
Charges). acrschedeesc es 595°

ef Overcharge....... 2205
Charlotan- ovcsecienuik 595° (Nicol)
Chariots of the Sun..... 596° (Margolis)

cf Images ........... 1452 (Cobern)
Charitably...........- 596
Charity:.. ps ishee ake 5972 (Rees)
Charitias devas ie vid 5975 (T. W. Davies)


cf Magic, Magician


Charran (Haran)... .
Chase


... 1963" (T. W. Davies)


ef Hunting .......... 1440+ (Smith)
Chaseba...........--- 598
Chaste, Chastity

ef Crimes ........... 745° (Hirsch)

cf Marriage .........1996> (Eager)
Chastening, Chastise-

MOM Gi, yidne cc edipeavece seek 598 (Jacohs)
Chatter n:26 6 css enn 599

ef Chirp ............ 6122 (W. L. Walker)
Chavah’ 4... susse-e0028: 5992


3210 GENERAL INDEX


Cheb ar? c.ceseciaen e whos 599° (Ewing)
CHE 08 6 chs nsceeth wat 599%
Checker-work.......... 599#
ef Broidered......... §23°
ef Embroidery ....... 940° (Patch)
Chedorlaomer.......... 599° (Pinches)
ef Hammurabi....... 1326+ (Pinches)
CiePidal feeG ni stems 2980* (Pinches)
Cheek, Cheekbone...... 6002 (Luering)
Cheek Teeth........... 600°
Cheer, Cheerfulness. . . . .600° (Edwards)
Cheese
ehHOOd i )..65-ciae 1123> (Eager)
Ch Malley oe. nese be 2051> (N. Isaacs)
Chelal...............05 600>
Chelcias
cf Helkias .......... 13712
ef Hilkiah .......... 1392* (Wallace)
Chellians.............. 6005
Chelluh (Cheluhi)...... 6018
Chelltisis fet ign o oe ks 600>
CHelo de. d ak nce teens 600>
Chelubs:: 0s. sces int 600>
ef Genealogy ........ 1183 (Crannell)
Chelubai.............. 601
ef Caleb ............ 541° (Margolis)
Cheluhi............... 6018
Chemarim............. 601° (Van Pelt)
ef Priests and Levites 2446> (Wiener)
Chemosh.............- 6018 (Nicol)
ef Gods ............- 1271* (Reeve)
ef Moab ............ 2070> (Porter)
cf Semites, Semitic
Religion........... 2717" (Mack)
Chenaanah............ 602
Chenani............... 602
Chenaniah............ 602>
Chephar-ammoni...... 602


Chephar-haamoni
ef Chephar-ammoni. . .602


Chephirah............. 602>
CHera 6 se eee eh vale 6032
Cherethites............ 6038 (Ewing)
ef Caphtor .......... 5682 (Ewing)
ef Pelethites........ 2297
ef Stranger and So-
journer (OT)....... 28652 (Wiener)
Cherish............... 6032
Cherith, The Brook... .603*
Cherub (place)......... 603»
Cherubic Forms in the
Constellations
ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Cherubim............. 603> (Margolis)
ef Astronomy ........ 310° (Maunder)
ef Tabernacle........ 2890° (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Temple .......... 29323 (Caldecott; Orr)
Chesalon.............. 604>
“ef Jearim, Mount... .1572>
Chesed’ see rakes escak'ee 605* (Sampey)
Chesil................605*
Ghest.ie cece eek 605° (Eager)


Chestnut Tree


of Plane Tree... .....2407%
Chesulloth............- 605»
Cheth (Heth).......... 13884»
Chettiim (Kittim)...... 1814> (Pinches)
Chew Cud............. 605 (N. Isaacs)
Chezib (Achzib)....... -.37> (Mack)
Chieken..............- 605> (Stratton-Porter)
Chide@) o.eccucei ete 6062
Chidon, The Threshing-

floor of.............. 6062
CGR tie et tvetesletten ies 606° (Farr)

ef Asiarch .......... 2828 (M. O. Evans)


Chief Friends, Good Men
cf Friends, Chief


: Friends .........-- 1146+
Chief Musician
ef Asaph ............ 262 (Millar)
Chief Seats............ 606> (J. M. Wilson)
ef Synagoguc ........ 2878> (Levertoff)
Child, Children......... 606 (Stearns; Fortune)
ef Firstborn, Firstling. 1113» (T. Lewis)
Child-bearing.......... 607 (Jacobs)
Childhood, Apocryphal
Gospel of the


ef Apocryphal Gospels 195° (Hutchison)
Children of the Bride-


chamber
cf Bridechamber, Sons
of the............. 5228
Children of the East... .610> (Fortune); 888 (Day)
cf People ........... 23198 (Easton)
Children of Eden....... 6075 (Fortune)
Children of God........ 608* (Rees)


ef Adoption .........58* (Rees)
ef Father, God the. ...1100° (Orr)


CEI GOR ler saison hanks 1261> (Rees)

ef Jesus Christ....... 16248 (Orr)

cf Sons of God (OT) . .2835* (Crichton)
Children of Israel... ... .610 (Fortune)
Chileab s:cn0-tcn at atte) 611s (Wolf)
ChNON ois05 cele oes ee 6119 (W. L. Walker)
Chilmad.............. 611 (Pinches)
Chimham............. 6115 (Wolf)
Chimney

cf House ............ 1484» (A.C. Dickie)
Chinnereth............ 611s
Chi08 3 i fein at dietetics 611» (Harry)

ef Samos........... 2674» (Kinsella)
Chirpsewinwegacccssee 6123 (W. L. Walker)

ef Chatter ..........5992
Chisleu (Kislev) ....... 1813
Chislon............... 612»
Chisloth-tabor

ef Chesulloth ........ 605>
Chitlish............... 6128
Chittim (Kittim)....... 1814» (Pinches)
CHM bene ea Mle 612* (Margolis)

cf Astrology ......... 295 (Maunder)

ef Rephan ..........25608


ef Semites, Semitic
Religion ..........2717* (Mack)


GENERAL INDEX


CEWalksckas fasta


Choose, Chosen........
ef Foreordain,
ordination.........
Chop ren. kleine ished
Chorashan (Cor-ashan). .
Chorazin..............
cf Palestine
Chorbe..............
Chosamaeus...........
Chosen
ef Choose
Chozeba
ef Achzib
Christ, Exaltation of....
Ascension...........


Judgment..........
Parousia............
Resurrection.........
Christ, Intercession of
ef Intercession
Christe 42 enioe eked
Christ, Jesus
cf Jesus Christ.......


612> (Rees)
2482 (Tillett)
30859 (W. L. Walker)


612> (Rees)


Fore-


709»
614° (Ewing)
2221» (Conder)


6148


6145
612> (Rees)


37> (Mack)

614> (Bevan)

263 (Thomas);
(Bevan)


615+


.1777* (Jacobs)


22499 (Easton)
2565> (Thomas)


of


1487 (Bevan)


1624° (Orr)


Christ as King, Priest,


Prophet
ef Christ, Offices of...
ef King, Christ as....
ef Priest
Christ, Offices of.......
cf King, Christ as ...
ef Priest
ef Priest, High.......
ef Priesthood
Christ, Person of.......
Christ, Temptation of...
Christian..............
Christianity


In principle and
essence... ....666--
ef Leviticus ...
ef Nero

Christology
ef Person of Christ ...
Christs
cf Christs, False......
ef Messiah
Christs, False..........


616 (Bevan)
1802" (M’Caig)
24412 (Moorehead)
616> (Bevan)


. 1802" (M’Caig)


2441" (Moorchead)
2441> (Reeve)
2444® (Moorehead)
2338° (Warfield)
2943" (Anderson)
621» (J. Dickie)


219% (Weir)


and doc-


624> (Orr) ”


6238 (J. Dickie)
1880 (Miller)
2138 (Angus)


2338* (Warfield)
628> (Orr)


2039 (Crichton)
628> (Orr)


3211
Chronicles, Books of... .629% (Beecher)
Additions to......... 631»
Authorship.......... 6337
Contents............ 630°
Critical estimates. .... 632>
HBT Yack mies ie oneal 6334
NINES oe alacurbytccn mien 6296
Numbers............ 630
Omissions........... 6328
Position in OT... ... .629
Purpose of........... 6326
ef Quotations........ 2520° (Sweet)
Sources............. 630"
POX Reon airmen eee 632
Trustworthiness. ..... 634"
Valuers de .cicecle eed 635%
Chronology of NT...... 644» (Armstrong)
Apostolic age........ 6475
Baptism of Jesus..... 646>
Birth of Jesus........ 6453
Captivity of Paul... .648>
Conversion of Paul. . .647>
Death of Jesus....... 647
Edict of Claudius... .648>
_ Epistles of Paul...... 649»
Famine under Claudius 648*
Gallio enn? see sata 648»
cf Gospels, Synoptic. . 1284* (Iverach)
Herod Agrippa....... 6488
ef Jesus Christ (Chro-
nology) ..........- 1628>
Jews expelled from
Rome. co-seaeee 648»
Ministry of Jesus. .... 646
Missionary journcys
of Paul............ 6492
cf Passion Week...... 1655"; 16588 (Orr)
ef Paul, the Apostle. . .2270% (A. T. Robertson)
ef Pentecost......... 2318" (Dosker)
Release and death of
Paul: ws ccettes ete 6496
St. Peter’sdeath...... 650
Sergius Paulus. ...... 6488
Synoptic Gospels. ... .650*
Chronology of OT...... 6352 (Mack)


Abraham to Creation .643*; 139° (Davis)
ef Deluge of Noah. .8215 (Wright)
Ages between OT and


ef Ahaziah
Assyrian period and

Judah after fall of

Samaria........... 6382
Babylonian period. . . .637
Disruption to the exo-


GUS: Ach sevanatserehce 6418
Divided kingdom
period ............638°
Exodus to birth of
Abraham.......... 6428
cf Menahem....... 2031 (Caldecott)
Persian period....... 636>


3212 GENERAL INDEX


Chronology of OT—continued


cf Tabernacle........ 2891%; 28949 (Caldecott;
Orr; Whitelaw)
ef Zechariah......... 3136* (Caldecott)
Chrysolite
cf Stones, Precious. . .2856° (Fletcher)
Chrysoprase, Chryso-
prasus
ef Stones, Precious . . .2856# (Fletcher)
Chub (Cub)........... 7653
Chun (Cun)........... 765»
Church. scot cn hans 650 (Lambert)
Adoption of term by
Jesus.............651
Consecration........ 652>
SACHS axe che etaceeld aneetjete 652°
Fellowship.......... 6523
ef JesusChrist....... 1648> (Orr)
Organization of....... 653
POWer eet es eke 652
Pre-Christian history
of the term........ 651
ef Presbyter......... 2437> (Mack)
Unity 28h et oe 652


Church of the Brethren
ef Lord’s Supper


(Dunkers)......... 19298 (Kurtz)
Church Government... .653° (Forrester)
ef Bishop ..........- 478 (Dosker)
Codéperative rela-
AIODS sede eevee 655%
External authority... .655*
ef Government....... 1287* (Heidel)
Internal order....... .654*
Meaning............ 6548
ef Ministry.......... 2059 (T. M. Lindsay)


ef Pauline Theology . .22892 (Easton)
Church Officers


In Clement.......... 18976 (Cowan)
In Didache.......... 18999 (Cowan)
In Ignatius.......... 19002 (Cowan)


ef Literature, Sub-apos.1896> (Cowan)
Churches, Robbers of

cf Robbers of Temples 2595
Churches, Seven

ef Angels of the Seven


Churches.......... 135° (Banks)
ef Smyrna .......... 2818> (Banks)
Chur les 26. oe aed cle 655> (Sampey)


Chushan-rishathaim
ef Cushan-rishathaim 768> (Baur)


CHUSI eS imasee 2 ceeeties 6555
Chuzas............00- 6555

ef Joanna ........... 1679* (Kerr)
CicGane nies sags he 655>

ef Cities of the Plain. .660* (Wright)

ef Plain............ 2406> (Day)
Cidkenu............... 1584


ef Ceiled, Ceiling..... 587* (Berry)
Ciliclaiscs: os Sesser 655> (White)


Cinnamon..........-.. 656+ (Masterman)
ef Cassia... ....-.0-- 582° (Masterman)
Cinneroth (Chinnereth) .611+
Cirama (Kirama).......1811*
Circlesien .cai5 Gee ies 656>
ef Astronomy........ 300 (Maunder)
cf Cicear ........--- 655; 660° (Wright)
ef Plain.............2406 (Day)
Circle of the Earth
ef Astronomy ....... 300 (Maunder)
Circuitec eaves 656> (N. Isaacs)
Cireumcision.......... 656> (T. Lewis);
(Petrie)
ef Firstborn, Firstling .1113° (T. Lewis)
ef Foreskin ......... 1131 (Luering)
cf Seal ........-00.- 2709 (Edwards)
cf Uncircumcised.... . 3035> (Easton)
Cis ciasinncna sian 657»
Cisai (Kiseus)........- 18133
Cistern, Well, Pool,
Aqueduct............657> (A. C. Dickie)
cf Fountain ......... 11415 (Day)
CEIPOO) oe nic, ok ed 2419 (Day)
CE Water cs cccccna ts ee 30742 (Joy)
Ge Well, oii... sees 3081" (Day)
Citadel
cf Fortification....... 1136 (Nicol)
Cithem..............- 6602 (Millar)
cf Music ............ 2094» (Millar)
Cities, Levitical
CECI as Sine es 6622 (A. C. Dickie)


.... 18692 (Wiener)


Cictali:. 4 J accneedast 660° (Wright)

cf Gomorrah ........12778 (Wright)

cf Slime, Slime Pits. . .2817 (Day)

cf Sodom ........... 2821> (Wright)
Cities of Refuge........ 2545 (Ewing)
Cities, Store

ChiGibysieriece hs tee 6622 (A. C. Dickie)
Citims (Chittim)....... 1814» (Pinches)
Citizenship. ........... 6614 (Trever)

cf Roman Law ...... 2611» (Allen)
Citron

ch Apple:isc is scarce: 2092 (Masterman)
City sc Aeataneesecte ee 6622 (A. C. Dickie)

Canaanite city...... 6624

Of Confusion......... 665

Of David (Zion)...... 3150 (Masterman)

Of Destruction....... 665+ (Orr)

ef Fortification....... 1186> (Nicol)

Cf: Gate rs. heet en dae 1175> (Easton)

ef Golden City....... 12754

Of Jewish occupation .668>

Levitical cities....... 6654; 1869° (Wiener)


cf Refuge, Cities of .2545> (Ewing)
Of Palm Trees


(Jericho) .......... 1592 (Wright)
Royal (Rabbah)...... 25205 (Ewing)
Rulers of............ 665° (Fortune)
cf Salt, City of....... 2664
Store cities........... 665+


GENERAL INDEX


City—continued


ROWS orstite nae sealants 30012 (Christie)
Walldges. 8 Ses Sed 3049» (Christie)
Of Waters (Rabbah) . .2520> (Ewing)
Clap een at hone 665>
Clasps svete be. ak 665 (Caldecott)
ef Selvedge ......... 2716>
Clauda (Cauda)........ 584» (Calder)
Claudia... ..........0. 666° (Jacobs)
ef Pudens ........... 25019 (Rutherfurd)
ef Woman ..........3103* (Pratt)
Claudius.............. 666° (Hutchison)
Claudius Lysias........ 666° (Kerr)
ef Lysias ...........1948> (Hutchison)
ef Tertullus .... . .2949> (Kerr)
CE Wie see tries tk oes 6679
Clayearss «ier Se ate 667° (Day)
ef Lime............. 1893» (Day)
Cleamess (hacen ene 667> (Crannell)
ef Defilement........818 (Crannell)
ef Pure, Purely ...... 2506 (W. L. Walker)
ef Purity ...........2507 (Caverno)
ef Seed ............. 2712> (Easton)
Clean and Unclean
Animals
cf Abomination ...... 16* (Eager)


Clean and Unclean Food 1121 (Eager)
Clean and Unclean


Meats

ef Abstinence........24> (Hager)
Cleanse..........-..-.- 667> (Crannell)
Clear, Clearness........ 668° (Jacobs)
Cleave: ih) eke dnd es 668> (Fortune)
Cleave Asunder....... 316> (S. F. Hunter)
Cleft, Cliff, Clift....... 668%
Clemency............- 668>
Clementiied pica en3 669° (Jacobs)
Clement of Rome.......481" (Lowndes)
Clement, Second Epis-

tle of

ef Literature, Sub-

BPOS suis i edhe. 1902» (Cowan)

Cleopas...........-+-. 669"

cf Alphaeus .........106* (Fortune)

ef Clopas ..........-669> (Jacobs)
Cleopatra............. 669° (Hutchison)
Cleophas (Clopas)...... 669> (Jacobs)
Clerk

ef Townelerk ........ 3001* (Dosker)
Cliff, Clift

ef Cleft ............- 668>
Cloak, Cloke.........- 669° (Eager)

ef Dress ............875 (Eager)
Clodieva ventas hie k ts 669° (M. O. Evans)
Clopas..... 6.6.0... ee 669° (Jacobs)

ef Alphaeus........- 106° (Fortune)
Close. assist nba fe 669° (W. L. Walker)
Closet fo ussienthe okce 669 (Estes)

ef House .......-.++- 1434> (A. C. Dickie)
Cloth, Clothing

cf Dress............875° (Eager)


Clothed Upon......... 670* (Clippinger)


Clothes, Rending of... .670° (Fortune)
Clouds. ee eas 670° (Joy)

Jehovah's presence and

glory in........... 6705

In Palestine......... 6708

Pillar of...........-- 670°

Raines 38 ita es code he 670°

Transitory.......... 670»
Cloutic.c 02a cele nee 6715
COVER Bee csi iach tio 6712 (Jacobs)
Club

ef Armor ...........251% (Nicol)

ef Staff.............2847
Cluster Sitecctcs asdeit 6715 (Masterman)
Cnidusine vitae oe 6715 (Banks)
Coal oe eatintinas dats 671> (Day)
Coastics: ohne ane 6728 (Day)

ef Island ............ 1511 (Day)

ef Quarter ..........25139

cf Shore ............ 2779» (Day)
Coat

cf Cloak, Cloke...... 669° (Eager)

ef Coat of Mail...... 253> (Nicol)

ch Dress’. .ip craven et 875> (Eager)

cf Priests and Levites 2446 (Wiener)
Cocke: sr. eee eat 672 (Stratton-Porter)

ef Chicken .......... 605> (Stratton-Porter)
Cockatrice............ 672» (Day)

cf Serpent ..........2736° (Day)
Cock-crowing.......... 672>

ef Cock ..........0... 672° (Stratton-Porter)
Cocker ec e.5 fnadcaree 672>
Cocklénsccndain asad out 672 (Masterman)


Code of Hammurabi... . 1327 (Ungnad)
Codex
ef Text and Manu-


scripts of NT...... 2952° (Sitterly)

Coele-Syria............ 672> (Ewing)
Coenaculum

ef Jerusalem ........ 1613* (Masterman)
Cole ¢ fois einige SORES 673"
Coffin

ef Burial ..........-. 529 (Eager)

cf Chest ............ 605* (Eager)
Cogitation............. 673%
Cohortiscine sic ages 673°

ef Band ..........-. 382° (Nicol; Rees)
COINS seid ake ace as 673° (Porter)

cf Money........... 2076" (Porter)

cf Phoenicia ......... 2388> (Porter)

ef Sidon ............ 2786* (Porter)

cf Weights and Meas-

UPeS Sen See 3081* (Porter)

Cola (Chola).......... 612>
COldl Plath ns oe 673» (Joy)

ef Seasons .......... 2710 (Joy)
Col-hozeh............-. 674
Colius

ef Calitas ........... 545> (Edwards)
Gollariia-eest yak ae 674° (N. Isaacs)
Collection............. 6748 (Trever)

ef Communion....... 688° (Miller)


3213


3214 GENERAL INDEX


College............... 6742
ef Mishneh......... 2066" (Masterman)
Collope ier Buran ees 674>
Colony.............0.. 674» (Heidel)
ef Citizenship ....... 6612 (Trever)
ef Philippi ..........23698 (Tod)
Color, Colors.......... 674» (Patch)
Bayer icckist ciate 6758
Black... 0... 2.0202. 6755
BUG i oalinri.g ene eal 675»
Brown: sca. etiserais 675>
Crimson............ 675»
ef Dye, Dyeing...... 883 (Patch)
Grae este ace ees eee ate 675»
Greens sh eatana 8 675>
OAT Pisa esek Oe ay a 675>
ef Paint... .......... 2208" (Crannell)
Purpleia at tee tale 675»; 2509» (Day)
Reds... fea ds 675"
Searlets... oes nya kd 6768
Sorrelisoe eo) dere 676%
ef Sorrel .......... 2836»
Vermilion. .......... 6768
Wihit@in vee theese 676
ef Worm, Scarlet-worm 31098 (Day)
Vellowisccis i sean hes 6768
Colossae.............. 676° (Banks)
Colossians, Epistle to the 676 (C. S. Lewis)
Argument...........- 6784
Authenticity......... 676
Destination.......... 6775
Internal evidence. .... 677
cf Laodiceans, Epistle
to the............18379 (Rutherfurd)
cf Philemon, Epistle
TOPS cc Mduosennenere nase 2366> (C. 8. Lewis)
Place and date....... 6774
Purpose............. 677
Relation to other NT
writings .......... 677>
Colt he 678% (Day)
Come nl iw es 678> ‘(W. L. Walker)
Comeliness...........- 678
Comfort...........--- 678 (Jacobs)
Comfortably..........- 678» (Pratt)
Comforter............. 6792 (Mullins)
ef Advocate ......... 65" (Mullins)
ef Holy Spirit ....... 1406 (Mullins)
ef Paraclete ......... 22458 (Mullins)
Comfortless............ 679° (Pratt)
Coming of Christ
ef Desire of All Nations 832% (Gray)
ef Parousia ......... 22498 (Easton)
Coming, Second
cf Parousia......... 22499 (Easton)
Commandment........ 679» (Jacobs)
cf Precept .......... 2434> (Edwards)
ef Ten Command-
ments............. 2944» (Sampey)
Commandment, The
Newt nate n hie node 679» (Rees)


ef Brotherly Love ... .525 (Rees)


Commandments, The


Ten iws sachatscn Wares 2944» (Sampey)
Commandments and the
Family............. 1095 (Caverno)
Commend...........-- 6808 (Jacobs)
Commentaries......... 680° (Orr)
Differences in char-
Scher ewok sees 6814
Hebrew. .........--- 685* (Oko)
Meaning of term..... 680"
Range of............ 6812
Commentary..........- 6872 (M. O. Evans)
ef Chronicles, Books
(3) Sea ee ARP re 629% (Beecher)
ef Midrash .......... 2050
Commerce...........-- 687» (Pollard)
ef Phoenicia ......... 2388> (Porter)


ef Stranger and So-
journer in the OT.. .28658 (Wiener)


ef Trade ..........-- 3002* (Easton)
Commission, Great
ef Jesus Christ....... 1666 (Orr)
Commits. sauces nei ae 688" (W. L. Walker)
Commodious........... 6888
Common.............. 688 (Jacobs)
Commonwealth..:..... 688
ef Citizenship ....... 6618 (Trever)
Commune............. 688>
ef Communion.......688> (Miller)
Communiecate.......... 688b
Communiecation........ 688»
Communion........... 688» (Miller)
Fellowship — Almsgiv-
Te een eo eke 689
Fellowship—Commu-
Hibyie swloemeer eh 6892
Fellowship—Cod6per-
Shonen oe a 6892
Fellowship in Holy
Eucharist......... 688>
Fellowship of the Holy
Spirit. 2.00.0... 6898
cf Lord’s Supper ..... 1921 (Gummey; Dosker;


Dau; Kurtz)
Communion with De-
TOOUS 46 Were} ce acecetees 689" (Sweet)


ef Familiar .......... 10948 (Pollard)
ef Night-monster..... 2143» (Sweet)
Community of Goods. . .690% (Jacobs)


Compact.............. 6915 (W. L. Walker)
Company............. 6918 (Pratt)
Comparative Religion. . .691> (Tisdall)
Compare.............. 694> (W. L. Walker)
Compass.............6 694 (W. L. Walker)
ef Tools ............ 2999 (Easton) :
Compassion........... 695° (W. L. Walker)
CEBIGY aces ce ond es 2402 (W. L. Walker)
Compel............... 695" (Trever)
Complaining........... 695»
Complete............. 695»
Composition........... 695»
Comprehend........... 695» (Pratt)


‘re


GENERAL INDEX


Conaniah............. 696°
Conceal............... 696
Conceit.............0. 6962


Conception, Conceive. . .6962
ef Immaculate Con-


ception...........1456 (Sweet)
Concerning............ 696 (W. L. Walker)
Concision.............696>

ef Circumcision ...... 910> (Petrie)

ef Foreskn ......... 1131> (Luering)

ef Member .......... 2030 (Luering)
Conclude.............. 696",
Conclusion............696®
Concordance..........- 696° (Orr)
Concourse............. 6975
Concubinage

ef Family ........... 1094 (Caverno)
Concupiscence......... 698 (Jacobs)
Condemn, Condemna-

MONS 62 hoe nate 698° (Trever)
Condescension of Christ,

ef Kenosis .......... 1792 (Haston)
Condiments........... 11249 (Eager)
Conduct

ef Ethics ........... 1013 (Alexander)
Conduit

ef Cistern .......... 657> (A. C. Dickie)
Cone ys. nce ee eee 698 (Day)

ef Rock-badger ...... 2596>
Confection, Confection-

BLY oases ate ee a etait 699"

ef Perfume .......... 2321> (Patch)
Confederate, Confeder-

Bier neta anes 699° (W. L. Walker)
Confer, Conference... .. 6999
Confession...........- 699° (Jacobs)
Confidence............7008 (W. L. Walker)


Confirm, Confirmation. . 700% (Jacobs)
ef Hands, Imposition of 1335* (Orr)
Confiscation


ef Punishments ...... 2504 (Hirsch)
Conflict. ...-......2-5- 700°

ef Agony ........... 71> (Pratt)
Conform...........-+: 700»
Confound...........-- 700° (W. L. Walker)
Confusion...........+> 700> (W. L. Walker)


Confusion of Tongues. . .2994> (Easton)
ef Babel, Tower of . . .355> (Pinches)


Congregation.......... 700 (Wiener)

ef Convocation ...... 7088 (Wiener)

ef Feasts and Fasts. ..1103° (E. D. Isaacs)

Mount of.........-. 7014 (Orr)

ef Tabernacle........ 2887 (Caldecott; Orr)
Goriah? cates es yse ate 7015

ef Jehoiachin ........ 1577 (Genung)

ef Servant of Jehovah .2739* (Hough)
Cononiah

ef Conaniah........- 696"
Conqueror. .....-.--+++ 701* (Jacobs)
Conscience.........--- 701» (Stalker)

Antecedent........-- 7025


Education of......... 702»


| Conscience—continued

History and literature. 703*

Institutional and asso-
ciational theories. . .702*

Sequent :
Judicial........... 7015
Predictive.........701°
Punitive.......... 701»
Social............. 701>

ef Spirit............. 2841 (Marais)

Consecrate, Consecra-

HODES oc eds tek ais 703» (Rees)

cf Ban (Curse) ...... 767° (T. Lewis)

ef Holiness.......... 1403> (Lambert)

cf Nazirite.......... 21249 (Christie)
Consent............005 7042 (Jacobs)
Consider.............. 704 (Jacobs)
Consist... ........00.. 7049
Consgolation........... 7048

ef Barnabas ......... 405° (Jacobs)

ef Comfort .......... 678» (Jacobs)
Consort............0.. 7048
Conspiracy

cf Confederacy ...... 699° (W. L. Walker)
Constant, Constantly .. . 704
Constellations

ef Astronomy ....... 3092 (Maunder)
Constrain............. 704°

cf Compel ......... .695° (Trever)
Consult.............-. 704> (Fortune)

ef Astrology ......... 295» (Maunder)

cf Communion with

Demons........... 689> (Sweet)

cf Divination ........ 860? (T. W. Davies)
Consume.............. 704 (W. L. Walker)
Consummation......... 704» (Clippinger)
Consumption.......... 7054
Contain

ef Continency ....... 705° (Rees)
Contend, Contention... .705* (Jacobs)
Content, Contentment. . 705
Continency............ 705° (Rees)

cf Temperance....... 2929> (Jacobs)
Continual, Continually. .705+ (Jacobs)
Continuance........... 705>
Contradiction.......... 705°
Contrary... ......-.0005 705> (Clippinger)
Contribution.......... 705’ (Jacobs)
Contrite, Contrition.... .706* (Jacobs)
Controversy........+++ 706* (Jacobs)
Convenient...........- 706 (Jacobs)
Convent......... 0.005 706° (Fortune)
Conversant...........- 7068
Conversation..........706* (Trever)
Conversion............ 706% (Nuelsen)

cf Palace te seas 2278b (A. T. Robertson)

ef Regeneration...... 2549 (Nuelsen)

ef Repentance....... 2558" (DeMent)
Convict, Conviction... . .707' Jacobs)
Convince...-.. 56... 00: 708

ef Convict..........- 707% (Jacobs)
Convoeation..........- 708° (Wiener)


8215


3216 GENERAL INDEX


Convulsing
cf Demon, Demoniac. 8272 (Sweet)
Cooking


Chia dena nyienene 1121 (Eager)
COG 8 alia cants tol eee 7082
Coos (Cos)............723* (Harry)
Coping
cf House ............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Copper............... 708° (Patch)
ef Metals............ 2044 (Patch)
ef Mine, Mining..... 2056° (Patch)
Coppersmith........... 708
ef Copper........... 7083 (Patch)
Coptic Versions........ 708 (Tisdall)
COres is hence ta cones 709%
ef Weights and Meas-
ures..............3079% (Porter)
Corallte oe acl rate 709% (Day)
Cor-ashan............. 709
ef Ashan............ 267%
Corban Fick 8s anes 709° (Baur)
ef Treasure ......... 3007 (Raffety)
Corbe (Chorbe)....... .614
Cord a Sa acd ean Mebig 709» (Eager)
CP ROpG ee sce o2 8k 2623 (Easton)
Cords, Small........... 710°
Core (Korah).......... 1816> (Beecher)
Coriander............. 710%; 1124* (Eager)
ef Food............. 11215 (Eager)
Corinth............... 710* (Harry)
ef Achaicus ......... 35
Corinthians
First Epistle to....... 711» (Shaw); 466% (Orr)
Authenticity of... ..711>
Contents of........ 7148
Datei tease ty ts. 713
Distinguishmg fea-
tures...........715%
Occasion of........ 713»
Paul’s previous rela-
tions with Corinth 713
Relations to Gala-
HANS ee aS 1158? (G. G. Findlay)
Rextisans cis tenascine 713


Second Epistle to... . .716* (Shaw)
Authenticity and


date............ 716°
Contents.......... 718»
Historical recon-
struction........ 7188
Integrity..........718%
New situation...... 7174
Relations to Gala-
HANS: Goa eS 1158 (G. G. Findlay)
Resumé of events . .716°
Via: 'snve utah naconce 720°
Corinthus............. 720°
ef Corinth .......... 710* (Harry)
Cormorant............ 720° (Stratton-Porter)
COM As eesG. tyke ose 720 (Masterman)


cf Agriculture .......75 (Patch)


Corn—continued


ef Food ............. 11228 (Eager)

ef Wheat ...........30826 (Masterman)
Cornelius. ...........-- 7212 (Trever)

ef Army, Roman..... 257% (Allen)
Corner..........0 000 721» (W. L. Walker)
Corner Gate

ef Jerusalem ........ 16032 (Masterman)
Corners of the Earth... .887* (Maunder)

cf Astronomy ....... 300° (Maunder)
Corner-stone........... 721» (Mack)

ef Canaan ..........549% (Sayce)

ef Fortification....... 1136> (Nicol)

cf House............ 1434> (A. C. Dickie)
Cornet

ef Music ............ 2094» (Millar)
Cornfloor.............. 7228

ef Threshing-floor.. .. .2975 (Patch)
Coronation............ 7228
CORPSES ed a eucen hake 722> (Luering)

ef Burial ............ 5295 (Hager)
Correction............. 722» (W. W. Davies)
Corruption. ........... 722» (Luering)

Mount of...........7238 (Ewing)
COB Fi8 Gacsae ou ee es 723* (Harry)

cf Samos ........... 2674» (Kinsella)
Wosam te. ao ee Bade 723°
Cosmogony

cf Anthropology... ... 144» (Marais)

ef Creation.......... 738 (J. Lindsay)

ef Farth............ 887" (Day)

ef Evolution. ........ 1043 (Zenos)

hee ce Ss 2814» (Day)

cf World, Cosmological 3106* (Orr)
Cosmology

cf Provideuce........ 2476» (Tillett)

cf World, Cosmological 3106* (Orr)
Costliness............. 723°
Cotes

cf Sheepcote......... 2757» (Patch)
Cottage

ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Cottons... secnowa beeen 723" (Masterman)
COUCH ay acfosts eee 723> (M. O. Evans)

ef Abel... 0.0.0.0... 5° (M. O. Evans)

CEADYS8) oi 0 ih Sa see 26> (‘T. Lewis)

CEB Ode oi) i a Rags 421> (Eager)

ef Cain ............. 538? (Farr)
Couching-place........ .723»
Coulter

Ch Plowss-eeeaeaad 24093 (Patch)
Council, Councillor... . .723

ef Sanhedrin......... 2688> (Levertoff)
Counsel, Counsellor... ... 723
Count nas sees ccd 7236
Countenance........... 723> (Luering)

ChPa cei rec vat ke 1085> (Luering)
Counter-charm

ef Amulet........... 126> (T. W. Davies)

ef Charm............ 5975 (T. W. Davies)
Couuterfeit.. 2.0.0.0... 7248 (W. L. Walker)
Countervail........... 7248


GENERAL INDEX


Country wes... 724" (Day)

ef Hill..............1392" (Masterman)

Cf ands i629 tent 1826 (Day)

ef Lowland.......... 1934® (Day)

ef Natural Features ..2122 (Day)
Countryman........... 724»

ef Cousin............ 727%

ef Kinsman.......... 1810* (Pollard)
Couples) cso eas 724
Coupling. ............. 724>
Courage............... 724
Courses. as ae 724» (Heidel)

cf Wheel............ 30826 (Easton)
Course of Priests and Le-

VICES aati. cites ils ere 2446> (Wiener)
Court :

ef Gate, East ........ 1176 (Caldecott)

ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)


Court of the Gentiles
ef Temple, Herod’s . . .29372 (Caldecott; Orr)
Court of the Sabbath


ef Covered Way...... 733° (Hirsch)
Court of the Sanctuary .725° (Caldecott)
Ezekiel’s temple ..... 725»
Herod’s temple....... 725>
Solomon's temple... . .725
cf Tabernacle...... 2889 (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Temple......... 2932 (Caldecott; Orr)
Courts, Judicial........ 725° (Hirsch)
ef Doctor........-.. 866>
ef Lawyer........... 1859* (Hirsch)
ef Sanhedrin......... 2688° (Levertoft)
ef Seribes........... 2704 (Hirsch)
Cousing 2 foe ne ceed is 7278
ef Kinsman.......... 1810* (Pollard)
Coutha (Cutha)........ 770°
Covenant.........--.. 727% (Berry)
ef Alliance........... 98» (Cohon)
Among men......... 727% (Berry)
ef Ark of............ 242% (Lotz)
Between God and men.728* (Berry)
Book of... .......---- 729° (Mack)
ef Lawin OT...... 1852" (Rule)
The new.........--- 731% (M’Caig)
~ Christ’s use at Last
Supper.......... 731%


Contrast of old and
new in 2 Cor... . . 733°
To Ezekiel........ 732Qb
“Inheritance” and
“Testament”... .732*
Mediator of....... 732%
New v. old........ 731°
Relation to Ex 24...731>
Relation to Jer 31


31-34. ........-- 732»
Use in Ep. to He-
brews. ......-.-- 7315
Ine ND ch a Se 729" (listes)
ef Testament....... 2950
TiO De Meee ats 7279 (Berry)


ef Philosophy...... 2384> (Rees)


Covenant—continued


OF Salt rection kes tive 729 (Pollard)
cf Salty... ceeds 2664* (Patch)

Cover eine cline 8 pase 733° (Stearns)
Coverdale, Miles. ......948 (Hutchison)
Covered Way.......... 733° (Hirsch)
Covering for the Head . .733* (Hager)
Covert ss y-ci oe eek cies 733°
Covetincd 4 teidisstat otis 733°
Covetousness.......... 733° (W. Evans)

ef Family.... 0.20... 1094» (Caverno)
COW Bes si tug taken 7342 (Day)

CE Calta son eee 542" (Day)

ef Cattle.. 2.2.2.0... 583 (Day)
COZ zee O44 shh Rees 7349
Cozbig ican cpus ote 734%
Cozeba

ef Achzib............ 376 (Mack)
Cracknel...........05. 734>
Craft, Craftiness, Crafty 734" (Jacobs)
Crafts. cu teen once 734* (Patch)

Brickmaking......... 735%

ef Brick. .......... 520° (Patch)
Ceramics...........- 735°


ef Potter, Pottery. . .2423> (Patch)
Dyeing and Cleansing 735°


ef Color........... 674 (Patch)

ef Dye, Dyeing..... 883» (Patch)

ef Fuller.......... 1148 (Patch)
Engraving........... 735

ef Carving......... 5815 (Patch)
Glass-making........ 7368

ef Glass..........- 1233+ (Porter)

cf Goldsmith... ....1275* (Patch)
Grinding............ 736%

cf Mill, Millstone. . .2052% (Patch)
Clon ccd ance ies ¢ 1492* (Patch)
Mason work ........ 736"

ef Mason.......... 2007

cf Mill, Millstone . .20528 (Patch)
Mining............- 736"

ef Metals......... 2044s (Patch)

cf Mine, Mining. .. .2056> (Patch)
Needle-work......... 735>

ef Embroidering. .. .940* (Patch)
Oil-making.......... 7364

CPOs bea es 2181> (Patch)
Painting........-.-. 736°
Paper-making.......- 7365
Perfume-making...... 736>

ef Perfume........ 2321» (Patch)


ef Potter, Pottery... . .2423> (Patch)
Spinning and weaving . 736°


ef Spinning........ 2841+ (Patch)

ef Weaving........ 3077* (Patch)
Tanning sc bese tock 736>

ef Tanner ......... 2908° (Patch)
ef Tent-maker....... 2948
Tent-making........ 7365

ef Tents o.5 cen 2947» (Patch)
CHLOGIS 3252 eo 2998> (Easton)
ef Wine...........-- 3086 (Easton)


3218


GENERAL INDEX


Crafts—continued | Crime—continued
Wine-making......... 7368 Bestiality........... 746"
ef Wine Press...... 3086* (Easton) Blasphemy.......... 746*
Wood-working....... 735% ef Blasphemy...... 485» (Rees)
ef Carpenter....... 580" Breach of covenant. . .746*
cf Tools........... 2998> (Easton) Breach of ritual...... 746
Craftsman............. 7379 (Patch) ef Breach of Trust. . . .3025*
CTAB er ste stss Koawe anes te 737% (Day) cf Bribery.........-. 5205 (Kaiser)
CROCK, 6-3 dnote 2596" (Day) Burglary..........-- 7468
Crane? eSid oeece ters 737° (Stratton-Porter) ef Debt . 8149 (W. Evans)
Crashing.............. 737> ; ef Deception......... 816° (Farr)
Crates ean caviae itu e 738% ef Dishonesty ........ 854
Creation.............. 738° (J. Lindsay) ef Disobedience . . . .. .854> (Clippinger)
cf Anthropology...... 144> (Marais) ef Divination........ 860° (T. W. Davies)
ef Harth............ 8879 (Day) ef Drunkenness......880% (Edwards)
Evolution...........739% Falsehood..........- 746
Genesis cosmogony . . . 738 False swearing ....... 746
ef World, Cosmo- Fornication.......... 7465
logical... 22.20... 3106 (Orr) Forswearing ......... 746>
Creator...........0005 740° (J. Lindsay) Harlotry ............ 7468
Creature.............. 740° (Day) cf Heresy..........-. 1377 (Jacobs)
Living... .......00. 740 (W. L. Walker); Homicide........... 746>
1906* (Day) ef Idolatry........... 14475 (Cobern)
Creditites ss 2 dee ee 7418 Incest. .........-45- 747"
Creditors adres vale 7415 (Betteridge) Infanticide..........747*
ef Debt............. 8149 (W. Evans) Irreverence.........- 7478
Creed accreted 7419 (Alexander) Kidnapping....-.... 7478
Historical Forms ef Lying............. 18879 (W. Evans)
Apostles’ Creed... . .742% cf Malice............19722 (W. L. Walker)
Athanasian Creed.. .743% cf Manslaughter... .. .1983> (Hirsch)
ef Light........... 1891 (Pratt) ef Murder........... 2094 (Hirsch)
Nicene Creed...... 7AQb cf Oath. csi sce ee 2172» (Levertoff)
Reformation Creeds 743 Parents, crimes
Scriptural Basis. ..... 7418 a against. ...-....... 747
erjur
Soe eae ey cn ee 2172 (Levertof)
cf Melita............ 2029» (Allen) Prophesyine, fal 7477
Creeping Thing......... 743 (Day) Gio a eer armiieeetk
Teeping & y Prostitution......... 7475
ef Insects............ 1473* (Day) Ragen a eae cede 7476
ef Locust Meee shat: 1907 (Day) Removing landmarks
Cremation............- 7448 (Eager); 530° (Eager) afaleandimarke, 1826»
Crescens..... 0.6.0.0 7448 Reviling
Crescents..........-.. 744° ef Punishments... . .2504> (Hirsch)
cf Moon............ 2081" (Schenk) Robbery............ 747b
ef Tires, Round...... 2986 Sahbath-breaking.. ...747°
Crete esha ihe eee ae 744 (Calder) Seduction........... 748"
ef Caphtor.......... 568* (Ewing) cf Seduce, Seducer. .2712" (Edwards)
cf Cherethites........ 603° (Ewing) efSlander........... 2814> (Edwards)
ef Fair Havens....... 1087> Sodomy
ef Gortyna.......... 1280+ ef Unnatural Vice.. .748*
ef Phoenix........... 2391 (Calder) Speaking evil......... 748%
Gribrees dic cae pet 745 ef Evil Speaking... .1043* (W. L. Walker)
Cricket. .....0....0000. 745 ef Slander......... 2814> (Edwards)
ef Beetle............425* (Day) Suicide............. 7488
ef Insects........... 1473" (Day) Thefts. S.42 pais et 748
cf Locust............ 1907 (Day) ef Punishments ....2504> (Hirsch)
Grier? <0 23 ea lyseesee 745» (Eager) ef Thief........... 2972 (Easton)
Crime? e520. eer a Oe 745> (Hirsch) Unchastity.......... 7489
Adultery... 0.0.0.2... 7468 ef Lewdness....... 1880° (Raffety)
ef Adultery........ 63° (Margolis) ef Marriage........ 1996> (Hager)
Assassination........ 7468 cf Uncleanness....... 3035» (Williams)


cf Assassination. . . .288 (Hirsch)


Unnatural Vice


GENERAL INDEX 3219


Crime—continued
ef Usury............ 30415 (Pollard)
Witnessing, false... . .748»
Whoredom.......... 748
Crimson
cf Colors............ 674> (Patch)
Cripple...............748°
ef Lame............. 1823 (Macalister)
Crisping Pins..........748>
ChePins eh eae nae oe 2399" (N. Isaacs)
Crispus:.o#. 45. cegeees 748
Criticism
Ca OF) | ee 538° (Farr)
cf High Place........ 1390* (Easton)
ef Priests and Levites. 2446> (Wiener)
cf Sanctuary......... 2686 (Wiener)
Criticism, Archaeology
EN eo | ae aerate erate es 226 (Kyle)
Criticism of the Bible. . .748> (Orr)
Higher’ % sui eos phe 7515
Lower or textual..... 749


Criticism (The Graf-
Wellhausen Hypothe-


SIS) Sa siies oe ohh 753° (Easton)
Crocodile

ef Dragon...........8739 (Day)

ef Leviathan......... 1868» (Day)
Crocodile, Land........ 1826> (Day)

ef Chameleon........ 592 (Day)
Crook-backed ......... 760° (Macalister)
Crooked...... ......- 760°
Crooked Serpent

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Cropx.2 sess eee C608
COSS Pe dy eve ie ese 760° (Dosker)

cf Blood and Water . .489* (Luering)

Crucifixion.......... 761>

Discovery of true

CLOBSin fea ya oe 761
Forms of...........+ 761°


Jesus’ references to. . .648> (Orr)
Symbolical uses of. . . .761*


Crossway............. 762
Crown ge fee ees Os 762° (Raffety)
ef Garland.......... 1175* (Doolan)
In Greek. ........... 7626
In Hebrew.........- 7628
ef Joshua’s..........1748> (Roberts)
Of thorns........... 763° (Dosker)
Use and significance.. . 7625
Crucifixion. ...........761 (Dosker)
cf Punishments... ....2504> (Hirsch)
Cruel, Cruelty......... 763 (Kaiser)
Crumbick avin axe nae: 7648
Crise? si se suc ates 764° (Pollard)
_ Cry, Crying........... 764> (W. L. Walker)
Crystaliic/fascieeec 764> (Farr)
ef Stones, Precious... .2856* (Fletcher)
GUD sia sect ee eeeeae 765%
Cubittisccase ee taee tale: 765° (Porter)


ef Measuring Reed... .2016>
ef Reed, Measuring. . .2545° (Orr)


Cubit—continued

ef Stature........... 2850° (Easton)

ef Temple........... 29318; 2935"; 29379 (Calde-

cott; Orr)
cf Weights and Meas-
MPEG Eso eh 3079> (Porter)

Cuckow............0.. 765° (Stratton-Porter)

cf Sea-mew.......... 2707" (Stratton-Porter)
Cucumber............. 765° (Masterman) -

ef Food............. 1122* (Eager)
Cud ;

ef Chew Cud........ 605> (N. Isaacs)
Culture............... 7656
Cumber............... 765
Cumi

cf Talitha Cumi...... 2904
Cummin.............. 765° (Masterman); 11248

(Eager)

Chines oa Pe ae 765»
Cunning.............. 765> (W. L. Walker)
Chip aierore elaee aie et 766" (Jacobs)


ef Blessing, Cup of... .487>
cf Divination, Cups for 860° (T. W. Davies)


Cupbearer............. 766> (Downer)
Cupboard............. 766°
Gurdle i. cu Paes 7666
Cure weak ikon les 766> (Macalister)
Curious. ............-- 767" (W. L. Walker)

ef Astrology.........295 (Maunder)
Current Money........ 2081* (Betteridge)
Curse Sear acae arene 767" (T. Lewis)

ef Heredity.......... 1376 (Easton)

ef Punishments... .....2504 (Hirsch)
Curtain. .........-..0. 767

ef Tabernacle, Curtains

OR Bee co ate 2887» (Caldecott; Orr)


Cush (ethnological). .... 767> (Pinches)
ef Africa............68% (Pinches)
ef Eden............. 897> (Wright)
ef Ethiopia..........10312 (Cobern)
ef Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches)


Cush (person)........-. 768
ef Cushi...........- 768» (Boyd)
Cushane 220i 2t cue visce 768> (Boyd)
Cushan-rishathaim......768' (Baur)
Cushit a3 essed ee: 768° (Boyd)
Cushion..........0.00 769° (Downer)
Cuishite’. 3 cia se vei 769° (Boyd)
Cushite Woman........ 769" (Boyd)
Custody..........-... 769%
Custom... ........0005 769" (Betteridge); 7695
(Farr)
Cut, Cutting......... .769 (W. L. Walker)
ef Concision........ .696°
ef Cuttings in the
Flesh............. 770° (Eager)
Cut Asunder.......... 316>
Cuthie tea eee ot 770° (Pinches)
Chitha cn eas co ees 770"
Cuthah
ef Cuth............. 7702 (Pinches)


3220 GENERAL INDEX


Cuthean, Cuthite


chGuth.2. 220k. 28 7702 (Pinches)

ef Samaritans........ 2673> (Ewing)
Cutting Asunder

ef Asunder.......... 3162 (8. F. Hunter)

ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)
Cutting Off

cf Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)
Cuttings in the Flesh... .770* (Eager)

ef Mark (noun)....... 1986 (Pratt)
Cyamon............... 770°

ef Jokneam.......... 17279 (Ewing)
Cymbal

ef Music............ 2101 (Millar)
Cypress... .........00. 509 (Masterman)

ef Holm Tree........ 1405" (Masterman)
Cyprians.............. 770° (Fortune)

ef Asiarch........... 2822 (M. O. Evans)
Cyprus... cccs eed 7712 (Tod)

Church in........... 772%

Early history........ 7718

Geography.......... 7714

And the Greeks...... 771

And the Jews........ 7728

ChIItIM Gs 4 ote 1814> (Pinches)

Later history........ 772»

NGM... cd Ahk 7718

cf Paphos........... 2237° (Tod)

Products............ 7718

And Rome.......... 771
Cyrama (Kirama)...... 18112
Cyrénes es. ies tates 772> (Kyle)
Cyrenian.............. 773>

ef Cyréne........... 772> (Kyle)

ef Lucius............ 1935 (S. F. Hunter)

ef Simon............ 2795> (S. F. Hunter)
Cyrenius (Quirinius)....2515>
Oyrian.jcnctengesuteniees 773°

Crea Yt ax awe wae 1821»
Cyruse ie. atin: 773> (Pinches) ; 368% (Clay)


Babylonian Chronicle .774>
Babylonian records of


TOIL yey eerteees. Wtses 7745

His country......... 773°

Cylinder of.......... 775°

Genealogy of......... 773°

ef Israel, History of.. .1526* (Orelli)

And the Jews........ 776°

Massagetae.......... 775?

His origin........... 773

In Persia............ 776

ef Persians.......... 2336° (Tisdall)

Reputation of........ 7762

Sacae, Berbices....... 775>
Dabareh (Daberath)....776*
Dabbesheth........... 776
Daberath.............776%
Dabriak 24 60s -siaton ees 7768
Dacubi...............776*

ef Akkub............ 8g


ef Dakubi...........777


Dadda,

ef Hadad............ 13135 (Hovey)
Daddeus.............. 776
Dadu

ef Hadad............ 1313> (Hovey)
Dagger

ef Armor............ 251* (Nicol)
Dagon. ........6.2.065 776> (Margolis)

ef Gods............. 12712 (Reeve)
Dail yea Poca se enn ee 777% (W. Evans)


Daily Offering or Sacri-


fice
ef Sacrifice..........
Dainties, Dainty Meats.
cf Delicate.........


2651* (Williams)
777 (Hager)


.8202 (W. W. Davies)


ef Food............. 1121 (Eager)
Daisans ecco kasiecea te 777%
Dakubi...............7778
Dalaiah (Delaiah)......819>
Dalanee:. 2. seuset Sacer?
Dale, King’s........... 777> (Masterman)


ef King’s Garden.....


18082 (Masterman)
30452 (Day)


Daleth ee eis, beo 8. beatae 777
cf Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)
Dall yer § Poca een pcx sess 777
Dalmanutha
ef Magadan......... 1961» (Ewing)
Dalmatia.............. 777» (Tod)
ef Illyricum.......... 1449> (Tod)
Dalphon..............7788
AD Noa paint earn rae ates 7788
Damage..............- 778 (Breslich)
Damaris:. ts o60.6 se 8 ks 7782
Damascenes........... 778°
Damascus............- 778 (C. H. Thomson)
Description of city... .778>
LIStORYe. erecta os 7798
Aramaean kingdom .779°
Early period. ...... 7798
Middle period...... 7808


Location and natural


Dammesek Eliezer
ef Eliezer............


929 (S. F. Hunter)


Damn, Damnation,
Damnable............ 780> (Rees)
cf Eschatology (NT). .979° (Vos)
ef Judgment.........17775 (Jacobs)
Damsel............... 738i
Dan (city)............7828 (Ewing)
ef Laish............. 1821
cE Vedans, excccces ces 3046> (Fulton)
Dan (person and tribe). .781* (Ewing)
Danite raid.......... 781
ef Micah............ 2045> (Lees)
Name nick hie ou cae 781%
Territory occupied by
CTD es ters eye S 781»
SET E 2a sees eee eee 781b
ef Rearward.......2534>


GENERAL INDEX 3221 -


Dancing .

cf Games............ 1169> (Smith)
Dandlev saci nee hes 782°
Danget.:.......8-+20ohhar. 782" (Breslich)
Danielins 25... sewn Hain ok 782» (R. D. Wilson)

Bel and the Dragon.. . 428°

Barly life............ 782»


Interpreter of dreams . 782
Interpreter of signs. . . 783°
Official of kings...... 783°

Seer of visions....... 783°

cf Seventy Weeks... ..2744* (Orr)
ef Susanna, the His-


tory of............ 2872 (T. W. Davies)
Daniel, Book of........ 783 (R. D. Wilson)
Apocryphal additions . 787
Canonicity.......... 783°
Divisions. ........... 783°
Doctrines........... 786°
Angels............ 787
Resurrection....... 7874
Genuineness......... 784»
As to historical mis-
statements....... 785>
As to language..... 785°
As to miracles...... 785
As to predictions. . .784°
As to text......... 785*
Interpretation........ 786°
ef Kingdom of God. . .1805> (Stalker)
Languages........... 784
Purpose............. 784
Unity ices eee tee 784
Danites............... 787
Dan-jaan.............. 787
Dannah............... 787°
Daphne:..0...0 6. sche: 787> (Ewing)
Dara
ef Darda............ 788"
Dard tna osc eetantn res 788"
Dare iets ce eee eo: 788
Daries yrcss 8s See 788°
ef Siglos............. 27899
Dariisss oc) Satatar ce 788: (R. D. Wilson)


Darius Hystaspes.. . . .788>
Darius the Mede. . .. .788


Darius Nothus....... 788»

ef Persians.......... 2336> (Tisdall)
Dark, Darkness........ 7899 (Joy)

ef Eclipse............ 303°; 3108 (Maunder)

ef Plagues........... 2402 (Macalister)
Darkly. .... 0.00.00 0 ue 7899
Darkon........0...55- 789°

ef Lozon............1934>
Dark Sayings.......... 789° (Margolis)
Darling...........--5- 7896
Dart copia tees 789

AYMOr.. 0... eee 251° (Nicol)
Dart-snake

ef Arrowsnake....... 260°
Darwinism............148* (Marais)


Dash ip gece ctesa siege terns 789 (Breslich)


Dates seccehe kiwi 790

cf Food.............1123 (Eager)

ef Palm Tree........ 2235° (Masterman)
Dathath-:-.4.icce es 790° (Beecher)

And Abiram

ef Korah.......... 1817 (Beecher)

Dathema.............. 790°
Dauba ys a iaaia ket 7902
Daughter.............7908 (Pollard)

ChGirl os es ee 1232


Daughter-in-Law
cf Relationships,


Family........... 25549 (E. D. and N. Isaacs)
David......- ING cia acta 790° (Weir); 8° (Beecher) ;
255 (Nicol)
cf Absalom.......... 23° (W. W. Davies)
Bethlehemite........450° (Masterman)
Buildings of......... 1614® (Masterman)
cf Cave of Adullam. . .62> (Beecher)
Domestic life........ 794»


Domestic trouble. . .794>
Wives and children .794>


Early years.......... 790%
In exile............. 793°

Alliance with Philis-

TIMES Fac te 793

As an outlaw...... 793
Flight of............ 23°
Friendship of Jona-

than. kee Achar as 1731> (Weir)
ef Judah, Kingdom of .1759» (Weir)
At Keilah........... 17912 (Masterman)
Kingship............ 793

Civil war.......... 793°


Foreign conquests . .793>

Removal of ark . .. .794
Lament of........... 24°
cf Mephibosheth..... 2033 (Wallace)
Name and genealogy. . 790°


ef Nathan........... 2120* (Roberts)
Officials............. 794
ef Palestine.......... 2215» (Conder)


Personal character... .795*
Authorship of


Psalms.......... 795"
Complexity of char-

ACERS esa eins 795
Courage........... 795»
Estimate of Chroni-

CleS aide ewe es 795"
Family relations... . 796
Friendships........ 796»
Nobility.......... 796°
Strategy.......... 7962

ef Philistines......... 2379 (Conder)


cf Psalms, Book of... .2489° (Sampey)
cf Samuel, Books of.. . 2679 (Geden)


CE Mauls Meese ee 2698? (Weir)
Service of Saul....... 791>
First exploits....... 7922


Flight of David. .. .792


3222


GENERAL INDEX


David—continued


Service of Saul—continued


Jealousy of Saul....


7928


Jonathan and David.792>


ef Temple...........


Co) ATs) «Cn ee
David, Root of.........

cf Root of Jesse... ...
David, Tower of

ef Jerusalem.........
Dawn, Dawning........
Day of Atonement

ef Atonement, Day of.
Day before the Sabbath .
Day, Break of

ef Break of Day......
Day of Christ

ef Lord’s Day........
Day (figurative)........

CP Third: 2 essen st
Day (general)..........

ef Afternoon.........


Day of Jehovah
ef Lord’s Day........
Day, Joshua’s Long


2930> (Caldecott; Orr)


1607 (Masterman)
797> (Porter)


324> (Moller)
798 (Hirsch)


19198 (Easton)
798 (Dosker)


797° (Gerberding)
68> (Wolf)
29822 (Porter)


1919 (Easton)


ef Beth-horon, Battle


£0) ie Re re ea
Day of Judgment
ef Judgment, Last. ...
Day, Last: oes tes
ef Eschatology of OT..
cf Last Time.........


446 (Maunder)


1777 (Easton)
799" (Orr)
972" (Orr)
18408 (Vos)


Day of the Lord (Jeho-


Vall eerie Be aan

ef Eschatology of NT..

ef Eschatology of OT. .

ef Judgment, Last... .

ef Parousia.........
Day, Lord’s

ef Lord’s Day........


cf Noon, Noonday... .
Day’s Journey........
Days, Last

ef Eschatology of OT..

cf Last Time........
Daysman.............
Dayspring.............


ef Astronomy.......
Day, That (The)

ef Day of the Lord... .
Deacon, Deaconess... ..

ef Bishop............

ef Church...........

ef Church Government


799% (Dosker)
979 (Vos)
9722 (Orr)
1777> (Easton)


. 22498 (Easton)


19198 (Easton)
7988 (Wolf)
2148 (Dosker)
21554


.799> (Stratton-Porter)


9724 (Orr)

1840 (Vos)

799> (A. W. Evans)
799» (Trever)

800° (Maunder)


.300° (Maunder)


799" (Dosker)

400° (Heidel)

478» (Dosker)

650° (Lambert)

653> (Forrester)

2059> (T. M. Lindsay)
3103° (Pratt)

800° (Macalister)


Dead, Baptism for the . .3899* (Rees) ‘


Dead Body
ef Corpse............- 722> (Luering)
Deadlyei i. cack esae ed 801* (Luering)
Dead Sea, The........- 8018 (Wright)
Climate............. 8078
Constitution of water . 806°
Former area......... 801»
ef Gomorrah......... 12778 (Wright)
History sea. di.e a seneet 8108
ef Jordan............ 1732> (Wright)
ef Jordan Valley......1735° (Wright)
Level in early historic
times oh es 802>


Geological evidence . 803
Soundings in 1849. .804>


Miscellaneous........ 807°
Ain Jidi........... 807°
Fortress of Masada. 8084
Jebel Usdum.... .. .808>


Plain of the Jordan. 807
Vale of Siddim..... 809»


cf Palestine, Recent
Exploration........ 2223» (Cobern)
Present area......... 801
Rodis ee Sas peated 807>
ef Salt... .......-..- 2664 (Patch)
ef Siddim........... 2784 (Wright)
ef Sodom............ 2821> (Wright)
Ch ZOar ec is Gue 89 SS 31548 (Wright)
Dead, State of the
ef Hades............ 13148 (Vos)
Date tee. ote eens 8115 (Macalister)
ef Dumb............ 8828 (Macalister)
Deal nies cctunl ok cee 811° (Breslich)
Dear, Dearly.......... 8118 (Jacobs)
Dearth
ef Famine........... 10972 (W. L. Walker)
Death................8118 (Macalister; Ba.
vinck)
ef Heredity.......... 1376+ (Easton)
ef Immortality....... 1458> (Orr)
Physiological and fig-
urative views...... 811" (Macalister)
cf Psychology........ 2498> (Marais)
cf Sheoli.. a eta S 2761* (Orr)
Theological view..... 811> (Bavinck)
Conception of sin
and death.......811°
Israelitish dread of
death. .......... 812°
Non-Christian death 812
Spiritual signifi-
cance........... 812>
Death, Body of....... .493" (Dosker)
Death, Second......... 8135
cf Eschatology of NT. 979» (Vos)
Debate...............8138
cf Makebates........ 1968"
Debir (person)......... 8135


Debir (place) .......... 813> (Masterman)
ef Negeb............ 2130° (Masterman)


GENERAL INDEX


Deborah.............. 813> (Margolis)

ef Sisera............ 2812> (Schenk)
Deborah, Song of

etl aele sc ative ini 1558" (Schenk)
Debt, Debtor.......... 8145 (W. Evans)

Figurative........... 814>

NT teachings........814>

OT practice......... 814>

ef Surety... 0.0.0.0... 28725 (Reeve)
Decalogue

ef Ten Command-

ments............. 2944» (Sampey)

Decapolis............. 815° (Ewing)

ef Gadara...........1152> (Ewing)
Dea yas é 815 (Farr)
Decease in NT......... 815>
Decease in OT and Apoc. 8152 (Luering)

ef Corpse............ 722> (Luering)

ef Death............ 8122 (Bavinck)

CiH Ades: s-2ie Kena 1314 (Vos)

ef Sheol............. 27619 (Orr)
Deceit. ... 0-2... 00-00 815>
Deceivableness, Deceive .816° (Farr)
Decently...........--. 816°
Decision.............. 816" (Fortune)

ef Augury........... 331° (T. W. Davies)


Decision, Valley of
cf Jehoshaphat, Valley


Obes ee 1583° (Masterman)
Declaration, Declare... .816"
Decline.............-. 816°
Dedan, Dedanites...... 816° (Orr)
Dedicate............-- 816°

cf Consecration...... 703> (Rees)

ef Sanctification...... 2681» (Rall)
Dedication, Feast of. . ..816' (Orr)
Deeds eee eee eet 817° (Edwards)

ef Accord........... 33> (M. O. Evans)
Deep ecco eerie! 8178

cf Abyss........ _. 26° (T. Lewis)

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Deep Sleep.......---.- 2817° (Easton)
Deere iieena, oe ene 8178 (Day)

ef Gazelle........... 1179* (Day)

ef Goat... .......06- 1249" (Day)

cf Roe, Roebuck...... 25978 (Day)
Defame............-5: 8188
Defect. .......--0-000- 818 (Fortune)
Defence

ef Courts, Judicial... .725> (Hirsch)
Defenced

ef Fortification...... - 1136" (Nicol)
Defer ter en ee See 8188
Defile, Defilement...... 818° (Crannell)


Defilement in NT... . .818°
Defilement in OT... . .818>


ef Totemism......... 3000" (M. O. Evans)
WDerge stn hea 8192
Degenerate.......-..-- 8192
Degree.......-00500 005 8192 (Edwards)
Degrees, Songs of... .... 8195 (Sampey);


(Maunder)


Dehaites.............- 819
Dehort................ 819°
Dek ar ticecor een iaacges 819»

cf Ben-deker......... 434>
Delaish............... 819>
Delayet 4c iceatine 820° (Breslich)
Delectable............. 820
Delicacy..............820°
Delicate..............- 820° (W. W. Davies)
Deliciously............ 8202
Delight...............820* (W. L. Walker)
Delightsome....... ».. 820°
Delilahs 456 Aes 820° (Beecher)

cf Samson........... 2675" (Robinson)
Deliver............005 820° (W. L. Walker)
Delos vets cena nk so 821* (Harry)


Deluge of Noah, The... .821> (Wright)
American Indian tra-


CitlONS shine eee oes 822
ef Ark of Noah. ......246° (Wright)
In Babylonian _liter- :
ature.............374 (Rogers)
Babylonian traditions .823*
Biblical account...... 821%
Chinese account...... 822>
Cuneiform tablets. . . .823>
Druid legend........ 822>
Egyptian tradition... .822°
ef Flood............. 1120* (Day)
ef Gopher Wood......1279% (Masterman)
Greek tradition....... 822
Indian tradition...... 8228
ef Noah............- 2153* (Wright)


“‘Noah’s Log Book”. .822*
Was flood universal?. 824°
Extent of human


TACE he. owen 824»
Geological evidence 825°
Glacial epoch...... 824»

Delusion............-- 826° (Edwards)
Demand............. .826%
Demag... seche soe a 826

ef Apostasy......-.-- 2022 (Pratt)
Demetrius.........---- 826° (Kinsella);

(Banks)
Demetriusl......... 8262
cf Antiochus Epiph-

ANES AS bees eae 159> (Harry)
ef Bacchides....... 375> (Breslich)
ef Maccabaeus..... 1946" (Hutchison)

Demetrius I]........ 826°

Demetrius III....... 8276

ef John, Epistles of . . .1718° (Law)

ef Tryphon.......... 30272 (Angus)
Demon, Demoniac, De-

monology...........827> (Sweet)

ef Accommodation... .83° (Sweet)

Definition........... 827>

cf Jesus Christ....... 1640° (Orr)


ef Magic, Magician. ..1964> (T. W. Davies)
cf Mary Magdalene. . .2003° (Sweet)
NT demonology..... 828"


3224


GENERAL INDEX


Demon, Demoniac, Demonology—continued
ef Night-monster.. . . .2143> (Sweet)


Origin of Biblical
demonology....... 827%
Animism.......... 827


Babylonian ideas. . .829°
Evolutionary theory 827+
cf Azazel........ 342° (Moller)
ef Communion
with Demons . .689» (Sweet)
Heathen deities. . . .828°


Polytheism........ 828+

Demophon............ 829%
Deri rigs stele ue yaaa 829» (Day)

ef Cave.............585 (Day)
Denarius.............. 830" (Porter)

ef Money........... 2076* (Porter)
Denounce............. 8302
DON Yop kaos see ee ene 8302 (Gray)

ef Peter, Simon....... 2348> (Gray)
Depart Asunder........ 316° (S. F. Hunter)
Deposit............... 830° (Jacobs)
Depths .isecys ackh eees 314

CISA DY SS) 225 ee get vtale ¢ 26 (T. Lewis)
Deputy cct cas ears 830 (Heidel)

ef Government....... 1287 (Heidel)
Derbe. ieee vas wenn 830° (Calder)

ef Lycaonia.......... 1942» (Calder)
Derision.............. 831
Descend.............. 831> (Jacobs)


Descent of Jesus


ef Apocryphal Gos-

Pelss. wrecks 195° (Hutchison)
Describe.............. 831> (W. W. Davies)
DOSCPY ios eit kata 831>
Desert ..:.08 nicest 831> (Day)

cf Natural Features ..2122* (Day)
Desirenct uete wee ese 832° (Breslich)
Desire of All Nations... .832> (Gray)
Desolate.............. 833° (Edwards)
Desolation, Abomination :

CO) sc eee er ee 16° (Hirsch)
Despair ic ace Cakes 833> (Edwards)
Despite, Despiteful..... 833> (Edwards)
Dessay vice ade eae 833°
Destiny (Meni)........ 833»

ef Astrology. ........295 (Maunder)

ef Meni............. 2033
Destroyer............. 833> (Edwards)
Destruction........... 8342

ef Abaddon.......... 2> (Beecher)


Destruction, City of (He-
liopolis or City of the


Sun)

ef Astronomy........ 301> (Maunder)

cf Ir-ha-heres........ 1491° (Kyle)

ChOn ek es 2s 2193 (Kyle)
Determinate........... 8342 (Edwards)
Determime............. 834" (Fortune)
Detestable Things...... 834° (Margolis)

ef Abomination...... 6° (Breslich); 15> (Hager)
Devel cicce evi cuy ke 834"


Deutero-canonical Books 834° (Fortune)


ef Apocrypha........178> (T. W. Davies)
cf Canon of OT...... 554 (Robinson)
NT Books........... 8358
OT Books.........-. 834>
Deuteronomy.......... 835° (Robinson)
Analysis............ 835>
Authorship.......... 8365
History appropri-
ate to Moses’
HIME Wee ees 836°
Language assumes
Moses’ author-
SHI Picccrhitil te cate 8374


Military law book.. 8372


Critical theory... ... .838°

Double allusions... .. .837

cf Government....... 1288> (Heidel)

ef High Place........1390* (Easton)

ef Hilkiah........... 1392" (Wallace)

Influence on _Israel’s
history............ 837

ef Josiah... 02.0.2... 1753" (Genung)


Late date of.........1752 (Genung)


ef Law in OT........1854 (Rule)
cf Moses............2088 (Kyle); 20902
(Kyle)
Name} so. gos cee? 835°
Object of book....... 835°
cf Palestine.......... 2211» (Conder)
Ruling ideas......... 8362
Relations of God and
Tsrael Moca sccsced ax 836
Unity ce said, ae 836°
PSV IGE eho a dee ain at 840° (Edwards)
Devil
ef Demon........... 827% (Sweet)
ef Satan. ............ 2693> (Sweet)
Devoted Things
ch Curses asa 7675 (T. Lewis)
cf Dedicate.......... 816°
Devotion, Devotions. .. .840®
Devout..........-.... 840° (M. O. Evans)
cf Rome............26222 (Allen)
DOWes ios een een Attn 840° (Joy)
Diadem............... 841" (Raffety)
cf Crown............ 7629 (Raffety)
Dial of Ahaz, The...... 8412 (Maunder)
Analysis and meaning
of the sign......... 8428
“Dial,” signifies a stair-
CASO. G8 Sachem eats 841
Fifteen “songs of de-
PTCCS ea eke 842
Hezekiah’s sickness and
the sign........... 8415
Sign, a real miracle. . .841>
Diamond
cf Stones, Precious... .2856° (Fletcher)
Digna sy io eee lat 842> (Banks)


Diana, Temple of... ....961> (Banks)


GENERAL INDEX


Diaspora
ef Dispersion........ 855 (Nicol)
Diblah................ 843>
Diblaim............... 843»
Diblath
ef Diblah............ 843»
Diblathaim
ef Almon-diblathaim . . 100*
Dibon, Dibon-gad...... 843° (Ewing)
TIDT Sass ine ees 843>
Dice-playing
ef Games............ 1168> (Smith)
Dictionaries........... 843° (Richardson)
Art and music........ 847>
Bible dictionaries. .... 8440
Bibliography......... 844°
Biographical......... 848"
Comparative religion. 845>
Denominational  dic-
tionaries.......... 8462
Geography.......... 848
Language........... 848
Philosophical. ....... 8472
Religious encyclopae-
CAS 2 22 See cten nese 8452
Universal encyclopae-
lass eho wakeek 8462
Didache............... 3875 (A. T. Robertson);
390° (T. M. Lindsay);
4812 (Lowndes)
ef Literature, Sub-
BPOS Antes eh i: 1898" (Cowan)
ef Teach, Teacher,
Teaching.......... 2923> (DeMent)
Didrachma............ 848; 872b
Didymus...........-.. 848>
DG sadder faces anes 848> (W. L. Walker)
WIG ts tics cae sae 848>
Digan het Ghee eee 849° (M. O. Evans)
Dignities, Dignity...... 8492
Dikee.¢ 5 eee 849°
ef Justice............ 17815 (Rall)
Diklah.......0000000-5 8492
Dileanisee saa oe welt Ss 8492
Diligence, Diligent, Dili-
gently.............. 849" (Gerberding)
Dill
CHAMISE acs ase es 136° (Masterman)
Diminish............-- 8492
Dimnah............-.- 849


ef Rimmon (place)... .2593° (Masterman)
Dimon, Dimonah


ef Dibon............ 843° (Ewing)
Dimah...........-..-- 849° (N. Isaacs)
Dinaites...........-5. 849b
Dinhabah............. 849>
Dinter. osc es 849> (Eager)

cf Meals...........-2013% (Eager)


Diognetus, Epistle to
ef Literature, Sub-
APOR ios ian 1904 (Cowan)


3225
Dionysia. ...........4.. 849> (Harry)

Greater festivals...... 850*

Rural festival........ 849»
Dionysius............. 850° (Harry)
Dionysus (Bacchus).... . 850* (Harry)

ef Bacehus.......... 376° (Rees)

ef Hellenism, Hellen-

Stiga we eee e er 1371* (Heidel)
Dioscorinthius.........850°

ef Calendar.......... 541> (Porter)

ef Time............. 2981 (Porter)
Dioseuri.............. 851° (Maunder)

Ch Blom ear wk veces acs 2789" (Stuart)
Diotrephes............8514

ef John, The Epistles

Obese, hare lentcletic aes 1718> (Law)
DIpiie th eet sos ie a a Pe 851+ (Breslich)
Diphath.............. 8514

ef Riphath.......... 2594»
Disallow. .......-...0- 851°
Disannul

ef Annul............ 137° (Hirsch)
Disappoint............ 851%
Discern..........--4-- 8512 (Dosker)


Discernings of Spirits . ..851> (Fortune)
ef Spiritual Gifts. .... 2843> (Lambert)


Diseiple.............- 851» (Trever)
Discipline............. 8528
ef Chastisement...... 598° (Jacobs)


Discomfit, Discomfiture.852* (Clippinger)
Discourse.............852*
Discover......-....00- 852° (Stearns)
Discrepancies, Biblical . .852% (Van Pelt)
Alleged discrepancies
as to doctrine...... 853>
Alleged discrepancies
as tofact.......... 853


Criticism v. inerrancy 852°
Nature of arguments .852>
Significance for faith. . 854*
ef Virgin-birth of Jesus


Christitesjnc ses 30542 (Sweet)

DISCuss.cceciicied eeacses 8542 (W. L. Walker)

ef Games............ 1168° (Smith)
Disease, Diseases....... 854> (Macalister)

ef Sick, Sickness... . . .2783* (Macalister)
Diseases of the Eye..... 1070* (Macalister)
Dishtee un eks oe etek 854» (Downer)
Dishan, Dishon........854°
Dishonesty............ 854>
Disobedience, Disobedi-

CN Gare be ee Se asset 854» (Clippinger)

ef Obedience........- 2175 (Clippinger)

CESIN Aes cirewae 2798> (McConnell)
Disorderly............. 855* (Desker)
Dispatch.............. 855"
Dispensation.......... 855"
Dispersion, The........ 855* (Nicol)


Alexandrian Judaism. .857¢
Among Greeks proper, 858*


3226 GENERAL INDEX


Dispersion, The—continued
In Asia Minor....... 857°


Eastern Dispersion... . 856"
Egyptian Dispersion. . 856*
Importance of dis-


COVERY ci cccierk: 856°
Jewish Temple at
Syene........... 856
Testimony of Ara- P
maic papyri...... 8562
Extent.sececc ae See 855
Golah and Diaspora. . .855*
Influence............ 859"


Internal organization. .859*
In Italy, Gaul, Spain,
aud North Africa. . .858°
Jews and Hellenism... 857%
Nations, Dispersion of


ef Babel........... 349° (Clay)

ef Table of Nations . 2898" (Pinches)
Numbers............ 858>
Proselytism.......... 858>
Purpose...........-- 855°


Influence in early
Roman Empire. . . 858>

Jews and first
Caesars......... 858

cf Roman Empire
and Christianity. .2600° (Angus)


Septuagint.......... 857>
ef Septuagint...... 2722° (Thackeray)

Ini Syrias fc nde. 857>
Disposition............ 859>
Disputation. . 859>
Distathe cc... bea Pie eas 859>

ef Spinning.......... 28412 (Patch)
Distiles.eiscc 2 yee toes 859»
Distinctly............. 859»
Ditehawee sta sates 859° (Clippinger)
Divers, Diverse, Diversi-

TIES sisi sc oe 859> (Breslich)
Dives

ef Hades............1315% (Vos)

ef Lazarus........... 1860° (Trever)
DiVId eh. Aires tase oes 860° (Breslich)
Divide Asunder........316° (8. F. Hunter)
Divination............ 8608 (T. W. Davies); 296°":

(Maunder)


In ancient Greece... . .13800° (Fairbanks)
Bible and divination. . 861°
Divination and proph-


CY ve csinag cee eek 8626
Fundamental assump-
tion..............860°
Astrology......... 860°
cf Astrology..... 296 (Maunder)
Hepatoscopy.. .....860°
Oracles........... . 860°


Origin of word..... 860°
ef Greece, Religion in .1301* (Fairbanks)


Divination—continued


cf Inquire........... 1472» (M. O. Evans)
BG Tas |: een ee 860

cf Augury.........831* (T. W. Davies)
Legitimate and ille-

gitimate .........- 860°
Gf Liver. a fiey sda 1905> (Luering)
ef Magi, The........ 19622 (Tisdall)


cf Magic, Magician. . .1964> (T. W. Davies)
Modes of divination.. .861>


Condemned methods 862*
Dreams........... 861°
Hydromancy.......862*
Sortilege......... .861>

ef Oracle............ 2198 (Easton)

ef Orator..........-. 2199 (Edwards)

ef Poetry, Hebrew... .2413 (T. W. Davies)

cf Prophecy......... 2466* (Orelli)

ef Python........... 2511> (Haston)

of Vault........ Hecewe: 30465

ef Wise Men......... 3096 (Easton)

ef Witch............ 30972 (T. W. Davies)

Divine, Diviner

ef Astrology.........296 (Maunder)

ef Augury........... 3312 (T. W. Davies)

cf Divination........ 860° (T. W. Davies)


Divine Names
cf God, Names of.. . . .1264> (Mack)
Divine Visitation


ef Punishments... .... 2504 (Hirsch)
Division..............863* (Edwards)
Divorce in NT......... 865° (Caverno)
Christ’s teachings... . .865°
ef Family........... 1094> (Caverno)
cf Hammurabi, Code
Oleisctee ate es 1330" (Ungnad)
ef Jesus Christ. ......1653 (Orr)
ef Law in NT........ 1845® (M’Caig)
ef Marriage.......... 1999+ (Eager)
Paul’s teachings. ..... 866"
ef Polygamy......... 2416* (Caverno)
ef Purity. ........... 25092 (Caverno)
Remedies for marriage
TS Seki eee 866
ef Family.........1094> (Caverno)
Divorce in OT.........863% (W. W. Davies)
ef Adultery.......... 63" (Margolis)
Divorce applicable
only to wives...... 864
Grounds for divorce. . .864*
Ta Wing goaces area aa eee 863°
Position of woman... .863°
Process and exceptions 864*
Di-zahab.............. 866> (Ewing)
Docetism
Ini John........... 1713+ (Law)
Doctomia nye fee 8665
ef Education......... 900> (Meyer)
ef Rabbi............ 2522° (Pollard)
ef Seribes........... 2704° (Hirsch)
Doctrine... ........... 866> (Rees)


Apostolic doctrines... .8679


GENERAL INDEX


Doctrine—continued
Beginnings of dogma .867*
ef Dogma.........868 (Rees)
Christ’s teachings in-
formal............ 8678
Docus
ef Dok........0..... 868 (Hutchison)
Dodai
ef Dodo............. 867
Dodanim.............. 867%
ef Rodanim.......... 2597"
Dodavahu............. 867
Dodo, Dodai.......... 867°
Doe
Gf Deerinrs Gait Sine 8179 (Day)
cf Roe, Roebuck..... . 25978 (Day)
Doeg.................867% (N. Isaacs)
DO Bebe her tat thane 867 (Day)
Cf Pricescs: et el co 24398
Dogma............... 8683 (Rees)
ef Comparative Re-
Ligtonis nea couse 693° (Tisdall)
h Be) eterna eran 868> (Hutchison)
Doleful............... 868%
Dolphin
ef Badger........... 376 (Day)
Dominion............. 8694
ef Angel ............ 132> (J. M. Wilson)
DOOM ets, Soutnn oa 869" (Van Pelt)
DO OF a esesee cw ee: a Mahe 8692 (Downer)
ef Achor ......87% (Beecher)
ef Gate.............1175 (Easton)
ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
ef Shepherd.......... 2763* (Patch)
Doorkeeper............ 869" (Hovey)
ef Port, Porter....... 2422 (Easton)
ef Priests and Levites .2446> (Wiener)
Doorpost
ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Dophkah.............. 869%
ef Wanderings of
Tsraels.. cc catreihee : 3064 (Conder)
Dor, Dora. 22-25 ¢..524 60: 869> (Porter)
Doreas:..% ic os eas AS 8708 (S. F. Hunter)
Dorymenes............ 8704
Dositheus...........-. 870° (Hutchison)
Dotaea...............870%
Dotee seg Pod paws 870°
Dothaim.............. 870>
Dothan............... 870> (Ewing)
Double Lees eee... 870° (Clippinger)
Doubts iccse le pee 871» (Gray)
ef Disputation....... 859»
Dough
ef Bread............514> (Eager)
DOVGn Ati ee ee 8718 (Stratton-Porter)
ef Pigeon............ 23952 (Stratton-Porter)
Dove’s Dung.......... 872» (Stratton-Porter)
Dowry.......--000- 00 872» (Pollard)
Doxology.......--..-- 8725 (M. O. Evans)


Drachma, Dram....... 872»


3227


Dragoman :
ef Targum........... 2910> (J. E. H. Thomson)
Dragon... 0... eee 8738 (Day)
ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
ef Bel and the........ 427 (T. W. Davies)
CE POX ccc aed ....11448 (Day)
ef Jackal............ 1548 (Day)
Red
ef Revelation of
John....... eae 25825 (Orr)
ef Sea-monster....... 2707 (Day)
cf Waterspout........ 3075* (Day)
cf Whale... ........: 30823 (Day)
ef Whelp............ 3083" (Day)
Dragon Well
ef Jackal’s Well...... 1548" (Masterman)
Dram
ef Drachma......... .872°
ef Money........... 2076+ (Porter)
Drama, Mimic
ef Games............ 1168* (Smith)
Draught..............878°
Drawer of Water....... 873» (Patch)
ef Hewer............ 1384» (Patch)
Dream, Dreamer.......874* (Clippinger)
ef Greece, Religion in. 1301+ (Fairbanks)
Dredges.c2.-e enced 875»
Dregstes sou oS 46 2gae 875
Drehem............... 365> (Clay)
TTOSS? 254 35. peek assmenregenes 875° (Eager)
ef Adorn............ 61» (Kapp)
ef Fisher’s Coat...... 1116
Footgear............ 8798
ef Fringes........... 1146> (E. D. Isaacs)
ef Frock. ........... 1147 (E. D. Isaacs)
ef Handkerchief. .....1834>
Headdress........... 878
ef Hem............. 13748 (Eager)
ch Hoodies, 2ivGet 1419
Of Jesus and His disci-
ples. ik Ata a os 879
ef Jewel............. 1675» (Orr)
ef Mantle........... 19848
Materials........... 876>


cf Meals, Meal-time.. .2015> (Eager)
Meaning of terms... . .876%


ef Muffler...........2093%
ef Napkin...........2119>
Outer garments...... 8778
cf Priests and Levites. 2452" (Wiener)
ef Shawl... 0.0.0.0... 2752
Under garments...... 877%
ef Veil..............80478 (Easton)
ef Wimple........... 3085°
Drink

ef Drink, Strong...... 879> (Edwards)
eli Hoad see as 1121» (Eager)
ef Offering........... 2645* (Reeve)

| Drink, Strong......... 879» (Edwards)
ef Liquor............ 1896
cf Temperance, Tem-

perate.. 6.0... 66. 2929» (Jacobs)

ef Wine.............3086® (Easton)


3228 GENERAL INDEX


Drive Asunder.......... 316 (S. F. Hunter)
Dromedary

ef Camel............ 547 (Day)
Drop, Dropping........ 8802
Dropsy...... 880°
DROSS pes ecpeeg ob snc ae ts 880"
Drought

ef Famine...........1097 (W. L. Walker)
Drove

ef Cattle............583> (Day)
Drowning

ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)
Druin ase striae 8802

cf Music............ 2101 (Millar)
Drunkenness........... 880° (Edwards)

ef Drink, Strong... ...879 (Edwards)

ef Wine............. 3088" (Easton)
Drusilla. .............. 881> (Kerr)
Dry

ef Ground........... 13072 (W. L. Walker)
Dualism

ef Philosophy........ 2383 (Rees)
Due

CEDUtLY.. 0 an dagidess 883> (W. L. Walker)
PG Sek an Sepa cod ishenetas 8822 (Van Pelt)

Cf: Chiefy, oe eens she 606° (Farr)
Dulcimer

ef Music............ 2094> (Millar)
Dumah............... 882 (Weir)
DUM DY erg See hace 882 (Macalister)
Dune tenes coe a 882» (Patch)
Dung Gate. ........... 882> (Patch)
Dungeon

ef Prison............2456 (T. Lewis)
Dunghill.............. 882>

ef Dung...........-. 882 (Patch)
Dunkers

ef Lord’sSupper...... 19292 (Kurtz)
Dura nke ee eee 883" (Pinches)
Dure 2d 22 sectereeeee 883"

ef Endure........... 944b
Dusty). asset ite des 883* (Edwards)

ef Rolling Thing...... 25976
DUG Ye i Set treet ee 883 (W. L. Walker)

ef Ethics... ......... 1013 (Alexander)
Dwarf. ec. ena taeis 883> (Farr)

cf Priests and Levites. 2446> (Wiener)
Dwell nn. oe Piers 883> (Edwards)

ef Inhabit...........1468* (Edwards)
Dye, Dyeing........... 883> (Patch)

ef Colors............ 674> (Patch)

ef Purple............ 2509 (Day)

ef Rams’ Skins....... 2530°

ef Tanner........... 2908> (Patch)

ef Thyatira.......... 2977> (Banks)
Dysentery...........-- 884> (Macalister)
HAL Oeics Aceh lla ayen ae 370 (Rogers)
Magles econ aes $858 (Stratton-Porter)
Eanes (Manes)......... 1981
DE acs et ae er 886> (Luering)


Barly cass a0. ot cei eee 886° (Gerberding)
Earnest. .........000005 886> (Schenk)
ef Pledge..........-- 2408> (aston)
Earring...........0.045 8879 (Eager)
ef Amulet.........-. 126 (T. W. Davies)
cf Ornament......... 2201 (Doolan)
CERIN G re ati 25942 (Crannell)
Marthe nua’. seen 8872 (Day)
cf Anthropology...... 144> (Marais)
Circle of the
ef Astronomy... ...314> (Maunder)
Corners of the........ 887
ef Astronomy... ...315* (Maunder)
ef Evolution......... 1043" (Zenos)
cf Heavens, New..... 1353 (Vos)
ef Land............. 1826 (Day)
New
cf Eschatology of
IN A 2 a Matyi 979> (Vos)
Pillars of the
cf Astronomy...... 315° (Maunder)
Vault of the.........887
ef Astronomy... ...315" (Maunder)
cf World, Cosmological 3106* (Orr)
Earthen Vessels. .......887% (Patch)
ef Potter............ 2423> (Patch)
Earthly............4-- 887> (Edwards)
Earthquake........... 8882 (Joy)
Causes of........... 8882
In Jerusalem... ..... .888°
In Palestine......... 8882
In Scripture......... 888>
Symbolic use........ 888>
MAS OS 4 ebiebved fue oR idee Ba 888> (Clippinger)
East


ef Natural Features... 2122* (Day)


East, Children of the... .888> (Day)


East Country.......... 8894
East Gate............. 1176> (Caldecott)
ef Tabernacle........ 2889 (Caldecott; Orr)
East Sea
cf Dead Sea.........801* (Wright)
East Wind
ef Wind............. 3085> (Joy)
Eiaster.s Ot je eek sou’ 889" (Porter)
Ebaliice taste kcc kes 88gb
Ebal, Mount.......... 889> (Ewing)
Hb edt eee be acd See 890>
Ebed-melech........... 890> (Farr)
Eben-bohan (Bohan)... .494#
Eben-ezel (Ezel)........ 1081>
Eben-ezer............. 890° (Ewing)
Eber ees See ee enka 890> (Grant)
ef Heber............1854> (Pollard)
ef Semites........... 2717" (Mack)
ot bey easier te Seine eR ne ie 890°
ef Abez............. 6>
Ebiasaph.............. 890°
cf Abiasaph......... 7> (Beecher)
Ebionism, Ebionites ....890° (J. E. H. Thomson)
Account of.......... 891>


GENERAL INDEX


Ebionism—continued
Christology of early


CHUPCH tyede cael ss 893>

History of........... 892+

Literature of......... 892"

Origin of name....... 891>

Paulinism of early

church............ 8940

Ebionites, | Apocryphal

Gospel of............ 1974 (Hutchison)
FEDON Vien hae al ed 894" (Masterman)
EbrOn see eo ce sa 894>

ef Abdon............ 4> (Beecher)

ef Hebron........... 13652 (Masterman)
Ebronah (Abronah).....23° -
Ecanus (Ethanus)...... 1012>
Ecbatana

ef Raphael.......... 2532> (J. E. H. Thomson)
Eece Homo............ 894> (Clippinger)
Ecclesiastes............ 894» (Beecher)

Canonicity.......... 8974

Composite authorship .895"

Contents............ 895*

Date and authorship. .896*

ef Games...........- 11685 (Smith)

“King in Jerusalem’’..896*

Koheleth........... "896%


Linguistic peculiarities 896>
Structure of book... ..895*


Ecclesiasticus
ef Games............ 1168 (Smith)
ef Jerusalem......... 1617* (Masterman)
ef Prologne.......... 2458>
cf Septuagint........ 2724» (Thackeray)
ef Sirach, Book of . . . .2806> (T. W. Davies)
Eclipse >
ef Astronomy........ 303>; 310° (Maunder)
A Os beer ee een eer 897° (Wright)
Edar (Eder)........... 899°
Eddias (Jeddias)........ 1448»
Eddinus ..........---- 897
Eden (garden)......... 897° (Wright)
Archaeological theory. 229 (Kyle)
Armenia...........- 898
Babylonia........... 8984
Central Asia......... 897
ef Gihon............ 1228) (Masterman)
ef Hiddekel.......... 1388 (Wright)
North Pole.........- 898
ef Shinar............ 2771» (Pinches)
ef Telassar.......... 2925 (Pinches)
ef Tigris............ 29819 (Wright)
Eden, Children of...... 607> (Fortune)
Eden, House of
ef Aven...........-- 3408
ef Betheden......... 897 (Wright)
ef Children of Eden... 607 (Fortune)
Eder (person) ......---. 8992
ef Ader......-...--- 55°
Eder (place)......-.--- 899" (Masterman)


Edes (Edos).......---- 900


3229
Hid pes et ache oe dagae 8999
Edification............ 8999 (Farr)
Anas se A Mvecotiedg neues 899%
Edom, Edomites ....... 899° (Ewing)
Boundaries.......... 8994
Character and features 899
Stony 2 ec sit oat aba 900°
Idumaea and the Idu-
maeans........... 900°
ef Jehoram.......... 1581> (Mosiman)
Origin of name....... 899>
CE Sits cea wht 2713* (Ewing)
cf Sela..............2713> (Ewing)
GOS tiaiste neice unt Soavaceee 900>
HAT C1 Pe best ssh ogc oleate 900° (Ewing)
Education............- 900° (Meyer)
Definition of......... 900°
In early Israel........ 901%
Deuteronomic legis-
lation ccs 2348 ek 901»
Monarchical period . 901°
Nomadic and agri-
cultural periods . .901*
Reading and writing 902°
ef Jehoshaphat....... 1582* (Mosiman)
In later Israel ....... 902
Book of the law. . . .902>
Book of Proverbs . .903*
Educational _ signifi-
cance of the
prophets......... 902
Greek and Roman
influences....... 903°
Scribes and Levites . 903+
Wise men......... 902>
In NT times......... 903°
Educational work of
early disciples... .904>
Method and aims.. .904#
Preéminence of Jesus
as a teacher...... 904»
Subject-matter of
instruction....... 904*
Valuable results of
Jewish education . 904
cf Schoolmaster...... 2702 (Easton)
cf Synagogue........ 2878> (Levertoff)
ef Teach............ 2921 (DeMent)
ef Tutor............ 3028
Eduth
cf Psalms, Book of .. .2487* (Sampey)
Effect cece oes 905° (Farr)
Egg................,- 905° (Stratton-Porter)
ef Food............. 1124 (Eager)
Biglals ke yoni He 905°
Eglaim..............-. 905>
Eglath-shelishiyah...... 905’ (Ewing)
of Heifers i4-2 bce d 1367> (Easton)
ef Palestine.......... 22192 (Conder)
Eglon (person)........- 905> (E. D. Isaacs)
Eglon (place)..........996* (Ewing)


ef Wisdom........... 3089¢ |((Easton)
eT


3230 GENERAL INDEX
Bigy pte. fect sd ens 906 (Petrie) Egyptian, The......... 916*
Brook of... .........523% (Kyle) Egyptian Kings (later),
ef Shihar.......... 2768 (Kyle) ef Egypt............ 906* (Petrie)
Civilization.......... 9148 ef Hophra........... 2359 (Nicol)
Character......... Q15> ef Necoh..........-. 23602 (Nicol)
Foreign gods....... 915 ef Pharaoh..........2359% (Kyle)
Four groups of gods 915* ef Shishak........... 2777> (Nicol)
Future life......... 914 Egyptian Versions
Language......... 9142 cf Coptic Versions. .. .708> (Tisdall)
Laws.............915> Egyptians, Gospel ac-
Literature......... 914> cording to the
Writing........... g14> ef Apocryphal Gospels 197* (Hutchison)
Country............ 906° GRY Boies teers. iced 916"
Basis of land....... 906" ef Ahiram........... 862 (Beecher)
Climate........... 906> PURUG So. tates, Sees 9168 (Farr)
Conditions of life. . .9072 Mitheneae t-seetiea a ahs 916
Earliest human re- TREY Acie wn Metta tanes 916°
mains........... 906 Ekrebel............0-5 916"
Fauna............ 907» Ekron.. 0... ....0. 0005 916° (Porter)
Florasa¢3¥ esters 907 ef Aeearon.......... Q7>
WNilerrshisi ia teas 907° Ekronite.............. 916> (Porter)
Nile Valley........ 906 El :
Prehistoric races... .907° ef God, Names of... . .1264 (Mack)
History............. 907> lap eeik ie teenth ae 916>
Arabic. ...........909> Eladah (Eleadah)...... 924»
Dynasties......... 908»; 909% Rah ays. eee Mae ticns cadens 9165 (Mosiman)
Early foreign con- Elah, Vale of.......... 916 (Masterman)
nections......... 9108 Elam (person)......... 9178 (Farr)
Prehistoric......... 9088 Elam, Elamites........ 9172 (Pinches)
Roman times...... 909» ef Shushan.......... 2782" (Pinches)
ef Mizraim.......... 2069> (Kyle) Plasa tec tcc bisa i tee 9238
GENUC aegis see 21458 (Kyle) Elasah...........000.. 9238
OT connections....... 9108 ef Eleasah........... 924> (Farr)
Abramic times. .... 910° cf Saloas............ 2664
Cireumeision....... 910> Elath, Eloth........... 9232 (Ewing)
Cities and places . . .9137 Elberith
Descent into Egypt .911° ef Baal-berith........ 347"
Egyptian Jew...... 913* El-beth-el... 2.0.0.2... 923>
Ethiopians......... 912 Elcia (EIkiah)......... 938"
Exodus...........911> Hldaiah icc eee eee 923>
Hadad............ 9122 ld ad ee he nena cteh ¢ 923
Historic position... .911> Eldad and Modad, Book
Hophra...........912> Obie eae ae een es ..923> (Fortune)
Israel in Canaan... .912% Elder (NT)............ 9248 (Grant)
Jews at Syene...... 912 ef Bishop........... 478> (Dosker)
Joseph. ........... 911 ef Church Govern-
New Jerusalem at ment.............653° (Forrester)
Oniah heh ks 9138 ef Ministry.......... 2059» (T. M. Lindsay)
Oppression......... 911° ef Presbyter......... 2437> (Mack)
Pharaoh’s daughter . 912 Elder (OT)............ 923 (Stearns)
Plagues........... 911» Cad ects ce magick Md 924
Semitic connections. 910" Eleadah............... 924>
Shishak........... 912> Hlealehe wis ee aad 924> (Ewing)
Tahpanhes......... 912 Eleasa (Elasa)......... 923
Zerakh............ 912> Eleasah............... 924> (Farr)
ef Phoenicia......... 23908 (Porter) Eleazar............... 924» (S. F. Hunter)
ef Plagues of Egypt. . .2403* (Kyle) Eleazurus (Eliasibus)... .929
ef Seveneh..........2744° WleCta nica eet tae’ 925° (Dunelm)
ef Ships and Boats... .2775> (Nicol) Elect Lady............ 925° (Law)
ef Sidon............. 2785> (Porter) ef Cyria..........0.. 773
ef Slave, Slavery...... 2815> (Raffety) ef John, Epistles of ...1719* (Law)
ef Lady............. 1821


GENERAL INDEX


Election............... 925> (Dunelm)
Cognate and _ illustra~
tive Biblical lan-


Considerations in re-
lief of thought...... 926>


Antinomies........ 926>

Fatalism another
thing...........9278

Moral aspects...... 9275


Unknown future... .927>

“We know in part’ 927
ef Foreordain........ 11315 (Orr)
Incidence upon com-

Maunity and indi-


vidual............9268

Mysterious element. . .925°

Perseverance........ 926°

cf Predestination..... 2435 (J. Lindsay)

Scope of............ 9262

Word im Scripture. . . . 925»
Electrum.............. 927> (Fortune)

ef Buying........... 533° (Eager)

ef Metal............ 20449 (Masterman)

ef Stones, Precious... .2856* (Fletcher)
El-Elohe-Israel......... 927> (Mack)


ef God, Names of... . .12678 (Mack)
El Elyon
ef God, Names of... . .12678 (Mack)


Element.............. 927>
ef Principles......... 2455
cf Rudiments........ 2624 (Rutherfurd)
Hlephxt cats teeta 2: 927
ef Nephtoah......... 2134* (Masterman)
Elephant.............. 9288
cf Behemoth......... 4274 (Day)
ef Ivory.........--+- 1544» (Day)
ef Maccabees, Books
OL ae eae rete 19548 (T. W. Davies)
Elephantine
ef Number.......... 21582 (Smith)
ef Palestine, Recent
Exploration........ 2223 (Cobern)
ef Papyrus..........- 2239" (Goodspeed)
cf Sacrifice (OT) ..... 2647» (Reeve)
cf Sanballat.........2681 (R. D. Wilson)
ef Sanctuary.......-- 26882 (Wiener)
ef Seveneh.......... 27448


Elephantine Papyri
ef Israel, History of.. .1525° (Orelli)
Elephantine-Syene Pa-


ogg bea pares ene ae rete 856> (Nicol)
Eleutherus..........-. 928
Eleven Stars

ef Astronomy........ 3092 (Maunder)
Eleven, The...........928% (Clippinger)
Elhanan.........----- 928" (Sampey)

ef Goliath........... 1276” (Reeve)
Pi ek hee, Fee 928> (Grant)

ef Shiloh.........--- 2769 (Ewing)


Eli, Eli, Lama Sabach-
thani (Eloi)......... 939% (Clippinger)


ae ote hein dee oredr 928> (Farr)
Hliada icc ia. oek ee ee eae 928>
Eliadas........ 928>
Eliadun (Tliadun).......14498
Eliah (Elijah)......... 930° (Farr)
Hliahba)scci4 cache: 929%
Eliakim............... 9294 (8. F. Hunter)
ef Jakim............ 1559
ef Shebna........... 2753» (Roberts)
Hiliali co: ¢teein dau cae het 9298
Hig tice tioeccacaeect 9298
Eliaonias.............. 9295
Elias (Elijah).......... 930° (Farr)
Eliasaph.............. 9298
Eliashib.............-. 9298 (Farr)
Eliasib (Eliashib)....... 929° (Farr)
Eliasibus........0.0.0.. 929»
Eliasimus............. 929»
Eliasis.........-....-- g929>
Eliathah.............. 929»
Elidad................ 929»
ef Eldad............ 923°
Eliehoenai............. 929»
Mhiel. O2tiin a 929>
Hhenaii ccna es 929»
Biezeres chiar alee 929» (S. F. Hunter)
Elihaba (Eliahba)...... 929»
Elihoenai (Elichoenai) . . .929>
Elihoreph............. 930°
AGIA ettsy gece ese weds tere 9308
In Book of Job... ....980* (Genung)
cf Job, Book of....... 1684> (Genung)
Elihu (general) ......... 930°
Mlijal ees ciscceteetgete 930° (Farr)
Character of prophet .932>
ef Israel, Religion of ..1538* (Orelli)
ef Jezebel........... 1675° (Roberts)
Miracles in Elijah nar-
ratives .........0. 9338
IMSNEDS cee cd cases! 933
ef Palestine.......... 2217 (Conder)
ef Prophecy......... 2459> (Orelli)
cf Raven............ 25338 (Stratton-Porter)
Works of ...........- 930° ‘
Ka 86 sip tintin kes 933»
Mecca wes abe sees 933°
Elimelech...........-. 933 (Reeve)
cf Naomi............ 21182 (Roberts)
ef Ruth............. 2627> (Geden)
Elioenai (Eliehoenai) 929>
Elionas... 2.60.0 e eee ee 933>
Eliphal.... . esa meela shies 933
Eliphalat ...........-- 934
Bliphaz........0-.0-- 934
In Book of Job... .... 9348 (Genung)
Eliphelehu........... 934%
Eliphelet (Eliphalat) .. . .934°
Elisabeth............-- 934°
ef Zacharias... .. .. ..8129° (Easton)
Eliseus
ef Elisha............ 934> (Reeve)


3231


GENERAL INDEX


3232
ilishaie: ACA. etek Se. 934 (Reeve)
And Benhadad II... ..4378 (Nicol)
Cally. cea Moc wen ts 934>
Career... ........... 935*
Character...........937%
Compared with Elijah 9372
ef Gehazi............ 11828 (Crichton)
ef Jehoahaz.......... 1575* (Caldecott)
ef Jehu... .......0.. 1585* (Caldecott)
ef Joash............. 1576 (Caldecott)
ef Palestine.......... 2217 (Conder)
Parting gift of Elijah. . 935°
Preparation.......... 934
Hlishalne). Siscactesixins et 937> (Grant)
Elishama.............. 937> (Farr)
Elishaphat............ 937
Elisheba.............. 937>
Elishua............... 938*
Elisimus (Eliasimus) . . . . 9387
BO) Tv eats aera sn er em 938"
Piliid’ 5 Veen Meets 938*
Elizaphan............. 9388 (Betteridge)
Elizgur........,.......938%
Elkamah.............. 938" (Farr)
BHlkiah................ 938"
Elkoshite.............. 938" (Betteridge)
lasar’. views Siac ek 938> (Pinches)
BD) ic ere race eae ete area 938>
ef Terebinth......... 29492 (Masterman)
Elmadam . .938>
Hla a am 632s oe eee 939
Elnathan.............. 939° (Farr)


Elohim, Eloi
ef God, Names of... . .1265 (Mack)
Eloi, Eloi, Lama Sabach-


Ghanieie oe ete 939+ (Clippinger)
Elon (person).......... 939
Elon (place)..........- 9395
Elon-beth-hanan (Elon) . 939°
Elonites

ef Elon............. 939%
Eloquent.............. 9395
Eloth (Elath).......... 923 (Ewing)
Hlpaale se. ceta.el se e: 939>
Elpalet..........0.-.. 939

ef Eliphalat......... 934%
El-paran.............. 22472 (Ewing)
Elpelet (Eliphelet)...... 934°
El] Roi

ef God, Names of... . .1264 (Mack)


El Shaddai
ef God, Names of... .
Elteke, Eltekeh.......


. 1264 (Mack)
.939> (Ewing)


Eltekon............... 939
Eltolad............... 939»
PUL e ed wena ate he: 939

oPTimes: ic. ce 2981 (Porter)
Wluzals yoy Seen 939>
Elymaeans (Elamites).. .917* (Pinches)
Blymais’ <2 egies os os 939>
Elymas...............9408

ef Bar-Jesus......... 404» (S. F. Hunter)


Elyon


ef


God, Names of.. ..


Elzaphan Se a


Emadabun. .


cf


Burial...........


Embrace.............-
Embroidery...........


cf


Crahte sis a aiid


Emek-keziz............
Emerald


ef


Stones, Precious.. .


Emerods..............


Of the Apocrypha...


ef


Jesus Christ.......


Emotion


ef


Passion...........


Emperor..............


ef
ef


Augustus..........
Caesar. ...........


Enaim, Fnam..........


ef


Open Place........


Nace se alate
Enasibus..............
Encampment


By the Red Sea... ..


. 1264" (Mack)


9408
. 938° (Betteridge)


. .940*


940*
940


.5299 (Hager)


940°
940° (Patch)
734° (Patch)
940°


.2856* (Fletcher)


940 (Macalister)
2402> (Macalister)
940> (Sayce)

941%


..1457> (A. W. Evans)


9412 (Masterman)


9412


9415 (Masterman)
2196 (Easton)


9429


cf Wanderings of


Enchantment..........


ef
ef
cf


ef
End


Astrology.........
Divination........
Orator............
Astronomy........
of the World


3064* (Conder)
3069° (Nicol)

942+ (Pratt)

295» (Maunder)
8608 (T. W. Davies)
2199* (Edwards)
9432 (W. L. Walker)
315* (Maunder)


ef Eschatology of the


943> (Orr)
943> (Ewing)


944° (Orr); 30979 (T. W.


Davies)


GENERAL INDEX


Endow, Endue......... 9442 (Farr)


Ends of the Earth

ef Astronomy........ 315° (Maunder)
Pindures sce as 944>
En-eglaim............. 944>

ef Fountain.......... 1141» (Day)
Enemessar............ 944> (Hutchison)
Ememy...........02.005 944> (W. L. Walker)
Eneneus..............945
Enflame (Inflame)...... 14688
En-gaddi.............. 9459
Engage eco en sed 945°
En-gannim............ 945° (Ewing)

cf Garden House.... . 1175
En-gedi............... 945° (Wright)

ef Fountain.......... 1141 (Day)
Engine...........-.... 945»

ef Siege............. 27862 (Nicol)
English Versions...... . 945> (Hutchison)

ef American Revised

Version...........116* (Easton)

Engraft (Graft)........ 1292 (Patch)
Engraving

ef Carving........... 581> (Patch)

ef Crafts........-... 7342 (Patch)
En-haddah............ 9524
Enhakkore............ 952>
En-hazor.............. 952>
Enigma

ef Games............ 1168» (Smith)
ENJOm cose. lek ele 952»
Enlarge............... 952» (Breslich)
Enlargement........... 952» (Breslich)
Enlighten.............952 (M. O. Evans)
Woy ese ety ne eden 370° (Rogers)
En-mishpat

ef Kadesh-barnea .. . .1788> :
Ennmity? sence easel 952> (W. L. Walker)

ef Abolish........... 15° (M. O. Evans)

ef Hate. 2. o.4 es 1343> (Orr)
Ennatan.............. 9538
Enoch (Henoch)....... 1374»
Enoch (person)........ 9532 (Grant)

ef Apocalyptic Liter-

AtUTE hicks Musee te es 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)

Enoch (place).......... 953* (Orr)
Enoch, Books of....... 164° (J. E. H. Thomson)

Dateneetie seen kee 165>


Ethiopic, Book of... ..164> (J. E. H. Thomson)
External chronology . . 166°


History..........--. 164
Language........... 165+
Quoted in Ep. of Jude 1771 (Moorehead)
Secrets, Book of...... 164° (J. E. H. Thomson)
Secrets of Enoch...... 166°
Slavonic, Book of... . .164° (J. E. H. Thomson)
Slavonic Enoch...... 166°
Enormity.........---- 9532
ENO wie see he ee i es 9532 (S. F. Hunter)
Bnoshae cca eeteare bt es 140° (Davis)
Enquire...........-5-- 953»


ef Inquire........... 1472 (M. O. Evans)


En-rimmon...........953> (Masterman)
ef Rimmon (place)... .2593 (Masterman)


En-rogel.............. 953> (Masterman)
ef Fountain.......... 1141 (Day)
Enrolment i


cf Chronology of NT. .6452 (Armstrong)


ef Tax..............2918* (Sweet)
Ensample

cf Example.......... 1050
En-shemesh........... 954
Ensign

ef Banner........... 384° (Eager)
Hinsuees hee he hes 954»
Entangle.............. 954> (Pratt)
En-tappuah ........... 954>
Entreat............... 1490> (Miller)
Environment

CEU chide e's anetben eal 2800 (McConnell)
PONV Yo eee ae 955° (W. L. Walker)
Epaenetus............. 955 (8. F. Hunter)
Epaphras............. 955+ (S. F. Hunter)
Epaphroditus.......... 955» (8. F. Hunter)
Ephah (measure)....... 955

cf Weights and Meas-

Uressrs chs acta ted, dacs 3079" (Porter)
Ephah (person)........955° (Williams)
Ephai................955°
Mpherns tose sateen 955»
Ephes-dammim........ 956° (Masterman)
Ephesian.............. 9562
Ephesians, Epistle to the 956° (C. S. Lewis)

Argument........... 9602
Authenticity......... 956
Destination.......... 957
cf Laodiceans, Ep. to .1837 (Rutherfurd)
Place and date....... 957°
Purpose............. 959>
Relation to other NT
writings........... 958>
Teaching............ 9608
Ephesus............... 9612 (Banks)
ef Samos............ 2674° (Kinsella)
ef Timothy.......... 2985 (Rutherfurd)
cf Town Clerk....... 30012 (Dosker)
Piphlahe sock des sc. nates 9628
Ephod (person)........962>; 8* (Beecher)
Ephod (vestment)......962* (Sampey)
cf Images........... 1452* (Cobern)
cf Priests and Levites. 2452 (Wiener)
Ephphatha............ 962»
Ephraim


ef Hill, Hill Country. .1392* (Masterman)


Ephraim (person aud
Gribe)iso ye tea 963° (Ewing)
Ephraim (town)........ 963> (Ewing)


Ephraim, Forest (Wood)of963>
Ephraim, Gate of


ef Jerusalem......... 16038 (Masterman)
Ephraim, Mount....... 963>

cf Gaash............ 1150
Ephraimite............ 963>

ef Ephrath.......... 964 (Masterman)


8234 GENERAL INDEX
Ephrain (Ephron)...... 964° (Masterman) YTS its bo ad ease age ee 970° (W. L. Walker)
Ephrath, Ephrathah.. . .964* (Masterman) Error... ..... AGA en 970° (W. L. Walker)
Ephrathite............ 964" (Masterman) Esaias
Ephron (person)....... 9643 ef Isaiah. ..........- 1495 (Robinson)

ef Money........... 2076* (Porter) Esarhaddon........... 9712 (Clay); 271% (Clay);
Ephron (place)......... 964" (Masterman) 2945 §=(Sa ;

yee);

of Gephyrun......... 1217 (Clay)
ee ee ; Peas (Rees) ef Sarchedonus....... 2692

ae 96s Esau. beeen eee 971° (Forrester)
Me ee oe ee ef Birthright Ne eas ate 478° (J. M. Wilson)
eS theses ang o6s cf Family of, in Genesis 1208 (Moller)
Canses of auccess. .. . .963" Reape ane ae pend sBave)
“Consensus CGentium ” 965° ESA's teak aeons cade oe: 9722
Egoistic hedonism. . . .964> Eschatology, NT....... Big y08)
Hipicurean gode.--)...065? Consummate state... .991*

Materialism. ........ 965> Deve ppmaent ey aud
Social contract....... 965" Doctrinal and religious
Social and political significance. ....... 979°

ECt eA suman hehe 9648 ef Gehenna.......... 1183* (Vos)
Chetsics eit ha 2854> (Rees) General and individual-981°
mesey af ideas. fs 965 General] structure... . .980

Epilepsy ef Hades............- 1315» (Vos)
ef Limatie sc. cs cess 1941> (Sweet) ef Heavens, New. . . . .1353* (Vos)
Epiphanies ef Hope............. 1419° (Easton)
oP aa EV Ge 159° (Harry) Intermediate state... .991>
Epiphanius............ 1000 (J. E. H. Thomson) Jesus’ discourse. ..... 1657» (Orr)
Mpiplity se gece onde 966" ef Johannine Theology 1705* (Law)
ef Year.............3126% Judgment. .......... 989
Bpisila.w.iecnoutinge ds. 966° (Pratt) ef Judgment, Last. .1777> (Easton)
Apocryphal......... 967% ef Last Time......... 18408 (Vos)
Distinctive. character: ef Mark, Gospel of... .1994> (Farmer)

Pairitii<Ave meee omen 9668 cf Paradise.......... 2246 (Wright)
Distinguished from a Parousia............ 981>; 22492 (Easton)

isttere 2) ae, Boe: 967° ef Prison, Spirits in. . .2456> (Orr)
Epistolary writings in ef Punishment, Ever-

IN Rae he oe ae 9678 lasting............ 2503° (Orr)
Letters in Apocrypha .9678 ef Regeneration... ...2546 (Nuelsen)
Letter-writing in an- Resurrection......... 986

tiquity............ 9662 ef Sirach, Book of... .2808° (T. W. Davies)
NT epistles.......... 9662 Eschatology, OT....... 9728 (Orr)

OT epistles.......... 966° ef Abraham’s Bosom. .22> (Orr)

Patristic epistles... ... 967» Apocalyptic......... 9788
Epistles, Captivity Apocryphal.......... 978%

ef Philemon, Ep. to. . .2366° (C. 8. Lewis) Conceptions of future
Epistles, The Pastoral... .2258 (Rutherfurd) life... 62... 66. 973°
Epistles, Spurious Fundamental ideas... .972

ef Apocryphal Epistles 194° (J. M. Wilson) Ch Helle ae hakt 13718 (Orr)
Hialeah atk wee 968° (Jacobs) Idea of judgment..... 977"
Equality.............. 968" (Jacobs) ef Immortal.........1460* (Orr)
Equity............005- 968" (M. O. Evans) of Jesus Christ....... 1630* (Orr)
put teat azs-coteeanee 9688 Later Jewish concep-
Dac Raed, cane: ates 968° (Porter) tioms............. 9788

CESTN Thee ken. eee 2982 (Porter) Life and resurrection. . 974>
RATS 6 ce iees etal 968° cf Messiah.......... 2042 (Crichton)
rani TGS. oo he Mes 968> ef Paradise.......... 22465 (Wright)
Erastus 7s.02scn 2b se 9698 (S. F. Hunter) cof Punishment, Ever-
Erech......0...00.000. 969" (Pinches); 365% lasting............ 2501 (Orr)

(Clay) ef Resurrection....... 2565° (aston)

Eri, Erites............. 969» ef Sheol. ............ 2761° (Orr)
Bri-aku..........2..-- 969» (Pinches) ef Zephaniah, Book of 3146+ (Hiselen)


of Tidal............. 2980* (Pinches)


Eschew............... 9938


GENERAL INDEX


Esdraelon, Plain of..... 993° (Ewing)


ef Harod, Well of..... 1340> (Ewing)
Esdras (Apocalyptic)... .996* (T. W. Davies)

Contents............ 9962

Daten tsk Mew eto ee 996>

NAM ive egies ok 9962


Origin of the book... .996
Original language... . .996*
Versions <2)... 2sAe eek 996»
Esdras, Fifth and Sixth. .996>
Esdras, First Book of. . .9942 (T. W. Davies)


Contents............ 994»
Date and authorship. .995°
Name............6-- 994
Versions............ 995°


Esdras, Fourth Book of .172* (J. E. H. Thomson)
Esdras, Second Book of
ef Apocalyptic Liter-


ALULE were toe 161 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Esdris.... 0. ce ued os 996°
Esebon.............-- 996°
Esebrias

ef Eserebias......... 9978
ef Sherebiah.........2764> (Wolf)
SOM ecient nee 9978
Eserebias............-. 9975
Mshanie ts. gs be Vee 9975
Eshbaal
OPTS iy. 3 f.siisenadan Haske 1508
cf Ishbosheth........ 1508° (Breslich)
Hshban:-vsc.-cs erent ss 9975
Cfelishscn ts. aeeecsghares 1508»
Eshcol (person).......- 9977
Eshcol (place)......... 9972 (Masterman)
Eshean (Eshan)........ 9978
Mish@kie ssn cvacas faced: 9972
Eshkalonite (Askelon).. .282>
Eshtaol............... 997% (Ewing)
Eshtaolites........... .997%
Eshtemoa, Eshtemoh . . .997°
Eishtonsesi2en sachsen nee 997
Pishies ese cess. cscetisede oo 997
Esora (Aesora)......... 65"
Espousal, Espouse...... 997
ef Spouse...........- 2846>
Eispy seca nc aehece ache 997
Esril (Earil).........-- 1085>
Msromitcn225 6 sa eecrnrede 997
Essenes, The.........-. 997> (J. E. H. Thomson)
cf Abstinence........25% (Hager)
And Christianity..... 100-46
ef Ebionism....... 890° (J. E. H. Thomson)
Deductions and com-
binations.......... 1001


History and origin... .1001>
ef Josephus Flavius.. .1742* (Wenley)


Sources of information 998*
Histateiienexcsesg ncn esas 1005
Esteem. ....-..-0200e 1005> (W. L. Walker)


3235


Esther (Hadassah)......1314>


ef Myrtle........... 2103 (Masterman)
Esther, Book of........ 1006 (Urquhart)
Attacks upon........ 1007
Authorship.......... 1006
Canonicity.......... 1006
Confirmations of..... 1008
Contents............ 1007
Dates. 2.ctsc caitralndiss 1006»
Greek additions...... 10076
Objections.......... 1008+


ef Tobit, Book of..... 2990 (T. W. Davies)
Esther, The Rest of... .1009> (T. W. Davies)


Contents............ 1009»
Date ie ia oe accion et 1010*
ef Lysimachus........ 1944* (Hutchison)
NAME Sees. pea aes 1009»


Original language ....
Estimate, Estimation ...1010+


Hisyelus; s.sceh.taccs des 1010+
Eta oc a seies baie uaties 10102 (Masterman)
ef Nephtoah......... 2134* (Masterman)


Eternals Ann Accent 1010> (J. Lindsay)
Eternal Life :
ef Johannine Theology 1702 (Law)


Eternity............6. 1011* (J. Lindsay)
Ethane cscciee wet es 1012» (Conder)

ef Goshen...........12808 (Conder)

ef Migdol........... 2050> (Conder)

ef Pithom........... 2401> (Conder)

ef Succoth........... 2869" (Conder)
Hth atic 24: t seca tae co 1012»

Hthanimeds i, 322 sys 1012»

ef Calendar.......... 541 (Porter)

Ch Times seeds cast 2981 (Porter)
Ethanus..........-... 1012
Ethbaal............... 1012
Bthericks weie.ds he Se hews 1013°
Hthiesesce.wikan deka oe 1013 (Alexander)


English moralists..... 10195
Evolutionary ethics. . .1019»


German idealists. .... 1019»
Greek philosophy... . .1017°
Want aioe tateseses 1019>
Nature and function of.1013°
QEIN DE le essa arene sorte 1022
Duties............ 1024
VATtUESs, Jo. eure atte 10248
Of OT and Apocrypha 1020*
Reformation......... 1019+
Scholasticism........1018¢
ef Sermon on the
Mount..........-. 2732» (Miller)
Cf Silica ean 2798> (McConnell)
ef Trade............ 3002* (Easton)
ef Truths... 06. 200s. 3025* (Carver)
Utilitarianism........ 10195
Ethics of Jesus......... 1026* (Stalker)
In the Fourth Gospel. 1030+
Eternal life........ 1030*
Fruits of union with
Christ.......... 10305


3236


Ethics of Jesus—continued
In the Fourth Gospel—continued
Nature of faith... . .1030°
Need of new birth. . 1030°


ef Jesus Christ....... 1642» (Orr)

ef Lord’s Day........ 1919* (Easton)

ef Sabbath.......... 2631 (Sampey)

ef Sermon on the
Mount............ 2732» (Miller)

CES rt Aes 2800" (McConnell)


In Synoptic Gospels... . 1026+
Blessings of the

kingdom........ 1026
Character of sub-

jects of kingdom .. 1027
Commandments of


the King........ 10298
Ethiopia.............. 10318 (Cobern)
CRAIGS 52 tate at 68* (Pinches)

Bible references... ... 1032
Exploration......... 1034»
Geography.......... 1031
FIStOTy ie es ees 1031
Literature........... 1034°
Religion............ 1033

Ethiopian Eunuch...... 1034» (Kerr)
ef Philip, the Evangel-
AStitiyee tesa eet 2368 (S. F. Hunter)


Ethiopian Woman
ef Cushite Woman... .769* (Boyd)


Ethiopic Language... .. .1035* (Littman)
Ethiopic Versions....... 10362 (Weir)
Eth-kasin............. 1036»
Ethma (Nooma)....... 2155"
Bthnaninc. ..c66 6 ee este 1036>
Ethnarch

ef Governor.......... 1289 (Heidel)
AGATE Sets se saarsrass he anos 1036»


_ Ethnography, Ethnology
ef Table of Nations. . .2898° (Pinches)


Eubulus............... 1036> (Rutherfurd)
Eucharist

ef Jesus Christ....... 1658> (Orr)

ef Lord’s Supper... ... 1921» (Gummey; Dosker;

Dau; Kurtz)

Fumenes II... ......... 1036> (Hutchison)
Eunatan (Ennatan).... .953*
Eunice. ............--. 10372 (Rutherfurd)

GELOISe 5: ic.u28. ce eee 1917 (Rutherfurd)
Eunuch............... 1037* (Eager)

ef Marriage.......... 1996> (Hager)

ef Member..........2030* (Luering)

ef Polygamy......... 2416" (Caverno)

ef Punishments....... 2506" (Hirsch)
Buodiaees 2 eke 10382 (Rutherfurd)

ef Succeed, Success . . .2868° (W. L. Walker)

ef Syntyche..........2880° (Rutherfurd)

ef Yokefellow........ 3127 (Rutherfurd)
Eupator.............- 1038 (Hutchison)
Euphrates..........-.. 1038 (Wright)
Eupolemus............10392 (Hutchison)


Euraquilo.............1039> (Joy)


GENERAL INDEX
=


Eusebius ‘
cf Mark, Gospel of... . 1990# (Farmer)
ef Palestine, Recent


Exploration... .... .2223% (Cobern)
Eutychus............. 1039* (8. F. Hunter)
Evangelist............. 1039° (Gray)

Eve, Gospel of......... 1040

Evein NT............ 1040° (Fortune)
cf Child-bearing...... 607° (Jacobs)

Evein OT............ 1040" (Genung)
ef Adam in OT and

ADOC? oecndese du 495 (Genung)


ef Adam in OT (Evo-
lutionary Interpreta-


HON) soe eas 51> (Genung)
ef Family........... 1095* (Caverno)
ef Havvah........... 1345+
CES InGe us eA ee 2799 (McConnell)


Even, Evening, Eventide 1041 (Porter)
Evenings, Between the. .1041*


Hventhoser nae. eae 10418
Everlasting............ 10418 (Orr)
CLADE ese dig anes 70> (W. L. Walker)
ef Eternal........... 1010 (J. Lindsay)
ef Eternity.......... 10112 (J. Lindsay)
d Dy dia cede er is ereyency 1041
Evidence, Evident...... 1041> (W. L. Walker)
0 Dial Coen ea ae we ea ee 1041> (Dungan)
Moral evil........... 10428
Physical evil......... 1042
Evil-doers............. 1042
Evil Eye... ........... 1042 (Luering)
CHAD Vir 8 ove ene ai 955" (W. L. Walker)
CIV On etn ee 1069> (Luering)


Evil-favoredness.......
Evil-merodach........


.1043* (Luering)
10438 (R. D. Wilson);
367° (Clay)


Evil One... 0.0... 0000. 10438 (Dungan)
ef Satan. ............ 2693> (Sweet)
Evil-speaking.......... 10432 (W. L. Walker)
cf Blasphemy........ 485» (Rees)
ef Railing........... 2525> (W. L. Walker)
ef Slander........... 2814> (Edwards)
Evil Spirit
ef Communion with
Demons..........689 (Sweet)
ef Demon...........827° (Sweet)
ef Satan... 2... 2693> (Sweet)
Evil Thing............ 1043 (Dungan)
Evolution.............1043» (Zenos); 148° (Ma-


rais); 692* (Tisdall)
And Biblical truth... .1044


Christianity and Chris-


tian doctrine....... 10478
And creation ........1044>
Descent of man...... 10468
And the fall ......... 1093+
TA GBOE rie Benet len ncd 1043>


Moral nature........

Origin and nature of
religion........... 1046>

And origin of species. . 1044»

Recent origin of notion.10442

ef Regeneration. ..... 2546" (Nuelsen)


GENERAL INDEX 3237


Evolution—continued


ef Virgin-birth....... 3052° (Sweet)
ef World, Cosmo-
logical............ 3106* (Orr)


Evolutionary History
Archaeological theory. 2312 (Kyle)


wet cs neh itis Sane ay 10494

ef Sheep............ 2756 (Day)
XACU Hee sis. ace ied eet 1049* (Betteridge)
Exaction.............. 1049°
Exactors.........2..0. 1049>
Exe Ge cA Ned Ae cad ad 10496 (W. L. Walker)


Exaltation of Christ... ..614> (Bevan)
Examine, Examination. .1049° (Hirsch)
ef Courts, Judicial... .725 (Hirsch)


Example.............. 1050
Excavation

cf Memphis......... 2031° (Petrie)

ef Palestine.......... 22124 (Conder)

ef Sherghat.......... 27659 (Banks)

ef Tahpanhes........ 2903 (Cobern)
Exceed, Exceeding, Ex-

ceedingly............ 10508
Excellency............. 1050* (W. L. Walker)
Excellent.............. 1050 (W. L. Walker)


Exchange, Exchanger
ef Bank, Banking... . .3838 (Eager)


Excommunication...... 1050° (Crannell)
Execute, Execution..... 1051> (Eager)
Exegesis

ef Interpretation...... 1489 (Schodde)
Exercise.......-....5-5 1051 (W. L. Walker)
Exhortation........... 1051» (W. L. Walker)
NX een ho oes 1052

ef Captivity......... 569 (Nicol)


ef Israel, History of . .1525* (Orelli)
ef Israel, Religion of. .1539> (Orelli)


ef Trade............ 3003 (Easton)

Exodus, The.........- 1052" (Conder); 911»
(Petrie)

Datei och en egienes 10538

ef Goshen..........- 1280* (Conder)

cf Israel, History of . .1515° (relli)

Lepsius’ theory....... 1054

ef Migdol...........2050 (Conder)

ef Moses.......-.--- 20869 (Kyle)

Numbers.........-.- 1056*

cf Palestine.......... 2212» (Conder)

ef Pithom........... 2401» (Conder)

cf Raamses, Rameses. .2520° (Conder)

ef Red Sea.......... 2539 (Wright)

Route... 0.0.0.0 ee 1052

ef Succoth........... 28692 (Conder)

ef Wanderings of Israel 3066°; 3069 (Conder)
Exodus, Book of....... 1056 (Moller)

Authorship........-. 1066"


Connection with other

books of Pentateuch 1057%
Contents, analysis of. .1058*
ef Genesis.......-.-- 1207* (Maller)
Historical character... 1064


Exodus, Book of—continued


cf Leviticus.......... 1871°; 18788 (Méller)

INBIN6 ee. odes cea aes 1056
Exorcism.......-.00005 1067 (Sweet)

cf Zoroastrianism..... 31575 (Easton)


Expect, Expectation. .. .1068° (Jacobs)
Expectation, Messianic


cf Christs, False...... 628> (Orr)

cf Eschatology of OT .9722 (Orr)

ef Jesus Christ... ....1624* (Orr)

cf Messiah.......... 20392 (Crichton)
Expedient............- 1068 (W. L. Walker)
Experience............ 1068" (Gray)
Experiment............ 1069
Expiation............. 1069 (Carver)

cf Atonement........ 627> (Orr)

ef Propitiation.......2467* (Carver)

ef Sacrifice, OT...... 2638" (Reeve)
Exposure to Wild Beasts

cf Punishments... ....2504> (Hirsch)
Express... .......-005 1069
Exquisite.............. 1069
Extinct. c0i tea, he 10695
Extortion.............1069" (W. Evans)
Extreme, Extremity... ..1069°
Eye............-+++.-1069° (Luering)

ef Envy.......-.-66- 955" (W. L. Walker)

cf Evil Eye .........1042> (Luering)
Byelid. 2.2... 0.0 e eee ee 1070 (Eager)
Eyepaint

cf Color, Colors...... 674> (Patch)

ef Eyelid..........- 1070 (Eager)

cf Keren-happuch ... .1793*

cf Paint.........-.-- 22084 (Crannell)
Eyesalve.........--065 1070
Eyes, Blinding of

ChE Yess deaths 1069 (Luering)

cf Punishments... .....2504> (Hirsch)
Eyes, Covering of...... 1070
Eyes, Diseases of....... 10702 (Macalister)

ef Blindness......... 487 (Macalister)
Eyeservice..........--1070°
Eyes, Tender

cf Blindness.........487 (Macalister)
Ezar (Ezer)........--- 1081>
Pabale: cows ed eke 1070»
BZbOD heeds ona nee ok 1070°

ef Omni... .... 6. eee 2206
Ezekias (Ezechias)..... 10712
Ezekiel........----0-- 10718 (Mller)

cf Genesis.........-- 1202 (Maller)

ef Jehezkel..........1574*

ef Leviticus......... 1871"; 1879> (Maller)

ef Ministry of Ezekiel .573* (Nicol)

cf Palestine.......--- 2219 (Conder)

Prophet and his book. 1071*

The book......... 10728
Person of Ezekiel. . .1071*
ef Sacrifice, OT...... 2648" (Reeve)


Significance of Ezekiel
in Israel’s religious
history.....-6----- 1073


3238


GENERAL INDEX


Ezekiel—continued


Significance of Ezekiel in Israel’s religious history


cf Temple of Ezekiel. .2934" (Caldecott; Orr)


—continued

Ezekiel and apoca-
lyptic literature . .1080*

Ezekiel and Levitical
system.......... 1074


of God. ......... 1080
Formal characteris-
tics of Ezekiel . . . 10735


cf Tile, Tiling........ 2981
7) (eee ROR 1081
POZOMN oe gue sede deg dh oietes 10815
IZOD etecd a ag ble meagan 1081>
Ezerias.......0.....4.. 1081
Ezias (Ozias).......... 2206"
Ezion-geber............ 10826 (Ewing)
Exznite
ef Adino............ 56° (Beecher)
1 OY.10) ¢: Noe epee aaa See 1082
Ezra (person).......... 10828 (R. D. Wilson)
Fanoily. 2) canal ceeass 1082
His commission...... 1082
ef Israel, History of . .1526> (Orelli)
Occupation.......... 1082»
Reforms and labors of 575» (Nicol)
Traditions........... 1083
Ezra-Nehemiah (Book) .1083+ (R. D. Wilson)
Historicity.......... 10843
Languages........... 1083»
Literary character... .1083>
Name nied eecee ase 10832
cf Nehemiah......... 21312 (R. D. Wilson)
Objectassy. wah ses 1083*
Plan teeaciaiscseneaies 10834
Sources............. 1083»
LORE Sie. ect trier Re 1084»
WRG Yioey-cy eae ees 10834
Exrahite.............. 1085
OP 88 3 aac ceo oeatals 1085
Bariliiess cas cana cet pen 1085
Pablee eens e adele 1085" (Easton)
ef Allegory.......... 976 (Schodde)
Of Jotham.......... 1754 (Caldecott)
ef Parable........... 22438 (Schodde)
Paceieatie. cer ats 1085» (Luering)
ef Countenance....... 723> (Luering)
ef Forehead......... 1127> (Luering)
CE SPIES ols cep eis 28469 (T. Lewis)
Wahi tee tases. pee te 1086?
Pade: 28 isis ie Qa eae 1086* (W. L. Walker)
Pails 5 se ooelthaete hie stet 10862 (W. L. Walker)
Paine once ee ees 1086° (W. L. Walker)
ef Almost...........100% (Harry)
Pain teenie ca teten tute 1086° (Macalister)
Fair a . 10879 (Luering)


Fair Havens........... 1087
ef Crete..........0-. 7446 (Calder)
cf Lasea...........-- 1840

Parse’, Mace areek ee 1087
ef Wares.........-.- 3072+ (Raffety)

Baithive oe Sara 1087° (Dunelm)
Of Abraham......... 1088 ;
Active and passive... . 1088+
As creed............ 10882
Centrality of.........1088+
Etymology, English.. . 1087
Etymology, NT. .....1087>
Etymology, OT....... 1087
CHMOD Ese eeatnnce ee 1419° (Easton)
ef Justification. ...... 1783> (Faulkner)
Of Moses.........--- 10882
Of Rahab........... 1088+


Faithful, Faithfulness. . .1088> (Hodge)
ef Doctrine of, in


Habakkuk......... 1313+ (Eiselen)
Faithfulness of God

Tn ND eas ede 1090

TmOD 5 Agana 1088
ef Immutability...... 1461>
ef Righteousness... .. .2591* (McConnell)
Cf Truths sc. iat ee. 2 3025" (Carver)


ef Unchangeable, Un-
changeableness..... 3033 (Hodge)


Faithful Sayings....... 1091* (Rutherfurd)

ef Poetry, NT........ 2414» (Schenk)
Faithless.............. 1091>
Paleons.ici¢ 64s be cecees 1091 (Stratton-Porter)

ef Hawk. ........... 13452 (Stratton-Porter)
Fall (noun). ........... 1092* (Bavinck)

ef Adam in OT and

ADOC Ex are eset ae 49° (Genung)


ef Adam in OT (Evo-
lutionary Interpre-


tation). ........... 529 (Genung)
Babylonian seal... ... 10934
Characterof.........1093°
AndEvolution....... 10932


Meaning of Gen 3... .1092°
In the OT and NT... .1092°


ef Psychology........ 2498 (Marais)
Fall (verb). ........... 10923 (W. L. Walker)
Falling Stars........... 1094+

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Ballowetrestscikd a cenave: 10948

ef Ground........... 13072 (W. L. Walker)
False Christs.......... 628° (Orr)

ef Lie, Lying........ 18872 (W. Evans)
Falsehood............. 746> (Hirsch)

ef Lie, Lying........ 18879 (W. Evans)
False Prophets......... 10944

ef Lie, Lying......... 18879 (W. Evans)


cf Prophesyings, False 2466 (Schenk)
False Swearing, Witness. 1094*


ef Crimes........... 745% (Hirsch)

ef Lie, Lying........ 18879 (W. Evans)

ef Oath.............2172 (Levertoff)
FAM G2 eed. ccd ised 1094 (W. L. Walker)


GENERAL INDEX 3239
Familiar........00..... 1094* (Pollard) Father (Ab) ........... 2p
ef Astrology......... 295 (Maunder) Father, God the........ 1100° (Orr)
ef Communion with ef Children of God... .608" (Rees)
Demons........... 6895 (Sweet) ef Trinity........... 3012 (Warfield)
Familiar Spirit Father-in-Law.........1101
ef Vault............. 3046> ef Family........... 1094® (Caverno)
ef Witch............ 30979 (T. W. Davies) ef Relationships, Fam-
Family.........00.000. 1094> (Caverno) Uva sree hs aan, 2554+ (N. and E. D. Isaacs)
of Affinity........... 66° (W. W. Davies) Fatherless............. 11012 (Edwards)
ef Covetousness...... 733 (W. Evans) ef Orphan........... 2202+
ef Divorce in OT..... 863> (W. W. Davies) Father’s Brother....... 1101+
Equality of sexes..... 1095 ef Family........... 1094 (Caverno)
Fifth Commandment. . 1095? ci Relationships, Fam- ;
Foundation of........ 1094» iH Aare see Re RE 25542 (N. and E. D. Isaacs)
ef Hammurabi, Code Father’s House, Fathers’

Of hee Pe irate Mune: 13302 (Ungnad) Houses............. 11012 (W. L. Walker)
ef Heredity.......... 13762 (Easton) Fathom............... 1101»
cf Husband’s Brother . 1442 (Crannell) ef Weights and Meas-

Modern dangers...... 1096» UPB... 3079+ (Porter)

Monogamy the ideal. .1095* Fatling, Fatted

Img NsD a eee eon ee 1096° cf Calf... 6... 5428 (Day)

ef Patrimony........ 2264" (Mack) ef Fat (in sacrifice) .. .1099° (Luering)

Polygamy........... 10952 Fatness sy io %4cinccks nls 1101® (W. L. Walker)
ef Polygamy....... 2416+ (Caverno) Fauchion

Reforms of Ezra and ef Scimitar..........2703

Nehemiah......... 10962 Fal Geo het ccscesenlt Serene 1101 (W. L. Walker)
ef Relationships, Fam- FAVOR ne eb ase Sia cag 1102* (W.-L. Walker)

Aly Stecueterdins eas eng 25549 (N.and E.D.Isaacs) | Fawn
Seventh Command- ef Deer wee BLT (Day)

Men ithe ches 1095? Peart eee i 11022 (W. L. Walker)
Teachings of Jesus... . 1096" Weartully. fats. bute ates 11022 (W. L. Walker)
Teachings of Paul... .1096> Fearfully ROSE. o sa annem aoee aa 1102 (W. L. Walker)
Tenth Commandment 1096+ Fearfulness............ 1102+ (W. L. Walker)

Family Relationships. . .2554* (N. and E.D. Isaacs) | Feast of Ingathering
Wamine sin tec nek oon 10972 (W. L. Walker) ef Feasts and Fasts...11033 (KE. D. Isaaes)
Fame. 24:4 eb oeders: 1097 (W. L. Walker) Feast of Tabernacles
Fan, Fanner........... 1097 (Patch) ef Goodly Trees...... 1278> (Masterman)
ancy nya ek eb aewee 1097» Feasting
Far, Farther........... 1097 (W. L. Walker) ef Triclinium........ 3011* (N. Isaacs)
War Honseot ee 10988 Feasts and Fasts....... 1103 (E. D. Isaacs)
ef Beth-merhak...... 450° cf Fast, Fasting...... 1099¢ (T. Lewis)
Era tue ie ec 1098+ (Williams) ei Solemn, folemnity. . 2821" (Baston)
ef Farewell.......... 1098" (W. L. Walker) Hensley Gecaonis total Oe
ef Astronomy........300> (Maunder)
Farewell............-- 10982 (W. L. Walker) F 7 ¢
ia eathers.......-...... 1104» (Stratton-Porter)
Gi Mares om. .ci is toes 1098" (Williams) Feeble. Knees 1104 (Luering)
f Greeting..........1305 (W. L. Walker) ee ee 8
£ 8 ef Palsy............ 2236 (Macalister)
Farm. sida a Soatndneerds be ait Sane Sees 10982 (Patch) Feeble-minded hd ee ee 1105
Farthing.............. 1098? Rosine ee ber oles 1105 (Luering)
ef Penny............ 2298* Feet, Washing of.......3072 (Anderson; Kurtz)
Fashion............-.- 1098 (Edwards) ef Foot.............1125+ (Luering)
Fast, Fasting.......... 10992 (T. Lewis) ef Hair, Symbolical
ef Abstinence........ 24> (Hager) Use esha eta.ghs 1321 (Luering)
ef Feasts and Fasts. ..1103* (HZ. D. Isaacs) ef Lord’s Supper..... .1929* (Kurtz)
ef Jesus Christ....... 1641* (Orr) Feigny..32 2 shee 1105* (W. L. Walker)
Fasts and Feasts....... 1103 (E. D. Isaacs) Felix Antonius......... 1105 (Kerr)
Fat (figurative)......... 1100 (Luering) ef Assassins......... 2882 (S. F. Hunter)
Fat (in sacrifice)........ 1099» (Luering) ef Festus, Porcius.....11074 (Kerr)
ef Fowl (Fatited)...... 1142> (W. L. Walker) ef Gallio............ 1167 (Kerr)
ef Grease............ 1294s ef Governor......... 1289» (Heidel)
ef Kidneys.......... 1797 (Easton) ef Paul....... of Rig BAe, 22728 (A. T. Robertson)
Father. ............0-. 1100* (Crannell) ef Tertullus..........- 2949» (Kerr)


3240 GENERAL INDEX


Felloes.........0.0.02. 1106+
ef Wheel............ 3082> (Easton)
Helloween. cee ees 1106° (W. L. Walker)


Fellow-citizen, Fellow-
disciple, Fellow-heirs. .11068 (W. L. Walker)


Fellowship

ef Communion....... 688> (Miller)
Female............... 1106> (Luering)
PONCCiesceen cece 11065 (W. L. Walker)

ef Hedge............13866> (Masterman)
Fenced Cities

ef Fortification....... 1136% (Nicol)
Herre tics ie7sfecetyed sack 1106 (Day)

ef Chameleon........ 5928 (Day)

ef Gecko............ 1181

ef Lizard............ 1906* (Day)
Ferry-boat

ef Ships and Boats... .2774 (Nicol)
Fervent, Fervently..... 11078 (W. L. Walker)
Festival

cf Feasts and Fasts. ..1103* (E. D. Isaacs)
Festus, Porcius........ 11072 (Kerr)

ef Felix Antonius..... 1105 (Kerr)

Cf: Galhioy 2.54. ee 11676 (Kerr)

ef Governor......... 1289° (Heidel)

Cf Paul eek ee 22728 (A. T. Robertson)
FGtehs wicteca adieu cats 1107> (W. L. Walker)
Feb GOIy arses ctee iene Mahanhtes 1107

ef Chain .. .689" (Fortune)

Hever hte Ses ee eee 1107 (Macalister)

of Ague............. 78 (Macalister)

ef Fiery Heat........ 1108

cf Inflammation...... 14682
Field

ef Agriculture........ 75° (Patch)
Fierceness

ef Fury.............11508
Fiery Heat............1108>

ef Fever............. 11076 (Macalister)
Fiery Serpent

ef Serpent........... 2736" (Day)

Fig, Fig-tree........... 1108" (Masterman)
ef Food... .......... 1122» (Eager)
Fight

ef Games............ 1168 (Smith)

ef War.............- 3069> (Nicol)

Figures Gr s.c isan Pe te 1109 (W. L. Walker)
PB te ark bee ear oe 1110+

ef Tools............. 2999° (Easton)

Bille tic seis es, soos soerneee: 1110 (Raffety)

Filth, Filthiness, Filthy..1110 (W. L. Walker)
ef Uncleanness....... 3035° (Williams)

Fin

ef Fish..............- 1114 (Day)
Pine go hina etc, 24-2 eens 1110 (W. L. Walker)
Finer, Fining

ef Refiner...........2545* (Patch)
Fines

ef Punishments....... 2504 (Hirsch)


Finger................1111* (Luering)


Finger (measure)....... 1111
cf Weights and Meas-
ures..............80799 (Porter)
Finish 3s. e0 2. eee 1111° (W. L. Walker)
Finisher............-.- 1111> (W. L. Walker)
Fir, Fir-tree...........1111% (Masterman)
HIPC in i es tebe 11129 (W. L. Walker)
ef Idolatry.......... 1447> (Cobern)


ef Molech..........
Fire Baptism
cf Baptism of Fire. . . .399 (Kapp)


.2074 (Nicol)


ef Molech........... 20748 (Nicol)
Fire, Lake of.......... 18228 (Vos)
Fire, Strange.......... 1112

CEhMIren eda 11128 (W. L. Walker)
Fire, Unquenchable..... 30388 (Orr)
Firebrand............. 1112 (W. L. Walker)

ef Brand............5149
Firepan............... 11138 (Harry)

ef Censer............ 587> (T. Lewis)
Pires ht goa tyne aleaun een 1113°
Pipkin’ jo scctselwsnatee 1113°

cf Weights and Meas-

Ures poten ees 3079 (Porter)

Firmament............ 300 (Maunder)
IPS he Ai ccet devas, ates 11139 (W. L. Walker)
First-begotten......... 1113 (Rees); 426> (Rees)


cf Firstborn, Firstling. .1113 (T. Lewis)
Firstborn, Firstling..... 1113 (T. Lewis)


ef Child. ............ 606° (Stearns)
ef Circumcision ...... 656" (T. Lewis)
ef First-begotten..... 1113" (Rees)

cl Heine. fous occa ct 1369 (Easton)


ef Plagues of Egypt. ..2405 (Kyle)
ef Priests and Levites.2446> (Wiener)


cf Primogeniture...... 2452» (N. Isaacs)

Redemptionof.......1114
First-fruits............1114* (Levertoff)

ef Priests and Levites. 2446» (Wiener)

CL Dithein, cae ve ehaks 2987» (Levertoff)
First Principles

ef Rudiments........ 2624 (Rutherfurd)
Bish’, icp cig ea eimacens 1114® (Day)

Fishing............. 1115°

Jonah’s fish.......... 11158

ef Sea Food......... 1123 (Hager)

ef Whale............ 3082° (Day)
Fisher, Fisherman...... 1115 (Patch)
Fish Gate

cf Jerusalem.........1607* (Masterman)

ef Mishneh.......... 2066 (Masterman)
Fisher’s Coat.......... 1116

cf Dress............. 875 (Eager)
Fishhook.............. 1116° (Patch)

cf Fishing........... 1116° (Patch)
Fishing...............1116* (Patch)

ef Fishhook.......... 1116* (Patch)

cf Galilee, Sea of..... 1165* (Ewing)
Fishpools.............. 11175
BG SHG h ye bo eese eis sealers 11175 (W. L. Walker)
Fitches (Vetch)........ 11179 (Masterman)

ef Food............. 1121> (Eager)


GENERAL INDEX 3241


Five Flowers (Bloom, Blos- ©
ef Number.......... 2157° (Smith) som, etc) ........... 1120° (Masterman)
Fila oe ei g tactietuann ts 1117 ef Botany........... 505 (Masterman)
ef Reed....... . 25449 (Masterman) Flue Net
Plagon 22636000 Fee 1117 (Hovey) ef Fish. ter eee eens 1114® (Day)
ef Wine............. 3086° (Easton) a Fishing...........1116% (Patch)
* te
HBO Pye. vestotias ee 1117 (Luering) . Bae
Flame see. 1117 (W. L. Walker) ee been ee
(6) tol hol: eer err 11125 (W. L. ay alest) ef Bloody Flux....... 490° (Macalister)
ae IN O86}. eons eo ee , ef Dysentery.........884° (Macalister)
DK coe RA eye eh ce Mian hoe 2 (Masterman Ty(verb) 22 da ceeds 11219 (W. L. Walker)
ef Linen............. 1894 (E. D. Isaacs) Fly, Flies............. 1120° (Day)
Flaying ef Plague............ 2402> (Macalister)
ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch) Poaliee scsi cts hte 11214
Bless ee ee oes 1{18> (Day) cf Colt........-....5 678+ (Day)
ef Gnat.............1240* (Day) aoe ee Bia eay)
. ‘ er
a ae Flies Rite Saget Bee (Day) ef Provender......... 2469> (Masterman)
ae aes Fold, Folding.......... 11212 (W. L. Walker)
ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Bs Fly (verb)......... 11215 (W. L. Walker) Poll eee ee 1121> (W. L. Walker)
CeCe Folk-lore
i oe Rens at Mat abas Mies aah aoe ef Night-monster..... 21449 (Sweet)
c eep............2756° (Day) FOUGW 220.2 here 1121> (W. L. Walker)
ef Wool............. 3104° (Patch) Follower.............. 1121
Fleet, Roman.......... 257° (Allen) Folly
Mleshtre aus soleat ON 1118> (Luering) cf Fools... ccc vee ees 1124@ (W. L. Walker)
ef Resurrection... ....2565* (Easton) Food. .... Tas Bsa as at nea (Eager)
cf Sinlessness........ 2805 (Dunelm) ef Abomination....... 15° (Eager)
of Spirit.........0... 2841» (Marais) A awe shia Bd aah oa ae oe
Flesh and Blood........1119° ta aaa le ores)
’ Butter i. wea fia 1123
ef Flesh............. 1118 (Luering) Gsfeals 11228
ersten agrees eh es ane Ca ef Clean............. 667° (Crannell)
ete IES Sie nea (Easton) ef Coriander......... 7102
Flesh-pot.............. 1119» cf Fitches...........1117* (Masterman)
ef Food............. 1121> (Eager) cf Flesh-pot......... 1119>
Flies Goat. ... 0.2.6.2... . 1123
ef Fly, Fhes.......... 1120 (Day) ef Honey............ 14185 (Patch)
ef Plagues of Egypt. ..2404> (Kyle) Leguminous plants .. . 1122
Pin Gs set nccun sess 1119* (Day) ef Locust............ 1907 (Day)
ef Rock. ............ 2596* (Day) ef Meal.............2013°
ef Stone, Stones. .....2856* (Day) cf Meals, Meal-time.. .2013> (Eager)
Float (Flote) CEMA erie ace 2051 (N. Isaacs)
ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol) ceil): nes seers 2052 (Patch)
Flock CHOU ees ack Cu eratis 2182> (Patch)
ef. @attle >. .f lowaehas 583 (Day) ef Pot. eee ce tenees pan (Betteridge)
Plood ma geen tare eae 1120" (Day) Primitive habits...... eon
of Deluge of Noah. . . .821> (Wright) Gh alte rane oe eae)
ef Geological Theory SHC GD sa oo ea 1128
a (K Of trees... 0.2.00... 1122
OL nce e aie 230 (Kyle) ce
Floor cf Uncleanness...... .3036* (Williams)
: b
ef House............ 1434 (A. C. Dickie) CURE er eae oe ne)
ef Threshing-floor.... 2975» (Patch) CeMUnE teas irae a0eoes ast)
Flote (Float) ayn Fool, Folly............ 11249 (W. L. Walker)
Lee : cf Wisdom.......... 30892 (Easton)
ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol) Foolery.......----05-- 1125¢ (W. L. Walker)
Flour FOOt sgt esedesids shame 11259 (Luering)
ef Bread............ 514° (Eager) Footgear............-- 8792 (Eager)
cf Food...........-- 1121» (Hager) ef Shoe, Shoe-latchet. .2779 (Easton)
Flourish..............- 11208 (W. L. Walker) Footman
ef Almond........... 100° (Masterman) ef War..............3069 (Nicol)


3242 GENERAL INDEX


Footstool............. 1126 (Doolan)

ef Neck... 0.0... 002. 2129 (Luering)
WOM Sindee ayuderen tetas 1126 (W. L. Walker)
WOPAY 6 owe eine ne 1126>

CE Wearctisc shoe eek 3069° (Nicol)
Forbear............... 11265 (W. L. Walker)
Forbearance........... 1126 (W. L. Walker)
Morbid vis eacewsacen 6 11278 (W. L. Walker)
HOLCESS. onticactis oa arn aes 11272
POrd 2g Siiscicne ae weston 11278 (Day)

ef Jordan............ 1732» (Wright)
Forecast.........-.-4. 1127> (W. L. Walker)
Forefather............. 1127
Forefront.............. 11275 (W. L. Walker)
Forego

ef Forgo............ 1135>
Forehead.............. 1127> (Luering)

ef Face............. 1085> (Luering)

CHE AW ie eee SS le 29188


Foreign Divinities
cf Gods (Strange)... . .12725 (Betteridge)
Foreigner ............. 1128
ef Alien............. 97 (Hirsch)
ef Stranger and So-
journer in the OT.. .2865* (Wiener)
Foreknow, Foreknowl-


COBO iach kc aisc alec 1128+ (Hodge)
And foreordination . . .1129>

ef Knowledge........ 1815» (Orr)
ef Omniscience....... 21912 (Vos)


ef Predestination..... 24358 (J. Lindsay)


Foreordain, Foreordi-
nation............-. 11318 (Orr); 1129 (Hodge)
cf Choose......-.... 6125 (Rees)
ef Election.......... 925» (Dunelm)


ef Judas as Betrayer. .1766> (Kerr)
ef Predestination..... 2435" (J. Lindsay)


ef Providence........ 2476» (Tillett)

cf Purpose of God... .2510#
Forepart.............- 1131
Forerunner............ 11312 (W. Evans)


cf John the Baptist. . .1708 (Miller)


Foresail
ef Ships and Boats... .27749 (Nicol)


Foreship
cf Forepart.......... 1131
ef Ships and Boats... .27748 (Nicol)
Foreskin............-- 1131» (Luering)
cf Circumcision...... 656> (T. Lewis)
ef Concision......... 696
Porestiec ses ee ee 1132° (Masterman)
ef Botany........... 505° (Masterman)
cf Thicket........... 29728
Forest of Ephraim...... 963°
ef Ephraim.......... 963> (Ewing)
Foretell, Foretold ...... 1132
cf Prophecy......... 2459» (Orelli)
Forfeit necs 28s Sek aes 11328 (W. L. Walker)
Forge, Forger.......... 1132> (W. L. Walker)


Forget, Forgetful....... 1132 (W. L. Walker)


Forgiveness............ 1132> (Morro)
cf Absolution. ....... 24° (Jacobs)
And atonement....... 11355
ef Atonement... ...627> (Orr)
ef Blasphemy........ 485° (Rees)
Etymology.......... 1182
Ch Hopes 2 ssc 08 1419> (Easton)
cf Keys, Power of.....1794* (Carver)
ef Lawin NT........ 18448 (M’Caig)
Limitations.......... 1134
OT teaching......... 1134
Pagan and Jewish
ideas..........--- 11332
ef Remission........ 2557» (Jacobs)
cf Salvation......... 2668" (Easton)
Teaching of Jesus... .. 11338
OTRO ain mare eee a 1135»
PODS erpesits ec 30 GAe OOO 11368
HOP 4, fete ea cea 11362 (W. L. Walker)
FOTMEDS 2 ede a: Kets eras 11362 (W. L. Walker)
Fornication
cf Crimes...........745 (Hirsch)
Forswear
ef Crimes........... 745» (Hirsch)
POrtis jk vated cies ee 1136> (Nicol)
Forth2< iad sateen 1136 (W. L. Walker)
Fortification. .......... 1136 (Nicol)
cf Canaan........... 5492 (Sayce)
CE CIY 26 tie Sis Fe 6628 (A. C. Dickie)
ef Corner-stone.......721 (Mack)
Gates? osc ee tha many 11388
cf Gate...........1175 (Easton)
cf Gezer............. 12228 (Masterman)
ef Hold............. 14032
ef Jerusalem......... 1595> (Masterman)
Masonry............ 1138"
Recent excavations. . .1137*
ef Siege ..........--. 27868 (Nicol)
Towers............. 1137
Welles oeteciencs 1137
Fortified (Fenced) Cities 1136® (Nicol)
Fortress. ........2 2000 1136> (Nicol)
Fortress of Masada..... 8082 (Wright)
Fortunatus............ 11418
Fortune. ............46. 11418
cf Divination ........ 860° (T. W. Davies)
MOrtyed Mele ey a 11412
CE BOUT Santis taeteniel 11428 (W. L. Walker)
ef Number.......... 2157 (Smith)
Forum} i3.. o3 ecee Na ee 11415
Forum (Appii)......... 11418


ef Market of Appins.. 209 (Allen)
Forward, Forwardness.. .1141" (W. L. Walker)
Rouleess ives seats 11415 (W. L. Walker)
Foundation............ 1141° (Orr)
Foundation Sacrifices

cf Palestine, Recent


Exploration........ 2228 (Cobern)
Founder
ef Goldsmith.........12758 (Patch)
ef Refiner...........2545* (Patch)


GENERAL INDEX 3243
Fountain.............. 1141 (Day) Fried
cf Cistern, Well, Pool, of Bread. ........... 514> (Eager)
Aqueduct......... 657 (A. C. Dickie) ef Food............. 1121 (Eager)

ef En-eglaim......... 944 ef Locusts........... 1907> (Day)

ef En-gedi........... 945° (Wright) Friend, Friendship... ...1146* (Clippinger)

ef En-rogel.......... 953> (Masterman) Friends, Chief Friends . .1146*

: ee sae REA ae ee (Joy) Fringes... 0... .....408 1146> (E. D. Isaacs)
ee oe 3081* (Day) ef Dress............. 875 (Eager)
Fountain Gate chem 6.82.5. Pes 13749 (Eager)

ef Jerusalem......... 1606> (Masterman) ef Phylactery........ 2392» (Mack)

OUD eet ea ett yao 11428 (W. L. Walker) ef Tassel............ 2917> (Caldecott)

Four Hundred. ........1142» EGC ARE 50:9 sac svneg eras 1147¢ (E. D. Isaacs)
Of Four i) ssa ne 1142> (W. L. Walker) ef Dress..........-.. 875» (Eager)

Four Thousand. ....... 1142° RrOe tenets ae 1147 (Day)

CHB OUN: cys. See eka 1142> (W. L. Walker) ef Plagues of Egypt... 2404» (Kyle)
Fourfold.............. 11425 Frontier............006 11474
Fourscore...........-. 1142° Frontlets.............. 11476

ef Four.............1142> (W. L. Walker) ef Phylactery........2392 (Mack)

cf Number.......... 2157° (Smith) Bist coast ae ca aaa 11474 (Joy)
Foursquare............ 1142> (W. L. Walker) Frowardness........... 114°7> i
Fourteen.............. 1142 Bitit sete tots eee 1147

ef Number.......... 2157: (Smith) NA: Apple............ 209° (Masterman)
Fourth Part........... 1142» ef Botany...........505 (Masterman)

ef Four............. 1142 (W. L. Walker) CE BIG es Sinaia kanes 1108 (Masterman)
Bowls fee Ak ioe kia 1142> (W. L. Walker) ef Food. ............ 1122 (Eager)
Fowl (Fatted) ef Vine.............. 3049> (Masterman)

ef Fat (in sacrifice) ...1099> (Luering) ef Wine............. 3086> (Easton)

cf Fowl is s294 viens 1142> (W. L. Walker) Frustrate...........06. 1147> (W. L. Walker)
Fowler... o.0.4 sees 1143° (Stratton-Porter) Frying-pan............ 1147

ef Hunting.......... 14408 (Smith) ef Bread............ 514> (Hager)

ef Snare............. 28192 (Stratton-Porter) CE Rane. cu ue dandainnces 2237° (Betteridge)
OX eee ratte tal eeatoas 1143 (Day) Tuel ett pe das sha eee 1147 (Doolan)

ef Dragon........... 873" (Day) Fugitive... 2.0... 0.00.. 11484

ef Jackal............ 15482 (Day) Plitls fesse edie aanacl 1148 (W. L. Walker)
Fragment............. 11442 (W. L. Walker) Fuller... soeedescetec8 11488 (Patch)
YAM Sy. 06 6 bos ek see a 1144> (Luering) ef Wool............. 3104> (Patch)
Frank Mountain Fuller’s Field.......... 1148+ (Masterman)

ef Jerusalem......... 1611 (Masterman) ef Gihon............ 12285 (Masterman)
Frankincense.......... 1144> (Masterman) ef Jerusalem......... 1608 (Masterman)

ef Incense........... 1466> (Orr) Fuller’s Fountain....... 114g
Frankly...........-.-. 1145" ef En-rogel..........953° (Masterman)
Fray... 6-0 e seers 1145" Pulnesece ce aoc en 2 1148> (Rutherfurd)

ef War........-.. ++: 3069 (Nicol) ef Gnosticism........ 1240" (Rutherfurd)
Freekled Spot.....-...- He Funeral... .........0.. 1149»

ef Leprosy........... 18672 (Macalister) Of Bilal osetia 5298 (Eager)
. ef Spot, Spotted...... 2846 (Macalister) Furlong _. 1149»
ice Uae Pane te 2950* cf Weights and Meas-

‘] EW

oe ae 612> (Rees) - (vig ane ere tee He isa

of Will... 00... 0.00-- 30852 (W. L. Walker) WIMACE. eee eee = (Hager)
ee Ore 11458 Furnaces, Tower of the. .1149'

Wiese aman ef Jerusalem......... 1595» (Masterman)

of as ee et Cee 27994 (McConnell) Furnish ara Pee ae rs te 1149 (W. L. Walker)
Pry a s.ccoeta es 1145 (W. L. Walker) Furniture. ............ BREN
Free Will ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)

es a ee ee 2191> (Vos) ef Tabernacle........ aes (Caldecott ; Orr)
Praawillioteting. ¢204 1145 ef Temple........... 29302 (Caldecott; Orr)
Freewoman...........- 1145» Furrow. Esa ene ci Sea 11508 (Patch)
Frequent............-. 1145 (W. L. Walker) ef Agriculture........ 75° (Patch)

Lh eer aren 1145 (W. L. Walker) of Plow.............2409* (Patch)


1145» (W. L. Walker)


Further, Furtherance....1150 (W. L. Walker)


3244 GENERAL INDEX


Pury. Ae ee ay 1150

CEAN PEP 9.6: ean wea 135" (Farr)

ef Wrath............ 3113* (W. Evans)
Huturevs.4 Biber ute ot 1150


cf Eschatology, NT. ..979% (Vos)
Future Life
cf Greece, Religion in. .1303* (Fairbanks)


Gaalics cathe Maes 11503"

ef Abimelech........ 11» (Mack)
Gaash erie nase do 1150*

ef Ephraim, Mount. . .963>

ef Timnath-heres..... 2983" (Ewing)
Gaba ep sets nce ees 1150*

cf Geba............. 1180° (Ewing)
Gabael (Apoc).........1150°

cf Gabrias (Apoc).....11518
Gabatha (Apoc)........ 11505
Gabbaleis cas 1150
Gabbatha............. 1150° (Masterman)

cf Judgment Seat... . .1778"

cf Pavement......... 2292>

ef Pilate, Pontius..... 2397> (J. M. Wilson)

cf Praetorium........ 2428> (Masterman)
Gabbe, Gabdes (Apoc). . 1151°

Ch Geba scien ay 11809 (Ewing)
Gabrias (Apoc)........ 11515

cf Gabael (Apoc)..... 1150
Gabriels icy cs ponies 11518 (Orr)

ef Angel............ 132> (J. M. Wilson)
Gad (tribe)

History............. 1151»
Gad (verb)............ 1152»
Gad, God of Good Luck 1152" (Stearns)

ef Astrology......... 295° (Maunder)

ef Meni............. 20338
Gad, Seer of David..... 11528 (E. D. Isaacs)
Gad, Son of Jacob...... 1151s (Ewing)
Gad, Valley of (River of) 1152’ (Ewing)

CHAT A che ica hite 211° (Ewing)
Gadaras”./siooe sat aekts 1152» (Ewing)

ef Decapolis......... 8159 (Ewing)

cf Gerasa............ 1217 (Ewing)

ef Gergesenes........ 12188
Gadarenes............. 11535

ef Gadara........... 1152» (Ewing)

cf Gergesenes........ 1218
Gaddiz peel ageihi ees 11538
Gaddiel............... 1153
Gaddis (Apoc)......... 11538
Gadhb and Meni........ 2998
Gade as sires Sate 11535
Gadites............... 1153»
Galati ariits ick aero 1153»
Gahan. cc5 tesea cating ees 1153

ef Geddur (Apoc).. . . .1181
GI sn ted EUR eek 1153»
GBI ee valned eae re he 1153 (Williams)
Gainsay, Gainsayer, Gain-

BAYNE eiclae es 1153 (W. L. Walker)
Gals rset Pak ork oe 11549 (Kerr)

ef John, Epp. of...... 1718 (Law)


Galaad (Gilead). .......11542

Galals. 23.33.02 00.0 maak 11548

Galatia... 00.0... ce eee 11542 (Ramsay)
Churches of......... 11558


Evangelization of... ..11558

cf Galatians, Ep. to. 1155» (G. G. Findlay)
Gaulish kingdom..... 1154
Geographical and po-


tical ee eee eats 1154
cf Location of....... 1159> (G. G. Findlay)
cf Paul, the Apostle.. .22834 (A. T. Robertson)
ef Region............ 25505
Roman Province...... 1154
Galatians in Asia Minor.275® (Calder)
cf Galatia........... 1154 (Ramsay)
Paul’s use of ........ 1155


Galatians, Epistle to the 1155 (G. G. Findlay)
Antiochs, the two... .. 1162


Authorship.......... 1156
Barnabas in.........1161>
Characteristics of... . .11583
Contents............ 1156"
Controversial features

Obie tacacee ees 1157
Destination and date. .1159*
ef Galatia........... 1154* (Ramsay)
cf Law ins. cca. 1850" (M’Caig)
Literature on........ 1162»


thians............ 1158

Relations to Romans. .1158*

Time notesin........ 11606
Galbanum............. 11635. (Masterman)
Galeéd ios ey eiacne a bs 11635 (Ewing)
Galgala (Apoc).........11634

ef Gilgal............ 12318 (Wright)
Galilean

cf Galilee............ 1163" (Ewing)
Galilee..........0..04. 1163® (Ewing)

Ancient boundaries. . . 1163*

cf Asher............. 268 (Ewing)

Description of........ 1164

cf Galilee, Sea of..... 1165 (Ewing)

ef Issachar........... 1541 (Ewing)

cf Naphtali.......... 2118 (Ewing)

In NT times......... 1164

In OT times......... 1163>

ef Palestine.......... 2221 (Conder)

Population.......... 1165

Products of.......... 1164»


Zebulun and Naphtali 1163
Galilee, Mountain in... .11658


Galilee, Sea of......... 1165* (Ewing)
ef Capernaum........ 566° (Ewing)
Description of....... 1165"

Fishin ee. .4eeeclolne 1166
ef Fishng......... 1116* (Patch)
cf Galilee............ 1163* (Ewing)


ef Gennesaret, Land of 1214 (Ewing)


GENERAL INDEX


Galilee, Sea of—continued


ef Jordan............ 1733° (Wright)

Stormson........... 11662
Callen enews aan 1166 (Masterman)
Gallant o.oo kc ae. 1167°

ef Ships and Boats... .2774% (Nicol)
Gallery... 0... 0.....0.. 11674 (N. Isaacs)

ef Palestine..........2218> (Conder)

ef Temple........... 2935 (Caldecott; Orr)
Galley

ef Ships and Boats... :2774 (Nicol)
Gallina 66 ora 1167 (Masterman)
Gallo se tds ei ntne ees 1167> (Kerr)


ef Felix Antonius..... 1105° (Kerr)
ef Festus, Porcius..... 1107* (Kerr)


ef Lysias............ 1943 (Hutchison)
Gallows

ef Hanging.......... 1335 (Hirsch)

ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)
Gamael (Apoc)......... 11684
Gamaliel.............. 1168+ (Kerr)

ef Theudas..........2972" (Kerr)
Game + vara tke acne 1123» (Eager)
Games.............055 1168 (Smith)

Archery............. 11692

Beast fighting........ 11728

For children......... 1168»

Dancing............ 1169»

DiC 8 6 sn hoo vtia ae ohne 11698

ef Discus............ 854° (W. L. Walker)

ef Ecclesiastes........ 894» (Beecher)

ef Ecclesiasticus...... 2806" (T. W. Davies)

Of Greece and Rome. .1171+

ef Herald............ 1375"

Proverbs. . .... 1170

ef Proverbs, Book of .2471 (Genung)

Racing............-. 1172»

Riddles............. 1170°

ef Tale..c ee. ces cea 29049 (T. Lewis)
Gammadim............ 1173°
Gamul................ 1173°
Gangrene............. 1173 (Macalister)
Gap icuiact sedge Seka eee 1173
Garis telaue a eta 11748

Cf :Gas). si ees cies 1175
Garden. 240s se es 1174 (Patch)

ef Irrigation......... 1492» (Patch)

ef Jerusalem......... 16032 (Masterman)

ef Paradise.......... 22468 (Wright)


Garden of Gethsemane
ef Olives, Mount of. ..2187 (Masterman)
Garden, The King’s .. . .1175 (Orr)


ef Jerusalem......... 1595" (Masterman)
Garden-house.......... 11758

ef Beth-haggam.......445>

ef En-gannim........ 945° (Ewing) .
Gardener.............. 11759

ef Watchman... ...’. .3074* (Christie)
Gareb................ 11758

ef Gibeath.....: Ea Wee 1225 (Ewing)

CELE GE cetiek ed ean sete 14915 (Farr)


Gareb, Hill of ......... 1175 (Masterman)


Garizim

ef Gerizim, Mount... .1218* (Ewing)
Garlands igo iaiade4e 1175* (Doolan)

ef Crown............ 762* (Raffety)
Garhi eset cod intend Sem 1175> (Masterman); 11228

(Eager)

Garment

ef Dress............. 875» (Eager)
Garmite............... 1175"

ef Keilah............ 1791" (Masterman)
Garner Misien cg hake 1175
Gamish............... 1175° (Reeve)
Garrison

ef War.............. 3069% (Nicol)
Gasaie i etre en eee 1175
Gashmu............005 1175

ef Geshem........... 1219> (Reeve)
Gatam.............00. 1175
Gates tc etle esti aiattek 1175» (Easton)

Cf Cityin eee knead casted 662 (A. C. Dickie)

ef Fortification....... 11388 (Nicol)

ef Jerusalem......... 1606> (Masterman)

Ch Lilt seo heve oe 1890 (Easton)

ef Tabernacle........ 2887> (Caldecott; Orr)

ef Temple........... 29308 (Caldecott; Orr)
Gate, The Beautiful... ..1176® (Caldecott)

ef Gate, Hast........ 1176 (Caldecott)

ef Temple........... 2937 (Caldecott; Orr)
Gate, Corner.......... 1176

ef Jerusalem......... 1606" (Masterman)
Gate, East............ 1176> (Caldecott)

ef Gate, The Beautiful. 1176 (Caldecott)

ef Harsith........... 13414

cf Shecaniah......... 2754» (Wolf)

ef Tabernacle........ 2887» (Caldecott; Orr)
Gate, Fountain

ef Jerusalem......... 1606> (Masterman)


Gate of Hammiphkad
ef Jerusalem Gates... .1602" (Masterman)
Gate, Horse -


ef Jerusalem......... 16079 (Masterman)
Gate, Sur

ef Jerusalem......... 16068 (Masterman)
Gate, Valley........... 11774

ef Jerusalem......... 1607° (Masterman)
Gath ei atest 11778 (Porter)

ef Palestine, Recent

Exploration........ 22274 (Cobern)

ef Wine............. 3086 (Easton)
Gather joie teeth ey 1177 (W. L. Walker)
Gatherer, Gathering... .1177' (W. L. Walker)
Gath-hepher........... 11788 (Ewing)
Gath-rimmon..........1178 (Ewing)

cf Ibleam........... 14462 (Ewing)
Gaulonitis............. 11788

ef Golan............ 1273 (Ewing)
Galilee a die bvecawiauee 1178+ (Hutchison)
(OL: Rian ae arene a aremencrer ae 1178 (Porter)

ef Agzah............ 345>

cf Gazathites (Gazites)11792
Gazar (Gezer)......... 1222> (Masterman)


3245


3246 GENERAL INDEX
re al
Gazara (Gazzam)....... 1179* (Ewing) Geliloth.............-- 11838 (Ewing)
ef Gazera.........., 1179% Gem ica onl as ecnes 1183*
ch Geezer oof oem 1222* (Masterman) cf Stones, Precious... .2856* (Fletcher)
Gazathites (Gazites). .. .1179° Gemalli............60. 1183
ef Gaza.............1178> (Porter) Gemara
Gazelle...............1179* (Day) cf Talmud........... 2904» (Strack)
of Deer..........+5. Bley, Gemariah............- 11836
CE Goat even eee oes 1248 (Day) Geman
GEE pe ocbtele soe cee Day) EPG leas cote ate 1170 (Smith)
rel Bt LOOMS yes a ne eee (Day) cf Number.......... 2162° (Smith)
Le ea eee ear eC ee fr, oe 1183° (W. L. Walker
ef Gezer..........045 12225 (Masterman) Gender.......... 5 f ( CG 11) )
cr ee ee 1179» Genealogy Ree ieee es peg (Cranne
ef Gazara........... 1179 (Ewing) of Abiud............ 18
Gases 1179» cf Genealogy of Jesus
se ee Clrsicnc ris. Sere; 1196* (Sweet)
Gazing-stock.......... 1179» (W. L. Walker) : ;
i i a Interpretation....... 1184
Gazites (Gazathites)....1179 ist in 1 C “ 11918
Gazzam (Gazara)....... 11808 =e a es ee MB 1189"
Cobar g ciao ara 1180" (Ewing) Perea | pe nee
ef Gibeah........... 1225 (Ewing) as a ee Ceres ne hae
re Daly cccaa oer: 1180 (Porter) SY CROSS ee ‘
: b List in 1 Kings....... 1191
cf Gebalites..........1180" (Hovey) Liskee Luke 11958
ge eae ae List in Matthew... .1195°
ef Tammuz.......... 2908 (Porter) Tash Neh craic 1195
ee ‘i ice eae aa, oe (Porter) List in Numbers... ... 1189°
pete ee ys ‘ List in Ruth......... 1190
Geber (Ben-geber)...... 1180 (Downer) Rar “
Cebim 11805 List in 2 Samuel...... 1190
ie aga be lar’ ae: 11819 ef Patriarch.......... 22648 (Orr)
amare a Senne aes ef Pentateuch........ 2309 (Wiener)
ef Ferret............ 1106° (Day) auers if
ef Lizard............ 1906 (Day) Principles. .......... 1183
of Spider............ 2840 (Day) ef Shuthelah, Shuthela- S
Gedaliah............+- 1181* (Crichton) pee es ee,
ef Governor of Judah. 574* (Nicol) G is ae of ‘ ieee
ef Ishmael........... 1510° (Baur) nee Og,
Christsce testes ae 1196 (Sweet)
Re oer egies 1181 :
ae Gahar Sa inde s Se ES 1153° Comparison of  ac-
Gedeon counts............ 1197
ef Gideon........... 1226» (Schenk) pee edo eces foe a
Gederirccee sc duealeds cent 1181» cl Jesus i * (Orr
Gederah, Gederathite. . 1181» In Luke............. me
ef Gederothaim....... 11828 In Matthew. . vines 1196
ef Hedge............ 1366° (Masterman) And the Virgin-birth. 11988
Gederite ef Virgin-birth...... 30529; 30549 (Sweet)
ef Geder............ 1181 : General, Generally... ...1199° (W. L. Walker)
Gederoth ............. 1181 (Ewing) Generation. ........... 11992 (Crannell)
Gederothaim.......... 11828 Genesis... ............ 1199 (Méller)
ef Gederah.......... 1181 Abraham, family of. . .1207*
Geédore het eis ait tate 1181 (Ewing) Contents and connec-
ef Simeon........... 27949 (Masterman) tion. .............12008
GeGSOr a ected Stevia aeae 1124+ (Eager) Critical theory....... 12012
Ge-harashim........... 1182@ cf Day of Atonement. .324 (Méller)
ef Joab............. 1677 (Roberts) The Divine names. .. .1203>
Gelagie civic eae 11828 (Crichton) Divisions............ 1206+
Gehenna.............. 11832 (Vos) Early traditions of....12115  »
ef Eschatology of the Esau, family of....... 1208
IND ce st gach hacen alee 979» (Vos) ef Exodus, Book of .. .1056 (Miller)
C0 le (=) | Cee een ee 13718 (Orr) ef Ezekiel........... 10712 (Moller)
ef Hinnom, Valley of. .1893 (Masterman) Historicity.......... 1209
ef Jehoshaphat, Valley Isaac, family of...... 1208
OL eon 1583 (Masterman) Jacob, family of...... 12082


ef Kidron, The Brook. 1798 (Masterman)


ef Leviticus.......... 1871» (Méller)


GENERAL INDEX 3247


Genesis—continued
Mosaie authorship af-


-firmed............ 12128
Noah, family of...... 1206»
ef Pentateuch........ 23046 (Wiener)


Rejection of docu-
mentary theory... ..12025


Unity of plan........1200>

Value of............ 1213
Geneva Bible.......... 949> (Hutchison)
Gennaeus (Genneus).. . .1214>

ef Apollonius........ 200° (Hutchison)


Gennesaret, Lake of
ef Galilee, Sea of..... 1165* (Ewing)
Gennesaret, Land of... .1214> (Ewing)


ef Galilee, Sea of..... 11659 (Ewing)
Gentiles............... 1215 (Porter)
ef Grecians..........1295" (Heidel)


ef Stranger and So-
journer, in OT... . .2865* (Wiener)
Gentiles, Court of


cf Temple........... 2930* (Caldecott; Orr)
Gentiles, Isles of the... .1511>
‘Gentleness, Gentle... ...1215° (W. L. Walker)
ef Kindness.......... 17992 (W. L. Walker)
Genubath............. 1215
Geography
ef Island..........:.1511* (Day)
ef Negeb............ 2130° (Masterman)
cf Palestine.......... 2208 (Conder)


ef Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches)
ef World, Cosmological 3106* (Orr)
Geology of Palestime. .. .1215' (Day)


‘ef Jerusalem......... 1596> (Masterman)
ef Jordan Valley...... 1735* (Wright)
ef Palestine.......... 2209 (Conder)
CUROCK So bsc8 chee 2596° (Day)

Geon
cf Gihon............1228 (Masterman)


Georgian Versions
cf Versions, Georgian. .3048* (Easton)


Gephyrun............. 12178

ef Ephron........... 964 (Masterman)
Geran fe tece Mee cee 1217%
Geral auc eirakg 2.0% 1217

ef Weights and Meas-

UNOS viel asia NA 3079 (Porter)

Gerar scare guaw aaces s 4217» (Porter)
Gerasa, Gerasenes...... 1217> (Ewing)


ef Gadara (Gadarenes) .1152> (Ewing)
ef Ramoth-gilead.... . 2529* (Ewing)


Gergesenes...........- 1218+
ef Gadara (Gadarenes).1152 (Ewing)
Gerizim, Mount........ 1218" (Ewing)


ef Jerusalem Hills..... 1599 (Masterman)
ef Moriah, Land of. . .2082> (Ewing)
ef Samaritans.... ...2673> (Ewing)


Geren s.o5.6 poked eRe 1219
Gerrenians............ 1219* (Hutchison)
Gershom...........-.. 1219 (EB. D. Isaacs)


Gershon, Gershonites.. . .1219* (E. D. Isaacs)
Gerson (Gershom)...... 1219


Geruth Chimham....... 1219
Gerzitcs
cf Girzites (Gizrites). . 1233
Geshan’ csc acetic 12196
Geshem............... 1219 (Reeve)
Geshur..........000005 1219 (Ewing)
Geshurites
ef Geshur........... 1219 (Ewing)
Gesture... 0. ...0..0005 12205 (W. L. Walker)
ef Attitudes......... 329 (W. W. Davies)
Get, Getting........... 1221" (W. L. Walker)
Gether ee. nhc eek 1221»
Gethsemane........... 1221» (Masterman)
cf Temptation of
Christ............ 2943 (Anderson)
Geutel ico ak nates 12228
Geezer oe eh haa 12222 (Masterman)
ef Asherah.......... 268> (Sayce)
CE Baal at eee ass 345° (Sayce)
ef Fortification....... 11378 (Nicol)
ef Gazara........... 1179" (Ewing)
cf High Place........ 1390° (Easton)
ef Housesat......... 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
ef Jerusalem......... 1597; 1608* (Masterman)
cf Palestine, Recent
Exploration........ 2231» (Cobern)
ef Pillar............. 2398 (Orr)
ef Segub............ 2713* (Wolf)
ef Siloam............- 2791% (Masterman)
CHZION. nasil nen ate 3150> (Masterman)
Gezrites
ef Girzites (Gizrites) . . 1233
Ghost? Hissin eine 1224 (W. L. Walker)
ef Holy Spirit........ 1406* (Mullins)
Cf Spirits 22.2. ee ees 2841» (Marais)
Giahes oy tease dees 12245
Giants...... aah ater. 1224» (Orr)
ef Antediluvians......139* (Davis)
ef Sons of God. ..... .2835* (Crichton)


Giants, Valley of the
cf Rephaim, Vale of. . .2560* (Ewing)


Gibbark-.s0 sei aas 1224>
ef Gibeon........... 1225> (Ewing)
Gibbethon............. 1224 (Ewing)
Gibear sey ¢ecieay Sas 1224>
Gibeah? akeeiaks 1225 (Ewing)
ef Geba............. 1180° (Ewing)
ef Gibeath........... 1225> (Ewing)
ef Hill, Hill Country. .1392* (Masterman)
CESaulas se elses 2697> (Weir)
Gibeath............... 1225> (Ewing).
ef Ammah........... 117°
ef Gareb............ 1175"
ef Gibeah........... 1225 (Ewing)
. ef Hachilah.......... 1313»
ef Moreh............ 2082 (Ewing)
wef Tabor............ 2901% (Ewing)
Gibeathite
ef Shemaah.......... 2759»
Gib@ons.... os ce venga 1225> (Ewing)
ef Gibbar........... 1224


ef Helkath-hazzurim. . 1370 (Ewing)


GENERAL INDEX


3248
Gibeon—continued

ef Joshua............ 17462 (Roberts )
Gibeonites............. 1226>

ef Gibeon...........1225> (Ewing)
Giblites (Gebalites)..... 11808

ef Geba............. 1180* (Ewing)
Giddalti............... 1226
Giddel (Isdael)......... 1226; 1508>
Gideoni. tc kes 1226 (Schenk)

Callots tes Soke Aabtos 1226»

Defeat of Midianites. .1227>

ef Jerubbaal......... 1595


ef Judges, Book of... .1773" (Geden)
Making of ephod..... 12288


ef Palestine.......... 2213 (Conder)
Selection of army... . .1227%
Gideoni............... 12288
Gidomrs.s. 5 aissaceses or 1228
Gier-eagle............. 1228* (Stratton-Porter)
Gt ee tee aurat enter ce? 1228" (W. L. Walker)
Gift of Tongues........ 2995 (Easton)
Gifts of Healmg........ 1349° (Lambert)
ef Healing........... 13495
Gifts, Spiritual......... 2843» (Lambert)
Gahons 5s is tkes on ccat es 1228> (Masterman)
cf Bethesda.......... 444> (Masterman)
cf Fuller's Field...... 1148 Masterman)
ef Hinnom, Valley of .1393 (Masterman)
ef Jerusalem......... 1608? (Masterman)
ef Shihor............ 27688 (Kyle)
cf Siloam............ 27919 (Masterman)
ef Zion.............. 3150° (Masterman)
Gihon (River of Eden). .1228>
cf Eden............. 897 (Wright)
Gilalai eter essihs teelets 3 1229
GilbGaia.s s\fooks tees 12296 (Ewing)
Battle of.....-2..2¢00: 7935 (Weir)
ef Gilead... ......... 1229 (Ewing)
cf Well of Harod..... 1340° (Ewing)
Gilead, Balm of........ 3815 (Masterman)
Gilead (person)........ 12318
Gilead (place) ......... 1229> (Ewing)
Geology............. 1230
cf Gilboa, Mount..... 1229> (Ewing)
ef Havvoth-jair...... 13455 (Ewing)
History............. 1230
ef Jabbok........... 1546> (Ewing)
Location. ........... 12308
-ef Peraea............ 2319> (Ewing)


cf Ramoth-gilead..... 25299 (Ewing)
Gilead, Mount


cf Gilead (place) ..... 1229 (Ewing)
Gileadites............. 1231
Gilgaliesccic. eA arden 1231* (Wright)

ef Galgala........... 11633

ef Gallim............ 1167 (Masterman)
Gilohier rie s.c2 Sheek ee 1231
Gilonite

ef Giloh............. 1231
Gimel oeetheie oe 1231»

ef Alphabet.......... 103 (Richardson)
GimZ0) ove ee hed 12316


.. 1231» (Stratton-Porter)
.. .2819" (Stratton-Porter)
.. .30072 (Stratton-Porter)


Ginnethoi (Ginnethon). . 1232


Girdle


ef Dress..........-


.. .2549 (Nicol)
.. .875> (Eager)


ef Priests and Levites.2452* (Wiener)


Girgashite..........


ef Daughter......
ef Maid, Maiden. .
Girzites (Gizrites).. .
Gishpa.............
ef Hasupha.......


Gittah-hepher..........


Gittaim............
Gittites... 2.0.0.2...
Gittith 2


GIVES cetins sanescuene


Gleaning...........
ef Agriculture.....
ef Harvest........
ef Reaping.......

Gledex sich. joes Sau


Glistering..........
Glitter, Glittering...


ci God...........

In NT and Apoc. .

OT passages......

ef Shekinah.......

Use of term ......
Glowing Sand

ef Mirage........


Gnash.............


ef Lice..........


Christian antithesis


.. .12328 (Sayce)


...790* (Pollard)
... 1967 (Pollard)
.. 12388


.. .2094 (Millar)
.. .24879 (Sampey)
.. 1232 (W. L. Walker)


...1222" (Masterman)

.. 1233 (W. L. Walker)
.. 12338 (Porter)
...23884 (Porter)

.. .1234> (Orr)

...1234 (Patch)

...77% (Patch)

...1841» (Patch)

.. .2534* (Patch)

.. 12384


1234


.. .1235° (Betteridge)
.. .1235> (Betteridge)
.. 1235 (Betteridge)
...1235> (Betteridge)
.. .1235° (Betteridge)
.. 1253» (Rees)

. . .1238e


.. 20669 (Joy)

...1239> (W. L. Walker)

.. 1239 (W. L. Walker)

.. .1240* (Day)

..-1118> (Day)

.. 18879 (Day)

.. . 26886

.. 12408 (Rutherfurd); 627*
(Orr)

...65 (Kapp)


.. 063% (Riggs)
.. 12448


Gnosticism—continued


Definitions..........
ef Fulnmess...........


Harnack’s view...... :


Influence and growth. .
Its sects ............
ef Johannine Theology
In Johannine writings
In 1 John...........
ef Literature,

apostolic ..........
Modern forms.......
Nature of...........
In Pauline writings. . .
Science.............
ef Simon Magus......
Sources..........---


ef Zodlogy...........


Goat’s Hair...........


ef Almighty.........
ef Asherah..........


Attributes of

ef Omniscience.....
ef Authority of .......
ef Children of........
Definition of idea... .
Ethnic ideas of.......
ef Faithfulness of... .


Idea of, in NT.......
Divine Fatherhood..
God as King.......


GENERAL INDEX


1148 (Rutherfurd)


1245»
1246>
1697" (Law)
1243
1713* (Law)


Sub-


12425

2702 (Rutherfurd)
27979 (Rutherfurd)
1241s

1248 (W. L. Walker)
1248» (Patch)
24398 (edwards)
1248>

1595» (Masterman)
1248> (Day)

592> (Day)

8179 (Day)

1123 (Hager)


. .1179% (Day)


1797

2697 (Day)
3155* (Day)
1249»

2947> (Patch)
1249 (Patch)
13208 (Luering)
3077 (Patch)
1250

1250

1250° (Rees)
100°

268> (Sayce)


1128’ (Hodge)
334> (Rees)
608" (Rees)


. 12512


1252


.1088> (Hodge)


1100 (Orr)

1235 (Betteridge)
1406* (Mullins)
1250; 1260
12618

1262»


Metaphysical attri-


Idea of, in OT.......


1263


Course of develop-


God—continued


Idea of, in OT—continued


Names of God..... 1254
Post-exilie period . . .1258
Pre-prophetic con-
ceptions......... 1255
Prophetic period... .12572
Image of............ 12645 (Orr)
cf Anthropology... .144» (Marais)
cf Jesus Christ..... 1624 (Orr)
In Johannine theology 1697* (Law)
Knowledge of........ 1251
Names of..........- 1264» (Mack)
ef Adonai......... 578
cf Almighty....... 100+


cf El-Elohe-Israel..


ef Genesis..........
ef Highest.........
cf Lord of Hosts...


Ty OTM ees

cf War, Man of....

ef Zurishaddai.....
cf Patience........
cf Pauline Theology. .
cf Philosophy........
cf Self-revelation of. .
ef Son of............
ef Trinity. ..........
ef The Unknown.....
cf Wisdom of.......
cf Zoroastrianism. ....


cf Babylonia.........
cf Calf, Golden.......
ef Chemosh..........
ef Dagon............


.9275 (Mack)


1265
1203" (Méller)
1390 (W. L. Walker)


1919


2112" (W. L. Walker)


. .2113* (Davis)


12675


. .2188> (Vos)


1265°


80723

8159

. .2263> (W. L. Walker)
. 22899 (Easton)


2384» (Rees)


.692° (Tisdall)


2826 (Stalker)
30128 (Warfield)
3037 (Easton)


.3092* (Easton)


3157 (Easton)-
12688

1268° (Warfield)
1270° (W. Evans)
1270 (Orr)

1270 (Reeve)


. 61° (Beecher)


268? (Sayce)
269% (Sayce)


358° (Clay)
298° (Maunder)
601" (Nicol)
776 (Margolis)


cf God, Names of, in


Genesis...........


cf God, Names of, in
T


cf God(s), Strange....
ef Idolatry..........
Meaningin NT......
Meaning in OT......
cf Molech, Moloch....
ef Nergal............
ef Nibhaz...........
ef Rimmon..........
ef Sons of God, OT...


1203¢ (Miller)


1264> (Mack)
12725 (Betteridge)
14474 (Cobern)


2504 (N. Isaacs)
28358 (Crichton)


3249


3250 GENERAL INDEX
Gods—continued Goodness—continued
ef Succoth-benoth. . . .2869* (Pinches) ef Good, Chief....... 12782 (W. L. Walker)
ef Tartak......... . 2917 ef Kindness.......... 17994 (W. L. Walker)
ef Teraphim......... 1455* (Cobern) Goods fences 12799 (W. L. Walker)
God(s), Strange........ 12728 (Betteridge) Gopher Wood......... 1279» (Masterman)
ef Gods... cece. < 1270> (Reeve) ef Deluge of Noah... .821 (Wright)
Godspeed............. 1272> (W. L. Walker) Gordon’s Calvary
ef Hail (interjection). .1319° ef Golgotha.......... 1275> (Masterman)
Godless at dee oe 1272» (Breslich) Goren ieseee ae 4 1279 (W. L. Walker)
ef Avenge .......... 340* (Breslich) Gorgeous, Gorgeously . . .1279° (W. L. Walker)
ef Murder........... 2094 (Hirsch) GOrgetie. sands Ae eke. 1279» (Nicol)
cf Refuge, Cities of .. .2545 (Ewing) ef Armor, Arms...... 2512 (Nicol)
cf Revenge, Revenger . 2587 (Breslich) Gorgias... 0. ......000. 1280 (Hutchison)
Goma Me Se 12732 (Reeve) Gortyna.............. 12808
ef Magog............ 1965> ef Crete...........-. 744» (Calder)
Gol eon otto 12738 Goshen. .... 0.0... 1280° (Conder)
Going, Goings......... 12737 (W. L. Walker) Character.......... eee
Golan, Gaulonitis...... 1273> (Ewing) ef Etham............ ea (Conder)
ef Refuge, Cities of. . .2545° (Ewing) cf Exodus. poser cade ee (Conder)
Cold nce ete: 12749 (Patch) PEON ee ce ie
ef Metals............ 20442 (Patch) Meaning. San a saad ;
ef Peacock.......... 2294 (Stratton-Porter) cf Pi-hahiroth........ ay (Kyle)
ef Phoenicia......... 2388 (Porter) ef Pithom........... 2401> (Conder)
ef Raamses, Rameses. .2520 (Conder)
OR Cob ect arr aris CP Zoane sss ler eas 31532 (Conder)
CE ReUOIORY sain gers poo a aunder) Gogeietca ce ee 12812 (Bauslin); 465» (Orr)
e oF a panes Tae ef Jesus Christ....... 1626 (Orr)
c Olatry. wir. Gas obern


ef Johannine Theology 1695> (Law)


Golden Candlestick rear 558° (Orr) ef John, Gospel of. . ..1720% (Iverach)
Golden City........... 12752 Melee Sab:

Golden Number........ 12759 Eel gea “519040: (Gawany
ef Astronomy. .......300® (Maunder) Brak en ent set 1910+ (Smith)
Goldsmith. ............ 1275s (Patch) ef. Matthew, Gospel of 2009® (Schodde)

ef Crafts............734* (Patch) Gospel according to the


ef Founder..........


1141»
1275* (Masterman)


. 1611 (Masterman)


Hebrews............ 1281%
ef Apocryphal Gospels. 195 (Hutchison)
ef Matthew, Gospel of 2010° (Schodde)


Meaning . 12759 Gospel of Infancy
Sites okie cottons 1275» ef Apocryphal Gospels 195* (Hutchison)
CE Skull sche. os ken 28 2814? Gospels of the Childhood 1281»
Goliaths ong aos ele 1276> (Reeve) ef Apocryphal Gospels.195* (Hutchison)
ef Elhanan.......... 9282 (Sampey) Gospels, Spurious....... 1281»
ef Lahmi............ 1821> ef Apocryphal Gospels 195* (Hutchison)
Gomere2.2 6 Adhare eek 1276 (Berry) Gospels, The Synoptic.. .1281° (Iverach)
Gomer, Wife of Hosea. . .1276 (Reeve) ef Bible... .......... 459» (Orr)
cf Hoseanens aaa 1424 (J. Robertson) ef Canon of NT...... 563" (Riggs)
Gomorrah............. 12772 (Wright) ef Chronology of NT..644> (Armstrong)
ef Arabah........... 211 (Wright) Datescc Se ee aed 1284s
ef Cities of the Plain. .660° (Wright) Ethics of Jesus in... . .1285%
ef Dead Sea... ...... 8015 (Wright) Influence of oral in-
Good). key het ee 12778 (W. L. Walker) struction
ef Good, Chicf....... 12782 (W. L. Walker) ef Catechist........ 5826 (Gerberding)


ef Goodness.........


12793 (W. L. Walker)


Jesus as a thinker in. . 1286


Good, Chief... ........12782 (W. L. Walker) ef Jesus Christ. ....1626> (Orr)

Cf Good... cence 1277* (W. L. Walker) cf Johannine Theology 1695 (Law)
Goodliness............ 12788 ef John, Gospel of. . . .17202 (Iverach)
Goodly eecncie te Sele 1278 (W. L. Walker) ef Justificationin. .... 1785° (Faulkner)
Goodly Trees.......... 1278 (Masterman) ef Kingdom of God in. 1805 (Stalker)

ef Feast of Tabernacles 11033 (E. D. Isaacs) ef Luke, Gospelof..... 19389 (A. T. Robertson)
Goodman............. 1279 (Reeve) cf Matthew, Gospel of 2011 (Schodde)
Goodness.............. 12798 (W. L. Walker) Meaning of term..... 1281

ef Good............, 12778 (W. L. Walker) Messianic hope... . .. .12853


GENERAL INDEX 3251
Gospels, The Synoptic—continued Graecia
Messianic idea....... 1284» ef Greece. ........... 1295? (Heidel)
Oral tradition. ...... 12839 CRE ances Lane 1292% (Patch)
Order of events....... 1283 Grain
ef Person of Christ... .2344° (Warfield) cf Agriculture........ 75> (Patch)
Problem of sources... . 1282 ef Garner........... 1175
Purpose of.......... 1286 Granary
ef Relation to Fourth ef Garner...........1175>
Gospel. ........... 1722° (Iverach) cf Store-houses...... 28634
Relation of OT to... .1285%. Grapes
Time cf Food.............1122 (Hager)
ef Chronology of NT 644 (Armstrong) ef Vine...........0.. 3049° (Masterman)
ef Jesus Christ. .... 1626» (Orr) Grapes, Wild..........1293
Gothic Version........ 30482 (Easton) ef Vine.............. 3050* (Masterman)
Gotholias............. 1286» Gras pre ok. cee 1293 (Miller)
Gothoniel............. 1286° CE PIZ6 e.eoce en hd 24574 (Edwards)
Gourd hig eee cals 1286 (Masterman) cf Robber, Robbery... 2595> (Easton)
Gourd, Wild...... aes 1286> (Masterman) Grass ait ees Pe 1293 (Masterman)
Government........... 12875 (Heidel) cE Herbs soe cence 1375 (Masterman)
Fiscal institutions... . .1288> Grasshopper
Greek ef Locust............ 19088 (Day)
cf Asmoneans...... 283* (Dosker) Grate, Grating......... 1293» (Caldecott).
Later code Grave
cf Deuteronomy... .835> (Robinson) ef Burial............ 529 (Eager)
Later periods........ 12899 Grave (adjective)
Nomadic period. ..... 12879 ef Gravity........... 1293 (W. L. Walker)
Period of judges...... 1287 Grave, Graving
Period of the mon- CE Gratts sane sens Rats 734* (Patch)
archy’... 6556453): 1288 Gravel) cnc... .5ce ted 1293 (Day)
ef Presbyter.........2437% (Mack) Gravity. ......0....0.. 1293> (W. L. Walker)
Roman Gray
ef Governor........ 1289» (Heidel) ef Colors. ........... 674° (Patch)
ef Senate, Senator . .2719> (Heidel) Grease... ..-ccceceeves 1294
Governor.......--..655 1289> (Heidel) ChB Sti ncs eka ee Ps 1099> (Luering)
ef Felix Antonius..... 1105° (Kerr) cf Gross............. 13074
cf Festus, Porcius.. ...1107* (Kerr) Great, Greatness... ....12948 (W. L. Walker)
ef Government....... 1289+ (Heidel) Great Bear (Arcturus).. .313
Inte es Sucensc kre as 1289> Greaves
InOD sc ates 1289> cf Armor, Arms...... 2512 (Nicol)
ef Pilate............ 23962 (J. M. Wilson) Grecians, Greeks....... 1294» (Heidel)
ef Prince............2453 (Baur) ef Gentiles.......... 12154 (Porter)
cf Procurator........2457® (Allen) cf Hellenism......... 1371 (Heidel)
ef Tirshatha......... 2986 (R. D. Wilson) Greece, Graecia........ 1295* (Heidel)
Goyim Climate............. 12962
ef Goiim............ 12734 The country......... 12952
Gozan.... 0... e ee ees 12908 (Orr) cf Divination........ 860° (T. W. Davies)
ef Habor...........-1813> (Pinches) cf Dreams........... 8748 (Clippinger)
ef Halah............1821% (Pinches) Geology and topog- :
Graba raphy............. 1296
ef Aggaba...........71> ef Javan............ 15724 (Roberts)
GIACOWA 4 is Het eee icee 12902 (Easton) Greece, Religion in An-
ef Holy Spirit........ 1406 (Mullins) ClENG ies eva 1297 (Fairbanks)
In Justification... ....1291 Divination.......... 1300°
ef Justification. .... 1782> (Faulkner) cf Divination...... 860° (T. W. Davies)
TOT cts sacs ee 12928 ef Dreams........... 874 (Clippinger)
Other uses........... 1291 Festivals............ 13022
Power..............1290° Forms of worship... . .1301°
Teaching of Christ... .1291> Future life.......... 13034
Termsisty es ees 1290 Gods. ..-.-...-.0555 1298"
ef Thank, Thanks, Gods of activity and
Thanksgiving...... 2964> (Easton) emotions.......... 1300+


Gracious....-.-...555 1292 (Clippinger)


Gods and Nature..... 1299


3252 GENERAL INDEX


Greece, Religion in Ancient—continued
The Great Gods...... 1299»
cf Hellenism, Hellenist 13712 (Heidel)
Influence on Chris-


tianity.. 0.6.0.0... 1304>
Local shrines........ 12982
Mysteries...........18039
The myths.......... 1297
Omens, dreams....... 1300»
Oracles............. 13015
Prayers antic hott he 13023
Priestsiacs croc aty ders 1301»
ef Prophecy......... 24667 (Orelli)
Revelation, —_inspira-
TOD sted 2 weet 1300+
ef Rome............ 2620» (Allen)
Sacrificegs............ 1302
Sin, expiation........ 1304"
Greece, Sons of......... 1305
ef Asmoneans........ 283% (Dosker)
ef Javan............ 1572+ (Roberts)


Greek Language


cf Language of NT... 1826 (A. T. Robertson)


Greek Religion

ef Greece, Religion in. .12979 (Fairbanks)

ef Mercury, Mercurius 2035* (M. O. Evans)
Greek Versions

ef Septuagint........ 27228 (Thackeray)

ef Versions, Georgian,

Gothic, Slavonic. ..3048° (Easton)

Greeks


ef Grecians.......... 1294» (Heidel)
Green, Greenish

ef Colors............674° (Patch)
Greeting..............1805* (W. L. Walker)

ef Farewell.......... 1098? (W. L. Walker)

ef Hail (interjection). .1319>

CL RGAGe. eae iene os 22939 (W. L. Walker)
Greyhound

ef Dog.............. 867» (Day)
Grief, Grieve.......... 1305» (W. L. Walker)
Grievance... 2.02.2... 1306> (W. L. Walker)
Grievous, Grievously,

Grievousness........ 13065 (W. L. Walker)
Grinder

0 | See 2052+ (Patch)
Grinding

ef Crafts... eeu cee cas 736° (Patch)
Grisled, Grizzled

ef Colors............ 674» (Patch)
Groan sce exh es Se 1306 (Macalister)
GrO8S ese AEs ee he 13079

ef Grease............ 1294
Ground, Grounded...... 13072 (W. L. Walker)

ef Fallow............ 1094

ef Parched.......... 2247> (Patch)
GIOVE sic dese oo ghee 1307

ef Asherah........... 268> (Sayce)

ef Tamarisk......... 507° (Masterman)
Grudge............... 13076 (W. L. Walker)
Guard... ............. 1307* (Nicol)


ef Captain........... 568> (Nicol)


Guard—continued


Foreigners as........ 1808

Ch Postusecis cea 24233 (M. O. Evans)

Royal bodyguards .. .1308+

In temple........... 1308?
Guardian

ef Angels......0..... 132 (J. M. Wilson)

ef Family........... 1094» (Caverno)
Gubarn.... 0.0.0.0... 7888 (R. D. Wilson)
Gudea :

ef Shinar............ 2773 (Pinches)
Gudgodah............. 1308
Guests jon See a nd vitss 1308> (Clippinger)

cf Guest-chamber.. . . .1308> (Estes)

cf Hospitality........ 14325 (Easton)
Guest-chamber......... 1308> (Estes)

ch Guests 1308 (Clippinger)
Guide. ............008. 1308 (W. L. Walker)
Guilese © nehisceseearc ieee 13099 (W. L. Walker)
Grail tg eae ae Pe che 13092 (Rall)

In OT..............1809

ef Sin...... Brine aa 27985 (McConnell)


In teachings of Jesus. .1309»
In teachings of Paul . .1309>


Guilt Offering
ef Sacrifice, OT...... 26457 (Reeve)
Guiltless.............. 1310
Guiltyera eens 13102 (Rall)
ef Guilt... 0.0.0.0... 13092 (Rall)
Gulfe sche sates 1310° (M. O. Evans)
cf Abraham’s Bosom. .222 (Orr)
ef Hades............ 1314 (Vos)
ef Punishment, Ever-
lasting. ........... 2502° (Orr)
Guni, Gunites......... 1310°
Gur, The Ascent....... 1310>
Gur-baal.. 2... eee. 1310 (Ewing)
Gutter
ef House............ 14346 (A. C. Dickie)
Gymnasium
cf Games............ 1168 (Smith)
THe ica ta heisk Sene anceps 13118
ef Ah, Aha.......... 78* (Mack)
Haahashtari...........13112
Habaiah (Hobaiah)..... 1311+
Habaiah (Obdia).......2174>
Habakkuk............. 1311° (Hiselen)
Author.............. 1311
cf Bel and the Dragon . 428» (T. W. Davies)
Books. fons os nt 1311>
Date and occasion. .. . 1312
Integrity. 2.0.0.0... 13125
Interpretation of chap-
tersland2....... 1311»
Styles 5 5 oe iea 1312
Teaching............ 1312»


Habakkuk, Prayer of
; ef Beth-horon, Battle


OL a cere a ees 446 (Maunder)
| Habaziniah (Habazzi-
niah)...........,...1313


GENERAL INDEX


3253


Habergeon............ 1313

ef Armor, Arms...... 2512 (Nicol)
Habiri ;

ef Tell el-Amarna Tab-

lets ie Betis rd 2927> (Kyle)

Habitation............ 1313 (Orr)

ef House............14384> (A. C. Dickic)
Haborsc ioc ea eng aes 1313 (Pinches)

ef Gozan............ 12908 (Orr)

ef Halah............1821> (Pinches)
Hacaliah (Hachaliah) .. .1313>
Hachilah.............. 1313

cf Gibeath........... 1225> (Ewing)
Hachmoni (Hachmonite).1313> (Hovey)
Hadad ace nce soarutes st ale 13138 (Hovey);

(Petrie)

Hadadezer............1814" (Nicol)

cf Benhadad......... 435» (Nicol)
Hadadrimmon......... 13149 (Ewing)

ef Adadrimmon...... 4.8

ef Rimmon..........2594 (N. Isaacs)
Hadar

ef Hadad............ 1314* (Hovey)
Hadarezer............. 1314

ef Benhadad......... 435> (Nicol)

ef Hadadezer........ 13148 (Nicol)
Hadashah...........-. 13145
Hadassah............. 1314»

ef Esther............ 1006" (Urquhart)
Hadattah

ef Hazor............ 1347 (Ewing)
Hadesin. 26 2 esha 13148 (Vos)


cf Abraham’s Bosom. .22' (Orr)
ef Eschatology of NT .979> (Vos)


Gf Gulf eee ek 1310 (M. O. Evans)
TiN cers sre eet cee 1314

Not a final state...... 1315

In OT (Sheol)........ 1314

ef Paradise..........2246* (Wright)

ef Sheol............. 2761* (Orr)


ef Spirits in Prison... .24566 (Orr)


Hadid (Adida) ........ 1315»
ef Adida............ 55>
ef Zeboim..........- 3134" (Masterman)
Hadlai::2u seeks erie 1315°
Hadoram (Joram)...... 1316 (Hovey)
ef Adoniram......... 58* (Beecher)
Hadrach............-- 1316*
Hagabe nine niet siete 1316°
Hagaba sve... ste 1316
ef Accaba.... ...... 27>
ef Hagabah.......... 13164
Hagabah.............- 1316*
ef Hagaba........... 1316"
Hagar © eds 1316* (Crichton)
Allegorical use by St.
Peter.............181798
Allegory of..........13174
Critical points........ 13176


Expulsion and Divine
help


912s


Hagar—continued
Pligh Gy octave Sos ye


Vision and return.....
Hagarenes

ef Agarenes..........

ef Hagrites.........
Hagarites (Hagarenes)

ef Hagrites..........
Hagerite

cf Hagrites..........
Haggada


1316*
1509 (Baur)


. 1316


26915 (Boyd)
13168


. 1319" (Mack)


1319" (Mack)
13198 (Mack)


2904» (Strack)
13174 (Robinson)


Contribution to proph-
ecy—necessity of re-


building the temple.
Criticigzm.........-..
ef Joshua (son of Je-


ef Haggi............
Haggites..............
Haggith............066
Hagia

CH APIO ee: oone eae
Hagiographa

ef Bible.............

ef Canon of OT.....


Hagrites.............
Ha-hiroth

ef Pi-hahiroth........
IAT he ech dee dae


ef Lightning........
Plague of............
Hail (interjection)......


cf Camel’s Hair.....
Cutting and shaving. .

ef Head...........
ef Goat’s Hair
ef Goatskins.........


1318>


459> (Orr)


.554* (Robinson)


2730 (Thackeray)
13198


.1319* (Mack)


2396" (Kyle)
1319

87> (Mack)
1319» (Joy)


. 18926 (Joy)


1319>
13195


. 13805" (W. L. Walker)


13202 (Luering)
403" (Eager)


.548° (Patch)


1320

1348 (Luering)
1249» (Patch)
1249


3254 GENERAL INDEX


Hair—continued


Nazirite............. 13206

Offerings............ 1320*

Ointments........... 1321

Plucking of the

cf Punishments... . .2504> (Hirsch)

GL Poll see) Bohn Ser 2415 (Luering)

ef Razor............2533»

Symbolical use....... 1321

cf Washing of Feet..3072* (Anderson)

ef Weaving.......... 3077" (Patch)
Ha-jehudijah.......... 1321
Hakkatan............. 1321>

ef Akatan........... BRb
Hakkotie.ecescas, oe. 1321>

ef Akkos............ 89"
Hakupha.............. 1321

ef Achipa........... 36°
Halahiecea alas 1h ieee 1321» (Pinches)

ef Gozan............ 1290° (Orr)

ef Habor............1313> (Pinches)
Halak, Mount......... 1322% (Ewing)

ef Hor, Mount....... 1421* (Ewing)
Halakha

ef Talmud........... 2904» (Strack)
Hale, Haling........... 13229
Half

ef Number.......... 2157 (Smith)
Halhul es enccttecea ne otaee 1322* (Masterman)
Ds Eb serve seer ian pamela 1322»
Halicarnassus.......... 1322» (Banks)
Hall

cf House............ 1434> (A. C. Dickie)
Hall, Judgment........ 1777° (Rutherfurd)
Halleligek ce tia aacce dees 1322 (Sampey)
Hallelujah............. 1323 (Breslich)
Hallohesh............. 1323°
Hallows eeicca cess 13232 (Crannell)
Hallowed (Hallow)..... 1323 (Crannell)
Halt..... Se natn ties 1323 (Orr)
Ham (person)....... .. 1323» (Pinches)

ef Japheth........... 1568» (Pinches)

ef Shem............. 2759" (Pinches)

ef Table of Nations. . .2898 (Pinches)
Ham (place)........... 13242 (Ewing)

ef Mizraim.......... 2069> (Kyle)

ef Shem............. 2759 (Pinches)
Haman.......... enone 1324 (Urquhart)
Hamath is c..cecc ge ace 1324» (Christie)
Hamath-zobah......... 1325* (Christie)
Hammath (person)..... 1325* (Ewing)
Hammath (place)...... 1325* (Ewing)
Hammeah, Tower of... .1325> (Masterman)

ef Jerusalem......... 1607> (Masterman)
Hammedatha.......... 1325>
Hammelech............1325>
Hammer.............. 1325» (Patch)

ef Tools ............ 2998> (Easton)
Hammiphkad, The Gate

Obs A eee Bo An oa TOD
Hammolecheth (Hammo-

leketh).............. 1325>


Hammon.............- 1325> (Ewing)
Hammoth-dor......... 1326* (Christie)
Hammuel............. 138268
Hammurabi........... 1326 (Pinches); 3668
(Clay)

cf Amraphel......... 126* (Pinches)

ef Arioch............ 241% (Pinches)

Authorship of Deuter-

onomy..........-- 8402
cf Chedorlaomer..... . 599 (Pinches)


ef Nineveh, Library of .2152* (Sayce)
ef Semites, Semitic
Religion........... 2717% (Mack)
Cf Didakicee scene ae 29802 (Pinches)
Hammurabi, Code of... .1327* (Ungnad)
Comparison with other


systems........... 13322
Contents............ 13289
Discovery of......... 1327


Hammurabi and Moses1331>
The inscription... ....13827°


ef Law in OT........ 1854" (Rule)

Laws regarding family.1330*

Significance.......... 1331
Hamonah.............1832
Hamon-gog............ 1332>
Hamor................ 1332» (DeMent)
Hamran (Amran)....... 1332?

cf Hemdan.......... 1374>
Hamuel............... 1332

cf Hammuel.... 1326
Hamill. scence es ees 1332
Hamutal..............1332
Hanamel

ef Jerusalem......... 1595> (Masterman)
FLAT ATi is, Sete Gat eee 1333" (DeMent)
Hananel, Tower of... ...1333° (Masterman)

cf Jerusalem......... 1603" (Masterman)
Hanan .cf yh c dase 13332 (DeMent)
Hananiah............. 1333» (Reeve)

ef Shadrach.......... 2746* (R. D. Wilson)
U's Eh ieee ee rare Perera pee 1333° (Luering)

cf Palm of the....... 2235 (Luering)
Handbreadth.......... 1334

ef Weights and Meas-

ures..............8079% (Porter)

Handful............... 1334> (Porter)
Handicraft,

ef Crafts............734% (Patch)
Handkerchief.......... 13346

ef Dress............. 875» (Eager)

ef Napkin........... 2119
Handles cin leneeve tek 18352
Handmaid............. 1335* (McGlothlin)
Hands, Imposition of... .1835¢ (Orr)

ef Ministry.......... 20572 (T. M. Lindsay)

ef Ordain, Ordination .2199° (Edwards)

ef Sacrifice.......... 2651° (Williams)


Hands, Laying on of
ef Hands, Imposition
Olep tees jonas canes 1335* (Orr)
ef Lay, Laying....... 1859° (Breslich)


GENERAL INDEX 3255


Handstaff....... 1335>
CES taihnd encees 2847>
Handwriting
cf Manuscripts...... 1984* (Richardson)
ef Writing........... 3114 (Richardson)
Hanes erence 8 ee eee ee 1335> (Kyle)
Hanging.............. 1335> (Hirsch)
ef Punishments....... 2504 (Hirsch)
Hangings............. 1335 (Downer)
Haniel
cf Hanniel........... 1336"
Hannah............... 1336* (DeMent)
Hannathon............ 1336
Hanniel............... 1336*
Hanoch (Hanochites) . . .1336*
cf Henoch........... 1374
Hanna cna oes 13365 (DeMent)
Hap, Haply........... 1336 (W. L. Walker)
Hapharaim (Haphraim). 1336> ;
Happens nes 2s sade 1336> (W. L. Walker)
ef Chance...........593" (Trever)
Happimess............. 1336
cf Blessedness........ 487" (Gray)
Happizzez............. 1336>
aray.06.2 0.6005 See 13375 Cewing)
Haradah.............. 13372
cf Wanderings of Israel] 3064* (Conder)
Haran (person)........ 1337
Haran (place)...... ».. 13837" (Ewing)
Hararite.............. 1317
Harbona, Harbonah.. .. .13837> (Wolf)
Harbour.............. 1337
ef Havenun So. 4cccecies 1344> (Day)
ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
Hardt sett egg eats 1337> (W. L. Walker)
ef Harden........... 13389 (W. L. Walker)
Hard Sayings.......... 1338
Hard Sentences. ..... . .1338°
Hard eni:ice sg ete cerns 1338 (W. L. Walker)
ef Hard............- 13375 (W. L. Walker)
Hlardiness............- 13375 (W. L. Walker)
Hardly
ef Hard............. 1337 (W. L. Walker)
Hardness
ef Hard............. 1337 (W. L. Walker)
inet oc ctr acne 1338 (Day)
Hareph.........--04-- 13394
Hareth..0 65.6 reece 1339
ef Hereth...........13877* (Masterman)
Harhaiah.............- 1339
Harhas...............1839%
ef Hasrah........... 1842
Harhur......0-.-0000-- 13392.
Harm: 2 ivetese eae eras 1339% (Stearns)
ef Rehum...........2552> (Stearns)
Hariph (Jorah)........- 1339
Partlotinc sk ectnee as 1339> (Hager)
of Ashtoreth......... 270° (Sayce)
ef Idolatry..........1447> (Cobern)
ef Images..........- 14529 (Cobern)
Harlotry.....---- eee: 746>


Har-magedon.......... 1340° (Ewing)
Harnepher............ 1340>
Harness... 0.0... ... cae 1340> (W. L. Walker)
Harod, Wellof......... 1340> (Ewing)

cf Esdraelon, Plain of .993* (Ewing)

cf Jezreel..........,.1677* (Ewing)
Harodite.............. 1340>

cf Harod, Well of... . .1840> (Ewing)
Haroehi asic de cndeeresear ates 1341°

cf Reaiah............ 2534
Harorite

ef Harodite.......... 1340>


Harosheth, of the Gen-
tiles or of the Nations 1341 (Ewing)


Harp
ef Music. ........... 2099» (Millar)
ef Musical  instru-
ments............. 2101>
Harrow............005 1341* (Patch)
ef Agriculture..... -...75” (Patch)
Harrows.........--00- 13418
Harsha........0...00.. 13419
Harsith...............18418
ef Deer.............8178 (Day)
cf Gate, East........ 1176 (Caldecott)
ef Jerusalem......... 1595> (Masterman)
cf Potsherd.......... 2423»
Hart
ef Deer.............. 817 (Day)
Harun. esse 2 aoa eS 1341
Harumaph............ 1341>
Haruphite............. 1341>
ef Hareph........... 1339
ef Hariph........... 1339°
Paras 5 coeds eee 1341»
Harvest..........-..0. 1341» (Patch)
cf Agriculture........ 75 (Patch)
Figurative........... 1341» (Patch)
ef Gleaning.......... 1234» (Patch)
ef Mowing, Mown
Grass its< ine uc 20932 (M. O. Evans)
Hasadiah.............. 13422
Hasenuah
cf Hassenuah . ... .1342>
Hashabiah............. 1342 (Reeve)
cf Sabias (Apoc)...... 2636
Hashabnah............ 1342
Hashabneiah...........1342
Hashbadana (Hashbad-
ana)! iue sires 3 13428
Hashem (Jashen)....... 1342"
Hashmonah........... 1342+
ef Wanderings of Israel 30642 (Conder)
Hashub
ef Hasshub..........18425
Hashubah............. 1342°
Hashum.............. 1342 (Downer)
Hasidaeans............ 1342° (Hutchison)
ef Maccabaeus, Macca-
bees es: eect ef 1946> (Hutchison)
ef Pharisees...... . 2361+ (J. E. H. Thomson)


3256 GENERAL INDEX
Hasmoneans Hay

ef Asmoneans........ 283? (Dosker) ef Grass. .......0.004 1293 (Masterman)

ef Heshmon......... 1384 Hagael). ec emasioaent 1345° (Nicol); 437° (Nicol)

ef Hyreanus......... 1445 Hazaiah............... 13466

cf Sparta, Spartans. . .2839> (Orr) Hazarct. deh hus Sot 1346> (Ewing)

ef Temple...........2936> (Caldecott; Orr) Hazar-addar......... 1346»
Hasrabts cgyeauPcasreancses 1342» Hazar-enan.......... 1346

ef Harhas...........18392 Hazar-gaddah........13474
Hassenaah (Senaah). .. .1342 Hazar-hatticon....... 13478

ef Hassenuah........ 1342 Hazar-maveth....... 13478
Hassenuah............ 1342» Hazar-shual......... 13478

ef Senuah...........27214 Hazar-susah......... 13473
Hasshub (Hashub)...... 1342> Hazar-susim........ .1347#
Hassophereth Hazar-addar ‘

cf Sophereth......... 28362 ef Hazar............ 1346> (Ewing)
Haste (Hasty)......... 1343° (W. L. Walker) ef Village............ 3049» (Christie)
Hasupha (Hashupha). . . 13434 Hazazon-tamar (Haze-

ef Gishpa........... 1232 zon-tamar).......... 13472 (Masterman)
Hat..................18489 (Eager) Hazel

CEH OO, 3. ieee eee cee 14198 cf Almond........... 100° (Masterman)
Hatach Hazelelponi (Hazzelel-

ef Hathach.......... 1343 POU ew seid PS oachem Mee 1348
Hatchet............25- 1343» Hazer-hatticon ........ 13474

GLIA Beard cons eriass 3412 (Patch) ef Hazar............ 1346> (Ewing)

ef Tools ............ 2998> (Easton) Hazerim........-.0005 13472
Hate, Hatred.......... 1343» (Orr) Hazeroth.............. 1347>

ef Enmity cain oases 952> (CW. L. Walker) ef Wanderings of Is-
Hathach (Hatach)...... 1343> EP TAG lagt eacpcts ew nates 30642 (Conder)
Hathath.:.A0022 $e 1343» Hazezon-tamar
Hatipha............... 1343 ef Hazazon-tamar.....1347* (Masterman)
Hatitan cos iG bea hoe 1343» Haziel... civ cae Cay ans 1347»
Hatsi-hammenuchoth. . . 1343» LA ZOw bee enone a 1347°

ef Menuhoth......... 2033 (Wallace) Hazon end Sal nets it 1347 (Ewing)
Hattil (Agia).......... 1343 ef Kerioth-hezron ....1793°
Hattin, Horns of ef Merom........... 2037* (Wright)

cf Jesus Christ....... 1642> (Orr) of Village............ 3049> (Christie)
Hattush..............1348> (Wolf) Hazor-hadattah........ 1347>
Halititeec....8. os ees 13449 Hazzelelponi........... 13482
Hauran............... 13442 (Ewing) Heh tie eaternaehico ly anit 1348"
Havenie vey esa bees 1344» (W. L. Walker) ef Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)
HAVEN: Soviet Sat earite 1344> (Day) LCA eo cath nie. AD cRe yk es 13488 (Luering)

ef Bithynia.......... 483° (White) Chair tone wih 13208 (Luering)

ef Harbour.......... 1337 ef Heart............ 1350> (Marais)

ef Shore............. 2779» (Day) Headband
Havens, Fair........... 1087» ef Dress............. 875» (Eager)
Havilah............... 13454 (Fulton) Headdress
Havoc................13453 (W. L. Walker) ef Bonnet........... 495b
Havoth-jair (Havvoth- ef Dress........-.... 875> (Eager)

JABS eee Ate eee 13452 (Ewing) Headstone

Chait. ene 1559" (Crichton) cf Corner-stone.......721> (Mack)
Ha vvalecc ovens 1345* Headstrong
Havvoth-jair (Havoth- ef Heady............ 1349

JAIL) eciit. oh mete a ee! 1345* (Ewing) Headtire

CiiGileads ins desks 12308 (Ewing) cf Bonnet...........495»

ef Kamon........... 1789 (Ewing) ef Dress............. 875» (Eager)

cf Village............3049 (Christie) LOA y hi occa lactase 13492

CE TOWN: eet. eee 3001* (Christie) Heal.................. 1349° (Macalister)
Hawley. end tasueas 1345* (Stratton-Porter) Healed................ 1349* (Macalister)

ef Faleon............ 10915 (Stratton-Porter) Healers ran. eke sees Ses 1849" (Macalister)

ef Glede............. 1234> Healing............... 1349»

Che: ows ne RSS 1814* (Stratton-Porter) Healing, Gifts of.......1349» (Lambert)


ef Night-hawk.......2143> (Stratton-Porter)


cf Spiritual Gifts... .. 2843 (Lambert)


GENERAL INDEX


3257


Health. ............... 1350 (Macalister)
Heap tis see Sac -oaee 1350 (W. L. Walker)
HM Gatti es Seth atte ces 1350° (Marais)

ChiHéad oct Ss 13489 (Luering)

cf Psychology........ 2496 (Marais)
Hearth. cen iu see one 1351 (Downer)

ef House............ 1434> (A. C. Dickie)
Heartily..............18528
eaten valin Bee es 13528 (Joy)

ef Seasons........... 2710> (Joy)
Heath

ef Tamarisk......... 2908" (Masterman)
Heathen

ef Gentiles.......... 1215 (Porter)
Heave Offering

ef Sacrifice, OT...... 2645» (Reeve)
Heaven

ef Astronomy. .......300 (Maunder)

CESKY cece doe cee cee 2814 (Day)
Heaven, Host of

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Heaven, Ordinances of

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Heaven, Windows of

ef Astronomy........300' (Maunder)
Heavenly............. 1352 (Orr)

cf Heavens..........1852> (Orr)
Heavens.............. 1352 (Orr)

cf Heavenly......... 1352» (Orr)
Heavena (physical)... .. 1352

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)


ef World, Cosmological 3106* (Orr)
Heavens, New (and


Earth, New)......... 1353 (Vos)
Heavy, Heaviness, Heav-

Uyewe cs oes ste 13542 (W. L. Walker)
Hebers 2 cist icdavaes 1354 (Pollard)
Heberites............. 1354

ef Tell e!-Amarna Tab-

VetSiee! ok. we hate 2927 (Kyle)

Hebrew Apocryphal Gos-

Delon wy eels 196° (Hutchison)
Hebrew, Hebrewess.... . 1355 (Orr)
Hebrew Language...... 1355


ef Aramaic Language . 222° (J. E. H. Thomson)
ef Languages of OT.. .1833+ (Weir)
ef Semites, Semitic Re-


ligion .. eevee 2718" (Mack)

Hebrews, Epistle to the .1355* (Rees); 467° (Orr)
AUthoT's 26 ca.eee Sas 1356
Contents and teaching 1361*
Date.... shieen, LOLO*
Destination.......... 1358
Doctrine of Logos... . 1914> (Alexander)
La Willis sects a ache sues 18512 (M’Caig)
Literary form........ 1355
Literary style........ 1830> (A. T. Robertson)
ef Mediation......... 2024 (Edwards)
Teaching regarding


person of Christ... .2341* (Warfield)
Teaching on salvation 2670° (Easton)


Hebrews, Gospel accord-


ing to the...........
ef Apocryphal Gospels
Character and
tents......
Circulation and
guage..........05-


195° (Hutchison)


con-


1363°


References in early


church history... ..


Relation to St. Mat-


Time of composition. .
Uncanonical
and incidents.......
Hebrews, Religion of the
ef Israel, Religion of. .
Hebron (person).......
Hebron (place)........
ef Korah............


ef Mamre...........
cf Refuge, Cities of...
Hebronites............


Hedgehog.............
ef Bittern..........


ef Porcupine.........
ef Serpent...........
FLCCG scott 24 int dace Boe


ef Cattle............
ef Eglath-shelishiyah. .
Heifer, Red............
ef Adultery..........
ef Cedar...........
ef Hyssop...........
ef Sacrifice, OT......
ef Separation........
ef Talmud...........


Helchiah..............
ef Helkias...........


Heleb, Heled
ef Heldai............


1364>


sayings


1530° (Orelli)
1366


. 13865 (Masterman)


1816 (Beecher)
1960? (Masterman)
1973* (Mastcrman)
2545> (Ewing)

1366

1366 (Masterman)
1106> (W. L. Walker)
1181

1367


.484° (Stratton-Porter)


2421» (Day)

2736 (Day)

1367 (Orr)

13679 (M. O. Evans)
13679 (M. O. Evans)
13674


. 18679


10002 (J. E. H. Thomson)
1367> (Easton)

583 (Day)

905> (Ewing)

1367° (Easton)

63* (Margolis)


.509> (Masterman)


1445> (Masterman)
2645" (Reeve)
2721»

29062 (Strack)


. 1368" (Orr)


1369" (Easton)
1468» (Hirsch)
1996> (Eager)
1369»

1370


13702


1370* (Christie)


13712


ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
ef Spiritual Gifts... . . 2844> (Lambert)


Helv@et ic cckadaccrreies 1374
BG Cosa Geers pees Pe ner 1374+ (Eager)
ef Border............ 503° (Hirsch)
CHEDLESS!e6 44 sac cta eyes 875» (Eager)
Hemam
ef Heman...........1874 (Pollard)
ef Homam........... 1417
Heman...............1874 (Pollard)


Hemath


ef Hammath......... 1325 (Ewing)


3258 GENERAL INDEX
Helena of Adiabene Hemdan.............. 1374»

ef Jerusalem......... 16128 (Masterman) Hemlock
Helephin cc icstece: 2 vey: 1370° ef Gall... 2.22.00... 1166 (Masterman)
elegy aoe h he as ee 1370> Hen eke ek: eat 1374
LL ipa ihas a stece aad toes 1370° Hen (person).......... 1374>
Heliodorus............ 1370° (Hutchison) ChJOSiale. wetwe uss 1751» (Genung)

cf Maccabees, Books Henan toss ci at oe 1374° (Ewing)

(0) Ber ene eee ete 1955» (T. W. Davies) ef Ivvah _.....1544» (Pinches)

ef Seleucus.......... 2715» (Hutchison) PHancdnd bos. vec 1374b
aoe eens of Wiadun...... 0... 14490
io ea aaa pe Hisar, sue re, a 13742
ones aed aie rake oon Henoch (Enoch)....... 1374»
elkath .anscesscus i
f H Pipes Suess ees ces 1836*
Helkath-hazzurim...... 1370> (Ewing) Meee ara a : 750
i a : Hepher, Hepherites..... 1375
ef Gibeon........... 12268 (Ewing) Heaher Glnes) 12750
Helkias............... 13714 ren ag As am :
AEH aH cs ceases. 13922 (Wallace) eo ale nie apse
Hell. 34 cit sed, Secteur 13712 (Orr)
saat 122 (Al d
of Eschatology of OT .9725 (Orr) i aa toaes elcnanacr
ef Gehenna.......... 11832 (Vos) « (Hutehi
cf Hades............ 1314” (Vos) ae ee eats eee Gfunchsan)
cf Immortal......... 14614 (Orr) erald.........-.44. 1168 (Smith)
ef Parousia.......... 2249" (Easton) ef Games........... “ mt
CIPI eine 2401 (T. Lewis) aan : H . b a adie ne a ee
ef Punishment, Ever- et bitter Herbs.......404° (Master:
lasting... ... aki 2501 (Orr) ef Grass........... 12934 (Masterman)
ef Sheol............. 27612 (Orr) Hercules (Herakles). .. .1375* (Hutchison)
Hellenism, Hellenist.....13712 (Heidel) Herd
ef Dionysus......... 850 (Harry) cf Cattle............ nel ‘
Expansion of Greek Herdsman............. 13 ate
See Ceara » (Day)
peoples........... 1371 cf Sheep 2756" (Day
ef Grecians.......... 1295° (Heidel) Hereafter.............1375 (W. L. Walker)
ef Greece, Religion of Hereby ONE ators ace ete 1375% (W. L. Walker)
Ancient........... 12972 (Fairbanks) Heredity.............. 13765 (Easton)
Hellenic art and let- ef Blessing.......... 487> (Gray) :
POL Siste nS ene oe oe 1372 ef Curse............. 7679 (T. Lewis)
Hellenic life......... 13722 ef Death............ 8115 (Macalister)
Hellenic state........ 13722 ef Family...........1094® (Caverno)
chiPaulin eed ets 22748 (A. T. Robertson) cf Beer vee Rae ee 7
Philosophy. .........1372» GOIN Ne ieesais eek cConne
Religion............. 13732 Ch SOMA Sete gee ee 28264 (Betteridge)
Helm ef Tradition......... 30048 (Williams)

ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol) Herein. te axa eickiesa ast 1375* (W. L. Walker)
Helmet Hereofie icy suaiarad veces 1376

ef Armor, Arms...... 2512 (Nicol) Heresies ete: fh on 1376 (Masterman)
Helomiivrncu sana Sete. 13744 ef Ir-ha-heres........ 1491* (Kyle)
Help ie ace snes Matcndlea 13742 (Orr) ef Ir-shemesh........14932
Helpmeet Hereshi 003 hi 2 tad 1376°

ef Help............. 1374@ (Orr) Heresy................ 1377* (Jacobs)
Helpsie ry aee tawny: 1374 (Dosker) CHB GCtin sca Ales cek 2711> (W. L. Walker)


Hereth, The Forest of... .1377" (Masterman)


ef Adullam..........62> (Beecher)
Heretic, Heretical...... 13773
Heretical Apocryphal

Gospels... .......... 197" (Hutchison)
Heretofore............ 1375 (W. L. Walker)
Hereunto.............. 18759 (W. L. Walker)
Herewith.............. 1376° (W. L. Walker)
Heritage.......0..0.0., 1377
PLOPIMAS HE Sts fits sus oe 1377» (S. F. Hunter)
Hermeneutics

cf Interpretation... ... 1489* (Schodde)


GENERAL INDEX 3259

Hermes............... 1377 Hezekiah—continued

ef Mercury, Mercurius 20353 (M. O. Evans) ef Manasseh......... 1977* (Wallace)
Hermogenes........... 1377 (Rutherfurd) Reforms of .......... 1386"

ef Phygelus.......... 2392» (Rutherfurd) ef Sennacherib. ......27206 (Clay)
Hermon, Little......... 1378 Siege of Jerusalem
Hermon, Mt...........1378* (Ewing) under. .........0.. 1386

ef Senir............. 2720° (Ewing) ef Siloam............ 2792* (Masterman)

CRSION wie yea eth eS 2806 Hezekiah’s Sickness

ef Sirion..... settee 2812° ef Dial of Ahaz....... 8415 (Maunder)

ef Transfiguration, Mt. ; Hezekiah, The Men of . .1388*

ce 3006* (Ewing) ef Hezekiah......... 1385° (Genung)

Hermonites...%........ 1378? cf Proverbs, Book of. .2475 (Genung)
Herod isos fo elec dears 1378? (Dosker) Hezion............000 1388»

Herod Archelaus..... 1382 Tagine ee ee een 1383»

Herod Philip........ 1382* Hezro, Hezrai.......... 1388>

ef Temple........... 2937" (Caldecott; Orr) Gi Claeene lites es heel 579°
Herod Agrippa I........ 1882? Hezron (person)........ 1388>

ChPauli ser Sai 2271» (A. T. Robertson) Hezron (place)......... 1388
Herod Agrippa I....... 1383* Hezronites............ 1388>

ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch) Hiddai (Hurai) Ale vats 1388>
Herod SUNOS Slsece7 ee Hiddekel....0.....0.2. 1388? (Wright)

EONS ae eee Lee Or) Oona ch. Ate 897> (Wright)

de bests nest Fea eaten) PLM ae rt ie Seca 1380 (W. L. Walker)

Oe ee ees Hele ee atest an 1380 (Stearns)
pose a aaa eee Hierapolis............. 1380" (Banks)

ef Jerusalem......... 1611> (Masterman) Histol dahieli, ¢nctew. 13895

ef Jesus Christ....... 16335; 1727» (Orr) Hierenioe Jeremoth)... 380°

ef Machaerus........19599 (Ewing) Hierielus
Herodian Architecture. . .238* (A. C. Dickie) Se ae 1677°
Se err a ear ae pe ole Hiermas (Ramiah).. ... .1389
Herodias............-- 1383> (Kerr) Tica ee 1389»
FLOOD rena ae gee ef Psalms, Book of... .2487 (Sampey)

ef Jumias...........-. 17812 (S. F. Hunter) High D 18.89%
Heron.........0 0000s 1384° (Stratton-Porter) High ck pattie ace re
pee ae ws d 4388 cf God, Names of... . .1264> (Mack)
Hs eee cere 13842 (Ewing) High Place............ 1390* (Easton)

ti Baa np oaile ‘ We Rltan ete sya 108%; 109® (Wiener)
Heshmon............-. 1384 fB th 38

ef Asmoneans.......- 283° (Dosker) a ean ee ee 296 (Kyle)

bo GE RG PMUICIS we ee

ses i ao ae ete : cf Deuteronomy...... 835° (Robinson) ‘

ef Alphabet.......... 103 (Richardson) eee 1223 (Masterman)
Heth (person)......... 1384 eee Wg ote: Sere (Mast

of Hittites........... 1395? (Conder) : SN ena S75 (Mastermnan)

b isti o

Hethlon...........---- ee (Christie) Teoietien ac. 29348 (Cobern)
Heweri. so. 6. hae 1384 (Patch) anna 2527 (Ewing)
af a awrenok Waters ais” Mauch) ef Religion of Israel. . .1530% (Orelli)

exapla ea:

ef Septuagint........ 2726* (Thackeray) e Saad ven eeeees mee haart
Hexateuch............- 1385* (Wiener) Peer ee ae 2441 (Reeve)

ef Joshua, Book of... .1749* (Geden) High Things erste 1391 (W. L, Walker)

ef Fenech Sra aeie a hae Higher Criticism....... 500° (Richardson)

ef Septuagint........ 2729» (Thackeray) Hichest 1300 (W. L. Walker)
a sae Looe 14028 cf God, Names of... . .1264 (Mack)
Hezekiah (general)... . 1385" poe Mi teod saan are 1390° (W. L. Walker)
Hezekiah (king)........ 1385° (Genung ighw a, :

ef Dialof Ahaz...... 8412 (Maunder) ef Way crane Suet 3075° (Morro)

Isaiah and .......... 1386 Hilen (Holon)......... 13928

ef Jerusalem......... 1616 (Masterman) Pane is ae hee

ef Josiah. .........-- 1752; 1753" (Genung) a aed pau eid

Literary remains...... 1388 i aL EL ceca Pee RS ae 230» (Harry)

ef Israel, History of .1523> (Orelli) Hill of Ares..........-. y


3260 GENERAL INDEX


Hill, Hill Country...... 1392 (Masterman) Hittites—continued
ef Country.......... 724 (Day) cf Philistines......... 2376 (Conder)
ef Ephraim, Mount. . .963» Religion............. 1401*
ef Gibeah........... 1225* (Ewing) ef Sculpture of the. .. .279* (White)
ef Judah, Territory of .1763 (Masterman) ef Syria... 22... ee 2882 (Christie)
cf Natural Features. . .21229 (Day) cf Wanderings of Israel 3069" (Conder)
ef Ophel............ 2196> (Masterman) ef Zoan............. 31538 (Conder)
ef Palestine.......... 2208 (Conder) HVite est feet tears 1402* (Sayce)
Hill, Mount, Mountain. . 1392 (Day) ef Horite............ 1421” (Sayce)
Hill of Evil Counsel TLIVIGES Hered aoe ele Bese 446> (Maunder)
ef Jerusalem......... 1598 (Masterman) FAIZ KY hee heeled SB 14026
Hillel). oon cence eek cet 1393 Hizkiah..............- 1402 7
FLIN pce stetec canon eeaneesh ati 13938 ef Hezekiah (general) .1385¢
cf Weights and Meas- Hoar, Hoary
UPS et aa be ieee 3079° (Porter) ef Color............. 674 (Patch)
Hind Chaar osc eoxle x ecs 1320* (Luering)
ch: Deere ee 8178 (Day) Hoar-frost, Hoary
Hind of the Morning. . .13938 (M. O. Evans) ciiBrost ace ee 1147 (Joy)
ef Morning.......... 2082» (Porter) Hobabse aces tsec nets 1402 (Cotton)
ef Psalms........... 2487" (Sampey) ef Jethro............ 1674 (Crichton)
ef Song............. 2830° (Millar) ef Reuel............. 2573” (Wolf)
LIN Oe. rat scr Daaeeeares 1393» (Caldecott) Hobahes ck to isce veuhen 1402»
ef House............1434> (A. C. Dickie) Hobaiah.............. 1402»
Hinnom, Valley of...... 1393> (Masterman) ef Habaiah........... 1311+
ef Akeldema......... 892 (Masterman) cf Obdia............. 2174>
ef Gehenna.......... 1183" (Vos) Hock: eseea ees ess 1402
ef Gihon............ 1228> (Masterman) Od ein Ce eee ee 1402
ef Jackal’s Well...... 1548 (Masterman) Hodaiah
ef Jerusalem......... 1599* (Masterman) ef Hodaviah......... 1403"
ef Kidron, The Brook .1798* (Masterman) Hodaviah (Hodevah)... .1403*
ef Slaughter, Valley of 2815* Hodeiah (Hodevah).. . . .1403»
1 3 open eMC ae tre Rete ee 1394 Hodesh............... 1403
ef Thigh............ 2972» (Easton) Hodevah (Hodaviah, Ho-
Hippolytus............1000* (J. E. H. Thomson) delish) 22 ee we tela 8 1403*
Hippopotamus ef Sudias............ 2869>
ef Behemoth......... 4275 (Day) Hodiah, Hodijah....... 1403 (McAllister)
Hitalie etic as eee 1394» Hoglah............... 1403"
Hiram S04 Scot Nas 1394? (Cotton) Hoham............... 1365»; 14038
Hiram, Hirom, Huram. .1394> FOISC ee ce en ewan 14034
ef Huram........... 1442 Olde hea era aetna 14032
Hircanns ef Fortification. ...... 1136> (Nicol)
ef Hyrcanus.........1445» Holding............... 14038 (W. L. Walker)
Hire are ee 1395* (McGlothlin) Holiness.............. 1403” (Lambert)
Hireling............... 1395* (McGlothlin) NT usage........... 14048
FAS: cant jovee taunt Seaton er 13958 OT usage........... 1403>
F188 isso d eta een he es 1395 (W. L. Walker) ef Sanctification. ..... 2681 (Rall)
Hither toiekc ecgeeloe ater 13895» (W. L. Walker) Hollowisioe'2 sietdee ses 1404> (W. L. Walker)
Hittites. ............... 1395» (Conder) Holm-tree............. 1405* (Masterman)
cf Archaeological theory ef Susanna, History of 2872> (T. W. Davies)
Obs. oeiynh ake Mees 231» (Kyle) Holofernes............. 1405 (Hutchison)
cf Archaeology of Asia d 3 Ce) (0) Weare ee ee 1405*
Minories: 277" (White) Holy
cf In Asia Minor..... 2748 (Calder) cf Separate.......... 2721»
ChsHeths .cte moc 1384» Holyday...:.......... 1405¢ (T. Lewis)
History i. ws Hive cs 13968 Holy Ghost
Inscriptions......... 1401» ef Holy Spirit........ 1406* (Mullins)
cf Kadesh on Orontes .1789* (Christie) Holy Ghost (Spirit),
Language........... 13998 Sin against the
In Palestine......... 1396* cf Blasphemy........ 485> (Rees)
ef Palestine........ 2217" (Conder) ; ef Holy Spirit........ 1411» (Mullins)
cf Palestine, Recent Holy of Holies......... 14058 (Caldecott)


Exploration....... 2222» (Cobern) ef Ark of Covenant. ..242 (Lotz)


GENERAL INDEX


Holy of Holies—continued
ef Day of Atonement. .324> (Moller)


;


ef Mercy-seat........ 2036 (Caldecott)
ef Tabernacle........ 2887> (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Temple........... 29302 (Caldecott; Orr)
Holy One
ef God, Names of... . .1264 (Mack)
Holy Place............ 1405> (Caldecott)
ef Tabernacle........ 2887» (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Temple........... 2930 (Caldecott; Orr)
Holy Sepulchre
ef Jerusalem......... 1613 (Masterman)
Holy Spirit............ 1406 (Mullins)
ef Advocate......... 65° (Mullins)
ef Baptism of the
Holy Spirit........ 399> (Mullins)
ef Blasphemy........ 485 (Rees)
ef Ghost............ 12249 (W. L. Walker)
CHGOd ahs wants. 1264 (Rees)
ef Grace............ 12908 (Easton)
ef Johannine The-
OO RY Ri 26 eae 17002 (Law)
In non-canonical lit-
erature............ 1409»
ef Paraclete..........2245° (Mullins)
ef Pauline Theology . .2290* (Easton)
cf Personality of...... 17012 (Law)
ef Salvation......... 2669° (Easton)
ef Sanctification...... 2681> (Rall)
ef Spirit............. 2841> (Marais)


Teaching in the NT.. .1410
In the Kingdom of


In the life of Christ. 1410
In other NT writ-


In Paul’s writings... 1415*
Teaching in the OT. . . 1406
In external nature. . 1407?


Imparting powers for
service.........- 1407
In prophecy....... 14032
ef Tongues, Gift of... .2995> (Easton)
Homam (Heman)....... 1417>
Ome ete cae sw alts 1417’ (Downer)
Home-born............ 1418
Homersend emcee 14138
cf Weights and Meas-
ures..............380798 (Porter)
Homicide............-1418* (Levertoff); 746°
(Hirsch)
cof Refuge, Cities of... .2545° (Ewing)
Honest, Honesty... ....1418> (Orr)
HON Cysi.cee ese sios Paces 1418 (Patch)
ef Food... ......-065 1121> (Eager)
ef Pannag...........2237> (Masterman)
ef Wine............. 3086° (Easton)
Honorable............. 14192 (W. L. Walker)
OOM ieee Ras aknane sonst” 14192
ef Dress............. 875» (Eager)


CEA abi: oo eccta sa eaten 1343* (Eager)


3261
Hoof
cf Chew Cud........ 605» (N. Isaacs)
ef Cloven........... 6719 (Jacobs)
TIAGO Keats oot) Sancta ot 14192 (Easton)
ef Flesh-hook........ 1119° (Doolan)
CEE Wer ie, BAsohu ote ees 1572 (M. O. Evans)


cf Thorns, Thistles, etc 29742 (Masterman)


Hoopoe...............1419" (Stratton-Porter)
cf Lapwing.......... 1839»
Hope eee sacle eden ee | 1419» (Easton)
cf Eschatology of the
INET Se is ot lah) 979» (Vos)
ef Faith............. 1087 (Dunelm)


ef Forgiveness....... 1132 (Morro)
cf Israel, Religion of.. 1530 (Orelli)
ef Kingdom of God. . . 1805 (Stalker)


ef Messiah........... 2039° (Crichton)

PNG sos: dee Soe a dstends 14208

W001 04 Rec ater eam eer 1419

ef Parousia.......... 2249* (Easton)

ef Salvation......... 2665* (Easton)
Hophni and Phinehas.. . 1421* (Wallace)

ef Ichabod........... 1446> (Wallace)

ef Phinehas.......... 2385> (Wallace)
Hophra


cf Pharaoh Hophra. . .2359» (Nicol)


Hor, Mount...........14212 (Ewing)

cf Halak, Mount..... 13222 (Ewing)
Oram es em oe 1421»
Horeb

ef Massah and Meribah 20072 (Ewing)

ef Sinai... .......... 2802» (Conder)
LOPE yp sats Pe eat ews 1421»
Horéshin.cecficnccuanege 1421»
Hor-haggidgad......... 1421»

cf Wanderings of Israel 30642 (Conder)
Horie hee 1421»
Horite, Horim......... 1421» (Sayce)

ef Hivite............ 1402" (Sayce)
Hormah.............. 1422 (Ewing)
FGI eee sete ene eaten 1422° (Easton)

ef Altar.............106> (Wiener)

cf Horns of the Altar. . 1422 (Caldecott)

ef Ink-horn.......... 1469» (Richardson)

Cfeifte 3 4.0 tages 1890 (Easton)

cf Music............ 2094» (Millar)
HORM is2u fo ashe es 1422» (Day)
Horns of the Altar... .. .1422> (Caldecott)

CheAl tan yaw ane ec 106 (Wiener)

ef Horn............. 1422 (Easton)
Horns, Rams’

ef Musi¢c.........0.. 2094> (Millar)
Horns, Stream of

ef Shihor............ 2768" (Kyle)
Horonaim............. 1423 (Ewing)
Horonite.............. 1423

ef Beth-horon........ 446" (Masterman)
Horrible. ............. 14232 (W. L. Walker)
Horror................ 1423
HOPSC sive ii dad en eaaeee 1423 (Day)

ef Camel............ 547» (Day)

cf Swift Beasts....... 2875»


3262 GENERAL INDEX


Horse, Black Ne Pn oa teehee 1423 Hours of Prayer........ 14342 (Dosker)
oe co aaa of John. .25826 (Orr) Ouse: «oh ode oo heen 1434 (A. C. Dickie)
orse Gate ef Corner-stone.......721% (Mack)
a Jerusalem. ........ 1606¢ (Masterman) cf Fold, Folding...... 1121* (W. L. Walker)
orse, Red. Fetes 1423 ; ef Furniture......... 11508 (Reeve)
Pe: ere of John. us (Orr) ef Gezer............. 12229 (Masterman)
orse, (a ie ef Habitation........ 13138 (Orr)
- cf i reeagie of John. .2582° (Orr) ef Hearth........... 1351» (Downer)
orse each Bged dew iat ote 1424" (Day) cf Hinge............1893 (Caldecott)
ef Vampire.......... 3045° ef House of God... .. .14388 (Orr)
ee eee ef Household........ 1438* (Dosker)
hate eee 254 (Nicol) Cae ye Ce tet Pian tte 1793» (Pollard)
Horses of the Sun....... 1424
ef Sun-worship 2870° (Orr) ee aa ua
cece ef Palace............22088 (Orr)
Hosahie cca onset tee 1424 ef Parlor 224g»
Hosanna.............. 14249 (W. L. Walker) - Of Poet hick es ee: 24239 (M. O. Evans)
Hosea ec. se ee as 1424» (J. Robertson) R
The hook 14268 ef Temple........... 2930" (Caldecott; Orr)
Concern for Israel... 14315 ee ie ee
Cantante cand» odic ef Upper Chamber... .3039* (Orr)
Ge ten i a 14278 House, Father’s........ 11012 (W. L. Walker)
Historical baeke House, Garden......... 1175°
ground.......... 14270 House of God.......... 14384 (Orr)
References to carlier ef Bethel............ 443> (Ewing)
. near sued ee 1429» aa Ouse Faw at tee 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
tyle and scope... . . 1426 ousehold............. 14882 (Dosker)
ef Gomer (his wife). . .1276 (Reeve) ef House............ 1434? (A. C. Dickie)
ef Israel, Religion of .. 1538 (Orelli) Household, Caesar’s . .. .537* (Rutherfurd)
ef Lo-ammi.......... 1907" (Lees) Householder........... 1438>
The prophet......... 14248 Housetop
The prophet, date... .1425* ef House............ 1434> (A. C. Dickie)
The prophet, personal How, Howbeit, Howso-
history (marriage). . 1425 eter fleet. d Be ae ets 1438" (W. L. Walker)
ef Saerifice, OT....... 2648" (Reeve) HO Zab cotiicu mccain ere tons 1439 (McAllister)
xo ' Sie Boer .......178> (T. W. Davies)
cf Breeches.......... 2 fe) UCGkSteD ee ees 14392
Hoshaiahy 22sec eas 14318 Hukkok.........0..... 1439"
Hoshama.............. 14314 Hukok
Hoshearn: o.oo eae eS 1431 (Caldecott) ef Helkath........... 1370°
Hoshea (Osea)..:...... 22028 Puli net ee a te 1439
Hospitality. ........... 1432* (Easton) Huldah...............- 1439" (Reeve)
ef Bread. ........... 514> (Eager) Huleh, Lake
In the churches....... 1433 ef Jordan............ 1733* (Wright)
ef Guest......0...... 1308 (Clippinger) Human Sacrifice
Cheeses tees siete 1557 (Schenk) ef Molech........... 20758 (Nicol)
In the OT........... 1432 cf Sacrifice, Human. . .2658* (McGlothlin)
cf Bb eneueu aan ae ae ad ie nent 2647 (Reeve)
are eee .and E. D. Isaacs umiliation o rist
ef Romans, Epistle to .2614* (Dunelm) ef Kenosis....... _.... 17928 (Easton)
ef Sacrifice, NT... ... 2651 (Williams) cf Person of Christ... .2338° (Warfield)
Host of Heaven........ 1433° (Orr) ef Prize..........0.. 24579 (Edwards)
cf Angel........... _. 182° (J. M. Wilson) - Humility... ..00........ 1439" (W. L. Walker)
ef Astronomy. .......3006 (Maunder) Humps (Bunches)... ...1440+
cf Lord of Hosts...... 1919* um tah 2 hose. en ec cys 1440+
Hostage Hundred
CPP Woarre te ee xi peek 3069° (Nicol) cf Number.......... 2157 (Smith)
Hosts, Lord of......... 19192 Hunger. Cee eeeees es... 1440" (Macalister)
Hotham (Hothan)...... 14348 Hunting.............. 1440* (Smith)
Bothnia t , 14342 ef Fowler............ 11432 (Stratton-Porter)
Hough Methods of.......... 1440»
eh Hock: 60 dees 1402 Dr OMS oh Bie ie ancy me 1440»
Hounye sc. pena 1434° (Porter) Hupham.............. 1441


Gh Limes,» eae d ca 2981» (Porter) WHuppaltcsieiad des sata 1441


GENERAL INDEX 3263


Huppim

ef Hupham.......... 14415
Ur er tte ai a 1441» (Downer)
Hurans Sock os eek 14422
Hurai (Hiddai)........ 1388?
Huram (Hiram)........ 1442
URS cite le ce 14426
LUE eet A cure weacateoe 1442¢ (Orr)
Husband.............. 1442 (Eager)
Husbandman, Husband-

TV Pesos reece ee. sees 1442> (Patch)

ef Agriculture........ 75° (Patch)
Husband’s Brother...... 1442> (Crannell)

ef Family........... 1094» (Caverno)
Hushah............... 1443+
Hushai................ 1443" (Reeve)
Husham.............. 1443+
Hushathite............ 1443

ef Mebunnai......... 2016 (Wallace)

cf Sibbeccai......... 2783"
Hushimrni es tt cece 1443+
Hushshathite

ef Hushathite........14433
Husks. tes. oe eee 14438 (Masterman)
Huz

CL le ce barat ok 3042 (Reeve)
Huger in ep es 1443 (Crannell)
Hyacinth (Jacinth)..... 1443>

ef Stones, Precious.. . .2860* (Fletcher)
Hyades

ef Astrology......... 295» (Maunder)
Hydaspes............. 1443»
Hydromanecy.......... 331> (T. W. Davies)
Hyena......-......006 1443 (Day)
Hyksos

ef Joseph............ 1739* (Kyle)
Hymenaeus............ 14442 (Rutherfurd)

ef Alexander......... 90° (Rutherfurd)

ef Philetus........... 2367 (Rutherfurd)
Aymitte, hn ise eee 1445* (Millar)

cf Music............ 2094» (Millar)

ef Song..........-.. 2830" (Millar)
Hypocrisy, Hypocrite. . .1445° (W. L. Walker)
Hyrcanus.......-...++ 1445»

cf Aristobulus........ 241> (M. O. Evans)

cf Asmoneans........ 283° (Dosker)

cf Maccabaeus....... 19462 (Hutchison)

ef Tobias..........-. 2990
Hyssop.......--.02065 1445»

cf Heifer, Red........ 1367> (Easton)


I, 1 Am, I Am That I Am
cf God, Names of... . .12675 (Mack)


I Will Be
cf God, Names of... . .12676 (Mack)


Tacimus


cf Alecimus........... 89° (Mack)
Jacubus (Akkub)....... 1446+
Jadinus (Jamin)........ 1446
Tbelin


ef Jabneel........... 1547 (Porter)


«


Ibbar (Juchabar)....... 1446
EbIst cen eee OA 14462
CROW) sik. hak ok es 2205» (Stratton-Porter)
Tbleam (Bileam)........ 1446 (Ewing)
ef Gath-rimmon...... 1178* (Ewing)
Ibneiah............... 1446*
Ibnijah. . . 14468
Irie eee 1446+
Tbsam ions ete oe ne 1446
Tb gan ees thease cssektae 1446> (E. D. Isaacs)
LGCONC wpe iin eis tn cette 1446» (Joy)
Figurative........... 1446° (Joy)
Ichabod............... 1446> (Wallace)
ef Hophni and Phine-
asin piney mice clade 14212 (Wallace)
Tconium..............- 1446> (Calder)
ef Lycaonia.......... 1942» (Calder)
ef Lystra............ 1944® (Calder)
Id alah chan nett at! *, 14478
Idbash es. vice cea teckel as 1447
Iddo (Addo, Oded)..... 1447> (Crannell)
cf Jadau............ 1557*
Idle, Idleness.......... 1447> (T. Lewis)
Idol
cf Image............ 14508 (Edwards)
Idolatry............... 1447 (Cobern)


cf Calf, Golden......
cf Divination.......


.2989; 542 (Cobern)
.860* (T. W. Davies)


CEOs ph hei eae 11125 (W. L. Walker)
cf Gods............. 1270 (Reeve)
cf Harlot............ 1339> (Eager)
ef High Place........ 1390* (Easton)
cf Image............ 1450° (Edwards)
cf Images. ...........1452" (Cobern)
cf Jeremiah.......... 1589° (Orelli)
Idols
cf Gods............. 1270 (Reeve)
Iduel (Ariel)........... 1448>
Idumaea, Idumaeans.. . . 1448?
cf Edom............ 899" (Ewing)
Teddias (Eddias)....... 1448»
Teiel
ef Jehiah............ 15748
Tezer, Iezerites......... 14486
ef Abiezer:.......... 9* (Beecher)
galt ARP 1 oe Bees 1448>
Igdaliah..... ec nae es 1448»
Igeal................. 1448?


Ignatius, Ep. o
cf Literature, Sub-apos 1899» (Cowan)


Ignorance............. 1448 (W. L. Walker)
Tim (Iyim)............1545
Tje-abarim

cf Iye-abarim........ 15458
Ton reheat ates 14499 (Ewing)
Tkkéshicsvrascd eae ee: 1449«
Tlai (Zalmon).......... 1449

cf Zalmon........... 3131> (Ewing)
Wiadune esse eek 14492

cf Henadad.......... 1374»


Ill, Ill-favored
ef Evil-favoredness... .1043* (Luering)


3264 GENERAL INDEX


Illumination........... 1449* (Easton)
Illustrious, The........ 1449»

ef Apame........... 160°

ef Bartacus.......... 406
Illyricum....... Se tpeesue 1449> (Tod)

ef Dalmatia......... 777 (Tod)
Tm ages sce: Cmca hbase 1450° (Edwards)

Christ, image of...... 1451+

ef Divination........ 860" (T. W. Davies)

ef Idolatry........... 1447> (Cobern)

ef Images........... 1452® (Cobern)

Man in Divine image. . 14502

cioPallar i Stes 2398 (Orr)
Image of God.......... 1264> (Orr)
Imagery.............. 1452* (Edwards)

ef Images........... 14522 (Cobern)
IMAges x. drogexse sat glee 14522 (Cobern)

ef Astarte (Ashtaroth) .270* (Ewing)

Bible references...... 1454

ef Calf, Golden....... 2988; 542 (Cobern)

ef Chambers of Image-

TY 63 eee ek ee 592

ef Chariots of the Sun 596> (Margolis)

cf Ephod........... 8* (Beecher)

ef Harlot............ 1339> (Hager)

ef Idolatry........... 1447> (Cobern)

ef Image............1450" (Edwards)

cf Nehushtan........ 21822 (Longacre)

Origin of............ 1452

cf Palestine, Recent Ex-

ploration.......... 2222 (Cobern)

ef Pillane 250.05 2 ae 2398 (Orr)

ef Totemism......... 3000* (M. O. Evans)
Imagination........... 1456+ (W. L. Walker)
Imagine............... 14562 (W. L. Walker)
Imalcue............... 14562 (Hutchison)
Imla, Imlah........... 1456


Immaculate Conception . 1456 (Sweet)
ef Mary (Virgin)..... 2001 (Sweet)
Not to be confused
with Virgin-birth. . .1456>
Roman Catholic dog-
| 00: a, aN ti 1456>
ef Virgin-birth....... 3052" (Sweet)
Immanuel (Emmanuel)... 14575 (A. W. Evans)
Child prophecy of


Isaiah cdc aan 1457
ef Isaiah, Book of... ..1501* (Robinson)
ef Messiah.......... 2040" (Crichton)


ef Person of Christ... .2338° (Warfield)
cf Quotations, NT... .2517 (Sweet)
Relation to Messianic


OPO is eizaten tins se 1458

ef Shear-jashub...... . 2752

CLOSING se ocean 2789" (Stuart)

ef Virgin............ 3051> (Easton)

ef Virgin-birth........ 3052" (Sweet)
Immer........ Seas: 1458>
Immortal, Immortality .1458> (Orr)

Biblical doctrine...... 14605


Christian doctrine... . 1460
Christian hope....... 1460°


| Immortal, Immortality—continued

ef Death.......... ,.811> (Bavinck)
Doctrine in OT...... 14605
Egyptian doctrine. . . . 1459"

ef Eschatology of OT. 972° (Orr)


ef Helle oo hoe 13715 (Orr)
ef Incorruption... ... .1466>
Cf Eife eon oe he ee 18882 (Reeve)
ef Mortal, Mortality. .2083*
Origin of belief....... 1459*
ef Punishment, Ever-
lasting............ 2501; 25038> (Orr)
cf Resurrection... ....2562° (Easton)
ef Retribution........ 2570" (M’Caig)
ef Sheol............. 27618 (Orr)
Immutability, Immu-
table eae ii eca cen te 1461»
ef Faithful, Faithful-
ness..............1088> (Hodge)
ef Unchangeable...... 3033" (Hodge)
VIANA asthe ee tee en 1461>
Iminahinss ssc ees 1461>
ef Jimnah..... 1677>
Imnites (Jimnites)...... 1461>
AM parts eA eat ka nee! 1461
CRAG ct aciiaes oes 54> (M. O. Evans)
Impediment........... 1461>
Imperial Guard, Roman.257> (Allen)
Implead............... 1462+
Importable............ 1462
Importunity........... 14622 (Estes)


Imposition of Hands. .. .1335* (Orr)
ef Keys, Power of.... .1794" (Carver)


Impossible............14625
Impotent.............. 1462* (Macalister)
Imprisonment

ef Prison............ 24568 (T. Lewis)

cf Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)
Impurity

ef Uncleanness.......3035° (Williams)
Imputation............ 1462* (Hodge)

Of Adam’s sin....... 14638

ef Atonement........ 627° (Orr)


Basis of doctrines... . . 1463
Of Christ’s righteous-


NESS) fe es deste 1464s
Doctrines of......... 1462
ef Justification... ....1782° (Faulkner)
Of world’s sin to
Christ: cesscece ce 1463>
Tmrahy. oo eta s oh 14662
MT ie ed hen caclea ees 1466+
Ti eR NER ee ee 1466" (Orr)
In the Lord........... 1466" (Edwards)
Incantation
ef Magic............ 1963* (T. W. Davies)
Incarnation............ 692° (Tisdall)


ef Accommodation ...338 (Sweet)
ef Johannine Theology 1699" (Law)
ef Person of Christ... .2342> (Warfield)
| ANGONSE ee iy ee eek in 1466" (Orr)
ef Altar of Incense... .111> (Caldecott)


GENERAL INDEX 3265
Incense—continued Inner Man
ef Censer............ 587> (T. Lewis) ef Inward Man.......1490° (Pratt)
ef Frankincense...... 1145* (Masterman) Innocence, Innocency,
ef Perfume.......... 2321> (Patch) Innocent..........-. 1470 (Forrester)
ef Tabernacle........ 2887> (Caldecott; Orr) Innocents, Massacre of
on Temple........... 2930 (Caldecott; Orr) the se hs he ie 1471+ (Sweet)
mages Upton: SMe ves ae ef Virgin-birth of Jesus
Wen gaenie He ae edn rT te
Incorruption........... 1466> I oe a”, epee ae ae
apt ara qe nordinate a Sk, GON ae 1472» (Edwards)
tality ’ Fite Inquire. . re 1472> (M. O. Evans)
Rare AON nea EE i ( rr) ef Divination........ 860° (T. W. Davies)
Tea BE cia ents nora aa es ae (Miller) Inquisition............ 1472»
Indien ie ia ae 1467* (Ewing) Inscription............ 14738
ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch) z oe artes ae ao
iit caer of Assyria. .......... 290° (Sayce)
TifaneyliGospel a ‘the a ef Babylonia......... 358? (Clay)
, Inscription, Siloam
ef Apocryphal Gospels 195+ i awe
ite Rosen s 195° (Hutchison) ef Siloam............ 2792 (Masterman)
ab Mary (Vanes coe 2001» (Sweet) Insects............000- 14738 (Day); 11242 (Hager)
Iafant-Baptan ef Locust............ 1907 (Day)
t : ef Moth............. 2091» (Day)
cf Baptism.......... eS are Lindsay); C&Palmereworni se: 22362
Tatanticide (Dau) ef Sand Flies........ 2688»
ef Crimes........... 747* (Hirsch) CECB anase ee Bay)
of Molech........... 2074 (Nicol) Pe eres! sey
es eee 1467 (Carver) Inspiration............ 1473* (Warfield)
Tamia ek eee 1467* (Orr) ei bral elgins oss
ef Omnipresence.... . 21908 (Vos) of Conk fresh werd a piety 538 (Farr)
ef Omniscience....... 2191% (Vos) Cnet a Pesumony evel S10
TAR ene eee 1467* (Orr) Divine activity....... 1479
Infirmity.............. 1468" (Macalister) He onion Peri pare aa(e
TARE lie tes 14682 Human element...... 14798
Tnflammation: .«..:.... 1463" ef Interpretation...... 1489 (Schodde)
ef Fever........... 1107> (Macalister) ee Ue eae ce ae
Influences........... 14682 (W. L. Walker) Coumeupes in Pibleynaste :
Tisathierig, Feastof ef Prophecy ena ee 2460* (Orelli)
cf Feasts and Fasts. . .1103* (E. D. Isaacs) res Pee. aie ee
Inhabit............. 1468+ (Edwards) ae at vabaaetee bad
BAe oe tle 883> (Edwards) ef Revelation... ...25778 (Warfield)
Inhabitant............ 1468" (Edwards) Witness ot Apontles alae
Inheritance...........- 1468> (Hirsch) Instant, Instantly... .. . dasa (Maller)
Gf Hei ate. 1369" (Easton) Tnstmicnon:
en ee 2264 (Mack) ef Catechist ae Bute. Lene 582 (Gerberding)
Tei a eee en 1468> (Edwards) Chau eatOn ees oom Gileyer)
Injoin (Enjoin)........ 952» cf Schoolmaster...... 2702» (Easton)
Injurious.............- 14695 Instrument............ 1483?
Injury ef Music............ 2094» (Millar)
ef Crimes........... 745° (Hirsch) Instrumentsof Music. . .1484*
Tike eee e ceed Meccan 1469" (Richardson) cf Music............2094® (Millar)
ef Ink-horn.......... 1469> (Richardson) Insurrection...........1484¢
ef Pen.............- 2297> (Patch) Integrity. ............. 14849 (W. L. Walker)
ef Writing........... 3119*; 3122* (Richardson) ef Urim and Thum-
Ink-horn...........-.. 1469 (Richardson) MUM ee here eia t oS 3040> (N. Isaacs)
ef Horn............. 1422 (Easton) Intelligence............ 14848
Ofel nike ces temerity thse 1469" (Richardson) Intend, Intent......... 14844 (Miller)
CheR er eo. cases bois 2297 (Patch) Intercession........... 1484* (Bevan)
ef Printcccas ies 2455* (Richardson) Of Christ..........-. 14874
ef Writing.........-. 3119*; 3122* (Richardson) In the Gospels. ......1486
Titi eee eee acs ne 1470¢ (Christie) By holy men.........1485>
Earliest............- 1470* Of the Holy Spirit... .1487


Public..............14708


ef Prayers of Jesus... .2431> (Bevan)


3266 GENERAL INDEX
Intercession of Christ... . 1487 (Bevan) 1 bc) eae ma eRe er 1493

cf Intercession....... 1484 (Bevan) a EIEN ce serene rere re orc 14982 (Boyd)

ef Prayers of Jesus. . .2431> (Bevan) ‘ef Abraham......... 18* (Boyd)
Interest............... 1488 (Reeve) Biblical references to. . 1495+ ;

ef Usury............ 3041 (Pollard) ef Family of,in Genesis.1208* (Méller)
Intermeddle........... 14892 (M. O. Evans) ef Jacob............. 1550" (Boyd)
Intermediate State Marriage of......... 14942

cf Eschatology of the cf Sacrifice of........ 19° (Boyd)

AN Re tos etna ete ae 979» (Vos) ef Sarah............. 2691" (Boyd)

Interpretation......... 1489" (Schodde) ee. haere ae

ef Accommodation... .29* (Sweet) Che ApOcary DUC. Ulver a-

ef Inspiration........ 1473° (Warfield) _ ture... 2... Ma GLB homison)

: . Isaiah. . . .1495> (Robinson)

Interpretation of Chris- Book’of 1497>

tianity Ae GR aie, b

ef Leviticus......... 1880" (Mller) haan Be ou oae
Interpretation of Tongues ae ear : : : 1497%

ef Tongues, Gift of. . .2995' (Haston) Critical problem... .1504*
Interrogation.......... 1490° Grit arene deans 15042
Inter-testamental — His- cf Immanuel....... 1457° (A. W. Evans)

tory and Literature Recent views...... 1504»

cf Between the Testa- Wibetnn ee. © Putte 15002

ments............. 455 (Dosker) Gf DialotiAnag.. 841° (Maunder)

Intreat, Intreaty....... 1490» (Miller) ef Hezekiah.......... 1386" (Genung)
Inward Man........... 1490" (Pratt) ef Judah............1761> (Weir)
Inward Part........... 1490> (Pratt) Literary genius... ... .1496

ef Inward Man....... 1490> (Pratt) Martyrdom OR eatin. 14962
wy Gigshub) eee ae cf Messages to Ahaz.. .81> (Caldecott)
Toiada ef Messiah.......... 2040° (Crichton)

of Jehoiada.......... Tiss Roberts) ef Micah. ........... 2046> (Orelli)
Iphdeiah.............. 1491 Narco ate eee 1495
Iphtah..............-- 1491 . ef Palestine.......... 2219° (Conder)
Iphtab-el.............. 1491+ (Ewing) Personal history and
TP eee orl Co see8 re em 14912 Galley. cove atin ee 1495»
PE eh ee 14912 (Farr) Prophecies Ape Fark 15032

ef Gareb eee ae 1175° Prophetic ministry... . 1496

ef Jairite............ 1559" (Roberts) cf Servant of Jehovah
Trad... 00.2... eee eee 1491* (The Lord)........ 2739" (Hough)
ee teeters 1491" PIMOS OL. oases oe 1496

enaeus ; ;

cf Mark, Gospel of... .1989> (Farmer) eee eee
Ir-ha-heres............1491" (Kyle) ture..... Niko ae 161° (J. E. H. Thomson)

ch Heres. rs cnet 1376> (Masterman) Iseah.. 2.2... oe eee, 1508

(10h 0) ar 21932 (Kyle) Iscariot
Tri Gish wes eet tie 1508»

ef Ir... eee 1491 cf Judas Iscariot... ... 1765 (Kerr)

ef Urias............. pues Isdael (Giddel)......... 1508?
Trij Bee ee oo eee ons 14922 Ish Ee eters MRT 1508»
Ir-nahash..... . 14920 . ef Eshban........... 9972
Tropes. wcdaties Nea § 1492» (Patch) ef Ishtob............ 15112

cf Crafts... . .734* (Patch) Ishbaal

ef Metale.. 22. ce 2044* (Patch) ef Ish-bosheth........ 1508? (Breslich)
Tron (city)... 0.0.0.0... 1492> Ishbah................ 1508»
Tarpee ly xo 05.8 ston, es 1492 Ishbak................ 1508>
Irreverence Ishbi-benob............ 1508

cf Crime, Crimes... .. 745> (Hirsch) Ish-bosheth............ 1508? (Breslich)
Irrigation.............1492 (Patch) CE TSI WAS fle so cen RE ae 15112

cf Agriculture........ 76° (Patch) ef Mephibosheth.... . .2033 (Wallace)

of Garden...........1174® (Patch) ef Saul gsc ec le et 2699" (Weir)
Ir-shemesh............ 14932 Ishhod................ 1508»

cf Beth-shemesh.... . .453* (Kyle) ef Ishod............. 15112

Cfberess ti Aon aa 1376> (Masterman) Ahi: coe cvs Yad 15098


GENERAL INDEX


Ishi (person)........... 1509 (Farr)
Ishiah
cf Isshiah............ 1542»
Ishijah
cf Isshijah........... 1542>
Tshinae4 sees ere 4 1509*
Ishmael (Greek)........1510°
Ishmael (Hebrew)...... 1509 (Baur)
ef Gedaliah.......... 1181* (Crichton)
ef Ismael............ 1511
ef Sarah............. 2691" (Boyd)
Son of Abraham...... 15095
Son of Nethaniah.....1510*°
Ishmaelites............ 1510 (Porter)
Ishmaiah.............. 1510°
Ishmeelites
ef Ishmaelites........ 1510° (Porter)
Ishmerai.............. 1510°
Ishod (Ishhod)......... 15115
TSH Pah Bice. acc.s egw oes 1511
Ishpan................ 1511
Ish-sechel.............15118
Ishtar, oi... alae 371° (Rogers)
MSHCO Dee ie.t sce han tenes 15118
Chel sbi g5 25 eat oe 1508°
Tshuatht este. ee, oes eae 15114
ef Ishvah............ 15114
GEISHVE el we aevnton oe 1511
0 12) 11 eae 1511
CEIBH VA ote ce ahs 15114
Ishui (Ishuai).......... 1511
Thali occcis cs ee ee 1511
Tshiyiens Anse sence 5 eae 1511
cf Ish-bosheth........ 1508» (Breslich)
Ishvites (Ishvi)......... 1511+
Talamdie ns nc ake iten ote 1511+ (Day)
ChATVad toca ie Ou 261° (Porter)
cf Coast.........-.-- 672 (Day)
ef Jackal............15488 (Day)


cf Wolf.............8099% (Day)
Isle (Island)........... 15118 (Day)
Isles of the Gentiles... ..1511>

ef Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches)


Ismachiah............- 15115
cf Semachiah........ 27178
Ismael
ef Ishmael (Greek)... .1510%
Ismaerus (Omaerus)... .1511>; 2188
Ismaiah
ef Ishmaiah.......... 1510°
Ispah
cf Ishpah............ 15118
Israel
ef Jacob............. 1549" (Boyd)
Israel, History of the
People 4 icecccees oo 1511 (Orelli)
ef Calf, Golden... ....542' (Cobern); 1275*
cf In Canaan........ 912 (Petrie)
Chronology.......... 1520


Divided kingdoms, the 15204
Division of the nation 1519
Downfall of Judah , ..1525°


| Israel, History of the People—continued


In Egypt............ 1514
Exile, the........... 1525*
ef Gedaliah.......... 11812 (Crichton)
Greek period of...... 15278
cf Asmoneans......283 (Dosker)


cf Maccabaeus..... 1946* (Hutchison)
cf Israel, Kingdom of. 1528> (Weir)
cf Israel, Religion of. .1530> (Orelli)
ef Josephus Flavius. ..1742* (Wenley)


Leadership of Moses. .1515>
The literary prophets .1522>


Maccabees, the....... 15276
MOBS. 5 eee Sa eeatee 1515*
ef Israel, Religion of .1534> (Orelli)
Origing Save Pees oe 1513
Period of the Judges. .1517>
ef Providence........ 2477 (Tillett)


Religious character of .1512°
Return and _ restora-~


[6 (0) # Renee eee Comey oye 1526
Roman period....... 1527
cf Slave, Slavery...... 2815 (Raffety)
Soureces............. 15128
ef Tribes of.......... 1758> (Weir)
United kingdom...... 1518>
Israel, Kingdom of..... .1528» (Weir)
Battle of Karkar..... 1529»
Decline and fall...... 1530*
Early dynasties...... 1528
cf Israel, History of the
People............ 15115; 1522 (Orelli)
cf Judah, Kingdom of . 1758" (Weir)
cf Palestine.......... 2217 (Conder)
Revolution of Jehu... .1529»
Syrian wars......... 1529
Israel, Religion of...... 1530 (Orelli)


Amos and Hosea..... 1538>
cf Apocalyptic Litera-
GUPE Moya enad 3 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)
Before eighth century . 1536
Elijah and Elisha... . .1538


Exile, the........... 1539> .
God, conception of... . 1533
ef Hope............- 1419> (Easton)


ef Israel, History of. ..1511 (Orelli)
Moses, teachings of. . .1534>
Post-exilic period..... 15408
Pre-Mosaic period... .1531>
Psalms, teachings of . 1537+

cf Semites, Semitic Re-


1b 4 (0) ee ere re 2717+ (Mack)

cf Totemism......... 30002 (M. O. Evans)
Israelite, Israclitish.....1541>
Issachar.......-.--..00. 1541> (Ewing)

ef Galilee............ 1163+ (Ewing)

ef Numbers, Book of. .2163* (Whitelaw)
Tashiabieet< vie ecto 1542»
Isshijah (Aseas)........ 1542»
Issue........--..-... 15426
Issue (of Blood)........ 1542> (Macalister)


3267


Istalcurus.............
Isuah

ef Ishvah............
Isui

ef Ishvi......
Isvah

ef Ishvah............
Itala Version

ef Vulgate...........
Italian Band

ef Army, Roman.....


ef Band.............


Ithai


ef Ithiel and Ueal....
ef UWcaltccsce ees


Ituraea (Iturea)........
ef Jetur.. 00.0.0...
Ituraeans............
Ivah
ef Hena.............
ef Ivvah... 0.2.00...
TVOrye ees es gor eae


Iyar
CEAY Yaris tee cad
Iye-abarim...........


LyVariec doers: @iaducns


Izehar


Izharites..............
Izliah (Jezliah).........
Izrahiah.............
Terahite...........0...


GENERAL INDEX


1511*
3058 (Angus)


258> (Allen)

382° (Nicol)

1542> (Allen)
26182 (Allen)
1543? (Macalister)


1543> (Reeve)
15432 (Whitelaw)
3129> (Whitelaw)
1543


.1543> (Genung)


30322 (Roberts)
1543» (Genung)
1543

1543

1543»

1543

1543>

1543>

1543>

1543>

1543>

1543» (Reeve)
1544 (Ewing)
1675


15449 (Ewing)


1374> (Ewing)
1544» (Pinches)
1544» (Day)
1544

1544° (Pinches)
2721» (Pinches)
1545* (Hutchison)


1545>


1545"


1545*
1545>
541> (Porter)


1545»
1545>
1545»
1545>


1545


1545>
1545»
3147>


. .1545>


Jaakan
cf Beeroth-bene-jaakan
Jaakobah.............


ef Kiriath-jearim.....
Jaare-oregim...........
Jaareshiah.............
Jaasai (Jaasau, Jaasu). .
JAASIOLS ee. tens ela Mines


Jaazer
C0) ae 7) oe a
JABZIBN ef ies ease eeu


Jabbok..............


ef Lily-work........

ef Network..........

ef Pillar.............

ef Temple...........
Jacimus


Jacinth
cf Hyacinth..........
cf Stones, Precious... .


cf Jackal’s Well. .....
CE Sat yTe eke dees
cf Sea-monster......
ef Whale............


' ef Zoblogy...........
» Jackal’s Well..........


424>


1811> (Masterman)
1545> (Roberts)
1546

1546°

15462

1571

1546

1546 (Roberts)
1675>


1572* (Ewing)


. 1546


1546
1546> (Roberts)
1756*


.1546> (Ewing)


1230> (Ewing)
1546>

1546 (Ewing)
1546> (Ewing)
2698 (Weir)

1547

1547+ (E. D. Isaacs)
15479 (Porter)
1547>


....1547> (Crichton)
. .1547> (Caldecott)
.1893>


2140°
2398> (Orr)
2932" (Caldecott; Orr)


89> (Mack)


1443»

2856* (Fletcher)
1548 (Day)

873 (Day)

1144 (Day)

15118 (Day)

1548> (Masterman)
2697* (Day)


. 27079 (Day)


3082 (Day)
30842 (Day)
3099 (Day)
31558 (Day)
1548 (Masterman)


ef Jerusalem......... 1597 (Masterman)


| ef Hinnom, Valley of. .1393> (Masterman)
|


Jacob (father of Joseph


,


husband of Mary)... .1556
Jacob (patriarch). ...... 1549" (Boyd); 1556+


GENERAL INDEX


3269


Jacob—continued
ef Abraham......... 18* (Boyd)
Antiquity of name... .15495
At Beersheba........ 15522
At Bethel........... 1550°; 1551>


Blessing and death... .15528
Contrast with Esau. . .1553>
Critical reconstruc-


Dealings with Esau. . .1550*
Development of char-


SCLED sari cusps? Aeashaees 1552»
In Egypt............ 1552*
Epiphanies to........ 1553
ef And Esau......... 478> (J. M. Wilson)
ef Family of, in Gene-

BIS Geet eee en cere ict 1208" (Maller)
In Haran............ 15502
Importance among the

patriarchs.........1549>
And Israel........... 15542
Meaning of name ... .1549*

As myth or deity..... 1555»
Natural qualities. .... 1552>
ef Palestine.......... 2210 (Conder)


References to, in NT.. 1554»
References to, in OT. .1554>
Relations with God. . .1553
Residence in Canaan. . 15515
Return to Canaan. ...1551
As saga hero........- 1555>
Term denoting Israel-


Use of Divine names in
story of........... 1553>
Jacob, Testament of
ef Apocalyptic Litera-


TUrei eee es: 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)
Jacob’s Well. ..........- 1556> (Ewing)
Churches on site of. . . 1557*
Description.......... 1557"
Location............ 1556>
ef Shechem.......... 2755 (Ewing)
ef Sychar............ 2876 (Ewing) |
Jacubus (Akkub)....... 1557°
Jada cc ney tai he ones 1557*
Jadae ccik. sce xiGeees 1557"
ef Iddo... ,.1447> (Crannell)
Jaddai
cf Iddo ...1447> (Crannell)
Jaddua .....,,1557% (Crichton)
Jaddus.........-.00 005 1557>
ef Barzillai. .. 410 (Rees)
J ACON eee cFc teeta ake 1557> (Crichton)
Teel onc tete een ee 1557> (Schenk) ; 814% (Mar- |
golis)
Breach of hospitality. . 1557>
Praise of...........- 1558" |
ef Sigera............- 2812> (Schenk) |
JASUM as es exec ea RR 1558*
Jah


ef God, Names of... . .1264> (Mack)


Jahath...........0006- 1558> (Crichton)

DANI cosy cose seth 1558 (Ewing)
ef Kedemoth........ 1790°

Jahaziah (Jahzeiah).. ...1559° (Roberts)

Jahaziel............... 1558 (Roberts)
cf Uzziel............38044> (Roberts)


cf Zechariah.........3136 (Easton)

Jalidais isin san Coes 1558>
Jahdiel................ 1558
Jado sa es seo a hes 1558
Jahleel................ 1558?
Jahleelites.:........... 1558>
Jahmai............... 1558
Jahweh


cf God, Names of.... .1264 (Mack)


Jahzah (Jahaz).........1558
Jahzeel...............1558?
Jahzeelites............ 1559
Jahzeiah.............. 15592 (Roberts)
ef Jonathan......... 1730> (Roberts)
Jahzerah.............- 15598
Jahziel (Jahzeel)....... 1558?
Jailor
ef Prison............ 2456 (T. Lewis)
| Jair...........,.,.....1559* (Crichton)
ef Havvoth-jair...... 1345 (Ewing)
JAMIL Er 8 en Storrs aut 1559* (Roberts)
GET a x aed in sane: 1491 (Farr)
JAITUSS Rs es ale oe 1559» (Kerr)
Jairus (Apoc).......... 1559>
CERAIPUB Pens eee 88>
CE aE erin one cases 1559® (Crichton)
Jakan (Akan).......... 88>
Jakehissccditieat savant 1559» (Crichton)
Cf Agur hore ee eee 782 (Genung)
JaKiM Aree. wee awe 1559>
ef Eliakim........... 9292 (S. F. Hunter)
Jalam (Jaalam)........ 1559»
PAON et agehe ia oS 1559»
| Jambres
ef Jannes and Jam-
bres ey fe ele 1568" (Rutherfurd)
JaMbN scene eens 1559"
James (brother of the
TOT) nee tee ee etoe 1561° (Kerr)
In Apocryphal litera-
ture..............1561>
Appearance of Jesus
Ome soit, sat erethne & 1666>
Author of Epistle of
James............ 1561
ef Brethren of the
LOTS. Rates SA 518> (Jacobs)
In the Epistles....... 1561"
In the Gospels.......1561*


ef James, Epistle of. . .1662* (Hayes)
cf Joseph, Husband of


Mary ores eek 1740 (Kerr)

| James (the Less; son of
Alphaeus) ..........1561" (err)

cf Brethren of the
Lord.............518 (Jacobs)


3270 GENERAL INDEX


James (son of Alphaeus)—continued Japhleti. .............. 1569"
Called James the Less 1561 , Japhore fees sas etenes 15698
ef Simon the Canaan- ef Joppa............ 1731> (Ewing)
ite, or Cananaean, Jar
or Zealot.......... 2798 (Kerr) ef Barrel............406* (Hager)
James (son of Zebedee). . 1560" (Kerr) Varah... eee eee 1569»
In Apocryphal litera- ef Jehoaddah........ 1574»
Free hy eee, ee eee 1560° Jaréb oc. tecaten hh oS 1569» (Crichton)
Apostleship.......... 1560+ Epithet of Assyrian
of Brethren of the Lord 518° (Jacobs) king.............. 1569>
Call by Jesus........ 1556 Historical reference. . .1569> ;
Gi Zebedees. + casein 31348 Jared at seit Peat 15708; 139" (Davis)
James, Epistle of....... 1562* (Hayes) ef Jered Docs Pes 1587
Authoritative note ...1562> Jaresiah ’
Authorship. ......... 1563* of Jaareshiah........ ad
In church history . .. .15662 Jarha PS AER RR ca er Gants 1570°
Comparison with Jesus’ Jarib. . veer eens 15708
Style toe acne Pee 15645 ef Joribus........... 17365
Datos Joe nce 1565> Jarimoth.............. 1570*
In the Fathers....... 1566* Jarmuth..... ......1570* (Masterman)
Figures of speech. .... 15642 ef Ramoth........... 25298
ef James (brother of ef Remeth........... 2557*
the Lord). cho. 1561> (Kerr) Apes Aenea ae
Jesus and James...... 15678 peta geo GS ast Shea ase 1570"
Jewish character...... 1562 peau
ef Justification. ...... 1785 (Faulkner) ef Jeshurun.......... 1623" (Roberts)
Modern message...... 15672 Jashar, Book of........ 1570° Orr)
Practical nature...... 1562 ef Beth-horon, Battle
Style...............1563? Oba ahr hieY aata ek 446> (Maunder)
Vitninee sehr acne 15640 Jashen (Hashem)....... 1570 (Roberts)
dies: (Eroteeaneclion ef Jonathan... .......1730> (Roberts)
of Jasher, Book of
ef Apocryphal Gospels 195* (Hutchison) cf Beth-horon, Battle
Jamin (Iadinus)........ 1567; 14460 Che an ound)
Ce es aces ene 1568". cf Jashar, Book of... .1570* Orr)
od ees 1568 Jashobeam............1570 (Crichton)
ey irate lanes ei Tesh wees noe ances. 15718
ef Jabneel...........1547* (Porter) ef Tob. . ties ad ny er
: ef Jashubites.........1571
Jamnites..........-... 1568+ ee aoe ee 1571>
J anai (Jaanai) So mee ass 15682 of Shicces aahibs : ‘ ; "750%
Cre ee ree Jashubi-lehem.......... 1571"
sai st ame ae noe TaehOMleRe es oases 15712
ef Janum............ 1568 GAIA D as oh oa 15718
JANDA teh ig ke ea 15689 Ticlte woseth ate guns 15718
Jannes and Jambres.....1568* (Rutherfurd) Of Taasislo oe ee 1546
ager he eae JASON a fA isto ieg Bees 1571+ (Hutchison)
Janoa. sees. sss... ASO ing te Ee laa
Janum.... 6.2.6... ee. 1568? Companion of Paul. . .1571>
efJanim............ 15682 Host of Paulin Thessa-
Japheth............... 1568» (Pinches) IOnlGa ose eee 1571>
Connection with Greek Jasper (Jaspis)
Iapetos........... 1569 ef Stones, Precious... .2856* (Fletcher)
cisPlam e498 4. 2 ee 1323" (Pinches) Jasubus! 4400 eh 1571>
Meaning of word..... 1568> ef Jashub........... 15712
ef Shem............. 27599 (Pinches) Jatal
ef Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches) CE AGAI Scena 317
Japheth (place)........ 1569 Jathanie Fis Meenas 1571
Japhians 36. ook genes 1569" (Crichton) ef Jonathas.......... 1731>
Japhia (place)......... 1569+ Jathbath


Japhlet............... 1569 ef Jotbathah......... 17549


ef Hook.............


Jawbone.............
ef Ramath-lehi.......


Jealousy, Water of
ef Adultery..........
Jearim, Mount.........
cf Chesalon..........
Jeatherai, Jeaterai......
Jeberechiah............


Jecamiah
ef Jekamiah.........


Jeduthun
ef Asaph..........--


Jeezerites
ef Abiezer...........


GENERAL INDEX


1571»

1571> (Masterman)
1572" (Roberts)
1295 (Heidel)

1305*

252" (Nicol)

15728 (M. O. Evans)
1572

1419 (Easton)
1868> (Day)


.15728 (M. O. Evans)


2528> (Ewing)

15722 (M. O. Evans)
15728 (Ewing)

1572»

1572® (Forrester)
63* (Margolis)

2972» (Easton)


1452 (Cobern)


63° (Margolis)

1572»

604»

1572

15732

1573" (Masterman; Orr)
1573 (Orr)

1595» (Masterman)
15732 (Orr)

15738 (Orr)

1573* (Masterman; Orr)
1595 (Masterman)


1586>

1573»

1573»

1573»

1573

1573>

1573

1573

1573

1577" (Genung)
1573?

1573 (Roberts)
1573

1573° (Roberts)
1573

48> (Beecher)
1573>

1573>

15742


262> (Millar)
2488» (Sampey)


3271
Jegar-saha-dutha....... 1574
Jehallelel, Jehaleleel.... .1574*
Jehdeiah.............. 15748
Jehezkel, Jehezekel..... 15742
cf Ezekiel........... 1071* (Méller)
Sebighs. hace yee vs whee 1574°
POI Misa us acs, <; couse 1574* (Roberts)
cf Hiereel........... 1389»
ef Jehuel............ 1586
ef Jeiel..........-.-- 1586> (Roberts)
Jehizkiah.............. 1574
Jehoaddah, Jehoadah .. .1574>
Chiderahecs isa seatece 1569"
Jehoaddan............ 15742
Jehoaddin
ef Jehoaddan........ 1574»
Jehoahaz (of Israel) ... . 1574 (Caldecott)
Chronology of........ 1574
Idolatry of.......... 1575*
ef Jehoash (of Judah) . 1575» (Caldecott)
cf Joahaz............ 16785
Low state of the king-
COM 2 ts neat 1574
Jehoahaz (of Judah). . . .1575* (Genung)
cf Josiah............ 1751> (Genung)
cf Shallum.......... 27478 (Umbach)
Jehoash (of Israel)... . ..1576 (Caldecott)
Assyria and Damascus 1576°
And Elisha.......... 1576>
cf Jehoahaz (of Israel). 1574> (Caldecott)
ef Jeroboam II....... 15944 (Caldecott)


Victory over Amaziah 15779
Jehoash (of Judah)..... 1575 (Caldecott)


Assassinated......... 1576»
ef Athaliah.......... 317> (Caldecott)
Decline of........... 1576"
Made king by Jehoiada 1575°
Repair of temple..... 1576*
Saved from his grand-
mother............ 1575"
Jehohanan............1577* (Roberts)
ef Johanan.......... 1695 (Roberts)
Jehoiachin....:........ 1577 (Genung)
Deportation by Nebu-
chadnezzar........ 15776
Imprisonment in Baby-
lone Mien ee sere 1577
cf Manasseh......... 1978* (Genung)
Release of........... 1577°


Siege and surrender of
Jerusalem under... .573* (Nicol)


ef Zedekiah.......... 31412 (Genung)

Jehoiada.............- 1578* (Roberts)
cf Jehoash (of Judah) . 1575» (Caldecott)
ef Joiada............ 17278


Restoration of temple. 1578+
Two accounts of revo-


lution............-. 1578+
Jehoiada (of David's
time)§ acces ees 15788
Jehoiakim............. 1579* (Genung)
Character........... 1579»


3272 GENERAL INDEX


Jehoiakim—continued
Character of the


period............15798
Disastrous close of

TOMB es ceca aes 15802
ef Jeremiah.......... 1588" (Orelli)
ef Joiakim........... 17278
ef Jokim............17278
ef Josiah............1751> (Genung)
Meaning of name... . .1579*


Prophetic references to.1579*
Relation to Jeremiah. 1579
Revolt and punishment


Oise or tee 572 (Nicol)

Sources for his life. . . . 15792
Jehoiarib.............. 1580"

ef Joiarib............ 1727
Jehonadab (Jonadab). . .1580* (Roberts)

ef Jonathan.......... 1730° (Roberts)

ef Rechab, Rechabites .2535° (Mack)
Jehonathan............ 1580°

ef Jonathan.......... 1730" (Roberts)
Jehoram (of Israel)... . .1580% (Mosiman)


And Ahaziah of Judah 1581"
Chronology of his


BEG Ht ioe ae a 1580>
Conflicts with Syria... 1581+
ef Jehu.............1584> (Caldecott)


ef Joram............ 1732»
Murdered by Jehu... . 1581
Relation to Baalism.. .1580>


War with Moab...... 1580
Jehoram (of Judah)... .1581> (Mosiman)

Cruel character...... 1581»

Disease and death... .1581>

Encouragement of

Baalism........... 1581»

Letter of Elijah to... .15815

Loss of territory... ...1581

Married to Athaliah. . 1581

Revolt of Edom...... 1581
Jehoshabeath.......... 1581

cf Jehosheba......... 15835 :


Jehoshaphat (general)... 1581 (Roberts)
Jehoshaphat (of Judah) 1582 (Mosiman)
ef Ahaziah.......... 83" (Mosiman)
Alliance with Jehoram.1582
Death and burial..... 15837
Destruction of ships... 1583*
Educational system... 1582


Foreign policy....... 15825
ef Israel, History of the
People............ 1521» (Orelli)

ef Josaphat.......... 1736>
ef Joshaphat......... 1743
Judicial organization. . 1582
Public defense....... .1582»
Reforms of..........1582#
Relations with Ahab. . 1582»
Sources for..  ..... 1582«


Victory over Moab und
Ammon...........1582»


Jehoshaphat, Valley of. .1583° (Masterman)


ef Berecah..........- 4392 (Masterman)

ef Gehenna.......... 11832 (Vos)

ef Jerusalem......... 1599" (Masterman)

cf Kidron, The Brook . 1798 (Masterman)

cf King’s Vale........ 1808? (Masterman)
Jehosheba...........-. 15835

cf Jehoshabeath...... 1581»
Jehoshua.............. 15835

ef Joshua........... 1743" (Roberts)
Jehovah


. 12668 (Mack)
.1796° (Carver)


ef God, Names of... .
cf Keys, Power of....


ef Lord, The......... 1919 (Carver)

ef Name............21128 (W. L. Walker)
Jehovah-jireh.......... 1583> (Ewing)
Jehovah-nissi.......... 15848
Jehovah, Servant of.. .. .2739* (Hough)
Jehovah-shalom........ 15848
Jehovah-shammah...... 15848
Jehovah-tsidkenu...... 15844
Jehozabad............. 15845
Jehozadak............. 1584

ef Josedech.......... 1736»
Jeni es oh eee 2 toed 1584» (Caldecott)

Anointed king........1585*

Challenge to Samaria. 1585>

Character of......... 1586+

Destruction of house

of Ahab........... 1585>


Hosea’s verdict on... .1585
ef Israel, History of...1521> (Orelli)


cf Jezebel........... 1675» (Roberts)
Massacre of Baalites. . 1585»

ef Menahem......... 2031» (Caldecott)
Misfortunes of....... 15865


Murder of Jezebel... .1585*
Murder of Judaean


princes............ 1585
Murder of the kings.. .1585»
Officer of Ahab....... 1584»


Relations with Jona-
dab ben Rechab... .1585%


Ride to Jezreel....... 1585"
Tribute to Shalmaneser
fi Bercccn is FM ee se 15862

Wars with Hazael... .1585>
Jehubbah............. 1586*
Jehucal..........0.... 1586"
Jehud..............0., 15862
A I=)01 5 0 } ae 1586"
Jehudijah

ef Ha-jehudijah...... 1321
Jehuel................1586°

ef Jehiel... 20, 15748 (Roberts)
Jehush

ef Jeush............, 1675
Veil iene ss cked passe 1586> (Roberts)

cf Jehiel.. 02.0000... 1574* (Roberts)

ef Jeuel... 2.22... 16752

of Ochielus......... 21788


Jekabzeel

ef Kabzeel........... 1788
Jekameam............. 1586>
Jekamiah............. 1586>
Jekuthiel.............. 1586>
Jemimah.............. 1586"
Jemnaan.............. 1586>
Jemuel................ 1586
Jeopard, Jeopardy...... 1586>
Jephthah.............. 15876 (Schenk)

ef Judges, Book of... . 1772" (Geden)

Ch VOW fcc 1 5 elie ees 3058* (Levertoff)
Jephunneh............1587
Jérahy e164 s08 Halse eke 15875
Jerahmeel............. 1587 (Roberts)
Jerechu, Jerechus

ef Jericho........... 1592* (Wright)
DOTCU Re he okey 1587>

ef Jared............. 1570"
Jeremai............... 1587>

ef Jeremias.......... 1591+
Jeremiah (general)..... 1587> (Roberts)

ef Jeremias.......... 1591
Jeremiah (prophet)..... 1588* (Orelli); 407% (T. W.

Davies)
Compelled to go to
Egy pts Soris. ccc 1588>


Conspiracy against... .1588*
Depressing message of 1589>


Disposition.......... 1589
ef Egyptian Disper-

BION wee eae 856" (Nicol)
Growth of prophecies .1590*
Idealism of.......... 1590
ef Israel, History of . .1524* (Orelli)
ef Lamentations... .. . 1824» (Orelli)


Length of ministry... . 1588"
ef Ministry in Jerusa-


lenis fae Meo deere: 5732 (Nicol)
Ministry in reign of
Josiah. ........... 1588"


Name and parentage. . 1588"
ef Pharaoh Hophra. . . 2359 (Nicol)


Poetic nature of...... 1590
Preaching of......... 1589»
Preaching and death

in Egypt..........1588>
Preparation of the roll. 1588>
In prison ........... 1588>
References to Baby-

lonians by......... 1589»
References to Scythians

Bye iy ds eee 1589>


In reign of Jehoiachin. 1588>
In reign of Jehoiakim. 1588*
In reign of Zedekiah. . 1588


With the remnant after

fall of Jerusalem... . 1588»
ef Sacrifice, OT....... 2648" (Reeve)
ef Sheshach ......... 2765> (Wolf)


Siege of Jerusalem... .1588>


GENERAL INDEX


Jeremiah (prophet)—continued
Testimony of book to
character of....... 1589"
Tradition of stoning... 1589+
As a type of Jesus... .15897
Jeremiah, Book of


Authenticity......... 1590
Composition......... 1590+
Editorial elements. .. .1590°
Integrity............ 1590»
ef Obadiah, Book of. .2173> (Sampey)
ef Palestine.......... 2219> (Conder)


Relation to LXX..... 1591
Jeremiah, Epistle of

ef Jeremy, Epistle of. .1591* (T. W. Davies)
Jeremiah, The Lamenta-


tions of

cf Lamentations...... 18242 (Orelli)
Jeremias............5- 1591>

ef Jeremai........... 1587

ef Jeremiah.......... 1587> (Roberts)
Jeremiel.............-- 1591

cf Uriel :.nc. 2 ees 3040° (Angus)
Jeremoth............-- 15912

ef Hieremoth (Apoc). .1389>

ef Ramoth...........2529%
Jeremy


ef Jeremiah (general) . 1587» (Roberts)
Jeremy, The Epistle of. .1591* (T. W. Davies)
Authorship, date, and


ALIN AL fies ee es 1591»
Canonicity and posi-
POM s.:, Meda RA ase 1591»
Contents............ 1591>
Greek original....... 1591
Nature of...........1591>
Text and Versions... .1592*
Jeriahecte ee occ aie ale 15928
JerIbAaAln” Sas ores 1592*
Jericho.......-..-.0005 1592 (Wright)
Aqueducts near...... 1592>
Explanation of fall... . 1592
ef Jordan Valley...... 1735* (Wright)
ef Joshua............ 1745» (Roberts)


ef Judah, Territory of .1763° (Masterman)
Later OT references. . . 1592


Location...........-1592
In NT times.......... 1592
ef Palestine, Recent
Exploration ....... 2229 (Cobern)
As rendezvous for pil-
ATIMS fees 1592
Jere le iicsdeceeesaetien 1592
Jerijah
ef Jeriah............ 1592"
Jerimoth............-. 1593® (Roberts)
Jerioth............005- 15932
JeroboamI............ 1593" (Mosiman)
Choice of capital..... 1593»
Chosen king......... 1593»
Convocation at She-
chem.............1598"


3273


3274 GENERAL INDEX


Jeroboam I—continued Jerusalem—continued


Ephraimite leader. . . .15938 Climate
cf Israel, History of the Cisterns........... 1597
People ............- 1520 (Orelli) Cold and heat...... 1597
ef Nebat............ 2126» Healthfulness...... 15978
ef Rehoboam........ 2551° (Mosiman) Rainfall........... 1597
Relations with Ahijah 1593° ef Destruction of (586
Relations with the BONS Pierce eas 573> (Nicol)
prophets.......... 1594 Excavations........- 1601
Religious policy...... 1594 Archaeological — so-
ef Shishak........... 2777» (Nicol) cieties........... 1602
Sources for.......... 15938 Bliss and Dickie... . 1602
Jeroboam II........... 15942 (Caldecott) Clermont-Ganneau. . 1602*
Ceremonial religion. . .1594» Maudslay......... 1602*
ef Jehoash (of Israel) .1576> (Caldecott) Merrill, work of . .. . 1602+
Ministry of Jonah. . . .1595* Palestine Explora-
Mission of Amos...... 1595* tion Fund....... 1602
ef Shallum........... 27474 (Caldecott) Parker, work of. . . . 16025
Success of........... 1594> Robinson, work of. .1602*
Testimony of Amos. . .1594> Schick, work of... . .1602?
Jeroham.............. 1595* (Roberts) Warren and Conder . 1602*
Jerome Wilson, work of... .1602
cf Mark, Gospel of... .1990° (Farmer) Fortification. twa ee ae i
ef Septuagint........ 2723 (Thackeray) ef Fortification. .... 1136° (Nicol)
Gates v.caiciaa eo 16032
Jerubbaal............. 1595 Beniamin, Gate of. .1607°
ef Gideon........... 1226 (Schenk) Sa ee Ores 7
ef Jerubbesheth...... 1595+ (Roberts) Dung Gate Mer yo ee
Ephraim, Gate of.. .1607>
Jerubbesheth........... 1595* (Roberts) Existin t 1603°
ggates......
ef Jerubbaal......... 15958 Bick Gate ck 16072
ef Jeshebeab...:..... 16222 Peat Gate hou 1606
JOTUCL Se pd pesca oe 1595 ef Hammeah, Tower
ef Jezreel............ 1677° (Ewing) Off eieeucntewekee 1325 (Masterman)
Jerusalem............. 1595* (Masterman) of Hammiphkad,
Ancient water supply .1608* Gate of......... 1325
ef Bethesda........ 444» (Masterman) cf Hananel, Tower of 1333" (Masterman)
Birket Hammam el Horse Gate........ 16072
Batrack......... 16108 ef King’s Garden. . .1808* (Masterman)
Birket Israél....... 16108 ef King’s Pool...... 18082
Birket Mamilla.....1610° ef Maktesh........ 1969" (Masterman)
Birket es Sultan... .1610° cf Miphkad, Gate of 20625
Canaanite aqueduct 1608> cf Mishneh........ 2066 (Masterman)
Cistéern structure. . . 1609» Names, various.... .1603°
Cisterns of temple Old Gate.......... 16075
area............ 16108 Sheep Gate........ 16072
Cuttings at Job’s ef Sheep Gate... .2758*
Welles cists aad sak 1609° CEBU ee sai ices 2871>
ef Fuller’s Field... .1148* (Masterman) Upper Gate of
ef Gezer........... 1222 (Masterman) temple.......... 1608
ef Gihon.......... 1228> (Masterman) Valley Gate........ 1606"
Gihon dam........ 1608° ef Valley Gate... .3045 (Masterman)
Hezekiah’s aque- Water Gate........16078
GUC ERR es nN 1609» Geology............. 1596>
High level aqueduct. 1611 cf Geology of Pales-
Low level aqueduct. .1611* TMC af he eas 1215> (Day)
Other aqueducts.. . . 1609 Limestone......... 15978
Pool of Bethesda. . . 1610 Hills fais cytes B83 1599>
Pool of Siloam. .... 1610 ef Gerizim, Mount. .1218* (Ewing)
ef Siloam........ 27912 (Masterman) ef Millo........... 2055° (Masterman)
Present supply. .... 1611> ef Olives, Mount of . 21869 (Masterman)
Solomon’s Pools. ...1611* cf Ophel.......... 2196 (Masterman)


Zion, fortress of... .1597>


GENERAL INDEX


8275


Jerusalem—continued


HIStory. ies ees 1613”
ef Adoni-zedek..... 58* (Mack)
Akratiis.. pteg se: 1613>


Alexander the Great 1616»
Antiochian rule... ..1617#
Antiochus, capture


DY or hoes 16176
Antiochus, cruelties

Of se oe ante ans 1617
Antiochus _Epiph-

11) - ae 16178
Antipater made pro-

curator.......... 1618»


Bar-cochba’s revolt. 1619»
Besieged by Hazael. 1615+


ef Beth-zur........ 454° (Masterman)
ef Bezetha......... 459>
Capture by Syrians

in 134 BC....... 1618"
Chosroes IT captures

Cts ea ie 1620
Constantine’s church 1620*
Crusades.......... 1620»
David’s city. ......1614*
Disruption........ 1614>


Eudoxia’s walls... . .1620
Expansion in Da-


vid’s day........ 1614
Fall of the city, 70

ERD oso hy atric 1619»
Hadrian’s _restora-

TODS 2525 ds ees 1620+
Hasmonean _ build-

WN GS ge otto 1618


Hebrew conquest. . .1613»
Hellenization of city. 1617#
Heracleus enters city 1620
Herod Agrippa I... .1619°
Herod Archelaus..’. .1619
Herod’s buildings. . .1618>
Herod the Great’s
conquest........ 1618
Hezekiah’s _ public


Jebusite city ...... 1614*
Jehoash, captured by 1615*
Jeremiah’s ministry. 1616*
Jewish revolt...... 1619»
Jonathan’s restora-


Judas, defeat of... .1617>
Judas Maccabaeus,


Justinian’s buildings 16204
ef Praetorium....2428 (Masterman)


Jerusalem—continued


History—continued
Kharizimians....... 1620
Maccabean uprising 1617>
Manasseh’s reign. . .1615°
cf Melchizedek..... 2028 (Roberts)
Moslem conquest. ..1620°
Nehemiah’s wall... .1616>
ef Ophel.......... 2196> (Masterman)
Ottoman Turks... . .1620°
Paleolithie remains. . 1613
Parthian conquest. .1618>
Persian period... .. .1616"

Pilate, Pontius. ....1619*
Plundered by Arabs 1615*
Pompey’s conquest

of city........... 1618>


ef Salem.......... 2663+ (Pinches)
Seljuk Turks... ....1620>
Shishak’s invasion. . 1615
Siege and destruction

by Nebuchadnez-


GOAT el Fcc urate 1616
Siege by Vespasian
and Titus........ 1619
ef Siloam.......... 2791" (Masterman)
Solomon’s city..... 1614>
Solomon’s walls... .1614®
ef Solomon...... 28248 (Weir)
Tell el-Amarna let-
GOL S ire a eee 1613>
Uzziah’s _fortifica-

TIONS t6:3. 300 aca 1615+
Literature........... 1621
Modern city......... 1620°

Christian _ popula-
TOW xa. Seek ees 3620»


Jewish population .. 1620
Official and munici-
pal conditions... .16212


IN@ME). Fe caeenra ls Woe 15962
In cuneiform... .... 15968
In Greek and Latin. 1596
In Hebrew........ 1596°
Meaning.......... 1596
ef Palestine, Recent
Exploration ....... 2226 (Cobern)
ef Pentateuch........ 2305% (Wiener)
B1t@s 6 S:Ges Seta 1598»
Debris accumula-
TIONS foe ean: 1599>
East Valley........ 1599
Eastern hill........ 16002
ef Fuller’s Field... .1148* (Masterman)
ef Goah........... 1248>
ef Golgotha........ 1275* (Masterman)
ef Harsith......... 1341
ef Mishneh........ 2066 (Masterman)
Soiliessis fos reese 1598>


3276 GENERAL INDEX


Jerusalem—continued Jerusalem—continued
Site—continued CE Ug tect ey eee es 3042> (Weir)
St. Anne’s Valley. . .1599 Valleys
Surrounding moun- ef Hinnom, Valley of 1393> (Masterman)
CAINS Hoes eee 1598> ef Jehoshaphat, Val-
Temple hill........ 1600° ley Ofek ig Be 1583* (Masterman) i
ef Temple....... 2930°; 2937 (Caldecott; ef Kidron, The Brook 1798? (Masterman)
Orr) - ef Vale, Valley..... 3045* (Day)
Tyropoeon Valley. . .1599» Walls............... 1602
West Valley....... 1599" Broad wall. .......1607>
Western hill....... 1599° Buried remains... . .1603°
CE AION ek Sera 3150> (Masterman) Dam of the Tyro-
Springs poeon........... 1604"
Bath of healing... . .1598° First wall......... 1604>
ef Bethesda........ 444> (Masterman) Josephus’ testimony.1604°
Character of waters 1598 cf Millo........... 2055 (Masterman)
ef Gihon.......... 1228> (Masterman) Nehemiah’s account.1606"
Intermittent nature 1598* Present walls....... 1602»
Jackal’s Well...... 1548>; 1548> (Masterman) Robinson’s theory . . 1605"
Job’s Well......... 1598 Second wall... .... .1605*
Outlet............1598% Datecsce wl 1606
ef Siloam.......... 27912 (Masterman) South wall........ 1602
Spring of the Al- Third wall. . . 1605
mond . weuscthan ata & 1598» Jerusalem, New. . 1621” (Vos)
Spring of Gihon. . . .1597 cf Revalauen of 5 ahi 2582» (Orr)
cae remains and Jerushars . sce wate 16222
SIUES Acar ia is Jesarelah.............. 1622
Pee ee aD ee JUHA cine ctave 1622" (Roberts)
a ie ae 3 ef Osaias............ 2202
pope nes en Po) ee 16224
OCR IU ES eA Oe ae er oe ae eh 1622
a ed Teehebeaboe ees wee 1622"
pipe fee aa ef Jerubbesheth...... 1595 (Roberts)
ef Golgotha........ 1275" (Masterman)
: JOSEP ages ey s scanaaests 16222
Greek foundation Jeshimon 1622° (Masterman)
> © | deshimon............-.
Been eens os ee ef Judaea...... ..17579 (Masterman)
Grotto of St. James 16123
: ef Judah, Terrien of. 1763" (Masterman)
Herod’s tombs..... 1612* ¢
Kings, tombs of -1612* Jeshishai..............1622
? Lae . b
Robinson’s Arch.. ..1613* Jeshohaiah............1622
of Sepulchre 27328 Jeshua (person)........1622> (Roberts)
Simon the Just, tomb ef Jesus Christ... ....1624° (Orr)
of 1612> ef Joshua (general)... .1743
ef Temple......... 2930 (Caldecott; Orr) Jeshua (place)......... we
Various tombs..... 16128 Jeshuaby 06.2 vous 1622 ;
Virgin, tomb of... . .1613® JOSHULUM oy imeuigtacea 1623 (Roberts)
Zachariah, tomb of .1612* of Jashar, Book of. .. .1570° (Orr)
ef Zachariah... . .3129% Jesiah : :
Topography.........1600* ef Isshiah...........1542
Ale patercn ae hae ae 1601 JOSIAS! oo ood, week 1623+
Bezetha........... 1600 ef Josias............ 1753>
City of David ..... 1601> Jesimiel............... 16238
Five hills, the...... 1600> Jess@s Sake Shc. eee 1623* (Roberts)
Josephus’ _—_descrip- ef Abigail........... 9> (Mack)
{OMG eke pices 16008 ef Abishai........... 13° (Mack)
Lower city........ 1601» CEEBOAZ er 8 Sea! ee od 491° (Roberts)
Northern quarter. . .1600° ef Nahash........... 21099 (W. W. Davies)
Upper and lower ef Root of Jesse... .. .2623>
city............1600° ef Samuel, Books of.. .2678° (Geden)
PIONS a5 a deka, Saeee 1601> Jesting............000. 1624
Towers Jesu


Furnaces, Tower of .1607° ef Ishvah............ 15115


GENERAL INDEX


Jesuites
ef Ishvi..........0... 1511
Jesurun
ef Jeshurun.......... 1623* (Roberts)
Jesus (general)......... 16245
ef Jeshua............ 1622» (Roberts)
Jesus Christ...........1624# (Orr)
Chronology.......... 1628


cf Chronology of NT 644 (Armstrong)

Date of baptism... .1628°

Date of birth...... 1628>

Date of crucifixion. . 1629"

Length of ministry. . 1629"

ef Luke, Gospel of . .19402 (A. T. Robertson)
Life ere eines 1631"

Adoration of Jesus. .61° (Edwards)

Agony in garden... .1659°

Angels’ song....... 1633"

Annunciation, the . .1631°

Anointing at Beth-


ADYse wei Sse 1655°
Anointing at Si-
mon’s house...... 1644"


Appearances of Jesus
after resurrection . 1665°


ATTOSts oo 5 Essien eine 1660°; 16685 (Maclaren)
Ascension......... 1666"; 615° (Bevan)
Atonement........627 (Orr)


Baptism of Jesus. . . 1635
Barabbas v. Jesus . . 1662


Barren fig tree..... 1655>

Bartimaeus healed. . 1654

Beatitudes. ..... _. 16434

Beelzebub......... 1644»

Bethany beyond Jor-
Manresa cea a ees 1652

At Bethsaida ...... 451> (Ewing)


Betrayal by Judas. .16575; 454> (Rees)
ef Judas Iscariot. .1766* (Kerr)
Birth in Bethlehem . 1632; 1470>
ef Chronology of
NED ee nee 645° (Armstrong)
Birth and infancy.. .1471> (Sweet)
Blind from birth


healed.......... 1650°
Boyhood growth.. . .1634*
Brazen serpent..... 1638"
Bread of Life...... 16479
Brethren of Jesus. . .518° (Jacobs)
Burial: ccc eee 16645


Preparations for. .529° (Hager)
At Caesarea Philippi 1795° (Carver)
Callof four disciples 1639*
Capernaum  syna-

gogue......-..-- 1639»
Centurion’s servant. 1643"
Ceremonial washings 1647
Child as example of

humility........ 1650"
Children blessed. . . .1654*
Chronology of final

week. .........- 16558


3277


Jesus Christ— continued
Life—continued


Chronology of last
meal with disci-


Chronology of last
period in Galilee. 16517

Circumcision... ... . 16337

Claims of Jesus... ..1641>


Cleansing of temple 16378; 1650»


Cross-bearing......1649°

Cross, scenes at... . 1663+

Crucifixion, the... . . 1662
ef Blood and


Water......... 489% (Luering)


Darkness at death. .1663>
Daughter of Jairus


raised........... 1646+
David’s son and
OPO esxtsstatrataene 1656


Deaf man healed. . .1648+
Death of Jesus. .... 1663
Decapolis retreat. . .1648
Demand for author-


tyes iar eases 1656
Demon possession a
reality.......... 1640
cf Demoniac Pos-
session........ 827> (Sweet)
Demoniac in syna-
gogue........... 16395
Denunciation of
scribes and Phari-
SCCS ora ieenctrahees 1656"
Denunciation of un-
belief........... 1644*
Discourse on Last
Things.......... 1657"
Discourse in upper
room...........1659*
Dispute about great-
MOSS. 5.65 ese tao 1649»
Dispute about prece-
ences i. sores 16588
Divine sonship..... 1641
Divisions.......... 1631


Divorce, teaching on 1653°
Early disciples. .... 1636>
Early preaching. . . . 1638


“Hoece homo”’...... 16625
Egypt and Naza-
Teth cine ee 1633"


Elisabeth visited ...16325
Entry into Jerusa-


Epileptic child cured 1649+
Evil, relation to... .1643>


Exaltation of Jesus.614 (Bevan)


Expectations of the
pious........... 1631+

Fasting and joy... .1641*

Feast of Dedication 1652


3278


Jesus Christ—continued
Life—continued


Feast of John 6.....1641
Feast of Taber-


nacles........... 1650
Final departure from

Galilee.......... 16514
Final warning of the

passion......... 16542
Final week, impor-

tance of......... 16558
First circuit in Gali-

lees nA ee 16408
Fishers of men... .. 1639»


Five thousand fed . .1646>
Forgiveness taught. .1650*
Four thousand fed. .1648°
Gadarene demoniac.1645>
Galilean ministry. . . 1638»
Galilean visit after


resurrection... ...1666
Genealogies........ 16342
Gerizim or Jeru-

salem?.......... 1638>


Good Shepherd, the 1651*
Great commission... 1666
Greeks visit, Jesus. . . 1657
Guard at tomb..... 1664
Healing at Bethesda 1641>
Healing of blind man 1648
Healing on Sabbath 16422
Herod, Jesus before. 1661>


cf Herod........ 1378
Herod, Jesus’ refer-
PICO ow God 1652


Heroism of Jesus. . . 1662
Highest good, the... 1643


GENERAL INDEX


(Dosker)


And the Holy Spirit 400* (Mullins)


Holy Spirit’s de


Image of God...... 1451
Imprisonment of
John the Baptist . 1638


Incompleteness.. . . .1631*
Instructions to the
Twelve......... 1646»


Intolerance rebuked 1650+
Jericho, Jesus at... . 1654>


ef Jerusalem....... 1618»

Jesus and His
mother.......... 20025

John the Baptist. . .1634>
Birth of......... 1631
Preaching of..... 1634>
Witness of....... 1636


John’s messengers. . .1643>
Joseph’s perplexity. . 16323
Judas, indignation


OP es eed rages te 1655°
Judas’ remorse and
death........... 16615


Judas at the supper 1658


(Edwards)


(Masterman)


(Sweet)


Jesus Christ—continued
Life—continued


Kingdom, coming of . 1653


Language used by . .1832% (A. T. Robertson)


Law, relation of


Jesus t0......... 16435
Lazarus raised...... 1653
Leaven of Pharisees 1648°
Leper cured........ 1640>


Light of the world. .1650°


Logia of Jesus..... 1910> (Smith)


Lord’s Supper...... 1658»; 1921> (Gummey);
1924> (Dosker)
cf Passover...... 22568 (N. Isaacs)
cf Sacraments... .2636* (Lambert)
Love of Olivet..... 2187% (Masterman)


Luke’s Peraean


Magi from East... .1633
Marriage in Cana.. .1637*
Mary informed re-
garding her Child 1631>
Mary and Martha. .1652>
Massacre of  chil-


dren..........-- 16335
Matthew’s call and
feasts. ose sh cd 1641


Messiah, Jesus as... 2043 (Crichton)


Miracle of coin in
fish’s mouth...... 1649»
Miracle of fishes .. .1639>
Miracle at Nain... .1643>
Miracle of wine from


water..........- 16379
Miracles at death of

JOSS eee cae eens 1663>
Mother and brothers

of Jesus......... 16452
Murder of John the

Baptist......... 1646>


Nazareth synagogue 1639

Nicodemus’ visit... .1637°

Nobleman’s son
healed .......... 16392


Obedience of Jesus .2175> (Crannell)
Offices of Jesus..... 2021> (Edwards)


Parables
Good Samaritan. .1651>
Great supper... . .1652°
Lost sheep, coin,


and son....... 1652>


Meaning of par-
ables......... 16454
Pharisee and pub-
lican.......... 1654
Pounds......... 1655
Teaching by para-
blesiva cee et 16452


Two sons, hus-
bandmen, mar-
riage of prince. . 1656+


GENERAL INDEX 3279


Jesus Christ—continued


Life—continued
Parables—continued
Unjust judge... . .1653>
Unjust steward
and Dives..... 16535
Unmerciful serv-


Virgins, and tal-
ents and sheep. 1657»
Paralytie cured... ..1640>
Passion week....... 1655
Paul’s teachings re-
garding Jesus ....2023* (Edwards)
Peraean ministry. ..1651°
Peraean teachings
and parables. .... 1651»
Person of Jesus. . . .2338° (Warfield)
Peter forgiven...... 1666
Peter’s denials...... 16615
First confession... 1647»
Great confession. .1648>
Mother-in-law.. . .1640
ef Pharisees........ 23612 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Pharisees offended. .1647>
Pharisees v. Jesus. .1643
Pilate’s attitude


toward Jesus..... 1661
Condemnation of
Jesus......--. 16622


ef Pilate, Pontius. 2397* (J. M. Wilson)
Plot against Jesus . .1657>
Plucking grain on

Sabbath......... 16428
Prayers of Jesus... .2431 (Bevan)
Presentation in


Priests, Jesus before 1660
Private journey to


Prophetic claims. . . . 1639
Quirinius’ census. . . 1632
References to mar-

riage and divorce .1999* (Eager)
Rejected in Samaria 1651>
Request of James

and John.......- 1654>


Resurrection, events

OL e Bere ak oho 1665"; 623 (J. Dickie);
2565> (Thomas)

Importance of... .1664>

Retreat for rest... .1647>

Retreat to Caesarea
Philippi......... 1648?

Retreat to Ephraim 1653>

Return promised. ..1649°

Rich young man... . 16548


Jesus Christ—continued


Life—continued


Sabbath healings:
weakness and
dropsy.......... 1652
ef Sadducees....... 2658 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Sadducees silenced. . 1656"
Samaritan leper
thankful... ....... 1653
Samaritan woman . .1638+
Sanhedrin, powers
Oho at ee ely. Ss 1660*; 2688> (Levertoff)
Second Galilean cir-
CUlbse Sie ee Sent 1644>
Sermon on _ the
Mount.......... 1642»


Seventy sent out...1651>
Shepherds’ visit. . . .1632


Sign of Jonah...... 1644»
Simeon’s joy....... 1633
Simon of Cyrene... .1662
Spear thrust....... 1663»
Spiritual body...... 493> (Morro)
Storm calmed...... 1645»
Superscription of
CLOSSE Seve eee 1663
Syrophoenician
mother.......... 1648
ef Temple......... 2939" (Caldecott; Orr)


Temple tax, the. ...1649>
Temptation of Jesus
Inward nature of. 1635


Time of......... 1635
Typical character
Obie ties 1635»


Ten lepers healed. . 1653»
Third Galilean cir-


CULt ste ascot ee 1646
Thomas’ doubt... . . 1666
Threefold office of
Jesus.....2-..-- 621° (Bevan)
Time in Galilee... . 1638
THtles ivi eee ntebineneecs 16378
Tomb of Jesus..... 1664
Transfiguration... ..1649°
TTL eka ponncusha tes 16602; 1670* (Maclaren)


Before Pilate.....16615; 1672* (Maclaren);
23962 (J. M. Wilson)
Before Sanhedrin . 1660
Tribute to Caesar... 1656>


True freedom...... 1650"
Tuesday of passion
week.......-... 1656
Twelve chosen... .. .1642*
Character....... 1642»
Function........ 1642»
Names........-.- 1642>
Sent out........ 16468
Visits to tomb of
Jesus... .. 0-0 16658


Walking on the sea. 16478


3280


GENERAL INDEX


Jesus Christ—continued
Life—continued
Warnings of His
death. ..........1649*
Warnings to Peter. . 1659»
Washing disciples’


POSE Se okek Be eae 1658?
Water of Life...... 1650>
Wednesday of final

week...... Fat ace: 1657>


Weeping over Jesus. 1655>
Widow’s mites... .. 1657%


Woman taken in sin. 1650
Would-be disciples. . 16452
Youthful _ self-con-


sciousness........ 1634»
Youthful visit to
temple..........16348
-Zacchaeus, Jesus’
treatment of..... 1654»
Names
Christian 2: 8. sere: 1626
JESUSE 2. eye aes 16268
Order of treatment... . 1626+
Outward situation... .16275
Essenes...........16289
Herodian rule...... 16282
Palestine..........16274
Palestine provinces .1627°
Pharisees.......... 16282
Political conditions .1627°
Sadducees.........1628
Seribes............ 1628"
Preparation..........16278


ef Apocalyptic Lit-


erature..........161> (J. E. H. Thomson)


ef Eschatology of
Occ tel ne 972* (Orr)

Hebrew and Gentile.1627*

John the Baptist. . .1708® (Miller)


Births feces 1631»
Preaching of... .. 1634
Relations of Jesus
COp ere ne seed 1710 (Miller)
Limitations of His
knowledge....... 1792> (Easton)
Magi.............1633*
ef Magi.........1962? (Tisdall)
ef Star of the
Magi........ .2848* (Maunder)


OT expectations... . 1627


LIONS: 253 et vases 1627
Virgin-birth, objec-
tions to......... 1633


ef Mary (Virgin) .2001» (Sweet)
ef Virgin-birth.. . .3052* (Sweet )
Problems in His life.. . 1629*
Apocalyptic beliefs. . 1630"; 972" (Orr)
Apocalyptic ideas. . . 1630


Jesus Christ—continued
Problems in His life—continued
Authority of Jesus. .336° (Rees)
Descent into lower


world..........- 200 (Hutchison)
Difficulties with mir-
acleses, cnr uae 16299
ChGOd 2x Pascuiosas 12612 (Rees)
Kingdom, present or
future.......... 1630


Kingly office of... . .620° (Bevan)

Messianic element. . 1629

Messianic idea a
growth.......... 1629»

Miracles affirmed... 1629

Moral character. . . .1630>


Offices of. ......... 616° (Bevan)
ef Intercession... .1484* (Bevan)
Omniscience of..... 1792 (Easton)
Parables.......... 16452; 2243 (Schodde)
Person of..........627% (Orr); 2338" (War-
field)
ef Priest, High. ....2441> (Reeve)
Priesthood of...... 618 (Bevan)
As prophet........ 618* (Bevan)
Religion of........ 625° (Orr)
Sinlessness......... 16305
: Sinlessness and Mes-
siahship......... 16318
Sinlessness and Vir-
gin-birth........ 1630»
Sources............- 1626
Agrapha of........1903* (Cowan)
Characteristics in
Markets 2 inh esas 1988+ (Farmer)


Denial of existence. . 1626
Extra-Christian.. . . 1626


Fourth Gospel..... 1627; 1725" (lverach)
General........... 1626"
Gospels........... 1626+


cf John, Gospel of .1720> (Iverach)
cf Matthew, Gos-


pel of......... 2011" (Schodde)
ef Logia........... 1910* (Smith)
Synoptic Gospels. . .1626>; 1284 (Iverach)

Teachings

Ablution..........14> (Hager)
Abstinence........ 25> (Eager)
Advent, hope of... . 16682
After ascension... . . 16672
Beatitudes... ......419* (Lambert)
Blasphemy........ 1644>; 485> (Rees)


Claims to kingship. . 1802" (M’Caig)
Comparison with

author of Ep. of

James.......... 1564» (Hayes)
Cross and resurrec-

tion, significance of 1667


Divoree........... 865% (Caverno)
Ethics of, in Synop-
tic Gospels... ... 1285» (Iverach)


ef Ethics of Jesus. 1026* (Stalker)


GENERAL INDEX


Jesus Christ—continued
Teachings—continued


Faithfulness....... 1091° (Hodge)
Family... i.ccac eee 1096 (Caverno)
The Finisher...... 1111% (W. L. Walker)
Forgiveness........ 1133* (Morro)
Gospel, Jesus and

thes A id eh eed: 624 (J. Dickie)
Gospels and Epis-

tle. sGte. kes eas 1667>
On guilt........... 1309» (Rall)
cf Hebrews, Ep. to. 2024» (Edwards)
Holy Spirit and blas-

phemy.......... 486° (Rees)


Law in NT........ 1844 (M’Caig) B :
Light, Jesus as..... 1891> (Pratt) ere oar oe
Literature......... 1668 inal accusation... .
Lordship of Christ. .1667> Pilate, Jesus before. . 16725
Parousia..........22508 (Easton) Pilate’s surrender. . .1673> _
Person of Jesus... . .1687° Pilate washes hands 1673
Resurrection....... 2563 (Easton) Sent to Herod......
Revelation through ae of Jesus...
Spirits. Sr asaes 1667 SUDO AE Yer recente
Sabbath........... 2631 (Sampey) sere of Jesus...
Sacrifice.......... 2652» (Williams) ae ii pone eter
Salvation.......... 2667 (Easton) ; c ae a eee : Rees
Self-surrender...... 2716° (Pollard) cae Persea ogy O1.....
Sermon on _ the UL Freee oe
Mount.......... 2732> (Miller) Bgl Cae ie
Shepherd, Jesus as. .2764* (Patch) of Sach ER Scaled
Sine co PAN ets oe 28002 (MeConnell) Nahe ole te a abe
Teacher, Jesus as. . .1991> (Farmer) of Tene: ae” ‘.
Soy. ra be Jetheth...............
spiration........ 1476> (Warfield) Jethlah
Use of parables... . .2243> (Sehodde) cf Ithlah............
Use of “ Paraclete’’. 2245> (Mullins) TethEOiet eee eee 8


As a thinker, in Synop-


tic Gospels........ 12868 (Iverach)
Jesus Christ, Arrest and
Trishofe nev ea aes 1668> (Maclaren)
Introduction......... 1668>
Arrest in garden ...1669>
Causes.......--.-- 1669
Diffieulties of sub-
JOCt ae cn ews oan 1668>
Jewish and Roman
la Wits nee tes 1668»
Plac@s 2 csc wees 16692


Preparation for... . .1669*
Removal to city... .1669>
ef Jesus Christ 1660° (Orr)


Jewish trial.......... 16708
Bearing on........ 1670
Browbeating judge,

LD ae OE Ere ee 16712
Condemnation for

blasphemy....... 1671»
Criminal trials... .. 1670
False witnesses... .. 16712


Jewish law, the... . .1670"
Mishna, the....... . 1670"


Jesus Christ, Arrest and Trial of—continued
Jewish trial—continued


Morning session... .1671*
Night trial
Power of Sanhedrin. 1671»


Preliminary exam-
ination.......... 1670>
Summary.......... 1671>
ef Law in NT........ 1846> (M’Caig)
Roman trial......... 16728


Aecusations renewed 1672>
Acquittal by Pilate. . 1672
Attempt to evade

full trial
Barabbas or Jesus . . 1673


Charaeter of
Counsel to Moses. .
Father-in-law of Moses


cf Languages of OT...
ef Nose-jewels
cf Ornament
ef Stones, Precious... .


cf Cult, Suppression of


ef Arehiteeture.......


cf Pseudo-Messiahs. . .


2805> (Dunelm)

2826> (Stalker)

2939" (Caldeeott; Orr)
11962 (Sweet)

1674 (Rutherfurd)
2806> (T. W. Davies)


2806 (T. W. Davies)


16749 (Roberts) _
16748 (Criehton)


1674>


Relation to Hobab and


Reuel............. 1674>
Visit to Moses in
desert...........-. 1674>
JOtUT ee OS ne cop ees 1675
ef Ituraea.... 2.00... 15449 (Ewing)
Jeuel................. 1675
ef Jeiel......,....4.. 1586> (Roberts)
JOUSH: cache oe Lede 1675*
JOU Za eg ae ee 1675
Jew... ..........4....16759 (Orr)
ef Israel, Religion of . .1530> (Orelli)


1832+ (Weir)

1675> (Orr)

2156 (Pollard)
2201> (Doolan)
2856* (Fletcher)
1675* (Orr)

16758 (Orr)

234» (A. C. Dickie)
17> (Hirsch)

629° (Orr)


3282


GENERAL INDEX


JOWLY hn Mn es 1675
ef Judaea............ 1757+ (Masterman)

Jews
CEI OW os bees ds 1675 (Orr)

Jezaniah.............. 1675»
ef Jaazaniah......... 1546+ (Roberts)

Jezebel..........-..20. 1675» (Roberts)
CEANSD id petit codices 78 (Mosiman)
efBaals s3c.-2h-.0a wees 345° (Sayce)
Character of......... 16768
Death of............ 16768
ef Elijah............ 930> (Farr)
ef Jehu............- 1585 (Caldecott)
Persecution of proph-

CLS bine tices 1676+
Plot against Naboth of

Jezreel............ 16768
In Revelation 2 20... .1676

Jezelus........00...20. 1676

DOZETS 298 5s bw laho ieee 1676°

Jezerites.............-1676°

Jeziah
ef Igziah............1545°

Jezel es wkd does omens 16778

Jezliah
ef Izliah............. 1545

Jezoar
ef Izhar............. 1545

Jezrahiah
ef Izrahiah.......... 1545»

Jezreelen. Se area ean 16775 (Ewing)
ef Harod, Well of... . .13405 (Ewing)
ef Jeruel............ 1595
ef Lo-ammi.......... 19072 (Lees)
Location............ 1677
ef Naboth........... 2108 (Wallace)


Residence of Ahab... . 16778
Site of Naboth’s vine-


Yard os ae 1677+

Jezreel, Vale of

ef Esdraelon, Plain of. .993* (Ewing)
Jezreelite.............. 1677
Jezreelitess ............ 1677
Jezrielus (Hierielus)..... 1677
Jibsam

efIbsam............14466
Jidlaph..............- 1677"
Jimna, Jimnah......... 16776

ef Imnah. «5.2 css 1461»
Jimnites..............1677%

cf Imnites........... 1461
Jiphtah

ef Iphtah............ 14914
Jiphthah-el

ef Iphtab-el.......... 1491 (Ewing)
Foss OE Bd acl 1677 (Roberts); 13

(Mack); 15° (Mar-
golis); 795° (Weir)
Absalom’s relations
WIGS is eee wk 16789
Character of......... 1678»


Contest with Abner. . .1677


Joab—continued
David’s commander-
in-chief............ 1677
Death of............ 1678*
ef Ge-harashim.......1182
Murder of Abner..... 1677
Murder of Amasa.... .1678
Joachaz......... 00000 1678
Joacim
ef Joakim........... 1679* (Hutchison)
Joadanus.............- 1678
Joa ta fa4. 283 ek eos 1678»
ef Joha..........--- 1695
Joahaz.........20..00. 16788
ef Jehoahaz..........- 15745 (Caldecott);
(Genung)
ef Northern Israel... .1528 (Weir)
Joakim (Joacim)....... 1679 (Hutchison)
JOAMAN Sis iiaked haces 1679*
POADNA oe ok ese tae 16798 (Kerr)
Joamnes............--- 1679
Joarib..........2..4.. 16798
JOASB wo cess eee bee 1575» (Caldecott);
(Roberts) ; 1679
Joatham.............. 1679
ef Jotham........... 1754* (Caldecott)
JOD es Pek nea 1679 (Genung)
cl Botk:, 2ne2s Sees 4949 (Macalister)
Job, Book of. .......... 1679» (Genung)
Age and setting...... 1686
Contact with fact
slight........... 16386"


Jehoiachin’s impris-
onment, date... ..16874


Literature......... 1687
Parallels to Job.... . 16878
Prison setting of
bookie ee cs 16872
Relation to Wisdom
literature........ 168748
cf Date of Job....... 314»
Familiar story........ 16808
Ch Josiab.:.. cakes a8 1751» (Genung)
Literary form........ 16808
Characters of story. 1680
Literary art........ 1680+
Literary style...... 16814
Setting of story... ..1680>
ef Palestine.......... 2218 (Conder)
Position in canon..... 16802
Problem............ 1685"
Critical views dis-
missed.......... 1686
Job, the hero, the
answer.......... 1686
Problems of the age 1686+
Purpose of the book 1685


Theodicy of Job... . 1686
cf Proverbs, Book of . .2471> (Genung)
ef Providence. .......2478" (Tillett)
ef Resurrection... ....2563° (Easton)


15758


16798


Job, Book of—continued

The story .........-. 16813
An inner experience 1681
Charges against Job.1683°
Debate, the........ 1682

Demanding a hear-
ing from God. . . .1683*
Does death end all ?.1683*
Elihu’s appearance. . 1684
End of debate... . . .1684>
Fate of wicked men 1684*
Forgers of lies...... 1683"
Job’s prosperity... .1681*

Job’s review of his


Job’s vindicator. . . . 1683»
Mystery of suffering 1682
No Divine umpire. . 1683
Prosperity of evil. . .1684*
Questions from na-


tULGi fio be eec 1685
Rebuke of the
friends.......... 1685


Restoration of Job. .1685°
Satan’s challenge. . .1681>
Three friends, the.. . 1682
Voice from the storm 1685+
Job, Testament of
ef Apocalyptic Litera-


TUTE sere a ls 161° (J. E. H. Thomson)


Jobabier ieee 1688*
ef Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches)
Job’s Well
ef Jerusalem......... 15989 (Masterman)
Jochebed.............- 1688
JOO ees eed taut 16882
ef Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)
Cl Joteiecc Fe tes 1753 (Easton)
ef Yodh............. 3126?
Jod asso be eee ale 1688
Jodi woe tis secineeiaet us 16882
TOO sce eae esetnieeeet acca 16882 (Roberts)
Joel, Book of.........- 16888 (J. Robertson)


Allegorical interpreta-
flOD) Ate es 1690*
Connection with NT. .1695
Contents
Ch 1: drought and


Ch 2: Jeh’s jealousy
for His people... .1689*
Date indications... .. .1690
Future prospects... ..1689»
Language and style. . .1690°
Literal interpretation. .1690°


Literary form........ 1688
Outline............. 1688
Placed among early
books. .........--. 16902
Political arguments re-
garding date....... 1691»


Prophet, the......... 1688>


GENERAL INDEX


3283


Joel, Book of—continued
Quotations from earlier


books. .........4.- 1691+
ef Reaiah............ 25348
References to foreign

nationg........... 16928
Religious arguments

regarding date...... 1691


Resemblances to Amos 1690°
Review of men’s


theory............ 1694
Ritualistic arguments
regarding date...... 16915
Special expressions in . 1693+
JOC Ah ws Tate as oe Since 16957
Joezer... eee eee 1695*
Jogbehah.............. 1695*
A Opi cake» cote isg sto Soee seek 1695*
DOW apse eee vena el 1695
GE Joab. a oon A 1678?
Johanan............... 1695» (Roberts)
ef Jehohanan........ 1577> (Roberts)
Johannes
ef Joannes........... 16798
Johannine Theology, The 1695 (Law)
Antecedents......... 1696
Gentile thought con-
tact............1696°
Gnosticism, reaction
fromn sla 16972
Odes of Solomon, in-
fluence of........ 1696»
Relations to other
NT writings... .. 1696"


Transition days... . 16967
Writer’s personality 1696+
Church and sacraments1704°


Church, the....... 1704»
Lord’s Supper...... 1704
Sacraments, the... .1704°
Doctrine of God... .. .1697*
Life, God as... ....1697%
Life, types of the
Divine.......... 16975
Light, God as...... 1697»
Love, Godas...... 1698
Righteousness, God
Fs eae en Oe an a ome 1698+
Spirit, Godas...... 16974
Eschatology.........1705
Antichrist......... 1705
Christ’s coming per-
petual.......... 1705"
Historie basis..:... .1705*
Idealism.......... 1705*
Judgment......... 1705
Moral values....... 1705»
Parousia, the...... 1705"
Nature of....... 1706"
Relation of, to be-
Jievers........ 1706
Resurrection....... 1705»


3284 GENERAL INDEX


Johannine Theology, The—continued
Eternal life.......... 1702»
Abiding in God... . .1703>
Children of God... .1703>
Development of the
doctrine......... 17038
Ethical character of 1702
Greek influence... . .1702>
Metaphysical aspect 1702


ef Gospel............ 1281* (Bauslin)
cf Gospels, Synoptic . .1281> (Iverach)
Holy Spirit.......... 1700

Deity implied...... 1701


In First, Epistle... .1700>
In Fourth Gospel. . .1700+
Perpetuates work of


Christe: 380.0263: 1700
Personality of...... 17012
As Teacher........ 1700

Human nature and its
regeneration....... 1703
Classesdistinguished 1704
World, the........ 17048

Incarnation.......... 16992


In First: Epistle... ..1699>
Logos doctrine in
Fourth Gospel... . 1699>


Logosidea in Hebrew
literature........ 1699
Necessity of ....... 17008
Reality of human life
of Christ........ 1699»
Theme of Fourth
Gospel.......... 1699»


cf John, the Apostle.. .1706> (Iverach)
ef John, Epistles of. . .1711" (Law)


cf Bight 0:0. c.045 5 1890 (Pratt)
Literature........... 1706

cf Mediation......... 2025* (Edwards)
ef Parousia.......... 22518 (Easton)
cf Person of Christ... .2342° (Warfield)
ef Propitiation....... 2467 (Carver)
ef Salvation.......... 2665° (Easton)
Sin and pardon...... 1701>


Harmony with other
NT teaching..... 17022
Nature of sin...... 1701
Not elaborated in Jo-
hannine writings. 1701>
Propitiation in the
First Epistle... .. 17028
Propitiation in the
Fourth Gospel... .1701>


CHO oe eacie 23 2798> (McConnell)
Teachings regarding
person of Christ... .28428
John (Apoe)........... 1706 (Hutchison)
ef Asmoneans........ 2838 (Dosker)
cf Maceabaeus....... 19462 (Hutchison)
John, the Apostle....... 1706° (Iverach)
ef Antichrist in Epistles


Olen ee ie ue 155« (J. E. H. Thomson)


John, the Apostle—continued


cf Baptism of........ 396> (Dau)
Character of......... 1708°
Ephesian traditions. . .1708*
Relation to John, the
presbyter....... 1708


cf Johannine Theology 1695» (Law)

cf John, Epistles of. . .1711* (Law)

cf John, Gospel of... .1720* (Iverach)
ef Literature, Sub-


apostolic.......... 19012 (Cowan)
cf Machaerus........ 1959* (Ewing)
Martyrdom, alleged

ALLY oi irate hes 1707>

Residence in Ephe-

GUS oitiesiictser ren ane 1707

cf Patmos........... 2263> (Harry)
cf Revelation of John . 2582> (Orr)
Sources..........-.. 1706»


Acts and Galatians .1707>
Johannine writings. . 1706
NT record......... 1706
Synoptic Gospels. . .1707*


John the Baptist....... 1708 (Miller); 11315
(W. Evans)

Baptism, its origin... .1709»

Baptism of Jesus. .... 1710°

Death: of) ices ced 1710> .

Disciples of. ......... 1710

Dress and manner. .. .1709*

Harly life............ 1709

Estimate of, by Jesus. 1711

cf Forerumner........ 11315 (W. Evans)
Imprisonment........ 17108

ef Jesus Christ....... 1631>; 1634 (Orr)
Message............ 1709»

Place and date....... 1709"


Proselyte baptism... .1710°
Relation to Jesus.... .1710>
Severity of..........1709>
Sources and parentage 1709
cf Witness to Jesus. . . 1636 (Orr)


John, the Epistles of... .1711% (Law)


Canonicity and author-
SBAIPFie 2 caf oaoees 2 1715; 17188


Internal evidence. . .1715>
Traditional views. ..1715>


Traditional views,
reasonable....... 1716
Character...........1711°
Personal..........1711>


Style and diction. . .1712>
Themes, theological


and ethical... ... 17128

Traits of writer... . .17128
Elect lady, the....... 1719"; 925" (Law)

First Epistle. ....... 1711


cf Johannine Theology.1695> (Law)

ef John, the Apostle... 1706 (Iverach)
ef John, Gospel of. . ..1720* (Iverach)
ef Lady............. 1821»


GENERAL INDEX


John, the Epistles of—continued


Literature........... 1717°
Polemical aim........ 1712»
Antinomianism.... .1713°
Cerinthus.........1714°
Docetism.......... 1713"
Gnosticism........ 1713
Indignation of the
writer........... 1713>


Presbyter (elder)..... 1718"
Relations to Fourth
Gospel............ 1716
Argument for unity
of authorship... .1717*
Common features... 1716>
Differences ex-
plained.......... 1716
Priority considered. .1717>
Similar vocabulary. .1716>


Second Epistle....... 1719*
Structure and contents 1714*
Christian life....... 1714
Divine sonship..... 1714»


Order of themes... .1714*
Righteousness, love,


CECH AE vere tiaadeet 1715
Themes of the Epistles 1719
Third Epistle........ 1718

John, Gospelof........ 1720° (Iverach)
External evidence... . .1720>
Critical work...... 1722*
Ignatius........... 1721»
Trenaeus.......... 17215
Known at end of 2d
century......... 1720
Presbyter, John the .1721>
Summary.......... 1721»
Tatlans :iaa8 icons 17218
Theophilus........ 17218


ef Fourth Gospel..... 465> (Orr)
ef Gospels, Synoptic . .1281> (Iverach)
Internal evidence, char-


acteristics......... 1722
Critical presuppo-
sitions.......... 17225


Eye-witness records 1723
Importance of inter-
nal testimony... .1722*


Personal record... . . 1723
Relation to Synop-
TCS sso ee ee 1722»
Reminiscences il-
lustrated........ 1724"
Time covered...... 17232 |
Introduction......... 1720°
Date discussed..... 1720
Scope............. 1720°
ef Jesus Christ....... 1627" (Orr)


ef John, the Apostle. . 1706 (Iverach)
cf John, Epistles of. . .1718* (Law)

ef Logos. . .. 19115 (Alexander)
cf Person af Christ « . .2342> (Warfield)


John, Gospel of—continued
Progress and develop-


Faith and unbelief. .1726*
Logos doctrine... . .1725°


Messiahship....... 1726»
Person of Jesus... . . 1725"
ef Prologue.......... 2458»


ef Relations to 1 John. 17165 (Law)
ef Teaching on salva-


HIG fern dae 2670° (aston)
’ John Hyrcanus, the Mac-
CAGE. Ge og eae ea Bes 285° (Dosker)
cf Maceabaeus....... 1947" (Hutchison)


John Mark............ 1986 (Farmer)
John the Presbyter
ef Literature, Sub-


APO Seinen ee 19012 (Cowan)
John, the Revelation of..2582> (Orr)
Joi as 6h eee 1727

ef Jehoiada.......... 1578 (Roberts)
Joiakim............... 1727"

ef Jehoiakim......... 1579° (Genung)

ef Jokim............ 17274
JOIPID ee arte eget 17278

ef Jehoiarib......... 1580"
JOINS i See tee essere rs 1727*
Jokdeam.............. 17278
JoKim ewes hee 17278

ef Jehoiakim......... 1579" (Genung)

ef Joiakim........... 17274
Jokmeam............. 17274
Jokneam.............. 17272 (Ewing)

ef Kishon........... 1813 (Ewing)
Jokshan:..:2-ss0ie3 24.82 1727
DOK GAN ee oer tiene, het secios 1727
Joktheel.........2..... 1727

ef Sela... ......0000, 2713> (Ewing)
Jona

ef Jonah............ 1727 (Sampey)

ef Jonas............. 1730° (Kerr)
Jonadab

ef Jehonadab........ 15808 (Roberts)
JOM oes tee shyt bbe fois 1727» (Sampey)

ChPishs sohcch demas 1115" (Day)

ef Jonas.........-... 1730* (Kerr)

Leading figure in Book

of Jonah.......... 1727
Prophet in reign of
Jeroboam II.......1727>


Relation of prayer of

Jonah to Psalms... .1729>
ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
Sign of repentance... .1728*

ef Jesus Christ..... 1644 (Orr)

| Jonah, The Book of... .1728' (Sampey)

Aim of book. 1728
Authorship et date: 1729"
Contents of book..... 1728"
Did Jesus think it his-

(06) a Ate ae eee 1728
Is Mt 12 40 genuine? 1728>


3285


3286


GENERAL INDEX


Jonah, The Book of—continued
Modern critical views. 1729*


ef Shinar............ 27739 (Pinches)
Wnty Seicecs: i epeeee 1729

Jonam (Jonan)........ 1729»

Jonas (Apoc).......... 1729»

JODASs, .4.70' 64.2.0 dhhde 17308 (Kerr)
ef Jonah............ 1727 (Sampey)


Jonath Elem Rehokim. . 1730°
cf Psalms, Book of... .24878 (Sampey)


ef Song...........-. 2830° (Millar)
Jonathan (general)...... 17308 (Roberts); 792
(Weir)

Jonathan (son of Saul). .1730° (Weir)
Character........... 17318
Commanding at Mich-

MASH eee 1730°
Death at Gilboa......1731*
Filial piety.......... 1731»
Friendship for David. . 1731
ef Jahzeiah.......... 1559" (Roberts)
ef Jashen............ 1570 (Roberts)
ef Jehohanan......... 1577 (Roberts)
ef Jehonadab........ 1580 (Roberts)
ef Jehonathan........ 1580°
Leadership.......... 1731
Rout of Philistine gar-

FISON wheter ee eapetane 17314
cf Sauls. .e2 dae tats es 2698 (Weir)

Jonathan (Maccabaeus)
ef Maccabaeus....... 19478 (Hutchison); 284>

(Dosker)

Jonathan, Targum of
ef Targum........... 2912> (J. EK. H. Thomson)

JONATHA o:0) 60sec sek 1731»
ef Jathan............ 1571%

JOPPAe eh sae meee aie 1731° (Ewing)
Biblical references. . . . 1732
Maccabean times..... 1732*

Modern Jaffa........ 1732
Non-Hebrew references1731>
Roman and Crusader

TIMES ope 17328
Sea, the Great....... 2707> (Ewing)
ef Ships and Boats... .27749 (Nicol)

POL AL Secs oeteine ease s 1732
ef Hariph...........- 1339»

DOTAL Seo. c serena tne caver 1732

JOTAM. 308 ish eee kee ne 1732»; 1580° (Mosiman)
ef Hadoram.......... 1316" (Hovey)
ef Jehoram.......... 1580> (Mosiman)
cf Jozabad........... 1755

Jordan. esccsce sends cand 1732> (Wright)
ef Arabah.......... 211» (Wright)
Bridges........ err 1734»
ef Dead Sea......... 801° (Wright)
Et Ghor............ 1733
Fords of............ 17348

ef Ford........... 11272 (Day)
ef Joshua (son of Nun)1745* (Geden)
Lake Huleh......... 1733
Lower plain of....... 17348


Jordan—continued


cf Palestine.......... 22128 (Conder)
Sea of Galilee........ 1733°
Sources... .....00065 1732»
Yarmak, the.......-. 1733
Jordan, Plains of.......807° (Wright)
Jordan Valley........- 1735° (Wright)
Aqueductsin........ 1735»
ef Arabah........... 211> (Wright)
Climate, fauna and
flotaig., arto selects tenes 1736
cf Dead Sea......... 8012 (Wright)
Descriptions of....... 1735°
Divisions of........-. 1735»
ef Geology of Pales-
tinea manos: 1215” (Day)
cf Jericho........... 15928 (Wright)
cf Lebanon.......... 1864* (Wright)
cf Merom, Waters of . .2037* (Wright)
Physical features. .... 1735
Joribus...........-.85 1736>
CE Jari eae) sole cee tensed 15708
JONIM se he eee 17365
Jorkeam...........0-- 1736
Josabad
cf Jozabad.......... 1755»
Josabdus............4. 1736
Josaphat..... 26... .00- 1736
cf Jehoshaphat....... 1582" (Mosiman)
Josaphias............-- 1736»
JOSOR Fe aretha 1736»
Josech........-.-00005 1736
Josedech............-. 1736°
ef Jehozadak........ 1584>
JOSEdEK ie i ceheccnsolee 1736>
Joseph (general)........ 1736> (S. F. Hunter)
ef Barnabas.......... 405» (Jacobs)
CRI OSOS fv geecccctotcrdece 1743
Joseph (son of Jacob). . . 17379 (Kyle)
In Canaan........... 1738
ef Pentateuch...... 2298 (Wiener)
Character of......... 1739»
Critical views........ 1737
Dreams interpreted. . . 1739
Exaltation of........ 1739
Famines in Egypt... .1739>
Ideal patriarch, the. . .1740°
Is story composite? ..17378
ef Jacob............. 1551 (Boyd)
Jacob’s favoritism... . 1738
Literary questions... .1737°
Name, the........... 17378
Sold into slavery... .. 1738>
Story of............. 1738
“Tale of Two Broth-
CTS OG seme 1737


Tomb of
cf Jacob’s Well..... 1556* (Ewing)
cf Zaphenath-paneah. . 3132?
Joseph of Arimathaea. ..1741> (Kerr)
ef Joseph............ 1736° (S. F. Hunter)
ef Philip............2368* (Kerr)


GENERAL INDEX


Joseph Barnabas....... 405» (Jacobs)
Joseph Barsabbas....... 1740* (Kerr)

ef Justus. ........... 1788> (8. F. Hunter)
Joseph the Carpenter,


Apocryphal Gospel of

ef Apocryphal Gospels. 199" (Hutchison)
Joseph, Husband of Mary1740* (Kerr)

After the nativity... ..1740°

Before the nativity. . .1740»


Character of......... 1741
Extra-canonical refer-
EDCES oii tee 17414
cf James, Brother of
the Lord.......... 1561* (Kerr)
ef Jesus Christ....... 1632 (Orr)
ef Joseph............ 1736> (S. F. Hunter)
Sequence of events... .17418
Joseph, Prayer of.......1741> (Easton)
Joseph’s Dream
ef Astronomy........ 300> (Maunder)
ef Joseph............ 17378 (Kyle)
Josephus (Apoc)....... 17428
Josephus Flavius....... 1742" (Wenley); 999°


(J. E. H. Thomson)
Apologetic purpose... . 1742


Ascetic in youth... ...1742%
Description of Jerusa-
erin tint eateiiaceik 1600 (Masterman)
ef Essenes........... 9975 (J. E. H. Thomson)


Favored by Romans. .1742°
Governor of Galilee. . .1742+


Jewish war, the....... 17428

ef Pharisees.......... 2362 (J. E. H. Thomson)

ef Sadducees......... 26592 (J. E. H. Thomson)

ef Triumph.......... 3022 (A. W. Evans)

Visit to Rome........ 1742

Writings of.......... 1742

ef Zealots........... 3133” (Heidel)
JOSCB ca be Oe thes 1743

ef Brethren of the Lord 518° (Jacobs)

ef Joseph............ 1736° (8S. F. Hunter)
Joshah., s.s:66 002. feaeee 17438

ef Joshaviah......... 1743
Joshaphat...........-- 1743"

ef Jehoshaphat....... 1581» (Roberts)
Joshaviah...........-- 1743"

ef Joshah.........-.. 17438
Joshbekashah.......... 1743+

ef Romamti-ezer..... 2597»
Josheb-basshebeth...... 1743+
Joshibiah............-. 17432
Joshua (general)....... 1743°


Joshua (son of Nun)....1743*  (Geden); 255°
(Nicol); 446> (Maunder)
Allotment of territory


to tribes... ws. cee 1746»
ef Beth-horon, Battle

OLS has, peieenenses 446> (Maunder)
Capture of Jericho... .1745>
Character of.........- 1747


Conquest of Ai and
Bethel..........-. 1745


3287


Joshua (son of Nun)—continued
Conquests in Canaan. .1746>
Crossing of Jordan... .1745+
Crown for........... 1748»
Desert wanderings... .1744>
cf Deuteronomic law. .838* (Robinson)


ef Gibeon............ 1225> (Ewing)
Gibeonite stratagem... 1746+

ef Jehoshua.......... 1583»

ef Jeshua............ 1622> (Roberts)
ef Jordan............ 1732 (Wright)


ef Joshua, Book of ...1749* (Geden)
Last days and death. .1747*


Leadership of........ 1744>

Life of... ........... 1743»

ef Moses............ 2088+ (Kyle)

Name, the........... 1743

Natural staying of
Jordan............ 17453

ef Oshea............ 2202


Parallels with Moses. .1747*
Scouts sent to Jericho. 1745°


SPY thetic sa Fa eicet 1744
With Moses at Rephi-
dim..............1743>


With Moses at Sinai. .1744*
Joshua (son of Jehoza-


ak) Nhe sani oat 17489 (Roberts)
Companion of Zerub-
babel.............17482

ef Haggai........... 1317+ (Robinson)

Trialsof. 4 Sscteaue te 1748

ef Zechariah......... 3135° (Easton)

ef Zerubbabel........ 3147> (R. D. Wilson)
Joshua, Book of........ 17495 (Geden)

Allotments to tribes. . .1749>

Ancient versions...... 1751

Authorship.......... 1749"

Canonicity of........ 17514

Chronology of....... 17502

Compilation of....... 1749»

Conquest of Palestine. 1749

Contents............ 17492

Gaps in history....... 1750°

ef Hexateuch........ 1385+ (Wiener)

ef Joshua (son of Nun).1743+ (Geden)

ef Palestine.......... 2212 (Conder)


Purpose and teaching. 1751
Relation to Judges... .1750


Sources.............1750
Josiah oec es eae 1751» (Genung)

ef Amon............ 118 (Genung)
Centralization of wor-

BhIpt ste eres 1753°
Conditions at corona--

PIONS hse eee cea a 1752
Death at Megiddo....1753»
ef Deuteronomy...... 835° (Robinson)
Finding of the law

books 2c 3 au nae 1752
Great reformation... .1753*
cf Hen (person). . 1374


3288 GENERAL INDEX


Josiah—continued


ef Hezekiah......... 1388* (Genung)
ef Israel, History of... 1524* (Orelli)
ef Jehoahaz.......... 1575» (Genung)
ef Jehoiakim......... 1579° (Genung)
ef Jeremiah.......: ». .1588* (Orelli)
cf Job, Book of....... 1679 (Genung)
Later date of Deuter-
onomy............ 1752»
ef Pharaoh-necoh..... 2360" (Nicol)
Sources for..........17529
ef Writing........... 3114* (Richardson)
VOSIASS Bucs SE BOG Pam: 1753"
ef Jesias............. 1623+
Josibiah
cf Joshibiah......... 1743
Josiphiah.............- 1753"
Ob seeel tar Sine hey ae 1753> (Easton)
(ya Kole Ieee 16888
CeLittles gscns 2 ieee 2988>
Jotapata
ef Jotbathah......... 1754+
Jotbabtn. s.r laewcaces 1754*
ef Jotbathah......... 1754
Jotbathah............. 1754"
ef Wanderings of Is-
f=) Cees Meet inert 30642 (Conder)
JOtham' soo kiek Sa Ba 1754* (Easton)
Fable of............. 17548


Jatham (king of Judah) .1754* (Caldecott)
Building operations. . .1754°
Condition of Judah. . . 1754
Co-regent with Uzziah 1754*
Syrian league against. .1754>
War with Ammonites .1754°


Journey ;
cf Day’s Journey..... 799> (Porter)
ef Sabbath Day’s Jour-
DEY. 2 2, ab cee teens 26342 (Porter)
JOY 5s SA hee some 1755* (Edwards)
Terms for........... 1755°
Use in NT.......... 1755
Use in OT........... 1755
Jozabad............... 1755
ef Joram............1732°
Jozabdus...........-.. 1756*
JOBBCAT Ss oirics a.b oh Yes 1756+
Jozadak
ef Jehozadak........ 1584»
FAY La? | aneae ae n ae 1756
ef Jabal... 0.0.2.0... 1546° (Roberts)


Jubilee, Cycle of the
ef Astronomy, Luni-


solar Cycle........ 300° (Maunder)
Jubilee Year........... 1756* (Baur)
Character of......... 1756+
Liberty of........... 17562
Limitations of........ 1756"
ef Release........... 25565


Restitution of prop-


Jubilee Year—continued
ef Sabbaths of Years. .2634°
cf Sabbatical Year... .2634> (Baur)
Was it really observed ?17577


Jubilees, Book of... .... 1738 (J. HE. H. Thomson)
cf Seventy Weeks... ..2744° (Orr)
Jucal
ef Jehucal........... 1586"
Juchabar (Ibhar)....... 1446°
DUC a A lecate aortic keer 17578
ef Joda............4- 1688+
ef Judas............. 17652 (8. F. Hunter)
ef Juttah............ 1788> (Masterman)
Judaea.... 6... eee eee 17572 (Masterman)
Crusader times....... 17572
ef Jeshimon......... 1622° (Masterman)
CLIJCWry ewes neces 1675°
ef Judah............ 1758" (Ewing)
cf Judah, Territory of .1763* (Masterman)
TLamits see sca ee se eetic 1757
ef Negeb............ 2130* (Masterman)
Origin of name....... 1757
Judaea, Wilderness of . . .1757>
Judah (general) ........ 1757> (S. F. Hunter)
Judah (patriarch)... ... 1758 (Ewing),
ef Jacob............. 1549" (Boyd)
Son of Jacob.........17588
ef Tamar (person)... .2907° (Orr)
Terib@rots tone is kee ees 1758+


Judah (tribe)
ef Extent of tribe..... 1758 (Ewing)
ef Hill, Hill Country. .1392* (Masterman)
ef Judaea............ 1757+ (Masterman)
ef Judah, Territory of .1763* (Masterman)
ef Numbers, Book of .2163+ (Whitelaw)
Judah, Kingdom of. ....1758* (Weir)
Before the monarchy. .1758°


Early rulers........ 1759
Entrance into Ca-

NAD tase ee 1758>
Hebrew tribes... .. .1758°
Semites and Canaan-

LES atm pry ste etic ine: 1758

Cf David. ........... 790° (Weir)
Dual monarchy...... 17602


Age of Jehoshaphat. 1760*
Athaliah’s reign... .1760%
Civil wars......... 1760°
Contrasts between
Israel and Judah. . 17602
Influence of Isaiah. . 17612
Reign of Uzziah....17612
Revived fortunes. . .1760>
First three kings...... 1759
Kingdom of David. .1759>
Solomon and the dis-


ruption......... 1759
ef Israel, Kingdom of. 1528> (Weir)
Period of decline... .. 1761


Age of Hezekiah... .1761>
Age of Jeremiah... .1762+
Fall of Assyria... ..17625


GENERAL INDEX 3289
Judah, Kingdom of—continued Judas, Juda...........1765* (8. F. Hunter)
Period of decline—continued cf Judas Barsabbas.. .1765* (S. F. Hunter)
Fall of Judah...... 1762® ef Judas Iscariot...... 1765> (Kerr)
Foreign influences... 1761» ef Judas of James... ..1767° (Kerr)
Reaction under Ma- cf Lebbaeus.......... 18643
nasseh.......... 1761> cf Thaddaeus........29649 (Kerr)
Reformation of Jo- Judas, the Lord’s Brother
slab is. ? cehawatas 17625 ch Judes: ss ana see ke 1767
CE Saul eh cmos fee 2697> (Weir) Judas Maccabaeus......283> (Dosker); 457" (Dos-
Judah, Territory of..... 1763" (Masterman) ker)
ef Beth-horon........ 4462 (Masterman) cf Maccabaeus....... 19475 (Hutchison)
ef Beth-zur.......... 4549 (Masterman) cf Pharisees.......... 23612 (J. E. H. Thomson)
ef Botany........... 505" (Masterman) Juddah
Boundaries of King- ef Juttah............ 1788> (Masterman)
dom of Judah...... 1763"; 1764» TUCO eke ret Sonia atin 1767>
Chief roads.......... 1763> ef Judas, Juda....... 1765 (S. F. Hunter)
Divisions. ........... 1763° ef Judas of James . . ..1767> (Kerr)
Hill country. ........ 1763» cf Peter, Second Epistle
ef Jericho........... 1592+ (Wright) Ole teres. cote oe 2356> (Moorehead)
ef Jeshimon.......... 1622° (Masterman) Jude, Epistle of........ 1767’ (Moorehead)
cf Judaea............ 17572 (Masterman) Advice to faithful... . .1770*
ef Judah............ 1758 (Ewing) Brother of Jesus and
Products............ 17642 James?...........1767>
Shephelah........... 17633 Characters denounced .1768°; 1771+
Sizes Phe Wee 1764 Early testimony...... 1768
Tribe and its land... .1764* Libertinism.......... 1771»
Judah at the Jordan... .1765* Occasion of composi-
Judaism GION Scns. Ate Ne ase ne 1768>
In Arabia........... 219° (Weir) Parallels with 2 Peter. 1769»
ef Israel, Religion of. .1530> (Orelli) People addressed. .... 1768
CH Pa wl ee eon vee 22768 (A. T. Robertson) Position in canon..... 17682
Rise and development . 574» (Nicol) Priority of 2 Peter... .1770>
Judas (Apoc) ..........- 1765* (Hutchison) Question of date......17714
ef Maccabaeus....... 1946* (Hutchison) References to OT and
Judas Barsabbas....... 1765¢ (S. F. Hunter) extra-canonical liter-
ef Judas, Juda... ....1765* (S. F. Hunter) atOTed ia nh eek 17708
Judas of Damascus Relation to 2 Peter... 1769"
ef Judas, Juda....... 1765° (S. F. Hunter) Writer of ............ 1767
Judas of Galilee........ 17678 (Orr) B [1 (ot tie aenne ee ee nr 1771»
ef Judas, Juda....... 17652 (S. F. Hunter) cf Judaea............ 1757" (Masterman)
ef Quirinius.......... 6452 (Armstrong) Judges. sce ,...1771» (Levertoff)
Judas Iscariot.......... 1765 (Kerr) cf Judgment Seat... . . 17784
Attitude of Fourth Ch Oath sas teak he 2172» (Levertoff)
Gospel toward. ....1765> cf Priests and Levites.2452> (Wiener)
Betrayal of Jesus..... 1766 Judges, Book of........ 1772* (Geden)
Call by Jesus...... . . 1765» Artificial time and
Death of............ 1766° place! ees 17748
Foreordained......... 1766> Authorship.......... 174°
Gradual degeneration . 1766> Chronology of....... 1773>
Home... coches 1765" Contents. ........... 1772
Motives of..........- 1766» Early versions....... 1775*
ef Simon the Cana- Gideon.............. 1773
naean..........065 2797» (Kerr) Introductions to... .. . 1772»
Judas Iscariot, Gospel of 17674 (Orr) cf Israel, History of the
Judas (not Iscariot)... ..1765# People............ 1518? (Orelli)
ef Judas of James... ..1767 (Kerr) cf Jephthah.......... 15872 (Schenk)
ef Lebbaeus.......... 1864* cf Joshua, Book of... .1750 (Geden)
ef Thaddaeus........ 29642 (Kerr) ef Judah, Kingdom of .1759* (Weir)
Judas of James.........- 1767 (Kerr) ef Judges, Period of. . .1775> (Knudson)
of Vader sock thas. it 1767 cf King and Kingdom .1800* (Press)
ef Judas, Juda....... 1765° (S. F. Hunter) Micah of Ephraim . . .1773>
ef Thaddaeus........ 2964" (Kerr) ef Micah.......... 2045> (Lees)


3290


GENERAL INDEX


Judges, Book of —continued
Position in canon..... 1772>
Purpose and value... .1775*
Relation to Hexateuch 1774
cf Samson, History of .2675* (Robinson)
Sources............. 1774


War with Benjamin.. .1773°
Work of the Judges. . .1772


Judges, Period of....... 1775° (Knudson)
Chronology.......... 1775"
Invasions........... 1776»


cf Judges, Book of... .1772° (Geden)
Need of government. .1776»
Political situation... .. .1776#
Relation to Canaanites 1776+
Religious conditions. . . 1776»


Sources............. 1775»
Theological interpre-
tations :.2., Sane sa 17778
Tribal leaders........ 1776»
Tribal struggles... ... 17768


Judging, Judgment..... 1777* (Jacobs)
ef Johannine The-
ology............. 1705% (Law)
ef Retribution........ 2570? (M’Caig)
Judgment, Day of
ef Judgment, Last... .1777 (Easton)


Judgment Hall......... 1777 (Rutherfurd)
ef Palace............ 2208+ (Orr)
ef Praetorium........ 2428 (Masterman)
Judgment, Last........ 1777 (Easton)


“Day of the Lord”. . .1777°
ef Eschatology of the


Ne ee er nO Nhe te 979» (Vos)
In extra-canonical lit-
erature occu ves 17782

Nature of the doctrine .1777°

ef Parousia........... 2249* (Easton)

ef Resurrection....... 2564" (Easton)
Judgment Seat......... 17788

ef Gabbatha......... 1150° (Masterman)

ef Judge............. 1771> (Levertoff)
Judicial Blindness... ... 488* (T. Lewis)
Judicial Courts......... 725 (Hirsch)
Judicial Hardening

ef Harden........... 1338 (W. L. Walker)
SUIS ssn eee eee, 17788

ef Palestine.......... 22202 (Conder)
Judith, Book of........ 1778> (T. W. Davies)

ef Apocrypha........ 178> (T. W. Davies)

Contents............ 1778°

Dateots ca ho tule te 1779b

Dates suggested. ..... 1789»

Fact or fiction?. ... 7.17798

Historical errors of... .1779°

NAM Cee tele dence 1778»


Original language... . .1780°
Place in Hebrew litera-


GUNG reine: hint ea 1778>
Story of Judith....... 17798
Versions....... ae .1780°


UE reer nh ae, Steines 1780°
Jugglery...........0... 1780»
Juice... 2. eee 17805
DUS ee yay hes serne Roe eer ene 1780°
JUNUS§ oe een wou eS 17805


ef Army, Roman..... 2574 (Allen)
ef Band, Augustan.. . .382° (Nicol)
ef Roman Empire... ..2598> (Angus)


Jumping

ef Games............ 1168 (Smith)
JUMIASS oe ee wees 1781+ (S. F. Hunter)

ef Herodion..........18848
Juniper............... 1781 (Masterman)

ef Salt-wort..........2664° (Masterman)
Jupiter............00.. 17812 (Easton)

ef Abomination of

Desolation......... 16? (Hirsch)

ef Olympius......... 2188»

ef Zeus... ......0060. 3148 (Angus)
Jupiter and Mercury

ef Astrology......... 295° (Maunder)

ef Jupiter............ 17819 (Easton)

ef Mercury.......... 20352 (M. O. Evans)
Jurisdiction............ 1781»
Jushab-hesed........... 1781»

cf Shear-jashub.......2752°
Justice. ...........004. 1781 (Rall)

Divine.............. 1782

Flumanieg.s sci eis ya ane 1781°

cf Righteousness... .. .2591" (McConnell)

ef Sanctification. ..... 2682» (Rall)
Justification. .......... 1782» (Faulkner)

ef Faith............. 1087° (Dunelm)

ef Grace... 2.2.0.2... 1290* (Easton)

cf Imputation........ 1462* (Hodge)


Later development... .1786°
Church fathers. .... 1786
Council of Trent... .17879


Modern meaning. . .1787>
Schleiermacher and


Ritschl.......... 1787»
Venture of faith... .1788+
Old Testament....... 17868
Instances of ....... 1786
Other NT writings... .1784»
James. Akos ahs 1785»


ef James, Epistle of .1562° (Hayes)
Johannine writings. .1785>
1 Peter and Hebrews 1785%
Synoptic Gospels. . .1785*
In Paul’s writings... ..1782°
Baptism eliminated . 1784
Death and resurrec-
tion of Christ... .17834
Factors in justifica-
HOD Sete se 17842
Faith, not works... .1783>
Individual in mean-
Mica asc eden 8 1784»
Paul’s experience. . .17832
cf Paul, Theology of .22915 (Easton) . .


GENERAL INDEX


3291


Justification—continued
In Paul’s writings—continued
Perfection of Divine


Sin universal....... 1782
Work of Christ... . .1783+
cf Romans, Epistle to. .2616 (Dunelm)


ef Sacrifice, NT...... 2654 (Williams)
ef Salvation......... 2669> (Easton)
ef Work: 5 cee seen eke 3105 (W. L. Walker)


Justin Martyr


cf Literature, Sub-
BOS Ne eter, bard 1903 (Cowan)
cf Lord’s Supper...... 19235 (Gummey)
DUSCLE ss evr Ne daca mews 1788>
DUSHUS® ho aA Mees wee 1788> (S. F. Hunter)


ef Joseph Barsabbas . .1740* (Kerr)
ef Titus, or Titius Jus-


tus Se Pease 2989> (Rutherfurd)
Juttah. 2... Se heeake s 17885 (Masterman)
Gabe sen coe ie saan bate, 2: 17888
ef Weights and Meas-
ures..............3079% (Porter)
Kabzeel............... 17888
Kadesh............... 1788»
ef Kadesh-barnea ....1788> (8S. F. Hunter)
Kadesh-barnea......... 1788> (S. F. Hunter)
ef Kedesh........... 1790 (Ewing)
ef Wanderings of Is-
TAL osc copes edie eae 3064* (Conder)
Kadesh in Galilee
ef Kedesh........... 1790 (Ewing)
Kadesh on the Orontes. .1789° (Christie)
Kadmiel............-. 17898
Kadmonite............ 1789 (Sayce)
ef Kedemah......... 1790>
Kahtan, Kahtanite.....217> (Weir)
ain ete? tes oe, Co vetiericat Se 1789>
Kain (place)........... 1789> (Masterman)
Kallas ec cog scent 1789
Kamonecc. so cence 1789 (Ewing)
ef Havvoth-jair...... 1345° (Ewing)
Kanah®) 03. fadietee ds 1789 (Ewing)
Kean ts setodee-y Gouns wa deans 1019»
Kaphives tir yan tsa oe 1789»
ef Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)
Karaites.............. 685» (Oko)
Kareah. 22. eee anaes 17902
Kariathiarius........... 1790*
Karka. g2.: ea wees 1790*


Karkar, Battle of
ef Israel, Kingdom of .1529> (Weir)


cf Jehu..... Rhee tis kek 1586* (Caldecott)
Karkor. se eee cs 1790+
Karma.............055 692> (Tisdall)
Karnak

ef Shishak........... 2778+ (Nicol)
Kartah..............- 1790°

ef Kartan........... 1790


ef Kattath.......... 17903 (Ewing)


Kartan...............1790*

ef Kartah........... 17905
Kattathe: 304s. tens 17902 (Ewing)

ef Kartah...........17908
Kedar................1790° (Fulton)
Kedemah.............1790°

cf Kadmonite........ 1789" (Sayce)
Kedemoth............. 1790*

CE Jana g eis gies eudetes 1558 (Ewing)
Kedesh...............1790% (Ewing); 1791+

cf Kadesh-barnea.... .1788> (S. F. Hunter)

ef Kishion........... 18138

cf Refuge, Cities of... .2545° (Ewing)
Kedesh-naphtali

cf Kedegh........... 1790> (Ewing)

ef Naphtali.......... 2118> (Ewing)
Keeper, Keepers........ 1791+
Kehelathah............ 17915

ef Wanderings of Israel 3064* (Conder)
Keilah..............-- 17912 (Masterman)

David’s refuge... ....1791

ef Garmite.......... 1175

Identification of...... 17912
Kelaiah............... 1791
Kelita

ef Kelaiah........... 17915
Kemuel............... 1791»
Kenan iced baleen ee 17915; 1415 (Davis)
Kenath. wees... 1791 (Ewing)
Keenaas <4 echee wes 1791

ef Kenezite.......... 1791

ef Uknaz............ 30322
Keene22. Ss a ete eed 1791
Kenezite.............. 1791

ef Kenaz............ 1791>
Kenite

cf Rechab, Rechabites 2535 (Mack)
Kenites............... 17922 (Ewing)

(chek OF: 1h 1 ee ree 539> (Farr)

ef Jethro............ 1674° (Crichton)


cf Midian, Midianites. 2049 (Ewing)
Kenizzite


ef Kenezite.......... 1791
Kenosis eng cokes 3 2 1792+ (Easton)
ef Accommodation... .332 (Sweet)
Character of Divine
knowledge......... 1792


Difficulties of theory. . 1792
cf Humiliation of


Ignorance not incon-
sistent with omnis-


cience............. 1793
Limitations of Jesus’
knowledge......... 17925
Meaning of term..... 1792
ef Parousia.......... 22498 (Easton)


ef Person of Christ... .2338¢ (Warfield)
ef Philippians, Epistle


LO Sed saan Hida vater in tsed aite 2374° (Hayes)
CE PIZ62. 32 Bk ha tae 24578 (Edwards)
ef Reputation........ 25614


3292 GENERAL INDEX


Sates
WCF AS Fan Det svi ee, 17932 Khorsabad
Kerchief.............. 1793 ef Nineveh..........2148> (Pinches)
ef Mantle...........1984 Kibroth-hattaavah...... 1797
Keren-happuch...... . .1793* Kibzaim
Kerioth............... 17932 (Ewing) ef Jokmeam.........1727
ef Kerioth-hezron.... .1793> Macken’, oat aad yeee 1797"
Kerioth-hezron..... .. .1793% Kadi gti tos htt Ye dtne 1797
Cf Hazor'.... sc ceex.ces 1347> (Ewing) cf Goat............. 1248" (Day)
ef Judas Iscariot...... 1765> (Kerr) Kidnapping............ 1797; 747° (Hirsch)
ef Kerioth........... 1793° (Ewing) Kidneys............... 1797> (Easton)
Kernels. coe ie en es 1793 ef Fat..............1099% (Luering)
Werds:scad Bio e ee 1793» cf Psychology........ 2494> (Marais)
ef Nethmim......... 2139» (Lees) ef Reins............. 2553° (Luering)
Kesil ef Sacrifice, OT...... 2638" (Reeve)
cf Astronomy........300° (Maunder) Widrontvycte) he aettiarae 17982
Hesitah?. Stes dats Sets 1793> ef Hinnom, Valley of. .1393 (Masterman)
-ef Piece of Money. . . .2394> ef Jehoshaphat, Valley
Wetabinns mite cette 1793 Ob ete ae an ee 1583" (Masterman)
Kettle. wo... ccc cnn 1793» ef Jerusalem. ........ 1599" (Masterman)
Keturah.............. 1793 (Baur) Kidron, The Brook..... 17982 (Masterman)
Keyse sa et ees 1793° (Pollard) Burniug place for idols 1798»
ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie) David's crossing of... .1798>
Keys, Power of........ 1794 (Carver) East of Jerusalem... ..1798*
ef Absolution......... 242 (Jacobs) ef Gehenna.......... 11832 (Vos)
Authority or duty?. ..1794» cf Jehoshaphat, Valley
Binding and _ loosing of................15833 (Masterman)
SINS) Aare 2 aes 1796» ef King’s Garden..... 1808* (Masterman)
Catholic and Protes- ef Siloam............ 27915 (Masterman)
tant views......... 1794 cf Fopheth.......... 2999 (Masterman)
Church and kingdom. . 1795 Traditional scene of
Civil authority....... 1795° judgment.......... 1798*
Examples of use...... 1796° Kilan (Ceilan).........1798?
Extent of powers..... 1794> Kimah
Figurative meaning. . .1794* ef Astronomy........300 (Maunder)
Forgiveuess of sins... .1795* Kin
Functions of holder. . .1795* ef Kindred........... 1799* (Pollard)
ef Hands, Imposition of 1335° (Orr) Kin, Next of
Importance of subject. 1794* ef Kinsman.......... 1810° (Pollard)
Keys and binding... . .1794* Winah e726 etewre otateys 1798
Limits of power...... 1794» Kindness. ............. 17993 (W. L. Walker)
ef Lord's i200 cathe 1796*; 1919° (Carver) ef Gentleness........ 1215° (W. L. Walker)
In Luke 11 52....... 1796 ef Goodness......... 12792 (W. L. Walker)
May belong to anyone 1797* ef Lovingkindness... .1934" (W. L. Walker)
Meaning of Matthew cf. Mercy srs 2035% (W. L. Walker)
16 10. Ae oe 17952 Kindred............... 17998
Not official, but per- ef Kinsman.......... 1810* (Pollard)
SODA oie ke 1796" Kime... .--.- ee 1799°
ef Peter (Simon)...... 2348> (Gray) ef Cattle............ 583? (Day)
Redemptive power Cf COW eb eocce cu canes 734° (Day)
Only d ae ana ose 17972 King, Christ as......... 1802? (M’Caig)
Related Scripture... . .1796* By achievement... ... 1803»
In Rev 1 18.........1795> Christ’s acceptance of
Iu Rev$7.......... 1795> title... 6.0.6... 0... 1802»
Gs See eae 2596° (Day) Christ charged with
Rock and stone...... 1795» being king......... 1803"
We emiahvets a ese ina 17978 Christ’s claim to king-
ieee BIIPesshere teas ated 1802
ef Emek-keziz........940° ef Christ, Offices of. . .616> (Bevan)
Keziz, Valley of Divinely appointed. . . 1803
ef Emek-keziz....... .940° Etemalrule......... 1804»
Khan Foreshadowings (OT) . 1802+


CPANNS. 52st ata Re 1470° (Christie)


Grace, power, glory... 1804"


GENERAL INDEX 3293


King, Christ as—continued Kingdom of God (of Heaven), The—continued
Missionary extension. . 1804" Meaning and origin of
Nature of His king- Peri eee 1805"
ship.............. 1803" | Modern views... .... .1807
Reality of Christ’s - | In OT (Daniel)....... 1805"
kingship.......... 1802+ ef Parousia.......... 2249* (Easton)
Right by birth....... 1803 Place in theology..... 1807°
So presented in Gos- In Reformation age... 1807
19) rae 1802> ef Salvation......... 2667° (Easton)
Spiritual authority . ... 1803 ef Sermon on the
Testimony of Epistles Mount, The... ....2734* (Miller)
and apocalypse. .... 1803 Value of the idea. ... .1807»
Universal dominion. . .1804* | Kingdom of Israel... ... 1528> (Weir)
King of the Jews....... 1805+ Kingdom of Judah... .. .1758* (Weir)
ef Jesus Christ....... 16249 (Orr) ef Israel, Kingdom of. .1528> (Weir)
ef King, Christ as... . .1802" (M’Caig) King’s Dale........... 777 (Masterman)
King, Kingdom........ 1799 (Press) King’s Garden......... 1808" (Masterman)
Absolute ruler....... 1799» ef Kidron, The Brook . 1798 (Masterman)
Ancient rulers... .....1799% ef Siloam............ 27915 (Masterman)
Authority of king... . 1801+ King’s Mother......... 1808*
Choice of king........ 1800 cf Queen............2513» (Baur)
Davidic ideal. .......1801 ef Queen Mother. ... .2513> (Banr)
Disadvantages of King’s Pool............ 1808+
Hebrew system... . .1800* ef Jerusalem Gates... .1597; 1608" (Masterman)
Duties of............ 1801 King’s Vale............ 1808" (Masterman)
Lateness of Hebrew ef Jehoshaphat, Valley
kingdom......... .1799> OL Rae a eee 1583" (Masterman)
Meaning of term..... 1799» ef Salem............ 26639 (Pinches)
Period of Judges...... 1800+ Kings, Books of........ 1808» (Stearns)
ef Reign............ 2553° (Baur) Character and posi-
Revenue of.......... 1801 HOTS A eo SEA 1809+
Royal court......... 1801» Chronological value. . . 1809*
Samuel and monarchy 1800" Compilations......... 1809»
Strength of Hebrew Composition. ........ 1809»
Dates sie wc alias 1800 ALC Pin asen atemna 2 1810°
Symbols of royalty... .1801* Historical value...... 18098
Theocracy........... 1800" Kent’s outline........ 1809»
ef Throne...........2976* (Baur) Prominence of moral
Kingdom of God (of MOLIVEs soe Se ets 1809
Heaven), The........ 1805" (Stalker) Scope and contents. . . 1808?
In apostolic age... . .. 1807* *Sources.......-.00-. 1809»
Contrast between Jesus’ Title ees. etn) stieactee 1808
view and Jewish Kings’ Sepulchres
conception........ 1806" ef Jerusalem......... 1611 (Masterman)
Current Jewish views 18067 Kinsfolk
Danger of exaggera- ef Kindred........... 1799" (Pollard)
410 cache, eo ee 1807" JONSMAN 3 6 eee ee eS 1810* (Pollard)
In early centuries... . . 1807 ef Kindred........... 1799* (Pollard)
Futurist views....... 1806° Kinswoman............ 1810° (Pollard)
Historical growth of VOIP Sees ceare hissa creer 1810° (Pinches)
TdGAL eee a 18079 In Isaiah 22 5....... 1810>
ef Hope......-...--. 1419» (Easton) Meaning of word..... 1810°
Importance in Synop- Soldiers of.......... 1810»
tIStSioharechs eee 1805 Was it a place?...... 1810
ef Israel, Kingdom of. 1528 (Weir) Kir of Moab........... 1810° (Ewing)
ef Jesus Christ....... 16308 (Orr) ef Kiriath-huzoth... ..1811>
Jesus’ attitude toward Kirama (Cirama).......1811°
Jewish view....... 1806" Kir-hareseth........... 18119 (Ewing)
Jesus’ conceptions. . . . 1807* Kir-heres (Kir-harescth) 1811" (Ewing)
Jesus’ use of title..... 1806° Wairiath: ee gts de cents 1811»
“Kingdom of Heaven” ef Kiriath-jearim..... 1811> (Masterman)
and “of God”...... 1805> Kiriathaim............1811> (Ewing)


3294 GENERAL INDEX


Kiriath-arba
ef Hebron........... 1365* (Masterman)
Kiriath-arim


ef Kiriath-jearim. ....1811> (Masterman)


Kiriath-baal

cf Kiriath-jearim..... 1811° (Masterman)
Kiriath-huzoth......... 1811»

ef Kir of Moab....... 1810 (Ewing)
Kiriath-jearim......... 1811° (Masterman)

Identifications........ 1812

Chaar actestiee < kee 1545

ef Kiriath... 2.0.0... 1811

Location............ 18128

cf Mahaneb-dan... . . .1966 (Ewing)

OT references........ 1811
Kiriath-sannah......... 1812

cf Kiriath-sepher. . . . .1812
Kiriath-sepher......... 1812

ef Kiriath-sannah... . .1812>
Kirjath

ef Kiriath........... 1811>


Kirjathaim (Kiriathaim) 1811» (Ewing)
Kirjath-arba


ef Hebron........... 1365* (Masterman)
Kirjath-baal
ef Kiriath-jearim..... 1811 (Masterman)
Wiseus's ef 6 naa atin eens 18138
cf Kash... sccccu ie 1813 (Baur)
Kash? c.s eccscins eh tees 18132 (Baur); 364> (Clay)
ef Kiseus............ 1813+
CEOS ee eay Se nts 2697> (Weir)
Kishtisesc 2220a hy aise 1813
ef Kushaiah......... 1818»
Kishion...........--.- 18138
cf Kedesh........... 1790> (Ewing)
Wishon o.0h.4.accnewc 1813* (Ewing)
ef Jokneam.......... 17279 (Ewing)
Kislev (Chisleu, Chislev) . 1813
ef Calendar.......... 541> (Porter)
Kiss. ...... eer meee 1813> (W. L. Walker)
ef Adoration......... 60° (Edwards)
WRIST As ft te eeiced es 365* (Clay)
Kites. 3. eatuasioie fae 1814 (Stratton-Porter)
Ch Hawk nieuws soni ee 1345* (Stratton-Porter)
Kithlish
ef Chitlish.........-- 612°
EPO TAs es eats plates 1814+
Kittim susie yankee 1814» (Pinches)


Assyrians in Cyprus.. .1814>
Colonization of Cy-


PLUSi cea gag tees 1814>
Cyprian art.......... 1815
ef Cyprus........... 7718 (Tod)


Name for Cyprus... . .1814°


Name for western
coast lands........ 1814
Races and languages of
Cy priissesaye ee 18152
Two uses of name... .1814>
Kneading
ef Bread............ 514> (Eager)


Knee, Kneel..........- 18152 (Easton)
ef Attitudes......... 3292 (W. W. Davies)
ef Salutation........ 26652 (Pollard)
ef Thigh...........- 2972> (Easton)
ADF C 22 5 dose sand Sonia 1815> (Pollard)
cf Tools. ..........-- 2998> (Easton)
Rr Chkes 2 ieee ahhee Se 1815> (Miller)
Knope aie anes 1815
cf Temple........... 99308 (Caldecott; Orr)
Know, Knowledge...... 1815> (Orr)
cf Foreknowledge....- 1128* (Hodge)
KO8s As ne ee eae 1816


Kohath, Kohathites . . . . 1816 (Orr)
Koheleth


cf Ecclesiastes....... 894> (Beecher)
Kolaiah y.. 6 s4c4e-ecue is 1816
WONG: <. 2s nee resto ee 1816>
Kophse 'iias wipes tees 18165
cf Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)
Kor
CHOOT 28 AoW RSE 709
Korahivccc i. ear ened 1816> (Beecher)
ef Abiram..........- 12> (Beecher)
Character of the narra-
LIVGs ches knee ee oe 1817
Destroyed with his
company.......... 1816
ef Hebron (person) . . .1366>
ef Kore...........-. 1818° (Beecher)
Moses’ warning....... 1817*
Korahites...........-. 1817° (Beecher)
Duties of............ 1817
Genealogical details . .1817°
cf Korey 50 cc scene 1818> (Beecher)
Musical service of... . 1818+
Relation to Psalms... .1818*
Temple of music...... 1813°
Korathites
ef Korah............ 1816> (Beecher)
Wore eee le oes cinch Rites 1818> (Beecher)
ef Korah............ 1816> (Beecher)
ef Korahites......... 1817> (Beecher)
Korhites.............. 1818>
ef Korah............ 1816 (Beecher)
Koz
ef Hakkoz........... 1321»
Kushaiah............. 1818>
ef Kishi............. 1813
Bdadabidel ei. .kcane wee. 18192
Laadan
ef Ladan............ 1821+
Labaleenn-ehencc ket 18192 (Boyd)
Character of......... 1819»
cf Jacob............. 1550° (Boyd)
Name and genealogy . .1919*
ef Paddan-aram...... 2206> (Christie)
Relations with Jacob .1819
Tabanaris cicak eae ak 1819»
Laborise220 soso. Mass 1819> (Orr)
ef Slavery........... 2815 (Raffety)
ef Travail........... 30072 (Macalister)


Cf Works oo50chaeee 3105> (W. L. Walker)


GENERAL INDEX 3295
Laceunus............05 1819> Lamb of God—continued
aCe kes ste gat th 1819» Origin of term....... 1829>
Lacedaemonians cai metiees 1819 (Hutchison) Sacrificial sense. ... . :1822
ef Arius............. 2420 In Second Isaiah. .... 18232 |
cf Maccabaeus, Macca- TAM S oF eh Suess yates 1823> (Macalister)
DOCS Yr acctert ate 1947* (Hutchison) ef Cripple........... TARP
ef Sparta, Spartans. . .2839° (Orr) Lamech..........-...5 1823> (Baur)
Lachish 500-2 sesseeecces 1820+ (Porter) ef Polygamy Of eee 1095 (Caverno) ;
Destruction of....... 1820° Tamedh.i.2.. vans eesaes 1824
Excavation of........ 1820 ef Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)
History of........... 1820° Lament
Location............ 1820* cf Music............ 2094> (Millar)
ef Palestine.......... 2212* (Conder) Lamentation
ef Palestine, Recent ef Burial............ 5299 (Eager)
Exploration........ 2225 (Cobern) Lamentations, Book of. .1824* (Orelli)
Lackete.tescnissne ones 1821* (Gerberding) Author of........... 1824¢
Lacunus Contents............ 18246
ef Laccunus......... 1819> Critical view......... 1824>
Tad o elikevon oan geene es 18218 The five elegies . 18240
DAA aM. even vanes B26 18219 Name.ic oii Jo kewes: 1824#
ef Libni............. 18820 Position in Canon... .1825%
Ladanum............. 1821 Lamp, Lampstand...... 1825+ (Porter)
ef Myrrh............ 2102" (Masterman) ef Candlestick, Golden 553* (Orr)
Ladder Figurative use....... 1825®
ef Siege...........-- 2786* (Nicol) Forms and history... .1825>
Ladder of Tyre......... 18218 (Porter) Funeral use of....... 1826
ef Misrephoth-maim. . 20674 (Porter) Inseriptions.......... 18269
cf Phoenicia......... 2386> (Porter) Material and design.. .1825>
Lade, Lading.......... 1821» ChOU gis ae 2181 (Patch)
Tad yes ee isan ie hee 1821> cf Torch............ 2999
CHO yrldiesnc ticket 773» Use of term......... 1825*
ef Elect Lady........ 9259 (Law) Lampsacus
ef John, Epistles of. . .1711° (Law) cf Sampsames........ 2675+
Teal ante theca nis oe 1821> Lance, Lancer, Lancet
Lagash............-255 364° (Clay) cf Armor, Arms... ...251* (Nicol)
Haha: sieci3 cs coats 8 1821 Tandem tr. g os Otek 1826% (Day)
Lahai-roi ef Country.......... 7249 (Day)
ef Beer-lahai-roi...... 4248 (S. F. Hunter) ef Earth............ 8874 (Day)
Lahmam...........+++ 1821> Land-crocodile......... 1826> (Day)
Lahmas cf Chameleon........ 5928 (Day)
cf Lahmam..........- 1821> cf Lizard............ 1906+ (Day)
Lahmi.... 2... eee eee ee 1821° Land Laws
ef Elhanan.......... 928% (Sampey) ef Agrarian Laws..... 74® (Wiener)
cf Goliath.........-- 1276 (Reeve) Landmark............. 1826"
aisha ee ee ee 1821» gE) 1 cece ae Ne Ree er eee 1826»
cf Dail oc. ssc ee 7813 (Ewing) Language of the NT ....1826 (A. T. Robertson)
Laishah...........+++- 18228 ef Aramaic Language. .222¢ (J. B. H. Sy
Take scien te teen 1822% (Day) Character of the kein? 1829°
cf Pool. o.Aiiiiaeees 2419» (Day) Comparison of Biblical
Lake of Fire..........- 18228 (Vos) and common words. 1830*
Lake of Gennesarct Evidence from gram-
ef Galilee, Sea of..... 1165+ (Ewing) MAL... see eee eee 18298
Lakkum....... eee 18225 Evidence from inscrip-
Lama tions......-...06-- 1828>
ef Eloi, Eloi, Lama Sa- Evidence from modern
bachthani......... 939° (Clippinger) grammar.......... 1829
Lambe reise wee eee 1822> (Day) Evidence from ostraca 1828
cf Sheep.........-.- 2756> (Day) Evidence from the pa-
Lamb of God.......... 1822> (Bevan) pyri... .......... 18284
In the apocalypse... . . 18234 The koiné of the first
Historical interpre- century..........-. 18275
tations..........-- 18234 ef Latin............. 1840° (A. T. Robertson)


3296 GENERAL INDEX


Language of the NT—continued
Literary elements in


IN Gree tases ete 1830»

The newer view...... 18278

Old view of a Divine
speech............1826

ef Papyrus.......... 2238> (Goodspeed)

Peculiarities of writers.1831>

Recent workers in... .1827>

ef Roman Empire and
Christianity....... 2601* (Angus)

Semitic influence..... 1831

ef Septuagint........ 2722 (Thackeray)

Speech of Jesus...... 1832*


Languages of the OT... .1832 (Weir)
Absence of tenses... . .1834>


Adjectives few... ....1835>
Aramaic. .........4- 1835>
Aramaic and Hebrew
compared.......... 1835
Concrete nature of He-
brews sek et eed 1836"
Construct state of
NOUNS <i wala aS 1835"
Derived stems........ 1834
Differences of age and
pty ler sate ioea ee 1833»


Foreign influences. . . .1833>
Guttural sounds...... 18349
Hebrew is a Canaanite

language.......... 1833>
Hebrew, characteristics

Ole icdis.k ohne aay 1834*
Hebrew, death of..... 18348
Hebrew, history of. . .1833*
Hebrew of the OT... . 1833+


Hebrew remains...... 18334
Hebrew, a younger

speech............ 18348
Internal inflexion..... 1835*
cf Lamentations, Book

Ob eres te cite anaes 1836"; 18249 (Orelli)
Literary  characteris-

TICS ek cs oe teeta 18368
More sounds than let-

Persia wens: 1834*
Name of formation... .1834®
Name Hebrew....... 1832>


Oldest form of Hebrew 1833*
Picturesqueness of He-


brew...2d eee 1836*
Pronouns............ 1834
Prose and poetry..... 1833>
Semitic groups. ...... 1832
Semitic languages... . .1832
Syllables............ 1834
Syntax of verb....... 1835
ef Text of the OT... .2957% (Weir)
Triliteral roots....... 1834»


Uniformity of Hebrew. 1833*
Vowels and consonants18348


Lantern. ...........0-- 1836"
ef Torch...........- 29996
Laodicea...........0-- 1836> (Banks)


Laodiceans, Epistle to the 1836 (Rutherfurd)
ef Apocryphal Epistles 194° (J. M. Wilson)
Evidence favoring

Ephesians. ........ 1837
Jewish character of

church in Ephesus. . 1838+
Laodicea displaced by


Ephesus........... 1838>
Marcion’s opinion. . . .1837°
Paul’s reference to... .1837#
Purpose of the Epistle 1830*
Similarity of Ephesians
and Colossians..... 18388
Spurious Epistle... .. .1837*
Testimony in Ephe-
SIGNS a eak ee anes 1837>
TL) BES coast ered creeds Mente 1839* (Luering)
Lapis Assius........... 289°
Lappidoth............. 1839° (Lees)
Lapwing.............. 1839>
ef Hoopoe........... 1419+ (Stratton-Porter)
Liarse sy oe Se no ees 365% (Clay)
Lasciviousness.........1839> (Raffety)
TPasea es Ge. Nae. x. amen 1840°
cf Fair Havens....... 1087
Tasha peice cette cokes 1840° (Ewing)
Lassharon............. 1840
ef Sharon........... 2750 (Ewing)
Last Day............. 7999 (Orr)
Last Days
ef Eschatology of OT. 972* (Orr)
Last Time, Times... ...1840* (Vos)
cf Eschatology of NT. 979> (Vos)
Lasthenes............. 1840> (Hutchison)
Latehet............... 1840°
Mp atinsces eles yun eee 1840> (A. T. Robertson)


cf Language of the NT 1826 (A. T. Robertson)
cf Latin Version, The


Qld ats keane 1841 (Nicol)
cf Roman Empire and
Christianity....... 26018 (Angus)
ef Vulgate. .......... 3058> (Angus)
Latin Version, The Old. .1841 (Nicol)
Cyprian’s Bible...... 1842
Individual character-
ISLICR 3. indies ascend 18434


Later Italic MSS. ... .1843+
Need of translation. ..1841>


Old Latin MSS... ....1842»
Possible Eastern origin1842>
Prevalence of Greek... .18422
Tertullian’s Bible... . .1842>
Value for textual criti-


CISM oe ee aa ee cee 1843+
Versions before Jeromel841>
ef Vulgate........... 3058 (Angus)


Work of Jerome...... 1841»


GENERAL INDEX


3297


Latter Days
cf Eschatology of the


OT ae a ees 9729 (Orr)

Lattice

cf House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Lauder a Oe a 1843"
Laughing-stock......... 1843»

ef Mock............. 2072» (W. L. Walker)
Laughter.............. 1843" (W. L. Walker)
Launch

ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
Lavette. ce esctivces cave 1843 (Caldecott)

In the: NT =. 4.3 recs 1844


In the tabernacle. .... 1843»
ef Tabernacle... .. .2889% (Caldecott; Orr)


In the temple........ 1844
cf Temple......... 2934 (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Undersetter........ 3037
Law, Judicial.......... 1858 (Hirsch)
ef Roman Law....... 2611» (Allen)
ef Sanhedrin......... 2688° (Levertoff)
Law inthe NT........ 1844* (M’Caig)
Definition of law... . . .1844
ef Divorce........... 865° (Caverno)
ef Forgiveness....... 1132 (Morro)
ef Jesus Christ....... 1659 (Orr)
Law in the Acts...... 1847
Peter and Paul..... 1847
Roman law........ 1847


Stephen’s attitude. .1847*
Law in the Epistles. . .1848+
Adam and Christ. . .1848>


Bondage and
freedom......... 18504
Condemnation of
NAW esis tpi eae 1848
In Corinthians and
Philippians... ... 1850°
Effects of law...... 1848»
In Galatians. ...... 1850
In Hebrews........ 1851°
In James. ......... 1851
Law and righteous- ;
NESS... 0... eee 1848%


Liberty from the law 1849»
In Peter and John,
Epistles of....... 1852
Purity of the law. . 1849+
Romans, Ep. to... .1848
Law in the Gospels. . .1844>
Adultery and
divorce.......... 1845
Answers of Jesus . . . 1846
Christ's fulfilment of


Christ and tradition.1845*
Death of Christ... .1846>
Divisions. ......... 1844>
In Fourth Gospel... 1846+
In life of Jesus. .... 1846


Law in the NT —continued
Law in the Gospels—continued


cf Punishments.....
Retaliation.......
Sabbath...........
Sermon on Mount. .
Teaching of Christ. .
ef Wrath..........
Law in the OT.........
Abolition of the law...
Book of Covenant. ...
Ceremonies..........
Character and design..


2504" (Hirsch)


. 1845


1845»

1844

1844

3113° (W. Evans)
1852* (Rule)
18575

1854*


1855>


Comparison with code


of Hammurabi.....
ef Covenant, Book of.
Critical views........
Dates and codes......
Deuteronomic law... .
Final compilation.....
Groups of laws.......
High honor accorded. .
Later interpolations...
Law of holiness.......
Levitical ritual. ......
Limits of discussion. .


Sabbaths and feasts. .
Sacrifices, origin of...
Servants and poor...
Terms used..........
cf Torah..........
Value of the law.....
Written law........


Lawgiver........0...005
Lawless... ........00--


ef Seribes...........
Students of the law. .
Teacher of law.......


729» (Mack)


2705> (Hirsch)
1853
1855
1857"


. 1852+


1856

2089>; 2090° (Kyle)
22982 (Wiener)
1856+


.1856"
.1856>
.1856*


1852


_ 2581 (Warfield)
.1857°
1852


2611> (Allen)
18585 (W. Evans)
1858 (Morro)
1859" (W. Evans)
1859° (Hirsch)
1859»

18599

2704> (Hirsch)


1859"


1859» (Breslich)
1860° (Trever)


Critical views of the


Raising of...........
Leach
cf Horseleach........


Leaf, Leaves...........
League
cf Confederacy.......


14242 (Day)

1861* (Patch)

2044* (Patch)

2545 (Patch)

18615 (M. O. Evans)


699 (W. L. Walker)
1861° (Baur)


3298 GENERAL INDEX


Leannoth

cf Psalms, Book of... .2487* (Sampey)
Leaping

ef Games............ 1168® (Smith)
Leasing. ...........005 1862 (W. Evans)
Leather

ef Skin) ny. i. ois agit 2813> (Luering)

ef Tanner........... 2909 (Patch)
Leaven ca eeeees.. 1862* (Hager)

ef Bread............ 5145 (Eager)

cf Meals, Meal-time.. .2014* (Hager)
Lebana, Lebanah....... 1862»
Lebanon.............. 1862 (Wright)

Anti-Lebanon........ 1864

ef Arabah........... 211> (Wright)

General features... . . .1862>

Geology of.......... 1863°

History a2. as sien 18648

ef Jordan, Valley of. ..1735* (Wright)

Namen: ii atinbe ne 1862

Rivers of............ 18632

Scenery............. 1863»

Ch Syria. eee es eased 28812 (Christie)

ef Tower of Lebanon. .3000° (Christie)

View from........... 18632
Lebaoth............... 1864"
Lebbaeus..........-... 18642

ef Judas............. 17659 (S. F. Hunter)

cf Thaddaeus........ 2964* (Kerr)
Lebonah.............. 1864
Lecahect 8 2¢ hen tey 1864»
Ledg@eics ca cia san 1864

CE Altary sass o pisces 106° (Wiener)

ef Temple........... 29302 (Caldecott; Orr)
Teck ast 2 btveq cet atten 1864>; 1122% (Eager)
Lees

cf Wine, Winc Press . .3086* (Easton)
Lettaok cect eet 1864 (Luering)

ef Lefthanded........ 18652 (Luering)
Lefthanded............ 1865 (Luering)

Chilettiict-: ent asa: 1864° (Luermg)
OB Meetty cetoanas Mena Lene 1865* (Luering)

ef Loins............. 1917 (Luering)

ef Thigh............ 2972> (Easton)
Legendary Apocryphal

Gospels............. 198* (Hutchison)
Legions, Roman........ 257° (Allen)
Legislation of Sanctity

cf Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Legumes.............. 1122 (Eager)
Lehabim.............. 1865»

ef Lubim............ 1934
Lehi

ef Ramath-lehi....... 2528> (Ewing)
Lemuel s6e.5 gees 1865> (Genung)

cf Proverbs, Book of . .2473° (Genung)
Lend, Loan........... 1865 (Williams)
Lentils................ 18662 (Masterman); 1122°

(Eager)

Leopard............... 1866¢ (Day)

ef Beth-nimrah....... 450° (Wright)

ef Nimrah........... 2147* (Ewing)


Leopard—continued


ef Nimrim.......... 2147+ (Ewing)

cf Spot, Spotted. ..... 2846 (Macalister)
Leper: 2. iets lect 1867* (Macalister)

ef Uncleanness....... 3036” (Williams)
Leprosy .05 cee. c bs 1867% (Macalister)

Description.......... 1867

ef Freckled Spot...... 1145+

In garments......... 1867

In houses........... 1868"

Law regarding... .... 1868

Localities ........... 1867

Nature of........... 1867

Bry Nie cai Meats 1867"

ELT) Tp sehen t tack BE oh 18678

ef Purity... ......... 2507 (Caverno)

cf Spot, Spotted...... 2846 (Macalister)

ef Tetter............ 2950*
Leshem

cf Taishan cd Ae 1g21>
LOSSaU escent ees 1868+

ef Adasa... 2.2.0.0... 54>
Betas vena ae oak ane 18682
Lethechss. 2iscee iia 1868"

cf Weights and Meas-

UTES! hdc aoe ees 3079" (Porter)

Letter, Letters

ef Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)

cf Epistle........... 966 (Pratt)

cf Palestine....... *,. .2216 (Conder)

ef Palestine, Recent

Exploration....... 2228" (Cobern)

cf Tell el-Amarna.....2927> (Kyle)

ef Writing........... 3114* (Richardson)
Letushim............0. 1868

ef Leummim......... 1868>
Leummim............. 1868»

ef Letushim......... 1868
Levi (general)......... 1868b

ef Matthew.......... 20092 (Schodde)
Levi (patriarch)........ 1868> (Ewing)

ef Priests and Levites.2446> (Wiener)
Leviathan............. 1868> (Day)

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)

CLA Weak hos ha hae 1572 (M. O. Evans)

ef Job, Bookof....... 1685 (Genung)

cf Reptile........... 25613

ef Scales............2701+ (Luering)
Levirate Law

ef Marriage.......... 1996> (Eager)
Levirate Marriage...... 526° (Hirsch)

ef Husband’s Brother. 1442> (Crannell)
ISVISIS Acnencse susie Cae 1869+
Levites

ef Priests and Levites. 2446> (Wiener)
Levitical Cities... ...... 1869+ (Wiener)


cf Agrarian Laws..... 74> (Wiener)
Doubts as to their


existence.......... 1869»
Evidence favorable .. . 1869
Ezekiel’s plan. ....... 1869»
Legal provisions...... 18692


ef Priests and Levites.2446° (Wiener)


GENERAL INDEX


38299


Leviticus.............. 1870 (Moller)
Arguments for late
Cate exit ad 18779
Arguments for Mosaic
Gate snd rade he 1878*
cf Atonement, Day of .3824> (Méller)
Ceremonial laws...... 1875°
Character of......... 1870"
Critical extravagances 1872*
Critical views........ 18712
Defense of its integ-
TILY Cate etgee de. 18748
Dissent from critical
opinion........... 1837"
ef Exodus........... 1056" (Méller)
ef Ezekiel........... 10712 (Moller)
ef Genesis........... 12012 (Méller)
Interpretation of Chris-
tianity ... 6.0.2... 18808


Law of Holiness, the. .1870°
Law, imperfection of. .1880°


-ef Moses............ 2089 (Kyle)
Name? aise kat tec ays 18702
Origin..............18778


Plan of the book...... 1873>
Reasons for analysis. .18728
Rejection of critical


VIEWS). coca tarer bets 1871

Significance of....... 1879»

Structure............ 1871»

CL Wiart kc sews cee 3069° (Nicol)
Lewd, Lewdness........ 1880° (Raffety)
Libanus

cf Lebanon..........1862> (Wright)
Libation

ef Sacrifice, OT... . . .2638* (Reeve)
Liberal, Liberality, Liber-

BLL ye hy ec at wate oe aes 1881* (Gerberding)
Libertines............. 1881 (S. F. Hunter)

cf Rome...........- 2621» (Allen)

Suggestions regarding. 1881

Synagogue of........ 18818
Libertysesiiaes fsa Sees 1881 (Orr)
Libnahiotsorkaiderss ces 1881> (Masterman)

ef Wanderings of Is-

Pael os Aceon aoe es 30642 (Conder)
DM ih tote oe oa atten 18822

ef Ladan...........- 1821
Libnites

ef Libni...........-- 18822
Libraries.............- 1882 (Richardson)


Amarna collection. . . .1883>
Assyrian libraries... . . 1886


CE Book: 3.23 ee ees 495° (Richardson)
Bookcases and _ build-

INS resto shines Ga 18867
Book cities.......... 1884


Dead, libraries for the 1882°
Early literary activity 1884°
Egyptian age........ 1883"
Exodus, age of the... .1883>
Judges, age of........ 1884°


Libraries—continued


ef Nineveh, Library of .2151" (Sayce)
Non-biblical religious


libraries........... 1882»
Palestine at the con-

QUCStS sis dante ewes 1884
Patriarchal age... . .. .1883#
Prehistoric and primi-

tive collections. .... 1882>
Royal chronicles... .. . 1885"

Royal period........ 1884

ef Writing........... 3123> (Richardson)
Library

Alexandrian.........456% (Dosker)

Bible asa........... 18825

Definition of......... 18828

Natural selection of

Bible's. dessin cece 1882
Of Nineveh.......... 2151° (Sayce)
ef Writing........... 3119 (Richardson)

Libya, Libyans......... 1886
ef Lubim............ 19342
TACO sh coh thes see cee cevee es 1886> (Day)
ef Flea.............- 1118 (Day)
CEG rc ure egw 12409 (Day)
ef Plagues of Egypt. . .2404> (Kyle)
ef Sand Flies........ 2688
Licence............5.- 1887"
Lidebir............-.5. 18872
cf Lo-debar.......... 1909> (Ewing)
Lie, Lying............. 18879 (W. Evans)
Biblical instances..... 1887
ef Christs, False... ... 628> (Orr)
Defined............. 18878


cf False Swearing... . .746> (Hirsch)
God’s attitude toward 1887+


Penalty for.......... 1887
ef Prophesyings, False . 2466 (Schenk)


Racial sin, a.......,.1887%

Words employed...... 1887
Liers-in-wait........... 1888

ef Ambush..........115°
Lieutenant

cf Satrap............ 2697"
Tithe ie. Soh, encase coastal 1888" (Reeve)

Tn! Attss ee oe: 18902

ef Antediluvian Pa-

triarchs........... 189° (Davis)


Apocryphal ideas..... 1889
Capital punishment in


Oa e ee searrs td 1889"
Complexity of idea in
OTs Mater t tea oe 18882


Eternal life in NT... .1889*
Jn Fourth Gospel... . . 1889
cf Immortality... ....1458 (Orr)


3300 GENERAL INDEX


Life—continued

Johannine ideas... ...1890*
Long life desired in

OD ett tee 1888»
TaN Ee et arte hae 1889?
OT ideas of immortal-

LU Viceoth ele ah et es 1888»
OT teaching......... 18888


In Paul’s writings... . .1890*
Popular use in OT... . 1888
Relationship with God 1888>
In Synoptic Gospels. . .1889*


Terms used.......... 18882

ef Tree of Life........ 3009 (Reeve)
TEEG Po Bic oe ees a 1890 (Easton)

CLG ALE ae ai ged 1175» (Easton)

eh Hom... 2.2.00. 20. 1422° (Easton)
Light xin feeg sete 1890> (Pratt)

Attribute of holiness. .1891>

Church as........... 1892

ef Creeds............ 7419 (Alexander)

Figurative use........ 1891»

ef Johannine Theology 1695» (Law)

ef Logos............ 1911> (Alexander)

Origin of............ 1890°

Symbolism of........ 1892

Various meanings... ..1891*

ef Wisdom.......... 3089% (Easton)
Light, Lightness........ 1892 (Orr)
Lightning............. 1892> (Joy)

CRETE ahead rae, 1319 (Joy)

ef Thunder.......... 29779 (Joy)
Lign-aloes

ef Aloes...........-. 102 (Masterman)
Ligure


ef Stones, Precious... .2856* (Fletcher)


Liking.............. 1892” (Easton)
Tolchie ad sors a oda eh 1893@
Lilith

ef Night-monster..... 2143 (Sweet)
TAY peecea i cvane Biesesuaes 1893" (Masterman)

ef Lily-work......... 1893

ef Lotus Trees....... 1931> (Masterman)
Lily-work............. 1893

ef Jachin and Boaz. ..1547% (Caldecott)

CEG eda ees ane 1893" (Masterman)
TSUN ees serece Sees ass ence Ske 1893 (Day)

ef Chalkstone........ 591° (Day)

CE CIBY tok eases 667° (Day)

CRockis2% 2 ivan at 25968 (Day)
Tani Ae Mais ea ees 18942
Wine. sche Oe 1894 (Orr)

ef Measuring Line. . . .2016* (Porter)

ef Pencil............ 22988

CEROPC ee. ees ann eoe 2623 (Easton)

CE TOONS ei ce 2a5 See oe 2999 (Easton)

cf Weights and Meas-

res Sect 5 ea os 3079° (Porter)

Lineage............... 18949
DAMON eesti wee es 18942 (E. D. Isaacs)


(0 ia) IE: Cg eee en 1118* (Masterman)


Linen—continued
Garments made of... . 1894


History of........... 18942
ef Silk, Silkworm..... 2790° (Day)
' of Twine............ 30287
Lintel
cf House............1434> (A. C. Dickie)
TAN US Fe Slee, seat ieee 1894> (Rutherfurd)
DnOn Aue oe eo eae 1895 (Day)
Figurative use....... 1895
Natural history...... .1895*
References to........ 1895»
Terms used.......... 1895
ef Whelp............ 30832 (Day)
Laie satis cette chs <i aeree see 18962 (Luering)
ef Mouth............ 2093 (Luering)
TAQUOPs Ans beat aegien 3 1896* .
cf Drink, Strong... ...879 (Edwards)
ef Wine... .......... 3086" (Easton)
al St ber yee Sec ak ew eager 1896>
eA Ch UUSt ey ee Selec teres 1941» (Raffety)


Literature, Sub-apostolic 1896 (Cowan)
ef Apocryphal Acts... 183 (A. F. Findlay)
ef Apocryphal Gospels. 195* (Hutchison)
Aristides, Apology of. . 1903

Church in Athens,
the.............1903"
Contents.......... 1903"
Notable sayings. . . .1903>
Recovery and date. . 19035
Barnabas, Epistle of ..1901
Allegorical method. .1901>

Contents and author-


Date.............1901>
Notable sayings. .. .1902*
Reference to bap-


TABI «ie heat ee 19028
Reference to Lord’s
DAY... 22) canted, 1902+


Clement to Corin-
thians, Epistle of... .18972
Apologetic value... .1897
Authorship and date.1897+
Church organiza-


Doctrinal testimony 1897
Occasion and con-


tents........0.. 18978
Ritual............. 18988

Clement, Second
Epistle of........ 1902»
Agrapha of Jesus. . . 1903
Contents.......... 1903°

Date and  author-
Ship ee eats, 1903+


Nature of document 1902»
Notable sayings. .. .1903
Didache, The. .......1898°; 3875 (A. T. Robert-
son)


Literature, Sub-apostolic—continued
Didache, The—continued
Church officers. .... 1899"


Contents.......... 1898>
Datei: .o45. fees 1898"
Disappearance and
recovery......... 1898+
Ordinances........ 1898
Second advent...... 1899>
Diognetus, Epistle of. . 1904
Contents.......... 1905
Date and author-
F210) o eter ere rere tees 1904»
cf Gnosticism........ 1240" (Rutherfurd)


ef Gospels, Synoptic. . 1281» (Iverach)
Hermas, Shepherd of . . 19027
Authorship and date.1902*
Church officers... .. 1902>
Contents and object 1902>
Notable utterances. . 1902
Ignatius, Epistle of. . .1899>
Author and date... . 1899


Genuineness....... 1899»

Glory of martyrdom 1900

Leading ideas...... 1900"

Notable ideas. ..... 19002.
ef John, the Apostle... .1706% (Iverach)
Justin Martyr........ 1903

Dialogue with Try-

phones: erent hs 1904+
First apology...... 1903
Tif Gx Peet Aes totes 1903


Notable sayings. . . .1904*
Reference to Lord’s
Dayo vtrtce cient 1904*
Second apology... ..1904*
ef Mark, Gospel of... .1987 (Farmer)
cf Matthew, Gospel of 2009" (Schodde)
Papias Fragments... . .1901*
Author and date... .1901*
“John the Presby-


ter secs beta te  LQOL*
Matthew and Mark
mentioned....... 19015


Notable statements . 1901*


GENERAL INDEX


ef Peter, Epistles of . ..2351" (Moorehead)
Polycarp, Epistle of. . .1900°


Chief ideas.....


ef Simon Magus...

ef Spiritual Gifts. .

ef Trine Immersion

ef Widow........
Littery tenets ea

ef Palanquin......
Little Genesis

cf Book of Jubilees.
Lively... 00.00 000-


...2796> (Rutherfurd)
.. .28432 (Lambert)
...3011> (Kurtz)

.. 8084" (Eager)


.,.173* (J. E. H. Thomson)
... 1905 (W. L. Walker)


TV Oi tied tes each 1905» (Luering)
ef Astrology.........295> (Maunder)
Cf Caale oi. ec Se 584" (Luering)
cf Divination........860* (T. W. Davies)

LIVIN Gs riba ah ap are 1905° (W. L. Walker)

Living Creature........ 1906" (Day)
cf Creature, Living. ..740° (W. L. Walker)

Digard 8s cet Oks peas 1906" (Day)
cf Chameleon........592* (Day)
ef Ferret .s.03 ses 1106" (Day)
ef Gecko. ........... 1181+
ef Land-crocodile..... 1826 (Day)
cf Mole: ccc eee nte 20742 (Day)
Names! sic sons anne 1906"

In Palestine......... 1906

References to, in the
Bibles... 6 as 1906>

ef Reptile ........... 2561

ef Sand-lizard........ 2688

ef Snail.............2819" (Day)

ef Spider............ 2840" (Day)

ef Tortoise.......... 2999> (Day)

ef Weasel........... 8076" (Day)

Loaf
cf Bread.........,...514% (Hager)

Lo-rammi.............. 1907" (Lees)
cf Hosea............1424» (J. Robertson)
ef Jezreel............ 16779 (Ewing)

No} « heertee ear grerer Manan neturae 1865> (Williams)

LOK sin eset eat 1907+ (Luering)

TOCUStie tee ss 1907> (Day)
cf Beetle............ 425* (Day)
Figurative references. . 1909*
Asfood............. 1909

ef Food........... 1121> (Eager)
Grasshopper......... 1908
Hab itseteescee deed 1909*
Identifications........ 1907
ef Insects........... 1473* (Day)
Namesof...........1907
ef Palmer-worm...... 2236°
ef Plagues of Egypt. ..2405¢ (Kyle)

Lod, Lydda........... 1909" (Ewing)
Biblical references. . . .1909*
History............. 1909»
Identification. .......1909

Loddeus (Saddeus)..... 1909»

Lo-debar...........4-. 1909 (Ewing)
ef Lidebir........... 18878

Lod get: si38 es cece 1910*

LOftiatesicwenewoe ae 1910*

Loftily, Loftiness, Lofty .1910*

| Bs) secre ray rank cPoreree 1910*
ef Weights and Meas-

UNOS: fa AY Aagtcnd eas 3079" (Porter)

Logia, The............ 1910* (Smith)
ef Agrapha.......... 72 (Smith)
Dates cae etek es 1911*
Description of........ 1910"
Discovery of......... 1910*


ef Gospels, Synoptic . .1281> (Iverach)
ef Jesus Christ (sources) 1626* (Orr)


3301


3302 GENERAL INDEX


Logia—continued
ef Luke, Gospel of... .19392 (A. T. Robertson)
Meaning of word..... 19108
New sayings of Jesus. . 1910
Old sayings of Jesus... 1910
Origin and character. . 19112


ef Papyrus.......... 2242 (Goodspeed)
TOG 08%: ft erent soiree 1911» (Alexander)
Alexandrian synthesis . 1913
Personality........ 1914
PhUGtse sp eee 1913


Special features... . .1913
Christian realization. .1914*
In Ep. to Hebrews. . 1914
In Fourth Gospel,
doctrine......... 1914»
In Fourth Gospel,
Logos and God.. . 1915
In Fourth Gospel,
Logos and world.1915*
In Fourth Gospel,
terms used....... 1915
Pauline doctrine... . 19142
Philo and John... . . 1916
ef Doctrine of, in Jo-
hannine Theology . . 1699" (Law)
Greek speculation... . .19128


Anaxagoras........ 1912
Aristotle.......... 1912
Heraclitus......... 1912
Plat@nc tend Seats 19128
DlOICS etek ed eer es 1912»
Hebrew anticipation of
doctrine........... 1912»


Distinctions in Deity 1913"
Revelation of God. . 1913


Targums.......... 19133
Theophanies....... 1913
Wisdom........... 1913+

ef John, Gospel of. . . .17208 (Iverach)
Logos doctrine..... 1725

ef Light............. 1891> (Pratt)

Meaning of term..... 1911

ef Mediation......... 2021* (Edwards)

Patristic development. 1916®

ef Philosophy........ 2384" (Rees)

cf Platonic Doctrine of .337 (Rees)

cf Speech............ 2839> (W. L. Walker)


cf Wisdom of God... .3092" (Easton)
ef Wisdom of Solomon .3092% (T. W. Davies)


Ch Word cc ieee: 3105* (W. L. Walker)
VOWS scp ene ese es 1917* (Luering)
CE CR i te ee 1865° (Luering)
cf Thigh s..tcusenis 2972» (Easton)
ois a. Aine eases kee 1917 (Rutherfurd)
ef Eunice............ 1037 (Rutherfurd)
ef Timothy.......... 2983> (Rutherfurd)
Longevity............. 1917® (Macalister)
Longsuffering.......... 19186 (W. L. Walker)
ef Patience.......... 2263 (CW. L. Walker)


N Bo (0) conn nt eee 1918> (Easton)


Looking-glass.......... 19198

ef Glass............. 1233+ (Porter)
Loom

cf Weaving.......... 3077? (Patch)
LOOP ies Gie s aibvete x lett 1919°
Lord of Hosts.........- 19199


cf God, Names of.. . . .1264> (Mack)
cf Host of Heaven... . 1433 (Orr)
cf War, Manof...... 30722


Lord, The Lord........ 1919" (Carver)


cf God, Names of... . .1264» (Mack)
cf Keys, Power of... . .1796% (Carver)
ef Lord’s Day........ 19192 (Easton)


Lord’s Day............ 1919 (Easton)


Change from Sabbath. 19208

ef Ethics of Jesus... . . 1026 (Stalker)
Later history........ 1920

cf Literature, Sub-


APOS Mie et aa 1902+; 1904* (Cowan)
ef Lord, The Lord. . . .1919* (Carver)
Meaning of term..... 19192
NUS 38: kd ca ee a 1919>
Origin’ nue Bo as 1919»

Post-apostolic use... ..1919®
Practical usage....... 1920
ef Sabbath.......... 26312 (Sampey)


Sunday and Sabbath. . 1920+


Lord’s Prayer, The..... 1920 (Miller)


Arrangement........ 1920>
ef Church of........ 2188" (Masterman)
Purpose............. 19214
Sources............- 19215
Special expressions... . 1921*
Two forms of........1920>
Lord’s Supper (Dunkers) 1928 (Kurtz)
ef Agape............ 69> (Lambert)
Church of the Brethren
(Dunkers)......... 1928»
Date esc: hala sian 1928»


Love feast, the..... 19292
Perpetuation of sup-


Pele sok Bates 19298
Practice of Brethren
(Dunkers)....... 1929
Lord’s Supper (general) . 1921» (Gummey)
Definition........... 1921»
Historical setting..... 1922
ef Jesus Christ... ....1658> (Orr)


cf Johannine Theology 1704 (Law)

cf Literature, Sub-apos.1904> (Cowan)
Liturgical tradition. . .1924#

cf Meals, Meal-time . .2015* (Eager)


ef Mediation......... 2022 (Edwards)
NT narratives........ 19228
NT sources.......... 1921>
Observance by the

Churchs ascii 1923


ef Paul, Theology of. .2292> (Easton)
Post-apos fathers. .... 1923»


Post-apos usage... .. .1923>
Preparation for the
Eucharist......... 1922


GENERAL INDEX


3803


Lord’s Supper (general) —continued


cf Sacraments........ 2636" (Lambert)

ef Sacrifice, NT...... 2657° (Williams)

Sequence of the insti-
tutions............ 1923


ef Washing of Feet... .3072 (Anderson)
Words and acts of


POBUS Sy code 1922
Lord’s Supper  (histori-

CB EA Ge coro olen 1924» (Dosker)
In apos church....... 1925
Calvins 5.555% acdsedenn 1926
Derivation.......... 1924
Elements, the........ 1925
Luthers oi asec ate 1926+


Post-apos church..... 1925


Roman usage........ 1925>
Zwingli............. 1926
Lord’s Supper (Lutheran
interpretation)....... 1926 (Dau)
Command of Christ... 19276
Difficulties........... 19284
Doctrinal contents of
textesc ui tee ei kd 1927%
Elements used....... 1927
Eucharistic texts...... 19274
Purpose of ordinance. . 1928
Source and norm..... 19278


Term Eucharist, the. .1926>
Lords of the Philistines. . 1929°


cf Philistines......... 2376> (Conder)
Lo-ruhamah
ef Lo-ammi.......... 19072 (Lees)
ef Ruhamah......... 2625>
ef Shear-jashub....... 2752>
TOSS eich bad etna oe 1929> (Williams)
Lot
ef Divination........ 860° (T. W. Davies)
ef Pension........... 2298
Lot (person)........... 1929> (Boyd); 18 (Boyd)
Critical views........ 1931


Early career.........
Later Biblical refer-


ences.............19314
Later period......... 1930%
Personality........-. 1929
Relations with Abra-
AM 22, aneh ee eee 1930*
Wil G es ve wets! antes ea oe 19312
TiGtans.8) 2 sia caacereees 1931»
Lothasubus.........-.. 1931
Lots
ef Divination........ 860" (T. W. Davies)
Lots, Feast of
ef Purim...........- 2506 (Mack)
Lotus Trees...........- 1931> (Masterman)
chlalys eit eas 1893" (Masterman)
DOVE wth aoa Na te ee 1931> (W. Evans)
Biblical references. . . .1931
Definition........... 1932


Love—continued
God’s love; objects...
Human love; manner.
Human love; objects..
Human love; source. .
Love, Brotherly........
Love-feast


cf Psalms, Book of...
Lovingkindness........
cf Brotherly Love....
ef Goodness........
ef Kindness..........
ef Mercy............
Low Country
cf Shephelah.........
Lowland. .............
ef Natural Features. .
ef Shephelah.........
cf Valesvcie. 2) da ceas:


ef Libya.............
ef Shishak...........
Lucas (Luke)..........


Lucian


CE Gy dias foe fo See

Semitic Lud.........

Two different peoples.
Luhith, Ascent of.......
Luke

ef Lucas............
Luke, The Evangelist. . .

cf Acts of Apostles... .


19325
1933
1933°
19335
525> (Rees)


69> (Lambert)

19349 (W. L. Walker)
19349 (W. L. Walker)
19348


.24879 (Sampey)


1934 (W. L. Walker)


.525> (Rees)
.12792 (W. L. Walker)


17999 (W. L. Walker)
2035 (W. L. Walker)


2762" (Ewing)
1934> (Day)


2122" (Day)


2762" (Ewing)
3045* (Day)
1934>

1934>

1865°

1886>

2777° (Nicol)
1934


2727 (Thackeray)
1934

295 (Maunder)
1935+ (S. F. Hunter)
2170* (Angus)


. .1934> (Hutchison)


1935
1935 (Pinches)


. 1935?


1943 (Banks)
19352
1935"
1935» (Ewing)


1934
1935° (A. T. Robertson)
398 (A. T. Robertson)


Author of Acts and


Brother of Titus......
Gentile...... 00.000.


NT references........
Painter..........--.
Physician..........
Relations with Paul...
Luke, The Gospel of. ...
ef Acts of Apostles... .
Analysig.........0..
Authorship..........
Canonicity.........


1936> (A. T. Robertson}
39% (A. T. Robertson}
1941°

1937>


19378


3304 GENERAL INDEX


Luke, The Gospel of—continued


Characteristics. ...... 1940
Credibility........... 1940*
Date...............1940"
Genuineness.........1938*


ef Gospels, Synoptic . .1281 (Iverach)
Infancy narrative... . . 1938


Literary style....... 1831 (A. T. Robertson)
Logia, the........... 1939
Luke’s method....... 1938 °
Relations to Gospel of
IMR ar ete tues ct 1939+
Sources..... . 19388
Text eitincc-cle aa 19365
Lunatic 222. fake Seas 2 1941» (Sweet)


ef Mad, Madness..... 1960> (Macalister)
ef Night-monster..... 2143 (Sweet)
Lurk, Lurking-place.... .1941>


TUStaer sens ee 1941> (Raffety)

CE Distinn: ac scene be 1896>

NT usage...........19422

OT usage..........-. 19425
MS rls a we pte aso. ak tn eae 1942

ef Music............2094% (Millar)
Luther

Doctrine of justifica-

tion..............17879 (Faulkner)
ef Lord’s Supper (his-
torical)............ 1926° (Dosker)

TGP BE eaten tee 19428 (Ewing)
Lycaonia.............. 1942> (Calder)

ef Derbe............ 830 (Calder)

ef Icontum.......... 1446» (Calder)

ef Lystra............ 1944@ (Calder)
Tey Gla: singieiee 3 ne aeutae 1943 (Banks)

ef Phaselis.......... 2365> (Banks)
Lydda

CLALUOd tee 1909" (Ewing)
Lydia (country)........ 1943 (Banks)

GSA SIAN 5 chee ooe ha 272» (Banks)

ef Lud, Ludim....... 1935 (Pinches)

ef Philippi........... 2369 (Tod)
Lydia (person)......... 1943» (S. F. Hunter)
Lydian

ef Lydia............ 1943+ (Banks)
Lydians and Asia Minor 274» (Calder)
Lye

ef Nitre............. 2153* (Patch)
Tying. eo Se ona eae 1887* (W. Evans)

ef Christs, False... .. .628> (Orr)

ef False Swearing... . .746> (Hirsch)

ef Oath...........-. 2172> (Levertoff)

cf Prophesyings, False 2466 (Schenk)
Lysanias.............. 1943> (Kerr)

ef Abilene........... 11+ (C. H. Thomson)
Dysias) oe eos) ante 1943 (Hutchison)

ef Claudius Lysias.. . .666 (Kerr)

ef Gallio............ 1167> (Kerr)
Lysimachus........... 1944* (Hutchison)


ef Esther, The Rest of.1009% (T. W. Davies)
ef Robbers of Temples . 2595


MG YSU Are, Stn oie atts 19442 (Calder)
ef Antioch........... 156" (Calder)
Character and site... .1944°
ef Iconium.......... 1446» (Calder)
ef Lycaonia.......... 1942» (Calder)
Paul and Barnabas at.1944>
Religion of..........1944>

Maacah, Maachah (per- ;
SONS): 24.05. gatas 19458 (Ewing);

(Beecher)
ef Micaiah........... 2047° (Lees)
ef Tamar............ 2907° (Orr)

Maacah (place)........1945* (Ewing)
cf Maacathites....... 19459

Maacathites........... 1945

Maachathites
cf Maacah (place)... .1945* (Ewing)

Maadar sy. Pecan te aos 1945»

Maadiah (Moadiah) . .. .1945>

Maa ese eis eres 1945>

Maaleh-acrabbim....... 1945
ef Akrabbim......... 89"

Maina eh cad. Henne 1945
ef Meani............ 2016°

Maarath.............. 1945

Maareh-geba.......... 1945> (Ewing)

Maasai (Maasiai)....... 1945»

Maaseas (Mahseiah). .. .1945°

Maaseiah............. 1945» (Lees)
ef Mahseiah.........1967°
cf Moossias.......... 2081

Maaseiah (Baaseiah)... .1946*

Maaseiah (Massias) .. . . 2007
cf Manes............ 1981
cf Mathelas.......... 20088

Maasiai
cf Maasai........... 1945

Maasmas.............. 1946
ef Shemaiah......... 2759 (Wolf)

Maath................ 1946

MRAZ eee eset hs eae 19463

Maaziah.............. 19468

Mabdai
cf Mamdai..........1972>

Mabnabedai........... 1946
ef Machnadebai...... 1959»

Macalon.............. 1946°
cf Michmas.......... 2048

Maccabaeus, Maccabees 1946 (Hutchison);

(Dosker)
Antiochus Epiphanes. . 1946>
ef Architecture....... 237> (A. C. Dickie)
ef Aristobulus........ 241> (M. O. Evans)
cf Asmoneans........ 283° (Dosker)
cf Between the Testa-

Mente eet ee 455° (Dosker)
cf Hasidaeans........ 1342 (Hutchison)
ef Hyrcanus.........1445>
John and Eleazar.....19478
John Hyrcanus.......1947
Jonathan. ........... 1947


10


283°


GENERAL INDEX


Maccabaeus, Maccabees—continued


Jud agin, Soca nest 1949"; 1765* (Hutchison)


ef Jerusalem....... 1617 (Masterman)
cf Lacedaemonians.. . .1819 (Hutchison)
cf Maccabees, Books


Olea tine Wares Be 1947> (T. W. Davies)
Mattathias.......... 1946"; 2008 (Angus)
ef Modin............ 2073" (Ewing)
Namentctvor wea 1946
Palestine under the

Maccabees........ 1946°
Palestine under Syria .1946> :
Simon.............. 19478; 2794> (Angus)
ef Sparta, Spartans. . .2839> (Orr)
ef Temple........... 2936 (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Tryphon.......... 3027" (Angus)

Maccabees, Books of... .1947 (T. W. Davies)
ef Apocrypha........ 178 (T. W. Davies)
cf Asmoneans........ 283° (Dosker)

1 Maccabees......... 1947
Canonicity........ 1948
Contents.......... 1948
Datei. held oe 1949b
Historicity........ 1948>
Names... vee. ios 1947
Official letters...... 1948>


Original language. . .1950°
Prayers and speeches1948>
Sources........... 1950
Standpoint and aim 1949
Text and versions. . .1950°


2 Maccabees......... 1950>
AUER ohn oes 19534
Contents........-. 1950°
Date sn. e eset xt 1953+
Historicity......... 1951»
Name and canon-

TCIGY oes el 1950"


Official documents. .1951>
Original language. . . 1953*
Pharisaic standpoint 1951°


Sources........-.- 19513
Teachings......... 19522
3 Maccabees......... 1953
Canonicity........- 1953>
Contents.......-.- 1953
Date and author-
Ships ae vatias ete 1954>
Historicity........- 1954


Language and text .1954>
Miraculous deliver-


ances of Jesus... .1953>
Name.........-.-- 1953>
Teaching and aim... 1954°
4 Maccabees........- 1954
Canonicity and con-
tents........--- 1955
Date and author-
BNIp es. sees east 1955°
Language and text. . 1955>
Name.........-5-- 1954>


Maceabees, Books of—continued


5 Maccabees......... 1955
Canonicity and con-
FeNntSs ees eee 1955
Date and author-
BAIp Lee awa sen ee 1956
Historicity........ 1956
Namésisicranc8 dates 1955>


Original language. . . 1956
Purpose and teach-


ING, tea ceeie bites 1956+
ef Palestine. ........ 2220° (Conder)
ef Resurrect’.n.......2563> (Easton)
Macedonia.........- . 19568 (Tod)


Christians mentioned. .1959*
Christian women in. . .1958>


Church in........... 1958
Church characteristics

AM cciaeeits Hide reeks B 1958>
HIStory sen: 1956>
Land and people..... 1956
Paul and Macedonia. . 1957
Paul’s first visit... ...1957°
Paul’s second visit... . 1958
Paul’s third visit... .. 1958?


Paul’s visits later..... 1958
Philip and Alexander. .1957*
cf Philippi........... 2369% (Tod)
Roman intervention... 1957
Roman province, a... .1957°


Roman times and after-

SWAT) sasiteonee: neeneaee ts 1957
Machaerus:...........1959* (Ewing)
Machbannai........... 1959>
Machbena............. 1959

ef Cabbon........... 536
Machissicscns iain 1959»
Machir, Machirite...... 1959> (Lees)
Machmas :

cf Michmash.........2048* (Ewing)
Machnadebai.......... 1959>
Machpelah............1959> (Masterman)

Biblical references. . . .1959>

CAVEIOE 8.8.3. Vinge 1960»

Cenotaphs of patri-

archs.............1960*

Haram at Hebron... .1960*

ef Hebron........... 1365" (Masterman)

cf Mamre.....:.....1973* (Masterman)

Traditional site....... 19608

Visits to... 0... eee 19602
Maconah

ef Meconah.......... 2016
Macron (Ptolemy)...... 1960° (Angus)
Mad, Madness.......-. 1960° (Macalister)

ef Lunatic........... 1941> (Sweet)

NT references... .....1961

OT references........ 1961

Saul’s insanity.......1961*
Madai

ef Medes.......-..-. 2017* (Tisdall)


3305


3306 GENERAL INDEX


Madeba Mosaic
cf Palestine, Recent Ex-


ploration.......... 2225" (Cobern)

Madiabun

ef Emadabun........ 940°
Madian

ef Midian........... 2049° (Ewing)
Madmannah........... 1961>
Madmen.............. 1961>
Madmenah............ 1961>
Madness.............. 1960 (Macalister)
Madon.............--- 1961> (Ewing)
Maelus................ 1961>


Magadan (Dalmanutha) 1961 (Ewing)
Magbish (Magpiash).. . .1962°


Magdala

ef Magadan......... 1961> (Ewing)

cf Palestine.......... 2221» (Conder)
Magdalene

cf Mary...........6. 2003> (Sweet)
Magdiel............... 19624
Maged (Maked)....... .1969#
Magi, The............. 19622 (Tisdall)

cf Astrology......... 295° (Maunder)

ef Astronomy........300° (Maunder)

ef Divination........ 860° (T. W. Davies)

ef Jesus Christ....... 1633 (Orr)

Magi at Bethlehem. . .1962>

ef Magic............ 19632 (T. W. Davies)

Median tribe......... 1962

cf Persian Religion... .2334> (Tisdall)

cf Wise Men......... 3096> (Easton)

cf Zoroastrianism..... 3157* (Easton)
Magi, Star of.......... 2848 (Maunder)
Magic, Magician....... 1963 (T. W. Davies)

cf Amulet........... 126> (T. W. Davies)

In the Bible......... 1963>


Bible, hostility of, to. . 1963
Biblical denunciations


OLes Maer cation ate tae 1964»
Biblical terms........ 1964
ef Charm............ 597> (T. W. Davies)
Definition........... 1963°
cf Demonology....... 827> (Sweet)
ef Divination........ 860% (T. W. Davies)
Divination and sorcery1964>
Impersonal magic... . .1963*


Influence of charms. . .1964*
ef Jannes and Jambres. 1568? (Rutherfurd)


cf Magi, The......... 1962" (Tisdall)

Magical words....... 1964

Personal magic....... 1963»

Religion and......... 1963>

cf Repetitions....... 2559> (Kaston)

Term used.......... 19634

cf Witch, Witchcraft ..3097¢ (T. W. Davies)
Magistrate............ 1965* (Hirsch)
Magenifical............. 1965+
Magnificat... ......... 1965+
Magnify.............. 1965
Magog......-......--. 1965>

cf Gog ....... 1273 (Reeve)


“Magor-missabib........ 1965>

Magpiash (Magbish).. . . 1962

Magus, Simon.........2795° (Rutherfurd)
cf Magi............- 19622 (Tisdall)
cf Magic...........- 19632 (T. W. Davies)


Mahalah (Mahlah)..... 1965>
Mahalalel (Mahalaleel). . 1965; 139* (Davis)


Mahalath............. 1965 (Orr)

ef Basemath......... 411* (Breslich)

cf Psalms, Book of... .2487* (Sampey)
Mahali (Mahli)........2081°
Mahanaim (Mahaneh). .1966° (Ewing)

Jacob at............ 1966+

DLC OLe as eae esc has 19662
Mahanch (Mahanaim). .1966* (Ewing)
Mahaneh-dan.......... 1966° (Ewing)

cf Kiriath-jearim. .... 1811 (Masterman)
Maharai............-. 1966>
Mahath............... 1966 (Wallace)
Mahavite............. 1967
Mahazioth............ 1967"
Maher-shalal-hash-baz . .1967*

ef Shear-jashub....... 2752»
Mahlah (Mahalah)..... 19672 (Wallace)
Mahli (Mahali)........ 1967
Mahli (Mooli)......... 20812

ef Mahlites.......... 19672

ef Mahlon........... 1967
Mahlites

ef Mahlah........... 19672 (Wallace)

ef Mahli............ 1967*
Mahlon............... 1967*

ef Mahlah........... 19672 (Wallace)

ef Mahli............ 19672
Mahol................ 1967"
Mahseiah (Maaseas)... . 19678

cf Maaseiah.........1945> (Lees)
Maiannas.............- 19672

cf Maaseiah.......... 1945 (Lees)
Maid, Maiden.........1967» (Pollard)

CLG eed estates 12325

Ch Virgins iii deka es 3051» (Easton)
Mail cece ied 28 sh Sone 1967

cf Armor, Arms...... 251° (Nicol)
Maimed............... 1967> (Macalister)
Mainsail

cf Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
Makag cis fogedeh ites 19682
Make, Maker.......... 19682 (W. L. Walker)

Changes in RV... ....1968>

NT usage........... 1968»

OT usage............ 19633
Makebates............1968"
Maked (Maged)........1969°
Maker si iaccsaeckaks 1968* (W. L. Walker)
Makheloth............19692

cf Wanderings of Is-

rael ete Wohnen 3064* (Conder)

Makkedah............ 1969" (Ewing)
Maktesh, The......... 1969* (Masterman)

cf Jerusalem......... 1608 (Masterman)


cf Mishneh..........2066 (Masterman)


GENERAL INDEX 3307


Malachi............... 1969 (Rohinson)
Contents............ 1970°
Message............ 1970
cf Messenger... ...... 2039* (Breslich)
Name: ian nee ate 19696
Period of............ 1969»

Style .c02.. 44 eas 1970°
Malachy.............. 1971" (Rohinson)
_ ef Malachi.......... 1969" (Robinson)
Malcam (Malcham)....1971°
Maleam (Molech)...... 19715


Malcham (Malcam).....1971*
Malchiah (Melchiah).. . .2028*


ef Malchijah......... 1971 (Wallace)
Malchiel.............. 19715
Malchielites........... 1971°
Malchijah............. 1971" (Wallace)
Malchiram............1971
Malchi-shua........... 19714
Malchus.............. 1971 (Kerr)
Male sini tte iact star 1971> (Luering)

ef Woman........... 3100* (Pratt)
Malefactor............ 19728
Maleleel............... 19728
Malice, Malignity...... 19722 (W. L. Walker)
Malignity............. 19728 (W. L. Walker)
Mallos

ef Mallus............ 1972¢ (Ewing)
Mallothi.............. 19728 (Wallace)
Mallows

ef Salt-wort.......... 2664° (Masterman)
Malluch............... 19728
Malluch (Mamuchus). . .1974*
Malluchi.............. 1972:

ef Malluch.......... 19728
Malls... c2c..c4 242 cs 1972 (Ewing)


Malobathron (Bether).. . 1972
Maltanneus (Altaneus). 1972


ef Mattenai......... 2009
Mamaias

ef Samaias........... 2671" (Angus)
Mamdaj..............1972
Mammon............. 1972> (Miller)

ef Riches............ 2590 (Forrester)
Mamnitanemus (Mamni-

tanaimus)

ef Mattaniah........ 2008 (Wallace)

ef Mattenai......... 2009+
Mamre..........-.0-- 1973* (Masterman)

Biblical data......... 1973

ef Hebron........... 1365* (Masterman)

cf Machpelah........ 1960* (Masterman)

Three sites mentioned 1973"

Traditional sites... . ..1973*
Mamuchus (Malluch).. .1974*
Man

ef Anthropology...... 144> (Marais)

Antiquity of......... 151%

Nature of........-.- 145

Origin of.......-.--+ 146


Primitive conditions of .150°
Unity of race.......- 147


Man, Natural......... 1974" (Webb)
Biblical meaning..... 1974
Carnal man......... 1974»
cf Man, New......... 1975" (Webb)
Old man, the........ 1974"
ef Old Man........ 2183> (Pratt)


Outward man, the. ...19748
cf Outward Man. . .2205°


ef Regeneration...... 2546> (Nuelsen)
ef Spiritual.......... 2842> (Pratt)
Theological meaning. .1974>
_ Man, New............. 1975* (Webb)
Biblical meaning... ... 1975
Inward man......... 19758
cf Man, Natural..... 1974" (Webb)
ef Old Man.......... 2183» (Pratt)
ef Outward Man..... 2205; 1974
Spiritual man........ 1975%; 28440
Terms used.......... 1975°
Theological meaning. . 1975°
Man, Old............ .2183> (Pratt)
cf Man, New......... 1975" (Webb)
Man, Outward......... 2205
cf Man, Natural... ...1974* (Webb)
Man of Sin............ 1975» (Orr)
cf Antichrist......... 154° (J. E. H. Thomson)
ef Belial. ............ 431 (Orr)


Essential idea, the... .1976"
Pauline description .. .1975>


cf Perdition.......... 2320* (Vos)

cf Revelation of John. 2582» (Orr)

ef Thessalonians... .. .2969" (R. H. Walker)

Varying descriptions. .1976°
Man, Son of........... 2828> (Stalker)
Man of War

CEWAL. font epeace hoe 3069» (Nicol)
Manaen (Menahem)... .1976> (Orr)
Manahath............. 1976 (Ewing)

ef Menuhah.........20383°

ef Menuhoth........ 20332 (Wallace)

ef Zorites........-... 3157*
Manahathites (Mana-

hethites)............ 19775
Manasseas............1977#
Manasseh (general)..... 1977* (Wallace)

ef Pahath-moah...... 22072 (Wallace)
Manasseh (king)....... 19782 (Genung)

Character of reign. . . .1978>

ef Hezekiah......... 1385* (Genung)


Jdolatrous conduct... .1978>
Journey to Babylon.. .1979°


cf Manasses, The Prayer
Ol fie sias etate ie ae 1979> (T. W. Davies)

Names aecia eee eats 19788
Persecution.......... 19792
Political situation... . .1978>
Repentance.......... 19795
Sources for..........1978

Manassch (patriarch,
tribe, territory)...... 1977 (Ewing)
Genealogies of......-- 1978"


3308 GENERAL INDEX


Manasseh (patriarch, tribe, territory)—continued-


History of........... 1978+
cf Israel, History of the
People............ 1524 (Orelli)

ef Jehoiachin........ 1577* (Genung)’

Location in Canaan . .1977

Son of Joseph........ 1977*

Tribe in early period. .1977>
Manasses............. 19795 (Angus)
Manasses, Prayer of... .1979> (T. W. Davies)

Authenticity......... 1980+

Canonicity.......... 1979>

Contents............ 1980+

Date wes Ores ots 19805

ef Manasseh......... 19775 (Wallace)

ef Manasses......... 1979 (Ang:"s)

Motive of author..... 1980

INBINES ere SG toca ee 19795

Original language... . .1980*

Probable fiction. ..... 19802

Text and versions... . .1980>

ef Text of OT....... 29575 (Weir)
Manassites............ 1980>
Man-child............. 1980>
Mandrakes............ 19819 (Masterman)
Maneh (Mina)......... 1981* (Porter)

ef Pound............ 2426> (Porter)

ef Weights and Meas-

Mires thos Mica TNS 3079" (Porter)
Manes...............- 19818

ef Maaseiah.......... 1945» (Lees)

Manger crac eee ines 1981> (Orr)

Mani (Bani)........... 1981?

Manifest, Manifestation.1981> (W. L. Walker)
Manifestly............ 1981>

Manifold. ...... oy eee 1981> (W. L. Walker)
Manius, Titus (Manlius,

“TAbUs)h tet5 23a Getto 1982 (Angus)

cf Memmius, Quintus. 2030° (Angns)
Mankind.............. 1982
Manlius, Titus (Manius,

Titus)..............1982" (Angus)
Manna st.) e852 ctGhe ek 1982 (Masterman)

cf Moses............ 2087+ (Kyle)

Natural explanations. . 1982

NT references........ 19382

OT references........ 19826
Manner, Manners... ...1982b (W. L. Walker)

Apocryphal use....... 1983 ,

NT usage............ 1983>

OT usage’. v.25. ce 1982
Manoah............... 1983> (Schenk)
Manservant...........1983>

ef Servant........... 2738 (McGlothlin)

ef Slave............. 2815" (Raffety)
Mansion.............. 1983>
Manslaughter.......... 1983 (Hirsch)

ef Murder........... 20948 (Hirsch)
Manslayer............. 1983> (Hirsch)


ef Murder........... 2094s (Hirsch)


Manstealing

cf Kidnapping. ......1797> :

cf Punishments...... 2504° (Hirsch)
Mantelet............-- 19843

ef Siege... 2.0.0.0... 27868 (Nicol)
Mantle............... 19845

(103) Bg: 1 ae 875> (Hager)

ef Kerchief.......... 1793 :
Manuscripts........... 1984* (Richardson)

cf Bookigs nay kas 495» (Richardson)

ef Septuagint........2722 (Thackeray)

ef Text and Manu-

scripts of NT... ...2950> (Sitterly)


cf Versions, Georgian,
Gothic, Slavonic... .3048* (Easton)
ef Writing........... 3114 (Richardson); 103
(Richardson)
Manuscripts of the NT
ef Texts and Manu-


scripts of NT... ...2950> (Sitterly)
Manuscripts of the OT __

ef Languages of the

Oe aoe eae 1832* (Weir)
Maoch (Maacah)....... 19845
Maon, Maonites........ 1984" (Ewing)
Mars ia races 1984>
Mara tcc clea samen eet 1984
Marah 3s. uti nen 1984>

ef Wanderings of Is-

THC l erent ape eee tess 3064" (Conder)
Maralah.............. 1984>
Maranatha............ 1984
Marble: ese kcacecyendt 1984» (Day)
March, Marches

ch Ware. e860 i: 3069» (Nicol)
Marcheshvan
ef Time............. 2981» (Porter)


Marcion, Gospel of
ef Apocryphal Gospels.197> (Hutchison)
Marcus


efMarks orvcr sia ias 1985» (Pratt)
Mardocheus (Mordecai) . 1985+
Mardules 3, sce ok 8 ect ere 371> (Rogers)
IY Gh gs eR ge a 1985*

ef Camel............ 547> (Day)

cf Horse............ 142%° (Day)
Mareshah............. 1985* (Ewing)

ef Palestine, Recent

Exploration........ 2227* (Cobern)

Marimoth (Meraioth). ..1985°; 2030>

ef Mémeroth.........2030°
Mariner

ef Ships and Boats. . ..2774* (Nicol)
Mar isain cei tiis nase a 1985»

ef Mareshah......... 1985 (Ewing)
Marish................ 1985°
Marissa

ef Architecture....... 237° (A. C. Dickie)
Mark (noun)..........1985> (Pratt)

ef Cuttings intheFlesh 770° (Eager)

ch Printirsteha eae 2455* (Richardson)
Mark (verb)........... 1985" (Pratt)


GENERAL INDEX 3309


Mark, The Gospel ac-


cording to........... 1987 (Farmer)
Authorship.......... 1989»
Eusebius.......... 19902


External evidence. . .1989
Internal evidence. . .1990°


Irenaeus.......... 19902
Papias............ 1989
Peter’s relation to. . 1989»
ef Catechist......... 582> (Gerberding)
Contents and charac-
teristics............ 1987
Graphic details... . .1988>
Jesus as teacher. .. .1988*
Mighty works of
J OSUBi cena 19888
OT quotations..... 1988
Peculiarities....... 1987
Scope............. 1987
Date and place of com-
position........... 1992>
Caesarea or Antioch 1993>
Varying data....... 1992
Historicity.......... 19932
Language........... 19892
Original language . .1989>
Vocabulary........ 1989+
Leading doctrines... . .1994>
Eschatology....... 1994
Person of Christ... .1994>
Salvation.......... 1994»
Literature on......... 1995*
ef Literature, Sub-
ADOS 4s sce h ooh Sand 19012 (Cowan)
ef Luke, The Gospel of . 1939 (A. T. Robertson)
Styleset nik 1989»
ef Mark, John........ 1986> (Farmer)


cf Matthew, Gospel of 2012" (Schodde)
Purpose and plan... . .1993>
Gospel for Romans. . 1993
Plan of Mark...... 1994
Second Gospel, our . . .1987>
Sources and integrity... 1991
Apostolic traditions -1992*
Early writings...... 1991
Oral instruction... .1991°
Peter’s leadership. . . 1992*


POX cA Ate ope cee 1988
Problem of 16 9-20 1989
Mark, John........... 1986° (Farmer)


Abandonment of Paul 1987*
Extra-Biblical tradi-


HOD. tee eee 1987
History............. 1986>
cf Mark, The Gospel

according to....... 1987> (Farmer)


Name and family... . . 1986
Reunion with Paul... .19874
Market, Marketplace . . .1995° (Raffety)
ef Appii Forum....... 209° (Allen)
ef Traffic............ 3004> (Raffety)


Market, Sheep......... 2758"
Marmoth (Meremoth).. .1996*
Maroth ..j:: cc eeeu: 19968
Marriage.............. 1996 (Eager)
ef Affinity........... 66° (W. W. Davies)
Betrothal........... 1997
Ceremonies.......... 19982
Divorce. ....... 06.4. 19998
ef Divorce......:..863® (W. W. Davies);
865° (Caverno)
Hebrew customs......1996>
Ch Heise 28 deen. esas 13699 (Easton)
Importance of....... 1997
ef Of Isaac... ......- 1494 (Boyd)
Jesus’ use of. ........ 1999


cf Levirate Marriage. .526* (Hirsch)
Matriarchal ideas... . .1997>


Origins of........... 1996
Polygamy........... 1998; 24168 (Caverno)
Purchase of wife...... 1997
cf Spouse............ 2846»


ef Stranger and So-
journer (in OT)... .2865 (Wiener)


Supper. ccc. coseniet 19984
€f Vell. es cyan 3047 (Easton)
ef Woman........... 3101* (Pratt)
Marrow...........-.-- 1999> (Luering)
Marsena..........-05. 1999»
Marsh...........-..05 20002 (Eager)
Mars’ Hill
ef Areopagus.........238> (Harry)
Marshal............... 2000* (Eager)
Mart
cf Market, Market-
PIACE Sa eee 1995» (Raffety)
Marthan oc. e sees 20008 (Kerr)
ef Mary...........-. 2005» (Sweet)
Marty tons coteiciian se eens 2000"
Marvel, Marvelous..... 20013 (W. L. Walker)
Mary (mame).......... 2001* (Sweet)
cf Mariam........... 2066* (Lees)
Name and _ identifica-
OMe. 2 eas tien res 2001
The Maries of the
PON Dae eee os 2001
Problems.......... 2001
ef Simon............ 2795 (S. F. Hunter)


Mary (of Bethany)..... 2004> (Sweet)
Anointing of Jesus... .2004>
Attack on Luke’s nar-


Character........... 2005"
Evidence compared. . .2005°
Mary and Martha... .2005¢

Mary (wife of Clopas).. .2001>
cf Alphaeus.......... 1068 (Fortune)
Mother of James and


Mother of John Mark 2006
ef Mark, John...... 1986> (Farmer)
Mary (Magdalene)..... 2003" (Sweet)
cf Demon, Demoniac . 827 (Sweet)


3310


GENERAL INDEX


Mary (Magdalene)—continued


Her malady......... 20042
Not the sinful woman . 2003"
Mary (the other)....... 20012 (Sweet)
Mary (of Rome)....... 2001
Mary (Virgin)......... 2001 (Sweet)
Cana narrative....... 2002
In doctrine and tradi-
TOD s,-hvsisei ented cas 2003
ef Immaculate Con-
ception........... 1456» (Sweet)
Infancy narratives... .2001>
Jesus and........... 2002
cf Jesus Christ. ...... 1633> (Orr)
Mary’s children...... 2003
Mary in the Christian
community........ 2002


Mary at the cross... . .2002>

ef Perpetual Virginity .519» (Jacobs)

Roman Catholic views 20037

cf Virgin-birth of Jesus

Christitic.cse rsa 3 3054” (Sweet)

Mary, The Passing of

cf Apocrypha! Gospels 195° (Hutchison)
Masaloth


ef Mesaloth......... 2037
Maschil

cf Psalms, Book of... .2487* (Sampey)
Mash (Meshech)....... 2006» (Orr)
Mashals:2 02 2).a0 00% 2006

cf Mishal........... 2066
Masiase) i ors ed sachs 2006°
Masman (Maasmas). . . . 1946"
Masoncs coi: aasrnaet sets 2007"

ef Architecture....... 234 (A. C. Dickie)

ef Building.......... 527 (A. C. Dickie)

ef Crafts............ 734° (Patch)

ef Fortification....... 11388 (Nicol)

cf Gebal..... 2.2... 1180 (Porter)

cf House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Masorah

cf Text of the OT.... .2963* (Weir)
Maspha.............45 20078

cf Mizpah, Mizpeh. . . .2068* (Ewing)
Masrekah.............20078
Weassaivt icc catatuamnen ne 2007
Massacre of the Inno-

CONntS Oe ate 1471° Sweet)
Massah and Meribah... .20075 (Ewing)

cf Rephidim.........2560* (Ewing)

ef Sinai (Horeb). .. . .2802 (Conder)
Massias (Maaseiah) . .. .2007>
Mast

cf Ships and Boats... .2775% (Nicol)
Master’. i200 nana ides 20075 (W. L. Walker)

ef Assemblies, Masters

OR ein denaeh wae 288> (S. F. Hunter)

ef Rabboni.......... 25229
Mastery............-- 2008 (W. L. Walker)
Mastic, Mastick........ 2008" (Ewing)


Mathanias (Apoc)
cf Matthanias........ 2009°


Mathelas (Maaseiah) . . .2008*


Mathusala..........-- 20082

cf Methuselah........ 2045*
Matired :04sc6 aa anes 2008+
IM BGP: ea vcn he iS anese ee 2008
Matriarchal Customs

ef Marriage.........- 1997> (Eager)
Matrites............-. 2008"
Mattans co. 2. aceqgaiidt 2008+
Mattanah............. 2008 (Ewing)
Mattaniah...........- 2008> (Wallace)

cf Mamnitanemus. . . .1973*

cf Matthanias....... 2009*
Mattaniah (Othonias) . . .2008>
Mattatha............. 2008
Mattathah

cf Mattattah......... 20098
Mattathias............ 2008 (Angus);

(Pratt)
cf Asmoneans........ 283" (Dosker)
cf Maccabaeus....... 1946 (Hutchison)


Mattathias (Mattattah) .2009*
Mattathias the Macca-


beet ea hae eae te 283> (Dosker)
Mattattah (Mattathias) .2009*
cf Matthias.......... 20122 (Kerr)
Mattenai...........0.. 2009
cf Mamnitanemus. .. .1973*
Matter’: ach paced sed 2009* (Breslich)
Matthan.............. 2009
cf Matthat..........2009
Matthanias............ 2009
ef Mattaniah........ 2008° (Wallace)
Matthat..............20098
ef Matthan.......... 2009"
Matthew, the Apostle. . .2009* (Schodde)
Matthew’s Bible....... 948> (Hutchison)
Matthew, The Gospel of 2009> (Schodde)
Authorship.......... 2010°
cf Canon of NT...... 563 (Riggs)
Canonicity.......... 2010°
Contents and char-
DICTED ate teow 2010°
Datei tn. 2 5s iat eee 2012"
cf Gospel according to.
the Hebrews....... 196° (Hutchison)
cf Gospels, The Synop-
TAG eames Seacruceatac oes 12818 (Iverach)
Integrity and unity. . .2009»
Jews, written for..... 20118
ef Levi (general)... .. 1868»


Literary problems of. .2011>
ef Literature, Sub-


POS Ao 19012 (Cowan)
cf Mark, Gospel of... .1987 (Farmer)
Purpose............. 2011°
cf Quotations from the

CO) Rea eee te Goran 2515> (Sweet)


Relation to Greek and
Aramaic Gospels... .2010*
Relation to Mark and


1588


GENERAL INDEX 3311

Matthias............., 20122 (Kerr) Mecca Balsam......... 381° (Macalister)

ef Andrew........... 1318 (Kerr) Mecherathite..........2016

ef Nathanael.........2121 (Kerr) Meconah.............. 2016"
Mattithiah............ 2012> (Wallace) Medaba (Medeba)..... .2016>

ef Mazitias..... . .20138 Medad................ 2016" (E. D. Isaacs)
Mattock. ............. 2012» Medan: si gs eiedaes 2016

ef Tools............. 2998> (Easton) Medeba (Medaba)... .. .2016>; 2017+ (Ewing)
Male scot iats o ocoltee uae 2012 Medes.............00- 20172 (Tisdall)
Mauzzim.............. 2012» (Wallace) Biblical references to. . 2017
Maw acic5 si Bers ace od 2013 (Luering) Conclusion.......... 2025°
Mazitias.............. 2013 HVIStOr Yi .6 229th 20178

cf Mattithiah........2012 (Wallace) Racial connections... . 2017
Mazzaloth Meédiacc cites es ek 2018° (Tisdall)

ef Astrology.........298> (Maunder) Median
Mazzaroth............2013* ef Darius............ 788° (R. D. Wilson)

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder) ef Media............ 2018 (Tisdall)
Mazzebah Mediation, Mediator .. .2018* (Edwards)

ef Pillar............. 2398° (Orr) cf Atonement........321* (Carver)
Meadow.............. 2013* (Day) Introductory......... 2018

efePlain 33.5 aches er 2406> (Day) Principle of media-

cf Reed.............2544* (Masterman) LOM, ena 2018>
Meah Terms used........ 2018>

cf Hammeah......... 1325> (Masterman) ef Messiah.......... 2039 (Crichton)
Mealiizccters) aosag ohh 2013> TN ed siorresien Sooty -o 2021»

cf Food............- 11225 (Eager) Christ as King..... 2021»
Meal Offering Christ as Priest... . .2021

cf Sacrifice, OT...... 2643» (Reeve) Christ as Prophet... 2021»


Meals, Meal-time....... 2013 (Eager) Christ as Redeemer .2021>
ef Banquet.......... 384 (Hager) Fourth Gospel..... 20257
ef Bread............ 514> (Eager) Hebrews, Epistle to 2024°
Cereals............. 2013° Johannine Epistles. .2025»
Customs at.......... 2015* Lord’s Supper...... 2022
ef Dress............- 875> (Eager) Paul’s teachings... .2023+
ef Food.............- 1121> (Hager) Primitive apostolic
Frequency........-.. 2014 teaching........ 2022
ef Leaven........... 1862* (Eager) Speeches and letters.2022°
cf Lord’s Supper...... 1921> (Gummey) Synoptic Gospels. . .2021°
Meatiiainccharecee oes 2014 Tn OD se ese e eas 2019
CEO WS cenetetin kee 2182> (Patch) Agents, angels...... 2020°
Posture at.........-- 2015* Agents, Wisdom ...2021*
Preparation of food. . .2013° King, the.......... 2020°
Primitive customs. . . .2013> Messiah, the....... 2020
Sabbath eating....... 2015+ Negative teaching . .2019*
Time of eating....... 2014» Positive teaching. . .2019*
Vegetables.......... .2014* Priestly mediation. .2019>

Méan® © creer sedi dt 2015 (Breslich) Prophetic period. . . .2019°

Meani (Maani)........ 1945; 2016* Sacrificial system. . .2020*

Mearah..........-..+: 2016+ Suffering Servant. . .2020°


Measure, Measures
cf Mete.............


2016* (Porter)
2044» (Porter)
2016* (Porter)


cf Philo Judacus......


cf Prophets..........
ef Propitiation.......
cf Ransom


2380" (Wenley)


cf Priests and Levitcs. 2446> (Wiener)


2459> (Orelli)
24678 (Carver)
2530" (M’Caig)


Chine oe Boe ess 1894 (Orr)
ef Weights and Meas-
MIPOB eee aioe ee 30792 (Porter)

Measuring Reed........ 2016>

ef Cubit...........-. 765° (Porter)
Meats. sack. seus ees 2016»

cf Meals.........--- 2014 (Hager)
Meat Offering

ef Sacrifice, OT...... 2643> (Reeve)
Mebunnai...........-- 2016 (Wallace)


Mecca........0-02 eee 218” (Weir)


cf Reconciliation..... 2536* (M’Caig)
ef Sacrifice, NT...... 26519 (Williams)
ef Salvation......... 2665* (Easton)
Semi and non-canonical


literature.......... 2021
Logos idea......... 2021
cf Servant of Jehovah .2739* (Hough)
cf.Wisdom...........- 3089% (Easton)
Medicine.............. 2026" (Macalister)


3312 GENERAL INDEX


Meditation............ 2026" (W. L. Walker)
Mediterranean Sea... ... 2026> (Heidel)
cf Sea, The Great... ..2707 (Ewing)
Meedda (Meeda)....... 20278
cf Mehida........... 20282
Meek
ef Quiet............. 2515» (M. O. Evans)
Meekness............. 20272 (W. L. Walker)
Wee tee. pen se See 2027 (W. L. Walker)
Megiddo.............. 2027 (Ewing)
ef Armageddon (Har-
magedon)......... 13408 (Ewing)
cf Palestine, Recent
Exploration........ 22292 (Cobern)


ef Pharaoh-necoh..... 2360* (Nicol)
Mehetabel, Mehetabeel. . 20288


Mehida (Meedda)...... 2028
Mehirete: 2eck.a) peas 20288
Meholathite........... 2028

ef Abel-meholah...... 6* (Beecher)
Mehujael.............. 20288
Mehuman............. 2028
Mehunim (Meunim)

ef Maon............ 1984* (Ewing)
Mejargon

ef Makaz............ 1968"
Me-jarkon............. 2028
Mekonah

cf Meconah.......... 2016
Melatiah.............. 2028>
Melehtin non. esc ek 2028»
Melchiah (Malchiah).. . .2028°>

cf Malchijah......... 19715 (Wallace)
Melchias.............. 2028

cf Malchijah......... 1971° (Wallace)
Melchiel.............. 2028»
Melchishua

-cf Malchishua........ 1971+
Melchizedek, Melchise-

COCs clas. 3 sek ha 2028> (Roberts)

ef Archaeological The-

OLYOL Ss ka bee 230° (Kyle)
ef Jerusalem......... 1613> (Masterman)


Name and references. . 2028°
Reference to, in He-


brews............. 2028
Reference to, in Psalm
ALO! 422 2 Sak 2028»
Tell el-Amarna testi-
MODYeSs fected ae: 2029"
ef Tell el-Amarna
Tablets......... 2928> (Kyle)
Melos. cis? sce cig at 2029»
Meléch: eevee inn 2029»
Melicu (Malluchi)...... 2029
Melitase.c Lene cis 2029> (Allen)
ef Publius........... 2501* (Kerr)
Melody............... 2029»
ef Music............ 20978 (Millar)
Melons............... 2030
Melaarirgs ois co abok 2030" (R. D. Wilson)


ef Steward.......... .2853> (Reeve)


Metis ii toe che 2030"
. ef Alphabet.......... 103% (Richardson)
Member.............. 20302 (Luering)
ef Body............. 491> (Hirsch; Marais;
Pratt)
ef Concision......... 696>
ef Eunuch........... 10378 (Eager)


Memeroth (Meraioth).. .2030°
Memmius, Quintus..... 2030° (Angus)


_ ef Manius........... 19822 (Angus)
Memorial, Memory..... 2030 (W. L. Walker)
CEName: oe aeece as 2112 (W. L. Walker)
Memphis.............. 2080 (Petrie)
Excavations......... 2031
Founders............ 2031
NAM voce cock ace the 2030°
cf Noph............. 2155"
Political position... .. 20318
Memucan............. 2031>
Menaen
cf Herod (Antipas)... .13881° (Dosker)
Menahem............. 2031> (Caldecott)


Accession and reign. . .2031>
Chronological — prob-


lems ind ch nue 2032
ef Chronology of OT. .635* (Mack)
Early acts. .......... 2031
Ch Jebw si sca eee 1586" (Caldecott)
cf Pekahiah.......... 22968 (Caldecott)


Relations with Assyria 2031>
Menahem (Manaen). .. .1976> (Orr)


Menan (Menna)..... «, .2033*
Mene, Mene, Tekel,
Upharsin............ 20328 (R. D. Wilson)
Menelaus.............. 2032> (Angus)
Menestheus............ 2033"
cf Apollonius......... 200° (Hutchison)
Menten sa eats 2033"
cf Divination........ 860 (T. W. Davies)
. ef Gad, God of Good
Tuektxe.. Po vie. Boe 11528 (Stearns)
Menna (Menan)........ 2033
Menuhah.............. 2033
cf Manahath......... 1976> (Ewing)
Menuhoth............. 2033" (Wallace)
cf Hatsi-hammenu-
CHOt rics e se auet 1348>
cf Manahath......... 1976> (Ewing)
Meonenim, Oak of ..... 2033°
ef Augurs’ Oak....... 3312 (T. W. Davies)


ef Moreh, Hill of..... 2082 (Ewing)
ef Plain of the Pillar. .2407> (Ewing)


Meonothai............ 2033>
Mephaath............. 2033>
Mephibosheth......... 2033> (Wallace)
ef Armoni........... 2518
cf Ish-bosheth....... 1508> (Breslich)
cf Merib-baal........ 2036 (Wallace)
ef Rizpah...........2595" (Wallace)
Merabeiecs ries oe 2034° (Wallace)
cf Rizpah........... 2595 (Wallace)
Meraiah............... 2034


GENERAL INDEX


3313


Meraioth (Memeroth).. .2030°


Meran

ef Merran...........2037° (Ewing)
Merarte. occu vee ee 2034» (Wallace)

cf Merarites.........2085*
Merarites............. 20357

ef Merari............ 2034 (Wallace)
Merathaim............ 2035"
Merchandise........... 2035° (Raffety)

ef Traffic............ 3004 (Raffety)

cf Wares............ 3072° (Raffety)
Merchant, Merchantman

cf Commerce......... 687> (Pollard)

ef Merchandise....... 2035" (Raffety)

cf Trade............ 30028 (Easton)


Mercury, Mercurius.. ...2035* (M. O. Evans)
cf Greece, Religion in. 1297* (Fairbanks)


ef Hermes........... 1877°

ef Jupiter........... 1781 (Easton)
Mercy, Merciful........ 2035" (W. L. Walker)

cf Kindness.......... 1799" (W. L. Walker)

ef Lovingkindness. . . .1934* (W. L. Walker)

CESBIGY! <i os ats bee oa 2402> (W. L. Walker)
Mercy-seat, The....... 20362 (Caldecott)

ef Altar............. 106° (Wiener)


ef Ark of Covenant. . .242 (Lotz)
cf Atonement, Day of .324> (Mller)


ef Christianity....... 627° (Orr)

ef Holy of Holies. .. . .1405* (Caldecott)

ef Propitiation....... 24672 (Carver)

cf Tabernacle.......- 2890 (Caldecott; Orr)
Meréd’: > <i a eis ete ccod 2036° (Wallace)

ef Bithiah........... 483° (Hirsch)
Meremoth, Meraioth,

Memeroth..........- 2036* (Wallace)

cf Marmoth......... 1996

ef Uriah, Urijah...... 3040 (Easton)
Meribah

cf Massah and Meri-

babektec kes 20072 (Ewing)
ef Rephidim.........- 2560" (Ewing)


ef Sinai (Horeb)..... 2802> (Conder)
Meribath-kadesh, Meri-


both-kadesh ......... 2036"

ef Massah and Meribah 2007" (Ewing)
Merib-haal...........- 2036 (Wallace)

ef Mephibosheth..... 2033° (Wallace)
Merodach...........-- 2036
Merodach-baladan...... 20365 (R. D. Wilson)

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)


ef Babylonia and As-
syria, Religion of. . .368> (Rogers)


cf Baladan.......... 379» (R. D. Wilson)

ef Nimrod........... 2147° (Mack)
Merom, Waters of.....- 2037 (Wright)

ef Hazor...........- 1347° (Ewing)

ef Jordan Valley... ...1735 (Wright)
Meronothite..........- 2037
Meroz.....----0----7+ 2037° (Ewing)
Merran........----0-5 2037> (Ewing)
Meruth


Mesaloth..............
Mesech
cf Meshech..........


ef Jehoram..........
cf Moab...........
cf Moabite Stone.....


Meshech (Mash).......


Meshelemiah..........
ef Shallum..........
ef Shelemiah.........

Meshezahel............

Meshillemith..........

Meshillemoth..........

Meshobab.............

Meshullam............
cf Mosollamus.......
cf Olamus..........
ef Shallum..........

Meshullemeth.........
cf Meshullam........

Mesobaite
cf Mezobaite........

Mesopotamia
ef Aram........-..-.


Messenger............-
ef Malachi..........
Messiah...............


2037>


2038 (Wallace)
2037 (Ewing)
1580 (Mosiman)


.2071* (Porter)


2071» (Sayce)

2038 (R. D. Wilson)

2066"

27468 (R. D. Wilson)

2006 (Orr); 20388 (Wal-
lace)

20382"

27479 (Umbach)

2758> (Wolf)

2038

2038”

2038°

2038>

2038 (Lees)

2091


2183


2747* (Umbach)
2039"
2038> (Lees)


2045


2039+ (Breslich)
1969» (Robinson)
20392 (Crichton)


ef Apocalyptic Litera-


ture (Jewish).......


161> (J. E. H. Thomsen)


ef Doctrine of,in Fourth


Gospel............


1726> (Iverach)


ef Eschatology of the


of Hope.............


cf Idea of, in Synoptic


Gospels..........-
ef Immanuel.........


ef Jesus Christ.......


972+ (Orr)
1419° (Haston)


1284 (Iverach)
1457> (A. W. Evans)
1629 (Orr)


Meaning and use of


cf Mediation,


Messianic hope... ....
New Testament......
Christian elements. .
Christian


Fulfilment in Jesus...
Jesus’


ward Messiahship.


Jewish conception. .

Son of Man......-.
Old Testament

In Isaiah. .........


Media-


2018+ (Edwards)
2039°


2043


transfor-


2043


attitude to-


2043+
2042>
20437


3314 GENERAL INDEX


Messiah—continued
Old Testament—continued


In Jeremiah and Eze-

hae las ea rate ets 2040
Messianic King... . .2040*
Prophetic and priest-

ly relations ...... 2040°
Rise of apocalyptic

DG Cet: WeERe re aS een 2041»


Servant of Jehovah. 2041*
ef Pauline Theology.. .2289* (Easton)
Pre-christian age... .. 2041»
Apocalyptic _ liter-


Post-prophetic age. .2041>


ef Prophecy......... 2464» (Orelli); 832 (Gray)
ef Servant of Jehovah. 2739 (Hough)
ef Son of God........ 2827 (Stalker)
ef Son of Man........ 2829° (Stalker)
ef Zoroastrianism... .. 3157* (Easton)


Messianic Prophecy
cf Maccabees, Books


Obra patucuen 1949> (T. W. Davies)

Metalic ncried 4 etna: 2044* (Masterman)

ef Electrum.......... 927° (Fortune)

cf Stones, Precious... .28568 (Fletcher)
Metallurgy............ 2044+ (Patch)

cf Refiner, Refining. . .25459 (Patch)
Metals. ............... 2044 (Patch)

chGoldes.. (04g ees 1274® (Patch)

Chilrons secant 1492* (Patch)

ChLCads oa! seeks esas 1861* (Patch)

cf Mine, Mining...... 2056° (Patch)
Metal Working

ef Crafts............ 734% (Patch)

cf Mine, Mining...... 2056> (Patch)
Metestn endnotes 2044> (Porter)

cf Measure, Measures . 2016" (Porter)
Meterus

ef Baiterus.......... 378
Meteyard.............2045¢
Metheg-ammah........2045* (Porter)
Methussael

cf Methushael........ 2045
Methuselah............ 20458; 139° (Davis)
Methushael............ 20458
Meunim

ef Maon............ 19842 (Ewing)

ef Simeon........... 2793 (Masterman)
Meuzal............... 20459

CEU gal tats. Faaiee eae 3042> (Fulton)
Me-zahab...........- 2045
Mezarim (North)

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Mezobaite............. 2045°
Miamin

ef Mijamin..........20518

ef Miniamin.........2057°
Mibhar............... 20452
Mibsam............... 2045
Mibzar................ 2045>


Mica (Micha).......... 2045°

ef Micah.........-.. 2046 (Lees)

cf Micaiah........... 2047 (Lees)
Micah (general)........ 2045> (Lees)

Ch Danes de Kaa nd 7812 (Ewing)

ef Judges, Book of... .1772* (Geden)

cf Priesthood........ 2444 (Moorehead)
Micah, Book of........ 2046> (Orelli)


Contents of prophecies 2046>
Form of the prophecies.2046>
Relation to Isaiah... .2046>


Micah (prophet)....... 20462 (Orelli)
Name and person... . .2046°
Time of...........-- 2046+
Mieaiah............00- 2047 (Lees)
ef Maacah........... 19452 (Ewing)
ef Mica (Micha)...... 2045


cf Micah (prophet). . .2046* (Orelli)
Mice


ef Mouse............ 2092» (Day)
Micha, Michah

ef Mica............ 2045"

ef Micah (general)... .2045> (Lees)
Michael............... 2047> (Lees)

Reference to, in Ep. of

DUGE:.L iy eave 1770* (Moorehead)

Michah


cf Micah (general)... .2045> (Lees)
Michaiah


ef Micaiah........... 2047 (Lees)
Michal te tere coh caus waa 2048* (Lees)
Micheas (Michaeas).. . . .20488
Michmas.............. 20488

cf Macalon.......... 1946+
Michmash............. 2048" (Ewing)

Camp of Saul........ 20482

CL Geb ai ok tei once 1180* (Ewing)

Identification........ 204.8>

Later notices......... 2048»

ef Seneh............ 2720° (Ewing)
Michmethah........... 2049+
Michri.............4.. 20492
Michtam

ef Psalms, Book of... .2487* (Sampey)
Midday............... 2049

ef Noon, Noonday 2155
Middine.. foci gajaasauak 2049
Middle Wall

ef Partition.......... 2253* (Rutherfurd)


Midian, Midianites. ....2049 (Ewing)
cf Defeat of, by Gideon .1227 (Schenk)
Historical references. .2049>


ef Jethro... 2.0.0.2... 1674> (Crichton)
Kenite branch........ 2049»
ef Kenites......... 17922 (Ewing)

Modern Arabs:...... 2049»

ORIBING ik iota. ae 2049
Midianitish Woman... . .2049> (Lees)
Midnight.............. 2050" (Porter)

ef Time............. 2981> (Porter)
Midrash.............. 20507; 685% (Oko)


cf Commentary...... 687¢ (M. O. Evans)


ager


GENERAL INDEX : 3315


Midwife............... 2050* (Macalister)
Migdal-eder

CREM ER esis. sas . 8999 (Masterman)
Migdal-el............ 2050*
Migdal-gad............ 2050° (Masterman)
Migdol................ 2050 (Conder)

ef Exodus, The...... 1052" (Conder)

ef Shur............. 27822 (Conder)
Migration

Influence on family. . .1096°
Migronte. cote 2051> (Ewing)
Mijamin (Miamin)..... 20515

ef Miniamin.........2057%
Mikloth............... 20518
Mikneiah............. 20512
Milalai................ 2051+
Milea hi... foccnte kent 2051
Milcom (Malcam)

ef Molech...........2074 (Nicol)
Mildew............... 2051 (Masterman)

ef Blasting.......... 486° (Patch)
Miler: tenes cael eres 2051


ef Weights and Meas-


Mill, Millstone.........
ef Agriculture........
ef Crafts............


3079% (Porter)
2051» (Banks)
2674» (Kinsella)
2051» (N. Isaacs)
1123> (Hager)
2052 (Patch)
77? (Patch)

734 (Patch)
1121> (Eager)


Millennium (Postmillen-


nial View)


ef Eschatology of the
N’


Millennium
nial View)..........
ef Parousia...........
Teaching of apostles. .
Teaching of Jesus.....

Milletiesvts, opin peeet en


Akra site, the........
Beth-millo........
ef Jerusalem Hills.....


979» (Vos)


(Premillen-


2052 (Moorehead)

22492 (Easton)

2054*

2053

2055* (Masterman); 1122
(Eager)

2055® (Masterman)

2055"


. .20557


1599> (Masterman)


ef Jerusalem, History


ef Jerusalem Walls... .

OT references........

cf Solomon..........
Millstone


Mina


Dianoia and nous.. ...
Ethical sense.........
Reference in Luke 10 27.
Terms used not precise


1613 (Masterman)
1602 (Masterman)
2055

28249 (Weir)


2052 (Patch)


1981 (Porter)
2055»

2056" (Marais)
2056"


2055"
2056+


Mine, Mining.......... 2056” (Patch)
ef Crafts............ 734° (Patch)
ef Metals............ 20449 (Patch)

Minerals
ef Metals............ 2044 (Patch)


ef Stones, Precious... .2856* (Fletcher)
Mingled People (Mixed


Multitude).......... 2056 (Easton)
ef Samaria, City...... 2671" (Ewing)
ef Samaria, Country ..2672 (Ewing)
Miniamin.............2057%
ef Mijamm.......... 20512
Minish): .5 27 6.0 sade 2057
MARIStEY egos He eee a ete 20578 (T. M. Lindsay)
ef Bishop............ 478 (Dosker)
ef Church Government 653° (Forrester)
ef Deacon...........800° (Heidel)
cf Elder, OT and NT.923> (Stearns); 9248
(Grant)
ef Hands, Imposition of 1335+ (Orr)
ef Pastor............- 22.58


ef Pauline Theology. . .2292" (Easton)
Threefold congrega-

tional ministry... . .2060°

Bishops and presby-


Growth of orders. . .2061
Insistence on organ-


ization.......... 2060"
Synods............ 20622
Two different kinds of 2057
Apostles........... 2058


Local ministry, the. 20597
Origins of local min-


IBGLY. sce hake ne 2059
Prophetic ministry. .2058*
Prophets.......... 2058

Use of the word. .... .2057
Minnie ho sg ited 2062
Minnith............... 20625 (Ewing)
Minstrel

ef Music............ 2094° (Millar)
Mints see cork a kk 2062
Miphkad, Gate of... . . .2062>

cf Jerusalem......... 16072 (Masterman)
Miracle............... 2062> (Wace)

Biblical terms........ 2062»


Ecclesiastical miracles .2065°
Evidential value of .. . 2064


In the Gospels... .. . .20637

ef Jericho........... 1592" (Wright)
ef Jesus Christ....... 1629" (Orr)
Laws of Nature and.. .2063>

Nature of miracle... . .2062

OLR eb Sey 20652

ef Plagues of Egypt. . .2405> (Kyle)
cf Red Sea........... 2540° (Wright)
ef Sign. ....... 0. 2789* (Stuart)


In works of grace .. . .2065
Miracles, Gift of
ef Miracle........... 20625 (Wace)
ef Spiritual Gifts... .. 2843* (Lambert)


3316 GENERAL INDEX


Mirage.........-...006 2066 (Joy) Mizpah, Migpeh—continued


ef Parched.......... 2247 (Patch) ef Ramoth-gilead..... 2529" (Ewing)
Mire of Watchtower. ......3074°

ef Chalkstone........ 591* (Day) Mizpar (Mispar) ec s 20678

ef Clay............. 667° (Day) Mizraim.........:....2069° (Kyle)

ef Marsh............ 2000* (Day) ef Africa... 0.206. 68* (Pinches)
Mibam shoes eee 2066 (Lees) cf Egypt............ 906¢ (Petrie)

ef Mary (name)...... 20012 (Sweet) ef Ham, Land of... .. .1824> (Ewing)

cf Moses............ 2088* (Kyle) cf Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches)
Mirmah............... Ze Migrates coe! 2069
Mirror Mnason.............-- 2069» (S. F. Hunter)

of Looking-glass...... 19199 Moab, Moabites.. ..... .2069> (Porter)
Minn el ADO G)ices ie. ps3 2000; PLStOEy eosin Sa 2070°
Misaias (Masias)....... 2006 ef Jehoram.......... 1580 (Mosiman)
Mischief OA SUR owen Pen nto 2066 Land, the........... 2069
Misgab mg eget seine aati A 2066" cf Moabitess......... 2072»
Mishael............... 2066° People, the.......... 2070

ef Meshach.......... 2038° (R. D. Wilson) ef Plain of Moab.....2407*
MSD Leones eid eas ee Religion...) ioe 2070°
Misham sg Fa SERS 2066 Moabite Stone......... 2071» (Sayce); 80° (Mosi-
Misheal ‘ nee

of Mishal. 0.0.2.0... 2066 pc inh Nicol)
re am fe 2066 of Ahab... .......... 78° (Mosiman)
IMighiendalys:. cs sick 2066 Discovery. ..........20718
Mishna Inscription.......... 20728 ;

of Talmud........... 2905" (Strack) ef Jehoram..... Raat 1580 (Mosiman)
Mishneh.............. 2066 (Masterman) Tage OB e.ac2 annZe :

chores. eres 6740 cf Mesha Spree testes 2038 (Ewing)

cf Jerusalem. ........1607* (Masterman) ef Palestine, Recent

cf Maktesh, The..... 1969" (Masterman) an ae a so ek eae (Cobern)
Mishor...............- 2067 OAD IU CS sie sie) Beh a eR

GERIATR ret he ke 2406 (Day) ef Moab............ 2069» (Porter)
Mishraites............. 2067 Moadiah —
Mispar (Mispereth) ... 20678 cof Maadiah.......... 1945
Misrephoth-maim....... 2067 (Porter) Mochmur, The Brook. . .2072»

of Ladder of Tyre... .1821* (Porter) Mock, Mocker, Mocking 2072» (W. L. Walker)

ef Zarephath......... 3132 (Ewing) of Laughing-stock.. .. .1843>
Mist 02 ose. oes 2067" (Joy) Modad, Book of Eldad

ef Vapor............ 3046* (Day) LY 01s Ene pen mene Te .923> (Fortune)
Mistress. .......0.e00e 20674 Moderately............ 2073" (W. L. Walker)
Mite tes nh el aed hed 2067> (Porter) Moderation............ 2073*

ef Money...........- 2079* (Porter) Modin (Apoc)......... 2073 (Ewing)
Mithkah (Mithcah).. . . .2067¢ Home of the Macca-

ef Wanderings of Is- DeeSigat-s ti Sore yan 2073*

rael..............3064" (Conder) Identifications........ 2073°

Mithnite..<.2. <c.0sc0s 2067 cf Maccabaeus....... 1946 (Hutchison)
Mithra Monument at........ 2073

ef Persian Religion Moeth (Apoe)......... 2073*

(Ancient).......... 2333> (Tisdall) ef Noadiah.......... 2153°

Mithradates (Mithri- Moladah..............2073

Gates) joe ta eee 2067 ef Salt, City of....... 26645
Mithredath............ 2067+ Mole................. 2074 (Day)

ef Mithradates....... 2067" ef Chameleon........ 592+ (Day)
Mitre..........00.000. 2067> (T. Lewis) ef Lizard............ 1906" (Day)

cf Priests and Levites. 2452* (Wiener) cf Weasel........... 3076 (Day)
Tia : Be . wy een a 2068 (Harry) Molech, Moloch........ 2074 (Nicol)
Mixe ultitude CE Pires eet eet 1112 (W. L. Walker

cf Mingled People... .2056 (Easton) ef Gehenna.......... 1183 ne
Mizar, The Mill........ 2068" (Ewing) CE GOd Ss es 1271+ (Reeve)
Mizpah, Mizpeh........ 2068" (Ewing) ef Maleam.......... 1971+

ef Ramah........... 2528° (Ewing) Name rei aah 20742


cf Ramath-mizpeh... 25298 Nature of the worship 2075s


GENERAL INDEX


Molech, Moloch—continued
Origin of the worship. . 2075»


OT references........ 2074»
In the prophets...... 2074>
Moli
ef Mooli............ 20818
MO)id \ ees paces eens 2075»
Mollie gat 2075»
Moloch (Molech)....... 2075; 2074
ef Astrology.........295* (Maunder)
cf Semites, Semitic Re-
ligion............. 2717" (Mack)
Molten Image
ef Image............14508 (Edwards)
Molten Sea...........- 2708" (Caldecott)
Ch lavers! sea oko teee 1843» (Caldecott)
ef Ledge............1864>
Momdis (Apoc)........ 2075
Moment.............. 2076 (Porter)
Monarchianism........ 627 (Orr)
Moneys. os eee ees: 2076* (Porter)
Coined money....... 2076
Coins of various kings 2077"
Herodian coins....... 2079"
Maccabean coins..... 2078"
Material and form... .2076*
ef Mite.............2067% (Porter)
ef Penny............ 22982
cf Piece of Gold...... 2394>
ef Piece of Silver..... 2395* (Porter)
Roman coins......... 2079
ef Shekel............ 2758 (Porter)
ef Stater............ 28502
ef Talent...........- 2904 (Porter)
Of Limes: Dass 2981» (Porter)


cf Wedge of Gold... . .3078> (Porter)
ef Weights and Meas- ;


ULCS cocoa ater Ne 3079 (Porter)

ef Writing........... 3120> (Richardson)
Money-changers........ 2080° (Pollard)

ef Table.........---- 28982 (Easton)
Money, Current........ 20812 (Betteridge)
Money, Love of........ 20814

cf Covetousness...... 733 (W. Evans)
Money, Sin.........-- 2802

ef Sin Offering....... 2644» (Reeve)
Monogamy

ef Family........... 1095e (Caverno)
Monotheism


ef Johannine Theology 1701* (Law)
Monster


ef Dragon.........-- 8738 (Day)

ef Sea Monster....... 2707* (Day)
Month. .........------ 2081" (Porter)

ef Astronomy.......- 300° (Maunder)

ef Calendar........-- 541> (Porter)

ef Time.........---- 2981 (Porter)
Monthly Prognosticators

ef Astrology........- 295 (Maunder)
Monument


ef Vault. oc... eee ee 3046


3317


Mooli (Apoc).......... 2081+

MOON: sacra tint suas 2081+ (Schenk)
ef Astrology. ........295> (Maunder)
ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
ef Crescents......... 744

' Moon, New

cf Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
ef Divination........ 860+ (T. W. Davies)


cf Feasts and Fasts. . .1103* (E. D. Isaacs)
ef Sun, Smiting by... .2870° (Macalister)


Moossias (Apoc)....... 2081
Moph

cf Memphis......... 2030° (Petrie)
Morality

ef Ethies............ 1013 (Alexander)
Morashtite............ 2081»

cf Moresheth-gath. .. .2082% (Porter)
Mordecai.............. 2081> (Urquhart)
Moreh, Hill of...°.....20828 (Ewing)

ef Gibeath........... 1225> (Ewing)
Moreh, Oak of......... 20828 (Ewing)

cf Meonenim, Oak of. .2033>
Moresheth-gath........ 2082 (Porter)

ef Morashtite........2081>


Moriah, Hill of
ef Gerizim, Mount... . 1218+ (Ewing)
ef Jerusalem Hills... ..1599> (Masterman)


Moriah, Land of....... 2082> (Ewing)
Morning.............- 2082» (Porter)

ef Betimes........... 454 (Kinsella)

ef Hind of the Morn-

ing, The.......... 13938 (M. O. Evans)

Morning Watch........ 2083"

ef Watch............ 3074 (Porter)
Morning, Wings of

ef Astronomy........300% (Maunder)
Morrow, Tomorrow... . .2083+ (Porter)
Morrow after the Sab-

bathivert.. cea cirmict 2083" (Hirsch)
Morsel..........0.--065 2083

CESOPe se joe eee eee: 2836"
Mortal, Mortality...... 2083*

cf Immortal, Immortal-

ALYecsnser ese eae eee 1458 (Orr)

Mortar.......---.000- 2083" (Orr)

ef Bray.............514> (M. O. Evans)

ef Pestle............ 2348>

ef Whitewash... .... .3083>
Mortgage............- 2083»

ef Surety.....: Marte a 28725 (Reeve)
Moruly 2s ea os 2083> (Easton)
Moserah...........--- 2083
Moseroth............ -2083%

cf Wanderings of Israel 3064* (Conder)
MOSe8i cence eae eaten 2083+ (Kyle)

ef Aaron............ 1+ (Mack)


ef Ark of Bulrushes. . .2429 (Kyle):


ef Assumption of. .... 169* (J. E. H. Thomson)


ef Authorship of Deu-


teronomy......... 836 (Robinson)
cf Book of the Cove-
MAN Gi. shave aviisccauies 729» (Mack)


3318 GENERAL INDEX


ame ne
Moses—continued Mote iss. sateen tne adits 2091»
ef Brazen Serpent (Ne- Moth 3 250 hk tee 2091 (Day)
hushtan).......... 2132® (Longacre) ef Insects...........- 1473 (Day)
ef Burning Bush...... 532 (Kyle) ef Worm............ 3109* (Day)
ef Caleb.............5412 (Margolis) Mother............... 20922 (Dosker)
ef Calf, Golden....... 298° (Maunder) ef Family..........- 1095» (Caverno)
ef Claimed as author Mother-in-Law
of Genesis......... 1212 (Moller) cf Relationships, Fam-
Commissioned as Sean Sas Dene: 25562 (N. and E. D.
leader cad sae 2085 Tsaacs)
Conflict. with the Pha- Motion.............5: 2092 (Easton)
by: o) 11: ee ee 2085» Mound
Crossing the sea...... 2086" ef Siege.......2.-0-5 2787 (Nicol)
ef Deuteronomy...... 835° (Robinson) Mount, Mountain
Efforts at deliverance. 2084 ef High Place........ 1390° (Easton)
Exodus, the.......... 2086 ef Hill, Mount, Moun-
ef Exodus, The... .1052 (Conder) Laitinen 1392 (Day)
Faith Ole vetar eis ate: 2088+ Mount of the Amale-
Final acts... ........2088 cit ae ie cnt inna es eke 2092»
Genealogy........... 2084° ef Amalekites........ 112> (Porter)
Infancy and youth... .2084* Mount of the Amorites. .2092°
cf Intercessions of... . 1485" (Bevan) ef Atiorites 119° (Sayce)
ef Israel, Religion of . . .1534> (Orelli) Mount of Con; ane tee
of Joshua (son of Nun).1744* (Geden) aa Ser Ge
Journey to Canaan...2088% ns


Lawgiver............ 20902
Law received........ 2087
ef Leadership of Israel.1515* (Orelli)
ef Leviticus.......... 18708 (Moller)
ef Manna............ 1982 (Masterman)
ef Miriam........... 2066 (Lees)
cf Moses and Hammu-
PADS aches eis es 1331 (Ungnad)
Moses, Law of....... 2089>


ef Numbers, Book of. . 2169 (Whitelaw)
Obscurity of doctrine


of resurrection...... 2089»
Passover, the........ 2085»
ef Pentateuch........ 2298 (Wiener)
As prophet.......... 2091
ef PunishmentofKorah 1816° (Beecher)
ef Quail............. 25129 (Stratton-Porter)
Refugee in Midian. . . .2084>
Ch; SINAN den Ges he Seat 2802» (Conder)


Special providences. . . 2087
Tabernacle made..... 2087
ef Tell el-Amarna Tab-


Astoiler............ 2088”
Traditions regarding. . 20898
Unity of Pentateuch. . 2089»
cf Wanderings of Israel 3064 (Conder)
Work and character. . . 2088>

Moses, Assumption of
cf Apocalyptic Litera-


TUPey Stench Maas 1616 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Moses, Song of......... 20912 (Orr)
Mosollamon


ef Mosollamus (Apoc) 2091
Mosollamus (Apoc)..... 2091>
Most High, Most Holy
ef God, Names of... . . 12668; 12679 (Mack)


Mount of Corruption
ef Olives, Mount of.. .2185° (Masterman)


Mount Ephraim........ 963°

Mount Halak.......... 13228 (Ewing)

Mount of Olives........ 2185> (Masterman)
ef Jerusalem......... 1598 (Masterman)

Mount Seir

ef Simeon........... 27949 (Masterman)
Mount of Sodom....... 808 (Wright)
Mount of the Valley... .2092
Mourning

ef Burial............529*" (Eager)

CH Griel es cies ee a en 1305> (W. L. Walker)
Mouse, Mice........... 2092 (Day)
Mouthe- oni ince 20932 (Luering)

ChILaps 82 cece Cee 18962 (Luering)

ef Tongue...........2994> (Easton)
Mowing, Mown Grass.. .2093° (M. O. Evans)

ef Harvest........... 1341» (Patch)

ef Reaping.......... 25348 (Patch)
MOza ccrstoe fie ts Peete 2093
Mozah................ 2093>
Muffler............... 2093

GheDresse i iisivis hess 875> (Eager)

CEV El sie eee ees 3047 (Easton)
Mulberry Trees, Mul-

Berrys ease e. oaks 2093> (Masterman)

ef Acacia. ........... 27° (Masterman)

ef Food............. 1123+ (Hager)

ef Poplar............ 2421> (Masterman)

ef Syeamine.........2876 (Masterman)
Muleted.¢............ 2093°
Mules cae 2093 (Day)


Multitude, Mixed

ef Mingled People... .2056> (Easton)
Munition

ef Siege... 6.0... 2786° (Nicol)


GENERAL INDEX 3319
: pear
Muppim.............. 20948 Mystery..............2104" (Edwards)
ef Shephupham Braise 2764° Ancient pagan reli-
ef Shuppim.......... 27828 gions............. 21040
Murder............... 2094 (Hirsch) Chief features of pa-
ch Goel: aun seach 1272» (Breslich) ganism............ 21048
ef Lawin NT........ 18459 (M’Caig) NT references... .... .2104>
ef Manslaughter...... 1983> (Hirsch) OT and Apocrypha. . .2104>
ef Manslayer........ 1983 (Hirsch) Pagan mysteries and
Murderers............. 2094 (Nicol) the NT........... 2105»
ef Assassins.......... 288° (S. F. Hunter) Cf Paull ices och 2275» (A. T. Robertson)
Murmur, Murmurings. . .2094> (T’. Lewis) ef Seal.......00..0.. 2709* (Edwards)
Murrain.............. 2094> (Macalister) ef Tongues, Gift of... .2996° (Easton)
Muse, Musing dds tee apres 2094 Mythology
Mushi Re das heteih sites cea, 2094» cf Babylonia and As-
Music......-......... 2094° (Millar) syria, Religion of. . .368> (Rogers)
ef Asaph............262b (Millar) ef Fable............. 1085 (Easton)
Emotional range...... 2095 ef Greece, Religion in. 1297° (Fairbanks)
ChHomM es 3 seis ee 1422+ (Easton)
ef Hymn............ 1445 (Millar) Naan sects 22 caine teh 2106+
Illustrations, mural. . .2095> Naamah (persons)...... 21063
Importance of........ 2095 Naamah (place)........ 2106°
Instruments......... 2096> ef Naamathite....... 2106»
ef Instruments of Naaman............-- 2106 (Lees)
Music........... 14840 ef Naamite.......... 2106»
GE GUtE ie iteer ante nis 19428 Naamathite........... 2106
ef Melody........... 2029» cf Naamah (place)... .2106*
Musical theory....... 2096" Naamite.............. 2106
Percussion instruments21014 ef Naaman.......... 2106° (Lees)
Place in social life... .2095" Naarah (person)....... 2106>
Place in worship...... 2095» Naarah (place)......... 2107"
ef Singers, Singing. . . .2804> (Millar) Naarai (Paarai)........22067
Stringed instruments. . 20974 Naaran (Naarath)
CEAVIO is. eaten as hare 30512 ef Naarah (place)..... 21078
Wind instruments... .2099> Naashon, Naason, Naas-
Musical Instruments... .2101> son
Musician, Chief ef Nahshon.......... 2109
ef Asaph............262> (Millar) Naathus...........4. 21078
ef Music............ 2094» (Millar) Nabaioth (Nebaioth).. . .2126> (Fulton)
ef Psalms, Book of... .2487 (Sampey) Nabaliie.e oo seatiicnsc 21072 (W. W. Davies); 9
Mustard.............. 2101> (Masterman); 11244 (Maek)
(Eager) Nabarias............-- 2107
Muth-labben.......... 2102 Nabataeans, Nabathae-
ef Psalms, Book of.. . .2487° (Sampey) ANS! hehe ed de eo 2107> (Angus) ; 218* (Weir)
Mutilation Early history........ 2107
ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch) Locality...........-. 2107
Mutter. ccc lane ee 2102" (Easton) Relations with the
ChePeep ns ti-. ikadtae: 2295 erodes. ec kai 2107
Muzzle............... 2102° (T. Lewis) Relations with Rome. .2107°
Myndus.............-. 2102> (Banks) Rise to power........ 2107
Myton ec niles 2102 (Banks) Nabathites (Nabatacans)2107> (Angus)
ef Patara............ 2262> (Banks) Naboth............... 21088 (Wallace)
Myrrhe acetic peed 2102> (Masterman) ef Jezreel............ 16774 (Ewing)
ef Balsam...........381> (Macalister) Nabwisict Sie ered 371 (Rogers)
ef Botany...........505* (Masterman) Nabuchodonosor....... 2108+
ef Spice, Spices... .... 28402 (Masterman) ef Nebuchadnezzar... .2127 R. D. Wilson)
ef Stacte.........4-. 2847> Nachon (Nacon).......2108" (Masterman)
Myrtlevi hp ets 2103" (Masterman) Nachor........-.....% 2108»
ef Esther, Book of... .1006° (Urquhart) ef Nahor............ 2109»
ef Thick Trees....... 2972 Nacon, Threshing Floor
MySites: bai Steed att 2103° (Banks) Obes Hales eee een sheers 2108 (Masterman)
Mysteries Nadabs:....060. oes 2108» (Lees)
Tn ancient Greece... ..1303° (Fairbanks) Nadabath............. 2108>


3320 GENERAL INDEX


Nappat. 20. oy cn odes le 2108
ef Nogah............ 2154»
Nahalale cece te ee 2108> (Ewing)
Nahaliel.............. 2109°
Nahallal (Nahalol)
ef Nahalal........... 2108> (Ewing)
Naham...............2109*
Nahamani............. 2109
Naharai, Nahari....... 2109*
Nahash............... 21092 (W. W. Davies)
ef Jesse............. 1623" (Roberts)
Nahath............... 2109°
IN an bie. 3 | ve. cmaced eee 2109»
Nano rss axceett oe es 2109»
Nahshon.............. 2109
Nahum (Naum)........ 2122»; 2109»
Nahum, Book of....... 2109» (Hiselen)
Contents............ 21102
Date aoe ei we Rear 2110
Idea of God......... 2110°
Integrity............ 2110
Life and home of Na-
PUI eo ain eG 2 2109»
Name”. 3 Sia ee 2109»
Style...............2110°
Teaching of......... 2110
Naidus (Benaiah)...... 21112
Nae Oe OE wet uh 21115 (Orr)
cf Pare (the nails)... .2248>
Nain. ................2111> (Ewing)
Nealoth: «ie rl ists tee tice 2111> (Ewing)


Naked, Nakedness..... .2111> (Easton)
ef Text of the OT... .2957> (Weir)

Nain 22. esc itcesse Se 21128 (W. L. Walker)
Divine name......... 2112
cf God, Names of... . .1264> (Mack)
cf Memorial.........2030° (W. L. Walker)
cf Names, Proper... . .2113* (Davis)


Personal character in . .2112
Relation to prayer... .2113*


Names of God......... 1264 (Mack)
Names, Proper......... 2113* (Davis)
Characteristics of Bib-
lical references. .... 21168
Allusions linked with

mames.......... 2116»
Coincidence and con-

TABU ce wa one ant 2117"
Derivation....... 21168
Examples in Samuel

and Reuben...... 2116*


Narrator’s interest. .2116*
Prophetic use of


Punning on names. .2116*.
Form of Semitic names 21137
Methods of abbre-


Names, Proper—continued
Form of Semitic names—continued
Types of names... .2113*


Vocalization....... 2113
ef God, Names of... . .1264> (Mack)
ef Name............ 2112* (W. L. Walker)


Range of proper names 2114
Geographical names 2115


Personal names... . .2114>
Reasons for  selec-
HOD ieee ee tees 2115
Wide range........ 2114°
Nanaea (Nanea)....... 2117> (Angus)
Naomi...............- 2118 (Roberts)
Naphath-dor
CE DOP. seca ees 869> (Porter)
Naphish®.. regi csp ceases 21188
cf Nephish.........- 2133»
cf Nephushesim...... 2134°
Naphisi............... 2118"
cf Naphish.......... 2118+
Naphoth-dor
Ch Dore, ofS te oe 869» (Porter)
Naphtali (patriarch) . . ..2118> (Ewing)
Naphtali (tribe)........ 2118> (Ewing)
Distinction.......... 21195
cf Galilee........... 1163* (Ewing)


Location in Palestine. .2118>

Modern sites and
people............ 2119»

Name and traditions. .2118°

cf Numbers, Book of. .2163 (Whitelaw)

Physical features of... .2119*


Position............. 2118»
Transfiguration,
Mount of.......... 2119>; 3005> (Stuart)

Naphtali, Mount....... 2119»
Naphthar (Nephthar).. .2133> (Angus)
Naphtuhim............ 2119» (Lees)
Napkines ieee fen a 2119»

ef Dress............. 875» (Hager)

ef Handkerchief. .... .1334°
Narcissus............. 2120 (S. F. Hunter)
Nard

ef Spikenard......... 2840° (Masterman)
Nasbas............... 2120" (Angus)

ef Achiacharus. ..... .36%

ef Aman............ 113°
Nasi (Nasith).......... 2120*
Nasith (Neziah)........ 21412
Nasor

ef Hazor............ 1347> (Ewing)
Nathan (general)....... 2121* (Roberts)

cf Zabad............ 3128" (Roberts)
Nathan (prophet)...... 2120 (Roberts)

David’s sin.......... 2120»


David’s temple plans. .2120*
Solomon’s accession. . .2120°
Nathanael (apostle)... ..2121* (Kerr)
cf Bartholomew... ...406° (Kerr)
ef Matthias.......... 2012" (Kerr)


GENERAL INDEX 3321


cf Simon the Cana-
naean, or Zealot... .2797° (Kerr)
Nathanael (general)... . .2121*


Nathanias............. 2121
Nathaniel

cf James (son of Al-

phaeus)........... 15614 (Kerr)

Nathan-meleeh........ 2121»
Nations

cf Gentiles.......... 1215° (Porter)

ef Goilim............ 1273

ef Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches)

ef Tidal............. 2980 (Pinches)

cf World, Cosmologi-

CAL ohn cated wits 3106* (Orr)

Nativity, Apoeryphal

Gospel of............ 198* (Hutchison)
Nativity of Mary, Gospel

of

cf Apoeryphal Gospels. 195* (Hutchison)
Natural, Nature........ 2121> (W. L. Walker)
Natural Features....... 21226 (Day)

Arabah, the......... 2122+

ef Champaign........ 592» (Day)

ef Country.......... 724° (Day)

ef Desert............ 831> (Day)

Highlands........... 21228

ef Hill, Hill Country. .1392* (Masterman)

ef Lowland.......... 1934> (Day)

Negeb wicweig cea: 2122; 2130" (Master-

man)

ef Plain.........-... 2406> (Day)

CE ROOM eile cacao ene 2419> (Day)

ef South............. 2838 (Day)

ef Syria............. 2881" (Christie)
Natural History

ef Birds............. 475° (Stratton-Porter)

ef Botany........... 505* (Masterman)

ef Fish...... ee 1114 (Day)

ef Insects........... 1473* (Day)

ef Zodlogy........... 3155* (Day)
Natural Man, The... ...1974* (Webb)
Nature (Natural)....... 2121> (W. L. Walker)
Naught

ef Nought........... 2156> (W. L. Walker)
Naught, Naughty

Naughtiness.........2122
Naum (Nahum)........ 2109%
Nave

ef Sea, Molten....... 2708" (Caldecott)
Nave (Nun)........... 2122>
Navelecicc scactatuatens: 2122> (Luering)
Navy

ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
Nazarene.............. 2123* (Dosker)

Honorable name... ...2123

Name of scorn... .. ..2123*
Nazareth.............. 2123> (Ewing)

Jesus at............. 2124

ef Joseph.........,.. 1741 (Kerr)


Nazareth—continued


Position and features. .2123>

Nazirite (Nazarite).....2124® (Christie)
Antiquity and origin. .2124»
Conditions of vow... .2125#
In early Christian


@roups............ 2125°

Initiation and release. .2125*

ef Rechabites........2535° (Mack)

Samson and Samuel.. .2125>

ef Separate..........2721>

ef Separation........ 2721»

ef Vow... ... 0.00.05. 3058" (Levertoff)
Weah tar esbe ie. tea aat, 2126*
Neapolis..............2126* (Tod)

ef Philippi........... 2369° (Tod)

ef Samothrace..... .:. .2675* (Kinsella)
Near, Nigh............ 21268
Neariahe 2. siae sweet 2126
Nebai

ef Nobai...........- 21542
Nebaioth.............. 2126 (Fulton)
Neballatec60 iach 2126

ef Zeboim........... 3134 (Masterman)
Nebati.c 30 ee nccs 2126°

ef JeroboamI....... 1593* (Mosiman)
Nebo (god) ...........2126>


ef Babylonia and As-
syria, Religion of . . .368> (Rogers)


Nebo (place)........... 2126> (Ewing)
Nebo, Mount.......... 21272 (Ewing)
ef Nooma........... 2155
Nebuchadnezzar, Nebu-
chadregzar........... 2127» (R. D. Wilson)
Buildings of......... 2128
And Daniel.......... 7828 (R. D. Wilson)


Family and sources. . .2127°
ef Nabuchodonosor. . . 2108


NAMIC ei Sen ae 2127>
ef Nebuchadrezzar. .. .349> (Clay)

Political history. ..... 2128"

. Traditions regarding. .2128>
Nebuchadrezzar........ 349> (Clay)
NebuehadrezzarI....... 366° (Clay)


Nebuchadrezzar II...... 367% (Clay)
New Babylonian Em-


pire under......... 572> (Nicol); 367 (Clay)
Nebusaradan.......... 21292.
Nebushazban. (Nebu-
shasban)............ 2129


Necho, Nechoh
ef Pharaoh-necoh..... 23602 (Nicol)


Necks ite owes gt 2129 (Luering)
ef Footstool......... 1126 (Doolan)
Necklace.............. 2129>
Neco cic faa te 2129»
ef Pharaoh-necoh..... 2360° (Nicol) -
Necodan.
cf Nekoda...,....... 2133"


3322


GENERAL INDEX


Necromancy
ef Astrology.........
ef Divination........
ef Witcheraft........


Neesing...............


Description..........
ef Judaea............
Later history........
Meaning. . :

ef Natural Boar ares
OT references........


295> (Maunder)
860? (T. W. Davies)
30972 (T. W. Davies)


2129» (Patch)
547» (Day)


9402 (Patch)


. .2420° (W. L. Walker)


21302 (Easton)
2819>

2130° (Masterman)
813 (Masterman)
2130°

1757" (Masterman)
2130°


. 2180


. 2122 (Day)


Prosperity in antiquity2130°


ef Rehoboth Rr ee


ef Music............
ef Psalms, Book of. .
Nehelamite............
Nehemiah.............
ef Ezra-Nehemiah. . .


Governor of Judah..

ef Israel, History of.

Position at court... ..

Reforms and labors of

Services to Judah... .
Nehemiah, Book of

ef Ezra~Nehemiah. . .
Nehemias.............
Nehiloth

ef Music............


ef Roimus...........
Nehushta.............
Nehushtan...........


2552? (Masterman)
27942 (Masterman)
3149* (Masterman)


2094» (Millar)


. 2487 (Sampey)


2131
2131 (R. D. Wilson)


. 10832 (R. D. Wilson)


2131
. .2131>
. .1526> (Orelli)


575° (Nicol)


.2131>


. 1083 (R. D. Wilson)


.21322 (Longacre)


Hezekiah’s destruction


ef Images...........
Sacred serpent, the. .
ef Serpent, Fiery... ..
ef Serpent Worship. .


cf Noeba............
Nekodan..............
ef Nekoda...........


14532 (Cobern)


«2132»


2737" (Day)


. 2738" (Orr)


2132 (Edwards)


Nemuel..........-..-. 2133>
Nemuelites

ef Nemuel........... 2133°
Nephea

ef Music. ........--. 2094» (Millar)
Nepheg...........---+ 21335
Nephew

ef Relationships, Fam-

Bye ecg treo 25542 (N.
Isaacs)

Nephi (Nephthar)...... 2133> (Angus)
Nephilim.............. 2133> (Orr)

ef Sons of God... ... .2835* (Crichton)
Nephis

ef Niphis............ 2153?


Nephish, Nephisim, Ne-
phishesim, Nephusim. .2133>


ef Naphish.......... 21188
ef Nephushesim...... 2134
Nephisim
ef Nephushesim......2134
Nephthai
ef Nephthar.........2133% (Angus)
Nephthalim........... 2133»
ef Naphtali.......... 2118 (Ewing)
Nephthar aeasaaiee .2133> (Angus)
Nephtoah. . . .2134* (Masterman)
ef Eleph............ 9276
ef Etam............. 1010* (Masterman)
ef Netophah......... 2140° (Masterman)
Nephushesim.......... 2134
ef Naphish.......... 2118
ef Nephish, Nephisim . 2133
INGP Ss cohen ae wit anlar 2134
NGr6USi sche teen Mess at 21384
Netgal cick satiate 2134


ef Babylonia and As-
syria, Religion of. . .3715 (Rogers)


ef Gods............. 1271 (Reeve)
Nergal-sharezer........ 2134
ef Rab-mag.......... 2522+ (Clippinger)
IN GFD cc gstoh yin nik ye 2134
ef Neriah............ 2134
Neriahicr nia cia os aeens 2134
CLINGP to. a aw heh 2134>
Nerias. 2134
Nero. ree at .2134> (Angus)
Ambition of evippina 2135*
Downfall and char-
CLES tyne UH ine tee 2137
Five golden years... . .2135>
Great fire, the........ 2136*


Last years and death. . 2137

Name, parentage and
training........... 2134>

Nero and Christianity. 2138


“Nero Redivivus”’.. . .2137
_ef Number.......... 2162> (Smith)
Paul and Nero....... 2138+
Persecution of Chris-

GANS) sok 5 ae 2136


ef Persecution... .. 2325 (Rutherfurd)


and E. D.


F
r
i
iy


GENERAL INDEX 3323
ee


Nero—continued

Poppaea’s influence. . .2135>

ef Puteoli........... 25115 (Allen)

References in Revela-

PON ese sa ticike, 2137 :
ef Roman Empire and
Christianity....... 2605 (Angus)

Tigellinus........... 2136
Neste. 5 ieee ec 2138? (Stratton-Porter)

ef Owl.............. 2205> (Stratton-Porter)
Net

ef Fishing........... 11168 (Patch)

ef Fowler............ 1143* (Stratton-Porter)

ef Snare............. 2819* (Stratton-Porter)

Ch LT ap iirc Sten 3007 (Stratton-Porter)
Netaim............... 21398
Nethanel.............. 2139" (Lees)
Nethaniah............. 21398
Nethinim.............. 2139> (Lees)

History of........... 2139

ef Keros............. 1793>

Meaning............ 2139»

ef Padon............ 22078


Post-exilic references. .2139

ef Priests and Levites. 2446 (Wiener)
ef Solomon.......... 2824 (Weir) “
ef Solomon’s Servants .2825> (Mack)
ef Temple Keepers


(Servants)......... 2942 (Easton)

Netophah............. 2140* (Masterman)

ef Nephtoah......... 21348 (Masterman)
Netophas (Netophah). . .2140*
Netophathi, §Netopha-

thites

cf Netophah......... 2140 (Masterman)
Nettles. oi. gthaesied te 21402 (Masterman)

ef Thorns, Thistles.. . .2974* (Masterman)
Network.............. 21405

ef Jachin and Boaz. ..1547* (Caldecott)
New, Newness.........21408 (W. L. Walker)
New Birth

ef Regeneration...... 2546> (Nuelsen)


New Commandment
ef Brotherly Love... ..525 (Rees)


New Covenant......... 731° (M’Caig)
ef Lawin NT........ 18515 (M’Caig)
New Earth


ef Eschatology of NT. 979» (Vos)
cf Heavens, New..... 1353* (Vos)


New Heavens.......... 1353 (Vos)
New Jerusalem........ 1621> (Vos)

ef Revelation of John .2582> (Orr)
New Man.............- 1975* (Webb)
New Moon


ef Feasts and Fasts...11088 (EZ. D. Isaacs);
2081¢ (Schenk)
New Testament
ef Archaeology and


Criticism......... 226° (Kyle)
ef Bible............. 459» (Orr)
ef Canon of NT...... 563 (Riggs)
ef Inspiration of...... 1483* (Warfield)


New Testament Canon. .563° (Riggs)
New Testament Lan-


CETIME? eo ee 2981» (Porter)
ef Year.............38126#
Ne Zia ec os chow Coweta 21412
NOD. 4s een VAn eas 21416
Nibhag:s isc 6 05 Saye 2141
ef Gods............. 1271* (Reeve)
Nibshan............... 21418
Nicanor............... 21415 (Angus)
Nicene Creed.......... 742» (Alexander)
Nicodemus............ 2141> (Kerr)
Interview with Jesus. .2142¢
ef Jesus Christ... ....1637 (Orr)
Later references. ..... 21428
Nicodemus, Apocryphal
Gospel of............ 200° (Hutchison)
Nicolaitans............ 2142> (Kerr)
Controversies over... .2142>
ef Nicolatis.......... 21438 (8S. F. Hunter)
References to........2142>
Sect Oe. 4 act oats 2142
Nicolaiis, Nicolas....... 2143 (8. F. Hunter)
ef Nicolaitans........ 2142 (Kerr)
Nicopolis.............. 21438 (Harry)
Niger
ef Simeon........... 27942 (S. F. Hunter)
Nigh
ef Near............. 2126
Nightiss: 2 atte ae cance 2143> (Dosker)
ef Day and Night.....798* (Wolf)
Night-hawk............ 2143» (Stratton-Porter)
ef Hawk............ 13452 (Stratton-Porter)
Night-monster.........2148> (Sweet)


Accepted translation. .21448
ef Communion with


Demons........... 689> (Sweet)
cf Demonology....... 827% (Sweet)
Folklore in OT.......2144*
ef Lumatic........... 1941> (Sweet)
Poetical passages. .... 2144 ‘s
Term lilith.......... 21458
Night-watch........... 2145
ef Time............. 2981> (Porter)
ef Watch............ 30745 (Porter)
INTE! Mane eetheteiat tie eeaaere 8 21458 (Kyle); 907¢ (Petrie)
In history........... 2146>
Jnundation of........ 2146


Irrigation and farming.21474
Location of temples
and cemeteries..... 2146


Physical geography. . .2145>
Relation to religion. . .21474


ef Shihor............ 2768" (Kyle)
Value to Egypt....... 2146

Nimrabi soir 21475 (Ewing)
ef Leopard.......... 1866 (Day)
ef Nimrim...,....... 2147° (Ewing)


GENERAL INDEX


Niamorinips ey ee he 21475 (Ewing)
ef Leopard.......... 1866" (Day)
ef Nimrah........... 2147+ (Ewing)
Nimrod. cece osn cede 2147 (Mack)
ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)


ef Babylonia and As-
syria, Religion of . . .3868° (Rogers)


. As hunter............ 1440
ef Merodach......... 2036
ef Nineveh.......... 2148 (Pinches)
ef Orion............. 2201

NamSh is Geese es Gs 2147

Nimeveh.............. 2147» (Pinches)
Defenses........... .21484
Downfall of......... 5722 (Nicol)
Extent and population 2148>
Illustrations in  bas-

Peel 4.2 wyuties a24. 6 2150°
ef Nahum, Book of. . .2110° (Eiselen)
Name lS eared che 2 2148
ef Nimrod........... 2147> (Mack)
Overthrow of........ 2150>
Palace of Assur-bani-

ilk ae omtted Cebit 2149»
Palace of Sennacherib .2149
Palaces of............ 2149+
cf Rehoboth-ir....... 2552» (Pinches)
ef Resen..........-. 25614 (Pinches)
Ruins of............ 2148
Sennacherib’s descrip-

tion of... 2.2.0.0... 2149»

Nineveh, Library of... . .2151+ (Sayce)
Contents of.......... 2152
Discovery........... 2151
ef Hammurabi, Code of 13272 (Ungnad)
Historical texts....... 21526
ef Libraries.......... 1886> (Richardson)
Religious and other

LEXUS Ae eng eenc ae 2152
Translations and exer-

CISES 22 hat ee Ae wees 2152
Writing materials... ..2151>

Ninevites.............. 21539

INImibeaefo ae irae 372% (Rogers)

Niphisz ite. s ecco 21539

Nippur ®.¢.5:¢: 214.8 s.0 8 365" (Clay)
ef Shinar............ 2772» (Pinches)

Nisan oe Shade at eee 2153*
ef Calendar.......... 541» (Porter)

Nisroch..............- 21538


cf Babylonia and As-
syria, Religion of . . .368 (Rogers)


Nitocris............... 350° (Pinches)
INIGh@ goss ess arene 2153* (Patch)
ef Vinegar........... 3051* (Easton)
No
ef No-amon......... 2153" (Kyle)
Noadiah.............. 2153
ef Moeth............ 2073°
ef Neariah........... 2126
Noah ve nev beeen bees 2153" (Wright); 139°


(Davis)


Noah—continued
ef Antediluvian Patri-

ALCHS.. oc csce nds wet 139* (Davis)

A oe eeee sess 246? (Wright)
ef Deluge of Noah... .821> (Wright)
ef Family of, in Genesis 1206° (Moller)
CENOG Sue ee snr es 2154

Noah (woman)......... 21535

Noah, Book of
cf Apocalyptic Liter-


AtUTES o dorks 161» (J. E. H. Thomson)
No-amon...........-.- 2153> (Kyle)
Nobis cine a seduces 2153» (Ewing)
Nobah............005- 2154° (Ewing)

ef Nophah........... 2155+
INobaiey 2 ont Aaa 2154
Noble, Nobles, Noble-

MAN rhe eRe ag Beco, weet 2154 (W. L. Walker)
NOG ree reece vecceen tlie 2154»
Nodal... fh Sot 22 2154
NOG Rieke. Hace Eee 2154»

cf Noah............. 21532 (Wright)
Noeba........0...005- 2154

ef Nekoda..........- 21339

cf Nekodan.......... 2133
NOpabiath cette eres 2 ieee, 2154»

ef Naggai........... 2108>
NoOhabives soos ee eet 2154»

INGISG: coi dk eat 2154> (W. L. Walker)
Noisome.... 0.0.2... 21559 (W. L. Walker)
NON SARS Fein ees eens 21559

CEINUN ace os ed ae aes 2170
NOOM Ss 22-bit 21557

cf Nebo............. 2126
Noon, Noonday........ 2155+

ef Day and Night... ..798° (Wolf)

ef Midday........... 20498

CE TRIMe shea c a 2981» (Porter)
INGphiesecyietcn hes pe: 2155?

ef Memphis......... 2030 (Petrie)
Nophah) ste 2155

ef Nobah............ 2154 (Ewing)

North, North Country. .2155* (Day)

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Northeast, Southeast... .2155 (Day)

ef Phoenix........... 23912 (Calder)
Northern Israel

ef Joahaz............ 1678»

Nose, Nostrils......... 2155" (Luering)

ef Branch........... 513° (Masterman)
Nose-jewels............ 21562 (Pollard)

ef Amulet........... 126> (T. W. Davies)

ef Jewel. ............ 1675 (Orr)

Nostrils (Nose). ....... 2155> (Luering)
Notable............... 21562 (W. L. Walker)
NOté6L str. 32 esa aaeeet 2156> (W. L. Walker)
Nothing............... 2156 (W. L. Walker)
Noughts.is opie Pad a 21565 (W. L. Walker)
Nourish. .............. 21575 (Berry)
Novice............00.0. 21579 (Rutherfurd)
Number............... 21575 (Smith)
Arithmetic... ........2157"


GENERAL INDEX


Number—continued :

Exaggerated numbers. 2158"
Forty, the number... .2158>
Four, the number... . .2161>
Gematria............ 2162»
ef Nero.............2188* (Angus)
Notation of numbers. .2157°
Notation by words,

signs and letters... .2157>


IniODe eh etn alared 2158

ef Pentateuch........ 2302>; 2309» (Wiener)
Round numbers...... 2158>

ef Sabbath.......... 2629> (Sampey)


Seven, the number... .2159°
Apocalyptic use of. .2160>
Historical use of... .2160*
Literary use of..... 2160
Multiples of....... 2160
Ritual use of....... 2160+

Significant numbers. . .2159°

Ten, the number... .. 2162*

Three, the number... .21612

Twelve, the number.. .2162°


Number, Golden....... 1275»
Numbering :

ef David............- 790” (Weir)

ef Quirinius.......... 645° (Armstrong)
Numbers

ef Gad, Son of Jacob. .1151°

ef Issachar.......... 1541> (Ewing)

ef Judah............ 1758* (Ewing)

ef Naphtali.......... 2118> (Ewing)

ef Reuben........... 2572> (Ewing)

ef Zebulun........... 3135* (Ewing)
Numbers, Book of...... 2163* (Whitelaw)

Authorship........-- 2168


Against Mosaic view 2168>
Arguments for Mo-
saic tradition... .2169*
Historical credibility . .2165?
Chronological errors 2165”
Physical impossibil-


Statistical errors... .2166*
Literary structure... .2163>
Grounds of analysis 2163”
Objections to analy-
BIBS ct tects: 2164"
Title and contents... .2163*
ef Wanderings of Israel 3065°; 3069° (Conder)


Numenius............- 2170* (Angus)
ef Lucius............ 1934> (Hutchison); 1935*
(S. F. Hunter)
Numeri, Roman........ 257» (Allen)
Nun sect en ta 21702
Nilinis toate aan 21702
ef Alphabet.......... 108° (Richardson)
Nurse, Nursing........ 21702 (T. Lewis)
Nurture..............- 2170>
Nuts.................-2170% (Masterman); 1123
(Eager)


Nymphas.............2170 (Rutherfurd)


3325
Oabdius..............- 2171*
Oakcrest ls 2171° (Masterman)
Hebrew words and ref-
erences..........+. 2171+
Oaks in modern Pales-
tine...........,...21728
ef Terebinth......... 2949* (Masterman)
Varieties............2171"
| Oak of Tabor.......... 2172
| Oar
ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
Oath fs ton Salita enna eae? 2172 (Levertoff)


cf Adjuration........56% (Pratt)
Forms of swearing... .2172


Formula of oath... .. .2173*
ef Judge............. 1771» (Levertoff)
ef Lawin NT........ 1845+ (M’Caig)
Law regarding oaths. .2172
CLEMO Wer en aese eheatersecnn 3058+ (Levertoff)
Obadiah (general)...... 2173+ (Sampey)
cf Abdias............ 4a
Obadiah, Book of... . .. .2173" (Sampey)
Capture of Jerusalem .2174*
Contents............ 2173?
Dates. cots oe SLT 3P
Relation to Jeremiah
and Joel......... .2173°
Style and allusions... .2174>
Utes farsa eee 2173?
Obal
ef Ebal.............889%
Obdia, Habaiah, Ho-
baiah............... 2174
Obed as iuey odes acd 2175* (Roberts)
Obed-edom............ 2175* (Roberts)
Obedience, Obey... . . . .2175* (Clippinger)


cf Disobedience ...... 854» (Clippinger)
Meaning of terms... . .2175*


NT conception....... 2175>

OT conception....... 2175»
Obedience of Christ... ..2175> (Crannell)

ef Atonement........321* (Carver)


Christological bearing .2176*
An element in char-


ACHERS Ad ake 2175°
Soteriological bear-

ANG lent als Loe one eo Oe
Obeisance.............21779 (T. Lewis)
Obelisk. ..............2177

ef Pillar............. 2398> (Orr)
Obethe casa cen: ee QTE
Obey (Obedience) . . ... .2175* (Clippinger)
Obits) oe oes 2177
Objects suicar Si ia cia 2177"
Oblation.............. 2177>
ODO AB 1. oe eee es 240° (Dosker)
Oboth:-ce ce eee tes 2177

ef Wanderings of Is-

THE]. Nee ee 3064° (Conder)
Obscurity.............2177
Observation...........2178* (Easton)
Observe........-...0.. 2177 (Easton)


3326 GENERAL INDEX


Observer of Times


ef Divination........ 8602 (T. W. Davies)
Obstinacy

ef Harden.......... 1838" (W. L. Walker)
Oceasion.............. 21788
Oeeupy-en i scat eens 21788 (Estes)

ef Trade............8002" (Easton)
Occurrent............. 21782
Ochielus.............. 21788
Ochan ess icicacs 0g each’ 2178

ef Achan........... 35> (Beecher)
Ochre, Red............ 21782

ef Pencil............22988
Ocidelus..............2178°
Ocinash. 16. ete a 2178>
Ocodelus (Ocidelus).. . . .2178>
Ocran

ef Ochran...........21788
Oded teas mins wieetnes 2178> (Roberts)

ef Addo (Iddo)....... 1447> (Crannell)

ef Azariah........... 3422 (W. W. Davies)


Odes of Solomon
ef Apocalyptic Litera-


TuUrens abate Ai oat 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)

Odollam.............. 2178>

ef Adullam..........62 (Beecher)
Odomarra (Odomera). . .2178>
Odomera.............. 2178>
Odonarkes (Odomera). . .2178»
Odors, arenes coin te 2178

ef Savor............. 2700° (Edwards)
OVE ree ee meta tier: AM teats 21799 (Easton)
Offence, Offend......... 2179 (W. L. Walker)

NT usage...........2180°

OT usage........... 2179


ef Stumbling-block,
Stumbling-stone.. . .2867 (Hovey)
Offer, Offering


ef Saerifice, OT...... 2638" (Reeve)
Offices ase eaae 21802 (T. Lewis)
Ofieerin eee 2180° (T. Lewis)
Offices of Christ........ 616> (Bevan)
Offscouring............ 2180> (Gerberding)
Offspring

ef Children.......... 606 (Stearns)
Often cave iehe es Wien es 2180>
OE Mea ates ies A ae 2180> (Orr)

ef Argob............ 240> (Ewing)

ef Bashan........... 4112 (Ewing)

ef Rephaim.......... 2559» (Porter)
C0) v Ve [poeta ence meta 21815
Ohel vse eee atts 2181"
Oholah. ch eee 21812

ef Oholibah.......... 21812 (W. W. Davies)
Oholiab............... 21818
Oholibah.............. 21819 (W. W. Davies)
Oholibamah........... 21815
OU Steet can eae tet 2181> (Patch)

Figurative references. .2182>

Ch Wood sere a 1121> (Eager)

ef Lamp............ 1825° (Porter)

ef Meal............. 2013


Oil—continued
ef Meals, Meal-time . .2014* (Eager)
ef Oil, Anointing...... 2183+ (Orr)


ef Ointment.......... 2183" (Patch)

ef Perfume..........2321> (Patch)

Production........... 2181»

Terms used for....... 2181>

WSe8 Of. 4 sie ease a 21828

ef Wine, Wine Press. . 3086 (Easton)
Oil, Anointing......... 2183" (Orr)

ef Anointing......... 138+ (Eager)

CLOT Morr ine es setts 2181» (Patch)
Oil, Beaten. ........... 21838

ef Candlestick, Golden 553% (Orr)

Cl Ollsnaeta nt cee 2181> (Patch)
Oil, Holy

ef Anointing......... 138% (Eager)

CROW eRe es cee 2181 (Patch)
Oil-making

ef Crafts...........- 734% (Patch)
Oil, Olive

CLOW: a dees 2181» (Patch)

ef Olive Tree......... 21849 (Masterman)
Oil Press

CEO re 8 cy huhete ts 2181» (Patch)

ef Wine, Wine Press. .3086* (Easton)
Oil Trees: ese So es 2183" (Masterman); 5082

(Masterman)

ef Olive Tree......... 21849 (Masterman)

ef Pine Tree... ......2399* (Masterman)
Ointment............ 21838 (Patch)

ef Anointing......... 1382 (Eager)

OP OMS ee ceaae ees 2181> (Patch)

ef Perfume.......... 2321> (Patch)
Olamus...............2183>
Old

ef Age, Old Age...... 712 (W. L. Walker)
Old Gate

ef Jerusalem......... 16072 (Masterman)
Old Man.............. 2183> (Pratt)

ef Man, Natural...... 1974 (Webb)

ef Man, New......... 19752 (Webb)
Old Prophet, The....... 2183» (Roberts)

Central truths....... 21842


Critical considerations 2183>
Narrative in 1 K 13.. .2183>
Old Testament, Text of .2957> (Weir)
Criticism of.......... 748> (Orr)
Inspiration of........ 1482 (Warfield)
Old Testament Canon... 554° (Robinson)
Old Testament Lan-


GUALES. eae eas 1832? (Weir)
Oleaster

ef Oil Tree........... 2183 (Masterman)
Olive

ef Food... .......... 1122> (Eager)

CE OI AN ieee 2181 (Patch)

ef Olive Tree......... 2184 (Masterman)
Olive Berrics

ef Olive Tree......... 2184 (Masterman)


Olive, Grafted
ef Olive Tree........ 2184" (Masterman)


GENERAL INDEX 3327


Olive Tree............. 2184 (Masterman)
Hr Geel aes tee de 2185°
Importance.......... 2184>
ef Oil Tree.......... 2183 (Masterman)
Olive oil... ......... 2185»

Wild olives.......... 2185»

Olive, Wild............ 2185>

Olive Yard
ef Olive Tree........ 2184 (Masterman)

Olives, Mount of....... 2185> (Masterman)
ef Bahurim.......... 378 (Ewing)
ef Bethphage........ 451° (Masterman)
Churches and_ tradi-

GODS eee css 68S waa 2188
ef Gethsemane....... 1221 (Masterman)
High places.......... 21878
ef Jerusalem......... 1598 (Masterman)
Names.............. 2186
Olivet and Jesus...... 2187
OT associations.......2186°


Situation and extent. .2186
View of Jerusalem from 2187


Olivet

ef Olives, Mount of. . .2185> (Masterman)
Olympas iP hee 2188»
Olympius.............. 2188

ef Jupiter..........-. 1781 (Easton)
Omaerus.........0.... 2188
OMmars xan peso kta eces 2188
Omega


ef Alpha and Omega. .103> (Harry)
Omens


ef Augury........... 3312 (T. W. Davies)

ef Divination........ 8602 (T. W. Davies)
Omer heed bana 2188

ef Weights and Meas-

MECS tne Ase ten 3079* (Porter)

Omnipotence...........- 2188 (Vos)

Divine powers....... 2189+

Ch GOd nesnek Pahoa 1250* (Rees)


ef God, Names of.. . . .1264> (Mack)
Inherent in Divine


names............ 2188>
Manifestation of...... 2189>
Modes of expression... .2189*
ef Power.......----- 2427> (Orr)
Significance of........ 2189>
Terms and usage..... 2188>
Omnipresence.......... 21902 (Vos)
Negative views....... 2190
Non-occurrence of the
POPM esccee ves sve artes, ok 2190
Philosophical and pop-
ular ideas of....... 2190
Presence of God...... 2190>
Religious significance. .2190>
Omniscience........... 21912 (Vos)
Extent and mode..... 21918
ef Foreknow......... 1128 (Hodge)
Free willand........ 2191>
of Infinite........... 1467" (Orr)


Religious importance.. 2192
Terms and usage..... 2191


OMPi se eee Be sss Peake 21928 (Mosiman)
Accession........... 21925
Foreign policy....... 2192>


Founding of Samaria. .2192>
Religious influence. .. .2193>


On (Heliopolis)......... 21932 (Kyle)
Excavations at....... 2194
History eine sc tac 2193>
ef Ir-ha-heres........ 1491+ (Kyle)
Location and descrip-

MOD oss coke ays Petit coke 21938

On (person)..........- 21948

QnaMei ss SPs ae oe 21949
ef Onan.........-... 21945

Onan eis chee a ee 21948
ef Onam............ 2194

One
ef Number.......... 2157 (Smith)

Onesimus............. 21942 (Rutherfurd)
Epistles to Colossae

and Philemon...... 2194»
Paul’s relations with. .2194*

Onesiphorus........... 2195* (Rutherfurd)
Friend of Paul....... 21958
Household of........ 2195
Visits Paul in Rome.. .2195*

Oniares.......-..-0.0-- 2195»

OMIA od esca cela eh caeaetn 2195> (Angus)

Onions............-44. 21968; 11222 (Hager)

Onkelos
ef Targum........... 2911> (J. E. H. Thomson)

Only Begotten.........2196" (Rees)
cf Begotten.......... 426> (Rees)
ef Person of Christ... .2338* (Warfield)
ef Son of God........ 2826? (Stalker)

ONO: ce ten tian atte ect 2196 (Ewing)

Onus
ChONOS » 2 ca need 2196* (Ewing)

Onycha............0.. 2196 (Day)

Onyx
ef Stones, Precious... .2856* (Fletcher)

Open tsciae nonterieae sen 2196

Open Place............ 2196 (Easton)
ef Enaim............ 941> (Masterman)
Cf VOId siete? 3058

Operation............. 2196»

Ophel e232. 2bee gees as 2196> (Masterman)
ef Hill, Hill Country. .1392* (Masterman)
In Jerusalem........ 21978

ef Jerusalem.......1601* (Masterman); 1613?
Meaning of name... . .2196>
Three places men-
tioned............. 21978
CE ZION sees ed ee regen ow 3152" (Masterman)
Ophiree ieee eet 2197> (Fulton)


Geographical position. 2197
Probably Southern


Arabia. ........... 2197
Scripture references... .2197°
Opn S204 nae 21988
Ophrah............... 2198" (Ewing)
Opinion. .........66-.. 2198* (W. L. Walker)


3328 GENERAL INDEX
Opis sb MR ome hss, eee See 365> (Clay) Osnappar
Opobalsamum ef Ashurbanipal...... 271» (Clay); 367°
ef Stacte............2847> Osptayeniccce cs sai ona 22022 (Stratton-Porter)
Oppression............2198 (McGlothlin) Ossifrage...........6-- 2202» (Stratton-Porter)
CO) Ne hasan cae ARES erate 21982 Ostraca.... 0.0... 0000. 2202 (Goodspeed)
Orscle sit. eRe ee 2198> (Easton) CEA OF esc sc a anh 85° (Beecher)
ef Burden...........528 (Trever) Coptic ostraca....... 2203
ef Divination........ 8602 (T. W. Davies) Greek ostraca........ 22032
Oracles, Sibylline Hebrew ostraca...... 22026
ef Apocalyptic Litera- NT ostraca.......... 2203
GUTS eit secs scatiosts 161» (J. E. H. Thomson) ef Potsherd.......... 2423»
Orator, Oration........ 21992 (Edwards) ef Potter, Pottery.....2423 (Patch)
ef Divination........ 8602 (T. W. Davies) ef Writing........... 3120° (Richardson)
ef Enchantment...... 942° (Pratt) Ostrich............... 2203? (Stratton-Porter)
Orchards oissceersataveus 21998 Characteristics and pe-
ef Paradise.......... 2246* (Wright) cubarities......... .2203
Ordain, Ordination...... 21992 (Edwards) Eggs and eare of young 2204*
Biblical references. . . .2199> OT references........ 22048
ef Hands, Imposition of 1335 (Orr) ChOWL ctv es See 2205» (Stratton-Porter)
Meaning of term..... 2199 OEbD  iita6 ee edacece eet 2204>
NT usage........... 2199» Othniel............... 2204» (N. Isaacs)
Orders i dias aerate, 2200° (N. Isaacs) Othonias.............. 2204»
Arrangement in rows. . 2200 Ouches................ 2204» (Caldecott)
Classification and like- ef Stones, Precious... .28562 (Fletcher)
HESS! ea cies aac 2200» Outeast.. 2.6.6... ee 2204»
Regulation, command . 2200 Oberg ric asian VR 22058
Sequence in time..... 2200° Outgoing.............. 22052 (Easton)
Ordinance............. 22012 (T. Lewis) Outlandish............ 2205°
ef Sacraments........ 26362 (Lambert) Outrage, Outrageous... .22057
Ordinances of Heaven Outroads.. 0.0... ..000. 2205*
ef Astronomy........301* (Maunder) Outward Man.......... 2205*
Ordination............ 2199 (Edwards) ef Man, Natural...... 1974* (Webb)
ef Hands, Imposition of 1835 (Orr) ef Man, New........ 1975 (Webb)
ef Ordain............ 2199" (Edwards) Oven
Ora eens eel 2201» ef Bread............ 514» (Eager)
ef Sinai............. 2802 (Conder) ef Furnace........... 1149> (Mager)
Oreb and Zeeb......... 22012 (Roberts) Overcharge............ 22058
Oren se cde 2201» Overpass. ............. 2205*
Organ Overplus.............. 2205°
ef Music............ 2004» (Millar) Overseers. o¢ae2 tires 2205»
Origen ef Bishop............ 478» (Dosker)
ef Septuagint....... .2726* (Thackeray) Owl iste: battens 2205" (Stratton-~Porter)
Original Sin Biblical references. . . .2206*
ef Imputation........ 1462 (Hodge) Characteristics. ...... 2205»
Onions sao ee ses 2201>; 3128 ef Hedgehog......... 13675
ef Nimrod........... 21475 (Mack) CE UbIS# Ace ae Ava 1446
Ormazd (Ahura Mazda) ChINGSt le et.) ole 2138> (Stratton-Porter)
ef Persian Religion. . .2332° (Tisdall) ef Ostrich...........2203% (Stratton-Porter)
Ornament............. 2201> (Doolan) ef Owl, Great........ 2206 (Stratton-Porter)
ef Jewel. occa neo 1675° (Orr) ef Owl, Little........ 22068
Ornan , ef Porcupine......... 2421> (Day)
ef Araunah.......... 225> | ef Serpent........... 2737° (Day)
OTP al eg ido dence ete 22028 Owl, Great... 20.000... 2206 (Stratton-Porter)
Orphan............... 2202 I) CROW i eo ea aresctels 2205» (Stratton-Porter)
cf Fatherless......... 11012 (Edwards) Owl, Little............22068
Orthosia...... . -22028 COWIE. Nat Lee 2205 (Stratton-Porter)
OSRISS ese ee OE ae Bes 2202* Owl, Screech
OSC a ese csiees eae ee 22022 ef Night-monster..... 2143» (Sweet)
OsSeAS Se fetta a cheeNe 2202 Owner
OseCRA 2 voi i Senet See 22025 | ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
OSN Giese dls ec hee 2202 Ox
ef Joshua (son of Nun) . 1743" (Geden) | ef Antelope.......... 143 (Day)


GENERAL INDEX


Ox—continued
ef Cattle...........
ef Wild Ox.........
Ox (person)...........
Ox-goad


Ozgnites...............
ef Ozni............
Ozora (Ezora).........


Pacatiana.............
ef Phrygia...........
Poaceae ce. ee nates ale


Pad ong t oo es ctseeenies
ef Nethinim.........
ef Phaleas..........-

Pagel: con 26% a4 nde We

Pahath-moab..........
cf Manasseh.........
ef Phaath Moab......


Painting
ef Crafts............
PAs ee oh fio sang oars


ef House............
ef Judgment, Hall of. .
ef Temple...........


. 583 (Day)
.3084 (Day)


2206
1248» (Patch)


2240 (Goodspeed)
2206

2206>

3043> (Caldecott)
2206»

2206

2206»


. 2206


1082


2206

22068

2392* (Banks)
2206*

2206>

2206

2206 (Christie)


_ .2206> (Christie)


222°

18192 (Boyd)
2207

2207

2139> (Lees)
2358>

2207 (Wallace)
2207 (Wallace)
19772 (Wallace)
2358> (Angus)


2207 (Macalister)
22362 (Macalister)
2207° (Macalister)
2208 (Crannell)
674> (Patch)


22088 (Orr)

1434» (A. C. Dickie)
1777> (Rutherfurd)
29302 (Caldecott; Orr)


Palal vies icitreee nan Rie 22082
Palanquin............. 2208"

ef Litter............ 1905+
Palestina.........6...0- 2208

ef Philistia.......... 2376" (Porter)
Palestine............. 22085 (Conder)


ef Asmoneans........
ef Eglath-shelishiyah. .
ef Exodus, The.......
cf Galilee............
ef Gallery...........


2832 (Dosker)
905° (Ewing)
1052 (Conder)
1163" (Ewing)
11672 (N. Isaacs)


ef Geology of Palestine1215> (Day)


Palestine—continued
cf Hill, Hill Country. .1392* (Masterman)
In Historical Books of


Books of Kings... . .2217#
Joshua, Book of... .22128
Judges, Book of... .22134
Post-exilic histories .2218


Ruth, Book of..... 2214»

Samuel, Books of. . .2214>
ef Hittites........... 1395» (Conder)
of Jerusalem.........1596 (Masterman)
ef Jesus Christ... ....1627% (Orr)
ef Jordan River...... 1732 (Wright)
ef Lachish........... 1820* (Porter)
Literature on........ 2229>
New Testament locali-

HES sk ee ee 2220

ACE Zi2. adits 2222»

Fourth Gospel..... 22222


Galilean localities... 2221+

Galilean scenery... .22215

Synoptic Gospels. . .2220>
Palestine in the Apoc-

BY PHA tas ese. Me 22207


Maccabees, Books of 2220


cf Palestine, Recent
Exploration........ 2222 (Cobern)
Pentateuchal refer-
ONCOS eo sc 'eumey sane 2210"
Geography of Deu-
teronomy........ 2211»


‘Geography of Exo-

dus and Leviticus .2211>
Geography of Genesis2211*
Geography of Num-


bersiec oh 5 act ee 2211»
Places visited by
Abraham........ 2210
Places visited by
Jacob........... 2210°
Physical conditions. . .2208'
Climate........... 2209»


Drought and famine 2210*
Flora and fauna. .. .2209>
Geographical fea-


TUPeS4e oA 2208
Geology........... 2209
Rainfall........... 2209>
Water supply...... 2209

In Poetic Books of OT .2218*
Job, Book of....... 2218


Proverbs, Book of. .2218>

Psalms, Book of .. . .2218>

Song of Songs...... 2218
cf Song of Songs..2831* (Sampcy)

In Prophetic Books. . .2219*


Ezekiel. .......... 2219»
Taaiahs sacle 2219
Jeremiah.......... 2219»
Minor prophets... . .2220+
GLB Tate setae 2881+ (Christie)


3329


3330 GENERAL INDEX


Palestine, Recent Ex-


ploration............ 2222> (Cobern)
ef Ashtoreth......... 270> (Sayce)
Dead Sea........... 2223>


Era of preparation... .22238
Outside of Palestine . 2223+


In Palestine........ 2223»
Era of scientific exca-
vation............ 2225


Central Palestine. . .2230>
Eastern Palestine. . . 22302


Gatien cg genes 22278
Gezer... 0.0.0.0... 2231>
Jericho............ 2229»
Jerusalem......... 2226>
Mareshah......... 22278
Megiddo.......... 22292
Northern Palestine. . 22282
Samaria........... 22305


Shephelah, the... .. 22278
Southern Palestine. .2225>


Taanach.........- 2228
Tell el-Hesy (La-
chish)........... 2225
cf Lachish....... 1820" (Porter)
Tell Ham (Caper-
maum).....-.... 2229
Era of scientific ex-
ploration.......... 22248
Codéperative explora-
TONE he ee. Ge 2224b
Individual enter-
PTISES ocho Siaes ses 22240
Most recent results. 2225
ef Gezer............. 1222° (Masterman)
ef Images........... 14522 (Cobern)
ef Jericho........... 1592° (Wright)
ef Jerusalem......... 1601» (Masterman)
ef Philistines......... 2376> (Conder)
Palestra
ef Games............ 1168> (Smith)
Pallu, Palluites........ 2235
ef Peleth...........- 22978
Palm of the Hand...... 2235 (Luering)
Cf Hands oc 3 he hel 1333» (Luering)
CE PAW eve es ee chs 2293 (Luering)
Palm Tree............. 2235 (Masterman)
Abundance in Pales-
tine..............2286%
Name and refcrences. .2235%
Palm branches....... 22364
Symbolic use......... 2235>
ef Tamar............ 29075 (Ewing)
Palmer-worm.......... 22368
cf Insects...........1473* (Day)
ef Locust............ 1907 (Day)
Palsied
ef Feeble Knees...... 1104» (Luering)
Palsy ecco eae races 2236* (Macalister)
ef Pain............. 2207 (Macalister)
Palle issec vet ois 22362


Palticl ys cities cova. 2.8 8 2236
cf Phaltiel........... 2358>
Paltite: osu. ei se 2236
cf Pelonite........... 2297
Pamphylia............ 2236> (Banks)
ef Attalia........... 328 (Banks)
Importance.......... 2237
Introduction of Chris-
tianity............ 2237
ef Perga...........-. 2322 (Banks)
Physical features. ... . 2236>
CHSIDEs wratent acuce te 2785° (Banks)
Pans pita ten eee 2237 (Betteridge)
cf Poteet betes 2423° (Betteridge)
Pannag.............-- 2237 (Masterman)
cf Honey............ 1418> (Patch)
Panoply
ef Armor, Arms...... 251 (Nicol)
Pap! Ae cachet me 2237
CE Pate eet ce cel 2923>
Papal Infallibility....... 338> (Rees)
Paper
chiCrafts ip .isee 734 (Patch)
ef Papyrus.......... 2238 (Goodspeed)
of Reeds: sce ected 2544* (Masterman)
ef Writing........... 3114 (Richardson)
Paper Reeds........... 2237
Paphosy. si cas hcesteed 2237 (Tod)
ef Cyprus........... 771° (Tod)
History of New Pa-
phos. as 2238
History of Old Paphos 2237
DIC leet ee ee 2237>
Temple and cult...... 22388
Visit of the apostles. . .2238>
Papias
ef Literature, Sub-
BPOS eb Wei tat os 19019 (Cowan)


ef Mark, Gospel of... .1989> (Farmer)
cf Matthew, Gospel of 2010" (Schodde)
Testimony regarding


Apostle John... ....1707 (Iverach)
PAPYEUS esses bo aee as 2238> (Goodspeed)

Aramaic papyri...... 22392
Chief collections... ... 2242
Classical papyri...... 2241
Contribution to NT

BUCY s slogee Sele 2242
Coptic, Arabic and

other papyri....... 22438


Discovery of papyri.. . 2239»
Documentary papyri. . 22420


Egyptian papyri...... 22398
Greek papyri........ 22396
ef Jordan............ 1733* (Wright)
ef Jordan Valley... ...1736> (Wright)
ef Language of NT... .1828* (A. T. Robertson)
cf Logias.. oe ccee ess 1910" (Smith)
NT papyri..........2242
cf Palestine, Recent
Exploration....... 2223> (Cobern)


Papyrus paper....... 2238


GENERAL INDEX


Papyrus—continued


of Reed............. 25448 (Masterman)
Septuagint papyri. .. .2241%
ef Seveneh........... 27444


ef Ships and Boats... .27749 (Nicol)
ef Texts and Manuv-
scripts of the NT. . .2951° (Sitterly)
Theological papyri.. . . 2242
ef Writing........... 3122+ (Richardson)
Papyrus, Vessels of
ef Ships and Boats... .27749 (Nicol)


Parable............... 2243 (Schodde)
Christ’s purpose in
using the.......... 2243»


Christ’s use of the... .2243>
Doctrinal value of the 2244»


ef Fable............. 1085* (Easton)

Historical data....... 2243

Interpretation of the. .22448

ef Jesus Christ....... 1645* (Orr)

Names vac ce nheceees 22439
Paraclete.............. 2245° (Mullins)

ef Advocate......... 65 (Mullins)


As applied to Christ. . 2246
Christ’s use of the


WORD sos fe eis 8s suas 2245>
General meaning... .. 2245
ef Holy Spirit........ 14062 (Mullins)


Philo’s use of the word .2245%

Talmud and Targums.2245+

Translation, the best. .2245>

Word and usage...... 2245
Paradise...........--. 22469 (Wright)

cf Abraham’s Bosom. .22% (Orr)

ef Apocalyptic Litera-

TLE Se od seo oS 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)
ef Eschatology of NT. 979» (Vos)
ef Eschatology of OT .972* (Orr)


Forms and uses...... 2246»

ef Garden..........- 1174* (Patch)

ef Hades...........- 1314> (Vos)

ef Orchard........... 2199

Origin and meaning. . .2246°

Ch Parks ooctekiele 2 es 2248> (Day)

Use in Jewish literature 2246>

Used by Christ... ....2246>
Paral ct k vacnicseaetet 2247
Paralysis, Paralytic

CE Pain ess theirs ase atoe 22072 (Macalister)

CE Palsy essence 2236* (Macalister)
Paramour............. 22478
Param oe diy. eaten ee 22479 (Ewing)
Parbar cee. stp eee ees 2247* (Masterman)
Parcel drt ied gee? 2247>
Parched.............-% 2247 (Patch); 13079

(W. L. Walker)

ef Mirage........... 2066 (Joy)
Parched Corn

CEB OOd 0 oes tena: 1121» (Eager)
Parchment............ 2247> (Patch)

ef Tanner........... 2908 (Patch)


ef Writing........... 3121> (Richardson)


3331

Parchments............ 2248 (Rutherfurd)
Pardon

ef Forgiveness....... 11325 (Morro)
Pare (Nails)........... 2248»

CRN SIs ey oe bee eck 21114 (Orr)
Parent

cf Crimes against..... 747 (Hirsch)

ef Edueation......... 900% (Meyer)

ef Family........... 1094» (Caverno)

cf Punishments....... 25045 (Hirsch)
Parke iA a lettin egies acs 2248> (Day)

ef Paradise.......... 2246 (Wright)
Parlory. cisco Peace cee 2248»

cf House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Parmashta............ 2248»
Parmenas............- 2248
Parmach <..2s0feed oc Gee 2248
Paroshy i.e nee ee ake 2248

ef Pedaiah........... 2294 (Wallace)

ef Phoros.........-.- 2392
Parousiar. 238. i4.0 4 ears 22499 (Easton)

cf Antichrist......... 1542 (J. E. H. Thomson)

Apostolic doctrine. .. .2249%

Church a Divine quan-

Giessen oseioas ae 2251»

Critical problems. ... . 2250

Data and sources..... 22499

ef Day of the Lord... .799* (Dosker)

ef Eschatology, NT

andOT. mise seit 979> (Vos); 972" (Orr)

Fall of Jerusalem..... 22.50>

CEH el es rete oe etc 1371% (Orr)

ef Hope..........-.. 1419> (Easton)


Johannine solution... .2251*
Johannine teaching. . .2251

ef Johannine Theology 1705> (Law)

ef Judgment, Last... .1777' (Easton)


ef Kenosis..........- 1792 (Easton)

ef Kingdom of God. . . 18052 (Stalker)

cf Millennium........ 2052 (Moorehead)

cf Pauline Theology. . .2289* (Easton)

ef Presence.......... 2438 (Easton)

ef Resurrection....... 2562 (Easton)

Symbolism of........ 2250%

Teaching of Jesus... . .2250°

POTMs isis) 2 273 ed aes 22492

Timetofnce. haven ene 2251

Varieties of view..... 22.502

ef Zoroastrianism..... 3157* (Easton)
Parshandatha.......... 2251»
Part cnOee eo itenG pateinae 2251

ef Portion........... 2422 (Haston)
Part Asunder.........- 3165 (S. F. Hunter)
Parthians........-..+- 2251» (Porter)

Country and early his-

TOBY cise tes hatin ake 2251>

Culture............. 22.53%

Relations with Rome. .2252>

ef Scythians......... 2706* (Porter)

Seleucid kings........ 22525
Particular, Particularly . .2253° (Edwards)
Partition, The Middle

Wallof............. 2253° (Rutherfurd)


3332


Partition—continued

Barrier in the temple. . 2253»

Court of Gentiles..... 2253»

Herod's temple... .... 2253>

ef Temple........... 2937* (Caldecott; Orr)

Throwing down the

Darner : ice sted awk 2254

Warning stone, the. . .2253?
Partridge.............. 2254 (Stratton-Porter)

cf Food............. 11249 (Hager)

ef Quail............. 2512° (Stratton-Porter)
Paruah............... 2255
Parvaim.............. 2255 (Fulton)
Pasachis cielo; kaise nace 2.255%
Pas-dammim

cf Ephes-dammim. .. .956* (Masterman)
Paseale se 3 ic gien eet ot 2255*; 2365>

ef Phinoe............ 2385


Pashhur, Pashur........ 2255" (Wallace)
Pass, Passage, Passenger‘2255> (T. Lewis)
Passing of Mary, The

ef Apocryphal Gospels 195° (Hutchison)
Passion, Gospel of the

cf Apoeryphal Gospels 195" (Hutchison)
Passion, Passions....... 2255> (Easton)


ef Affection.......... 65° (Edwards)
ef Passover.......... 2256° (N. Isaacs)
Passover.............- 2256" (N. Isaacs)

Critical views of the

sources...........- 2257
Development of the

feasts 0s cade cry hatels: 2257»
Importance in NT

tIMOS iso koerne ee 2257
ef Jesus Christ (Lord’s

Supper). .........- 1658» (Orr)
Modern celebration. . .2258
cf Moses........-.-- 2085> (Kyle)
Name and meaning. . .2256°
Offerings of.......... 2257
Order of events....... 2256?
Origins...........-. 2257"
ef Passion........... 2255» (Easton)
References in OT..... 2256
Unleavened bread. . . .2256>
ef Worship.......... 31112 (Crannell)

Pastonen tihadie ook 2258»


rin een hee: 2057 (T. M. Lindsay)
. 2258 (Rutherfurd)


cf Ministry
Pastoral Epistles, The. .


Date and order....... 2262"
Defined............. 2258>
Difficulties with the

language.......... 2261+
Difficulties against

Pauline authorship. .2259"
Genuineness........ .2258>
Not the Christianity

of Paul.......... .2261%
cf Paul, the Apostle.. .2265*; 2267" (A. T. Rob-

ertson)

Paul’s relation to..... 22599


ef Persccution........


GENERAL INDEX


Pastoral Epistles, The—continued


Pasturage, Pasture


cf Herdsman 1375> (Patch)


ef Sheep Tending..... 27588 (Patch)
Patardes en kande et pent 2262> (Banks)

ef Myra............- 2.1026 (Banks)
Pate eis: Glaste tn! cate ee 2263° (Luering)
Path, Pathway......... 2263* (Edwards)

CE Wayscaces sc oe 3075» (Morro)
Patheus...........-.-- 22632
Pathros', 265i oleae nes 2263"
Pathrusim............. 2263
Patience...........--- 2263 (W. L. Walker)

CLGOs coc ee eee 1250* (Rees)

cf Longsuffering...... 19183 (W. L. Walker)
Patmoss-e- so. oe. see ashes 2263 (Harry)


ef John, the Apostle. .1706> (Iverach)

ef Revelation of John. 2582 (Orr)
Patriarch, Patriarchs.. . .2264* (Orr)

ef Antediluvian Patri-
Rani Sach dts seek 139 (Davis)

ef Genealogy 1183 (Crannell)
Patriarchs, Antediluvian 139% (Davis)
Patriarchs, Testaments of


the Twelve
ef Apocalyptic Litera-
ture eee ee ees 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)
Patrimony...........- 2264" (Mack)
ef Birthright......... 478° (J. M. Wilson)
ef Family........... 1094 (Caverno)


ef Inheritance 1468> (Hirsch)


Patristic Writings


Antichrist n......... 155> J. E. H. Thomson)
Patrobas.............. 22648
Patroclus.............. 22642
Pattern... .....-...00. 2264» (Patch)

Pau

CER al oo. Bk Sige tems Se 2207+
Paul, the Apostle... ....2264> (A. T. Robertson)

Antichrist in Epistles..154> (J. E. H. Thomson)

Baptism............ 397" (Dau)

Barnabas............ 405> (Jacobs)

Chronology.........- 2270°

Crucial points... ...2271*


Different schemes. . . 2270»
cf Chronology of NT..644> (Armstrong)
Controversy with Ga-

latians


1157> (G. G. Findlay)
8318 (Calder)
Doctrine of Logos. .. . 19149 (Alexander)
Epistle to Philemon... .2366> (C. S. Lewis)


Epistles of........... 466° (Orr)
Equipment of........ 2272
Conversion........ 2278
Hellenism......... 22740
Judaism........... 22768
Mystery-religions,
the? me Oe 2275
Personal character-
AStICS tonne ete 22774


GENERAL INDEX 3333


Paul, the Apostle—continued
Equipment of—continued
Roman citizenship. .2273>


Tarsus...........- 2273"
ef Faithful Sayings... .1091* (Rutherfurd)
And Felix........... 1105 (Kerr)
And Festus, Porcius. .1107¢ (Kerr)
And Galatia......... 1155* (Ramsay)

cf Galatians, Epistle

tomheenad eae 1155> (G. G. Findlay)

ef Gallio............ 1167" (Kerr)
ef Gamaliel.......... 1168 (Kerr)
And Gnosticism...... 1242* (Rutherfurd)
Gospelof............ 2287
On inspiration........ 1474* (Warfield)
Justification iu writings

of................1782 (Faulkner)
ef Lawin NT........ 1847 (M’Caig)
Literary style........ 1830 (A. T. Robertson)
Literature on........ 2288*
And Luke...........419; 428 (A. T. Robertson)
Lystra, Paul at.......1944> (Calder)
ef Macedonia........1957 (Tod)
Modern theories about

Pac seh athe nee 2269*


hipioni Ay hes 2270
Influence of escha-
tology.......... 2270


Nature of criticism. .2269*
Tubingen theory... .2269*


ef Mystery.......... 2105° (Edwards)
cf Persecution........ 2324> (Rutherfurd)
of Philippi........... 2369 (Tod)
cf Philippians, Epistle

LOS Scrat on ens 23728 (Hayes)
ef Pisidia............ 2401% (Calder)
Poetry of............ 2414> (Schenk)
Praetorian Guard... ..2427> (Rutherfurd)
ef Priest, High....... 2441> (Reeve)
Relation to Ilyri-

CUM tesa alates he 14502 (Tod)
Relation to Pastoral

Epistles........-.. 2259 (Rutherfurd)


Relations with Mark. . 1987 (Farmer)
Relations with Onesi-


MUS 22 es lve dece ape 2194" (Rutherfurd) ‘
Relations with Onesi-
phorus............ 2195 (Rutherfurd)


Relations with Silas. . .2790* (Kerr)
Relations with Titus. .2988 (Rutherfurd)


As sailor...........-- 2776> (Nicol)
ef Sanctification...... 2684" (Rall)
ef Sea, The Great... . .2708* (Ewing)
CEISIN here cate boas 2799 (McConnell)
Sources..........--+ 2265*

ACS! xno Roane 2265


Development in the
Epistles........- 2268"


Paul, the Apostle—continued


Sources—continued
Paul’s conception of


his Epistles...... 22678
Thirteen Epistles,

the.’ ke O oan es 2265

ef Spain............. 2838°


Tarsus, his birthplace. 2916 (Tod)
Teachings regarding


Family 5 p00. 1096> (Caverno)
Foreordination. . .. .1130* (Hodge)
Grater ee. sad fad 12918 (Easton)
GUI Go 5 os ote 1309» (Rall)
Man ofsin........ 1975> (Orr)
Mediation......... 2023° (Edwards)
Person of Christ... .2338> (Warfield)
The Sabbath... ....26315 (Sampey)
Sacrifice........... 26528 (Williams)
ef 1 Thessalonians... .2966* (R. H. Walker)
At Thessalonica...... 2970» (Tod)


Timothy and Paul... .2984* (Rutherfurd)
Tradition of visit to


Petra.............2714> (Ewing)
Trophimus and...... 3023> (Rutherfurd)
Use of “Seed” in Gal

S16 eta 2712» (Easton)
Voyage and shipwreck

Olt atsion eats 2286>

ef Phoenix......... 23916 (Calder)
Work of............. 2279>

Adjustment........ 2279»


Conflict at Jerusalem 2282+
First campaign..... 22815
Last imprisonment. . 22874


Later travels....... 2286
Opportunity.......2281+
Opposition........ 2280"
Prison life......... 2285


Second campaign. . .2283+
Third campaign... .2284°


Waiting........... 2280>
Pauline Theology....... 2289* (Easton)
ef Church Government 653> (Forrester)
Conversion, the...... 2290+
Christ@2e Stic? 22902
Justification....... 22915
Mystical union..... 2290°
Salvation.......... 2290°
Spirit, the........ 22908


Further developments 2291+
Abolition of the law 22912


Atonement........ 2291>
Function of the law 2292
Gentiles........... 2291
Moral example..... 2291
Redemption....... 2291

Of God gcc eee es 1250* (Rees)

ef Holy Spirit........ 1406* (Mullins)

cf Messiah.......... 2039" (Crichton)

‘ef Ministry.......... 2057° (T. M. Lindsay)
ef Parousia..........2249% (Easton)
cf Pharisees......... 2361° (J. E. H. Thomson)


3334


GENERAL INDEX


Pauline Theology—continued


Preparation..........
Pharisee, the... ....


2430° (Lambert)
2435° (J. Lindsay)


Primitive Christian-


WY. f2ciss wer Cae
Soul and sin.......
ef Propitiation.......
ef Salvation...... Hex


Special topics........
The Church.......
The Sacraments... .

ef Trinity. ..........

Paulus, Sergius........
Pavement.............


ef Gabbatha.........


Peacemaker...........
Peace Offering
ef Sacrifice, OT......
Peacocks e300. uekdoene
Biblical references. . . .
Characteristics.......
ef Gold.............
Pearl
cf Stones, Precious... .


Peculiar .ccc vais cee ss


2467+ (Carver)
2665* (Haston)
2290; 2681» (Rall)
2702 (Easton)
2799 (McConnell)


2292

3012" (Warfield)
2292> (Kerr)

2292>

1150° (Masterman)
2292> (Orr)

2293* (Luering)
2235* (Luering)
2293

103° (Richardson)
2293" (W. L. Walker)


. 13805" (W. L. Walker)


2293
22939
2293 (W. L. Walker)


2644 (Reeve)

22942 (Stratton-Porter)
2294+

2294

1274* (Patch)


2856" (Fletcher)


2294> (Wallace)


2295* (Betteridge)
22958 (Easton)


2102* (Easton)
2295* (Caldecott)


Invasion and deporta-


tion......
Pekahiah.............
ef Menahem.........
ef Uzziah............


2295°

2296 (Caldecott)
2031» (Caldecott)
3043> (Caldecott)


P@KOd2 ster aia cae e 2296>
Pelatab ic.) cise ek Ga 2296»

ef Phalias............ 23585
Pelaliah. 0.2.2.0... 22965
Pelatiah............... 22965
Peleg ee Ponce yin eee 2296» (S. F. Hunter)
Pelet sy erictahcy 5 cae soe 22978
Peleth.............-.. 2297

ef Pally... se. a fies 22352
Pelethites............- 22978

cf Cherethites........ 603° (Ewing)


ef Stranger and So-
journer (in OT)... .2865* (Wiener)
Pelias


cf Pedias............ 2295

Pelican... ....0..0.00.. 22972 (Stratton-Porter)

Pelishtim............. 2297
cf Philistines... ..... .2876% (Conder)

Pelonite..............- 2297»
ef Paltite............ 2236»

PON Mesh Relic he ond a A Ee 2297» (Patch)
CElnk e eteck ete eed 1469* (Richardson)
cf Ink-horn.......... 1469> (Richardson)
ef Writing........... 3114 (Richardson)

Pence
ef Money..........- 20762 (Porter)

Pence ods wa aes 22989
Ch TAN Ce tec ta oot 1894 (Orr)
ef Ochre, Red........ 21782
CET OOS cco nate pss 2998 (Easton)

Pendant...040.6 06. acess 2298

Pendle pce neceh aa 2298 (Ewing)
ef Phanuel.......... 2358

Peninnah............-- 2298

Penknife
C6) gl Sa) ( ea 2297» (Patch)

Penn ynctie o beak hs ak ese 2298*
ef Denarius.......... 830° (Porter)
cf Farthing.......... 1098
ef Money........... 2076+ (Porter)

Pension........-..-0-- 2298+
ef Divination ........ 860° (T. W. Davies)

Pentateuch............ 2298" (Wiener); 242

(Lotz); 464% (Orr)

Gf Altar irae 1065 (Caldecott)
ef Amraphel......... 3662 (Clay)
cf Archaeology and

Criticism.......... 226° (Kyle)
Authorship, composi-

tion, date......... 2299

Critical views...... 22995


Evidence of date. . .2304°
Evidence for modern
critical views... . .2300*
Fundamental  im-
probabilities ..... 23079
Objections to criti-
cal views........ 2301


GENERAL INDEX


3335


Pentateuch—continued
Character of Pentateuch—continued


Differences........ 2312
Hindu law books. . .2311>
Holiness...........2312
Universal aspect... .2312°


Criticism of the Bible. 748> (Orr)
cf Genealogy......... 1183> (Crannell)


ef Genesis........... 1201 (Miller)
ef Hexateuch......... 1385* (Wiener)
In history........... 2309%


Hebrew expressions .2309*
National coloring. . .2310°
Personification and
genealogies
Reasoned history. ..2311°
Textual criticism. . . 2309
Trustworthiness. .. .2310°
ef Jerusalem
cf Law in OT 1852 (Rule)
cf Moses 2088> (Kyle)
cf Names, Proper... . .2113* (Davis)


1595 (Masterman)


Peraea—continued
ef Gilead. ........
The history.......
Perazim, Mount
cf Baal-perazim
Perdition


Perez, Pharez
ef Phares
Perez-uzza


Perfect, Perfection...
The Christian ideal


Perfecter (Finisher)
Perform, Performance
Perfume, Perfumevr.. .


ef Number.......... 21572 (Smith) ef Incense........
GE PYieSti 2 ec dacgetia ce 2439 (Moorehead) CHOU a A eka cis
cf Priests and Levites.2447*; 2449; 2451 ef Ointment......

(Wiener) cf Spice, Spices... .


ef Sanctuary 2686" (Wiener)
cf Septuagint
Some literary points. .2308

Covenant, the


Style of legislation. .2308°


2722 (Thackeray)


Perfume-making
ef Crafts


Ministry of Jesus in... 16512 (Orr)


347 (Masterman)
2320" (Vos)
1975> (Orr)


3043* (Roberts)
...2320° (W. L. Walker)
.. 23214


. ..2321> (Easton)
2321 (Patch)
1466> (Orr)

2181» (Patch)

. ..21834 (Patch)
...2840* (Masterman)


Title, division, con- Christianity......... 23238
tents ior cier. Seka 2298 History............. 93220
Pentateuch, The Sa- Religions............ 2322»
maritan............. 2312 (J. E. H. Thomson) Partidate tess cutee es 23238
Age of Nablis roll... .2314° ef Pharida........... 23612
Bearing on the Penta- Perigzite.............. 2323% (Sayce)
teuchal question... . 2317+ of Pheresites 0s sia. 2366
Former knowledge of. .2313° cf Pherezite.......... 2366*
Knowledge of, revived.2313 Perjury
Nablis roll, the...... 2313° cf Crimes. os ose 745> (Hirsch)
Relation to LXX... . .2316° GOs ohNiale tered 2172 (Levertoff)
Relation to Massoretic cf Punishments....... 2504» (Hirsch)
tector tan ten 2315s ee EN
ef Samaritans. ....... 2673 (Ewing) Perpetuity........... 2323 (W. L. Walker)
Script, the.........-. 2313 : Persecution............ 2323 (Rutherfurd)
Targums and Chron- Causes of........... 2326»
ee Pane raat 20h Decian persecution... .2327>
Pentecost............. 2318 (Dosker) In early times 9399
cf Chronology of NT..644> (Armstrong) Gentile persecution $ : (239 4b
Later Christian observ- Hatred against Chris-
ANCE fea eee S ee fee tient 23273
Pathe IND cane sconces gas Jewish instigation.....2324>
In the OT...........- 2318" Libelli..............2327°
Spel Esters eee 228° (Ewing) Noromen beneedonee
Penurys is saene ees ees 23192 ef Nero ii Nga are bd 2136? (Angus)
In NT times......... 2324
People secs... he cde 2319


ef Children of the East 888 (Day)


POT ectesto hs eee 2319 (Ewing)
ef Zimri............. 3149% (Roberts)
Peraeais:. ci tone eins ye 2319 (Ewing)


2319>


ef Pastoral Epistles


Persecution in Asia
cf Phygelus


ef Paul, the Apostle...
Persceution in army...


2258° (Rutherfurd)
2264» (A. T. Robertson)
2327+

2325?

2392 (Rutherfurd)


3336 GENERAL INDEX


Persecution—continued
Pliny’s testimony... . .2826°


ef Pontus. sean 2418 (White)

of Praise............24298 (Lambert)

Results of........... 2327

cf Roman Empire and
Christianity....... 2604> (Angus)


Rome as persecutor. . .2325»
Second and third cen-


TUTIES cio pec ie 4 23826"
Stephen and the
apostles........... 2324
Persepolis.............2828° (Tisdall)
Perseus............--- 2328> (Angus)
ef Philip............2367 (utchison)
Perseverance........... 2328 (Dunelm)
Persian. eek cx ens 2329 (Tisdall)
ef Persians.......... 2335* (Tisdall)


Persian Language and
Literature (Ancient).. .23299 (Tisdall)


Date of Avesta....... 2330>
Divisions of Avesta. . .23312
Gathic.............. 2330"
Language........... 232.9%
Medic dialect........ 2330"
Old Persian inscrip-
TONS eS Aes 2329°
Ordinary Avestic..... 2330"
Pa hlavine scssccrs siete 2331
Zoroaster..........- 2330
Persian Religion (An-
GION L) i: aslacwes sarge ee 2331 (Tisdall)


Anro Mainyus (Ahri-
man), the evil one. . 2333"
Avesta and Rig-Veda..2331°


Before Zoroaster...... 23315
Creator, the.........2382
Early Aryan religion . .2331
Early traditions. ..... 2333”
Eschatology.......... 2334
Fire worship......... 2334


Heaven and Hell..... 23342
Leading principle... . . 2332
Non-monotheistic. . . . .2332*
Objects of worship.. . . 2332


ef Philosophy........ 2383° (Rees) °
Production and de-
struction.........- 23332
cl Satan 0 ead 2696 (Sweet)
Treatment of dead... .2334"  ~
Virgin-birth.......... 2334>
Zoroastrianism. ..... .2832*
ef Zoroastrianism. . .31575 (Easton)
Persians............--- 2335 (Tisdall)
AMIN ik a ed 233.5%
In Asia Mimor....... 274 (Calder)
Capture of Babylon... 2336"
Civilization.......... 2335


Classes and clans..... 2335?
Cyrus of Anshan..... 2336
Darius I............ 2336°
History.............2336


Persians—continued


ef Persia............ 23292 (Tisdall)
CE Dakar cece, shane 2919» (Sweet)
Merxess Ds eo dict, te hee 2336°
PGPsls Moses eaveuce cee 2337
Person of Christ........ 2338+ (Warfield)
Formulation of the
doctrine..........- 2347>
cf Gospels, The Synop-
CG sete iae nts ns 23448; 1281> (Iverach)
ef Immanuel......... 1457° (A. W. Evans)
ef Jesus Christ....... 1624 (Orr)


cf Johannine Theology 1695> (Law)

ef John, Gospel of... .17208 (Iverach)
ef Kenosis........... 1792* (Easton)
Method of the article .2338*

cf Only Begotten. ... .2196" (Rees)
Other Epistles besides


Hebrews .......... 2342
ef Salvation......... 2665" (Easton)
Teaching of Epistle to
Hebrews..........2341*
DEItY ach pccetn weds 23422
Humanity.........23842°


Teaching of Jesus... . .2344>
Johannine Jesus, the 2344
Synoptic Jesus, the . 2345»

Teaching of John..... 2342


Epistles... ........ 2342

Gospel, the........ 2343»

Prologue to Fourth
Gospel.......... 2342


Teaching of Paul..... 2338?
Humanity of Christ 2340
Intrinsic Deity..... 23385
Other Pauline texts . 2340


In Phil 2 5-9...... 2338»
Two natures presup-
posed icone eee 23478
GE Word sini orien 3105+ (W. L. Walker)
Person, Personality... ..23378 (W. L. Walker)
Biblical usage... ..... 23374
Subconscious, the... . .2337%
Terms used.......... 2337
Personality
ef Person............ 2337" (W. L. Walker)
Persuade, Persuasion... .23488 (Easton)
Peruda (Perida)........ 23238
ef Pharida........... 2361°
POrverse 20a cumdimesee 2348+
Peshito
cf Syriac Versions... . .2883° (Nicol)
Pestilence............. 2348 (Macalister)
Pestle. ...............2848
ef Mortar........... 20832 (Orr)


Peter, Apocalypse of
ef Apocryphal Gospels 195* (Hutchison)


' Peter, Apocryphal Gospel


Olis ech tt eee, 197 (Hutchison)

ef Literature, Sub-apos 1896> (Cowan)
Peter, The First Epistle

OS see nai a es 2351> (Moorehead)


GENERAL INDEX 3337


Peter, The First Epistle of —continued


Address, the........ .2352
Analysis............ 2355*
Canonicity of........2352


Characteristics of... . .2353>
Christian brotherhood 2354>


Design.............. 22852
Inheritance.......... 23544

ef Literature, Sub-

apostolic.......... 1896 (Cowan)

Persecution.......... 2353

Place and time....... 2352

cf Simon Magus...... 2796 (Rutherfurd)
Spirits in Prison...... 2354»


ef Prison, Spirits in.2456> (Orr)
Peter, The Second Epistle
(0) a enn ren eee 2355" (Moorehead)
Claim to Petrine au-
thorship........... 23564
Compared with Jude. .1769* (Moorehead)
Doctrinal teachings. . .2356»


External evidence... . .2355
Internal evidence..... 2355?
cf Peter (Simon)...... 2348> (Gray)
Quoted by Jude...... 2356>


cf Jude, Epistle of. .1767' (Moorehead)
Saving knowledge... . .2357%


cf Simon Magus...... 2796 (Rutherfurd)
Style and diction..... 2355»
cf Supply........... 2871 (Easton)
Three worlds, the... . .2357>
Peter, Simon.......... 2348> (Gray)

Character of......... 2349>
Confession of........ 1648> (Orr)
Denial of Jesus....... 16612 (Orr)
Dispute with Simon

Magia: arnicths 2796> (Rutherfurd)
In Galatians......... 1160 (G. G. Findlay)
On inspiration....... 1474> (Warfield)
cf Joseph of Arima-

thaea so ciiesen ts: 1741 (Kerr)
Keys given to........ 1794* (Carver)
cf Lawin NT........ 1847° (M’Caig)
Life story of......... 23.49%


cf Mark, Gospel of... .1989> (Farmer)
Name and first ap-


pearance.........- 2348?
cf Peter, First Epistle
Ob acai eel tase 2351» (Moorehead)
cf Peter, Second Epis-
tlOCOf sen cits ee 2355" (Moorehead)
Restoration of....... 1666 (Orr)
Theology of........- 2350
Writings of.......... 2350°
Pethahiah............. 2358
cf Patheus........... 2263¢
Pethors os. oo aed 2358* (Pinches)
Pethuel............--: 2358
Petition..........0.06- 2358" (Easton)
Petra
cf Nabataeans........ 2107 (Angus)


ce Sela ee weer 2713» (Ewing)


Peulthai, Peullethai ....2358>


Phaath Moab.......... 2358" (Angus)
ef Pahath-moab......2207* (Wallace)
Phacareth............. 2358>
cE Sabie. 2c 042 ses 2636
Phainon (Punon)....... 2506"
Phaisurs.. 4. cess casas 2358
Phaldeus.............. 2358»
Phaleas:. ic. ose s1 feeb 2358
Phalec...........0.0-. 2358
Phialigs 23: ee. 3s ates 2358»
Phallu
ef Pallu............. 2235"
Phalti
ef Palti... eee et 2236>
Phaltiel............-.. 2358°
cf Paltiel (Psaltiel) .. .2236>
Phanuel............... 2358
cf Peniel............ 2298 (Ewing)
Pharakim, Pharacim. .. .2359
Pharaoliis ns 225 secrcetbiars 2359" (Kyle)
ef Slave, Slavery... .. 2815 (Raffety)
cf Tahpenes......... 2903"


Use of name in Bible. . 2359"
Use of name in Egypt . 2359


Pharaoh Hophra....... 2359* (Nicol)
Alliance with Zedekiah 2359>
Palace of............ 2359»
Reception of Jeremiah
and Jews.......... 2359
Pharaoh-necoh........- 2360" (Nicol)


Battle of Carchemish. . 2360+

Battle of Megiddo... .2360+

ef Jehoiakim......... 1579" (Genung)

Revolt of............ 572° (Nicol)

ef Ships and Boats... .2775> (Nicol)
Pharaoh’s Daughter... . .2360> (Kyle)


Pharathon............- 2360" (Ewing)
ef Pirathon....... ',, .24008 (Ewing)
Pharest 020480). ota 2360>
Pharez, Perez.......... 2320; 23613
ef Phoros...........- 23612; 2392
Pharida (Pharira).......2361*
Pharisees. ..........-- 23614 (J. EK. H. Thomson);
458* (Dosker)
cf Asmoneans........ 283 (Dosker)


Attitude toward ‘‘peo-
ple of the land”... .2364°


Doctrines of......... 2362»

cf Hasidaeans........ 1342 (Hutchison)
History of........... 2361

Jesus and the........ 2365"

ef Jesus Christ....... 1624* (Orr)

cf Josephus Flavius. . .1742* (Wenley)
Later history of... ...2362*

Name and character . .2361*

NT references........ 2364>

In NT times......... 23628
Organization......... 2363°

Origin of.........4.- 2361

cf Pauline Theology.. .2289 (Easton)
cf Phylactery........ 2392 (Mack)


3338 GENERAL INDEX


Pharisees—continued


Regulations.......... 23642

cf Sadducees......... 2658 (J. E. H. Thomson)

Text of Scripture. .... 2363°

Traditions........... 2363"
Pharosh

ef Parosh............ 2248
Pharpars kos bowtie 2365

ef Amana........... 1138 (C. H. Thomson)
Pharzites

ef Perez.........-.-. 2320> (Wallace)
Phaseah...........-4-- 2365

cf Paseah..........- 2255
Phaselis' ic: c84.4.5s0ece 2365° (Banks)

CE Ly Cla jae s es eke 1943 (Banks)
Phasiron...........0.- 2365°
Phassaron

cf Phassurus......... 2365
Phassurus............- 2365

ef Phaisur........... 2358>
Phebe

ef Phoebe........... 23862 (8. F. Hunter)
Phenice

ef Phoenicia......... 23862 (Porter)

ef Phoenix........... 23912 (Calder)
Phenicia, :

ef Phoenicia.........2386% (Porter)
Pheresites............- 2366
Pherezite...........--. 2366
Phi-beseth

ef Pi-beseth.......... 2394> (Kyle)
Phicol, Phichol......... 2366"
Philadelphia........... 23668 (Banks)
Philarches

ef Phylarch.......... 2393
Philemon.............. 2366» (C. 8. Lewis)


ef Philemon, Epistle 102366 (C. 8. Lewis)
ef Philippians, Epistle


COie is, eae ooa nae eee 2372% (Hayes)
Philemon, Epistle to. . . .2366> (C. 8. Lewis)
Authenticity. ........ 23672
Contents...........- 23678
ef Philemon.......... 2366" (C. S. Lewis)
ef Philippians, Epistle
GO Festi ie oleate 23723 (Hayes)
Place of writing...... 2366"
Philetisyic, sewn ales 2367> (Rutherfurd)
cf Hymenaeus........ 1444 (Rutherfurd)
Philip, the Apostle..... 23682 (Kerr)
ef Andrew........... 131° (Kerr)


ef Apocryphal Gospels 195° (Hutchison)
Apocryphal references . 2368"


Character........... 2368>

cf Joseph of Arima-
thaeates.4.2.084 one 1741> (Kerr)

NT references........ 2368"


Philip, the Evangelist. . .2368> (8. F. Hunter)
ef Ethiopian Eunuch. .1034> (Kerr)
cf Simon Magus...... 2795» (Rutherfurd)
Philip (general)........ 2367 (Hutchison)
ef Perseus........... 2328> (Angus)


Philip, The Gospel of
ef Apocryphal Gospels 195* (Hutchison)
cf Philip, the Apostle. 2368" (Kerr)


Philip of Macedon...... 2367» (Hutchison)
cf Macedonia........- 1957" (Tod)
Philip, the Tetrarch
ef Herod...........- 1378> (Dosker)
Philippi.............-. 2369 (Tod)
Church in..........- 2371
FRIStOLnY Sees ss. 2e 2369
Ch Uoydiais ee: 2 ik we 1943> (S. F. Hunter)
cf Macedonia........19579 (Tod)
Name and position... .2369*
ef Neapolis.......... 2126 (Tod)
Paul’s visits to....... 2369»
cf Philippians, Epistle
LOM Senet eee 23728 (Hayes)
ef Proseuche......... 2469>
Roman elements in. . .2370°
cf Samothrace....... 2675+ (Kinsella)
Philippians, The Epistle
LOe Meets haw hes kee 23729 (Hayes)
Characteristics of the
churches Aces ae eats 2372"
Contents............ 2375
Date, place and occa-
SION eee ete 2374»
cf Kenosis..........- 1792° (Easton)
Love and joy........ 2373>


Nature of the Epistle .2372>
Paul and the church. .23728
cf Philemon, Epistle to 2366 (C. 8. Lewis)


ef Philippi........... 2369* (Tod)
cf Praetorian Guard.. .2427> (Rutherfurd)
ef Proseuche......... 2469»
Theological impor-
TAN CO Meats anton es 2374
Philistia...........004. 2376 (Porter)
cf Philistines......... 2376> (Conder)
Philistim
cf Philistines... ......2376 (Conder)
Philistines. ............ 2376 (Conder)
ef Ashtaroth......... 270° (Ewing)
Cretan theory... .... .2378>
David’s guards....... 2379%
Egyptian and Assyr-
ian references...... 2378
Government......... 2377
History............. 2377
cf Hittites........... 1395° (Conder)
ef Judah............ 1759* (Weir)
ef Lords of the Philis-
HINO Ss oksetadc cio tae 1929>


Monumental remains. .2378
Names mentioned. .. .23772
ef Palestine, Recent


Exploration... .... .2233° (Cobern)
cf Philistia.......... 2376 (Porter)
Race and origin...... 2376
Religion of.......... 23772
cf Samuel...........2677* (Geden)
CE Sal oe 6 Secc sngaeee 2698 (Weir)


GENERAL INDEX


Philistines, Lords of the. 1929»

cf Philistia........... 2376 (Porter)
Philistines, Sea of the

cf Mediterranean Sea .2026> (Heidel)


Philo Judaeus.......... 2380* (Wenley); 685
(Oko); 998% (J. E. H.
Thomson)
Changes and new
problems.......... 2380
cf Logos............ 19135 (Alexander)
ef Mediation, Media-
BORG ese teen eas 20218 (Edwards)
ef Paraclete.......... 2245° (Mullins)
Period iif. ee 2 Peden 23805
cf Philosophy. .......23839 (Rees)
TT aglete h o SPO es 2380>
Themes treated....... 2381>
ef Wisdom........... 3092 (Easton)
Philologus............. 2383* (S. F. Hunter)
Philometor
ef Ptolemy.......... 2499» (Angus)
Philosophy............ 23833 (Rees)


cf Covenant (in OT). .727* (Berry)
Definition and scope. . 2383


CEGQOG 2 Sy es eee 1250* (Rees)
Greek ee e.0ehda ne. 23848

cf Logos............. 1911> (Alexander)
NT references........ 23853


OT and Judaism..... 2384»
cf Persian Religion,


Ancient........... 2331 (Tisdall)
ef Philo Judacus...... 2380* (Wenley)
cf Righteousness. ..... 25918 (McConnell)
ef Stoics............. 2854> (Rees)
cftruths i324 oes 3025* (Carver)
ef Wisdom..........- 3089" (Easton)
Phinces.........--.-+: 2385 (Angus)
ef Phinoe............ 2385
Phinehas.............. 2385» (Wallace)
cf Hophni and Phine-
has sn: Pec. fads 1421* (Wallace)
ef Putiel............ 2511
PHINOC a. dices ek eh eo 2385»

cf Paseah............ 2255"

ef Phaseah.......... 2365»

cf Phinees........... 2385 (Angus)
Phinon (Punon)........ 2506
Phlegon.....-......055 2385»
Phoebe......-..ee eens 23862 (S. F. Hunter)
Phoenice

ef Phoenix........... 2391 (Calder)
Phoenicia, Phoenicians. . 2386 (Porter)

ef Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)

Arts and crafts....... 23888

ef Ashtoreth......-.. 270° (Sayce)

of Coins......-.666-- 673% (Porter)

Colonies...........- 23878

Commerce and trade. . 2388?

ef Glass.........-... 1233° (Porter)

ef Gold............- 12748 (Patch)

History.........005- 23905


ef Ladder of Tyre.... .1821* (Porter)


3339

Phoenicia, Phoenicians—continued

Tanda thee aa kee 23867

Language and culture .2389°

Peopleiat) cdi hase 23878

cf Ptolemais......... 24998

Religion............. 23892

cf Ships and Boats... .2775" (Nicol)

cf Sidon (place)...... 27854 (Porter)

CE Syria se Pee oes 2881 (Christie)

Ch Lyre. cc seeed 3030° (Porter)
Phoenix.....:........- 2391 (Calder)

Cl @retei cis eke ees 744» (Calder)

Harbor in Crete...... 23914

ef Literature, Sub-apos 1897" (Cowan)

Location............ 2391

ef Northeast......... 2155 (Day)


cf Paul, the Apostle.. .2286 (A. T. Robertson)
Reference in Acts 27. .2391>


cf Salmone.......... 2663°
PhoOros? i400 oye cay nha 23928

cf Pharez............ 2361
Phruralncw A eis eae 2392

ef Purim............ 2506 (Mack)
Phrygia ct eaecn ee 2392 (Banks)

cf Pacatiana......... 22068
Phrygian Immigrations

to Asia Minor........ 274» (Calder)
Phurah

ef Purah............- 2506
Phurim (Phrurai)....... 23928
Phut

CE PUt a asia Racha 2510* (Pinches)
Phuvah

ef Puah............. 25013 (E. D. Isaacs)
Phygelus (Phygellus)... .2392 (Rutherfurd)

cf Hermogenes....... 1377> (Rutherfurd)

cf Persecution........ 2323 (Rutherfurd)
Phylactery............ 2392> (Mack)

Bible references... ... 2392

Description.......... 23934

cf Fringes........... 1146° (EH. D. Isaacs)

ef Frontlets.......... 11474

Interpretation........ 23935

ef Libraries.......... 1886* (Richardson)

cf Pharisees.......... 23612 (J. BE. H. Thomson)
Phiylarcbs..3:2.0..n0sea 3 2393
Phylarches

ef Phylarch.......... 23938
Physician............. 2393» (Macalister)

Ancient references... .2393>

NT references........ 23944

Priest as... 0.2.00 ee 23944
Physiography.......... 314
Pi-beseth............4. 2394» (Kyle)
Piette secc ccc. need octes 2394» (T. Lewis)
Pieters 2 ava catet 2394» (T. Lewis)
Piece of Gold.......... 2394»

cf Money..........- 2076+ (Porter)
Piece of Money........ 2394
Piece of Silver......... 23955

ef Money.........-. 20768 (Porter)

ef Silverling.......... 27938


3340 GENERAL INDEX


Pletyiinee cave wee 2395 | Pinnacle... ..........- 24008
Pigeon 2 iano teehee 2395° (Stratton-Porter) PMO ce ess cv we 2400
Characteristics... .... 2395* Pipe
ef Dove............. 871* (Stratton-Porter) ef Candlestick........ 552> (Hager)
ef Food.............1124% (Hager) ef Lamp............1825* (Porter)
References to... .... .2395> ef Music............ 2094> (Millar)
Pi-hahiroth............ 23962 (Kyle) PIP eR teers ees 24008
of Goshen........... 12808 (Conder) | cf Caphira..........- 568"; 602°
Pilate, Acts of Piram 2400°
cf Apocryphal Gospels.195° (Hutchison) Pirathon, Pirathonite. . .2400* (Ewing)
cf Pilate, Pontius. .... 23969 (J. M. Wilson) cf Pharathon 2360° (Ewing)
Pilate, Pontius......... 23962 (J. M. Wilson) Biseak ar : : ; “24008 (Ewing)
Cee Gospels.195* i) Pishon, Pison.......... 24008
; er ee Seeded nes ee Disidia tl Monitor ag 2400 (Calder)
: ots atha........ pee (Masterman) Peni e et ae 24012
¢ overnor......... 1289) (Heidel) Situation and history. .2400>
cf Jerusalem......... 1611» (Masterman) Pison
Jesus and. . See he a 23978 cf Pishon............ 2400
ef Jesus Christ (Trial . :
before Pilate) 1661" (Orr); 16725 (M Eiepand Eanes: seg sen
Teens mes mr)s Br PU aon as tae ca den meneOl (he Lewis)
Naieand office nt 23962 ef Abyss............ 26> (T. Lewis)
ef Procurator........ 2457» (Allen) ef Hell... .....-...-. 1371* (Orr)
Procuratorship of... . .2396 of Water............ 8074* (Joy)
ef Province.......... 2485» (Allen) CEs is ge SOB TEED )
TPAditiOns ss sce ak 2397» Pitches cece \c dimia Y ea 2401» (Easton)
Pid abe sti Ge svenens 2398 ef Slime............. 2817 (Day)
Piles rn ngahe atone 23980 Pitcher.............+5. ao
ef Topheth..........2999 (Masterman) Pithom............--. 2401» (Conder)
Pileha ef Etham............ 1012» (Conder)
ef Pilha............. 2398> cf Exodus, The....... 1052 (Conder)
Pilgrim, Pilgrimage. .... 2398> ef Goshen. .......... 1280* (Conder)
Pilliarse SoH che aarral bess 2398» Name and meaning. . .2401
Pill ; ef Raamses.......... 2520* (Conder)
ef Peel. ............. 2295 (Easton) Situation............ 24020
Pillar, Sates daa testes 2398> (Orr) ef Store-cities........ 28632
ef Gezer............. 1223 (Masterman) ef Succoth........... 2869 (Conder)
ef High Place........1390* (Easton) ef Zoan............. 3153 (Conder)
ef Image............ 1450* (Edwards) PithOW eth, ¢ noe sen ooh eee 24024
ef Jachin and Boaz. . get (Caldecott) Pitiful... .. Sion 2 hae 24028 (W. L. Walker)
ef Obelisk. ......... 2177 Pityies Mae Mie gence 2402 (W. L. Walker)
Pillar of Cloud and Fire . 2399 (Orr); 670" (Joy) ef Compassion....... 6958 (W. L. Walker)
ea ao the...... 2407> (Ewing) ef Mercy............ 2035 (W. L. Walker)
aul, OF 98: PLA COs. cade ocak ete: icant: b
fs eee ee 1929» (Boyd) Pe eat eae
fSlime........ 28176 (Day) ry ricer
Pacis One oe OL CIty As eh ke 662 (A. C. Dickie)
Pillars of the Earth ;
apetsaacs 300% (Maunder) ef High Place........ 1390 (Easton)
Pillow Sencha aie ef Open Place........ 2196 (Easton)
ef Bolster noe. Sais abe 494> (Eager) Plague. 0 AMe Sat ales 2402 (Macalister) ; 911»
ef Cushion.......... 769° (Downer) : (Petrie)
Pilot ef Fly, Flies.......... 1120° (Day)
ef Ships and Boats... .2774% (Nicol) Plagues of Egypt....... 2403° (Kyle)
Piltsiv ewe be ee ih 23992 Boils, hail, locusts. . . .2405>
Pin Roce e sos ae a tea ea 2399 (N. Isaacs) ef Burning Bush... ... 532 (Kyle)
ef Crisping Pins...... 748 ef Firstborn, Firstling .1113> (T. Lewis)
ef Stake............. 2847 Frogs, lice, flies... ... 2404>
Pine | Miraculous features. . .2405>
ef Pining Sickness. . . .2399> (Macalister) | Moral purpose....... 2406"
Pine Tree............. 2399 (Masterman) Murrain of cattle. .... 24052
ef Oil Tree........... 21832 (Masterman) | Natural phenomena. . .2403>
Pining Sickness........ 2399» (Macalister) Water turned to blood 2404+


Pinion................2400* (Luering) Words used.......... 2403»


GENERAL INDEX 3341
Plaine e beng a 2406" (Day) Pochereth-hazzehaim.. . .24108
of Abel-cheramim.. . . .5> cf Phacareth......... 2358"
ef Arabah rete eee 211> (Wright) POCb ronighateastoute Aedes 2410* (Schenk)
ef Ciccar BD hie etussaceet 655> Poetry, Hebrew........ 2410° (T. W. Davies)
ef Cirele.............656> Definition... ........ 2410°
cf Meadow.......... 2013* (Day) cf Divination........860° (T. W. Davies)
ef Natural Features. ..2122* (Day) Forms.............. 24115
Plain, Cities of the...... 660° (Wright) Internal characteristics2413>
Plain of Moab......... 24079 Neglect of........... 2410>
ef Moab............. 2069> (Porter) Parallelism.......... 2411"
Plain of the Pillar... ... 2407> (Ewing) Poetical writings of
cf Meonenim, Oak of. .2033> OTD ir aie a Nie 2414°
Plain, Plainly.......... 2407 cf Poetry, NT....... 2414 (Schenk)
Plain of the Vineyards cf Psalms, Book of... .2491> (Sampey)
ef Abel-cheramim.....5° Poetry; NT i eiccnc eee 2414> (Schenk)
Plaister Examples of........- 2414
cf Plaster........... 2.4088 ef Faithful Sayings... .1091* (Rutherfurd)
Plaiting.........0..... 2407» Paul’s use of......... 24145
ef Braided, Braiding. .513> a pel Hebrew. .. .2410* (T. W. Davies)
Plane cf Quotations, NT... .2519 (Sweet)
ef Tools. ........ceee 2998 (Easton) PON GS vests ge 63 since ess 2415 (M. O. Evans)
Plane Tree .... 24075; 5075 (Masterman) cf Prayers of Jesus... .2431° (Bevan)
Planets cf Temptation of
ef Astrology......... 295 (Maunder) Christ............ 2943 (Anderson)
PEA eat ees 2407> ee dene Wictan entina thee ae (Macalister)
cf Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol) Dlg rake erasers pete
Poli¢yecoch ieee: 2415
Plant, Plants Polehed
ef Botany...........505* (Masterman) of Corher Hone rng 721 Madd)
Plaster ss. hehe cay ORs 2407 (Patch); 2408° P :
‘ Olek cakes nis ane Sesey ai 2415> (Luering)
Plastering : :
ef Hair.............. 1320° (Luering)
ef Crafts............ 734% (Patch) : 3
: Pollution. ...........-. 2416
Plates aise sce 24089 (Betteridge) Pollux
Platore. seen heehee ten 24 1017® (Alexander) BED RSOUeL oe eet 8519 (Maunder)
ef Logos.........--. 19125 (Alexander) Pol Epistle of
4088 (Pollard) Cees
Platter. ........-.0. ++ 2 ef Literature, Sub-apos 1900 (Cowan)
Play . Polygamy............. 2416" (Caverno); 10957
ef Games........-..- 1168 (Smith) (Caverno)
Plead, Pleadings........ 2408* (Easton) ef Divorce, NT and OT 865 (Caverno); 863° (W.
Pleasure.........+..-- 2408 (W. L. Walker) W. Davies)
Pledgesd ete tierec a4 24085 (Easton) apunGch eseccs coke 10372 (Eager)
ef Harnest........... 886> (Schenk) of Family........... 1094» (Caverno)
ef Surety............ 2872 (Reeve) cf Marriage.......... 19989 (Eager)
Pleiades Meaning...........- 24168
ef Astrology........- 295 (Maunder) Origin. ..... 0.00000. 24160
ef Astronomy. .......311 (Maunder) Inthe OT........... 2416>
cf Influences......... 1468* (W. L. Walker) cf Punishments....... 2506* (Hirsch)
Pleroma Weakness of.........24174
ef Fulness........... 1148> (Rutherfurd) ef Woman........... 3100¢ (Pratt)
Pliny? secret fees Me ees 1000* (J. E. H. Thomson) | Pomegranate.......... 2417> (Masterman); 11238
ef Persecution....... .2326* (Rutherfurd) (Eager)
Plows: 220? aihacs acer 2409" (Patch) Pommel.......-...000% 24188
Figurative use....... 2409» ef Bowl.........-.-- 511> (Eager)
Form of........0..5. 2409+ Pond
ef Furrow........-.-1150% (Patch) ef Cistern........... 657® (A. C. Dickie)
Words for........... 2409> cf Pool.........0 000: .2419> (Day)
Pluck Asunder......... 316> (S. F. Hunter) Ponder.........2.-000: 24188
Plucking Off the Hair Pontius
(1) il s 0: 11 eee an 1320° (Luering) cf Pilate, Pontius..... 2396 (J. M. Wilson)
ef Punishments....... 25045 (Hirsch) PonWib ees So Vk ee ees 24188 (White)
Plumb-line, Plummet ef Archaeology of Asia
ef Tools............. 2998> (Easton) Minor............ 2778 (White)


3342


GENERAL INDEX


Pontus—continued
of Bithynia..........
Christianity in.......
History.............
Location... ..........


Pool, Pond, Reservoir. .
ef Cistern...........


Poplake sc eae tea 8 8
cf Mulberry Trees...

Poppaea
ef Nero


483° (White)
24199


24182
2323> (Rutherfurd)


.2419 (Day)


657 (A. C. Dickie)
1610 (Masterman)
1822 (Day)


. .2122% (Day)


25448 (Masterman)
3074" (Joy)
30812 (Day)


657° (A. C. Dickie)
2419» (Day)

24202 (W. L. Walker)
1015 (Eager)

24215

24202

2426> (W. Evans)

2515 (M. O. Evans)
2421» (Masterman); 507


. 2093" (Masterman)


ef Porch, Portico, Solo-


ef Temple...........
Porch, Portico,


Porcius
cf Festus, Porcius....
Porcupme.............
ef Bittern...........


ef Serpent...........


Porpoises.2 5 -zay7 ee 74k
cf Badger...........
ef Sealskin..........

Port, Porter...........
ef Doorkeeper.......

POrtiON so dae ee oe BS


Possess, Possession......
Possession, Demoniacal


2421» (Caldecott)
2930° (Caldecott; Orr)


Solo-


1107 (Kerr)

2421» (Day)

484° (Stratton-Porter)

13678

2205» (Stratton-Porter)

27382 (Day)

24228; 10008
Thomson)

2422


(ee:


24222 (Easton)


. 869" (Hovey)


2422» (Easton)


ef Demon, Demoniac,


Demonology.......


8275 (Sweet)
24238 (M. O. Evans)


Potiphar.............-
Poti-phera...........--
Potsherd............--
ef Harsith..........-
ef Ostraca.........--
ef Potter, Pottery....
Potsherd Gate
ef Gate, East........
ef Harsith...........
Pottage
ef Food...........--
Potter, Pottery........
Biblical references. . .


ef Potsherd..........

ef Tools..........---

cf Vessel...........-

cf Wheel............
Potters’ Field

cf Akeldama.........


cf Wedge of Gold... ..


2202» (Goodspeed)


.2423> (Patch)


1176 (Caldecott)
13414


1121» (Eager)
2423> (Patch)


2425


7349 (Patch)


. .887> (Patch)


2998» (Easton)
3049* (Easton)
30825 (Easton)


89" (Masterman)
2426» (Porter)
19818 (Porter)
3078» (Porter)


cf Weights and Meas-


POVErty. 5 oe een aes
Degrees and causes. . .
OT references........
Gt POOL sh solistess 4 uae eee


ef Omnipotence
Power of Keys.........
Praetorian Guard.......


Interpretation........
Paul and the.........
ef Paul, the Apostle. .


30798 (Porter)
2426» (W. Evans)
24278


24275 (Orr)

2188 (Vos)

1794 (Carver)

2427 (Rutherfurd); 2586


2264 (A. T. Robertson)


ef Philippians, Epistle


Referencein Phil 1 13.


ef Jerusalem.........
ef Judgment Hall.....
cf Praetorian Guard.. .


God the object of... ..
Man the object of... .
cf Persecution........
ef Singers, Singing....
ef Worship..........
Prayers. 32tict soln Bets
In ancient Greece... ..


2372 (Hayes)
2428 (Masterman)
24275

3069® (Nicol)
2428> (Masterman)
1150° (Masterman)
16208 (Masterman)
17775 (Rutherfurd)
2427> (Rutherfurd)
2429 (Lambert)
24295

24298

2323 (Rutherfurd)
2804 (Millar)
3110* (Crannell)
2430 (Lambert)
13028 (Fairbanks)


GENERAL INDEX


3343


Prayer—continued
NT instances........ 2430>
OT cases............ 2430*
ef Pauline Theology. . .2289* (Easton)
cf Prayers of Jesus... .2431> (Bevan)
cf Repetitions........ 2559 (Easton)
Prayer of Habakkuk
cf Beth-horon, Battle of 446° (Maunder)


ef Habakkuk........ 1311* (Hiselen)
Prayer, Hours of.......1434* (Dosker)’
Prayer of Joseph....... 1741> (Easton)
Prayer, Lord’s......... 1920° (Miller)
Prayer of Manasses.... . 1979 (T. W. Davies)
Prayers of Jesus........ 2431» (Bevan)

cf Intercession........ 1484 (Bevan)

ef Intercession of

ChYISt cP eek i at 1487 (Bevan)

Other prayers........ 2432>

ef Points............ 24159 (M. O. Evans)

ef Prayer............ 24302 (Lambert)


Prayer in John 17... .24323
Teaching in regard to
Prayer Gar vada 2431>
Preacher, Preaching... . .2433* (Bauslin)
Biblical references. . . .2433>
Christ as preacher. . ..2434>
Need and limitations of 2433


Precepts cs tesserae 4 2434> (Edwards)
ef Commandment... . .679° (Jacobs)
Precious............-+ 2434> (Edwards)
Precious Stones........ 2856 (Fletcher)

Precipitation
ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)
Predestination.........2485 (J. Lindsay); 1130
(Hodge)
Doctrine of.......... 2435%
ef Election.......... 925» (Dunelm)
cf Foreknow, Fore-
knowledge......... 1128* (Hodge)
ef Foreordain, Fore-
ordination......... 11318 (Orr)


History of doctrine. . .2435


Nature and impor-

tANCO. .cawees ee eet 2435
ef Pauline Theology. . .2289* (Easton)
ef Providence........ 2476> (Tillett)


ef Purpose of God... .2510*
Two leading views... .2436*


Preéminence..........- 243748
Prefers. uses Sess 24378
Preparation........... 2437* (Betteridge)
Presbyter, Presbytery. . .2437> (Mack)

ef Bishop.........-.. 478 (Dosker)

ef Church........... 650° (Lambert)

ef Elder, NT and OT .924* (Grant); 923»

(Stearns)
ef Government....... 12879 (Heidel)


ef John, Epistles of. . .1718* (Law)
ef John, Gospel of. . . .1721> (Iverach)
Principle in Scripture ;
and history........ 24388
Use in NT...... wee D437


Presently.............-
President..............


ef Vine.......... ae
ef Wine, Wine Press. .
Présefatie ects. ve nee es
cf Wine, Wine Press. .


2438* (Easton)
2249 (Easton)


3049 (Masterman)
30862 (Easton)


3086 (Easton)


Presume, Presumptuous,


Presumptuously......
Prevent...............


Aaron and his sons... .
ef Christ, Offices of...
Functions and


ef Mediation.........


2438> (W. L. Walker)
2438> (W. L. Walker)
2439 (W. L. Walker)
503° (W. L. Walker)
8071> (Nicol)


867» (Day)

2439" (Edwards)
1248» (Patch)
2439* (Moorehead)
2441"

616° (Bevan)


char-


Melchizedek and


Nature of the office. . .
cf Priest, High.......
Priest, High..........
ef Abiathar..........


ef Caiapbas..........
cf Christ, Offices of...
Dress and duties.....
History of the office...
Institution..........
ef Jesus Christ.......


cf Paul, the Apostle. .
cf Priest...........-.
cf Priesthood........
cf Priesthood in NT...
Priesthood...........


ef Christ, Offices of...
ef Maccabaeus.......
ef Micah..........-.


ef Priest, High.......
cf Priesthood in NT...
Priesthood in the NT...
Jewish priesthood.....
ef Priest, High.......
cf Priesthood........
Priesthood of believers
Priesthood of Jesus...


2439>
2441» (Reeve)


.2441> (Reeve)


7’ (Beecher)
1378 (Edwards)
538> (Kerr)
616° (Bevan)
2442"

2442»


16242 (Orr)

2443»

24438

2264» (A. T. Robertson)
24392 (Moorehead)
24448 (Moorehead)
2445* (Estes)


.24448 (Moorehead)


2024> (Edwards)
6188 (Bevan)
19524 (T. W. Davies)
2045° (Lees)

2444

24444

2441> (Reeve)
2445° (Estes)
2445* (Estes)
2445»

2441» (Reeve)
2444 (Moorehead)
2446>

2445>


3344 GENERAL INDEX


Priests and Levites..... 2446> (Wiener)
Aaron and his sons... .2449#
ef Agrarian Laws..... 748 (Wiener)
ef Archaeology and


Criticism. ......... 2262 (Kyle)
ef Blessing.......... 487> (Gray)
ef Breastplate........ 253 (Nicol)
ef Chemarim........ 6018 (Van Pelt)
Chronicles........... 2451»
ef Criticism of Bible. .748' (Orr)
cf Doorkeeper....... 8692 (Hovey)
ef Dress............. 875» (Eager)
cf Ephod............ 962° (Sampey)
Bzekielisy ec. My gui oes 24514
ef First Fruits........ 1114+ (Levertoff)
ef Firstborn, Firstling . 1113 (T. Lewis)
ChJud gens. 230c8 ek 1771> (Levertoff)
Legal provisions...... 2452
CETGE Vie i 18685 (Ewing)
Levites, the......... 24482


ef Levitical Cities... ..18692 (Wiener)
cf Mediation, Media-


COL Se ek Re 2018+ (Edwards)
CEMitres Soo cele 2 2067 (T. Lewis)
ef Nethinim......... 2139° (Lees)


Old and new views... .24478
Other parts of Penta-
teuch than Leviticus. 2449


cf Pentateuch...... 22984 (Wiener)
Priest code, the....... 24482
ef Sacrifice, NT...... 26512 (Williams)
ef Sanctuary......... 2686» (Wiener)
ef Singers............ 2804> (Millar)
ef Sons of Solomon's
Servants.......... 2825 (Mack)
Sources, the......... 24502
cf Stranger and So-
journer in OT...... 28657 (Wiener)
MTItheStes bes gtk a eee 2987 (Levertoff)
ef Urim and Thummim 3040° (N. Isaacs)
ef Zabud............ 3128 (Roberts)
ef Zadok. ........... 3129» (Whitelaw)
Primogeniture......... 2452° (N. Isaacs)
Biblical references. . . .2452>
ef Birthright......... 478+ (J. M. Wilson)
Double portion... .... 2452
ef Firstborn, Firstling .1113+ (T. Lewis)
Law of firstborn... : . .2453°
PrinCe fies ties othe 24539 (Baur)
cf Governor......... 1289» (Heidel)
NASIiy aetiond sont & 24544
Other terms......... 24542
Dale eile aha Ae teers 2453»
Terms used.......... 2453
Princes, The Seven
Ch Prine fed shel eaaets 24539 (Baur)
Princess............... 2454> (Baur)
Principal «3. ésca. .oeees 2454>
Principality............ 2454> (Heidel)
ef Angel............. 132» (J. M. Wilson)
ef Satan............. 26935 (Sweet)


Principles............. 2455
ef Element.......... 927
cf Rudiments........2624> (Rutherfurd)
Print, Printing, Printed .2455* (Richardson)
CH Book ec) un eee 495> (Richardson)
Early writing......-. 2455
ef Ink-horn.......... 1469 (Richardson)
ef Mark...... Scseeoe 1985» (Pratt)
Materials........... 2455
Ch Seals tank air. ar ves 2708? (Edwards)
ef Text and MSS of NT 2950 (Sitterly)
ef Writing. ..........3121* (Richardson)
Prisca, Priscilla
ef Aquila............ 211° (Kapp)
Prison, Prisoner........ 24562 (T. Lewis)
Causes for imprison-
TONG ists Mavad tne 2456+
Garments........... 2456
NT usage. c 456 ese 2456
cf Punishments....... 2504 (Hirsch)
References to........ 2456"
Prison, Spirits in... ... .2456 (Orr)


cf Eschatology of NT. 979° (Vos)
cf Peter, The First


Epistle of......... 2351» (Moorehead)
Privy, Privily.......... 24574
ef Tormah.......... 2999
PEiZe tat rate oene ate ier 24574 (Edwards)
ef Grasp............12988 (Miller)
cf Humiliation of Christ 2345* (Warfield)
ef Kenosis........... 1792 (Easton)


Probation, Second
cf Eschatology of NT. 979% (Vos)


Prochorus............. 2457>
Proconsul............. 2457

ef Province.......... 2485 (Allen)
Procurator............ 2457» (Allen)

Administration of... . .2458

ef Governor......... 1289» (Heidel)

List of Judaean pro-

curators........... 24584

ef Pilate, Pontius..... 23968 (J. M. Wilson)

ef Province.......... 2485» (Allen)

ef Rome............ 2621» (Allen)
Protaneis. avin gs aiychnt 2458> (W. L. Walker)
Profess, Profession... . ..2458> (W. L. Walker)
Prognosticators, Monthly

ef Astrology......... 295° (Maunder)
Prologue.............. 2458>


ef John, Gospel of... .1720* (Iverach)


ef Sirach............2806> (T. W. Davies)
Prolong’. fe Goo. ealegen 24599 (W. L. Walker)
Promise............... 2459 (W. L. Walker)
Proper ee Foe es dyd tess 2459
Proper Names......... 2113 (Davis)
Property

cf Agrarian Laws..... 742 (Wiener)

ef Patrimony........ 2264* (Mack)

ef Poor........ Beano 24208 (W. L. Walker)

ef Portion........... 2422 (Easton)

ef Primogeniture.. ... .2452> (N. Isaacs)

ef Wealth...........3076° (W. Evans)


GENERAL INDEX


Prophecy, Gift of
ef Spiritual Gifts... .. 2843* (Lambert)
Prophecy, Prophets..... 2459° (Orelli)
cf Accommodation... .30° (Sweet)
Amos and Hosea.... . 2463"
cf Apocalyptic Litera-


PUTO ee Vea! 161% (J. Ik. H. Thomson)
Contribution of Ha-

bakkuk soos cceans 1313* (Hiselen)

Faithfulness....... 13138

Universality of Jeho-

Vahievu hse ces 13138

Contribution of Hag-

alee neh ee Seebeck te 1318 (Robinson)


Necessity of rebuild-
ing the temple... .1318?
Contribution of Hosea 1428° (J. Robertson)


Divination.......... 2466+; 860° (T. W. Davies)
Dreams...........-. 24608
Elijah and Elisha... . .2462>
PExilic age........... 2463»


ef Foretell, Foretold.. .1132°
ef Greece, Religion of .1297° (Fairbanks)
History of, in Israel... .2461>


Inspiration.......... 2460

ef Israel, Religion of . .1530" (Orelli)

ef Messiah........... 20392 (Crichton)
Messianic idea... . . . .2464>

ef Micaiah........... 2047 (Lees)

cf Ministry.......... 2058» (T. M. Lindsay)
NT examples........ 2464


Non-Hebrew prophecy 2464°
Prediction and fulfil-


MOD Goo aac tin ote 2461
ef Prophesyings, False . 2466 (Schenk)
ef Prophetess......-.- 2466 (Schenk)
ef Revelation........ 25773 (Warfield)
Schools of prophets. . .2462
Seereyacc See 24598; 27139
ef Shiloh...........- 2768° (Orr)
Visions........------ 2460°
Prophesyings, False... ..2466 (Schenk);
(Hirsch)
ef Prophecy......----. 2459> (Orelli)
Prophet, The Old......- 2183 (Roberts)
Prophetess.........+-- 2466> (Schenk)
ef Prophecy.......--. 2460° (Orelli)
Propitiation........-.- 2467 (Carver)
cf Atonement........ 3212 (Carver)


cf Atonement, Day of .324° (Maller)
ef Johannine Theology 17015 (Law)
ef Mediation, Media-

HOD vrs eck as, eae ree 2018+ (Edwards)
ef Mercy-seat, The... .2036% (Caldecott)
ef Pauline Theology... .2289* (Easton)
ef Reconcile, Reconcil-

IATIONY.< oxeee Hee he 2536" (M’Caig)
ef Romans, Epistle to. .2617* (Dunelm)
Term and meaning... .2467°
Theological implication2467°

Proportion...........0. 2467>


747>


3345
Proselyte..........0.06 2467> (Levertoff)
NT references....... .2468°
Oger Soe eas 24675
Proselytizing......... 24674
ef Rome............- 2622* (Allen)
ef Stranger and So-
journer in OT..... 2865" (Wiener)
Talmudic regulations. .2469°
ef Titus, or Titius
JUBCUS. erence kes 2989 (Rutherfurd)
Proselyte Baptism...... 3862 (A. T. Robertson)
Proseuche, Proseucha. . .2469
ef Philippi........... 2369" (Tod)
Prostitution
ef Crimes..........- 747 (Hirsch)
ef Harlot............ 1339 (Eager)
ef Punishments....... 2504 (Hirsch)
Prostration
cf Attitudes.......... 329° (W. W. Davies)
Protevangelium of James.198* (Hutchison)
Prove: Saved deanna 2469> (W. L. Walker)
ef Tempt............ 2942» (Stuart)
Provender..........-.- 2469» (Masterman)
Proverbs. ficken 2469> (Genung)
Folk meaning and use 2470?
ef Games............ 1168° (Smith)
Literary growth...... 2470»
cf Proverbs, Book of. .2471> (Genung)
ef Wisdom.......... 3089" (Easton)
Wisdom idea........ 24718
Proverbs, Book of...... 2471» (Genung)
' Age and literary kin-
nena nee 2474»
CP AGUE. se ee es 78" (Genung)


Conception of Wisdom 2474>
ef Hezekiah, The Men


(0) Se ees Sa Re 1388
ef Job, Book of... ....1679> (Genung)
ef Lemuel........... 1865 (Genung)
Nucleus, and later ad-
ditions............ 24725
Philosophie effort... . .2473°
ef Proverb.........-. 2469" (Genung)
Successive compila-
HONS Beene eee 2472
Title and author...... 2471
ef Wisdom.........- 3089" (Easton)
Providence..........-- 2476 (Tillett)
ef Affliction.......... 662 (Edwards)
Biblical views........ 2477


cf Choose, Chosen. . . .612° (Rees)
Content of the Biblical


doctrine........... 2481°
Definition.........-. 2476
ef Foreordain, Fore-
ordination......... 11312 (Orr)
Free will and........ 2483»
ef Israel, History of
the People......... 1511> (Orelli)
JOD Gus ear teener eee 2478
ef Job, Book of....... 1679> (Genung)


Natural and moral evil 2484>


3346


GENERAL INDEX


Providence—continued


NT conceptions...... 2479

OT ideas of.......... 2477

OT and NT ideas com-
Dated sj 36 Met heed 2480°


ef Predestination..... 2436> (J. Lindsay)


Purpose............. 2482

Special providence. . . .2482>

Spheres of........... 24774

CLS Wil is i tan ee nied 3085* (W. L. Walker)
Province.............. 2485» (Allen)

Judaea...........05. 2486°

Meaning............ 2485>

ef Pilate, Pontius..... 2396* (J. M. Wilson)

ef Procurators........ 2457 (Allen)

Roman administration 2486*
Provocation........... 2486> (W. L. Walker)
Provoke............... 2486> (W. L. Walker)
Prudence.............. 2486> (W. L. Walker)

ef Wisdom.......... 3089° (Easton)
Prudent. .............. 2486> (W. L. Walker)
Pruning-hook

ef Hook............. 14192 (Easton)

ef Vine...........0.. 3049> (Masterman)
Psalms

ef Asaph............ 262> (Millar)

ef Higgaion.......... 1389»

cf Hind of the Morning,

iB) 1: Rare ea et 13932 (M. O. Evans)
cf Jonath Elem Reho-
Team he eats 17308

ef Mahalath......... 1965> (Orr)

ef Muth-labben...... 21028

ef Palestine.......... 2218> (Conder)
Psalms, Book of........ 24872 (Sampey)

Gospel in the Psalter. .2492+

Growth of........... 24914

Imprecatory psalms.. .2494

Messianic element... .2492>

Number and place... .2487°

Poetry: of... nce ees 2491>

ef Poetry, Hebrew... .2410° (T. W. Davies)

Problem of sin....... 2493°

Relation of David to. .2489*

ef Selah............. 2096> (Millar)

ef Shiggaion......... 2767>

Speaker in the....... 24922

Superscriptions....... 2487>

Temple psalms....... 2490>

Titlevenc ssh vec Sect ade 24874
Psalms of David....... 795> (Weir)


Psalms, Imprecatory
ef Psalms, Book of... .24942 (Sampey)
Psalms (Psalter) of Solo-


mon
ef Apocalyptic Litera-

UPC. Sehr. ee ne 1615 (J. E. H. Thomson)
ef Between the Testa-

mentsse.% i... eas 455° (Dosker)
cf Messiah........... 2042* (Crichton)


Psaltery

ef Music...........- 20985 (Millar)
Psaltiel. 0.0 0000220005 2494b
Pseudepigrapha.......-174 (J. E. H. Thomson);


. - 4576 (Dosker)
Pseudo-Matthew, Apoc-


ryphal Gospel of... .. .198® (Hutchison)
Psychology...........- 2494» (Marais)
Creationism......... 2495>
Death and immortal-
UYerwa teed ceannaiee duces oe 24992
ef Death.......... 811> (Bavinck)
Fall of man.......... 24988
ef Fall, The........ 1092 (Bavinck) .
ef Heart............. 1350° (Marais)
ef Kidneys.........- 1797> (Easton)
Monism............- 2497
Pauline expressions. . .2497>
ef Resurrection....... 2562* (Easton)
Scope of Biblical psy-
chology........... 2494>
Scripture terms....... 2496>
ef Sensual........... 2721 (Pratt)
Soul, the............- 24959
ef Soul............ 2837° (Marais)
ef Spirit. ........0.... 2841> (Marais)
Trichotomy......... 2496
Ptolemais............. 24998
CE ACCOM a these 28 (Porter)
ef Phoenicia......... 23863 (Porter)
Ptolemy.............- 2499 (Angus)
ef Macron........... 1960 (Angus)
ef Septuagint........27228 (Thackeray)
Ptolemy Philadelphus.. .456> (Dosker)
ef Septuagint........ 2723° (Thackeray)
Ptolemy Soter......... 456> (Dosker)
Puah, Puvah.......... 25018 (E. D. Isaaes)
Publican
ef Tax, Taxing....... 2918 (Sweet)
Publius.... 0.0.0.0... 25012 (Kerr)
ef Apocryphal Acts. ..183> (A. F. Findlay)
ef Melita............ 2029° (Allen)
PUdenS ak ove chan nee 2501 (Rutherfurd)
ef Claudia........... 666° (Jacobs)
Puhites (Puthites)...... 25118
PuUlceGhe Pa ee Sekt tea mutta 25015
GURUGS Jaan d wae bie 25108 (Pinches)
ef Tiglath-pileser..... 29806 (Nicol)
Pulp ite nc ens, fot eh 2501>
Pulse pics. ciel hanes 25015
Punishment, Everlasting 2501> (Orr)
Annihilation. ........2503>


cf Eschatology of NT. 979» (Vos)
ef Eschatology of OT. 9722 (Orr)


Ci: Gultie vasa 1310> (M. O. Evans)
CEHEW Me cniea ee eee 1371 (Orr)
cf Immortal, Immor-

Palit. cakoe Athos es 1461+ (Orr)
Nature of punishment. .2503>
Probation........... 25035
cf Restoration........ 2561> (Miller)


ef Retribution... .....2570" (M’Caig)


GENERAL INDEX


Punishment, Everlasting—continued
Scriptural teaching... .2502*
Survival of death..... 2501
Universal salvation. . .2503
cf Unquenchable Fire. .3038* (Orr)


Punishments........... 2504> (Hirsch)
ef Brand............ 5145
ef Burning........... 532
Capital punishments. .2505*
ef Eunuch.......... 10375 (Eager)
Foreign punishments. .2505
cf Hanging..........1335> (Hirsch)
Hebrew law......... 2504
ef Herod............ 1378> (Dosker)
ef Lawin NT........ 18449 (M’Caig)
ef Polygamy......... 2416? (Caverno)
ef Prison............ 2456° (T. Lewis)
ef Scorpion.......... 2703" (Day)
ef Scourging......... 2704* (Dosker)
ef Seduce, Seducer.. . .2712* (Edwards)
ef Slander........... 2814> (Edwards)
ef Slavery........... 2815* (Raffety)
CHS COCK ean a is 2854
ef Uncleanness....... 3036 (Williams)
ef Visitation......... 3058" (Edwards)
Punites...........2--. 2506
Punony. hoc oi ive ee: 2506+
ef Wanderings of Is-
PAO) sehen eet es 8 3064* (Conder)
Pur
ef Purim............ 2506> (Mack)
Purah UNE aisha 25068
Purchase........-...-. 2506* (Easton)
Pure, Purely, Purity... ..2506 (W. L. Walker)
ef Clean............. 6672 (Crannell)
ef Purity............ 2507 (Caverno)
PULEOS codeine ceeds 25065 (Mack)
Purification
ef Purge............ 2506 (Mack)
ef Purity..........-- 2507> (Caverno)
ef Uncleanness....... 3036 (Williams)
Purim: oes an Shee 2506 (Mack)
ef Agagite..........- 69° (Wolf)
History of.......-... 2507
Manner of observance 25079
Origin.............. 2507
ef Phrurai........... 2392+
PUrity eee Aner 2507 (Caverno)


Christ’s teachings... . .2509°

ef Divorce in NT..... 865° (Caverno)

ef Divorce in OT. ....863> (W. W. Davies)
Prophetic teaching... .2508°


ef Pure, Purely....... 2506 (W. L. Walker)

Sex relations......... 2508+

Song of Songs........ 2508>

ef Unwashen......... 3038° (Williams)
Purloining............- 2509%
Purple.......-...00055 2509 (Day)

ef Colors............ 674° (Patch)

ef Dye, Dyeing....... 883> (Patch)


SidODi rior nee oh 2785* (Porter)


3347

Purpose of God........ 25108

ef Foreordination..... 11318 (Orr)

ef Predestination..... 2435° (J. Lindsay)
Purse

Ch Bag ate oelke gid 377° (Eager)
Purslain Juice

ef Juice... .......0.. 1780
Purtenance............ 2510*
Puts ee eileen tea cc atekaee 2510 (Pinches)

CEP ete ean wees 2501
Put Asunder........... 316> (S. F. Hunter)
Puteoliics veces 2510 (Allen)

CEINCL Oi fo cannes inte 2134» (Angus)
Puthites...........0... 2511
PUtlel ee bd ene 25118

ef Phinehas.......... 2385 (Wallace)
Puvah

ef Puah........ ad aaa 2501 (E. D. Isaacs)
Py parginc heii s ss 2511 (Day)

ef Zoélogy........... 31554 (Day)
Pyramid.) fi. fees 2511» (Ewing)
Pyrrhus 655 snk 2511

ef Sopater........... 2836
Python....... boaters: 2511> (Easton)

ef Divination........ 8602 (T. W. Davies)
Qoph

ef Koph............. 1816>
Quail os cede ola? 2512+ (Stratton-Porter)

CERO... eee 1124® (Eager)

cf Moses............2087¢ (Kyle)

cf Partridge......... 22542 (Stratton-Porter)
Quarrel sien Finn 3. oes 2512
Quarries............:- 2512> (Day)

ef Shebarim......... 2753>
Quarter soiree 0 2513

ef Border............ 503° (Hirsch)

ef Coast............- 672* (Day)
Quartus............0-- 2513
Quaternion............ 2513% (Nicol)
QUEEN Sich nite a ceeel hes 2513> (Baur)

cf King’s Mother..... 18084

ef Queen of Heaven. . .2514# (Nicol)
Queen of Heaven....... 2514* (Nicol)

ef Queen.........--- 2513> (Baur)
Queen Mother........- 2513> (Baur)

Biblical references... .2514

cf King’s Mother..... 18082

Mother of king... ... .2513°

ef Relationships, Fam-

Uys hela ee seiinn eet 2554" (N. and E. D.
Isaacs)

Queen of Sheba....... .2514” (Roberts)
Quench. .........6 ees 2515 (Gerberding)
Question. ...........4. 2515 (Easton)
Quick, Quicken........ 25154 (Estes)
Quicksands

ef Syrtis............ 2886
Quiet? Oct tian aeuhe 2515> (M. O. Evans) -

cf Meekness......... 2027" (W. L. Walker)

ef Poor.........-.-. 2420? (W. L. Walker)
Quintus Memmius...... 2030> (Angus)


3348 GENERAL INDEX


Quirinius
ef Chronology of the
NED ea Bue ee 644> (Armstrong)
ef Jesus Christ (Birth) . 1628' (Orr)
ef Judas of Galilee... .1767* (Orr)
ef Luke, Gospel of... .1936 (A. T. Robertson)


Quite ects Monin 2515
QUIVER cS oe fs 2515»
Quotations, NT........ 2515> (Sweet)
ef Accommodation.. .29* (Sweet)
Argument........... 2519
Authority of OT...... 2516»
ef Chronicles, Books of 629° (Beecher)
Examples of......... 2516»
ef Immanuel......... 1457% (A. W. Evans)
ef Poetry, NT....... 2414 (Schenk)
Prevision of Christian-
ity mOT......... 2517»
Unity of two dispensa-
PIONS see 88 eee Bes 2516
ef Virgin-birth....... 30522 (Sweet)


Quotations from the OT
ef Mark, Gospel of... .1988" (Farmer)
cf Matthew, Gospel of .2011° (Schodde)


Raama, Raamah....... 2520° (Fulton)

Raamiah (Reelaiah).... .2520°; 2545

Raamses, Rameses...... 25202 (Conder)
ef Exodus, The....... 10522 (Conder)


ef Exodus, Book of...1056° (MGller)


ef Goshen...........12804 (Conder)

ef Pithom........... 2401» (Conder)

ef Store-cities........ 2863

ef Zoan............. 31532 (Conder)
Rabbah dscci isu woken 2520> (Ewing)

Ammonite capital... . .2520

Modern site......... 2521

References to........ 2521"
Rabbi wa cessed ack ese cad 25222 (Pollard)

ef Rabboni..........2522

ef Talmud........... 2904> (Strack)
Rabbith............... 25228
Rabblés-si5 2 kaa. Ses 25222
Rabboni.............. 25222

ef Master............ 2007 CW. L. Walker)

ef Rabbi ...2522° (Pollard)
Rab-mag.............. 2522 (Clippinger)

ef Nergal-sharezer. . . .2134>

ef Rab-saris......... 2522» (Clippinger)

ef Samgar-nebo...... 2674 (Wolf)

ef Zoroastrianism..... 3157 (Easton)
Rab-saris.............. 25225 (Clippinger)

ef Assyria...........292 (Sayce)

ef Rab-mag.......... 2522+ (Clippinger)

ef Tartan. 2.8. v 2 2917+ (Hiselen)
Rabshakeh............ 25226 (Clippinger)

ef Tartan........... 2917 (Eiselen)
Racer Ae acid eae 25233 (Edwards)

ef Rail, Railing, Railer 2525 (W. L. Walker)
Ratalies cnc sn. tons 2523* (N. Isaacs)
Race

ef Games............ 1168 (Smith)


Races

ef Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches)
Rachab (Rahab)........ 25238
Rachal

ef Racal.........-.-. 25232 (N. Isaacs)
Rachel eet enue dias odes 2523> (Press); 449 (Mas-

terman)

Biography..........- 2523>

Character.........-. 2523»

Chdacobsen Woes was 1550 (Boyd)

Rachel’s tomb....... 2524
Raddai.............-. 2524
Radiant cian sca es 25249 (M. O. Evans)
Raft

ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
Rafter

ef Gallery........... 11672 (N. Isaacs)

ef House............ 1484» (A. C. Dickie)
Ridio es ke: oe warineecuat tan 25246
Ragau (Apoe).........- 2524>
Rages, Ragau (Apoc)... .2524> (Tisdall)
Raguel............000- 2525 (N. Isaacs)

ef Jethro............ 1674> (Crichton)

ef Relationships, Fam-

Mog CBO cane ES re 8 2554 (N. and E. D.
Isaacs)

ef Reucl............. 2573 (Wolf)
Raguel (Apoc).........2525

ef Raphael (Apoc)... .2532> (J. E. H. Thomson)
Rahabcsiase elt eee ey 2525 (N. Isaacs)

ef Astronomy. .......300> (Maunder)

ef Faith of........... 1088+ (Dunelm)
Raham.........-.-0-- 2525»
Rahel

ef Rachel............ 2523" (Press)
Raid

Of War veicd dss on 3069» (Nicol)
Rail, Railing, Railer....2525> (W. L. Walker)

ef Raca............. 25232 (Edwards)
Raiment

ef Dress............. 875> (Eager)
Raiment, Soft......... 2525 (Hager)
RAI ran eure eek en cad sunt 2525> (Joy)

Rainy seasons... .... .2526

ef Seasons........... 27108 (Joy)

Tables of rainfall..... 25262

Water supply........2525
Rainbow.............. 2527" (Joy)
easements ua he 25272 (W. L. Walker)
Raisin-cakes.......... .25278

ef Raisins...........25272 (Masterman)
Raisins...............2527* (Masterman)
Riakem sented: ovine ete 2527

ef Rekem............ 2553” (Wolf)
Rakkath.............. 2527> (Ewing)
Rakkon

ef Me-jarkon....... . 20284
Ram (animal)... ...... .2527

ef Sheep............ 2756 (Day)
Ram (person).......... 2527 (Wolf)


Ram, Battering
ef Siege... 02... 08, 2786 (Nicol)


GENERAL INDEX 3349

Rama (Ramah)........ 2527 Raphon............... 2532 (Ewing)
Ramah... 2627 (Ewing) Rasher cates 2533"

ef High Place........ 1390" (Easton) Riasses): ei. escs oo. cae 2533 (S. F. Hunter)

ef Mizpah........... 2068" (Ewing) Rathumus (Apoc)...... 2533
Ramah of the South. . . .2528 (Ewing) ef Beeltethmus....... 423
Ramath-lehi........... 2528 (Ewing) Raveneic. 225 dh ee ueaa hve 2533+ (Stratton-Porter)

cf Jaw, Jawbone. .... 15722 (M. O. Evans) ef Hlijah............ 930> (Farr)
Ramath-mizpeh........ 25292 Raven, Ravin (verb)... .2533°

ef Mizpah........... 2068" (Ewing) Razis (Apoc)........... 2533" -
Ramathaim............ 25292 RAZOR icicwde eiiteans, RM 2533?
Ramathaim-zophim ef Barber............ 403 (Eager)

ef Ramah........... 2528 (Ewing) ef Hair.............. 1320 (Luering)
Ramathite............ 25298 Reading.............55 2534* (Edwards)
Rameses (Raamses) . . . .2520* (Conder) Ready... .....0.0.005- 2534#
Patil ewe ech oe 13806; 2520 Reaiah (Haroeh)...... .2534*
Ramleh ef Joel... .......00.. 16882 (J. Robertson)

ef Lod, Lydda....... 1909 (Ewing) Reapmg... «orci yess 25349 (Patch)
Ramman.............. 372* (Rogers) ef Agriculture betes 75> (Patch)
Rammon-nirari Ill... .. 437> (Nicol) ef Gleaning teens 1234» (Patch)
Ramoth (person)......- 2529 ef Mowing, Mown

ef Jeremoth.........- 15918 Grass.............209389 (M. O. Evans)
Ramoth (place)........ 25290 ef Sickle............ 27848 (Patch)

ef Jarmuth..........1570" (Masterman) Rearward. . fete tay ae eae 2534"

cf Remeth........... 2557" ef Dan, Tribe of... ... 781> (Ewing)

ef Stones, Precious. . . .2856+ (Fletcher) of War......---. 2. 3069° (Nicol)
Ramoth-gilead......... 25292 (Ewing) Reason, Reasonable,

cf Gerasa, Gerasenes. . 1218" (Ewing) Reasoning........... 2534> (W. L. Walker)

GG lead wea lege 1229> (Ewing) Reba... .....-...-205. 2534»

FUStG Ey oe oes che 25298 Rebekah. ............. 2534» (Boyd)

Identification........ 2529» ef Jacob Seep PeHsl ca ance dh cutyon 1550* (Boyd)

cf Mizpah........... 2068" (Ewing) Rebellion

ef Ramath-mizpeh. . . .2529 cf Transgression...... 3006’ (Dungan)

cf Refuge, Cities of. . .2545% (Ewing) Rebuke «.. 2. 4-1..05 0104 25352 (W. L. Walker)
Ramoth of the South Recah bOitdel tees ott 2535>

ef Ramah........... 2528> (Ewing) Receipt of Custom
Rampart ef Custom........... 769° (Betteridge)

ef Fortification....... 1136» (Nicol) Receiver. ....--....0-- 2535>
Ram’s Horn Rechab, Rechabites.. . . .2535° (Mack)

ef Music............2094° (Millar) ef Jehonadab........ 1580* (Roberts)
Rams’ Skins.........-. 25308 cf Kenites........... 1792s (Ewing)

ef Dye, Dyeing....... 883° (Patch) cf Nazirite........... 21248 (Christie)

ef Tabernacle........ 2887> (Caldecott; Orr) Rechah
Range.........----5-+ 2530" (Easton) ef Recah........-.-- 2535>
Rankeeca i e.es geese 2530 Reclining
Ranks: eie- ag cas 23 2530* ef Meals........-.-: 2013» (Hager)
Rangom.......-..+--- 2530° (M’Caig) ef Triclinium........ 3011" (N. Isaacs)

ef Mediation, Medi- Reconcile, | Reconcilia-

ALOT Ase) ks eee 2018 (Edwards) HON: Secseae Senay 2536* (M’Caig)
OT usage.......---- 25308 ef Atonement, Day of .324> (Maller)
cf Redeemer, Redemp- Biblical teaching.... . 2536"
HiT ee 25415 (McConnell) ef Mediation, Medi-

To whom paid?...... 2532 AbOF eisacie sete bee 2018 (Edwards)
Rape ef Propitiation....... 2467" (Carver)

ef Crimes........... 745% (Hirsch) ef Sacrifice... .......2655* (Williams)

ef Punishments... ... .2504® (Hirsch) Terms.....-.----+5- 2536°
Rapha, Raphah........ 2532> (Wolf) ef Wrath...........- 31132 (W. Evans)

cf Rephaiah......... 2559 Record.........00+ 200+ 2538"

ef Rephaim.......... 2559 (Porter) Recorder. .....-..-+-++ 25338
Raphael (Apoc)........ 2532» (J. E. H. Thomson) ; Recover....-..--.----- 2538" (W. L. Walker)

ef Rages............2524> (Tisdall) Recruiting System, Ro-
Raphaim (Apoc)....... 2532» Mall wher cert, 258" (Allen)


3350 GENERAL INDEX


Red

ef Colors............ 674> (Patch)
Red Dragon

cf Revelation of John. 2582> (Orr)
Red Heifer............ 1367> (Easton)
Red Horse

cf Revelation of John.2582> (Orr) _
Red Sea............... 2538> (Wright)

ef Egypt............ 911» (Petrie)

Name wi nied gaa dees 2538>

OT references....... 25398

Passage of Israel... .. 2539>

Peculiarities......... 2538°


ef Ships and Boats... .2774° (Nicol)
Redeemer, Redemption. . 2541" (McConnell)

cf Job, Book of... .. . 1683 (Genung)
Life in individual..... 2541+
cf Mediation, Media-

CODE eae cieeen a ee 2018" (Edwards)
Moral implications. . . .2542>
Moralizing of the idea 2541
ef Paul, Theology of. .2291> (Easton)


ef Ransom........... 2530° (M’Caig)

ef Sacrifice, NT...... 26532 (Williams)

GHSIN, 4c8 Me ee anes 28012 (McConnell)
* Social process........ 25428

Son of God, the...... 2543
Redness of Eyes

ef Drunkenmness...... 880° (Edwards)
Redound.............. 25442
Rice dere eh esa 25448 (Masterman)

Cf Flags ieiuccerns 1117

cf Meadow.......... 2013" (Day)

ef Papyrus.......... 2238 (Goodspeed)

CEP OMS sca ace eating 2419 (Day)

ef Rush. ............ 2627> (Masterman)

ef Tools............. 29998 (Easton)
Reed-grass

Gh ag jo is 5 on tt 1117

CHRGEd ss. 6k sccs cece 2544 (Masterman)
Reed, Measuring. ....... 25458 (Orr)

ef Cubit............. 765° (Porter)

ef Weights and Meas-

MTreS0 ek ck enn 3079+ (Porter)


Reelaiah (Raamiah).....2545*; 2520*
Reelias, Reelius (Apoc) . .2545*


Reesaias

cf Resaias........... 2561
Refiner, Refining....... 2545 (Patch)

ef Founder.......... 1141

Gf. Lead acsi-c kate: 1861* (Patch)

ef Metallurgy........ 20449 (Patch)
R@fOrIne 2 cori Ancients 2545
Reformation........... 25455; 1019* (Alexander)
Reformation Creeds.....743> (Alexander)
Reformation, Principles

Ole Re toes re eat tt 338° (Rees)
Refresh, Refreshing... .. 2545> (W. L. Walker)
Refuges vcsict reeks 2545»
Refuge, Cities of....... 2545> (Ewing)

ef Bézer. .. 25... cass 459>


Ch Goch civil 1272° (Breslich)


Refuge, Cities of —continued


ef Golan............ 1273> (Ewing)

cf Hebron........... 1365* (Masterman)

ef Homicide......... 14182 (Levertoff)

cf Kedesh........... 1790 (Ewing)

cf Ramoth-gilead..... 2529° (Ewing)

ef Shechem.......... 27559 (Ewing)
FREtusOy os joke va enn 2546+
Réflite ss. Avec ee 2546+ (Edwards)
Regem...............- 2546
Regem-melech......... 2546>

ef Sharezer......... 27502 (Eiselen)
Regeneration........... 2546° (Nuelsen)

Apostolic teaching... .2548*

ef Conversion........ 706 (Nuelsen)

cf Eschatology of the

INE tS ee oenlecee 979» (Vos)


ef Johannine Theology 1703> (Law)
Later development... .2549>


cf Man, New........ 1975* (Webb)

OT doctrine......... 25478

Present significance. . .2549>

CESCCU Ec ots an Ge uses 2712 (Easton)

Teaching of Jesus... ..2547>

Term explained. ..... 2546
Regeneration, Baptismal 3972 (Orr; Bishop; Dau)
Regione. gio os eee ee 2550°

ef Galatia........... 11542 (Ramsay)
Register

cf Genealogy........ 1183> (Crannell)

cf Quirinius.......... 645° (Armstrong)
Rehabiah............. 2550°
Rehearse.............. 2550°
Rehob2nees as scans 2550? (Christie)
Rehoboam............ 25512 (Mosiman)


‘Division of kingdom. .25512
cf Israel, History of the


People ............ 15218 (Orelli)
ef Jeroboam J........ 1593> (Mosiman)
cf Roboam..........2596
ef Shishak........... 2778 (Nicol)
Shishak’s invasion. . . .2552*

Rehoboth. ............ 2552+ (Masterman)
cf Negeb............ 2130° (Masterman)
ef Sitnah............ 28139

Rehobothb-ir............ 2552> (Pinches)
ef Nineveh. .........2147> (Pinches)

Rehoboth by the River. .2552> (Ewing)

Rehumys 3. ga eae 2552 (Stearns)
ef Harim............ 13399 (Stearns)
cf Nehum........... 2132
cf Roimus (Apoe)..... 25972
cf Shimshai.......... 27712 (Wolf)

Reli-2 sucess oslo ce 2553 (Wolf)

RGIGD! ice ete ney PES 2553 (Baur)
ef King............. 17992 (Press)

Reins eso ee Ae 2553 (Luering)
ef Kidneys.......... 1797% (Easton)

Rekem..............., 2553» (Wolf)
ef Rakem........... 2527

Relationships, Family...2554" (N. and E. D,

Isaacs)


GENERAL INDEX 3351


Relationships, Family—continued
Brothers and sisters.. .2555°
Father-in-law, etc... ..2556%
ef Hospitality........ 1432* (Easton)
Husband and wife... .2555
Other domestic ties. . .2556*

Parents and children. .2554%
ef Queen Mother..... 2513> (Baur)


ef Raguel........... 2525° (N. Isaacs)

ef Sister............. 2813 (Pollard)

ef Slavery........... 2815* (Raffety)

ef Son, Sons......... 2826° (Betteridge)

ef Spouse............ 2846>

Uncles, ete.......... 2555%
Release.............4. 2556

ef Jubilee Year ...... 1756* (Baur)
Religion............+.. 2556 (Easton)


ef Babylonia and As-
syria, Religion of. . .368 (Rogers)


cf Superstition. ...... 2871 (Doolan)
Theories of origin and
growth............ 692° (Tisdall)

Universality of....... 6928 (Tisdall)
Religion, Comparative . .691> (Tisdall)
Religion of Israel....... 1513° (Orelli)
Religion, Science of..... 691» (Tisdall)
Remainder............ 2557*
Remaliah...........-- 25574
Remember, Remem-

brance.......-..--- 25578 (W. L. Walker)
Remeth........---+5++ 25578

ef Jarmuth.......... 1570 (Masterman)

ef Ramoth (place). . . .2529°
Remission of Sins....... 2557» (Jacobs)

ef Absolution........ 24% (Jacobs)

ef Forgiveness. ...... 1132» (Morro)

ef Sacrifice, NT....-- 2653" (Williams)
Remmon..........---- 2557

ef Rimmon (place)... .2593 (Masterman)
Remmon-methoar.....- 2557

ef Rimmon (place)... .2593> (Masterman)
Remnant..........---- 2557> (W. L. Walker)

ef Rest:...-......-5- 2561» (W. L. Walker)
Removing Landmarks

ef Landmark......... 18265
Remphan

ef Rephan........--- 25602
Rend Asunder.......-. 316> (S..F. Hunter)
Rending of Garments

ef Burial............ 529% (Eager)

ef Dress.........---- 875> (Eager)
Renew. ..-....eee eee 2557> (Gerberding)
Repair. .........---065 2558
Repentance...........+ 2558" (DeMent)

NT terms..........- 2558

OT terms..........- 2558

Psychological elements 2559*

CE Sins Caine teers fs 2801» (McConnell)
Repetitions.......,.... 2559> (Easton)


ef Magic, Magician. . .1964° (T. W. Davies)
ef Prayer..........45 2430° (Lambert)


Rephah iu. ces epics 2559>
Rephaiah............. 25598
ef Rapha, Raphah. . . .2532> (Wolf)
Rephaim.............. 2559> (Porter)
Ch OB ie Retcal este corens 2180 (Orr)


ef Rapha, Raphah. .. .2532' (Wolf)
ef Sons of God (OT). .2835* (Crichton)


ChTitan sie een 29878
ef Zamzummim...... 31322

Rephaim, Vale of... ... .2560* (Ewing)

Rephan.............4. 2560
ef Astrology......... 295’ (Maunder)
ef Chiun............ 612° (Margolis)

Rephidim............. 2560* (Ewing)
ef Massah and Meri-

baie Sn ite ees 2007+ (Ewing)

Reprobate............. 2560" (Vos)

Reproof, Reprove...... 2560> (Easton)

Reptile............... 2561
ef Leviathan......... 1868 (Day)
ef Lizard............ 1906" (Day)
ef Serpent........... 2736" (Day)
ef Tortoise.......... 2999> (Day)

Reputation............ 2561+
ef Kenosis........... 1792 (Easton)

Require.........-..05- 2561%

Rereward
ef Rearward.........2534>

Resaias (Reelaiah)......25613; 2545

Resenins Suss Wtadnueaes 25614 (Pinches)
ef Calah...........- 539 (Pinches)
ef Nineveh.......... 2149* (Pinches)

Reservoir.........-.04- 25614
ef Cistern........... 657> (A. C. Dickie)
CH Ditches sddorn giants 859° (Clippinger)
cf Pools ec ieca eos’ 2419 (Day)

Reshiciki et tre sete th hace 2561
ef Alphabet.......... 103’ (Richardson)

Resheph......-....0-. 2561»

Residue :
cf Remnant......... 2557" (W. L. Walker)

Respect of Persons...... 2561> (Easton)
ef Accept.........-.- 27> (Pratt)

Rest toed Aunt aie eran 2561> (W. L. Walker)
ef Remnant......... 2557> (W. L. Walker)
ef Sabbath.......... 2629 (Sampey)

Restitution, Restoration
cf Punishments....... 2504 (Hirsch)

Restoration............ 2561> (Miller)
ef Punishment, Ever-

lasting............ 25015 (Orr)

Resurrection..........- 2562* (Easton); 614>

(Bevan)

Apostolic teaching... .2564°

ef Body. .......-.-5- 491 (Hirsch; Marais;
Pratt)


of Eschatology, NT. . .979% (Vos)
ef Eschatology, OT. . .972% (Orr)


ef Flesh. .........-.- 1118> (Luering)
ef Heart........--.. 1350 (Marais)
ef Immortality...... , 1461+ (Orr)


8352


GENERAL INDEX


Resurrection—continued
Israel and immortality 2562°
ef Jesus Christ....... 1664 (Orr)
ef Job, Book of....... 1679> (Genung)
ef Johannine Theology 1705> (Law)
cf Last Judgment... ..1777 (Easton)


ef Lazarus........... 1860" (Trever) ef Inspiration... .. .1473* (Warfield)
cf Maccabees, Books ef John, the Apostle.. .1706> (Iverach)
Ol, went ae rota detec 1949° (T. W. Davies) Modes of........-..- 25778
OT ideas cn occ cece 2563 Process of.........+5 25762
ef Parousia.......... 22492 (Easton) Prophecy. ........+++ 2578*
ef Psychology........ 2494» (Marais) cf Prophecy........ 2459> (Orelli)
cf Salvation.......... 2670° (Easton) Scriptures........--- 2582
ef Sheol............. 27612 (Orr) cf Sees. ose eis 2712> (M. O. Evans)
CESOUL: ha 84 ete 28372 (Marais) Supernatural character 2573>
CESPING sens chen x 2841> (Marais) Revelation (Doctrine of)
Teaching of Christ. . . .2563> Through spirit... .... 1667* (Orr)
cf Witchcraft ........ 30972 (T. W. Davies) Revelation of John..... .2582% (Orr)
cf Zoroastrianism ..... 3157* (Kaston) Analysis of......... .2585¢
Resurrection, Gospel of Antichrist........... 155 (J. E. H. Thomson)
the cf Apocalyptic — Lit-
cf Apocryphal Gospels. 195* (Hutchison) erature............ 161» (J. E. H. Thomson)
Resurrection of Jesus Canonicity and author-
Christ, The.......... 2565» (Thomas) ity Sache sete 2683*
Effect on disciples. . . .2567* Date and unity...... 25848
Empty grave, the... . .2566* ef Horse, Black....... 1423»
Gospel record........ 2568" cf Horse, Red........ 14235
Paul’s witness........ 2567% cf Horse, White. .....14249
Primitive church... .. 2567> Interpretation........ 2586


Proofs.s:2 ice teh eases 2565
Theology of......... 2.569%
Retains ee esses adja’ 2569»
Retaliation
ef Law in the NT.....18442 (M’Caig)
ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)


cf Retribution
Retention of Sins
Retribution
Biblical terms
ef Immortality.......
ef Judgment.........


25709 (M’Caig)
Ae en 2569» (Jacobs)
25709 (M’Caig)


1461 (Orr)
1777 (Jacobs)


Moral sense......... 2571
Nature of........... 2570
cf Punishment, Ever-
lasting ¥.0 022. ss 3 2502* (Orr)
cf Sacrifice, NT... .. .2655% (Williams)
ef Sheol............. 27612 (Orr)
Wrath and grace..... 25709
ef Wrath.......... 3113* (W. Evans)
EU as eee as, Anos 2572"
Reuben............... 2572" (Ewing)


Jacob’s eldest son... . .2572
cf Names, Proper... . .2116 (Davis)


cf Numbers, Book of . .2163° (Whitelaw)


Tribal history........ 2572»
Reubenites............ 25735
RGU ai. cookie choise 25735 (Wolf)
ef Hobab............ 1402» (Cotton)
ef Jethro............ 1674 (Crichton)
cf Raguel........... 2525® (N. Isaacs)
Reumahs...22 06 / eee ree: 25735


Revelation.............
cf Accommodation... .
Biblical terms........
Christ as.........-0-
General and special...
Inspiration.........


cf Jerusalem, New...
ef John, Gospel of...
cf Man of Sin
ef Patmos...........
Theology of
Title and character. .
Revellings.............
Revenge, Revenger
ef Avenge, Avenger. .
ef Blood...........
cf Goel ce ean
Revenue
Reverence
Revile
cf Crimes..........
cf Punishments.......


Rhesa


Rhodes... ............
History............


2573 (Warfield)
32> (Sweet)
25805

2580

2574


-2580*


.1621° (Vos)
.1720* (Iverach)


1976® (Orr)
2263 (Harry)
2587


2582»


2587" (Gerberding)
25878 (Breslich)


.340* (Breslich)
.488> (Clippinger)


1272° (Breslich)
25875
2587> (Forrester)


.745> (Hirsch)


2504 (Hirsch)

469° (Orr)

2587> (W. L. Walker)
25875

2588" (Pinches)


2595*

2588" (Nicol)

2588 (Nicol)

2588? (Nicol)

2588) (Allen)

2588

25898

3037°

2589 (S. F. Hunter)
2589" (Harry)


2598?


GENERAL INDEX 3353
Rhodes—continued Biotec, peeetete 2594» (Easton)
Location............ 25894 Riphath............... 2594»
ef Rodanim.......... 2597 ef Diphath..........851+
Rhodocus (Apoc)....... 2590 (Luering) Rising............... 2594»
Ribreigtrn Pek. pike eset 2590 (Luering) ef Leprosy........... 18672 (Macalister)
RDA at rs. asda ernie? 2590 Rissali ss? oe Sates 2594»
Ribband.............. 25908 cf Wanderings of Is-
ef Color............. 674» (Patch) rael Su cei ek 3064 (Conder)
ef Cord.............709 (Eager) Rives ahaseo te eaas 693° (Tisdall)
Riblab iW i.1.2g fancies 2590* (Christie) Rithmah............., 2595"
Richess: § ee ae oetetet on 25905 (Forrester) cf Wanderings of Is-
ef Mammon.........1972> (Miller) Tae). coe heat wen 3064* (Conder)
cf Treasure..........3007 (Raffety) River.............00., 2595° (Day)
af Wesltlys...t05.cecane 30762 (W. Evans) ef Brook............ 523? (Day)
Rid, Riddance... .... . .2590° of Stream. ..........2866> (Day)
Riddle ef Valley............80452 (Day)
of Games............ 1170 (Smith) GE Walshe urse sich. BUS Day)
Pies eh ane 25918 Hiver of Paypt
cf Brook of Egypt... .523 (Kyle)
cf Spelt... 0.0.0.2... 28408 :
. CENe 2 fates Sakata: 2145? (Kyle)
FRAG DG ety oben ee ata 25919 (W. L. Walker) River, the (Great) :
ef Truth............3025* (Carver) cf Euphrates......... 1038 (Wright)
Righteousness... .......2591" (McConnell); 1027" | Rivers of Eden
(Stalker) is ;
Character of God... . 2502 fe
Double aspect... .. . .2591" Wesitinpalies yee apes 2595 (Wallace)
ef Faithful, Faithful- cf Mephibosheth..... 2033> (Wallace)
MES... 1088” (Hodge) cf Merab............ 2034* (Wallace)
ef Justice............ 1781 (Rall) Road (Inroad). oe ee 25O5P
cf Philosophy wot peel Nialnaieae 2384> (Rees) cf War, Warfare. ... .3069> (Nicol)
ef Sermon on the Road (Way)
Mount et eeseienn: 2734» (Miller) ef Roman Empire and
Social custom........ 2591» Christianity........ 2598 (Angus)
Rig-veda Cl Ways kad ah anes 3075» (Morro)
cf Persian Religion Roast
(Ancient)......... 2331» (Tisdall) cf Food............. 1121> (Eager)
Rim Robber, Robbery....... 2595 (Easton); 747%
CERIN gs hiace4 soe 25948 (Crannell) (Hirsch)
Rimmon (god)... ..... .2594° (N. Isaacs) | ef Grasp............12934 (Miller)
ef Gods............. 1271* (Reeve) |) eof Dhiel. neces! 2972 (Easton)
cf Hadadrimmon. . . . .1314* (Ewing) Robbers of Temples.. .. .2595
ef Tabrimmon....... 2902 cf Lysimachus (Apoe) .1944° (Hutchison)
Rimmon (person)....... 25942 (N. Isaacs) Robe
Rimmon (place)........ 2593 (Masterman) cf Dress............. 875> (Eager)
ef Dimnah.......... 8492 ef Priests and Levites. 2452* (Wiener)
ef En-rimmon........ 9535 (Masterman) Robinson’s Arch


cf Remmon-methoar. . 2557
Rimmon-nirari
Western campaigns of 570° (Nicol)


Rimmon-perez......... 2594
ef Wanderings of Is-
PACD aor eel ace: 30642 (Conder)


Rimmon, Rock of

ef Rimmon (place)... .2593> (Masterman)
Rimmonah, Rimmono

ef Rimmon (place)... .2593 (Masterman)


Ring Pk eae 25948 (Crannell)
ef Harring. .......... 8879 (Eager)
of Seal.............- 2708 (Edwards)
Ringleader............ 2594»
Ringstreaked........... 2594»


cf Jerusalem......... 1613* (Masterman)
Roboam (Rehoboam). . . 2596


Rock.................2596% (Day)
CRCrag ee. oc sp eek 737% (Day)
CEE UN tic herds acts. 1119» (Day)
Jesus’ reference to
Peter and the...... 1648 (Orr)
cf Keys, Power of.... .1794* (Carver)
cf Lime............. 1893> (Day)
ef Sand... .......... 2688> (Day)
cf Spiritual Drink . . . .2843
cf Stone, Stones...... 28568 (Day)
Rock of Ages..........71
ef Isaiah............ 1497 (Robinson)
Rock-badger........... 2596
ef Coney............ 698> (Day)


3354 GENERAL INDEX


Rod erent i ade 2596° (Orr)
Of Aaron............ 2® (Mack)
Of almond........... 100° (Masterman)
ef Armor, Arms...... 251 (Nicol)
ef Staves............ 2850* (Caldecott)
Rodanim.............. 25978
ef Dodanim..........867>
ef Rhodes........... 2589° (Harry)
Roe, Roebuck.......... 25972 (Day)
ef Deer.............8178 (Day)
ef Gazelle........... 1179* (Day)
Rogelim......../..-... 25978
Rohgahh’¢ i25.05858.c.0e.d 25978
Roimus (Apoe)........ 2597
ef Nehum.......... .2132+
- ef Rehum...........2552> (Stearns)
Roll (Seroll)........... 2597 (Richardson)
ef Tablet............ 2900* (Richardson)
ef Volume........... 3058
Roller kee e eee hes 2597
Rolling Thing.......... 2597>
of Chaff.........-... 588 (Patch)
ef Dust............. 883" (Edwards)
ef Stubble........... 2867
Romamti-ezer..........2597>
ef Joshbekashah...... 1743"
Roman, Romans
cf Citizenship........ 661° (Trever)
GP Rome veic beg ais 2618+ (Allen)
Roman Army.........- 2572 (Allen)


Roman Citizenship
ef Paul, the Apostle. . .2273» (A. T. Robertson)
Roman Empire and


Christianity......... 2598* (Angus)
Attitude toward reli-

Plone Aaah 2602»
ef Dispersion......... 855? (Nicol)


Historical outline... . . 25982
cf Language of the NT1826> (A. T. Robertson)


of Latini...c.ccnecnees 1840 (A. T. Robertson)
ef Nero............. 2138° (Angus)
PCaCO 2s ieee na somee Ss 26002
ef Persecution........ 2323 (Rutherfurd)
Preparation for Chris-
Planityes . ae eis 2600
Protection........... 26012
Relations between. . . . 2605
ef Roman Law....... 2611> (Allen)
ef Rome............ 26182 (Allen)
ef Stoies............. 2854> (Rees)
Victory of Christianity 2610
Roman Law........... 26115 (Allen)
cf Citizenship........ 661° (Trever)
Criminal law........ 2612»
Private law.......... 2612
ef Roman Empire and
Christianity........ 2602" (Angus)
ef Rome............ 2618* (Allen)


Roman Religion
ef Roman Empire and
Christianity........ 2602 (Angus)
cf Rome...,..,...... 2618+ (Allen)


Pons in Asia Minor. .281* (White); 275° (Cal-
der); 483% (White); 272>
(Banks)
Romans, Epistle to the. .2614* (Dunelm)
Characteristics and


teachings.........- 2616>
FEW ree, ae aaa ete 2615*
Genuineness and integ-

TGV hee © oleate 2614
ef Hospitality........ 14329 (Easton)
ef Justification. ......1782> (Faulkner)
Dawaneen ees bes 18482 (M’Caig)
Place and destination. . 2615
ef Propitiation....... 2467¢ (Carver)
Relation to Galatians. .1158 (G. G. Findlay)
cf Sacrifice, NT ...... 2655> (Williams)

Rome tie sea does ... .2618 (Allen)

cf Apocalyptic Liter-

BUUTEi ie consis 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)
cf Devout........... 8402 (M. O. Evans)


ef Greece, Religion in..1297* (Fairbanks)
Imperial government. .2620°


CE Tally 4:5 a ees 1542> (Allen)
ef Libertines......... 1881 (S. F. Hunter)
cf Macedonia........1957" (Tod)
Persecution.......... 26232
cf Persecution... .. .2325 (Rutherfurd)
ef Procurator........ 2457» (Allen)
cf Proselytes.........2467> (Levertoff)
cf Relation to Ilyri-
CUM Paes sh acsie ed 1449» (Tod)
Republican  constitu-
TONE eet iiss eee aleas 2618
cf Roman Empire and
Christianity....... 25982 (Angus)
cf Roman Law....... 2611 (Allen)
Roman religion... 2620
Rome and the Chris-
HANS Se pens cca 26222
Rome and the Jews. . .2621>
CE DAK ott ote Gees ta 2920" (Sweet)
cf Treaty............ 3008 (Nicol)
Roof
cf House............ 1434> (A. C. Dickie)
Roof-chamber
cf House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Room
cf House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
IROOU scent. 622 cases 26232
Root of David. . 2.797
Root of Jesse. .. 2623
ef David, Boot fe . 797
CEJ OSSC ccna: lake ae 1623* (Roberts)
ROPE Sheree! eae eens 2623 (Easton)
ef Cord............. 709% (Eager)
cf Manes a Vas kas 18942 (Orr)
ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
ROSCciniect tet o4 vate 2623 (Masterman)
Rosh (person)......... 2623>
Rosh (place).......... 2623> (Pinches)
ef Telassar.......... 2925® (Pinches)
Rot, Rottenness........ 26242
ROte trees Sethe adit os 2624"


GENERAL INDEX 3355
Rower, Rowing Sabat
ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol) ef Saphat........... 2690"
Royal. Lette eeeees 2624° (Baur) Sabateus (Shabbethai).. .2629°
Royal City Sabathus (Zabad)...... 2629»
ef Royal............ 2624* (Baur) Sabatus
Royal Shekel........... 2758 ef Sabathus.......... 2629»
Ruby Sabban
ef Stones, Precious... .2856° (Fletcher) ef Sabannus.......... 2629»
Rudder, Rudder-bands. .2624> Sabbateus (Shabbethai). .2629°
ef Ships and Boats... .27749 (Nicol) Sabbath............... 2629 (Sampey)
Ruddy. ..........-.0-5 2624® ef Ethics of Jesus... . .1026° (Stalker)
Rude. ee ee 2624» History of........... 26310
Rudiments............ 2624> (Rutherfurd) Jesus and the........ 2631
ef Elements Eo E Pas e 927% ef Lord’s Day........ 1920° (Easton)
ef Principles... ..... .24558 ef Meals............ 2015* (Eager)
Rue.....: ee 2625» cf Number........... 2160* (Smith)
Ruftists e474. 2 Niger ee 2625» (S. F. Hunter) Origin, Biblical ac-
RUG ett s ice cbt tenes 2625 COU eee hree eee 26300
Ruhamah. . teens 2625» Origin, critical views. .2630°
ef Lo-ammi.......... 19072 (Lees) In OT and Maccabean
RU aie) aca aan sete 2625> (W. L. Walker) fincas eee? 26319
Ruler eri dea 2625> (Baur) Pauls teaching re-
Ruler of the Feast...... 2627 (T. Lewis) garding the........ 2631»
Ruler of the Synagogue ef Rest............-. 2561> (W. L. Walker)
R a aR 4 Cit rakes ay 2626” (Baur) Seventh-day Adventist
UES er ee LY, MOM ice se 8 2632" (Prescott)
2 position
ee Bulet scan ati 2028 (Baur) efTenCommandmerts,
Rumah.............-. 2627+ (Ewing) eee ee 2944> (Bampey)
Rump 2 tas 2627 ate
eeaily, Sonia ee 2003 (Luering) See cr sera tens
cee Sgn ae pore ae ef Punishments....... 2504» (Hirsch)
ef Forerunner ...11312 (W. Evans) Sabbath, Court of the
at. : ef Covered Way... ...733" (Hirsch)
ef Games............ 1168> (Smith) :
Rush 2627" (Masterman) Sabbath, Day before the 798 (Hirsch)
ef Reed : i i : ; : (25448 (Masterman) Sabbath Day’s Journey . .2634% (Porter)
Ruste eas weaken ae 2627° (Patch) ef Weights and sear Pe
ef Scum............. 2706 Ures.. 2. eee eee eee * (Porter
Ruthin, of 205 eos uuecnees 26278  (Geden); 4508 | Sabbath, Morrow after :
Matemeay CHOOPE ceton a ts 2083* (Hirsch)
cf Boaz...........-. 491% (Roberts) Sabbath, Second after the cares
ef Ruth, Book of..... 2628> (Geden) Birstiay sc scauidoceeene 2634> (Baur
Ruth, Book of.........2628 (Geden) Sabbatheus
acne and date. .2628° cf Sabbateus......... 2629»
cf Palestine.........- 2214» (Conder) Sabbaths of Years...... 2634>
CESROIEL soap ecusr aes 2627» (Geden) ef Astronomy........ 300” (Maunder)
Rye ef Jubilee Year....... 1756* (Baur)
ef Spelt..........00- 28402 Sabbatical Year........ 2634> (Baur)
“ef Astronomy........300° (Maunder)
Sabachthani Central idea.........2635°
ef Eli, Eli, Lama Sa- ef Jubilee Year....... 1756° (Baur)
hachitani Sabres 939° (Clippinger) Mosaic legislation... . .2635°
(Clipp
Sabaco (Sabakon) Observance.......... 2635
ef So....: Ten ious see 2820* (Nicol) Primary intention... .2635°
Sabaeans............-5 26292 (Pinches) ef Sabbath.......... 26295 (Sampey)
ef Seba...........-- 2710 (Pinches) Sabbeus (Shemaiah)... .2636+
ef Sheba ............ 2752» (Weir) Sabi (Shobai) Daneman 2636°
ef Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches) ef Sabie............. 2636"
Sabanneus (Zabad)..... 2629» eee Payee
Sabannus...........-. 2629 n Arabia..........- eir
Sabaoth Sabias (Hashabiah)..... 26362
ef God, Names of... ..1264> (Mack) Sabie m.-c:-c.oete gees 26362
cf Lord of Hosts...... 1919 Sabta, Sabtah.......... 26362 (Fulton)


3356 GENERAL INDEX
Sabteca, Sabtechah..... 26362 (Ewing) Sacrifice (NT)—continued
Sacanyse ihe teehee 2636 Reconciliation by the
Sackbut sacrifice of Christ. . .2653°
cf Music............ 2094> (Millar) ef Reconciliation... .2536* (M’Caig)
Sackeloth Redemption by the
ef Burial............ 529% (Hager) sacrifice of Christ. . .2653*
Sacraments............ 2636 (Lambert) Relation of Christ’s
ef Baptism..........385° (A. T. Robertson; | sacrifice to salvation 2653*
T. M. Lindsay; Dau) Remission by sacrifice
Efficacy... .......... 2637" of Christ... ....... 2653>
Instituted by Christ. .2637° Requirements for ap-
ef Jesus Christ (Lord’s propriation........ 2656>
Supper)........... 1658? (Orr) ef Retribution........ 25708 (M’Caig)
ef Johannine Theology 1704° (Law) hs See Romans, Epistle to
ef Lord’s Supper... ... 1924° (Dosker) the fuser janet ate: 26149 (Dunelm)
Nature and number... .2636° ef Salvation......... 2666° (Easton)
Term, the........... 2636> | Sanctification by sacri-
Sacrifice, Human....... 2658* (McGlothlin) fice of Christ... ... 26542
Biblical instances... .. 2658 ' Summaries of the doc-
Heathen usage....... 26588 {TNC ae eee eee 2657>
ef Jephthah. aie Sy Gea ale 1587 (Schenk) j Terms employed. - 2. 26515
ef Sacrifice (OT)...... 2638* (Reeve) | Sacrifice (OT).......... 2638" (Reeve)
Use by Hebrews... . . .2658* Ly acieAbelioon ee nee ee 5+ (M. O. Evans)
Sacrifice (NT)......... 26519 (Williams) iy OR CEAltar Scars Sino! 27 8 106° (Wiener; Caldecott)
Appeal of  Christ’s ef In ancient Greece. .1302> (Fairbanks)
death i032 somes 2657* ‘Classification of... .. .26412
Attitude of Jesus and cf Hands, Imposition
NID habe Sa ccnet as oht 2652* | Of eee cael 1335? (Orr)
Blood offerings vs. |  ¢f Heifer, Red........ 1367 (Easton)
ethical views....... 26515 : ef Hospitality........ 1432* (Easton)
Cancellation of guilt Idea and efficacy of. . .2649°
by sacrifice of Christ 26549 Food, adoration, de-
Christ’s sacrifice needs votion.......... 26498
completion......... 26579 Purification and con-
Christian life as sacri- secration........ 2649»
NGG irk er Secs ates ee 2656 Sacramental view. . .2649>


Symbol of prayer. . .2650°
Typology of sacri-


How Christ’s sacrifice
procures salvation. .2654*


Human conditions of DG Citi ies ches cates 2650
application........ 26568 Vicarious expiation. .2650%

Idea in NT.......... 2652> ef Kidneys..........17975 (Easton)

Jesus’ acceptance of ef Law in OT........1856> (Rule)
the doctrine....... 2652 Mosaic sacrifices...... 2642

Jesus’ teaching ...... 2652" H Aaron and his sons. .2643*

Jesus’ teaching  re- Burnt offering... .. .2643%
garding method of Common altars... . .2642>
salvation.......... 2654" Covenant sacrifice. .2642>

Justification by sacri- Drink offering ..... 2645>
fice of Christ....... 26542 Guilt offering. ..... 2645

Lord’s Supper as a Heave and wave
sacrifice........... 2657 offerings......... 2645

ef Mediation, Mediator2018* (Edwards) Meal offering... ... 2643

Nature of Christian Peace offering... ... 2644
sacrifice........... 26575 Sin offering. ....... 2644

Paul and the Epistle to Origin and nature of. . 26392
the Hebrews....... 2652" Theories of natural


Paul’s teaching regard-
ing method of sal-
vation............ 2654>
Paul’s use of terms... .2654>
Rationale of Christ’s
sacrifice........... 2656


origin. .......... 2639%
Theory of Divine
revelation....... 2639»


Theory of homage. .2640*
Theory of piacular
offerings........ .2640°


GENERAL INDEX


3357


Sacrifice (OT)—continued
Origin and nature of—continued
Theory of religious


instincts......... 26406
Theory of sacrificial
THEAL! wert tea gee 2639°
Pre-Mosaic Age...... 2641
Egypt and Baby- ;
lomian sia. tesa re 2641+


Patriarchal examples 2642*
Primitive instances. .2641>
ef Priests and Levites.2452* (Wiener)
Prophets and sacrifice .2647>


Amos and Hosea. . .2647>
Ezekiel...........2648*
Jeremiah.......... 26488
Micah and Isaiah... . 2648+
Sacrifice im the his-
COPY ils ota 2646
David and Solomon 2646»
Early days......... 2646
Exilic and post-
exilic ages....... 2647
Human sacrifices. . .2647
Northern kingdom. .2646>
Samuel and Saul... .2646*
Southern kingdom. .2647*


cf Sacrifice, Human. . .2658* (McGlothlin)
Sacrifice in the “Writ-


AINE B47 vecie son see nee 2648>
ef Shoulder.......... 2780 (Luering)
Terms aud definitions .2638>
of Thigh’, 2225 os e04 2972 (Easton)
ef Totemism......... 30002 (M. O. Evans)
cf Trespass.......... 3010* (Dungan)
ef Wine.............30888 (Easton)
Sacrilege.........-.... 2658?
Sadamias
cf Salemas.......... 2663"
Sadas
cf Astad............ 2954
Saddeus
ef Loddeus.......... 1909»
Saddle (noun).........- 2658°
Saddle (verb).........- 2658
Sadducees............. 2658» (J. E. H. Thomson);


458 (Dosker)
Acceptance of Penta-


teuch alone........ 2660°
Attitude toward apos-

tests Sess cee ie caeas 2660*
Attitude toward Jesus 2659
Character of......... 2660>
Disbelief in traditions . 2660+
Doctrines of......... 2660°
Fall of the party...... 26608
Jesus and the........ 2661
ef Jesus Christ....... 1656° (Orr)
ef Josephus Flavius. . .1742* (Wenley)
Literature of......... 2660°


cf Maccabees, Books
of................19499 (T. W. Davies)


|


Sadducees—continued


Meaning of name... . .2659"
cf Pharisees.......... 2361° (J. E. H. Thomson)
Relation to temple... .2660>


Relations with Hellen-


Rise of the party. .... 2659>
Sources of knowledge


Olver it Rehan as 2659"
Talmudic testimony re-
garding........... 2660
Testimony of Josephus
regarding......... 2659
Treatment by Jewish
Yulers?a.3c2 nee 2659
Sadduke .k1 24 ne ns 2661
ef Zadok............ 3129» (Whitelaw)
Sade es oe aya eke 2661
ef Zadok............ 3129 (Whitelaw)
Safed
cf Naphtali.......... 2119 (Ewing)
Saffron. saeco ots 2661* (Masterman)
Sail, Sailor . ... 26614
cf Ships and Boats.. . .27749 (Nicol)
Saints. Le ueeees 26619 (Estes)
ef Separate thes dhe Podesta 2721»
Sala, Salah............ 26622
ef Shelah............ 2758
Salamiel.............. 26628
cf Shelumiel......... 2759 (Wolf)
Salamis............-.- 2662" (Tod)
Early history... .....2662*
Later history......... 2662
Sites, sansa ane bts 26622
Visit of Paul and Bar-
nabas...........-. 26622
Salasadai.............. 2662»
Salathiel............... 2662°
ef Phaltiel........... 2358"
cf Shealtiel..........27523
Sales ec-c-e sihec signee ep. 2662>
Salecah, Salcah, Salchah 2662> (Ewing
Salem (person)......... 2663+
ef Shallum........... 2747 (Umbach)
Salem (place).......... 2663+ (Pinches)
ef Jerusalem, History.. 1595 (Masterman)
cf King’s Vale........ 1808+ (Masterman)
Salemas (Sadamias)... . . 2663+
ef Shallum.......... 2747" (Umbach)
Salim slash Snes <A ee 2663+ (Ewing)
ef Aenon............ 65> (Ewing)
Salimoth............-- 2663»
ef Shelomith.........27595 (Wolf)
Salat... satires ta 2663»
Sallu
| of Salat. psc wears: 2663>
Sallumus............6. 26635
ef Salum............2665
cf Shallum.......... 2747" (Umbach)
’ Salma
cf Salmon...........2663> (8. F. Hunter)


3358 GENERAL INDEX
SalMAal sooo. ote cae as 2663> Salvation—continued
ef Shalmai........... 2747° ef Person of Christ... .2338° (Warfield)
cf Subai............. 28682 Rest of NT.......... 2670
Salmanasar.........:.. 2663 Hebrews, Ep. to... .2670°
cf Shalmaneser....... 2747» (Nicol) St. John... ........ 2760
Salmon, Salma......... 2663> (8. F. Hunter) Summaries........ 2670
ef Zalmon...........3131> (Ewing) cf Resurrection ...... 2562 (Easton)
Salmone............... 2663» ef Sanctification. ..... 2681» (Rail)
ef Phoenix........... 2391* (Calder) cf Saviour........... 2700* (Easton)
DalOAS en eye. Akeieaste 2664+ ef Spiritual Gifts... .. 2843* (Lambert)
ef Elasah............ 923° Teaching of Jesus... . .2667*
cf Talsas............ 2907 Individualism...... 2667
Salom. . . .2664 John the Baptist... .2667*
Ch Salt ect ec ates 2664> Kingdom of God... .2667>
ef Shallum........... 2747" (Umbach) Moral progress. .... 2667
Salome ee cease 2664 (Orr) Person of Christ... . 26682
ef Zebedee........... 31342 Present and future. .2667°
Dalton re eae Aetesates 2664 (Patch) Teaching of Paul..... 2668>
cf Covenant of Salt. ..729° (Pollard) Atonement........ 2669"
cf Dead Sea......... 8012 (Wright) Forgiveness........ 2669"
CLE MOO te vec. sas Seeds 1121 (Eager) General views...... 2668"
Salt, City of... .....00. 2664> Holy Spirit........ 2669*
ef Moladah.......... 2073 (Masterman) Moral progress. .... 2668>


Salt, Covenant of.......
Salt, Pillar of


Salt Sea
ef Dead Sea.........
Salt, Valley of.........
CLIMGL Ass succes weet


729» (Pollard)


1929 (Boyd)
2664" (Patch)


_ 27842 (Wright)


2817 (Day)


801° (Wright)
2664> (Masterman)
2713> (Ewing)
2664> (Masterman)


..1781* (Masterman)


2664>


. -2664%


2665
2663


. .27472 (Umbach)


2665 (Pollard)
1815* (Easton)
2665* (Easton)
321" (Carver) —
1376" (Easton)
1419 (Easton)


Intermediate literature2666> .


General references. .
Law, views of the...
cf Johannine Theology
ef Justification. ......
ef Mark, Gospel of.. ..
cf Mediation,


General teaching...
Moral law.........
Nation


ef Paul, Theology of. .


2666

26672

1695 (Law)
1782> (Faulkner)
1994> (Farmer)


Medi-


2018" (Edwards)


2665"


2290> (Easton)


Mystical union..... 26692


Terms used.......... 2665*
ef Zoroastrianism..... 3157* (Easton)
Samael
ef Salamiel.......... 2662
Samaias............... 2671* (Angus)
ef Shemaiah......... 2759» (Wolf)
Samaria, City of....... 26712 (Ewing)
Captured by Sargon...571* (Nicol)
Christian events... .. .2672
Depopulation and re-
population of....... 571> (Nicol)
Excavations......... 26715
Herod’s buildings... . .2672+
Historyrd siete eee aS 2671»
Location............ 2671»
cf Mingled People. ... 2056 (Easton)
CEOMPrl. « naicndes a 2192» (Mosiman)
Origin and name...... 26712
cf Palestine, Recent Ex-
ploration.......... 2230 (Cobern)
SIELES Se eG es 2671
Samaria, Country of... .2672> (Ewing)
Boundaries.......... 2672>
Invasion and fall..... 2673>
Later history........ 2673*
ef Samaritans........ 2673> (Ewing)
Scenery............. 26732
Samaria, Woman of
cf Jesus Christ. ...... 1638* (Orr)
Samaritan Pentateuch,
DO e ee ney sees, selec 2312 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Samaritans............ 26735 (Ewing)
ef Gerizim, Mount... .1218* (Ewing)
Later history and
present status...... 2674


Origin of the race... . .2673>
ef Pentateuch, The Sa-


maritan........... 2312> (J. E. H. Thomson)


GENERAL INDEX


Samaritans—continued
Relations with Jews.. .2674*
cf Samaria, Country of 2672 (Ewing)


Samatus.............. 2674
Samech.............4. 26748

ef Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)
Sameius

ef Sameus........... 2674"
Samellius.............. 26748

ef Shimshai.......... 27715 (Wolf)
Sameus............... 26749

ef Shemaiah......... 2759> (Wolf)
Samgar-nebo........... 2674» (Wolf)

ef Rab-mag.......... 2522* (Clippinger)

ef Rab-saris.......... 2522> (Clippinger)
Sami

ef Sabi.............. 26369
Samis

ef Someis............ 2826
Samlah............... 2674>
Sammus............... 2674>

ef Shema............ 2759» (Wolf)
Samoset duce ccdet bans 2674> (Kinsella)

ef Chios............. 611 (Harry)

ef Cos..............7288 (Harry)

ef Ephesus........... 9615 (Banks)

ef Miletus........... 2051> (Banks)

ef Samothrace........ 2675* (Kinsella)
Samothrace............ 2675* (Kinsella)

ef Neapolis.......... 2126* (Tod)

ef Philippi........... 2369 (Tod)

ef Samos............ 2674> (Kinsella)
Sampsames............ 2675*
Samson......-.--..00. 2675" (Robinson); 781>

(Ewing) ; 820° (Beecher)

ef Abdon............ 4° (Beecher)

Adventures in Philistia 2676*

Historicity of the

stories............ 2676>

cf Manoah.......... 1983 (Schenk)

Marriage...........- 2675> :

Name and character. .2675*

ef Palestine.......... 22145 (Conder)

Religious value of the

stories............2676°
Story of his life....... 2675°


Samson, History of
ef Judges, Book of... .1772® (Geden)
Samilelin. ke. anges 2677 (Geden)
Anointing of David. . .792* (Weir)
Character and = in-


fluence.....-...4+: 26788
CERN ya see 1800° (Press)
ef Libraries.......... 1884> (Richardson)


Meaning of name... . .2677%

ef Names, Proper... .2116* (Davis)
Public service........ 2677
Rejection of Saul..... 26788
Relations with David. .2678*
ef Samuel, Books of.. . 2678" (Geden)
ef Saul: ad. he v3 eee 2698> (Weir)


Samuel—continued


Two narratives of
Saul’s elevation... . .2677>


Youth at Shiloh...... 2677"
Samuel, Books of....... 2678 (Geden)
Analysis, life of Sam-
uel... 2 eee ee 26798
Analysis, reign of
Davides: so eee eees 2679»
Contents............ 2679"
Date of sources....... 2680>
Ethical and religious
teaching.......... 2680"
Greek versions....... 26805
ef Jesse............. 1623" (Roberts)
cf Palestine..........- 2214» (Conder)
Period of history..... 26792
Position in canon..... 2678»
ef Samuel........... 2677" (Geden)
CE Saul.2 ceca vein 2698" (Weir)


Sources of history... . .2680°
Two main narratives. .2680°


Sanaas........----000- 2681
ef Senaah........... 2719> (Ewing)
Sanabassar, Sanabas-
SALUS A eatery tai sae o8 2681" (Angus)
ef Shenazzar......... 27615
ef Sheshbazzar....... 2766 (R. D. Wilson)
ef Zerubbabel........ 3147° (R. D. Wilson)
Sanasib............0-. 26815
Sanballat.............. 2681 (R. D. Wilson)
Sanctification.......... 2681> (Rall)
Change from formal to
ethical idea........ 2683°
Criticisms and answers 2686*
Doctrine stated...... 2685
Element in Christian
Lif Gekul wean tetas 26842
Ethical sense........ 2683°
Etymology.......... 2681>


Fellowship with God. .2684*
Formal sense in NT.. .2682>
Formal sense in OT. . .2682°


As God’s gift........- 2683?
ef Holiness.......... 1403> (Lambert)
ef Holy Spirit........ 1406 (Mullins)
Instantaneous and en-

CPG Pes lee ae 2684»
ef Justice............ 1781> (Rall)
Man’s task.......... 2685°


ef Pauline Theology. . .2290 (Easton)
Paul’s teaching on... .2683°
Relation to God per-


sonal............- 2683
ef Sacrifice, NT...... 2654* (Williams)
ef Salvation......... 2665* (Easton)
ef Self-righteousness.. .2715 (Carver)
Cf Sieh k ee ae 2801» (McConnell)


Time and method... . .2683>


3359


3360 GENERAL INDEX


Sanctification, Wesleyan


Doctrine............ 2685» (Steele)
Hymnology.......... 2686"
Wesley’s personal tes-
timony............ 2686°
Sanctity, Legislation of
ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Sanctuary............. 2686 (Wiener)
Ch Altay (osc yc one 106® (Wiener; Caldecott)
Critical views........ 26865
Difficulties of critical
VIC WS ice tate tte Orete os 2687
Explanation attempted 2688*
cf High Place........ 1390* (Easton)
ef Pentateuch........ 22988 (Wiener)
ef Priests and Levites. 2447+; 2450 (Wiener)
ef Seveneh.......... 27448
ef Tabernacle........ 2887> (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Temple........... 29302 (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Worship.......... 3111* (Crannell)
Sand yet caresses dean ce 2688> (Day)
ef Rock............- 25962 (Day)
ef Shore............. 2779 (Day)
Sandal ;
CP Dress wes cece ee eee 875> (Eager)
ef Shoe.............2779" (Easton)
Sand Flies.............- 2688
Cheb leas. esi a ees 1118 (Day)
ef Gnat w..eee 12408 (Day)
ef Insects........... 1473* (Day)
CAGES 25 ena sca eh 1886> (Day)
Sand, Glowing
ef Mirage............ 2066° (Joy)
Sand-lizard............ 2688°
ef Lizard............ 19068 (Day)
ef Snail............. 2819* (Day)
Sanhedrin......... “,,..2688° (Levertoff)
Constitution......... 2689>
cf Jesus Christ (Powers
of Sanhedrin)...... 1660* (Orr)
ef Jesus Christ’s Arrest.1671> (Maclaren)
Jurisdiction......... 2689>
ef Law, Judicial...... 1858* (Hirsch)
Literature........... 2690+
IN AMG secre etre meee 2688>


INE Mee ar Sets 2690

Procedure........... 2690

ef Senate............ 2719» (Heidel)

ef Talmud........... 2904> (Strack)
Sansamnah............. 2690
Saph (Sippai).......... 2690»
Saphates fiche 26905

ef Shephatiah........ 2762° (Orr)
Saphatias.............2690°

cf Shephatiah........ 2762s (Orr)
Sapheth

ef Saphuthi.......... 2690
Saphir


ef Shaphir........... 2750° (Masterman)


Saphuthi.............. 2690>

ef Shephatiah........ 27628 (Orr)
Sapphira.............. 2690>

ef Ananias........... 129 (Edwards)
Sapphire

ef Stones, Precious. . . .2856% (Fletcher)
Saqqareh

cf Memphis......... 2030° (Petrie)
Sarabias............-- 2690>

cf Asebebias......... 266

ef Sherebiah......... 2764» (Wolf)
Sarah (Apoc).......... 2691 (Boyd)

cf Tobit, Book of..... 2990 (T. W. Davies)
Sarah, Sarai.......... 2690 (Boyd)

ef Abraham......... 18° (Boyd)

Birth of Isaac........ 26918

Burial at Hebron. .... 26915

Character of......... 2691>

Forms of the name... .2690°

Mythical view....... 2691>

Relation to Abraham. .2691*
Saraias.............--- 2691

cf Azaraias.......... 3428

ef Seraiah........... 27324 (Wolf)
Saramel

ef Asaramel.......... 263° (Wolf)
Saraph.............05. 2692
Sarchedonus........... 26928

cf Esar-haddon....... 9715 (Clay)
Sardeus

ef Zardeus........... 3132»


Sardin(e), Sardius
cf Stones, Precious... .2856" (Fletcher)


Sardise ce coun ch Sane 2692 (Banks)
Biblical references. . . .2692*
Excavations at....... 26924
History............. 2692

Sardite
ef Sered............. 2732

Sardius


cf Stones, Precious... .2856* (Fletcher)
Sardonyx
cf Stones, Precious... .28568 (Fletcher)


Dale peas ej ek sk cee 2692>

ef Zarephath......... 3132> (Ewing)
Sargon................ 2693 (Clay)

Capture of Samaria by 57+ (Nicol)
Saridv 30.0. cu. tO Rede: 2692»
Sarons ace wa ees 2693+

ef Sharon............ 2750> (Ewing)
Sarothie............... 26935
Sarsechim............. 2693
Saruch................ 26935

ef Serug............. 27385
Satanes; Loses ce ccaeras 2693> (Sweet)

Character........... 2693>

Divine unity....... . .2696*

Foreign influence. ... .2696*

History of........... 2694

Ideain OT.......... 2695>

ef Job, Book of....... 1680; 1681 (Genung)

ef Joshua (son of Jeho-

zadak)............ 1748* (Roberts)


GENERAL INDEX


Satan—continued


Limitations of........ 2696
Mythological origin? .2696°
Names of........... 2693?
No systematic teach-
ING ey cee A ae 2695"
ef Persian Religion
(Ancient).......... 2331> (Tisdall)
Personality of........ 2695
ef Principality........ 2454> (Heidel)
Relation to God...... 2695»


Scriptural statements .2693°
ef Temptation of


Christ............29488 (Anderson)
Works of............ 26942
ef Zoroastrianism..... 3157* (Easton)
Satan, Depths of....... 2696> (Forrester)


Satan, Synagogue of... . 2696 (Williams)
Satchel


ChiBag sb chee en! 377% (Eager)
Sathrabuzanes......... 2696?
ef Shethar-bozenai. .. .2766 (Wolf)
Satisfaction............ 26972 (Downer)
Satrapsich wees eas 26978
Saturn or Moloch Wor-
Ships isk key sh 2 eadesaze 298
Satire ncccove eee 26972 (Day)
ef Goat.............1248 (Day)
ef Jackal...........- 1548 (Day)
ef Zoélogy..........- 3155 (Day)
Saul Sateen cote ee eas 2697» (Weir); 255°
(Nicol)
Attitude of Chronicles
toward............ 2699>
Character..........-2699>
David in the service
Ola iti tans 791> (Weir)
cf David.......... 790> (Weir)
Duplicate accounts. . . 2698"
Genealogy.........-- 2697
ef Gibeah...........12259 (Ewing)
HOME ht eae es 2697
ef Ish-bosheth........ 1508> (Breslich)
ef Jabesh-gilead...... 1546° (Ewing)
ef Jonathan.........- 1730° (Weir)


ef Judah, Kingdom of .1759° (Weir)

Last battle and death. 2699*

ef Mad, Madness. ...- 19618 (Macalister)
Meaning of name... . .2697>


ef Palestine.......... 2215* (Conder)
Posterity of.......... 2699» ;
Reign and fall........ 2698"


Relations with David. 2698
Relations with Samuel 2698>


Rescue of Jabesh-
gilead............. 2698
ef Samuel........... 2677* (Geden)


ef Samuel, Books of.. .2678 (Geden)

Sources and narrative . 2698+

Struggles against Phi-
listines..........-. 26982


3361


Saul—continued
Virtues of........
Weaknesses of... ..

Saul of Tarsus
cf Paul, the Apostle

Savaran


ef Avaran........... 340
DaVes coe ha eng dean 2700"
DAVIES ecatcnc eeienadh aetre rs 2700

CRUZ ZirS See ee 30432 (Roberts)
SAVIOUTe his one neek 2700° (Easton)

ef Salvation......... 2665° (Easton)
DAVOTe vee ul ees 2700° (Edwards)

cf Odor ween DL78Y

ef Triumph.......... 3022> (A. W. Evans)
Saw

cf Tools............. 2998> (Easton)
Sawing Asunder........ 316° (S. F. Hunter)

ef Punishments....... 2504 (Hirsch)
Sayest oe Acc chokes 27019


Sayings, Dark........
Sayings, Faithful.....


Sayings of Jesus


ef Logia...........


Sayings, Unwritten


ef Agrapha........
Scab, Scabbed........


Scabbard, Sheath
ef Armor, Arms


Scale


ef Balance.........
ef Siege..........-


. .7892 (Margolis)
..1091° (Rutherfurd)


. .1910* (Smith)


.. 729 (Smith)
. .2701° (Macalister)


. .2512 (Nicol)
. .8069> (Nicol)


. .379> (Hager)
. .2786* (Nicol)


cf Weights and Meas-


Scape-goat


ef Azazel..........


Scarlet


cf Colors..........


ef Dyeing.........


Scarlet (Worm)......
ef Colors..........


ef Staff... 0.000...


Scholasticism........
School
ef Tyrannus.......


Schoolmaster........


. .8079° (Porter)


. 674° (Patch)
. -883 (Patch)
. 2109 (Day)


_ 855" (Nicol)

. .2701» (Easton)

. .2850° (Caldecott)

. .27022 (S. F. Hunter)
. 1018 (Alexander)


. .3030¢ (S. F. Hunter)
. .2702> (Easton)


cf Pauline Theology. . .22922 (Easton)


ef Tutor..........


3362


GENERAL INDEX


Schools of the Prophets


ef Education......... 900° (Meyer)
ef Prophets.......... 2459 (Orelli)
DCIENCEs tae «cotta 2702» (Rutherfurd)
ef Gnosticism. ....... 12402 (Rutherfurd)
Scimitar. .... . 2703"
Scoff, Scoffer........... 27032
COMM ety Ses So dt calcein 2703" (McPheeters)
Scorpion.............. 2703 (Day)
ef Insects........... 1473 (Day)
Scorpions, Chastising with
cf Punishments... .... 2506 (Hirsch)
ef Scorpion.......... 2703" (Day)
Scourge, Scourging...... 2704* (Dosker)
Serabble..............2704#
Screech Owl
ef Night-monster. .... 2143 (Sweet)
Scribes................ 2704 (Hirsch)
Formalism result of
scribal work....... 2705»
Generally Pharisees. . .2705*
Greatness of the law. .2705
Honor accorded to... .2704>
ef Lawyer. . .....1859* (Hirsch)
Outgrowth of priestly
service..........-- 27042
Proverbs regarding... .2705*
Remuneration........ 2705"
Writers and teachers of
the law........... 2704
Scripts Hed te et 2705
CF Bag ioe ce. e hes 377" (Eager)
Scripture.............. 2706* (Orr)
CE Bible. atta neteGc 459» (Orr)


Scriptures, Search the
cf Search the Scrip-


tures.............2710° (Harry)
Scroll

CHARM & vc toe tad ars 25972 (Richardson)
Sculpture and _ Inscrip-

tions

At Carchemish....... 577» (Pinches)
Scum Ags Ue, 2706"

CL RUStis 2 oc caceer ees 2627> (Patch)
SCUBVYs i pee es ess 27062 (Macalister)
Scythians............. 2706* (Porter)

ef Jeremiah.......... 1589> (Orelli)

ef Parthians.........2 2251> (Porter)
cf Zephaniah, Book of 3145 (Hiselen)
Scythopolis............ 2706"

cf Beth-shean........ 452> (Ewing)
Sea seed orate 2706° (Day)

cf Sea of Jazer....... 2707
Sea, Adriatic

ef Adria............. 62° (Allen)
Sea of Arabah

cf Dead Sea......... 8012 (Wright)


Sea, Brazen

cf Sea, The Molten. .
Sea of Chinnereth

ef Galilee, Sea of..... 1165* (Ewing)


. 2708" (Caldecott)


r


Sea, Dead; Eastern


cf Dead Sea.........- 801* (Wright)
Sea, Former

cf Dead Sea......... 801° (Wright)

ef Former........... 11362 (W. L. Walker)
Sea of Galilee.......... 1165* (Ewing)

ef Ships and Boats... .2776% (Nicol)
Sea of Glass........... 1234> (Orr)
Sea, The Great......... 2707> (Ewing)

CE ACCO ees oe 28° (Porter)

Israel and the sea... . .2707°

ef Joppa. . _.1731> (Ewing)

ef Mediterranean Bea: .2026> (Heidel)

Names of.........-.- 2707

Inthe NT.......... 2708"


cf Paul, the Apostle. ..2264> (A. T. Robertson)
Sea, Hinder; Utmost;

Uttermost; Western

cf Mediterranean Sea. .2026> (Heidel)


Sea of Jazer........... 2707>
ef Jazer.........004. 1572* (Ewing)
CE Sea. eikg ea eae ne 2707 (Day)


Sea of Joppa
cf Mediterranean Sea. 2026 (Heidel)
Sea of Lot


cf Dead Sea......... 8018 (Wright)
CE LAK Cs hacia csi'tierins 18228 (Day)
Sea, Mediterranean... . .2026% (Heidel)
Sea-mew.............. 2707+ (Stratton-Porter)
ef Cuckoo........... 7659 (Stratton-Porter)
Sea, The Molten, or

BYaZOD ss ccane creed 4 2708 (Caldecott)

ef Temple........... 29302 (Caldecott; Orr)
Sea-monster........... 27078 (Day)

cf Dragon........... 873° (Day)

ef Jackal... 0.2.22... 1548 (Day)

cf Water-spont....... 3075* (Day)

ef Whale............ 380823 (Day)


Sea of the Philistines
cf Mediterranean Sea.2026> (Heidel)


Sea, of the Plain (Arabah)

cf Dead Sea......... 8012 (Wright)
Sea, Red............. 2538> (Wright)
Sea, Salt

cf Dead Sea.......... 801° (Wright)
Sea of Sodom (Sodomit-

ish)

cf Dead Sea......... 801% (Wright)
Sea of Tiberias

cf Galilee, Sea of..... 1165 (Ewing)


Sea, Western
cf Mediterranean Sea. .2026> (Heidel)


Seabr cc? aetna rs 27088
cf Weights and Meas-
UTES as Mele Pena 3079* (Porter)
Deals terete ee tN 2708* (Edwards)
Among the Hebrews. .2708
Baptism as.......... 2709
Circumcision as...... 2709»
Metaphorical use. .... 27098
ef Mystery.......... 2104* (Edwards)


GENERAL INDEX


3363


Seal—continued


Prevalence in an-
tiquity.........0.. 2708*

Cf Prints: c0i0ths sated 2455* (Richardson)

eb Rings sna ea a 2594 (Crannell)

cf Sealed Fountain... .2709°


ef Text of the Old


Testament......... 2957> (Weir)
Uses of sealing....... 2709"
Sealed Fountain........ 27098
ef Jerusalem......... 16112 (Masterman)
CES eal sc. crane vce. 2709" (Edwards)
Sealskin............... 2709»
ef Badger........... 376° (Day)
ef Porpoise.......... 2422
CESKY: Gh laden ass 2813> (Luering)
Seam, Seamless........ 2710°
Sears ch ch holies 1 dese. 27108
Search ashe cetera 2710* (Gerberding)
ef Searchings........ 2710 (N. Isaacs)
Search the Scriptures... .2710* (Harry)
Searchings............ 2710 (N. Isaacs)
ef Search............ 2710° (Gerberding)
Seasons............... 2710° (Joy)
cf Astronomy........ 304* (Maunder)
CE Coldest sus os Sek 673> (Joy)
Ch Heath he 1352" (Joy)
ef Raine sees ges 2525> (Joy)
cf Summer.......... 2870+ (Porter)
BOA ts tk ee ena la erracl 2710° (Cotton)
ef Stool............. 2862> (Cotton)
Seats, Chief........... 606° (J. M. Wilson)
Sebar Ont. een tcc eed aeons 2710° (Pinches)
cf Sabaeans.......... 26299 (Pinches)
cf Sheba............ 2752> (Weir)
Sebam.........-...65. 27118 (Ewing)
Sebat
ef Shebat............ 2753
Secacah.............-. 2711% (Masterman)
Sechenias.........-..- 27118
ef Shecaniah......... 2754> (Wolf)
Sechu
ef Secu........-.--5- 2711 (Ewing)
Second Advent......... 616* (Bevan)
Secondarily..........-- 2711>
Second Coming
cf Eschatology of the
INAy ache seston perce 979» (Vos)
cf Parousia.......... 2249 (Haston)
Second Death :
ef Death... ......... 8118 (Macalister; Ba-
vinck)
cf Eschatology of the
NUTS eee to San 979 (Vos)
Second Sabbath........2634> (Baur)
Secret....--....-...0-- 2711>
Sethe sini aerate ak, 27115 (W. L. Walker)
ef Heresy...........18778 (Jacobs)
SOC Utes nett Rta 2711> (Ewing)
Secundus.............. 2711


Secure, Securely, Security 27115 (Dosker)
ef Surety. ........... 2872® (Reeve)


Sedekias (Sedecias)..... 27128


Zedechias........... 3141+

Sedition............0.. 2712

Seduce, Seducer........ 2712" (Edwards)
ef Crimes........... 745° (Hirsch)
cf Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)

Seduction............. 7488 (Hirsch)

SCO cused erie aes 2712 (M. O. Evans)
ef Revelation........ 2573» (Warfield)

Deedes vidas 2712> (Easton)
ef Agriculture........ 75> (Patch)

Cf Cleaties. ccc Geis ote 6672 (Crannell)
cf Regeneration...... 2546» (Nuelsen)

S66iicien asees 2713° (Orr)
ef Prophet, Prophecy. .2459> (Orelli)

Seethe...............- 27138

DSeoubits eos hs 2713" (Wolf)
cf Gezer..........0.. 1222 (Masterman)

Sein aguk Vienne eee 2713* (Ewing)
cf Edom............ 899" (Ewing)

Séirahs2:.c¢ntoew see a eels 27138

Seirath
ef Seirah............2713*

Selasass tac aan a 2713> (Ewing)
Bozrah of Amos 1 12 .2713>
Commercial impor-

GAN COs: Si oat scl sheet eet 2714®
Impressiveness of city

Of Petras. esse 2714
ef Joktheel..........1727>
Location... ......... 2713°
Petras ethiecs oi Osanes 2713°
cf Stone, Stones...... 2856° (Day)

Selahs oncneesd vere ba 2714°
ef Music...........- 2094° (Millar)


cf Psalms, Book of... .2488 (Sampey)
Sela-hammahlekoth..... 2714


Seleditsk ter li Pra Boles 2714
Selemia

cf Selemias.......... 2714
Selemias..........-..-. 2714
Seleucia............00. 2714° (Christie)

History of. .......... 27159

Port of Antioch...... 2714

Ruins of............ 2715"
Seleucidae

ef Seleucus.......... 27158 (Hutchison)
Seleucus............--- 2715* (Hutchison)

ef Heliodorus........ 1370° (Hutchison)
Self-control............ 2715
Self-denial

ef Abstinence........ 24> (Eager)
Self-righteousness....... 2715> (Carver)

cf Sanctification...... 26815 (Rall)
Self-surrender.......... 2715» (Pollard)

In Christ’s teaching... .2716*

Examples in OT...... 2716°

Ideal in law and

prophets.......... 27168

Idealin NT.........2716%

Self-will..........--5.. 2716° (Dosker)


3364


GENERAL INDEX


Sell, Seller
ef Lydia (country)... .1943® (Banks)


ef Trader ek. . 30022 (Easton)
Selvedge.............. 2716

ef Clasps............ 665° (Caldecott)
Haid pare erase ea Oe 27174
Semachiah............ 27178

ef Ismachiah......... 1511
Semele el tS cee 27179

ef Shimei............ 2770 (Mack)
Semeias............... 27179

ef Shimei............ 2770 (Mack)
Semein................ 27178
DEMIS ok A Shas oes 27178

ef Shimei............ 27702 (Mack)
Semellius

ef Samellius.......... 26743

ef Shimshai.......... 27719 (Wolf)
Semiramis............. 350° (Pinches)
Semis '

ef Semeis............ 27174
Semites, Semitic Religion2717* (Mack)

ef Abraham......... 18 (Boyd)

ef Arphaxad........ 259

ef Ashtoreth......... 270° (Sayce)

ef Assyria........... 290° (Sayce)

cf Baal.............8452 (Sayce)

ef Babylonia......... 358° (Clay)

Biblical references... .2717*

ef Chiun............ 6122 (Margolis)

ef Eber......... .890> (Grant)


Immanence of God. . .2719
ef Israel, Religion of. .1530% (Orelli)
Mixed racially....... 2718%
ef Moloch (Molech). .2074* (Nicol)


Moral character of
Deltyic. can eases 2719»
Original home of...... 2717
Personality of Deity. .2719*
Semitic languages... . .2718>
Semitic religion...... 2718>
Sons of Shem........ 2717
Table of Gen 10...... 27188


ef Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches)
Theism of Semites... .2719"


Senaahy shen ce aes 2719> (Ewing)

ef Hassenuah........ 1342

ef Sanaas............ 26812
Senate, Senator........2719> (Heidel)

ef Government....... 12879 (Heidel)

ef Sanhedrin......... 2688° (Levertoff)
Seneca

ef Nero oo... . 21359 (Angus)
Seneh..............0.. 2720° (Ewing)

ef Bozez............ 512> (Ewing)

ef Michmash......... 2048* (Ewing)
Deniers. fuck oo noe 27203 (Ewing)

ef Hermon.......... 1378* (Ewing)

ef Shenir............2761
Sennacherib............ 2720° (Clay); 3679 (Clay)


Campaign against Ju-


Sennacherib—continued
Early campaigns.....
Later years and death
Name and rise.......
ef Nineveh..........
ef Sharezer..........


Sentence..............
Senuah...............


Separate 4.0/2. 38084
ef Nazirite..........


Separation............
ef Heifer, Red........
ef Nazirite..........
ef Uncleanness.......


ef Ivwah............
ef Sepharvites.......
Sepharvites............
ef Sepharvaim........
Sepphoris............
Septuagint............


2720
2720°


2149 (Pinches)

2750 (Eiselen)

2720 (W. L. Walker)
27218 (Pratt)

2494 (Marais)

27212 (W. L. Walker)
27912 (Masterman)


1367° (Easton)
2124 (Christie)
3035> (Williams)
2721 (Fulton)
2721° (Orr)
2721» (Pinches)
1544° (Pinches)


27228


2722
2721 (Pinches)


27228


2722* (Thackeray); 461°
(Orr); 457% (Dosker);
857% (Nicol)


Characteristies of the


General features... .


27312


Grouping on internal


evidence........
Hexateuch, the.....


2729


Latest LXX trans-


“Latter” prophets. .2730
“Writings,” the. .. :2730°


Differences between
Greek and Hebrew
LEXUS vests 27314
Sequence.......... 27314


Subject-matter..... 2731
Evidence of prologue

to Sirach.......... 2724»
Importance.......... 2722

Based on early text .2722>

Bible of the early


chureh..........2722>

ef Jeremiah.......... 15912 (Orelli)
ef JeroboamI]........ 1593* (Mosiman)
ef Manuscripts....... 1984* (Richardson)
Names rir. eee 2722
Number, titles and or-

der of books....... 2728»

Contents.......... 2728»


ef Kingdom of God. 1805+ (Stalker)
Message, the........ 2733>


Unity of Second Isaiah 2739°
Servants, Solomon’s . . . .2825° (Mack)


GENERAL INDEX 3365
Septuagint—continued Sermon on the Mount, The—continued
Number, titles and order of books—continued Motive and conduct. .2735*
Grouping and order New righteousness, the 2734°
of books........ 27299 Parallels............ 27322
Pte gs cos tia oe eds 2729° Principles........... 2735?
ef Papyrus.......... 22415 (Goodspeed) Scene.............-- 27338
cf Pentateuch........ 2302 (Wiener) cf Sermon on the Plain
ef Ptolemy.......... 2499> (Angus) THO scos3 asia ated : 2736 (Miller)
Reconstruction of text.2727> Time and occasion. . . .2733*
Ancient versions. 2 2727> Sermon on the Plain
Coptie, Ethiopic and PRG iccnaneacs ees bts 27368 (Miller)
Syriac. Fees 27276 ef Sermon on the
Manuscripts... .... 2728" Mount, The....... 2732> (Miller)
Printed texts....... 2728* Seronin estas careless 2736"
Reconstruction —_ of Serpent............0.. 2736 (Day)
the original text. .2728¢ ef Adder............ 55* (Day)
ef Text and Manu- Biblical names....... 27378 :
scripts of the NT. . .2950° (Sitterly) ef Bittern........... 4844 (Stratton-Porter)
ef Text of the OT... .2960* (Weir) Figurative use........ 2738
Traditional origin... . .2723% cf Hedgehog......... 13678
Christian views... . .2723> ef Jerusalem......... 1610 (Masterman)
Evidence of Aristo- In the Orient........ 2736
bulus and Philo. .2723+ CLOW een ohne ets 2205> (Stratton-Porter)
Letter of Aristeas.. .2723° In Palestine.......... 2736"
Transmission of LXX ef Porcupine......... 2421> (Day)
bexbien tee lls 27246 cf Reptile........... 25618
Aquila ee 2725> ef Viper. ............ 3051>
Hesychius codec odie es 2727 Serpent, Brazen
Lucian edge Deere 2727* cf Nehushtan........ 2132 (Longacre)
Official revision of Serpent-charming....... 2738°
Hebrew......... 27258 Serpent, Crooked 2738b
Origen and the Hexa- i re: war b
iy eae, 97968 ¢ tronomy TE dtadsats 300° (Maunder)
Symmachus....... 2726 Serpent, Fiery
ThGgd tion ce coe 2725 ef Nehushtan........ 2132* (Longacre)
ef Versions, Georgian. .3048* (Easton) of Serpent. i ein hs weal 213087)
ef Writing...........3121* (Richardson) Serpent Worship... .... 2te Orr)
Sepulchre............. 27328 cf Nehushtan........ 21322 (Longacre)
ef Burial............ 529% (Hager) Serigeicheteeess Gees 2738
ef Jerusalem......... 1611> (Masterman) ef Saruch............ 2693°
Serah we wi ed ee cece 27328 Servant... 0.0.2... 2738 (McGlothlin)
Seraiah............--. 27322 (Wolf) cf Manservant....... 1983
ef Azaraias.......... 3428 ef Slave, Slavery...... 2815* (Raffety)
ef Saraias........... 2691> Servant of Jehovah (The
Seraphim.............. 2732+ (Carver) Lord) test ence: 27393 (Hough)
Seraitas /) nicest Sees 2732 Date of Servant sec-
ef Sisera............ 2812° (Schenk) HONS ce eer ete ien 2740
Sereda. PS aa 2732> Historical situation. . .2739*
Sergius Paulus......... 2292> (Kerr) Ideas of Isaiah 40-66. .2739°
Serjeants...........-.- 2732 ef Isaiah............ 1495 (Robinson)
Sermon on the Mount, ef Mediation, Medi-
Wee ilies lhe ke 2732> (Miller) BOOP iiss oe ate Gee Y 2020> (Edwards)
Analysis............ 27349 ef Messiah.......... 20414 (Crichton)
cf Beatitudes......... 4199 (Lambert) Messianic significance . 2742°
ef Ethics............ 1013? (Alexander) Not by Prophet Isaiah 2739*
ef Ethics of Jesus... . .1026* (Stalker) Personality of Servant.2741+
Heavens............ 2733° Place in OT......... 2742
Historicity........-- 2733 Psychology of the
ef Jesus Christ....... 1642 (Orr) prophecy.......... 27420
Kingdom of God..... 2734 Servant passages. .... 2740+


3366 GENERAL INDEX
Service................ 2742 (Raffety) Shadow of Death....... 27462 (W. L. Walker)
ef Servant........... 2738 (McGlothlin) Shadrach.............. 27462 (R. D. Wilson)
Servitig-women cf Abednego...... ...4° (R. D. Wilson)
ef Priests and Levites.2446> (Wiener) ef Hananiah.........13833 (Reeve)
Servitude ef Meshach.......... 2038" (R. D. Wilson)
ef Servant........... 2738 (McGlothlin) ef Song of Three Chil-
ef Slave, Slavery...... 2815" (Raffety) Oren iss ota ea 28342 (T. W. Davies)
DESIST fn zene 27434 Shady Trees........... 2746>
ef Shashai........... 27514 cf Lotus Trees....... 1931> (Masterman)
Sesthélitin 2 Scace wkitewes 27434 DAL sic s teks once ees _ 2746»
ef Bezalel........... 459> (Farr) ef Archery........... 233° (Hager)
SEA epee ames Nea 2743 (Dosker) ef Armor, Arms...... 2518 (Nicol)
Seth, Sheth............ 2743 (S. F. Hunter); 139> | Shagee...........-...- 2746?
Seimei sebwee te 2743 Shaharaim............ 2746"
Setting........0...0.-. 2743 Shahazumah........... 2746»
Settle (noun)........... 92743» Shalem...............2746 (Ewing)
ef Temple........... 29302 (Caldecott; Orr) Shalim :
Settle (verb)........... 2743» (Dosker) of Shaalim, Dank Oh eee eine
eI gee 9743 Shalishah, Land of...... 2746> (Ewing)
HS nt eral Ok lobe 2159 (Smith); 2160" Shallecheth.......:....2747 (Masterman)
(Smith) Shallum (general)...... 2747 (Umbach)
Seen Churches ef Jehoahaz.........- 1575* (Genung)
cf UAnees or Peved cf Jeroboam I Sea 1594 (Caldecott)
Churches.........- 135° (Banks) cf Meshelemiah....... 2038°
Rie Ie ee 7440 ef Meshullam........ 2038» (Lees)
cf Avariale Panpuage 294): EH Thomson) ee ae cc
ef Egypt............906 (Petrie) Oa eas er hay ee
ef Papyrus.......... 2238 (Goodspeed) Eta, alas
ef Sanctuary......... 2686> (Wiener) Cee Oe uteare 206%
Gesamte ef Salum.. betes . 2665
of Gach ona. ede B08 cf Shillem, Shillemites 2768
WoC Al. sees 24538 (Baur) ae (king). ........ in (Caldecott)
Seven Star Sai oe
F ef pee Finch ances 300° (Maunder) Gh Saladin. cre ee 2663>
even ay Shalman.............. 2747> (Hiselen)
ef Sabbath.......... 2629> (Sam :
Se eee Wane sa i oem
ef Number........... 2157* (Smith) Apres orks a, 290° (Sayce); 487" (Nicol)
Seventy Disciples....... 2744* (Carver) Ci Meba sk caveat 1586" (Caldecott)
Seventy Weeks........ 2744* (Orr) of Syria......... .. . .2882° (Christie)
Sceeee ey “on ae D. Wilson) Pas campaigns. . Bie 5712 (Nicol)
ef Captivity......... 569 (Nicol) Spee eo ane
Deversne Ge conte deeds 2744» ef Salmai............ 2663>
Several, Severally....... 2744> Shamariah
Shaalabbin............ 2745" ef Shemariah........ 2760° (Wolf)
Shaalbim.............. 2745+ (Ewing) Shamash.............. 3718 (Rogers)
Shaalbonite............ 2745 Shambles.............. 27485
Shaalim, Land of....... 2745* (Ewing) Shame ssid. ernoie ech 27485 (Stuart)
Shaaph seMisebevke hicie soy tie ogee 27458 Shamed (Shemed)
Shaaraim............. 2745* (Masterman) ef Shemer........... 2760> (Wolf)
ef Shilhim........... 2768? Shamefacedness
Shaashgaz............. 2745» cf Shamefastness..... 2748»
Shabbethai............ 2745 (Wolf) Shamefastness.......... 2748>
ef Sabbateus......... 2629° Shamer
Shachia............... 2745» ef Shemer.......... .2760% (Wolf)
Shaddai Shamgar.............. 2748) (E. D. Isaacs
ef God, Names of... ..1264> (Mack) Shamhuth
Shade, Shadow, Shadow- cf Shammua, Sham-
ing.................2745 (W. L. Walker) Muda. hc ete aloe 2749»
ef Shadow of Death.. .2746° (W. L. Walker) Shamir (person)........ 27493


GENERAL INDEX 3367
Shamir (places)....... 2749* (Masterman) Shear
Shamlai ef Sheep............2756% (Day)
ef Salmai............ 2663> ef Sheep Tending..... 2758* (Patch)
ef Subai............. 2868 Sheariah.............. 2752
Shamma.............. 27498 Shearing House........2752>
Shammah............. 2749° (Wolf) Shear-jashub.......... 2752>
cf Harod, Well of... ..1340> (Ewing) ef Immanuel......... 1457> (A. W. Evans)
ef Shimea...........2769> ef Jashub...........15718
ef Shimei............ 27708 (Mack) cf Jushab-hesed... .. .1781>
Shammai.............. 2749> cf Maher-shalal-hash-
Shammoth di ie Wee loco Ractive eaten 19678
, eat:
se Shammah......... 27498 (Wolf) CES WOE ss «a eos 4a ps DEPAON CAD)
mmua, Shammuah.. .2749° ‘ :
: Sheba (person and tribe). 2752 (Weir)
ef Shemaiah......... 2759» (Wolf) ; : Fe
ef Shimea........... 2769° peer i a a lee
ee ae as 9749» Civilization Bln. Raves 2753
, History. aie 5 ot ease 2752
Shaper 244 we aie es 2749» (Luering) Religion............. 27530
Shapham.............. 2749? ef Sabaeans.......... 26292 (Pinches)
Shaphan aelton eons he, fas wi oat ay ses 2749> (Wolf) cf Seba......eeccues 2710> (Pinches)
ef Totemism......... 3000° (M. O. Evans) cf Us.............. 3042 (Weir)
Shaphat............... 2750" Sheba (place).......... 2753° (Masterman)
Shapher cf Shema (place)..... 2759 (Masterman)
ef Shepher stl castes 2763° Sheba, Queen of........ 2514 (Roberts)
Shaphir............... 2750" (Masterman) Shebah
Sharale so0.g das he a ae 2750° ef Shibah............ 27676
Sharaim Shebam
ef Shaaraim......... 27459 (Masterman) cf Sebam............ 27112 (Ewing)
Sharar Shebaniah.............. 2753
ef Sacar............. 2636* ef Shecaniah......... 2754> (Wolf)
Share Shebarim.............- 2753>
ef Plow............. 2409* (Patch) ef Quarries........... 2512b (Day)
Sharezer.............. 2750* (Eiselen) SHebatcsiceelsccnuis beieowe 2753
ef Adrammelech...... 61» (Beecher) cf Calendar.......... 541» (Porter)
cf Regem-melech. .. . .2546° Sheber.......-..0--0-- 2753»
ef Sennacherib....... 2720+ (Clay) Shebna...........00-- 2753 (Roberts)
Sharon.......--....-65 2750° (Ewing) ef Eliakim........... 929 (S. F. Hunter)
ef Lassharon......... 1840* Reference in Isaiah 22 2753>
ef Saron............. 2693" Reference in 2 K 18, .2754*
Sharonite............. 27518 Relation of the two
ef Sharon........... 2750> (Ewing) references......... 27542
ef Shitrail............ 2778 ef Zabud............ 3128> (Roberts)
Sharuhen.............. 27514 Shebuel.............0 2754
ef Shaaraim......... 2745° (Masterman) ef Shubael........... 2781
ef Shilhim........... 2768> Shecaniah, Shechaniah... 2754» (Wolf)
Shashais .1 ene eheuwns 27519 ef Sechenias (Apoc).. .2711¢
ef Sesis (Apoc)....... 2743 ef Shebaniah......... 2753>
Shashak............... 27518 Shechem.............. 2755* (Ewing)
Shaul, Shaulites........ 2751 Israelite history. .....2755>
Shaveh-kiriathaim...... 2751> ef Jacob’s Well....... 1556" (Ewing)
Shaveh, Vale of........2751> Location and features. 2756+
ef King’s Vale....... 1808* (Masterman) Modern Shechem..... 2756"
Shaving............... 2751» (Orr) Patriarchal history... .2755*
Shavsha.............. 2751> (Wolf). cf Refuge, Cities of. ..2545> (Ewing)
ef Sheva............2766> ef Sychar............ 2876 (Ewing)
Shawl cucsitsiee ke felts 2752 Shechemites........... 2756
ef Dress............- 875» (Eager) Shed, Shedding......... 2756> (Dosker)
Sheaf, Sheaves..... _....2752 (Patch) Shedeur..............- 2756
ef Agriculture........ 75° (Patch) Sheep c.eas ccs sans 2756" (Day)
Shea es. ce ee ett 2752 Care of wat ea ee 205e2
Shealtiel............. 27528 cf Cattle............583> (Day)
ef Salathiel (Apoc).. . . 2662 Ch Wels el ideale 10499 (Day)


3368


GENERAL INDEX


Sheep—continued
Figurative references. .2757°


ch Rood. iui ee 1123> (Hager)

ef Herdsman......... 1375 (Patch)

ef Lamb............ 1822 (Day)

INaIMESs Species suited tees 2756>

OT references........ 2757

ef Ram (animal)...... 2527»

Sheep of Palestine. .. .2756

ef Shepherd......... 2763" (Patch)

Species.............. 2756
Sheepcote, Sheepfold.. . .2757% (Patch)
Sheep Gate............ 2758*

ef Bethesda.......... 444> (Masterman)


ef Jerusalem Gates... .1597 (Masterman)


cf Sheep Market...... 2758


Sheep Market......... 2758"
cf Bethesda.......... 444> (Masterman)
cf Sheep Gate........ 27588
Sheep-master........... 2758


cf Sheep-shearing..... 2758* (Patch)
Sheep-raising


ef Agriculture........ 78® (Patch)
ef Herdsman......... 1375> (Patch)
Sheep-shearing......... 2758° (Patch)
Sheepskin
ef Bottle............ 509> (Eager)
ef Dress............. 875> (Eager)
cf Rams’ Skins....... 2530*
Sheep Tending......... 2758* (Patch)
Sheerah............... 2758
Sheet............-0005 2758
Shehariah....... 2758
Shekel... .............. 2758* (Porter)
ef Money............ 2076* (Porter)
cf Shekel of the Sanctu-
ary or Sacred Shekel 2758>
ef Stater............ 2850
cf Weights and Meas-
ures..............3079* (Porter)
Shekel of the King’s
Weight or Royal
Shekel. ..........-.- 2758
ef Weights and Meas-
UPESS ch oe Nawiaet 30792 (Porter)


Shekel of the Sanctuary
or Sacred Shekel...... 2758°


ef Shekel............ 2758* (Porter)
Shekinah.............. 2758>

CHGIOLY Uae a eite mene 1235» (Betteridge)
Shelah................ 2758»

ef Sala, Salah. ....... 2662

ef Siloam. ........... 2791 (Masterman)
Shelah, Pool of

cf Jerusalem......... 1601>; 1606 (Master-

man)

Shelanites

ef Shelah............ 2758>
Shelemiah............. 2758» (Wolf)

cf Meshelemiah...... 2038°
Sheleph............... 2759


Shelesh............... 2759"


Shelomi............... 2759*

Shelomith............. 2759 (Wolf)
ef Salimoth (Apoc)... .2663°

Shelomoth............. 2759

Shelumiel............. 2759° (Wolf)
ef Salamiel (Apoc)... .2662*

Shem: 5.0 24sec heats 2759* (Pinches) -
ef Ham (person)..... 1323> (Pinches)
ef Ham (place)....... 1324* (Ewing)
ef Japheth........... 1568> (Pinches)


cf Table of Nations. . .2898 (Pinches)
Shema (persons)... .... .2759 (Wolf)
cf Sammus (Apoc)....2674>


cf Shimei............ 2770° (Mack)
Shema (place)......... 2759> (Masterman)

cf Sheba............ 2753* (Masterman)
Shemaah.............. 2759
Shemaiah............. 2759» (Wolf)


ef Maasmas (Apoc).. .1946*
cf Sabbeus (Apoc). .. . 2636
ef Samaias (Apoc). .. .26719 (Angus)
cf Sameus (Apoc).. .. .2674°


ef Shammua, Sham-

MUAH es ent Sire 2749>
Shemariah............. 2760 (Wolf)
Shemeber............. 2760

ef Shinab............ 27712 (Wolf)
Shemed

ef Shemer........... 2760> (Wolf)
Shemer............... 2760> (Wolf)

ef Shomer........... 2779%
Shemida, Shemidah, She-

midaites............ 2760°
Sheminith

ef Music............ 2094> (Millar)

ef Psalms, Book of... .24872 (Sampey)
Shemiramoth..........2761* (Wolf)
Shemites

ef Semites........... 27179 (Mack)
Shemuel.............. 2761

ef Samuel........... 2677 (Geden)
NONE Minot eh es acete ee 2761
Shenazar

ef Shenazzar......... 27618
Shenazzar............. 2761

ef Sanabassar, Sana-

bassarus........... 26815 (Angus)

Shenir............0.00.. 2761

ef Senir...... Pree Rae 2720" (Ewing)
Sheolic Ba. eres ees 27612 (Orr)


‘Abode of the dead... .2761
ef Abraham’s Bosom. .22> (Orr)


ef Death............ 8115 (Macalister; Bavinck)
cf Eschatology of the
OT a ed ee a 972 (Orr)
ef Hades............ 1314> (Vos)
ef Hell.............. 1371+ (Orr)
ef Immortal......... 1458> (Orr)
IN Su Oi ion a he yes eee 2761¢


Not out of God’s rule. 2761>
Not state of uncon-
sciousness.........2761>


GENERAL INDEX 3369


Sheol—continued
Post-canonical devel-


opment........... 2762
Relation to future life.2761>
ef Resurrection....... 2562* (Haston)
ef Retribution........ 25702 (M’Caig)
Shepham.............. 2762
Shephatiah............ 2762* (Orr)


cf Saphat (Apoc)..... 2690>
ef Saphatias (Apoc). . .2690
ef Saphuthi (Apoc).. . .2690°


Shephelah............. 2762" (Ewing)
Districts and features. 2762»
Five valleys. ........2762>
ef Judah, Territory of .1763* (Masterman)
ef Lowland.......... 1934> (Day)
Meaning and _ refer-
ANCES: cd dae des 2762
CLV ale. cakes case 3045* (Day)
Shepher............... 2763"
ef Wanderings of Israel 3064" (Conder)
Shepherd.............. 2763* (Patch)
Biblical references. . . .2763*
Duties of............ 2763"
Equipment of........ 27645
- Figurative references. .2764*
Jesus aS.........-264- 27645
ef Sheep............ 2756 (Day)
ef Staff.............2847%
Shephi, Shepho......... 2764*
Shephupham, Shephu-
phanis on oe ate ek 27645
ef Muppim.......... 20942
ef Shuppim.......... 27825
Sherah
ef Sheerah........... 2758
Sherd
ef Potsherd.......... 2423»
Sherebiah............- 2764> (Wolf)


ef Asebebias (Apoc). .266>
ef Sarabias (Apoc)... .2690>


Sheresh........-..-0-- 2764>
Sherezer

ef Sharezer.......... 2750° (Hiselen )
Sherghat, or Asshur or

ASSUPS ected ten ctant 2764 (Banks)

ef Assyria...-.....-. 290° (Sayce)

Excavations at.....-.. 2765

First capital of Assyria 2764

Monoliths of......... 2765%

Mounds of Assur..... 2764»

Temple of Assur...... 2765°

Tombs of kings.....-- 2765»
Sheriff........00.--0-- 2765
Sheshach..........---- 2765° (Wolf)

ef Jeremiah.......... 1587> (Roberts)
Sheshai.........-----. 2766°
Sheshan..........-.--- 2766*
Sheshbazzar............ 2766° (R. D. Wilson)


ef Sanabassar, Sana-
bassarus (Apoc).. . .2681" (Angus)
Sheth
ef Seth.............. 2743> (S. F. Hunter)


Shethar............... 2766"
Shethar-bozenai, Shethar-

bogtals eves 2766" (Wolf)

ef Sathrabuzanes..... 2696
Shevas-£ wweisch be 2766»

ef Shavsha.......... 2751> (Wolf)
Shew, Show........... 2766> (Easton)
Shewbread............ 2767* (Caldecott)

Frankincense with... .2767>

On journeys......... 2767


Meaning of term..... 2767%
Priestly regulations. . .2767*
cf Shewbread, Table of 2767 (Caldecott)


Significance.......... 2767
Shewbread, Table of. . . .2767 (Caldecott)

ef Shewbread........ 2767 (Caldceott)

cf Tabernacle........ 2891 (Caldecott; Orr)

cf Table............. 2898" (Easton)

ef Temple........... 2933> (Caldecott; Orr)
Shibah...............- 2767

ef Beer-sheba........ 424> (Masterman)

ef Sheba (place)...... 2753 (Masterman)
Shibboleth............ 2767
Shibmah (Sibmah)

ef Sebam........... 27115 (Ewing)
Shicron

cf Shikkeron......... 27685
Shield

ef Armor, Arms...... 252> (Nicol)
Shiggaion............. 2767

ef Psalms, Book of... .2487* (Sampey)
Shihon

ef Shion............. 2774
Shibor®. sss eda ees 2768" (Kyle)

ef Gihon............ 1228> (Masterman)

Che Nales cena eK 2145 (Kyle)
Shihor-libnath.......... 2768 (Ewing)
Shikkeron............. 2768
SHibi wks Aas eon 2768
Shilhim............... 2768

ef Shaaraim........ 2745" (Masterman)
Shillem, Shillemites..... 2768

ef Shallum........... 2747" (Umbach)
Shiloah

ef Jerusalem......... 16015; 1609 (Master-

man)

ef Siloam............ 27912 (Masterman)
Shiloh (person)......... 2768> (Orr)

cf Prophecy........- 2459> (Orelli)
Shiloh (place).......... 2768> (Ewing)

Early references. ..... 2769

ef Jerusalem......... 1609* (Masterman)

Sanctuary in Ephraim .2769*

Site and ruins........ 2769"

ef Tabernacle........ 2891> (Caldecott; Orr)
Shilonite.............. 2769>
Shilshah.............- 2769»
Shimea......-....--65 2769»

ef Shammah......... 2749" (Wolf)

cf Shammua........ 2749
Shimeah.......-.....- 2769»


3370


GENERAL INDEX


Shimeam Shiphtan.............. 27745
cf Shimeah..........2769% Shipmaster
Shimeath.............. 2769 (Wolf) cf Phoenix.......... 23912 (Calder)
ef Shomer........... 279% ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
Shimeathites ME 7 teeta 2769> (Wolf) Shipmen
Shimei. . beeen 27708 (Mack) ef Ships and Boats. . . .2774% (Nicol)
ef Semel........-... 2717" Ships and Boats........ 2774 (Nicol)
ef Semeias........... 2717 In the Acts.......... 2776"
ef Semeis (Apoc)..... 27178 In Assyria and Baby-
ef Shammah.........2749 (Wolf) Ghia ee eee O775b
ef Shema (person)... .2759> (Wolf) In Corinthians and
ef Someis (Apoc).... Ke other Books....... 277°
Sere ee 2770) In Egypt...........- 275%
ef Shimei............ 2770" (Mack) ee Sears aoe
Shimi, Shimites fue ive use....... :
ef Shimei............ 2770" (Mack) Se a OR ar pads
Shiminis General references. . . .2776*
ef Shammah......... 2749" (Wolf) In the Gospels....... ae
PS Saeco aerate 2770> cf Harbour.......... 1337>
Te iy ee ee 277Q> ‘ Hebrews, among the. .2774>
Shimrie! fae seeeuane 2770> (Umbach) Hebrews ane she aaah 2100
ce or Measures in stom... .277%
ef Shomer...........2779° ea Saree SEs 27768
Shimron (person)....... 27710 In OT and Apoc...... 2774
Shimron (place)........ 2771+ (Ewing) Paul's voyages. ...... ZEISS
Shimron-meron.........2771* (Ewing) s ade a renee oe, (Nicol)
Shimshai.............. 27714 (Wolf) Ty OC CLs ge aaah
ef Rehum...........2552 (Stearns) ef Plank............ 2407»
ef Samellius (Apoc). . .2674# ? Re Sea..... 2... ee ee
Shin, Sin...........0.. 27718 c 1?) 0]: re aston.
ef ‘Alphabet Sear archer 103 (Richardson) ae age ese dhe tars ae el
Shinab................ 27712 (Wolf ef Trade............ 3003* (Easton)
ef Admah........... 56b cirieit) - ce eT aa 3004? (Raffety)
ef Shemeber......... 2760" ords used for....... 27748
Shinar ee cree aes 2771» (Pinches) Shisha..............-. 2777
ef Babel............. 350* (Pinches) ef Shavsha.......... 2751» (Wolf)
ef Babel, Tower of... .355> (Pinches) Dhishake.. yer. a eee 2777> (Nicol)
ef Calneh........... 546* (Pinches) Inscription at Karnak 2778+
Comparison with Sem- Invasion of Palestine. . 2778
IGIC Ver es has 2772 ef Jerusalem......... 16152 (Masterman)
Condition and climate 2773 ef Lubim........... 1934>
Districts of.......... 2772» cf Rehoboam........ 2552" (Mosiman)
cf Eden.............897% (Wright) Relations with Jero-
Form of word........ 2771 boamis see. 48 Sire 2777
Form of writing...... 2773 Rise to power........ 2777
ef Jonah............ 1727 (Sampey) SHIA oe tas ea ees 2778»
ef Jonah, Book of... ..1728* (Sampey) ef Sharonite......... 27519"
Land of Babylonia... .2771> Shittah Tree........... 2778 (Masterman)
Primitive tongue of .. .2772% of Shittim Wood......508 (Masterman)
ee of uma ee sedhwsag tna hans ae (Ewing)
culptures........... 2 IZA Se Cele ieee 8
Sumerian equivalents. .2771> BhOM: 38 Mite neko. Ree 2778
Syriac Sen’ar........ 2772" Shobab......... ..... 2779*
cf Ur of the Chaldees .3039* (Clay) Shobach....... 2779+
ShinGas os eet aoc 2773 (Dosker) Shobai..........0000.. 27792
ShiGis Ais tenses Rees 27748 Shobal................ 2779
Shiphit.. paid edes anes 2774" Shobek............... 2779%
Shiphmite SOD oo 8 ssc ake 27798
cf Shepham.......... 27622 Shochoh.............. 27798
ef Siphmoth.... ....2806* ef Socoh............ 2821+ (Masterman)
Shiphrah........ |... 27748 Shoe, Shoe-latchet...... 27795 (Easton)
ef Zipporah.......... 3152> (Kyle) Shoham............... 2779


GENERAL INDEX


Shomer...........-... 2779
cf Shemer........... 2760> (Wolf)
ef Shimeath......... 2769» (Wolf)
ef Shimrith.......... 2771°
Shophach
ef Shobach.......... 2779
Shophan
ef Atroth-shophan. . . .328+
Shoréiss2 scan beets 2779» (Day)
ef Coast............. 672° (Day)
ef Haven............ 1344» (Day)
ef Sand............. 2688" (Day)
Shorten............... 2780°


Shoshannim Eduth
ef Psalms, Book of. . .2487" (Sampey)


eiSade tty late shits 2830° (Millar)
Shoulder.............. 27808 (Luering)

ef Sacrifice, NT...... 26512 (Williams)

ef Sacrifice, OT... ... 26383 (Reeve)
Shoulder-blade......... 2780"
Shoulder-piece......... 2780° (Luering)
Shovel cc.ee bee 2780> (Patch)
Show

ef Shew............. 2766> (Easton)
Showbread

ef Shewbread........ 2767 (Caldecott)


Showbread, Table of
ef Shewbread, Table of 2767 (Caldecott)


Shower..........--00- 2781" (Day)
SHVING seis ce cca eas 2781°
Shroud..............5: 27818

ef Burial............ 529° (Eager)
Shrubiite esses heehee 27818

eh Busliec. een eee 5322 (Masterman)
Shua, Shuah........... 27812

ef Bath-shua......... 416>

ef Bildad............ 473» (Genung)

ef Shuhah...........2781°

ef Shuhite...........2781>
Shualie Mend ieee tee 27812
Shual, Land of......... 2781* (Ewing)
Shubael...........-05. 2781

ef Shebuel........... 2754>
Shuhah............-4: 27812

ef Shua, Shuah....... 2781
Shuham.............5. 2781
Shuhite............05. 2781>

ef Bildad............ 473> (Genung)

ef Shua, Shuah....... 2781°
Shulammite........... 2781>

cf Shunammite....... 2781> (Ewing)
Shumathites.........-- 2781»
Shunammite........... 2781 (Ewing)
Shunem............--- 2781> (Ewing)
Shuni, Shunites........ 2782
Shupham, Shuphamites

ef Shephupham...... 2764%
Shuppim.............- 2782

cf Muppim.......... 2094°

cf Shephupham...... 27642
Sharycnswneee es 2782 (Conder)


ef Migdol........... 20512 (Conder)


3371
Shur—continued
ef Wanderings of Is-

PAC) So rccterenneneees 30642 (Conder)
Shuruppak............ 365° (Clay)
Shushan............... 2782 (Pinches)

Citadel, the... ...... .2782>
Description of Assur-
bani-apli.......... 2782
cf Elam, Elamites. .. .917° (Pinches)
Meaning of name... . .2782°
Monuments discovered 2782
Ruins of............ 2782
Shushanchites.......... 27839
Shushan Eduth
cf Psalms, Book of. . .2487 (Sampey)
CESONG ie eet ene 2830> (Millar)
Shuthalhites
ef Shuthelah......... 2783
Shuthelah, Shuthelahites 2783
ef Genealogy......... 1183 (Crannell)
Shuttle
ef Weaving. ......... 3077 (Patch)
Sia, Siaha.... 2.6.66... 27838
cf Sua (Apoc)........ 28682
Sibbecai, Sibbechai. .... 2783
Sibboleth
ef Shibboleth........ 2767>
Sibmah
cf Sebam............ 27114 (Ewing)
Sibraim.............-- 27838
Sibylline Oracles....... 178° (J. E. H. Thomson)
cf Apocalyptic Litera-

AUPE acne ae sae 161> (J. E. H. Thomson)

ef Messiah.......... 2042 (Crichton)
Sicarii

ef Assassins.......... 2882 (S. F. Hunter)
Sichem................ 2783

ef Shechem.......... 2755 (Ewing)
Sick, Sickness.......... 2783° (Macalister)

Causes of........... 2783>

ef Disease... .......- 8548 (Macalister)

Forms of............ 2783

Jesus and the........ 2783>

Terms used.......... 2783

Visiting the.......... 2783"
Sickles. .2.ceed Svea he es 2784® (Patch)

ef Reaping.......... 2534" (Patch)

ef Wine............. 3086" (Easton)
Sieyon...........ee eee 27849 (S. F. Hunter)
Siddim, Vale of........ 27849; 809 (Wright)

ef Arabah........... 211 (Wright)

cf Dead Sea........: 801° (Wright)

Geological changes... .2784>

Location... 0.0.2... 27848


cf Slime, Slime Pits. . .2817' (Day)
Traditions regarding. .2784>


ef Zeboiim.......... 31342
Side aw lascnae hse 2785° (Banks)
ef Pamphylia........ 2236> (Banks)
Sidesanvncedee. 2 Sana 2785*
Sidon (person).........27858


3372 GENERAL INDEX


Sidon (place)........... 27852 (Porter)
Disasters to......... 2785
Harbors of.......... 2785*

History of........... 2785
Kings of............ 2785»
Location............ 27858
AINE 7) sata aye eae 2786
ef Phoenicia......... 2386+ (Porter)
ef Tyre.............3031* (Porter)
ef Zarephath......... 3132» (Ewing)

Sidonians............. 27868

Dlepeiet Le ee 2786* (Nicol)
Assanlt, the......... 2787
Battering rams....... 27878
Defense against...... 2787»

In early Hebrew his-
LODY 20 ee resne a eee 27868


Figurative references. .2789#
In Hebrew monarchy. 2786


Horrors of........... 2788

Laws regarding....... 2786»

Mounds and ap-

proaches..........2787

IN DE ac eoitune ents 27892

Operations of........2786

In the prophets...... 2786°

Raising the siege... . . 27888

ef Slave, Slavery... .. 2815» (Rafiety)
Sieve, Sift

ef Agriculture........ 75 (Patch)

ef Threshing......... 2975» (Patch)
Sighosiun ¢ees.5 ad wines 2789

Ch Daritrtsa emcees 7888
Sigticee ws Let shen 2789 (Stuart)

ef Dioscuri..........8518 (Maunder)

ef Immanuel......... 1457> (A. W. Evans)

ef Miracle........... 2062 (Wace)

ef Ships and Boats... .27778 (Nicol)

cle Tokene.%,.0, 29 !st tah 29942 (Easton)
Signet

CERMB is vc eee 2594 (Crannell)

CE: Sealy cai cere ne 2708 (Edwards)
Signs of the Heavens

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Signs, Numerical

ef Number.......... 2157* (Smith)
Bihon: es Hee ec es 27902
Sihor

ef Shihor............ 2768" (Kyle)


Sihor-libnath
ef Shihor-libnath..... 2768° (Ewing)


Silasier suee tatiana ties 2790° (Kerr)
Companion of Barna-

DAS Ad its Ae dence tian 2790"
Journeys with Paul. . .27908
Movements of....... 2790
NT references to..... 2790

Silence: nes ees 27902

Silk, Silkworm......... 2790° (Day)
Chobinene cues 18942 (E. D. Isaacs)
ef Weaving.......... 3077 (Patch)

Gillan Gee neha lt 27918


Siloam, Siloah, Shelah,


Shiloah............. 2791" (Masterman)
Aqueduct........... 2791°
ef Gezer............. 1224 (Masterman)
ef Gihon............ 1228> (Masterman)
Inscription..........2792
ef Jerusalem......... 1606 (Masterman)


ef Jerusalem Springs. . 1597 (Masterman)
ef Kidron, The Brook. 1798" (Masterman)
ef King’s Garden..... 1808+ (Masterman)


Modern Silwan.......2791>

Poolof............. 27928

Second pool......... 2792

ChSente 2 ot ey anes: 2721 (W. L. Walker)

ef Shelah............ 2758>
Siloam Inscription

ef Jerusalem......... 1602° (Masterman)
Siloam, Tower in

ef Jerusalem ......... 16022 (Masterman)

ef Siloam............ 27912 (Masterman)
Silvanus............... 2792

CP Stlas 2 ocd ccess bees 27902 (Kerr)
SilVeres sion secant eee 2792» (Patch)
Silverling ............. 2793

ef Piece of Silver..... 2395* (Porter)
Silversmith............ 2793"
Simalcue

ef Imaleue........... 1456 (Hutchison)
Simeon (general)....... 27948 (8S. F. Hunter)
Simeon (Niger)........ 2794»

ef Symeon........... 2877%
Simeon (patriarch and

tribe eet eke ae 2793* (Masterman)


Absorbed in Judah... .2793%
Fancied inseriptional


references......... 27948
ef Gedor............ 1182* (Ewing)
CPlbe alts execs nak 1861 (Baur)
Meunim............ 2793
Mixed character of
EIDE essence 6 lk sect 2793%
Mt. Seir . vee 27948
OT references........ 2793
Son of Jacob......... 2793°
Territory of.......... 27948
Simeonites
ef Simeon (patriarch
and tribe)......... 2793* (Masterman)
Similitude............. 27946
Simon (Apoe).......... 2794» (Angus)
ef Maccabaens....... 1946° (Hutchison)
ef Thassiy ico hs oka 29659


Simon the Canaanite, or
Cananaean, or Zealot. .2797° (Kerr)
ef James, Son of Al-


phaeus............ 1561* (Kerr)
ef Nathanael........ 2121 (Kerr)
ef Thaddaenus........ 2964* (Kerr)
ef Zealot, Zealots..... 3133° (Heidel)
Simon (general)........ 2795* (S. F. Hunter)


ef Brethren of the Lord 518 (Jacobs)
ef Cyrenian.......... 773


GENERAL INDEX 3373
Simon (general)—continued Sin—continued
ef Judas Iscariot...... 1765° (Kerr) Transgression against
ef Nathanael......... 2121° (Kerr) light hAversse. epee 2799
ef Peter (Simon)...... 2348? (Gray) ef Truth............ 30252 (Carver)
cf Simeon (general). . .27942 (S. F. Hunter) cf Wickedness....... .3083 (Dungan)
Simon the Maccabee. . . .285* (Dosker) Sin (deity)............ 371 (Rogers)
ef Maccabaeus....... 1946* (Hutchison) Sin (place)............ 2802+ (Kyle)
Simon Magus..... . .2795> (Rutherfurd) Sin against the Holy
Contact with the apos- Ghost (Spirit)
tles i). Sisenusa ts 2795 ef Blasphemy... .....485> (Rees)
Death of............ 2797" Sin, Manof............ 1975» (Orr)
Early Christian tradi- Sin Money
tions.........-.... 2796" ef Sacrifice in the OT. 2638* (Reeve)
Followers of......... 2797* Sin Offering
ef Gnosticism........ 1240* (Rutherfurd) ef Sacrifice in the NT. 2651* (Williams)
ef Literature, Sub- cf Sacrifice in the OT. 2638" (Reeve)
APOS .......-...05. 1896" (Cowan) Sin, Shin.............. 27718
Magicians in NT..... 2796 Sin, Wilderness of
Mentioned as sorcerer 2795» cf Wanderings of Is-
ef Peter, First Epistle Tae! ala esas 30642 (Conder)
OL Oa et cies 2351» (Moorehead) Sins ass tit we Bee ok 2802
cf Peter, Second Epistle ef Sinai ......2802> (Conder)
Obie walk eee he 2355* (Moorehead) Sinai......... NG Seat ed 2802» (Conder)
ef Philip, the Evangel- Jebel Musa.......... 2803"
ISbeser ye aie ener as 2368> (S. F. Hunter) Location of.......... 1516* (Orelli)
Sources of the stories. . 2796» Modern views . -28049
Story of Simon and ef Moses............ 2087* (Kyle)
Helena............ 2796" Name®e2cscic unre 2802»
Simon Peter........... 2348 (Gray) OT references........ 2802
Simon, the Tanner Patristic views. . .28044
ef Tanner........... 2908» (Patch) Peaks of Jebel Mui . 2803»
Simple... e220 2 shai 2798 (McPheeters) Traditional site....... 2802»
Simplicity............. 2798 (W. L. Walker) cf Wanderings of Is-
Simri Tae] cei ae ee ens 3064" (Conder)
ef Shimri............ 2770° (Umbach) Sincere, Sincerity....... 2804 (W. L. Walker)
Site, Keeler aek a 2798 (McConnell) Sinews vats weeroee 2804 (Luering)
ef Adam in the OT...49» (Genung) ChIP Sick Se Sees 1394°
As disobedience...... 2798 Singers, Singing........ 2804» (Millar)
Environment........ 2800 cf Music............ 2094» (Millar)
ef Ethics...........- 1013 (Alexander) cf Praise. .24298 (Lambert)
ef Ethics of Jesus... . .1026° (Stalker) ef Priests fd evita: 2446» (Wiener)
Fall, story of........ 2798” ef Song.............2830> (Millar)
Forgiveness.......... 28015 ef Temple........... 2930 (Caldecott; Orr)
Freedom of man... ...2799* Single Eye............. 2805° (Easton)
ef Guilt..........-.. 13092 (Rall) Singular............... 2805
Heredity............ 2800 Sinim, Land of......... 2805° (Ewing)
ef Heredity........ 1376* (Easton) Sinitésic ea ake cerns 2805»
Inner law, the........ 2799» Sinlessness............. 2805 (Dunelm)
cf Johannine The- Christ sinless........ 2805
ology.. .......1701 (Law) ef Flesh.........-..-. 1118 (Luering)
Life in Christ. Or ean ae 28018 cf Jesus Christ... ... .1630° (Orr)
cf Paul, the Apostle. . 2264» (A. T. Robertson) Saints not sinless. .... 2806"
cf Pauline Theology. . .2289* (Easton) ef Spirit..........606 28415 (Marais)
Positive force, a...... 2800 Sinners. 8 cava eae 28068 (M. O. Evans)
Prophetic teachings. . .2799> COIN ganas ate 2798> (McConnell)
Redemption......... 28012 Sion ees Feit een ees S 2806*
ef Redemption..... 25419 (McConnell) ef Hermon........... 1378* (Ewing)
Repentance.........- 2801 GE ZAON ec cic  wremtan eto 3150¢ (Masterman)
ef Sanctification...... 26835 (Rall) Siphmoth.............. 2806*
cf Sinner . . .2806 (M. O. Evans) Sippai
Teachings at Paul: . 2799 ef Saph.............2690
ef Tradition......... 3004* (Williams) Gini. wercad ne Hoh ee 28068


3374


GENERAL INDEX


Sirach, The Alphabet of .2812* (T. W. Davies) Stl e fat etne eae 2814»
Sirach, Book of, or The ef Golgotha.......... 1275 (Masterman)
Wisdom of Jesus, the DV bes eemgieten A ayes 2814 (Day)
Son of Sirach........ 2806 (T. W. Davies) cf Heavens..........13852° (Orr)
AUTHOR isis eho Roses 2809 Slander............... 2814> (Edwards)
Canonicity..........28079 ef Crimes..........- 745» (Hirsch)
Composed in Hebrew. .2811* CE Mal eect codec Aes 2904 (T. Lewis)
Contents............ 2807 Slaughter of the Inno-
DBL Ge cet cis ewe see cae 28108 Gents cet thoes 14712 (Sweet)
Eschatology of....... 2808 Slaughter, Valley of... . .2815*
Literary form........ 2809" ef Hinnom, Valley of. .1393' (Masterman)
Maxims: seared. 2809* ef Jerusalem......... 1599* (Masterman)
Moral teachings of... .2808> Slave, Slavery......... 2815° (Raffety)
Name. 25.505 sees a4 2806" Acquisition.......... 2815*
Original languages. . . .2811° ef Egypt............ 906° (Petrie)
Teachings of......... 28078 Freedom of slaves... .2815°
Teachings on manners 2809" cf Israel, History of the
Unity and integrity... 2809» Peoples. siiccgeccias 1511 (Orelli)
VePslOnS sii Wiehe 2811 ef Labor............ 1819 (Orr)
View of religion...... 2807» cf Manservant....... 1983
ef Wisdom.......... 30892 (Easton) NT conception....... 28178
ef Wisdom of Solomon 3092? (T. W. Davies) ef Pharaoh..........23598 (Kyle)
Sirah, Wellof.......... 2812 cf Relationships, Fam-
SITIONS. sce Soc 4 es 2812° Dysart artes 2556 (N. and E. D.
ef Hermon........... 1378* (Ewing) : Isaacs)
Sisamai Rights of masters... . .2816>
GEISIGTIAL Sates ccs eee e 28138 Rights of slaves...... 2816>
Street. (1 Mee 2812> (Schenk) ef Servant RR a eas 2738" (McGlothlin)
SADcborahh «12a 813 (Margolis) CGE een peeeuee)
eine pate ee 1557 (Schenk) Se ou eee ae
. rian. | Slaying..... any Aeon eee
cf Palestine.......... gu (Conder) SEB aitavehicee oe 2504> (Hirsch)
ef Serar (Apoc)....... 2732
Sleeps dt Aieh eae ee a: 28178
Sisinnes............... 2813° ef Dream, Dreamer ...874° (Clippinger)
ef Tattenai..........2917 (Umbach) Se ee Saag
Picea eep, Deep............ 2817 (Easton)
Sismai.............0.. 28138 Sleeves
Sister... uaF nex Ghd 2813* (Pollard) CE Dres8 cc kia a dhe 875> (Hager)
ef Relationships, Fam- SIE Ta se en ee ae? 28176
Hy... e eee 2554* (N. and E. Slime, Slime Pits....... 2817 (Day)
oe Isaacs) ef Cities of the Plain. .660* (Wright)
Sister's Son............ 2813° ef Pitch ano 2401» (Easton)
ef Relationships, Fam- | ef Siddim, Vale of ... .2784* (Wright)
ily hae ga Ceres ae ee 25045 N. and E. Sling
Isaacs) cf Armor, Arms...... 251% (Nicol)
SID Pe. oh es. ek 2813" Slipaswew ata Som 2817
SIthPit: sags chee ee 2813° Slopes
Sitnah eg sos eres 2813 cf Ashdoth-pisgah. . . . 2682
ef Rehoboth.........2552" (Masterman) Swett noes nt 28182
STiq gal: sanee eee eee eee 2813> (M. O. Evans) Sluggard.............. 98188
Sivani. shreds. cise hie 2813° Sluitess: e246 whee 2818°
ef Calendar.......... 541° (Porter) Smell eee vs cen ness 2818 (Luering)
Sy Cee ae 2813 Smith
ef Number... .. 21579 (Smith) ef Crafts............ 734° (Patch)
Skill, Skilful...........2813> (N. Isaacs) ef Tools............. 2998 (Easton)
Skintor eg aa eee 2 2813> (Luering) ef Tubal-cain......... 3027% (Wolf)
For clothing and shoes .2814* Smiting by the Sun
Figurative use........ 2814 ef Sun, Smiting by... .2870° (Macalister)
Literal use........... 28142 Smoke. cy sein ts feat 2818»
ef Sealskin.......... 27098 SMTA osha h cs 2818 (Banks)
DET PR cokers teeta eaten heen: 2814» Ancient... .......... 2818
Ci Dressy. eo. cnc ae 875> (Eager) ef Angels of the Seven
ef Train (noun)...... 3005 Churches.......... 135> (Banks)


GENERAL INDEX


Smyrna—continued


History............. 2818>
Modern............. 28198
Snail ee cncte: Gorkha’ 2819* (Day)
Ch Lizards is.he 8 528s 1906" (Day)
ef Sand-lizard........ 2688>
Snare ysis coe es athe 2819 (Stratton-Porter)
ef Fowler............ 1143 (Stratton-Porter)
CGI ee aus. eee 1231> (Stratton-Porter)
CPAP TADS. sce. , Heathen 30072 (Stratton-Porter)
DMECZE i iis 8 is ans 2819>
of Neesing........... 2130" (Easton)
SNOW fie eee ea eke ee 2819> (Joy)


Snuffers, Snuffdishes. . . .2820° (Caldecott)


ef Tongs............2994%

Solos bec eee oe ce 28202 (Nicol)
SOaDs oA icone dergasd ee 2820 (Patch)

CL Wash sor lichies eters 3072> (Easton)
Sober, Sobriety, Sober-

NESS ee yak eek ae 2820> (Jacobs)

ef Temperance, Tem-

perate ss sees. -2929> (Jacobs)
Soche: Sake ee 2820>

cf Socoh............ 28219 (Masterman)
Socket. ............0.. 2821 (Caldecott)

ef Tenon............ 2947 (Caldecott)
Socoh, Soco, Shochoh,

Shoco, Shocho....... 28215 (Masterman)
Socrates...........020- 1017* (Alexander)
Sod, Sodden

ef Seethe............ 2713
Soda

ef Nitre............. 21532 (Patch)
Sodering.......-...... 2821
SOd Meigs cide deers 2821*

Sodom... Massey eect ees 2821> (Wright)

ef Arabah........... 211 (Wright)

ef Cities of the Plain. .6607 (Wright)

ef Dead Sea........-- 8012 (Wright)


And Gomorrah
Geological theory of
destruction of... .2308 (Kyle)


CLIO bs ce Foster feo seezae Ay 1930 (Boyd)

ef Siddim, Vale of... .2784* (Wright)
Sodom, Vine of......... 2821> (Masterman)

CEVA eo eee ees 3050° (Masterman)
Sodomite............-5 2821> (Ewing)

ef Dead Sea........- 801* (Wright)
Sodomitish Sea

cf Dead Sea.........8012 (Wright)
Sodomy

ef Crimes..........-. 745> (Hirsch)

ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)

ef Sodom..........-- 2821> (Wright)
Sojourner............- 2821


ef Stranger and
journer (in NT and


ODM ae 2865 (Wiener); 2866*
(Easton)
Soldering
ef Sodering.......... 28218
Soldier


ef Armor, Arms...... 2518 (Nicol)


3375


Solemn Assembly (Meet-


ing)

cf Congregation......

cf Feasts and Fasts...

cf Solemn, Solemnity..
Solemn, Solemnity......

cf Feasts and Fasts...


Solomon.............
Alliances of..........
Building operations. . .
Buildings of.........
Career of............
Character of.........
And Chemosh worship
Domestic troubles. ...
Early career.........
ef Jerusalem.........


700 (Wiener)
1103 (E. D. Isaacs)
2821> (Easton)
2821» (Easton)
1103+ (E. D. Isaacs)
28388 (Easton)


. 2822 (Weir); 256* (Nicol)


2823
2824


601> (Nicol)
2823>


1595> (Masterman)


cf Millo............. 2055* (Masterman)


Name and meaning...
ef Nethinim........


cf Ships and Boats... .
Sourees............-
ef Temple ...........
Temple and palace of.
ef Text of theOT.....
Ch Vradescncc 4 cstutees
Trade and commerce. .
Vision of...........-
Wisdom and learning of
Wives of............
Solomon, Odes of
cf Apocalyptic Litera-
(OPO. nb h ee
cf Johannine Theology
Solomon, Pools of......


2822


.2139> (Lees)


174> (J. E. H. Thomson)


» .2825*


28239

2823

27742 (Nicol)

2822»

2930* (Caldecott; Orr)
234» (A. C. Dickie)
2957> (Weir)

3003" (Easton)

2824>


2824>


1615 (J. E. H. Thomson)
1696> (Law)
2419» (Day)


Solomon, Psalms (Psalter)


Solomon, Song of

ef Song of Songs......
Solomon, Wisdom of....
Solomon’s Porch........


cf Nethinim.........

Number and duties. . .

Temple servants.....
Solyma

ef Jerusalem........
Someis (Apoc)........


Sometime.............
Son, Sons..........---
ef Bar (prefix).......
ef Ben (prefix)......-
cf Heredity..........


161> (J. E. H. Thomson)


2831+ (Sampey)
30928 (T. W. Davies)
2421» (Caldecott)
2825 (Mack)

2825»

2139» (Lees)

2825>


.1596> (Masterman)
2826"


483> (Breslich)
1376* (Easton)


cf Relationships, Fam-


25549 (N.and E. D. Isaacs)


3376


GENERAL INDEX


Son of God, The........ 28265 (Stalker)
Apostolie doctrine. . . .2828*
Applied to Christ... . .2827*
In Fourth Gospel... . .2828>
Messianic meaning... .2827°
Am OP i seers th 28265
ef Only Begotten. .... 21962 (Rees)
Particular texts... ... 28276
Use by Jesus......... 2827>
Use of title.......... 28266
Son-in-Law
ef Relationships, Fam-
A yest heneheh ers te 25545 (N. and E.
Isaacs)
Son of Man, The....... 2828» (Stalker)
Aramaic meaning... . .2830°
In Daniel........... 2829»
Extra-canonical litera-

CULE act te ote woe 2830"
ef Jesus Christ....... 1637* (Orr)
Jesus’ Messianic con-

sciousness......... 28302
ef Messiah... ....... 2043" (Crichton)
Messianic idea....... 2829>
Source of title........ 2829
Usagein OT......... 28292
Use and meaning in

INTE sya ta cote 28292
Why Jesus used title. .2830*
ef Zoroastrianism. .... 3157 (Easton)

DONG 7h ieeds big Sade ed 2830" (Millar)
ef Hind of the Morn-

ota ee wea wae 13932 (M. O. Evans)
ef Hymn............ 1445+ (Millar)
ef Jonath Elem Reho-

ia rae eee 1730*
ef Singers, Singing... .2804> (Millar)
ef Song of Songs...... 28318 (Sampey)
ef Spiritual Songs... . .2845° (Pratt)

Song of Songs.......... 28312 (Sampey)
Allegorical interpreta-

HOD eases ee 2832
Authorship and date. .2831>
Canonicity.......... 2831
Ewald’s view........ 2833
Hints and suggestions. 2833>
History of interpreta-

u13(0) «eee een eer nee 2831
Literal interpretation. . 2832
ef Palestine.......... 2218» (Conder)
ef Song............. 2830> (Millar)
Teste ok AWN ids tee 2831»

Typical interpretation 2832
Wedding songs....... 2833
Song of the Three Chil-
GYENS. ote hai lege 28349 (T. W. Davies)
Author and date...... 2834


ef Bel and the Dragon.428* (T. W. Davies)
Canonicity and con-


D.


Songs of Degrees


Sosthenes............
Sostratus..............


Song of the Three Children—continued


ef Shadrach.........- 27462 (R. D. Wilson)


ef Son, Sons........


ef Dial of Ahaz.......


Sons of God (NT)......


Doctrine of..........


Angelsveet edna G
ef Antediluvians... ..
cf Children of God....
In Genesis 6 2-4.....
ef Giants............


Sons of Korah..........
Sons of Solomon’s Serv-


ants
ef Priests and Levites.


Soothsayers


ef Astrology.........
ef Divination........


SOpaterzs hoot ce. eres :


ef Pyrrhus...........
ef Sosipater..........


Sope


ef Soap.............


Sophonias (Apoc).......
Sorcerer, Sorcery. .....


ef Astrology.........
ef Divination.......
ef Magie............
ef Resurrection... ...
ef Witehcraft........
ef Zoroastrianism.....


Sortilege.. 0... 000......
Sosipater..............


ef Sopater...........


NT meanings.......
OT meanings.......
ef Psychology........
ef Resurrection......
Soul and spirit.......


.2826* (Betteridge)
boa eee 819> (Sampey)


842» (Maunder)
2835» (W. Evans)
2835»

2835

2835 (Crichton)
2835»


1432 (Wright)


6082 (Rees)
2835

1224» (Orr)
1270» (Reeve)
2835


1817 (Beecher)


2446> (Wiener)


295» (Maunder)
8602 (T. W. Davies)


Soothsaying, Methods of 296*


1017 (Alexander)
28368.


.2836%


295> (Maunder)


.8602 (T. W. Davies)


1963* (T. W. Davies)


. 2562» (Easton)


3097 (T. W. Davies)
3157* (Easton)

2836* (Macalister)
2836 (Masterman)
2836>

674» (Patch)

2836 (W. L. Walker)
3315 (T. W. Davies)
2837 (8S. F. Hunter)
2836


28374


28375 (Angus)
2837

2837*

2837 (Marais)


2837
2837


2496> (Marais)


.2565° (Easton)


2838"


GENERAL INDEX


Soul—continued


ef Spirit.......0...... 2841> (Marais)

Survivalof.......... 14617,
Sounds e046 es. odes 2838° (Easton)

ef Bath Kol......... 415> (Van Pelt)


ef Solemn, Solemnity..2821> (Easton)
Soundings
ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)


Southt:2: he scouts 2838" (Day)

ef Natural Features. . .2122* (Day)
South, Chambers of the. 2838>

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
South, Queen of the

cf Queen of Sheba. . . .2514 (Roberts)
South Ramoth


ef Ramoth........... 2529
Southeast

cf Northeast......... 2155> (Day)
Sow

ef Swine... .....-.... 2875 (Day)
Sower, Sowing

ef Agriculture. ....... 75» (Patch)
Spal. sort wedheee? 2838»

cf Paul, the Apostle . .2264> (A. T. Robertson)

ef Tarshish.......... 2914
Spans sess esse 2838>

cf Weights and Meas-

MICS 22 Maen. one: 30798 (Porter)

Spark

ef Leviathan......... 1868» (Day)
Sparrow..............- 2838> (Stratton-Porter)

Biblical references... .2839*

Description. ......... 2838>

CEBOOd Song pec ee ye 11249 (Hager)
Sparta, Spartans....... 2839> (Orr)

ef Arius............- 2428

cf Asmoneans........ 283* (Dosker)

ef Lacedaemonians.. . .1819* (Hutchison)

cf Maccabaeus....... 1946 (Hutchison)
Speaking Evil.......... 748° (Hirsch)

ef Evil-speaking...... 10432 (W. L. Walker)

ef Slander........... 2814> (Edwards)
Spear, Spearmen

ef Armor, Arms...... 2528 (Nicol)
Specially.............- 2839» (Clippinger)
Speckled............-- 2839°

ef Colors...........- 674> (Patch)

ef Hyena............ 1443 (Day)
Spectacle............-- 2839°
Speech............--5- 2839> (W. L. Walker)

ef Logos.........--- 1911> (Alexander)

ef Word..........++- 3105° (W. L. Walker)
Spelivey, Sede nies aie nes 28402; 11225 (Eager)
Spice, Spices..........- 28407 (Masterman)

ef Burial............ 529° (Hager)

ef Myrrh. .........-- 2102 (Masterman)

ef Perfume ......... 2321» (Patch)

ef Tragacanth........ 3005

ef Wine............- 3086* (Easton)
Spider\.2.. s.a%- 1 ee: 2840° (Day)


ef Gecko............1181


3377

Spider—continued

ef Insects............ 1473 (Day)

ef Lizard............ 19062 (Day)
Spies ;

ef Joshua, Son of Nun. 1744 (Geden)
Spikenard.............2840% (Masterman)
Spindle

cf Spinning.......... 28418 (Patch)
Spinning.............. 28412 (Patch)

cf Distaff............ 859»
Spititye 4 eee 2841> (Marais)

ef Conscience........701% (Stalker)

ef Flesh............. 1118 (Luering)

ef Ghost............1224> (W. L. Walker)

cf Holy Spirit........ 1406 (Mullins)

Human and divine... . 2842

OT applications. ..... 28428

Primary and primitive

senseS ............ 2841»

cf Psychology........ 2496; 2497 (Marais)

cf Resurrection....... 2565* (Easton)

Shades of meaning... .2841>

cf Sinlessness......... 2805° (Dunelm)

CE SOU ori cee 28372 (Marais)

ef Spiritual.......... 2842> (Pratt)

cf Substance......... 2868: (W. L. Walker)
Spirit of Divination

cf Divination........ 860: (T. W. Davies)
Spirit, Evil

cf Demon, Demoniac. .827 (Sweet)

ef Satan............. 2693> (Sweet)
Spirit, Familiar ........ 1094 (Pollard)

cf Divination... .....860* (T. W. Davies)

ef Python........... 2511° (Easton)
Spirit of God

ef God... ....-..000- 1253> (Rees)
Spirit, Holy........... 1406+ (Mullins)


Spirit, Unclean (or Evil)
cf Demon, Demoniac. .827% (Sweet)
Spirits, Discernings of. . .851> (Fortune)
cf Spiritual Gifts... .. 2843" (Lambert)
Spirits in Prison. .......2456° (Orr)


cf Hades............ 1315° (Vos)
Spiritual..............2842> (Pratt)
cf Man, Natural...... 19742 (Webb)
ef Spirit. ............ 2841 (Marais)
cf Spiritual Man...... 2844>
cf Spirituality........ 2845» (Pratt)
Spiritual Blessing... ... .2843*
Spiritual Body........- 28438
Spiritual Drink......... 28438
ef Rock... 2.2.6.6... 2596* (Day)
cf Spiritual Rock. ... .2845* (Pratt)
Spiritual Gifts......... 2843% (Lambert)
cf Apostle........... 202 (Lambert)
Connected with min-
istry) veils tee nk 2843»
Connected with practi-
cal service......... 28448
cf Discernings of
Spiritsz fog 851» (Fortune)


cf Healing, Gifts of. . .1349» (Lambert)


3378 GENERAL INDEX


Spiritual Gifts—continued


ef Helps............. 13742 (Dosker)
ef Literature, Sub-
ADOBE Y ae bcd in 1896> (Cowan)
ef Salvation......... 26692 (Easton)
ef Teach, Teacher,
Teaching.......... 2921> (DeMent)
AROVTO A A. ay hie eye ect 28432
Tongues............- 28445
ef Tongues, Gift of... .2995> (Easton)
Spiritual House... .... .2844>
Spirituality. ........... 2845» (Pratt)
ef Spiritual Man...... 2844>
Spiritually.........0... 2845>
ef Spiritual.......... 2842> (Pratt)
Spiritual Man.......... 2844»
ef Man, New........ 1975" (Webb)
ef Spiritual..........2842> (Pratt)
cf Spirituality........ 2845» (Pratt)
Spiritual Meat......... 2844> (Pratt)
Spiritual Rock......... 2845* (Pratt)
ef Spiritual Drink... . .2843°
Spiritual Sacrifice....... 2845 (Pratt)
Spiritual Songs......... 2845+ (Pratt)
ef Song.............2830> (Millar)
Spiritual Things........ 2845> (Pratt)
Spit, Spittle........... 28462 (T. Lewis)
ef Face.............1085> (Luering)
Spoil
ef Booty... ......... 503> (W. L. Walker)
CEIPTOY oo iieg qd ewen 2439° (W. L. Walker)
CLSWiaT es Seco ote: 3069» (Nicol)
Spoilers... ence ee eek 2846
Spoke
cf Wheel............30826 (Easton)
Sponge................ 2846 (Day)
Spdone: Aiea ease 28462
Sports
cf Games............ 1168> (Smith)
Spot, Spotted.......... 2846> (Macalister)
ef Blemish........... 486> (Luering)
ef Freckled..........1145
ef Leopard........... 1866> (Day)
ef Leprosy........... 18679 (Macalister)
ef Tetter............ 2950+
Spouse................ 2846»
cf Espousal.......... 997>
ef Marriage.......... 1996> (Hager)
cf Relationships, Fam-
UU Varrances eas wie 25544 (N. and E. D. Isaacs)
Spread, Spreading...... 2846>
Spring
ef Fountain.......... 1141> (Day)
ef Water............ 30742 (Joy)

Ch Well 2 io 3 ae Sea ee 30812 (Day)
Sprinkle, Sprinkling.. . . .2846> (T. Lewis)
ef Heifer, Red........ 1367 (Easton)

Purification.......... 28472
Words used.......... 2846>

Spurious Acts, Epistles,
Gospels


ef Apocryphal Acts. . .183> (A. F. Findlay)


Spurious Acts, Epistles, Gospels—continued
ef Apocryphal Epistles 194> (J. M. Wilson)
ef Apocryphal Gospels 195* (Hutchison)


Spy


ef Espy......... .. .997>
Stachys............... 2847
Dtacksn ee). oy wack Gu acer 2847»
Stacte................2847>

ef Myrrh............ 2102 (Masterman)

cf Spice, Spices... . .. .2840* (Masterman)
Dtali we kee tacts Na Rema 2847

ef Sceptre........... 2701 (N. Isaacs)

ef Shepherd.......... 2763" (Patch)
Stair

ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Stake sii. eee 2847»

CF Pine. cee ac ils ages 2399" (N. Isaacs)
Dbalks 11058 2s Rae 2847>
Stalls. cst Pend 2847> (Patch)
Stammerer............2848?
Standard-bearer

ef Banner........... 384° (Hager)

CE Wats. ees eee 3069° (Nicol)
Standards

ef Astronomy........300° (Maunder)

ef Banner........... 3845 (Eager)

CLOW aris 2505-93 4d Sad oe 3069» (Nicol)
Standing

ef Attitudes.......... 3293 (W. W. Davies)
Star, Stars

ef Astronomy... .....300> (Maunder)


Star of Bethlehem
ef Star of the Magi. . .2848* (Maunder)


Star in the East


cf Magi... cei eye cuss 19628 (Tisdall)

cf Star of the Magi. . . 2848 (Maunder)
Stargazers

ef Astrology......... 297> (Maunder)
Star of the Magi....... 28482 (Maunder)

Balaam’s prophecy... .2848>

Herod’s inquiry...... 28482

Lesson of narrative. . . 2849»

Magi, the........... 28482


Not astrological lore. .2848>

Not a conjunction. . . .2849>

Not a constellation. . .2849+

Two facts........... 2848>

Well of Bethlehem... .2849+
Star of Wormwood

ef Wormwood, The Star 3110" (Orr)
Stars, Courses of


ef Astronomy........300° (Maunder)
Stars, Falling; Morning;

Wandering

ef Astronomy........300> (Maunder)
Stars, Seven

cf Astronomy........ 300> (Maunder)
Stately.......000000000, 2850"
DE ater se Cae ten acceled peau 2850

ef Money............ 2076* (Porter)

ef Shekel............ 2758 (Porter)


GENERAL INDEX 3379


Stature........0.000.. 28502 (Easton)
ef Cubit............. 765° (Porter)
Stavess..c conto e adey ance 28502 (Caldecott)
CE Altaricsy cscs 106 (Wiener)
CERO) sco % ei hook 2596" (Orr)
cf Sceptre...........2701 (N. Isaacs)
ef Staff.............2847°
Stay: So ss We ees 2850° (Easton)
Stead, Steads......... .2850°
Stealing
ef Crimes........... 748° (Hirsch)
ef Punishments... ... .2504> (Hirsch)
Chef x Mahan § 2972 (Easton)
Stedfastness...........2850°
beeline tse rawhaekdeen! 2850>
CL Brassica es 514* (Patch)
Stephanas............. 2950° (Press)
Stephen............... 2850° (Press)
Character and activity 2857"
Defense............. 28527
ef Lawin NT........ 18475 (M’Caig)
Martyrdom.......... 2853+


Personalantecedents. .2851%
Speech of Stephen. . . .2852>


Teaching............ 2851%
Trial in Jerusalem... .2851°
Steward............... 2853> (Reeve)
ef Melzar............ 20302 (R. D. Wilson)
NT usage.......... .2853°
OT usage............ 2853
Stewpan
Cle Pane es tus «wis i 2237 (Betteridge)
Stiff-necked............ 28542 (A. W. Evans)
Stuy ut tean ek ae hae 2854" (Easton)
Sing eee ee eee 2854 (Jacobs)
Stir, Stir Up........... 2854
Stocks cse es es 2854>
ef Punishments....... 2504° (Hirsch)
Stoicism...........-.- 1018 (Alexander)
ef Maccabees, Books
Ob Ce eactcit Mace ot 1955* (T. W. Davies)
Stoitsaucacte eres os 2854> (Rees)
ef Brotherly Kindness 525> (Rees)
ef Epicureans........ 964* (Rees)
Ethical teaching... . . .28557
ef Logos......-..+-- 1912> (Alexander)
Metaphysics and reli-
PIOD A asc ae ee wee 2855
Origin and propaga-
HOD ieee Ne res 2854
ef Philosophy........ 2383* (Rees)
Relation to Christian-
DEY tos hoameed Rosia 2855>
ef Roman Empire and
Christianity........ 2600" (Angus)
Sensationalist episto-
mology.........-- 2855+
Stoics and Epicureans . .1018* (Alexander)
Stomach............-- 2855
Stomacher............- 28564
Stone, Stones.......... 2856 (Day)


ef Flint.............1119® (Day)


Stone, Stones—continued


ef Punishments... ....2504> (Hirsch)

cP Rock hese 2596* (Day)

CE Sela ect gee eet 2713> (Ewing)
Stone-squarers.........2856
Stones, Precious........ 2856* (Fletcher)

cf Adamant..........54* (Day)

Change of meaning. . .2856°

Different stones... .. .2858

Hebrew names...... .28578

ef Hyacinth......... 1443»

Inconsistencies. ...... 2857

Interpretation of Greek

mames............ 2856

cf Jewel............. 1675° (Orr)

List of stones... .... .28565

cf Metal............ 20449 (Masterman)

Names..........-..- 28563

ef Ouches........... 2204> (Caldecott)

cf Tarshish.......... 29148

Various texts......... 2858>
Stoning

ef Punishments....... 2504 (Hirsch)
Stoole8 20 e haces 2862 (Cotton)

cf Birth-stool........ 478°

CE Seat rie soca ees 2710" (Cotton)
Storax

ef Poplar............ 2421> (Masterman)

cf Stacte............ 2847>

ef Tragacanth........ 3005+
Store-cities............ 2863+

ef Pithom........... 2401> (Conder)

cf Raamses.......... 2520° (Conder)
Storehouses............ 2863

cf Agriculture........ 77° (Patch)
Stories 2:24 vehi ae Gah 2863

ef Temple........... 29302 (Caldecott; Orr)
Stork eee cst ea es 28628 (Stratton-Porter)
Storms

On Sea of Galilee..... 1166 (Ewing)
Story

ef Commentary.. .'. . .687° (M. O. Evans)
Story Telling

ef Games............ 11685 (Smith)
Story Writer........... 2863"
Stout, Stoutness....... .2863°


Straight, Straightway. ..2864* (Haston)
Straight Street


cf Damascus......... 778 (C. H. Thomson)
Straits. 2c tet sx 2864"
Strait, Straiten, Straitly .2864* (M. O. Evans)
Strakes (Strake)........2864°

ef Strike............2867" (Easton)
Strange Fire........... 2864? (Dosker)
Strange Gods......... .1272* (Betteridge)
Strange Wife..........2864>


ef Stranger and So-
journer (in OT) . . . .2865* (Wiener)
Strange Woman........ 2865+
ef Strange Wife. .....2864>


GENERAL INDEX


3380

Stranger and Sojourner
On: OD) ee. Sede 2865 (Wiener)
ef Cherethites........ 6032 (Ewing)
ef Commerece......... 687° (Pollard)
ef Foreigner......... 1128+
Foreigners, the....... 2865>
ef Gentiles.......... 1215* (Porter)
Ger theses Haste ts 2865
Legal provisions. ..... 28652
cf Marriage....... *...1996> (Eager)
ef Pelethites......... 22972
ef Priests and Levites.24528 (Wiener)
ef Proselyte.......... 2469° (Levertoff)
cf Relationships, Fam-

Tyee Secsstia tele eS 2556 (N. and E.
Isaacs)


Stranger and Sojourner
(in Apoc and NT)... .2866* (Easton)


Strangled............. 2866+ (Pollard)
Strangling

ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)
Straw, Stubble......... 2866» (Patch)
Strawed............... 2866
Stream................ 2866> (Day)

cf Brook............ 523 (Day)

cf Canals........... 5522 (Kyle)

ef Channel.......... 594 (Day)

GIR ER ee caked 25952 (Day)

CE Valé icio2 ecco Bee ee 3045" (Day)

ef Watercourse....... 38074 (Day)
Street

CHOY S2Gee aes nas 6622 (A. C. Dickie)
Strength of Israel... .. . . 2867


Strife, Waters of
cf Massah and Meri-


Dah toate 20078 (Ewing)

Strike, Striker, Stroke. . .2867* (Easton)

ef Sure, Surely....... 2871> (Easton)

ef Surety. ..........- 2872* (Reeve)
Stringed Instruments

ef Music............ 2094 (Millar)
Stripes

ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)
Strive

ef Games............ 1168> (Smith)
Stronghold

cf Fortification....... 1136> (Nicol)
Stubble............... 2867

cf Agriculture........ 77° (Patch)

cf Rolling Thing...... 2597>
StidS eh settee el 2867
Stuf See. kchdva ends 2867>
Stumbling-block, Stum-

bling-stone........... 2867 (Hovey)

cf Offence...........2179 (W. L. Walker)
Sue etek he a oe es 2868*

ef Sia, Siaha......... 2783
Suah...... cco ee AM n oe 2868"
Dub ales on dechae 8 hee te 2868

cf Salmai............ 2663°


Subasss6 ee 28682


ef Spirit.............


28682 (W. L. Walker)
28422 (Marais)


Subtil, Subtle, Subtlety,


Subtlycoe ccc tee ee


Succeed, Success.......

ef Euodia...........
Succor, Suecorer........
Succoth............00.


ef Pithom...........
Succoth-benoth........


Suchathites
cf Sucathites.........


Suffocation
ef Punishments... ... .
Suicide


Sulphur
cf Brimstone.........


ef Seasons...........
Summer-house.........

ef Winter-house......
Sun

cf Astronomy........
Sun (figurative)........

ef Sun-worship.......
Sun, Chariots of the

ef Horses of the Sun. .
Sunday

ef Lord’s Day........
Sun Gate

cf Gate, East........
Sun-god............00.
Sun, Horses of the. .....
Sun-images

ef Images...........
Sunrising..............
Sun, Smiting by........

ef Moon............
Sunstroke

ef Sun, Smiting by....
Sun-worship...........

ef Beth-shemesh......


cf Horses of the Sun. .
ef Sun (figurative)... .


Sup, Supper


2868" (W. L. Walker)


6622 (A. C. Dickie)
2868> (W. L. Walker)


28682 (W. L. Walker)
1038 (Rutherfurd)
2868 (W. L. Walker)
2869 (Ewing)

2869 (Conder)

1012 (Conder)

1052* (Conder) .
2401» (Conder)

2869 (Pinches)

1271 (Reeve)


522> (Patch)
28702 (Porter)
2710 (Joy)
28708


301> (Maunder)
2870* (Schenk)
2870° (Orr)


1424
19192 (Haston)


1176 (Caldecott)
345* (Sayce)


2870° (Macalister)
20812 (Schenk)


2870> (Maealister)
2870° (Orr)

453° (Kyle)

14246

2870 (Schenk)


2013> (Eager)


GENERAL INDEX 3381


Superfluous, Superfluity .2871° (T. Lewis) Sweet Incense
Superscription......... 28712 (Miller) ef Spices............ 2840" (Masterman)
CPE ee ceded 2988> Swelleei ce. deta 2875* (Macalister)
Superstition, Supersti- ef Swollen........... 28768
MOUS), 265 258. ee ee, 2871" (Doolan) Swelling............... 2875 (Easton)
ef Religion.......... 2556 (Easton) Swift
SUPRA cnet aah ee 2871* (Ewing) ef Swallow........... 2874° (Stratton-Porter)
Suphah............... 2871 (Ewing) Swift Beasts........... 2875>
Suppah ef Camel............ 547> (Day)
ef Vaheb............ 30448 ef Horse............. 1423" (Day)
Supper BWING) beii cineca es 2875 (Day)
ef Meals............ 2013° (Eager) Swollen............... 2876"
Supper, Lord’s......... 1921 (Gummey) Sword :
Supply................ 2871 (Easton) ef Armor, Arms. . . . . .252 (Nicol)
Fa IN: Fe De oe 54> (M. O. Evans) Sycamine Tree......... 28762 (Masterman); 507
ef Peter, Second Epistle (Masterman)
OLE haga enn ee 2357" (Moorehead) ef Mulberry......... 2093° (Masterman)
Sut wanda 2871 BYCaROTS
ef Jerusalem......... 1595 (Masterman) cf Sycomore Tree. .... 2877" (Masterman)
Sure, Surely...........2871 (Easton) Sychar. . . Rants aa 2876" (Ewing)
ap Striles thee 2s 2867* (Easton) cf Jacob’s Well....... 1556 (Ewing)
ef Surety ih el WO tiny MN, 28720 (Reeve) ef Shechem.......... 2755" (Ewing)
ef Undertake........ 30372 Sychem..............- 28778
Sin epee Ae ee 2872 (Reeve) Sycomore Tree BON heen xe cal (Masterman)
ef Debt, Debtor... .. .814° (W. Evans) es Hrpcet a noul | AeetcrnaD)
ef Mortgage........ .2083> .
ef Pledge............ 2408» (Easton) s Bk as fee wat ak pies
ef Security.......... 2711» (Dosker) ¥ Pace Ne cera Bare
ef Strike............ 28672 (Easton) ee ter (Simon)... .. (Gray)
ef Simeon........... 27942 (S. F. Hunter)
ef Sure, Surely....... 2871> (Easton) g h
a ymmachus
een aor tale roc ek othe : ef Septuagint........2726+ (Thackeray)
Surname. .........-... 2872? (T. Lewis) Synagogue............. 2877° (Levertoff); 2385
Susa (Apoe) (Crp)
ef Shushan..........2782# (Pinches) Building. ...........2878>
Susanchites cf Chief Seats........ 606° (J. M. Wilson)
ef Shushanchites..... . 2783" ef Education......... 900 (Meyer)
Susanna, The History of 2872> (T. W. Davies) Names tice eos sacar 2877%
ef Bel and the Dragon.427> (T. W. Davies) Officials............. 2878
Canonicity and posi- Origin... i pee: 2878"
ON wae eee 2872 Service.............- 2879
Contents............ 2873° Spread.............. 2878"
ef Daniel..........-- 782» (R. D. Wilson) Synagogue, The Great.. .2879> (Orr)
Date iis cesses 2873> ef Canon of the OT.. .554* (Robinson)
Fact or fiction?...... 28739 Synagogue of Libertines
cf Holm Tree........ 1405* (Masterman) cf Libertines......... 18812 (S. F. Hunter)
NaMeswcccide cheese 28726 Synagogue of Satan... . .2696° (Williams)
Original language... . .2873° Synoptic Gospels....... 1281» (Iverach)
ef Text of the OT..... 2957° (Weir) Syntyche.............. 28802 (Rutherfurd) *
ef Woman........... 3102> (Pratt) ef Kuodia............ 1038+ (Rutherfurd)
Suber atid wis con creas 28742 ef Yokefellow........ 3127 (Rutherfurd)
Swaddle, Swaddling- Synzygus...........05. 2880"
band? 9 cde 28742 (Easton) Syracuse..............2880" (Allen)
Swallow........-...0-- 2874° (Stratton-Porter) Sy Plain ioisk dtcoxe ee 2880° (Christie)
Gwatl seis avec tely dh eatades 2874> (Stratton-Porter) History... .......00- 2881
Swearing ef Hittites........... 1395» (Conder)
cf Crimes..........- 745> (Hirsch) ef Lebaton.......... 1862 (Wright)
ef Oath............. 2172» (Levertoff) Name and its origin.. .2880°
ef Punishments....... 2504» (Hirsch) cf Natural Features ..21228 (Day)
Sweatvcis coe 2874 (Luering) Other designations .. . 2880”
Sweet Cane ef Palestine.......... 2208> (Conder)


ef Reed..........0-- 25449 (Masterman) ef Phoenicia......... 2386 (Porter)


3382 GENERAL INDEX


Syria—continued
Physical features. .... 2881


cf Aramaic Language. 222° (J. E. H. Thomson)


ef Languages of the
Oats ren nice er 1832* (Weir)
Syriac Versions........ 2883» (Nicol)
Analogy of Vulgate. . .2883>
History of Peshito... .2885*
Old Syriac texts...... 2884
Origin of Peshito..... 2884>
Other translations. . . .2885+


PeshitG.. ph ceded 2883°
Syriac NT........... 28848
Syriac OT........... 2883>
Syria-maachah .
CES YTS el eked BES 2880° (Christie)
Syrian (AV Syriack) Lan-
GUILE rs deca as 2885»
Syrian Language
ef Syriac............ 28832
Syrians nse i ade S 2885 (Porter)
Division of Aram..... 2885
Mixed race.......... 28862
Nabathaeans and Pal-
myrenes.......... 2886
Religion............. 2886>
Semites............. 2885>
Syria and Israel... ... 2886
Syrophoenician......... 2886> (Ewing)
Syrophoenician Woman
ef Jesus Christ....... 16488 (Orr)
SYEtiss at eee hae ets 2886°
Syzygus
ef Synzygus......... 28802
Taanach..............28878 (Ewing)
ef Palestine, Recent
Exploration........ 22282 (Cohbern)
Taanath-shiloh......... 28872 (Ewing)
Tabaoth, Tabbaoth..... 2887*
ef Tabbath.......... 2887
Tabbath.............. 2887»
Tabeelen.cegccend sive 2887 (Hiselen)
ef Tobiel............ 2990°
Tabellius.............. 2887"
PAbert eck ots ct eek 2 2887»
Paberahss.\ 8.0%. Wh els 2887
Tabernacle A (structure
and history)......... 2887 (Caldecott; Orr)
cf Altar x... cate: 106° (Wiener)
ef Ark of Covenant. . .2426 (Lotz)
ef Candle........... 552 (Eager)
ef Candlestick, Golden 553° (Orr)
ef Chernbim.........603> (Margolis)
ef Chronology of the
O De eend te sectee eeu 635° (Mack)


ef Court of Sanctuary .725° (Caldecott)

Delocalization of wor-
BbipisatAccte es 2, Recs 2892

Destruction of Shiloh. 2891>


Tabernacle A (structure and history) —continued


Divisions............ 2889"

Furmiture of......... 2890°; 1150* (Reeve)
cf Gate.............1175> (Easton)

ef Gate, East........ 1176 (Caldecott)
HIStOBY). dike hie 2891"

ef Holy of Holies. ....1405* (Caldecott)
cf Holy Place........ 1405> (Caldecott)
ef Incense........... 1466> (Orr)
Inclosure or court... . .2889
Introductory........ 2888

ef Laver............ 1843> (Caldecott)
ef Loop............. 1919

ef Mercy-seat........ 20362 (Caldecott)
NT references... .... .2892

cf Rams’ Skins....... 2530


Removal from Sinai.. .28912
Restoration of the ark 2892"

ef Sanctuary......... 2686> (Wiener)
Settlement in Canaan . 2891

ef Shewhbread, Table of 2767 (Caldecott)
Sojourn at Kadesh.. . .2891>

Stage in revelation... .2888>

Structure of the taber-


MACley seca. yale eens 2888"
Symbolism.......... 28920
ef Tabernacle B..... .2893 (Whitelaw)


Tent of Meeting... ...2888*
Tabernacle B (criticism) 2893" (Whitelaw)
‘Ability to construct
such a building in
the wilderness..... 2895*
ef Chronology of theOT 635" (Mack)
Conservative and criti-


cal views.......... 2893"
cf Moses..........-- 2087° (Kyle)
No tabernacle in pre-

Solomonic times. . . .2893>


Preéxilic prophets and
the tabernacle cultus 28979
Relation to temple... .2893
ef Shiloh (place)... ... 2768 (Ewing)
ef Tabernacle A...... 2887> (Caldecott; Orr)
Tabernacles at Shiloh,
Nob and Gibeon.. . .2893>


ef Tax, Taxing....... 2918 (Sweet)

ef Temple........... 2930° (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Tent.............2947 (Patch)

ef Twine............3028%


Unhistorical character
of the narratives... .2895>


Cf Viel site: ene 3047" (Caldecott)

ef Witness........... 3099* (Levertoff)

ef Worship.......... 31112 (Crannell)
Tabernacle of Testimony

(Witness)........... 2898"

ef Tabernacle A... .. .2892 (Caldecott; Orr)


Tabernacles, Feast of
ef Feasts and Fasts...1103? (E. D. Isaacs)


CHANG aye. hostess bee 30872 (Easton)
Tabitha
ef Doreas............870° (S. F. Hunter)


GENERAL INDEX


TVabletas tut eaten teases 2898+ (Easton)
ef Meals............ 20135 (Hager)
ef Money-changers.. . .2080° (Pollard)
ef Shewbread, Table of 2767 (Caldecott)


ef Tablet............ 2900° (Richardson)
Table of Nations....... 2898> (Pinches)

ef Abraham.......... 18 (Boyd)

Daten cies en tk 2900°

of Ham.............1823> (Pinches)

ef Isles of the Gentiles.1511>

ef Japheth........... 1568> (Pinches)

ef Jobab............ 1688

ef Mizraim.......... 2069" (Kyle)

ef Sabaeans.......... 26298 (Pinches)

SCOPE: ke eens 28992

ef Semites, Semitic Re-

Lipton e224 cin 2718* (Mack)

ef Shem............. 2759" (Pinches)

Sons of Ham......... 2899"

Sons of Japheth...... 28997

Sons of Shem........ 2899»

Table and its object,

Ge isin eee. 2898»

Three races, the...... 28992

ef Togarmah......... 2993 (Pinches)

ef Ur of the Chaldees.3039* (Clay)

Value of............ 29002
Table of Shewbread... . .2767% (Caldecott)

CP Altar’ sc oi cee 110* (Caldecott)
Tabletn.soyccs, fo 2900° (Richardson)

Biblical references. . . .2900°

ef Roll (Scroll)....... 25979 (Richardson)

ef Table............. 2898" (Easton)

ef Tell el-Amarna.. . . .2925> (Kyle)

PQQ ci i2 sae dest ee 2900+

ef Writing........... 3121 (Richardson)
‘Paboriecse aia aeseee 29012 (Ewing)

ef Gibeath.......... 1225> (Ewing)
Tabor, Mount........- 29019 (Ewing)

Appearance.......... 2901

Events at............- 29012

Location...........- 29012

Transfiguration...... 29015

ef Transfiguration,

Mount of.......-. 3006* (Ewing)
Tabor, Oak of......--.- 29022 (Ewing)
Tabret, Timbrel

ef Music...........- 2094 (Millar)
Tabrimmon..........-. 2902

ef Ben-hadad......... 435» (Nicol)

ef Rimmon.......... 25942 (N. Isaacs)
Taches

ef Clasps. ....-...--5 665° (Caldecott)
Tachmonite

cf Tahchemonite..... 2902
Tackling

cf Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
Tadmor.....-..0eeseee 29022 (Weir)

ef Tamar (place)..... 2907° (Ewing)
Tahan, Tahanites....... 2902+
Tahapanes.........-.-- 2902


Tahash......-...-0055 2902


Tahath (person)... ..
Tahath (place)......
ef Wanderings of
Paes cody es ee
Tahchemonite.......
cf Hachmonite....
Tahpanhes.........
Biblical references.


3383


Is-
...80642 (Conder)


.. 13813 (Hovey)
.. .2902 (Cobern)
.. .2902>


Excavations and dis-


coveries........
Location.........
Tahpenes..........
cf Pharaoh.......


cf Tarea..........
Tahtim-hodshi

cf Hittites........

_ ef Kadesh on Oront:


cf Telem (person).
TPalmudies. kic203 2


.. .2359% (Kyle)


_. 1395 (Conder)
es. 1789* (Christie)


...2903> (Easton)
.. 2904 (T. Lewis)
.. .1168> (Smith)

_, .2814> (Edwards)
.. .29042 (Porter)
...2076* (Porter)


. . .2925>
.. .2904> (Strack); 6852 (Oko)


Babylonian Talmud.. .2906°
Contents and divisions 2905+


ef Heifer, Red.....
Importance of... ..
Literature on.....
Palestinian Talmud


Traditional law... .


Verbal explanations. . .


ef Saloas............


Tamah


Tamar (person).....
cf Absalom.......
ef Amnon........
ef Judah........
cf Maacah (person)
ef Thamar........

Tamar (place)......
cf Palm Tree......
ef Tadmor........

Tamarisk..........-


ef Adonis........-
ef Calendar.......


.. .2906

.. .2864° (J. E. H. Thomson)
...25224 (Pollard)

.. .2688° (Levertoff)


.. .2907 (Orr)
.. 289 (W. W. Davies)
.. 118


....1758* (Ewing)


... 1945+ (Ewing)


.. .2907° (Ewing)

_. .22357 (Masterman)

.. .29028 (Weir)

,..29082 (Masterman); 507>
(Masterman)


...2908* (Porter); 372
(Rogers)
.. 688


...541> (Porter)


3384


GENERAL INDEX


Tammuz—continued


of Cobalys cn. 11802 (Porter)
ef Phoenicia... ......2387%; 2389> (Porter)
Tanach
ef Taanach.......... 28872 (Ewing)
Tanhumeth............ 2908
PANS ete scot ae tal eee 2908»
CE ZOaD. coc. AR te 3153+ (Conder)
Tanner sisi gan es 2908> (Patch)
cf CrattSee ec cae es 7342 (Patch)
ef Dyeing ....-883> (Patch)
Leather............. 29092
Method............. 2908>
ef Parchment........ 2247> (Patch)
Simon, the.......... 2908
Tanning
ef Wool............. 3104 (Patch)
Tapestry. ............. 2909
ef Weaving.......... 3077 (Patch)
Tapbath sce. cee ee ee 2909
Taphon
ef Tephon........... 2948>
Tappuah (person)...... 2909»
Tappuah (place)....... 2909 (Ewing)
Tarah
ef Terah............ 2948> (Easton)
"Var alahis oi. cecns Sobek 2909
WAT Cait te ps rag Retna ee 2910*
ef Tahrea............ 2903
Panes tec ccaseh, 2 eee 29108
Target
ef Mark (noun)... .. .1985> (Pratt)
Targum xc y eee 29102 (J. E. H. Thomson);
685" (Oko)
Date si eid hee MS cha: 2911
Jonathan, Targum of..2912>
Language of......... 2910°
ef Logos............. 19138 (Alexander)
Meaning of term... .. 2910
Mode of giving....... 2911
Onkelos, Targum of... 2911>
year. hore eects 29108
Other Targums....... 2913
UseOlses ees oa 2913>
Tarpelites............. 29148
Tarshish............-. 29148
ef Stones, Precious... .2862? (Fletcher)
Tarshish, Navy (Ships) of
cf Jehoshaphat....... 1583" (Mosiman)
ef Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)
Tarsusincs se .cc ia ent 2914 (Tod)
Constitution of....... 29162
Foundation legends. . .2914>
Later history ........ 29178
ef Paul, the Apostle. .2273" (A. T. Robertson)
Paul’s home......... 2916
Roman period........ 2915»
Situation............ 2914


Under Greck sway... .2915>
Under oricntal power. .2915*
University at..-..... 29168


Rartaks ecco ctte yaad 2917
ef Gods..........--. 12712 (Reeve)
WPartanteds ten ations seaness 2917 (Hiselen)
ef Rabsaris.......... 2522> (Clippinger)
cf Rabshakeh........ 25226 (Clippinger)
Taskmaster........-..- 2917° (Hirsch)
Passel? ok eine ho eees 2917> (Caldecott)
ef Fringes..........- 1146 (CE. D. Isaacs)
TRASEOES oehteneeyscs seas setgne 2917 (Luering)
Tattenai.............. 2917" (Umbach)
ef Sisinnes.........-. 2813°
Pattlerscies gu Ps a 6 3.0 whe 2917
Tav
Ch Ta Wee rae ais BE 2918"
Taverns, Three......... 29182 (Allen)
EL LWi frat eve timewiens, tee 29185
ef Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)
ef Forehead......... 1127> (Luering)
cf Mark (noun)...... 1985> (Pratt)
Tax, Taxing........... 29188 (Sweet)
General considerations 2918
In Israel............ 2918»
Publicans............ 29205
ef Tabernacle........ 2887> (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Tribute. ...: Piaetens 3010° (Hirsch)
Under Assyria and
Babylonia......... 29195
Under Egypt and
SYTlas see 29208
Under foreign conquer-
OFS Oe Aas ae 29198
Under judges. .......2918>
Under kings. ........2918>
Under Persia......... 29195
Under Rome........ .2920*
Teach, Teacher, Teach-
DNB ak eee teks es 2921 (DeMent)
Apostolic work....... 29235
ef Catechist.......... 582> (Gerberding)
Christ’s work of teach-
ie Ate. nee 29230
ef Didache.......... 387> (A. T. Robertson)
ef Education......... 900° (Meyer)
Extra-Biblical history 2922
NT history.......... 29233
NT terms........... 2922
OT history.......... 2922>
OT terms........... 29215


ef Spiritual Gifts... .. 2843> (Lambert)
Terms for,in OT..... 29218


Tear Bottle............ 2.923
cA <TR = Sea ae a 2923> (Macalister)

ef Bottle............ 509° (Eager)
Peatis! fie occa case 2923

Ch Paps ids aout ee 2237
Mebahie yA oe Sewn Me eee 29248
Tebaliah.............. 29248

ef Tobijah........... 2990
Tebeth........0.....0.. 29248

ef Calendar.......... 5415 (Porter)
Tehaphnehes

ef Tahpanhes........ 2902 (Cobern)


GENERAL INDEX 3385


Tehinnah............. 29242
POU ERC ete evs Oieter sess 2924%

ef Terebinth......... 2949* (Masterman)
Tekel

cf Mene, Mene, Tekel,

Upharsin.......... 2032 (R. D. Wilson)
Tekoawe: cast Aaa deen id 2924 (Masterman)

Later history........ 2924»

Scripture references. . .2924*

SITE ak ee hae | 2924»
Tel-abib............... 2924» (Pinches)
Dela rtecsce ceelntiacce: 2925
Telaimis.. esate es 2925° (Masterman)
Telassarcnciaicnc sin ae es 2925* (Pinches)

ef Eden............. 897 (Wright)

ef Rosh............. 2623 (Pinches)
Telem (person)......... 2925»

ef Talmon........... 2904

cf Tolbanes..... Rees 29942
Telem (place).......... 2925

ef Telaim............ 2925+ (Masterman)
Tel-harsha............. 2925+
Tell

ef Tale. sen cnn es 2904 (T. Lewis)


Tell el-Amarna Tablets. .2925> (Kyle)
ef Archaeology and
Criticism. ......... 2262 (Kyle)
Canaanite civilization .29274
Cuneiform writing. . . .2926
Diplomatic correspond-


ONGC. baw ee es 2927
Discovery........... 2925» '
Egyptian rule, but

Babylonian lan-

guage...........-. 2927
Geographical value... .2926
cf Heberites...... oe 1354?
ef Hebrew........... 1355° (Orr)
Historical value...... 2926
ef Jerusalem.........1613% (Masterman)
ef Libraries.......... 1882 (Richardson)
ef Melchizedek....... 2028» (Roberts)
ef Moses..........-. 2083» (Kyle)
Name seen ied oe satits 2925»
ef Palestine, Recent

Exploration........ 2223 (Cobern)


Philological value... . .2926>
Physical character. . . .2926°
Problem of the Habiri 2927°


Proper names........ 29263

ef Sidon..........--- 2785° (Porter)

Verification of Biblical
statements......... 2926


Tell el-Hesy (Lachish)
ef Palestine, Recent


Exploration........ 2225> (Cobern)
Tel-melah............. 2928»
ef Tel-harsha......... 2925*
POM dix vee aet Retecig be ea 2928» (Ewing)
Temah
ef Thomei........... 2973


Temeni............... 29299
Temper............... 2929 (T. Lewis)
Temperance, Temperate 2929 (Jacobs)

ef Abstinence........ 24> (Eager)

ef Drink, Strong... .. .879 (Edwards)

cf Sobriety.......... 2820> (Jacobs)
Tempest.............. 2929> (Joy)
Temple A (structure and

history)............. 2930* (Caldecott; Orr)

ef Adytum........... 658

ch Altar. hccay assis 106° (Wiener)

cf Altar of Burnt Offer-

pe Ona te ee ar te 110° (Caldecott)

ef Architecture....... 2349 (A. C. Dickie)

cf Asmoneans........ 2832 (Dosker)

CE BOAR se Bedecers eles oes 4915 (Roberts);  1547>

(Caldecott)

cf Candlestick, Golden 553° (Orr)

ef Cherubim......... 603° (Margolis)

ef Court of the Sanc-

AMANY oe. wera anes 725* (Caldecott)

ef Cubit............. 765° (Porter)

ef Furniture......... 1150* (Reeve)

ef Gate...........-- 1175> (Easton)


ef Gate, The Beautiful 1176 (Caldecott)
cf Holy of Holies..... 1405" (Caldecott)


ef Holy Place........ 1405» (Caldecott)

ef House............ 1434 (A. C. Dickie)

ef Incense........... 1466» (Orr)

ef Jachin and Boaz. ..1547% (Caldecott)

ef Jerusalem......... 1618° (Masterman)

ef Jesus Christ... ....1637° (Orr)

CL Knopp hice 1815°

ef ha vertion cies outes 1843» (Caldecott)

ef Ledge............ 1864

ef Lily-work......... 1893

ef Maccabees, Books of 19528 (T. W. Davies)

Of Onias............ 2374 (A. C. Dickie)

ef Palace............ 22082 (Orr)

ef Partition, Middle
Wealkiotis2heie.dss 22539 (Rutherfurd)

ef Porch ni: .ccs ve ees 24215


ef Porch, Solomon’s. . 2421» (Caldecott)
cf Reed, Measuring. . .2545* (Orr)


ef Sanctuary......... 2686» (Wiener)
cf Sea, The Molten, or
Brazen .../....... 2708" (Caldecott)
ef Settle (Moun)... ...2743>
cf Shewbread, Table of 2767 (Caldecott)
cf Shiloh (place)... ... 2768 (Ewing)
OF Siah*sre3c eee 238%
cf Singers, Singing. .. .2804® (Millar)
cf Solomon.......... 2824" (Weir)
Of Solomon.......... 234» (A.C. Dickie)
ef Stories............ 2863"
ef Tabernacle B (criti-
Cism)... 0... eee 2893? (Whitelaw)
cf Treasure, Treasurer,
Treasury.......... 30075 (Raffety)
ef Treasury (of Tem-
ple)ichand 2) 3008" (Caldecott)


cf Upper Chamber... .3039° (Orr)


3386 GENERAL INDEX


Temple A (structure and history)—continued


ct Viell ets a tee 3047 (Caldecott)
ef Worship.......... 31112 (Crannell)
cf Zacharias......... 3129> (Easton)

Temple B (in criticism) . 2940" (Whitelaw)
Central sanctuary... .2942>


Challenge of criticism. 2940+
Errors in Chronicles.. .2941*
Errors as to David... .29415
Omissions and contra-
dictions........... 29412
Plan of the temple... .2941>
Quantity of material. .2941>


Service of........... 29422
Versions different... . .2940°
Temple (Ezekiel’s)...... 2934» (Caldecott; Orr)
Buildings and adjunets 2935»
Courts...........-0- 2935*
Relation to history of
the temple......... 2934»
Temple (Herod’s)....... 2937* (Caldecott; Orr)


Apostolic church...... 2939
Beginning of work... .2937*
cf Gate, The Beautiful .1176> (Caldecott)


Grandeur of......... 2937
ef Holy of Holies..... 1405 (Caldecott)
Inner sanctuary...... 2937
Jesus in the.......... 2939*
NT references to..... 2939*
Passion Week........ 2939»
Temple area......... 29375


Temple building, the. .2938>
Temple in Christian


thought........... 2939>
cf Treasury (of Tem-
: pleas 2 eee ek 30082 (Caldecott)
Temple (Solomon’s). . . .2930° (Caldecott; Orr)
Building, the......... 2931
@ourtel <ssriets bee 2932
David's plan......... 2930°
Furniture of court. . . .2933>
Furniture of sanctuary 2933
History of........... 2934+
Phoenieian help...... 2931


Plans and character... . 2930
Porch and pillars. .... 2932"


Royal buildings...... 2933
Side chambers........ 2932
Sitele mos eee ties 29305


Temple (Zerubbabel’s) . .2936* (Caldecott; Orr)
Building and furniture 2936°


Decree of Cyrus...... 2936"
Founding and comple-
HOM es aes 29362
Later fortunes........ 2936
Temple Keepers (Serv-
PANES) Lee ieee tees 2942» (Easton)
ef Nethinim......... 2139» (Lees)
Templess. 2 i.a. os cance os 2942>


Temples, Robbers of. . . .2942° (Jacobs)
Tempt, Temptation... . .2942 (Stuart)
ef Buddha.......... 1635° (Orr)


Tempt, Temptation—continued


Cf PROVE: 2 ...oa Gg oeieecns 2469> (W. L. Walker)
ef Temptation of

Christ ca) naan eee 2943+ (Anderson)

Temptation of Christ...2943* (Anderson); 1806*
(Stalker)

Charaeter of the narra-

TVs sane ics acerca iets 29444
First temptation... .. .2943°
cf Gethsemane....... 1221» (Masterman)
How be tempted if sin-

less? ace Sarre 2944
ef Jesus Christ... ....1635% (Orr)
ef Points...........- 2415* (M. O. Evans)
ef Satan.........---- 2694» (Sweet)
Second temptation... .2943>
Significance.......... 2943


ef Tempt, Temptation.2942> (Stuart)
Third temptation... . .2944*°
Time, place and


SOUICES...- 62.000. 2943+

Ten

ef Number..........2157* (Smith)
Ten Commandments,

THe ich serene gina eis 2944» (Sampey)

Exegetical notes...... 29468

ef Family........... 1094 (Caverno)

Groups...........06 2945>

How numbered?..... 2945


logue ...........-. 2946

Original form... .....2945>

Promulgation........ 2945

cf Sabbath.......... 2629 (Sampey)
Ten Strings

ef Music............. 2094> (Millar)
Ten Tribes in Captivity .571> (Nicol)
Tender. oiceicueacitvene s 2947 (Easton)

cf Blindness......... 487> (Macalister)
Tenone neces es 2947+ (Caldecott)

cf Socket........... 2821* (Caldecott)

cf Tabernacle........ 2890 (Caldecott; Orr)
Pent. faassen 2947 (Pateh)

Arab customs........ 2947>

Biblical references. . . .2947

Figurative use........ 2948

ef Goat’s Hair........ 1249» (Patch)

ef Weaving.......... 8077 (Pateh)
Tenth

of Tithe v.30 2987> (Levertoff)
Tenth Deal............ 29488
Tent-maker............ 29482

cf Crafts.... 0.0.0... 7342 (Patch)
Tephon vnc fewer ce at 2948»
Terah (person)......... 2948 (Easton)
Terah (place).......... 2949+


cf Wanderings of Israel 3064* (Conder)
Teraphim


cf Astrology......... 295 (Maunder)
cf Divination........ 860° (T. W. Davies)
ef Gods............. 1270» (Reeve)


GENERAL INDEX


Teraphim—continued


ef Idolatry.......... 1447> (Cobern)
cf Image............ 1450* (Edwards)
‘ef Images........... 1452 (Cobern)
cf Jacob............. 1551% (Boyd)
Terebinth............. 2949" (Masterman); 508*
(Masterman)
Ch Oakes cen ote knees 2171" (Masterman)
Veres bret ves Mek 2949
TRGVPaCeG st ced rs exec oS 2949
Terrible, Terror........ 2949» (M. O. Evans)
TP OrtHiS ts os terk oe yh ee 2949» (S. F. Hunter)
Tertullus.............. 2949 (Kerr)
ef Felix Antonius..... 1105 (Kerr)
Testament............. 2950
Of Abraham.........177*
Of Adami: jag casio. 1778
cf Covenant in the
Nt aoe es a ghee ay 729> (Estes); 175° (J. E.
H. Thomson)
Of JOb Hie aes 1778
Of the twelve patri-
archaic. wig shen 1758


Testament of Isaac
ef Apocalyptic Litera-


PUP eis oss See eee 161 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Testament, New, Canon
Of the eke eae ieee 563° (Riggs)
Testament, New, Text
and Manuscripts..... 2950> (Sitterly)
Testament, Old, Canon of
thes vera edn a 5548 (Robinson)


ef Text of the OT... ..2957 (Weir)
Testaments, Between the 455" (Dosker)
Testaments of the Twelve

Patriarchs

ef Apocalyptic Litera-

tures oe ae et 161” (J. E. H. Thomson)

Testimony, Ark of the

ef Ark of the Cove-


DAD bee es Hae 242» (Lotz)

Teta

ef Ateta..........4.. 317%
eth hse cay es ay ekes 29508

ef Alphabet.......... 103» (Richardson)
Tetrarch............-- 2950" (Dosker)
Tethers ees nen ose geen 2950

ef Freckled.......... 1145+

ef Leprosy........-.. 18679 (Macalister)

ef Spot, Spotted...... 2846> (Macalister)
Text and Manuscripts of

thee De acco cheer tea st ocd 2950° (Sitterly)


Autograph copies. .... 2950>
Evidence abundant. . .2950°
Four groups of texts. .2956°
Greek copies or manu-


scripts... .......65 2952"
History of textual criti-
CASU, 280, S64. yaa ese alae 2956


Text and Manuscripts of the NT—continued
List of manuscripts. . .2952
ef Manuscripts..... 19842 (Richardson)
Methods of criticism . .2955>
Necessity for criticism
of evidence........ 2955"
Papyrus fragments... .2952%


Patristic quotations . .29549
Periods of textual
criticism. ......... 2957
cf Print............. 2455* (Richardson)


cf Septuagint........2727> (Thackeray)
Sources of evidence. . .2950>


Types oferror........2955*
Vernacular versions. . .2954*
Text of the OT....... 2957> (Weir)

cf Alphabet.......... 103> (Richardson)

Alteration of docu-
ments............. 29618

Change in the law. . . .2959"

Change of script...... 2959


Chapter and verses. . .2963>
Date of vowel points .2962>
Division into books. . .2962
Divisions into verses. .2962
Earliest form of writ-


en eee ie 2958"
Early printed texts. . .2963>
Euphemisms......... 2961
External circumstances

of preservation..... 2959»
History of the text... .2961>
Inscriptions.......... 2958
Internal conditions of

preservation....... 2959»
Inversion and abbre-

viation............ 29605


Jehovah and Baal... .2961*
cf Languages of the

Old Testament..... 1833
Letters and punctua-

tion marks........ 29602
cf Manasses, Prayer of 1980° (T. W. Davies)
Manuscripts and print-


(Weir)


ed texts........... 2963>
Masorah, the........ 2963
New or Aramaean al-

phabet............ 2958»


Old Hebrew alphabet .2958>

Palestinian consonants,
vowels and accents. .2963>

Palestinian vowel


points............ 2962
Preservation of the

Lexteg  ceacs aes teats 29090"
Scribal alteration. .... 2961>
Scribal errors....... .2961>
CLS OAL ass na heres: 2708" (Edwards)
Sections in law, proph-

GtSOLCe Son Scot he 29628


Septuagint version... .2960*


3387


3388 GENERAL INDEX


Text of the OT—continued
Text in the first cen-
tury AD cic eees 2960
Two Hebrew scripts. . .2958>
Types of error in text. 2961>
Vocalization of the


texte cee 2962»
ef Writing........... 3114 (Richardson)
Thaddaeus............ 2964 (Kerr)
cf Apocryphal Acts. . .183> (A. F. Findlay)
Ch Judase 4 be cae 1765* (S. F. Hunter)


cf Judas, Not Iscariot .1767*
cf Judas of James... ..1767> (Kerr)


cf Lebbaeus.......... 18648
ef Simon the Cana-
TASCA Sheed a Goeace ss 2797» (Kerr)

cf Thomas........... 2973" (Kerr)
Thahash

ef Tahash........... 2902>
Thamah

ef Temah............ 2929
Thamar’. 2.24.2 5tca ke 2964


cf Tamar (person)... .2907> (Orr)
Thammuz


ef Tammuz.......... 29088 (Porter)
Thamnatha

ef Timnah.......... 29832 (Masterman)
Thank, Thanks, Thanks-

givng.............. 2964» (Easton)

CE.Grace.:, <3 eles ce3 12908 (Easton)
Thank Offering

cf Sacrifice in the OT. .2638" (Reeve)
Bd Yb ent oer 2965"

cf Terah (person)... . .2948> (Haston)
PhAaIV as. ae acess ae ss 29658
Tharshish

ef Tarshish..........2914*
PEHASSD Ato se cca da haem 2965

ef Simon............ 2794> (Angus)
That Day


cf Day of the Lord... .799 (Dosker)
Theatre


ef Games............ 11685 (Smith)
Thebes

ef No-amon....... _.. .2153> (Kyle)
Thebeg ics we Woe dice fe 2965° (Ewing)
Thecoe

cf Tekoa............ 2924 (Masterman)
Thee-ward............. 2965

cf Ward............. 30722 (Easton)
Theft

ef Crimes............ 7488 (Hirsch)

cf Punishments.......2504> (Hirsch)

CH TAIGE is caine aa da 2972 (Easton)
Thelasar

ef Telassar.......... 2925* (Pinches)
Thelersas.............. 2965>

ef Tel-harsha......... 2925
Theocanus............. 2965»

ef Thocanus......... 2973

ef Tikvah............ 2981»


Theocracy............. 2965> (McPheeters)
OT idea. ............ 2965
OT passages. ....... .2965>
Origin of term........ 2965>
Theodotion
ef Language of the NT 1826° (A. T. Robertson)
cf Septuagint........2725> (Thackeray)
Theodotus..........-.. 2966+
Theology


cf Biblical Theology.. .469> (J. Lindsay)
cf Johannine Theology 1695> (Law)
cf Pauline Theology... .2289 (Easton)


Theophilus............ 2966* (Kerr)
WheCras 252 f¥en cd Ges 2966
Thermeleth............- 2966"

ef Tel-melah......... 2928»


Thessalonians, The First
Epistle of Paul to the. 2966" (R. H. Walker)


Analysis............. 2967
Conditions in the
church ............ 29678


Doctrinal features... .2967>
Founding of the
chureh Heese 2966»
Importance.......... 29662
Luke’s narrative re-
garding the church. . 2966
Paul’s characteristics
as revealed........ 2967
Thessalonians, The Sec-
ond Epistle of Paul to


Chet eiye cca ttaata 29682 (R. H. Walker)
Against Pauline author-

ship. esse Racca eaes 2968"
Arguments for Pauline

authorship........ 2968>
Authenticity......... 2968"
Exhortation to indus-

Gey es nema 2970"


Importance of study-
ing 1 Thess and 2
Thess together..... 2968


Man of sin, the....... 2969+
ef Man of Sin...... 1976® (Orr)
Theories regarding
man of sin......... 2969
Thessalonica........... 2970* (Tod)
History............. 2970»
Later history of the
church in.......... 2971»
Paul’s visit... ....... 2970


Position and name... . 29702
Thessalonian church. .29715


Theudas.............. 29729 (Kerr)

cf Gamaliel.......... 1168+ (Kerr)
Thick Treeg...........29728

cf Myrtle............ 2103 (Masterman)
"Thicket 2 sat hs. canted 2972

cf Forest............ 11322 (Masterman)
Mehlety 2 actrees’ 29728 (Easton)

cf Assassins.......... 2882 (S. F. Hunter)


ef Barabbas.......... 402° (Rees)


GENERAL INDEX 3389


ig
Thief—continued Three Children, Song of
ef Crimes...........- 745° (Hirsch) thes roe aoe ees 28342 (T. W. Davies)
ef Robber, Robbery. . . 2595 (Easton) Threescore
PRG hires sed csctdoha adores 2972 (Easton) ef Number........... 21579 (Smith)
CHIPS aadeee eae oan: 1394» Threshing............. 2975» (Patch)
ef Jealousy..........1572% (Forrester) ef Agriculture........ 75» (Patch)
ef Knee............. 1815* (Easton) Threshing-floor......... 2975 (Patch)
Ciilbeg cs edad ade as 1865 (Luering) Threshold
ChLOMB see ake 1917 (Luering) ef House............1484> (A. C. Dickie)
ef Sacrifice in NT... . .2651% (Williams) Throne............... 2976 (Baur)
ef Sacrifice in OT... . .26382 (Reeve) Biblical references. . . .2976>
Thimnathah........... 2972> cf King, Kingdom... . 1799 (Press)
ef Timnah..........-. 2983" (Masterman) Majesty of.......... 2976
Think? hot wondehs es 2972> (Jacobs) Symbol of Divine
ef Thought.......... 29759 power............. 29778
Shirdi Riese pe eit 29738 PRP les cecias sees 29774
ef Calendar.......... 541° (Porter) Thummim
CiaDay cn asec 797 (Gerberding) ef Integrity.......... 14848 (W. L. Walker)
ef Time............. 2981> (Porter) ef Urim and Thum-
Third Day MUM. Gs eee ok eee 3040° (N. Isaacs)
ef Lord’s Day es 19192 (Easton) Thunder. erage Ansara anes 29774 (Joy)
THiS cco nee 2973° (Orr) ELIE MUNE org cals page ey)
Thirteen, Thirty Thyatira Lae eden ect taces ete 2977 (Banks)
ef Number.......... 2157* (Smith) History and productes 20/7"
Thee atic enone 29738 TOCOR eres tee
. Present town......... 2977»
Ehieules Thyine Wood 29738
ef Thorns, Thistles. . .2974" (Masterman) mesg er ea eee
Tiberias. 20.5.) nee ces 2978" (Ewing)
Thocanus.............2973 Hi f 297g>
Fee ahy haw veers 2981» Bey en see
¢ Location............ 2978
Thomasis:c¢4 6.30 Seek 29739 (Kerr) Modern city......... 29792


ef Apocryphal Gospels.195* (Hutchison)
In apocryphal litera-


TUTE? 2A eas 2973>
Character........-.- 2973»
Ine Ny eee 29739
cf Thaddaeus........ 29642 (Kerr)


Thomei...........-.-- 2973
ef Temah............ 29292
Thorn in the Flesh...... 2974* (Macalister)
ef Thorns, Thistles.. . .2974* (Masterman)
Thorns, Thistles........ 29748 (Masterman)


In Biblical history. . . .2975*
Biblical references. . . .2974


ef Botany........... 505° (Masterman)

ef Hook............- 1419 (Easton)

Names for..........- 29748

ef Nettles...........2140° (Masterman)

Plentifulness in Pales-

LING =. 4o8 face Mae 2975"

Thought...........-.. 2975 :

ef Think............2972> (Jacobs)
Thousand

ef Number.......... 21572 (Smith)
Thracia, Thracian...... 2975? |

CE Tiras .o onto ss 2986" (Wolf)
Thrasaeus...........-- 2975»

cf Apollonius........ 200° (Hutchison)
Three


ef Number.......... 2157% (Smith)


Tiberias, Sea of
cf Galilee, Sea of..... 1165* (Ewing)


Tiberius............... 2979" (Angus)
Administration....... 2979>
Character........... 2979"

Early life and relations

to Augustus....... 29792
Jews, the, and........ 2980
Name and parentage .2979*
Niland yA: tinea 2979>
ROD bae eee 2979»

Tibhath............... 2980+ (Christie)

SEIDD oy cssciee si «a cates 2980

Tiboam
ef Jerusalem......... 1608" (Masterman)

Tidal. Give sina lncw ets 29802 (Pinches)
cf Amraphel. ........1268 (Pinches) ; 366 (Clay)
ef Arioch............ 2418 (Pinches)
cf Chedorlaomer...... 599 (Pinches)
ef Eri-aku........... 969» (Pinches)
ef Hammurabi....... 1326+ (Pinches)
Name and its forms.. .2980>
Suggestions.......... 2980
Tudhula mentioned. . .2980>

Tidings, Glad.......... 1233° (W. L. Walker)

Tigellinus
ef Nero............- 2136 (Angus)

Tiglath-pileser......... 2980 = (Nicol); 2948

(Sayce)
History of........... 29814


Name and references. .2980°


3390 GENERAL INDEX


Tiglath-pileser—continued


ChARU aii er rad ta a AY 2501
CE Sy Tid os rly sek 2883" (Christie)
Western campaigns of 570° (Nicol)
SDIGTIS ae tet tends 29815 (Wright)
Citbden 3.2423 Wate es 897° (Wright)
Tikvah, Tikvath....... 29815
ef Theocanus......... 2965»
ef Thocanus.........29732
Tile, Tiling............ 2981>
ef Ezekiel............ 10715 (Moller)
ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)


Tilgath-pilneser
ef Tiglath-pileser. .... 2980» (Nicol)


Tillage

ef Agriculture. ....... 75 (Patch)
PETG eases SAS tae cae ertes 2981
PAMNACUS® 6 ed ccch a dem ton 2981»

ef Bartimaeus........ 406 (Rees)
Timbrel

ef Music............ 2094» (Millar)
STAI ORS tS Fa ee aah hee att 2981» (Porter)

cf Astronomy........300 (Maunder)

ef Calendar.......... 541> (Porter)

Cia 0) 1 t= ea 673* (Porter)

ChDays cette 797> (Gerberding)

CHAE enc el auton artes 968> (Porter)

Hebrew divisions..... 2982

CL OUI 8 beet es 1434* (Porter)

ef Midnight.......... 2050* (Porter)

ef Money........... 20762 (Porter)

ef Month............ 2081 (Porter)

ef Night-watch....... 2145*

NOs@faie 4 esas dees 2982

ef Noon, Noonday. ,. .2155

Cf THIrd 6 ies eens 2973*

ef Watch............ 3074 (Porter)

GCE Wiebke tira aks 3078

Week and month..... 29822

CHMCAT Ss: asta ike 31262

Year and seasons..... 2982
Tame; ast oso -i e 18404 (Vos)
Time, Times and a Half .2982

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Times, Observer of

ef Divination........8608 (T. W. Davies)

ef Magic............ 1963+ (T. W. Davies)
AMM aaron ch ol dheatmahoe 29834
Timnah............... 2983" (Masterman)
Timnath

ef Timnah........... 2983 (Masterman)
Timnath-heres.........2983* (Ewing)
Timnath-serah.........2983* (Ewing)

ef Gaash............1150"
Timmite sci. wack: oats 2983"
PDA OM ee ou haus Sek hye he 2983"
Timotheus............. 2983° (Angus)
Timothy. ............. 2983> (Rutherfurd)


Birth and conversion. .2984°

Circumcision and ordi-
nation............2984

Father and mother... .29842


Timothy—continued
CE LOIS a ete eee tec 1917 (Rutherfurd)


Relations to Ephesus. .2985*
Relations with Paul.. .2984*
Rome, at.........--. 2985>
CEYBICUS': Soe Sele tae eects 2988 (Rutherfurd)


“Timothy, Epistles to


ef Pastoral Epistles. . .2258> (Rutherfurd)


Die Pe atecsran Sotemernes 2985»

ef Alloy...........6. 99>
Tiphsah..............- 2085> (Ewing)
ED IPAS We csc ote oka ees 29862 (Wolf)

cf Thracia, Thracian. .2975>
Tirathites............- 2986 (Wolf)
Tire, Headtire......... 2986

ef Dress.........000- 875> (Eager)
Tires, Round..........- 2986"

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)

ef Crescents........- 744»
Tirhakah.............. 2986* (Pinches)

Chronology.......... 2986»


Name and dynasty... .2986
Relations with Assyria 2986


WPirhaniar’ Boos ccc oe 2986
Tiras soe yeas ene 2986»
Tirshatha............- 2986> (R. D. Wilson)
ef Governor.......... 1289 (Heidel)
cf Zerubbabel........ 3147> (R. D. Wilson)
CBIR G ane Re et Sly 2987" (Ewing)
Tishbite............-.- 29878
ef Elijah............930 (Farr)
Tishri, Tisri............ 2987
cf Calendar.......... 541» (Porter)
MPIGANS awn ale ce a bale aes 2987
ef Rephaim.......... 2559» (Porter)
TT Ith Greta tet nance eee 2987> (Levertoff)
ef First-fruits........ 1114* (Levertoff)
OT references........ 2987


cf Priests and Levites.2446* (Wiener)
Relation of priests to. .2987>


Variations in laws... .29882
Titius Justus
ef Justus............ 1788> (8S. F. Hunter)
ef Titus or Titius Jus-
LUISE isn eee eae 2989" (Rutherfurd)
Pitlesse gain irearse 2988>
ef Superscription..... 2871" (Miller)
Mittles cote ites aes 29885
Che J Ota tie .iohe ae hanaed 1753> (Easton)
ef Yodh............. 3126
Titus ieuitee says ace ete 2988 (Rutherfurd)
Character........... 2989>
Circumcised.......... 2988>
Journeys............ 2989"
Relations with Paul.. .2988>
ef Timothy.......... 2984* (Rutherfurd)


Titus, Epistle to
ef Pastoral Epistles. ..2258> (Rutherfurd)
Titus, or Titius Justus. .2989> (Rutherfurd)
ef Justus............ 1788> (8. F. Hunter)
ef Proselyte.......... 2467> (Levertoff)


GENERAL INDEX 3391


Titus Manius.......... 19822 (Angus)
PIAMGC Ais 3 6S ese ode bee 2990°
Toah

ef Nahath........... 2109>
Tob, The Land of...... 2990° (Ewing)

ef Tubias............ 30275
Tob-adonijah..........2990°
Toblahtocc3 2. P.cctsen: 29908 (R. D. Wilson)
TODIAB iis sen eicie ed Ls 2990°

of Hyreanus SE a Raa 1445


ef Tobit, Book of..... 2990> (T. W. Davies)
Tobie


ef Tubias............ 3027
Toblelen ies isc cdisilejtueten 2990>
ef Tabeel............ 2887» (Hiselen)
Wobijah ede ceion escveten aes 2990>
ef Tebaliah.......... 2924
Tobit, Book of......... 2990° (T. W. Davies)
cf Apocrypha........ 178 (T. W. Davies)
Contents............ 2990°
Datesensde outa ces nis 2992
Fact or fiction? ...... 29918


Name and canonicity .2990>
Original language... . .2993*
Place of composition . .2992>
Relation to Esther... . 2992


cfSaralii sc. cecc ce es 2691 (Boyd)

Sources...........-- 2991>

ef Tobias............ 2990»

Versions............. 2992»
Tochen............... 2993%
Togarmah............. 2993> (Pinches)

cf Armenia.......... 246% (Tisdall)

cf Table of Nations. . .2898> (Pinches)

cf Trade............ 3003 (Easton)
Tohu

ef Nahath........-.. 2109>
Toi

CET OWS iti ee ice 3000
TOKEN ete. de ates ee 29942 (Easton)

GESIgN. eos 2oeu; ak 27892 (Stuart)
Tokhath

ef Tikvah...........29815
Tole ta: feos ha yee ee 2994" (EH. D. Isaacs)
Tolad

ef Eltolad........... 939
Tolaites

ef Tola...........-. 2994 (E. D. Isaacs)

“Tolbanes........-.---- 2994

ef Telem (person)... .2925>
olla ier a oie ace Pro 2994 (Pollard)
Tomb

ef Burial............ 530° (Eager)

cf Seal..........2+-- 2709° (Edwards)
Tomorrow

ef Morrow........--- 2083 (Porter)
TOMES cise hi alata 29948

ef Snuffers, Snuffdishes 2820° (Caldecott)

Cf Tools: estes ee 2999 (Easton)
Tongue...........00-- 2994 (Easton)


cf Mouth............ 2093 (Luering)


Tongue—continued
ef Tongues, Confusion
Os Se at eeecaae 2994» (Easton)
Tongues, Confusion of.. .2994> (Haston)
cf Babel, Tower of... .355° (Pinches)


Context............. 2995
Historicity..........2995
Narrative, the........ 2994»
Religious value... ... .2995>
Sources....-........ 2995?
ef Tongue........... 2994> (Easton)
Tongues of Fire........ 2997" (Moorehead)
Distinctions.......... 2998"
Pentecost scene...... 2997
Qualities imparted by
the Spirit......... 2998
Sinai and Pentecost
compared......... 2997
ef Tongues, Gift of... .2995> (Easton)
Tongues, Giftof....... 2995> (Haston)


Account in Acts 2... .2996
Description in 1 Cor


1 ear pee ee pee 2996
Ecstasy, state of...... 2996"
Foreign languages
barred out......... 2996
ef Holy Spirit........ 1406 (Mullins)
ef Mystery.......... 2104* (Edwards)


Religious emotionalism 2997

ef Spiritual Gifts... .. 2843 (Lambert)

ef Tongues of Fire. . . .2997* (Moorehead)

ef Worship.......... 3112? (Crannell)
Tongues, Interpretation of

ef Spiritual Gifts..... 2843 (Lambert)

cf Tongues, Gift of... .2995> (Easton)


OOS Ah iecic gras mao 2998 (Easton)

ef Agriculture........ 75» (Patch)

ef Ax, Ax-head....... 341° (Patch)

CIAWI eck teed wae 3414

ef Carpenter......... 580

ef Compasses........ 694> (W. L. Walker)

ef Crafts..°......... 734° (Patch) |

Cutting tools......... 2998>

CEP x i 8 et eas es 1110

Hammer............ 2998>

cf Hammer........1825> (Patch)

ef Hatchet........... 1343>

ef Knife............. 1815> (Pollard)

CHLMe tetra. eel hes 1894 (Orr)

ef Mattock.......... 2012

Other tools.......... 2999

ef Pencil............ 22988

ef Potter............ 2423> (Patch)

ef Reed............. 2544 (Masterman)

ef Tongs...........- 2994
Toparchy..........--- 2999
Topaz

cf Stones, Precious... .2862> (Fletcher)
Tophel is..isecie cinnias 2999" (Ewing)
Topheth 0c eeeeat 2999» (Masterman)


cf Hinnom, Valley of . 1393 (Masterman)
cf Kidron, The Brook. 1798 (Masterman)


3392 GENERAL INDEX


CNP ile Soe we ees ete 2398>
Torah
ef Law in the OT... . .1852® (Rule)
ef Revelation........ 2573> (Warfield)
Orel ys ieee eee aes e ate 2999
ef Lamp............ 1825* (Porter)
ef Lantern........... 1836»
Torm ahio.t.. 2 tosses 2999b
CERPIVY see te ese te 2457"
Torment, Place of...... 2999>
ch Hell ietane aires . 13718 (Orr)
Tormentor............ 2999 (Easton)
Tortoise............... 2999 (Day)
ef Lizard............ 1906 (Day)
ef Reptile........... 25615
Torture :
ef Siege............. 27885 (Nicol)
Totemism............. 3000" (M. O. Evans)
Animal names........ 30002
Criticism. ........... 3000
ef Defilement........ 8188 (Crannell)
ef Images............ 1453* (Cobern)
In Israel............ 3000


cf Israel, Religion of . .1532% (Orelli)
cf Sacrifice (NT)..... 2651° (Williams)


ef Sacrifice (OT)...... 2638" (Reeve)
ef Shaphan.......... 2749 (Wolf)
ef Wolf............. 3099" (Day)
ef Zimran........... 3149» (Roberts)
TOM Gs is face We CRs 3000
TOW fxs sae ea nes 3000°
Tower
CEC cris ticsracncatah ct 6628 (A. C. Dickie)
ef Fortification....... 1137® (Nicol)
ef Watch-tower....... 3074
Tower of Babel
ef Astronomy........ 300" (Maunder)


cf Babel, Tower of... .355 (Pinches)
cf Tongues, Confusion


Oleh Petes Lame 2994» (Easton)
Tower of David
ef Jerusalem......... 1595 (Masterman)
Tower of Edar (The
Flock) :
CEOs yg ce ca ae 899 (Masterman)


Tower of the Furnaces. .1149°
Tower of Hananeel
ef Hananel, Tower of. 1333" (Masterman)


Tower of Ivory......... 3000° (Christie)
Tower of Lebanon...... 3000" (Christie)

cf Lebanon.......... 1862» (Wright)
Tower of Meah


cf Hammeah, Tower of 13825 (Masterman)
Tower of Penuel


ef Peniel............ 2298 (Ewing)
Tower of Shechem...... 30005
Tower of Siloam

ef Siloam............ 27918 (Masterman)
Tower of Syene

ef Sevench........... 2744


ELOWD Shires) se Re 30012 (Christie)


Ch. Clty’ oe oe 6622 (A. C. Dickie)

cf Havvoth-jair....... 1345* (Ewing)

ef Village............ 3049» (Christie)
Town Clerk........... 30014 (Dosker)

cf Ephesus..........961" (Banks)
Trachonitis...........- 30018 (Ewing)

ef Argob............ 240° (Ewing)

Deseription.......... 3001

Location............ 3001*

Present condition... ..30014
PTAC Hota hs: dak tian set 3002 (Easton)

ef Alexandria........ 93" (Cobern)

ef Antioch........... 1575 (C. H. Thomson)

cf Chapman......... 594»

Early history of...... 3002

cf Ethies............ 1013* (Alexander)

Exilie and later... ....3003"

ef Exile........... 1052
Maritime trade... . . . .3003
Position of Palestine. . 3002


Preéxilic............ 30035
Products of Palestine. .3002¢
ef Ships and Boats... .2774% (Nicol)


Solomon............8003+

Termsfor........... 30022

ef Togarmah.-........ 2993 (Pinches)

ef Traffic............ 3004> (Raffety)

ef Wine............. 3088 (Easton)
Trades

ef Crafts... 0.00.00... 734" (Patch)
Tradition.............. 30042 (Williams)

cf Heredity.......... 1376* (Easton)


In Jewish theology... .3004*
In Pauline writings. . .3004>


CE SI evict unites 2798 (McConnell)

ef Uncleanness....... 3036° (Williams)
Traffic, Trafficker....... 3004 (Raffety)

ef Canaan........... 549® (Sayce)

ef Market........... 1995> (Raffety)

cf Merchandise... ....2035° (Raffety)

cf Ships and Boats... .2774* (Nicol)

ef Trade............. 30022 (Easton)
Tragaecanth............ 3005

ef Spice............. 2840? (Masterman)

ef Stacte............ 2847%
Train (noun)........... 3005*

ef Skirt............. 2814»
Train, Trained......... 30057
"TANG 22 fete ee ak Sacer 8005+ (Macalister)
Transfiguration........ 3005» (Stuart)

ef Jesus Christ....... 1649* (Orr)

ef Naphtali.......... 2118> (Ewing)

Narrative of.........3005>

Significance of....... 30056
Transfiguration, Mount

Obs radietuiihe othe: 3006+ (Ewing)

cf Caesarea.......... 536> (Ewing)

Jebel Jermuk........3006>

Mt. Hermon.........3006*


Not Olivet or Tabor. .3006*
ef Tabor, Mount of. ..2901" (Ewing)


GENERAL INDEX 3393


Transform............. 3006 ; eEribG sire he tae: ao oes 3010* (Easton)
Transgression.......... 3006 (Dungan) cf Palestine.......... 2212> (Conder)
Translation............ 3007" (McPheeters) Tribulation............ 3010° (Pollard)
SEPAD fois 8 fot cee oes 3007+ (Stratton-Porter) Tribute, aactee atone 3010° (Hirsch)
ef Gin..............1231> (Stratton-Porter) ef Tax, Taxing....... 2918" (Sweet)
ef Snare............. 2819" (Stratton-Porter) Tribute Money........ 3011
“Brava O53 Gees 30075 (Macalister) Triclinium............. 3011 (N. Isaacs)
ef Birth... .......... 477> (Hager) cf Feasts and Fasts. ..1103® (EZ. D. Isaacs)
ef Labor............- 1819» (Orr) Primes. e A cotta Asks oe U 3011+
Traveller. .:........... 3007 Trine (Triuvne) Immer-
ef Wayfaring Man... .3076* BOD Sas yey Pecan eh 3011 (Kurtz)
Travels in Palestine ef Baptism.......... 385 (A. T. Robertson; T.
cf Palestine, Recent M. Lindsay; Dau)
Exploration........ 2223» (Cobern) Church fathers, the. . .3012*
Traverner, Richard..... 948> (Hutchison) Doctrinal argument. . .3011>
Tread Greek church usage. . .3012+
ef Wine, Wine Press. .3086 (aston) Historical practice... .3011°
Treason... /2800e. eas ee: 3007 Jesus and early Chris-
Treasure, Treasurer, tas 42-0 e decry 3011
Treasury............ 3007° (Raffety) Linguistic basis....... 3011
ef Corban........... 709° (Baur) ef Literature, Sub-apos.1899" (Cowan)
Hidden riches........ 3007" ADrinit yee ec pace ves 3012* (Warfield)
NT references... .... .8008* cf Baptism........... 385> (A. T. Robertson; T.
OT references........ 3007» M. Lindsay; Dau)
ef Riches............ 2590> (Forrester) Baptismal formula... .3017%
Storehouse........... 3007 Baptismal formula,
ef Temple...........2938° (Caldecott; Orr) criticism of........ 3018
Treasury (of Temple). . .3008> (Caldecott) Christian  conscious-
Later temples........ 3008" MOSS 9s encicn ee aie ike 3021
Origin of............ 30082 ef Father, God the... .1100% (Orr)
In Solomonic temple. .3008* Foundation of the doc-
ef Temple........... 29389 (Caldecott; Orr) trine..... Sl ea 3021»
Treaty cs: 64. 0st een 3008" (Nicol) CE God ees .ee dg eouaes 1250" (Rees)
ef Rome..........-. 26182 (Allen) Hints of, in OT...... 3014>
CE Waren cic seen e es 3069% (Nicol) Implications of the
Tree “Son” and “Spirit’’ 3020+
ef Botany.........-. 505° (Masterman) Implied in NT....... 3015>
CHP OOR ss. 24 wold ners 1122> (Hager) In Johannine dis-
ef Siege. .......-...- 2786> (Nicol) courses........--. 3016°
Tree of Life..........-. 3009" (Reeve) Manifested in Son and
In apocryphal writings. 3009° SPI tis soya hey 3015
In Eden............. 3009 No rational proof of... .3013*
Interpretation of Eden Not mentioned in OT 30142
BEONY eh ea 30092 In other NT writings. . 3019
CL Life cos ce a ead ae 1888" (Reeve) In Pauline writings. . .3018>
Poetic simile......... 3009 cf Pauline Theology 2290 (Easton)
In Revelation of John .3009> Presupposed in NT. ..3014
Trees, Goodly. ........- 1278> (Masterman) A revealed doctrine. . .3012"
Trees, Shady Question of subordi-
ef Lotus Trees........1931> (Masterman) nation............ 3020°
Trees, Thick........... 29728 Supported by reason. .3013>
Trench In teaching of Jesus. . .3016*
ef Siege... .....---4. 2786" (Nicol) Term, the........... 3012+
Trespass..........-6--- 3010" (Dungan) Triads of gods....... 3012»
Trespass Offering Variations in nomen-
cf Sacrifice in the OT. .2638* (Reeve) clature............ 3019»
Trial Various arguments for 3013*
ef Courts, Judicial... .725» (Hirsch) Tripolis (Apoc)......... 3022 (Ewing)
ef Sanhedrin......... 2688» (Levertoff) Triumph.............. 3022% (A. W. Evans)
Trial of Jesus cf Josephus Flavius. ..1742° (Wenley)
ef Jesus, Arrest and : ef Savor............. 2700 (Edwards)
Trial of......-..5. 1668 (Maclaren) STPORSS: vext Gt 4 Oe ee 3023° (Banks)


3394


GENERAL INDEX


Troglodytes
ef Palestine, Recent
Exploration........ 2232* (Cobern)
Trogyllium............ 3023 (Banks)
Troop
ef Army..........04. 254° (Nicol)
Trophimus............3023 (Rutherfurd)
Cause of Paul’s arrest .3023
Description of........ 30242
An Ephesian........ .8023°
At Miletus..........3023>
Trough
ef Bread... .......0.. 514> (Hager)
FTO Week: atten Satie: 30248
Troy, Archaeological Evi-
dence of............. 2802 (White)
Trucebreaker..........3024*
Trump, Trumpet
ef Music............ 2094> (Millar)
Trumpets, Feast of...... 3024 (Easton)
Deseription.......... 30248
Later history........ 3024»
Origin. ............. 3024»
Ritual oon. lea. pee tases 30245
Significance.......... 3024
Trust, Breach of........ 3025+
PEruthe nn daithene asked sed 3025* (Carver)
Aspects of........... 3025>
ef Authority (in Reh-
BION) A eye 333* (Rees)
ef Ethies............ 1013 (Alexander)
cf Faithfulness....... 1088 (Hodge)
TinGOdsces suet ees 30264
i lotpast:h elmer ee ara Tm 3026»
ef Philosophy........ 2383 (Rees)
In religion........... 3026
ef Right............. 25918 (W. L. Walker)
CPI sec desSarei sisters 2798° (McConnell)
Special features....... 30267
Standards of..... ae B025°
Terms.............. 3025*
Tryphaena............ 3027 (S. F. Hunter)
Trypho :
cf Literature, Sub-apos 1904* (Cowan)
Tryphon.............. 3027# (Angus)
ef Antiochus VI...... 159> (Harry)
cf Demetrius......... 826 (Kinsella)
cf Maccabaeus, Macca-
bees... 0. 00...000. 19472 (Hutchison)
Tryphosa...........-- 30279
ef Tryphaena........ 30272 (8S. F. Hunter)
Tsadhe
cf Cadhe............ 536
CP ubal vireo catia eee 3027> (Wolf)
Tubal-cain............ 3027> (Wolf)
Tubiase vs: caves eas 3027
ef Tob, The Land of . .2990 (Ewing)
TPubliend 4 eset oes 3027>
TMM OF fice pth cose 3027>
ef Emerods.......... 940° (Macalister)
Turanian Armenians... .247'
Turban


CEDTCSSsoioics ene oa 875> (Eager)


Turpentine Tree


ef Terebinth......... 29499 (Masterman)
Turtle-dove

ef Dove..........6-- 872% (Stratton-Porter)
SEMLORS, 22.5 2042.08 0) Gees 3028+

ef Schoolmaster......2702 (Easton)
Twelve

ef Apostles.......... 202 (Lambert)

ef Number.......... 2157 (Smith)
Twelve Apostles, Gospels :

OR tHe fs ek wa Meet 198* (Hutchison)


Twelve Patriarchs, Testa-
ments of the
ef Apocalyptic Litera-


TUTE Scene a iesaae 161» (J. E. H. Thomson)

Twelve Stars

ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
Twenty

ef Number.......... 2157* (Smith)
Twilight.............. 30282 (Joy)
Twin Brothers

ef Dioscuri.......... 851* (Maunder)
Twine................38028#

ef Limen...........-- 18948 (E. D. Isaacs)
Two

ef Number.......... 2157* (Smith)
Tychicus.............-- 30282 (Rutherfurd)


Character and career. .3028>
ef Laodiceans, Epistle


tothe. acca ees 1836> (Rutherfurd)
NT references... .....3028*
Paul’s relations with. .3028°
LY PCy Reese essen eases 30298 (Moorehead)
Classification of types .3029°
Definition. .......... 30292
Distinetive features of
AV DES tae eee 3029°
re OW es aan Sataacaeee 3029>
Tyramnus...........--- 3030+ (S. F. Hunter)
Unido = se ere a 3030° (Porter)
History... .......... 30314
ef Phoenicia.........2391* (Porter)


Physical features..... 3030
ef Ships and Boats... .2775' (Nicol)


ef Sidon............. 2785* (Porter)
ef Siege.... 0.2.00... 2787 (Nicol)
Subjection to Sidon,
Egypt, ete......... 30314
Tyre, Ladder of........ 3032> (Christie)
Tyropoeon, The
ef Jerusalem......... 1599» (Masterman)
Tyrus
CLD yee 5.5 toe oe aed 3030° (Porter)
Tzaddi
ef Gadhe............ 536%
cals ac ctehey as ieie ates 3032+ (Roberts)
ef Ithiel............. 1543 (Genung)
fl O=) Claes Bia tee oe 3032
ND kan i os oie ac adults eee oe 3032
ef Kenaz............ 1791»
Ue Nertire staat crea 3032* (Pinches)


GENERAL INDEX


3395


Ulainics een tee es 30332
Uae lee Gee ae Pe 30332
Umma............0... 365* (Clay)
Ummah............... 3033
Umpire

ef Daysman.........7999 (A. W. Evans)
Unbelief.............. 3033* (Dunelm)
Unbeliever............ 3033


Uncertain, Uncertainty. .3033+
Unchangeable, Unchange-


ableness............. 3033* (Hodge)
ef Faithful, Faithful-
NESS ess eat Sc ee 1088" (Hodge)
Godse. iene eh 3033>
ef Immutability...... 1461»
Knowledge and free
Will ee Po ia 2 3034>
In natural theology . . .3033°
Not immobility....... 80342
Relations to men..... 3035
Relation to world... . .3034>
In Scripture......... 3033°
Unchastity
ef Crimes............ 7489 (Hirsch)
ef Lewdness......... 1880 (Raffety)
ef Marriage.......... 1996> (Eager)
cf Punishments....... 2504 (Hirsch)
Uncircumcised......... 3035» (Easton)
ef Circumcision....... 656 (T. Lewis)
Unelev ees ee ies 3035»
cf Relationships, Fam-
Ly nee ete eee 25544 (N. and E.
Isaacs)
Unclean
ef Seed.............. 2712» (Easton)
Unclean Foods
cf Abomination....... 16+ (Eager)
Uncleanness...........3035° (Williams)
ef Crimes........... 745» (Hirsch)
ef Filth, Filthiness,
Filthy............ 1110 (W. L. Walker)
CE POOd vec esses 1121> (Eager)
Israel’s laws......... 3036
ef Leper............. 18672 (Macalister)
IngN siete Metres eee 3036
NT terms. 3036+
OT teaching......... 3036"
OT terms........... 3035>
ef Punishments... ....2504° (Hirsch)
ef Separation........ 2721»
ef Tradition......... 8004* (Williams)
ef Unwashen......... 3038 (Williams)


Unclean Spirit

ef Demon, Demoniac. .827> (Sweet)
Unclothed

ef Clothed Upon...... 670° (Clippinger)


Unetion..............-- 30372
Undefiled.............. 3037
Undergirding

ef Ships and Boats... .2774% (Nicol)
Underneath........... 30378


Undersetter........... 3037


Undertake............. 30374

ef Sure.............. 2871» (Easton)

ef Surety. ........... 2872* (Reeve)
Unequal.............. 3037

ef Yoke............. 3126 (Easton)
Unfeigned............. 3037
Ungodly............... 3037 (W. Evans)
Unicorn. .............. 3037

cf Rhinoceros........ 25892
Union with Christ

Chath ce ees ke 1087 (Dunelm)
Uni tyes teanasee ove 8037
University

ef Tarsus............ 29168 (Tod)
Unknown God.........3087% (Easton)

ef Athens........... 319> (Harry)
Unlearned............. 30382
Unleavened

ef Leaven........... 1862 (Eager)

ef Passover.......... 22562 (N. Isaacs)


ef Sacrifice in the OT .2638 (Reeve)


ef Crimes........... 748° (Hirsch)

cf Punishments... ....2504> (Hirsch)
LO) chet Geeemtareee pense eter smote a 30382
UNG 24 tee he ae 8038+
Unpardonable Sin

cf Blasphemy........485 (Rees)


Unquenchable Fire..... 3038 (Orr)


lasting........-... 2501> (Orr)

Untempered........... 3038> (Patch)

cf Whitewash........ 3083>
Untoward............. 3038>
Unwalled

ef Village............ 3049» (Christie)
Unwashen............. 8038> (Williams)

Cf Purity 228. cies 2 cae 2506 (W. L. Walker);

2507 (Caverno)

cf Uncleanness....... 3035 (Williams)
Unworthily............ 80385
Unwritten Sayings

ef Agrapha.......... 72 (Smith)
Upharsin.............. 3038

cf Mene, Mene, Tekel,

Upharsin.......... 2032 (R. D. Wilson)

Uphagacaa ca esa 3038> (Weir)
Upper Chamber, Upper

Rooms scone 3039° (Orr)

ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Upper Garment

cf Fisher’s Coat. .....1116*
Ur of the Chaldees...... 3039° (Clay)

Identifications........ 3039

Search for........... 3039

ef Shinar............ 2773 (Pinches)

cf Table of Nations. . .2899% (Pinches)

Various views........ 3039»
Ur (person)............ 3039+
Urbane

ef Urbanus.......... 3039»
Urbanus.............. 3039»
Utah Aes cs wetted 3039?


3396


GENERAL INDEX


3039> (Easton)


ef Ahikam........... 84° (Beecher)
chAltariyec) ut ey eh 106 (Wiener)
ef Bathsheba........ 416¢ (Breslich)
ef Marmoth (Mere-
moth)............. 1996+
Utah erent aaa 30408
ef Uriah, Urijah...... 3039> (Easton)
Wrasse: we eed fs ety 30402
Uriel (archangel)....... 30402 (Angus)
Uriel (person).......... 3040


Urijah
ef Uriah, Urijah 3039 (Easton)
Urim and Thummim.. . .3040> (N. Isaacs)


Critical view......... 30412
Definition... ........ 3040
Etymology.......... 3041>


ef Integrity
ef Priests and Levites. 2452* (Wiener)


Traditional view...... 30412

Use in OT........... 3040°
Urumma.............. 365° (Clay)
-Use

ef Abuse............26
Usury.....4..........3041 (Pollard)

ef Interest. .......... 1488 (Reeve)
NILA R cea s kee cme feces 3042+
Gthalts 8:2 eRe cee cnet 30427
WU tht detente tt sn oe 3042>
Utilitarianism.......... 1019* (Alexander


Utmost, Uttermost Sea
ef Mediterranean Sea.2026> (Heidel)


14849 (W. L. Walker)


Vainglory

ef Vanity
Vaizatha, Vajezatha. . .
Vale of Siddim


Vale, Valley
cf Brook
ef Champaign
ef Jerusalem.......-.
ef Lowland.........


ef Stream
Valiant, Valiantly
Valley
ef River
ef Vale, Valley. .....
Valley of Decision
ef Jehoshaphat, Valley
of
| Valley Gate
cf Jerusalem Gates... .
Valley of Giants
cf Rephaim, Vale of...
Valley of Hinnom
ef Topheth
Valley of Jehoshaphat. . .
| Valley, Jordan........
| Valley of Keziz
ef Emek-keziz.......
| Valley of Slaughter
ef Hinnom, Valley of. .


Uttermost. ............ 30428 ef Topheth..........
Uz (person)........... 3042 (Reeve) Valley of Sorek........
Uz (place). ............ 3042> (Weir) CLV eh Bh eek

ef Jerusalem......... 1595 (Masterman) Valley of Vision........

ef Sheba............ 2752” (Weir) Vampire..............
WMO ZAY tees avian eae es 3042> ef Horseleach........
Wal sss tiihereos Sd anes 3042> (Fulton) Wie ae tert oe aud eats hk ay


Uzza, Uzzah 30432 (Roberts)


Vanity, Vanities.......


Uzzen-sheerah......... 3043 ef Vainglory........
Wah 8 en ieee 3043 (Roberts) Vapors ciecici sun anes
WEL At he ae aN ie eter er 3043 ef Mist.............
Uaziah (Azariah)....... 30438» (Caldecott) Vashnicctesen nas esbea
Accession and reign. . .3043> Vashtii2-2 2-006) bye
Chronology of........ 30442 Vat (fat vessel)........
Leprosy of...........8043» Vallee eee tes nae
Name, the........... 3043» ef Divination........
CEOS <6 os. vee aie 2206 ef Witcheraft.........
ef Pekahiah.......... 2296" (Caldecott) Vault of the Earth
U2ziell es —ticutes eeess 3044> (Roberts) ef Astronomy.......
ef Azarel............ 342% Vav
ef Jahaziel........... 1558> (Roberts) OP WAWE 25 sus oe he
ef Oziel............. 2206 Vedan. .. ve
Vegetable Foods........
Vagabond............. 8044+ Vegetables
Vaheb................3044* ef Meals..........
ef Suphah...........2871> (Ewing) Vehement, Vehemently.
ef Veil..............8047# (Caldecott) ef Dress... 0.00000...
Valin steric Wigk id 30440 ef Marriage..........


ef Vanity. ........... 30455 (W. L. Walker)


ef Muffler... .......


3044> (W. L. Walker)
30455 (W. L. Walker)


.8044>


56 (Wright)

3045* (Day)

523> (Day)

592» (Day)

1599" (Masterman)


. 1934" (Day)


2595* (Day)

2762+ (Ewing)

2866 (Day)

3045> (W. L. Walker)


2595* (Day)


.38045* (Day)


1583+ (Masterman)
3045> (Masterman)
1595 (Masterman)


25607 (Ewing)

1393 (Masterman)

2999 (Masterman)

1583? (Masterman)
(


.17352 (Wright)


.940>
28157


1393> (Masterman)
2999 (Masterman)
2836" (Masterman)
3049 (Masterman)
3045>

3045

1424 (Day)

3045>


.8045° (W. L. Walker)
.8044> (W. L. Walker)


(
3046" (Day)
2067* (Joy)

30462

3046> (Urquhart)
11002

3046

860° (T. W. Davies)
3097 (T. W. Davies)


.3800° (Maunder)


3075


. .8046° (Fulton)


1121> (Eager)


..2014" (Hager)
.8046> (W, L. Walker)
. 80479 (Easton)


875> (Eager)
1996> (Eager)


2093


GENERAL INDEX 3397
Veil (Vail)............. 3047 Vine—continued
ef Tabernacle. .......2887% (Caldecott; Orr) ef Grapes, Wild...... 1293
ef Temple........... 2930° (Caldecott; Orr) Hebrew words........ 3050*
Velie cients. tedaa ees 3047> cf Press............ 24385
Vengeance ; cf Sodom, Vine of... ..2821> (Masterman) ~
if ee coe eens 8408 eich) ef Sorek, Valley of... .28386° (Masterman)
ss 8 Reece ck tae (Brestich): Vinegar... 6.0... ..000e 3051* (Easton)
eee 2570° (M’Caig) HINTS os. .e cate 2153* (Patch)
ef Revenge..........2587° (Breslich) Vineyard
pa Bet ASR 3047 ef Vine.............. 3049> (Masterman)
erdigris Vineyards, Meadow of
ef Scum............. 2706" the
re ars ithecabes 3047 (W. L. Walker) ef Abel-cheramim.... .5> .
ermilion
f Meadow.......... a
pilots! ccc eee 674» (Patch) Give Hap a0toe Day
Version, The Old Latin. . 1841* (Nicol) of sad x 3049» (Masterman)
Versions eee nee
aa ance pe es Gees cf Music............2094 (Millar)
A. Arable Merona, .-. 221 Cen) ag. Violent...... rae (Easton)
ef Armenian Versions. .249 (Tisdall) . ; ace i ee a 2736 (Day)
ef Coptic Versions. .. . 708 (Tisdall) Vigin veel, - 3051» (Easton)
ef English Versions. . .945° (Hutchison) ° In i Nace es 1457° (A. W. EB
ef Ethiopic Versions... .1036* (Weir) - ‘i Pan. id hen hoes en oe : d vans)
ef Latin Version, The 7 Virgin Amie ares oa (Pollard)
(6s Kear ere eee 18415 (Nicol) ais oS
cf Manuscripts....... 19848 (Richardson) : Christ Ses eget te 3052s (Sweet)
cf Septuagint........ 2722 (Thackeray) Virgin-bir th of Jesus %
ef Syriac Versions... . .2883> (Nicol) Christ . ee ees .38052* (Sweet)
. See ee _ . .2910° (J. E. H. Thomson) i mae aaa ee
ef Text an ofthe.” 5.0 t~‘it«‘t:CSi ee rr
NUE Mesa tay nelak 2950° (Sitterly) Discrepancies, Biblical 3054*
ef Text of the OT... . .2957> (Weir) pl ene - -8055*
ef Vulgate..........- 3058 (Angus) cr Genealogy of Jesus :
Pepe oaeeian rey Christ, The. .......1196* Sweet)
Gothic, Slavonic...... 3048 (Easton) Historical question... .3052
cf Armenian Versions. 249° (Tisdall) ef Immaculate Concep-
ef Septuagint....... aay (Thackeray) tee teas ee ao aCe
Very ns ee SS 3048> (W. L. Walker) er immanuel......... pao tN ALLS,
Vessel... _ .80498 (Easton) ef aia poagc eee Cees
ef Potter.........+.- 2423> (Patch) of the............. * (Swee
Vestments ; ef Jesus Christ....... 1630; 1633> (Orr)
ef Dress........-0.-0+ 875> (Eager) : Luke, en ae a : 1938 (A. T. Robertson)
Vestry. 0. c ec es 304.9% cf Mary, Mother o
Vex, Vexation.......... 30499 (W. L. Walker) Christ............ 2001» (Sweet)
Vinee deere 30498 Objections........... 3056"; 1633> (Orr)


Vicarious Expiation
ef Sacrifice, OT.......
Vice, Unnatural........
Victuals
ef Food...........-.
Vile, Villany..........-
Village... 0.0... eee
ef City. ........5-0 0:
ef Havvoth-jair......
ef Hazar-addar.......
ef Hazor.........-.-.


ef Agriculture........
ef Eshcol (place)... .


2650° (Reeve)
748° (Hirsch)


1121> (Eager)
3049 (W. Evans)
3049> (Christie)
6622 (A. C. Dickie)
1345 (Ewing)
1346> (Ewing)
1347> (Ewing)
3001* (Christie)


30492 (W. Evans)
3049 (Masterman)
78° (Patch)


.997 (Masterman)


ef Quotations, NT... .2518 (Sweet)
Sources of documents .3054°


Textual question..... 3052*

ef Virgin. ........06. 3051 (Easton)
Virgins, Foolish

ef Marriage.......... 1998" (Eager)
Virgin’s Fountain ;

ef Jerusalem......... 1597> (Masterman)
Vintle: jue cage ak tice ee ays 3057 (Edwards)
Vision.............., .8057° (Stuart)
Vision, Valley of....... 304
Visitation............. 3058° (Edwards)

ef Punishments....... 2505> (Hirsch)
Vocation

ef Calling........... .545> (Trever)
Voice

ef Bath Kol......... 415> (Van Pelt)


GENERAL INDEX


NOD heen oesa ae en 30582
ef Open Place........ 2196> (Easton)
Volition. ........0.0... 30852 (W. L. Walker)
Volume............... 30585
ef Roll.............. 25972 (Richardson)
Voluntary............. 30585
Vophste? 2..cc2033 hie 30582
Viowige teen Cake ae ee i 30584 (Levertoff)
ef Jephthah..........1587* (Schenk)
ef Nazirite........... 21248 (Christie)
Cf Oaths keane. 2172> (Levertoff)
Voyage and Shipwreck
of St. Paul
ef Paul, the Apostle. .2264> (A. T. Robertson)
ef Phoenix........... 23912 (Calder)
Vulgate. ........0000. ..38058> (Angus); 462° (Orr)
Jerome’s work........ 3060
Later history......... 30612
cf Latin i... eee ees 1840> (A. T. Robertson)


ef Latin Version, The


Vulture. ..........000.
Wafer


Wail, Wailing
ef Burial... 20.0000.


Wall
CE Git end ene


cf House. e.5 cece es

ef Jerusalem.........

ef Village............
Wallet

ef Serip.............
Wandering Stars

ef Astronomy........
Wanderings of Israel. ...


Exodus.............
Final journey........
First journey.........
ef Haradah..........
ef Hashmonah........
ef Hazeroth..........
ef Hittites...........
ef Hor-haggidgad.....
ef Kadesh-barnea.....
ef Kehelathah........
ef Libnah............
ef Makheloth.......


18418 (Nicol)

3058

3059

2727> (Thackeray)
3062 (Stratton-Porter)


514> (Hager)
3063" (Raffety)


5814 (Patch)


5292 (Hager)
3063> (A. W. Evans)
30642 (Miller)


234 (A. C. Dickie)
6628 (A. C. Dickie)
1137> (Nicol)

1434» (A. C. Dickie)
1602 (Masterman)
3049" (Christie)


2705»


300° (Maunder)
30642 (Conder)
8065+

112

8065>

3066>; 3069>
3068


1395» (Conder)
1421»

1788> (S. F. Hunter)
17912

1881» (Masterman)


. 1969


Wanderings of Israel—continued
ef Marah.:.......... 1984
ef Moseroth......... 2083


ef Numbers, Book of. .
ef Oboth............


20882 (Kyle)
21633 (Whitelaw)
2177


CE Punon ii fecka ees 25062
Regions included. .... 3064
ef Rimmon-perez..... 25948
ef Rissah............- 2594>
ef Rithmah.......... 2595+
ef Shepher........... 2763
ef Shur............. 27822 (Conder)
Sinai and Kadesh.. . . .8067°
ef Sinai... 2.6.0... 2802» (Conder)

ef Terabe iccj4 eee os 29492
Thirty-eight years... .3068*

War, Warfare.......... 3069° (Nicol)
ef Army............. 254> (Nicol)
ef Fortification....... 1137° (Nicol)
CE PVA Oh: Scag tea es 1145+
NT references........ 3071
Operations of........ 3070


ef Praetorian Guard. .
ef Rearward........
Treaties of peace.....


2427> (Rutherfurd)


.2534>


30715


ef Treaty.......... 3008° (Nicol)
Warden aiieesui alanis 3072 (Easton)
ef Watch............ 3074 (Porter)
‘Wares .csieig ate cee 8 30728 (Raffety)
ef Fairssscccc ces ee 1087
cf Merchandise... ... .2035* (Raffety)
Warfare
ef War, Warfare... . . .3069» (Nicol)
War, Manof.......... 30723
ef God, Names of... . .1264> (Mack)
ef Lord of Hosts.. ....1919*
Warning Stone
ef Partition, Middle
Wall Ofe. ii cae. 2253> (Rutherfurd)
Watp icici ini nee titers 30728
ef Weaving.......... 8077 (Patch)
Wars of Jehovah, Book of
the


ef Bible, The........
Wash, Washing........


459> (Orr)
3072> (Easton)


CL S0aps oh e iy 2820° (Patch)
Washing of Feet... .....3072 (Anderson)
According to belief of
Church of the Breth-
TONS Ses Fa ee es 3073* (Kurtz)
cf Lord’s Supper
(Dunkers)......... 1928» (Kurtz)
Washpot.............. 3073>
Wasp
ef Hornet........... 1422 (Day)
Watchin ws sac a emeieed 30742 (Porter)
ef Midnight.......... 20502 (Porter)
cf Morning-watch.... .2083
ef Night-watch....... 2145*
ef Ward............ 3072 (Easton)
Watcher.............. 30742 (Christie)


GENERAL INDEX 3399


Watchman............3074® (Christie)

ef Gardener.......... 1175
Watch-tower........... 3074

ef Fortification....... 1137 (Nicol)

ef Mizpah, Mizpeh. . .2068* (Ewing)
Waters aie cucu 3074" (Joy)

ef Cistern........... 657» (A. C. Dickie)

ef Fountain.......... 1141 (Day)

Ged od ie arene ee Re re 2401» (T. Lewis)

CER OO ra. nik tes 2419> (Day)

CeWell. nee ool as 3081 (Day)
Water of Bitterness

ef Adultery.......... 63* (Margolis)

ef Heifer, Red........ 1367> (Haston)
Water of Jealousy

ef Adultery.......... 632 (Margolis)
Water of Separation

cf Defilement........ 818" (Crannell)

ef Separation........ 2721>

cf Uncleanness....... 3035> (Williams)
Water of Uncleanness

ef Defilement........ 818* (Crannell)

ef Separation......... 2721>

ef Uncleanness....... 3035? (Williams)
Watercourse........... 3074» (Day)

cf Brook............523 (Day)

ef River............. 2595" (Day)

ef Stream........... 2866 (Day)

ef Waterfall......... 3074
Waterfall............. 3074»

ef Watercourse....... 3074 (Day)

cf Waterspout........ 3075 (Day)
Waterpot............- 3075*
Waters wicca ge teat 3075° (Day)
Waters of Merom....... 2037" (Wright)


Waters of Strife
cf Massah and Meri-


palin teetacg ee Aneat 2007° (Ewing)

Waterspout..........-- 3075 (Day)

cf Dragon...........878* (Day)

ef Sea-monster....... 2707" (Day)

ef Waterfall......... 3074
Wave Offering

ef Sacrifice in the OT. 2638" (Reeve)
Wawerntcnvestecd yk ated 3075>

ef Alphabet.......... 103° (Richardson)
Waxtricicun stiscsc ake 3075»

ef Writing........... 3114 (Richardson)
WAY nia dh rete et es 3075» (Morro)

ef Path, Pathway... . .2263" (Edwards)
Way, Covered.......... 733° (Hirsch)
Way, Little........... 30764
Wayfaring Man........ 3076
Waymark.........---- 3076"
Wealth, Wealthy....... 3076+ (W. Evans)

ef Riches...........- 2590° (Forrester)
Weanitiins tice otis 3076> (Easton)
Weapons

cf Armor, Arms...... 2518 (Nicol)
Weasel............-005 3076» (Day)

ef Lizard............ 19062 (Day)


ef Mole.........-..-- 2074 (Day)


Weather.............. 30772 (Joy)
Weaving.............. 3077 (Patch)
ef Agriculture........ 78° (Patch)
cf Camel's Hair...... 548 (Patch)
cf Goatskins.........1249»
Chany. osc cs ea 1320° (Luering)
ef Silk, Silkworm..... 2790 (Day)
ef Tents ees aoe se 2947» (Patch)
ef Warp............. 30728
Web
ef Spider............ 2840> (Day)
ef Weaving.......... 3077 (Patch)
Wedding
ef Marriage.......... 1996> (Eager)
Wedge of Gold......... 3078> (Porter)
ef Money............2076 (Porter)
ef Pound............ 2426> (Porter)
Weeds hes cheebcace cs pt getenns 3078»
ef Cockle. ........... 672> (Masterman)
Cf Flags. Auli cas ey 11175
cf Red Sea.......... 2538 (Wright)
Wieekics etek crt toa aes 3078»
ef Astrology......... 295> (Maunder)
ef Astronomy........ 300° (Maunder)
ef Time............. 29815 (Porter)


Weeks, Feast of
cf Pentecost........
Weeks, Seventy.......


.2318* (Dosker)
.27448 (Orr)


Weeping

ef Burial............ 529% (Hager)
Weight................ 30799 (Porter)

ef Weights and Meas-

UTES ssa halen: 3079 (Porter)

Weights and Measures. .3079* (Porter)

cf Fathom........... 11015

cf Finger (measure). . .1111>

ef Firkin............ 11138

cf Handbreadth...... 1334

CESEIIN te Rese 13932

ef Homer............ 14182

CE Kab. cecil as 1788

ef Lethech........... 1868

Cf. Lites este os ae tk 1894 (Orr)

Linear measures...... 3079%

sa ee 19102


ef Maneh (Mina)..... 1981" (Porter)
Measures of capacity. .3080°
cf Measuring Line. .. .2016 (Porter)


ch Miles 2 ugttse panes 2051
cf Money. .......20768 (Porter)
ef Omer............. 2188>
cf Pound............ 2426> (Porter)
cf Reed, Measuring. . .2545 (Orr)
cf Sabbath Day’s Jour-

DEY s Pallvpeacwaec 2634 (Porter)
ef Seah... ........... 27088
cf Shekel............ 2758 (Porter)


cf Shekel of the King’s
Weight, or Royal
Shekel............2758>

Weights............. 3080*


GENERAL INDEX


Well artis cco ctsd diay fale 3081" (Day);


658>
(A. C. Dickie)
ef Cistern........... 657» (A. C. Dickie)
ef Fountain.......... i141 (Day)
CEABIU Sh hee celle tas 2401> (T. Lewis)
ChePOOl 2: cas ei Lae 2419» (Day)
ef Water............ 3074* (Joy)
ef Wellspring......... 3082
Well of Harod.......... 1340> (Ewing)
cf Gilboa, Mount..... 1229 (Ewing)
- Well, Jacob’s.......... 1556 (Ewing)
Wellspring............ 30825
ef Well.............. 3081* (Day)
WG ioc fi acrsie Wie gaa Rasa 30828
Wench 05 4 tsps kcatedeg 30822
Wesley, John
Doctrine of sanctifica-

TIONS, acovea eae ine ae 2685> (Steele)
WeeSttwt seeahe nt 30825 (Day)
Whales) 3.5.34 scsvesegee al 3082* (Day)

ef Dragon........... 873" (Day)

of Fish ss c..s ee ound 1114 (Day)

ef Jackal... ......... 1548 (Day)

cf Sea-monster....... 2707% (Day)
Wheat 2s. cies eaters 3082> (Masterman)

ef Corn ve... 720% (Masterman)

ef Food woeeees.- 1122% (Hager)
Wheel eco Aetna: 3082 (Easton)

ef Agriculture........ 75> (Patch)

ef Course............ 724» (Heidel)

ef Potter............ 2423 (Patch)
Whelpi. fcststen sete ae 3083" (Day)

ef Dragon........... 873" (Day)

ef Lion.............. 1895* (Day)
Whirlwind............. 30832 (Joy)

ef Wind............. 3085" (Joy)
White

ef Colors............ 674> (Patch)
White Horse. .......... 14244
Whitewash. ........... 3083°

ef Mortar........... 2083 (Orr)

ef Untempered....... 3038> (Patch)
Whole, Wholesome..... 3083 (Easton)
Whore, Whoredom

ef Crimes........... 745> (Hirsch)

ef Harlot............ 1339> (Eager)

ef Punishments....... 2504> (Hirsch)
Wickedness............ 3083" (Dungan)

CEB ID SG: 84 se inte 2798» (McConnell)
Widow................ 3084* (Eager)

ef Literature, Sub-

BPOS) oy Yee: Gel Bee 1896 (Cowan)

ef Woman........... 3103 (Pratt)
Wife

ef Family............ 1094» (Caverno)

cf Marriage.......... 1996 (Hager)

cf Relationships, Fam-

Virgins Set yl @ Woo 25542 (N. and E. D. Isaacs)
Wife, Brother’s

cf Marriage.......... 1996» (Eager)


cf Relationships, Fam-
11h eee eee ee 25542 (N. and E. D. Isaacs)


Wild Beast............3084* (Day)

ef Jackal... ......... 1548" (Day)
Wild-ox.............-. 3084» (Day)

ef Antelope.......... 143° (Day)

cf Cattle............583 (Day)
Wilderness

ef Desert............ 831» (Day)

ef Judaea........... 1757+ (Masterman)

cf Negeb............ 2130* (Masterman)

ef Wanderings of Is-

POGUP silat cee Behr. We 3064" (Conder)

Wilderness of Paran.....22479 (Ewing)
Will

cf Providence........ 24822 (Tillett)

cf Testament........ 29502
Will, Volition.......... 30852 (W. L. Walker)
Will-worship........... 3085>
Willow. ............0.. 507> (Masterman)
Willow Tree........... 3085?
Willows............... 3085° (Masterman)
Willows, Brook of the. . .3085°

cf Brook............523° (Day)

Gi Aered 23603, ewes is 8147+ (Ewing)
Wimple...............3085°

ef Dress............. 875» (Hager)
Wind aie tscsc. cee bia detes 3085» (Joy)

ef Whirlwind........ 3083" (Joy)
Window

ef House............ 1434» (A. C. Dickie)
Windows of Heaven

cf Astronomy........ 300 (Maunder)
Wine, Wine Press...... 3086* (Easton)

cf Blood............. 488> (Clippinger)

Ch Crafts srs 2250225034 734* (Patch)

ef Drink, Strong...... 879» (Edwards)

cf Drunkenness.......880 (Edwards)

cf Feasts and Fasts.. .1108° (E. D. Isaacs)

ef Flagon............ 1117 (Hovey)

ef Food.............1121» (Eager)

Cf Gath. cin feces 1177* (Porter)

ef Honey............ 1418 (Patch)

ef Liquor............ 1896

ef Lord’s Supper... .. .1925* (Dosker)

Cf Press’... es ek eS 2438»

cf Sacrifice (OT). .... 2638" (Reeve)

ef Sickle............. 2784* (Patch)

ef Spice, Spices... ... .2840* (Masterman)

ef Trade............ 30022 (Easton)

Use of wine.......... 3087

CE NING a encsiaw aes 3049 (Masterman)

Wine-making........3086>

cf Wine-skins........ 3088 (Christie)
Winebibber............ 3088
Winefat, Winevat

ef Crafts............ 736 (Patch)

ef Vne.............. 3049> (Masterman)

ef Wine............. 3086* (Easton)
Wine Press............ 3086 (Easton)

cf Agriculture........ 78* (Patch)

ef Crafts............736 (Patch)

CRONE LS ccccead aac aus 2181» (Patch)


Wine Press—continued


GENERAL INDEX


3401


Terms used.......... 30864

OF VINES sede ec cere 3049> (Masterman)

ef Wines va rcs 3086* (Easton)
Wine-skins............. 3088 (Christie)

ef Wine............. 3086* (Easton)
Winevat

ef Crafts............ 736> (Patch)

ef Vine.............. 3049> (Masterman)

ef Wine............. 3086" (Easton)
Wings................8088> (Stratton-Porter)
Wank Mas hee Mecs ty sa.c sre Goan 3088» (A. W. Evans)
Winnowing :

ef Agriculture........ 77> (Patch)

of Kans. he uote. 1097 (Patch)

ef Threshing......... 2975» (Patch)
Winters.2.¢07 toni hohe 3089

ef Seasons........... 2710% (Joy)
Winter-house......... .3089%

ef Summer-house..... 2870
Wisdom............... 3089 (Easton)

ef Egypt............ 906° (Petrie)

cf Fool, Folly........ 1124 (W. L. Walker)

History............. 3089»

Ideals: +s ovaecperncesy ¢ 3090°

ef Light............. 1890 (Pratt)

ef Logos............ 1911> (Alexander)

ef Mediation, Mediator 2021+ (Edwards)

NT ideas............ 3091

cf Philo Judaeus...... 2380" (Wenley)

ef Philosophy........ 2384» (Rees)

ef Proverbs, Book of . .2472 (Genung)

cf Prudence......... 2486> (W. L. Walker)

ef Wisdom of Solomon . 3092 (T. W. Davies)
Wisdom of God........ 3092


Wisdom of Jesus
ef Sirach, Book of... .2806> (T. W. Davies)
Wisdom Literature
ef Poetry, Hebrew... .2413 (T. W. Davies)
ef Sirach, Book of. . . .2806 (T. W. Davies)


cf Wisdom........... 3089" (Easton)
Wisdom of Solomon,

The fctuks Pay cess 3092* (T. W. Davies)

Aim and author...... 3095

Canonicity and con-

Pentss2ae vate ess 3092

Datei tien beet oNe 3095»

Language and versions 3096*

ef Logos.......-..-+ 1911> (Alexander)

Name? ..csbe chante 3092

ef Sirach, Book of. . . .2806° (T. W. Davies)

Teaching............ 3093°

Unity and integrity. . .3093>

ef Wisdom.........-. 3089 (Easton)
Wise Man

ef Wisdom.......... 3089" (Easton)
Wise-Men..........--- 3096 (Easton)

cf Astrology..... ....295> (Maunder)

ef Divination........ 860° (T. W. Davies)

cf Magi, The......... 19628 (Tisdall)
Wish....... . 8096 (A. W. Evans)


Wist, Witty, Wot.......3096> (Easton)


Witch, Witcheraft......3097° (T. W. Davies)
Biblical usage........ 30974
ef Divination........ 8602 (T. W. Davies)
ef Endor, Witch of... .944* (Orr)
ef Familiar.......... 1094 (Pollard)
Magic i ccie oe. g ade. 3097
ef Magic.......... 19632 (T. W. Davies)
Spread and persecu-
tion... 2.2. ....... 8098
ef Vault... 0... ....0., 3046
Witcheraft


ef Witch, Witcheraft. .
Withered..............
Withes, Withs, Green...
EWitDeSS i. Mencia ts aia oats
Witness of the Spirit....
Witnessing, False......
Witty

cf Wist, Witty, Wot. .
Wizard


30972 (T. W. Davies)
3098> (A. W. Evans)
3098> (Masterman)
3099 (Levertoff)
3099 (Dunelm)


. 748" (Hirsch)


3096 (Easton)


ef Astrology......... 295» (Maunder)

ef Divination........ 860+ (T. W. Davies)
cf Familiar.......... 1094" (Pollard)

ef Magic............ 1963" (T. W. Davies)


ef Witch, Witcheraft. .


3097* (T. W. Davies)
3099> (Day)


ef Island............1511* (Day)

ef Jackal............ 1548 (Day)

cf Totemism......... 3000* (M. O. Evans)
Womiane eis brass eeet S 31002 (Pratt)

ef Adam in OT.......49> (Genung)


ef Anthropology......


144» (Marais)


Creative plan........ 31008

ef Deaconess......... 800* (Heidel)
Later times.......... 3103

ef Male............. 1971» (Luering)
ef Marriage.......... 1996> (Eager)
NT ideas............ 3102

OT ideas............ 3100°


cf Polygamy.........


cf Susanna, History of.


cf Widow....
Wonder, Wonderful... ..
Wood


2416° (Caverno)
2872 (T. W. Davies)
3084" (Eager)

3104 (W. L. Walker)


ef Botany........... 505* (Masterman)

ef Forest.........-.- 1132* (Masterman)
Wood of Ephraim

ef Ephraim, Forest of. 963»
Wooliscccas des 3104

ef Warp.........--.- 3072
Wool ntti < Rate 3104> (Patch)

ef Fuller............ 1148? (Patch)

ef Tanner...........2908 (Patch)
Words eusvennee edn ois 3105+ (W. L. Walker)

ef Logos............1911» (Alexander)

cf Person of Christ... .2338% (Warfield)

ef Speech............ 2839> (W. L. Walker)


Work, Works..........
ef Justification.......


Worker... ........0.4.


3105» (W. L. Walker)
1782> (Faulkner)
1819> (Orr)

3105> (W. L. Walker)


3402


Workfellow...........- 3105> (W. L. Walker)
Workman............. 3105» (W. L. Walker)
World (Cosmological) . . .3106* (Orr)

ef Anthropology...... 144> (Marais)


ef Babylonia and As-
syria, Religion of . ..368> (Rogers)
Cosmogony of Gen 1. .3107*


ef Creation.......... 738° (J. Lindsay)
ef Evolution......... 1043> (Zenos)
Hebrew ideas........ 3106


World, End of the

ef Eschatology of NT. 979» (Vos)

cf Heavens, New..... 1353" (Vos)
World (general). ....... 3108 (Dunelm)

cf Heavenly.......... 1352> (Orr)

cf Johannine Theology 1704* (Law)
Worm, Scarlet-worm.. . .3109* (Day) -


ef Colors............ 674» (Patch)

ef Moth............. 2091» (Day)
Wormwood............ 3109" (Masterman)
Wormwood, The Star. . .3110* (Orr)

ef Astronomy........ 300% (Maunder)
Worship............-- 3110* (Crannell)

Cf Altar }.-i2c06 sees os 1066 (Wiener)


cf In Ancient Greece. .13019 (Fairbanks)
Christian worship... ..3111


cf High Place........ 13902 (Easton)

OT worship......... 8110>

cf Passover.......... 2256* (N. Isaacs)

ef Praise............ 2429% (Lambert)

ef Sanctuary......... 2686° (Wiener)

cf Tabernacle........ 2887 (Caldecott; Orr)
cf Temple . .29308 (Caldecott; Orr)


Terms: 4. heacaeue: 3110
cf Tongues, Gift of... .2995> (Haston)
Worship, Image


ef Images........... 14524 (Cobern)
Worshipper
ef Worship.......... 3110* (Crannell)
Worthies.............. 3113
Wot
cf Wist, Witty, Wot. .3096° (Easton)
Wrath (Anger)......... 3113* (W. Evans)
Ch ROLY eo Saas 1150
ef Lawin NT........ 1844" (M’Caig)
cf Reconcile, Reconcil-
WAOM eee apt ek 25362 (M’Caig)
ef Retribution........ 2570* (M’Caig)
WILESL bce tnase ees ane cae 3113 (Gerberding)
Wrestling
cf Games............ 1168 (Smith)
ef Jacob............. 15492 (Boyd)
ef Naphtali.......... 2118 (Ewing)
Wrinkle............--. 31148
Writing............... 3114" (Richardson); 103>
(Richardson)
ef Alphabet.......... 106* (Richardson)
Cl Bookie es oes 495> (Richardson)
Definition........... 31148
Forms..... . 81228
History of. .......... 3124
Chak ie isccicaes 1469" (Richardson)
ef Ink-horn.......... 1469 (Richardson)


GENERAL INDEX


Writing—continued
Instruments........-.
ef Josiah............
ef Libraries.........-
cf Manuscripts.......
Materials..........--
Methods..........--
cf Money.........-.


1753* (Genung)
1882 (Richardson)
19844 (Richardson)


cf Nineveh, Library


Olfscctat tyes Sceone aes 2151> (Sayce)
ef Ostraca........--- 2202 (Goodspeed)
cf Palestine.......... 2216 (Conder)
ef Papyrus.......... 2242» (Goodspeed)
cf Parchments........ 2248 (Rutherfurd)
Cf Petine:. oe ck ates 2297> (Patch)
cf Pentateuch, Samari-
tale 2 Ace ea a 2313 (J. E. H. Thomson)
Picture writing....... 3117*
cf Printing.......... 2455* (Richardson)
cf Rollcac eines aes ne ees 2597¢ (Richardson)
ef Septuagint........ 2722° (Thackeray)
ef Shinar............ 2773» (Pinches)
Symbols............. 3115
cf Tablet............ 29002 (Richardson)
ef Text of the OT..... 2957 (Weir)
CREW EX eerie 3075
Writersis. aces. saetleees 31234
Wycliffe, John......... 946> (Hutchison)
Xanthicus............. 3126
cf Calendar.......... 541» (Porter)
CEH TIME 6 irk kone eed 2981» (Porter)
ef Year.........-... 31265
GIXCS Na nites Gita Hears 3126* (Easton)


cf Ahasuerus........
ef Persians..........


cf Spinning..........
ef Weaving..........


Years, Seventy........
Yellow


cf Unequal.........
ef Yoke-fellow.......
Yoke-fellow...........
ef Syntyche.........


cf Synzygus.........
cf Yoke wi. hedges.


Young Men...........
Young Women.........


.80> (R. D. Wilson)


2336° (Tisdall)


1894* (E. D. Isaacs)
28418 (Patch)

3077* (Patch)

3126 (Hirsch)
3126


... 800 (Maunder)
. 29829 (Porter)
27448


674> (Patch)
3126

103 (Richardson)
16882

29885

3126 (Kaston)


8037


31275 (Rutherfurd)
3127% (Rutherfurd)


.2880* (Rutherfurd)


3126> (Easton)
3127 (W. L. Walker)
31275 (W. L. Walker)


GENERAL INDEX


3403


Zaanaim
ef Zaanannim........ 31284 (Ewing)
AGANAN. sae eee 3128
Zaanannim, Plain or Oak
Ob ene ieee ae ahaa! 3128" (Ewing)
FAAVAN Sls 5 fcc this 31288
LAD adi, oe cee ate 3128" (Roberts)
ef Nathan........... 2121* (Roberts)


cf Sabanneus (Apoc) . .2629°
ef Sabathus (Apoe). . .2629»


Zabadaeans............ 3128 (Easton)
Zabadaias
ef Zabadeas......... 3128
Zabadeas.............. 3128
Aa DD ales. y0:00 5s cols eek 3128°
Zabbud oi. 3.2.2 cs tea es 3128>
ef Zaceur............ 3129° (Roberts)
Zabdeus............... 3128
ef Zebadiah.......... 3133> (Roberts)
Babies, 2h sb heehee aes 3128 (Roberts)
ef Zichri............ 3149" (Roberts)
ef Zimri............. 3149" (Roberts)
Zabdiels docket ges 3128
ef Zebadiah.......... 3133 (Roberts)
Zabudeecnok eee: 3128» (Roberts)
ef Priests and Levites.2446> (Wiener)
ef Shebna........... 2753> (Roberts)
ef Zaccur............ 3129* (Roberts)
Zabulon...........600- 3129
Zaceai
ef Zabbai............ 3128
Zacchaeus...........-. 31295 (Kerr)
Zaechur
ef Zaeeur............ 31292 (Roberts)
Zacour... 12.022. 0c eee 3129" (Roberts)
ef Zabbud........... 3128°
ef Zabud............ 3128 (Roberts)
ef Zechariah (general) .3135> (Easton)
Zachariah............- 3129
ef Berechiah......... 439»


ef Jerusalem Tombs.. .1611 (Masterman)
ef Zechariah (general) .3135> (Easton)


Zacharias...........-+ 3129 (Angus); 3129>
(Easton)
ef Abijah............ 10° (Beecher)
ef Temple........... 2930° (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Zaraias........... 31328
Zachary ......-.2s ee eee 3129
Zacher
ef Zecher...........- 3140>
Jadok............+..+-3129 (Whitelaw); 8
: (Beecher)
Chronicles.........-- 31308
Critical views........ 31314
ef Ithamar.......... 15432 (Whitelaw)
ef Priests and Levites. 2446 (Wiener)
ef Sadduk........... 2661"
In Samuel and Kings. .3130*
Taham ss «60. hoe ees hale aes 3131
Zain
ef Zayin... 6... eee 3133


DAA ey osc ee Bee eae eee 3131>


Halapliiveesccss 1i5 <2 ee? 31315
ZAlMON cM ere, ees the ae 3131 (Ewing)
CLM als cee oe hea 1449


’ ef Salmon, Salma. .... 2663» (S. F. Hunter)
Zalmonah.............3131°.
cf Wanderings of Is-


TAG) OS ioe cee nts oe kas 3064* (Conder)

Zalmunna

ef Zebah and Zalmunna 3133» (Roberts)
Zambis (Zambri).°..... 3131
Zambri...............3131°
ZAI Ob oe. 29 sea ees 3131

ef Zathui............ 31335
Zamzummim.......... 31322

ef Rephaim.......... 2559° (Porter)
ZaNOa s,s. 5% hg weed 8 31328 (Ewing)
Zaphenath-paneah...... 3132

ef Joseph. ........... 1736° (S. F. Hunter)
Zaphnath-paaneah


cf Zaphenath-paneah. .3132*


4:10) ¢(0) see ee ee 31322 (Ewing)
TATA 205 cease Tees ie BSNS 31328

ef Zerah (the Ethi-

opian)............ 3146> (Cobern)

Zaraces

ef Zarakes........... 3132
Zarah

ef Zerah (general)... .3146> (Roberts)
FATOass. 8 ik alee cee 3132%

ef Zacharias. ........ 3129> (Angus)
Zarakes...........-05- 3132
Zardeus (Sardeus)...... 3132
Zareah..........20000- 3132

ef Zorah............. 3157 (Masterman)
Zareathites

ef Zorathites......... 31579
VACHS G Wee ee ae eee 3132

cf Zered............- 31474 (Ewing)
Zarephath............. 3132» (Ewing)

ef Misrephoth-maim. .2067* (Porter)

ef Sarepta..........- 2692

ef Sidon. ............ 2785* (Porter)
Jaretan...-....-.0000- 3132>

ef Zarethan.......... 3133* (Wright)
Zarethan.........-005- 31337 (Wright)
Zareth-shahar

ef Zereth-shahar......3147>
Zarhites

ef Zerah (general)... .3146° (Roberts)

ef Zerahites.......... 31475
Zartanah..........000- 3133+
Zarthan......-02.-000% 3133"

ef Zarethan.......... 3133° (Wright)
Fathoes.... 02.0... 00 ee 31334

ef Zattu....... 0.0.0. 3133* (Roberts)
Jathui... 0.0.2... - eee 31334
atthe ects ee iaecgaes 3133*

ef Zattu..........06- 3133* (Roberts)
Tig tt eee aime oeea eae 31339 (Roberts)
Zavan

ef Zaavan..........- 3128


3404 GENERAL INDEX


LAVAS re Pte ds 2 nena: 3133

ef Alphabet.......... 103 (Richardson)
FLV Vy er ise NE 31332
Zealot, Zealots......... 3133> (Heidel)

ef Assassins.......... 2888 (S. F, Hunter)


ef Josephus Flavius. ..1742* (Wenley)
cf Simon, the Zealot. .2797" (Kerr)


Zebadiah.............. 3133 (Roberts)
ef Zabdeus.......... 3128>
ef Zabdi............. 3128 (Roberts)
ef Zabdiel...........3128>


Zebah and Zalmunna.. ..3133> (Roberts)
Zebaim


aie he 24102

Zebedee. .............- 3134

ef James, Son of Zebe-

CEG e Mee aise cee vente: 1560 (Kerr)

ef Salome........... 2664° (Orr)

ef Zabdi............. 3128> (Roberts)
Zebidah............... 31342 (Roberts)
Zebina................ 31348
Zeboiim............... 31345

ef Siddim, Vale of... .2784= (Wright)
ZeDOWMS cog eh ak eas 31349 (Masterman)

ef Hadid............1315»

ef Neballat...... 2. 2126P -
Zebudah

ef Zebidah........... 3134° (Roberts)
/A-| 01) 1 ane ee ee ee 3134> (Roberts)
Zebulonites ; .

ef Zebulunites........3135>
Zebulun............... 3135 (Ewing)

ef Numbers, Book of. .2163* (Whitelaw)
Zebulunites............ 3135>


Zechariah, Book of... ...3186 (Robinson)
Contents and analysis 3137*
Critical questions... . .3137>
Prophet Zechariah. . . .3136>
Question of unity... . .3139>
ef Zechariah (general) .3135» (Easton)


Zechariah (general)... ..3135" (Kaston)
ef Jahaziel........... 1558 (Roberts)
ef Joshua (son of Jehoz-

AGAKY oe eieicen iene e 1748 (Roberts)
Tomb of............ 236»
ef Zaceur............ 3129" (Roberts)
ef Zachariah......... 3129°


ef Zechariah (king). ..3136* (Caldecott)
ef Zechariah, Book of. 3136 (Robinson)


ef Zecher............ 3140
ef Zichri............ 3149 (Roberts)
Zechariah (king)... ....31368 (Caldecott)


ef Chronology of OT. .635* (Mack)
Zechariah, Son of Bar-


achiah

ef Jehoash........... 1576* (Caldecott)
Zecher.............0.. 3140°

ef Zechariah (general) .3135> (Easton)
Zechrias............... 3140
ZOCad ©. ors 2 oe he Dl 3140> (Christie)
Zedechias.............31418


Zedekiah (general)... . . .3141+ (Lees)


Zedekiah (king).......- 3141* (Genung)
Downfall of Judah... .3142
ef Jehoiachin......... 15779 (Genung)
ef Jeremiah.......... 1588 (Orelli)


ef Pharaoh Hophra. . .2359 (Nicol)
Rebellion and siege of


Jerusalem......... 573° (Nicol)
- Reign of............3141>
Sources.............3141*
Zeeb


ef Oreb and Zeeb..... 22012 (Roberts)


Zela, Zelah............3142°
Hel€k ie. ccc cis ea een ee 3143
Zelophehad...........- 3143 (Roberts)


Zelotes
ef Simon, the Zealot. .27975 (Kerr)
ef Zealot, Zealots... .. 3133 (Heidel)


Zelzah... 6.6... eee 31439 (Ewing)
Zemaraim............. 31439 (Ewing)
Zemarite...........4.. 3143° (Ewing)
Zemira (Zemirah)...... 3143»
Aemiraley 2 Ss) Adee Pb ex 3143»
Zenan

ef Zaanan...........31284
YA) 0 Kola ee ee 3143 (Rutherfurd)


Zend-avesta
ef Persian Religion... .2331% (Tisdall)
ef Zoroastrianism... . . 3157" (Easton)
Zephaniah (general)... . .3144* (N. Isaacs)
ef Zephaniah, Book of 3144* (Hiselen)


Zephaniah, Apocalypse
Ole eis eee aoe 3144
Zephaniah, Book of..... 3144" (Hiselen)
Author.............. 3144
Contents and integrity 3145>
Dates aS 3144>
ef Eschatology of OT. 972* (Orr)
ef Scythians......... 2706° (Porter)
Teaching............ 3146


ef Zephaniah (general) 3144 (N. Isaacs)
Zephath


ef Hormah.......... 14225 (Ewing)
Zephathah, Valley of... .3146
Zephi, Zepho.......... 3146 (Roberts)
Zephon
ef Ziphion....... 1. 8152
Zephonites............. 31465
ZOE Se ee EN ar ie So 3146
Zerah (general)......... 3146> (Roberts)
ef Zohar............ 3154>
Zerah (The Ethiopian) . .3146° (Cobern)
CIE AAT Ar al et py ae Nee 31328
Zerahiah.............. 31478
Zerahites.............. 31478
LOTUS yal advo teste aD, 3147 (Ewing)
cf Willows, The Brook
ofthese GS 3085»


Zeredah, Zeredath, Zere-
datha, Zererah, Zere-
rath :
ef Zarethan.......... 31339 (Wright)


Zeresh.............004 31476
Meter hese 302 jciere a duets 3147
Zereth-shahar.......... 3147
VA 11 eRe oe RT 31476

Ch Lark tee en es 1545
ZOVOR 92 cae yet Bs 3147»

CEBU Cr Pa Me alee 3159
Zeruah.............00. 3147
Zerubbabel......... 8147 (R. D. Wilson)

cf Joshua (son of Jehoz-

adak)< 2s twine 1748" (Roberts)
cf Sanabassar, Sana-
bassarus........... 2681* (Angus)

ef Temple ........... 2936 (Caldecott; Orr)
ef Tirshatha......... 29865 (R. D. Wilson)

Zeruiah............... 3148" (Roberts)
ef Abigail...........9° (Mack)

Zetham............... 31489

Zethan..............4. 3148

Let Hae <2 ap ace settles 3148

LOUS oe ele er enn 31488 (Angus)
ef Jupiter...........1781% (Easton)

TRUST a aes Ree 3148?

PANG hp One Nene TE ae cere tes 3148 (Roberts)

Zibeon................ 3148>

Zibia.. . . 8148

Zabials) 7 ca ga he Sas 3148

ZiGhr ites eee to Get 3149* (Roberts)
ef Zabdi............. 3128 (Roberts)
ef Zechariah (general) .3135> (Easton)

Ziddim’) c5-h. haa 31495

Zid-kijah


cf Zedekiah (general). .3141* (Lees)
Zidon, Zidonians
ef Sidon, Sidonians.. . .2785 (Porter)


CE Ziv: cc eee en ed 3153"
DADA ieee noe ace ida ene Pie 3149
7 ANALY scree ea eee 3149* (Masterman)
cf Negeb............ 2130" (Masterman)
VALE eee ere ee emer 3149
Zillethai............... 3149>
Filpehes sc nat elena 3149»
Zilthai
ef Zillethai..........3149>
Zimmah..............- 3149»
AiMrAN sk ee es 3149> (Roberts)
ef Totemism......... 30008 (M. O. Evans)
ef Zimri (general)..... 3149" (Roberts)
Zumri (general)......... 3149> (Roberts)
ef Baal-peor.........846 (Sayee)
cf Balaam........... 378 (Baur)
Ct Peor es iee eee: ...2319> (Ewing)
ef Zabdi............. 3128> (Roberts)
ef Zimran........... 3149> (Roberts)
Zimri (king)........... 3150* (Mosiman)
DAN BOS RE csc ng eek (ated 3150* (Ewing)
Zina
ef Zizah............. 31534
DOW set oe ee gt ced 3150" (Masterman)
ef Gezer.........0005 1224* (Masterman)


ef Gihon..........6. 1228 (Masterman)


GENERAL INDEX 3405


Zion—continued


Jebusite city......... 8150>
ef Jerusalem......... 1601» (Masterman)
cf Ophel............2196 (Masterman)
Prophetie references.. .3151°
CE SION Sen coed 2806
AOD iis tan batty ita wen Se 3152>
Ziph (person).......... 31525
Ziph (place)...........3152> (Masterman)
Ziphah................ 3152
Ziphims
ef Ziph (place)... ....3152 (Masterman)
Ziphion............... 3152>
ef Zaphon........... 3132" (Ewing)
cf Zepbonites........ 3146
Ziphites
ef Ziph (place). ......3152" (Masterman)
Ziphron
ef Sibraim........... 2783
ZAP DOK! eGo here ea ec eevn haan 38152>
Zipporah.............. 3152> (Kyle)
ef Shiphrah.......... 27745
Zithri
ef Sithri............. 28139
A ferrari Ai ney Aen Pre 3153"
ef Calendar.......... 541» (Porter)
Ziz, Ascent of.......... 3153"
LALA soo dopatetee mute whigeay 3153
LAVA 6p ae eee eon en ee arse 3153
Zizath
CLAIZa. Seis ot asaereele 3153
LOAN Pe ice fe) Bar Ses 3153+ (Conder)
ef Goshen........... 12802 (Conder)
ef Hittites........... 1395» (Conder)
Location............381539
Monumental data... .3153>
cf Pithom........... 2401 (Conder)
cf Raamses.......... 2520" (Conder)
LOB 6 OV he aya Sus ee 31549 (Wright)
cf Dead Sea......... 801" (Wright)
Zobah................38154 (Christie)
ef Syria............. 2880> (Christie)
Zobebah.............. 3154"
Zodiac, Signs of........ 312>
Zodiacal Tablet
cf Palestine, Recent
Exploration... .... .2283> (Cobern)
DQ AR Gs des Seek alge hoes 31546
cf Zerah (general)... .3146 (Roberts)
Zoheleth, Stone of ...... 3155° (Masterman)
DOW th ser caret occ ewe 3155
ef Benzoheth........ 4398
Zodlogy... 2... cece eves 3155* (Day)
ef Gazelle...........11799 (Day)
ef Goat... 0.6... .000. 1248 (Day)
cf Jackal............ 1548* (Day)
ef Pygarg........... 2511" (Day)
Zopbah............... 3156"
ZOpharie. sevens. cers 3156»
ef Zuph............. 3158" (Roberts)
Dopharie sc circ. Satna 3156 (Genung)
ef Bildad............ 473 (Genung)


3406 GENERAL INDEX
—
Zophim, Field of. ...... 8157* Zoroastrianism—continued
Lovaas 52) RG ay 3157" (Masterman) ef Rab-mag........- 2522 (Clippinger)
Zorathites............. 31574 Relation to Israel... . .3157°
Zoreah..... 0.6... cece 31578 ef Resurrection... . .. .2565+ (Easton)
ef Zorah............ 3157" (Masterman) ef Salvation.........- 2665* (Easton)
DOTICCS Ponce Ge Pace 31578 ef Satan.........---. 2696". (Sweet)
ef Manahath........ 1976> (Ewing) ef Son of Man.......- 2828» (Stalker)
ef Zorathites......... 31579 Special features...... 31582
Zoroaster Zorobabel..........-5- 3158
cf Persian Language Zorzelleus..... . dl58b
and Literature..... 2330° (Tisdall) ef Barzillai.......... 410» (Rees)
Zoroastrianism......... 3157* (Easton) EMA ocr teasird dere Aaa 3158
ef Antichrist......... 154° (J. E. H. Thomson) PUD ils cise oe ee 3158> (Roberts)
ef Astrology......... 295° (Maunder) ef Zophai..........-. 3156
ef Branch........... 513° (Masterman) VA amet ee mete 3159*
ef Exorcism......... 1067 (Sweet) ef Zeror.. 1.2... 0. eee 3147
CE-Godies hi cer atone ss 1250 (Rees) VAN atc) ae ee oe 3159* (Roberts)
History.............3157 Zurishaddai............ 3159
cf Magi, The......... 1962® (Tisdall) ef God, Names of... . .1264 (Mack)
ef Messiah...........20398 (Crichton) ef Zuriel............ 3159" (Roberts)
ef Parousia.......... 22493 (Easton) PRB 63 2h 2a-2'h ees 3159»
ef Persian Religion Zwingli


(Ancient).......... 2334 (Tisdall)


ef Lord’s Supper.....


.1926* (Dosker)


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Norez.—The following illustrates the method of arranging this Index: 315 (3) =reference will be found on page 315
near Dox: heading 3. 145>=right-hand column. 148=left-hand column. 1095?=the reference is found twice on
page De


Gen 1 Gen 4—continued Gen 11
1—146 (III); 1046; 1915 75 1—29958
2—3074 8—539 3—521; 2817
31411 | 9—1887 (4) 5—1128; 1467 (4); 1533°
6—315 (3) 10—489 (2); 703 6—1129>
9—316 (7) 12—1042 (2) 7—3014 (5)
14-302; 3108 13—2570 (4) 10—140
16—299° 15—657 (2); 2393; 3124 31—910 (2); 1929
21—150 (5) 19—1095 (4) aes
26—49; 51 (3); 1046 (2); 1270 (1); | 23—1823° ingraa .
1407; 1450 (6); 3014 (5) 2425040 3458 (4); 1022 (6) 1212 ©);
27—1095 (2); 1406 (b); 1460 Gen B jieo Gis asi, 674
ee 2—52 (6); 146 (6) 6—2303
ore 24—975 (1); 1460 (11)? 72019; 2642 (6)
Gen 2 29—1824 Gg
22632 (1) Gen 6 ee
eae) 1—608 (1) 42642 (6)
7—A9; 973 (2)3; 9897; 2495 (2) 2—145; 2835 8—19308
8—147(3) 4—143>; 2133» 10—807 (1)
9—8l1 (5); 420; 3009 5—2798 (2) 15-—2519»
14-1520 6—2558; 3034 (1) Goede
16—51 (4); 1463 (1); 2575 (1) 71467 (4) bat Pans.
17—51 (5); 811 (1); 1460; 2498 | g 1460 (3) 1—119; 126; 327 (7); 365; 550
(10) 9—2799 (5) ate
18—51 (3); 1040; 2416 mathe 3—809
11722; 2800 (8)
21—3100 ea 6—2232 (a)
121042 (2)
23—1095 7973) 152168 (4)
25—1040; 2111 18—1267 (3); 3088 (2)
aes Gen 8 222028
20-1484 (1); 2019; 2444 (2); Gen 15
1—492 (5); 828; 2696 (4); pcan asia
aie 21—1534 (6); 2575 (2); 2700 | 5 ang
3—51 (5)
53089 (2) Gen 9 6—2517
6—51 (5); 3101 (7) 1-—2575 (2) 9—727 (2); 732 (6)
neice @146 (3) 13—911 (6); 1128; 1515
8—603°; 703; 1128; 2574; 2575 | 123124 (3) eee (1)
(2) 13-309; 2527; 2789° ee
14309 (3) 22-2112 on
15—52 (6); 477 (2); 620°; 1281; | 23—877 Gen 16
1353 (4); 1367 26—435 1—1331 (1)
16—1040 (1); 1463; 3100 27—1376 (2) 3—2300 (3); 2302 (3)
18—1095 Gen 10 5—504
19—515; 811 (1) 6—2690"
22-51 (5); 52 (6); 3009 (1); | 5289 @) 72021
3014 (5) nai oe 359 (8); 574 (16); | 12-2510 )
24308" ae By j * | 13-1967 (5)
Grn 4 11—2148 (5) Gen 17
1—477 (2) 19-2304 (4) 42574
3—3110° 21—1513 (2) 6—1800 (8)
41460 (3); 2640 (1); 2642 (4) | 22—918; 2305 (2) 82519


3407


3408


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Gen 17—continued
10—489; 1534 (b)
17—2117>
18—1509»
25—2302>

Gen 18
1—1022 (b); 1432 (2)
4—414>- 1195
5—1351 (2)
6—516 (6) .
12—2117>
14—2189 (4)
18—458 (4); 2574
19—583
21—1467 (4)
22—2019
25—972 (1); 1534; 2592 (3)
27—269


32—972 (b)
, Gen 19

2—414>
8—1482 (4); 2556>
28—3046

Gen 20
3—861 (2)
7—2461>
16—488 (bd)

Gen 21
8—1316 (3)


9—1168 (6); 1509 (3)
10—478; 2690> Pe
14—2300 (3); 2302 (3)
19—510°
21—1376 (2)

23—1011 (2); 3034
Gen 22

2—2642 (6)

12—1113


14—1583
18—620 (VI); 2574


Gun 23
1—2304
8—533 (2)
16—2081
Gen 24
26—3110 (2)
31—1819
40—20
538—1331>
60—487 (3)
67—2691>
Gen 26
8—974 (4)
19—2554 (1)
23—1114
26—2302
30—144>
31—2453 (3)


GEN 25—continued
32—1550 (6b)
34—1866>

Gen 26
25—2642 (8)
34—2300 (3)
35—2556"

GEN 27
4— 487
12—971>
138—2912
27—435
41—2302>
46—2300 (3)


Gren 28
10—1637
13—1553 (3)
16—1531 (bd)
18—1454 (5); 2642 (9); 3124 3
20—2430
21—2302 (2) -
Grn 29
17—487
31—1933 (b)
Grn 30
1—1331 (1)
6—2523 (2)
20—1861 (b)
37—100 (b)
Gen 31
7—1550>
19—1582 (6); 1551
46—107>
538—1442
Gen 32
9—1442
18—2918>
24—1551
30—1316 (2)
Gen 33
10—2918
Gen 34
1—1551 (6)
3—1868>
25—2793 (1)
Grn 35
2—1532»; 2523 (2)
5—1551 (0)
22—2416>
28—2302>
Gen 36
31—2303
Gen 87
2—1738>
3—878 (3)
9—310 (6)
27—2301
28—2416»


)


Gen 38
15—2211 (4) ;
18—498 (b); 735 (3); 2708 (1)
21—2682 (1)
24—2305 (3)


Gen 39
20—1739
Gen 40


16—413
17—516 (5)


Gen 41


-14—408 (2)


25—1739 (4)
41—2708 (2)
43—911
45—913 (23); 3132
50—2444 (8)
54—824 (11)

Gen 42
21—2504>
22—2571 (1)
23—2210 (1)
37—2305 (3)

Gren 43
11—100 (4); 2918>
21—535
34—880 (b)

Gren 44
3—331 (2)
20—488 (1)

Gen 45
138—1236

Gen 46
4—529 (4)
34—1739 (3)

Gen 47
4.27—911 (5,9)
11—1054; 25208


18—1738

Gren 48
5—2556>
8—598 (2)
18—1334

Gen 49
1—1552


3—1376 (2); 2453 (3); 2572 (1)
4310

6—1236>

10—620 (VI); 1858»; 2768>
12—2052

18—1553 (3)


Gen 50
2—530; 974 (4)
38—911 (5)
5—976 (1)


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


3409


Gen 50—continued
17—11338 (2)
20—2484 (6)
26—911 (6)


1—1055
8—3154
11—520; 1064; 2086; 2539»
15—2166>
16—2862>


Ex 2


3—242; 736 (13);
2817

5—1053 (3); 23600

10—2084 (2)?

15—2085


2084 (2);


Ex 3


2—532? -

5—404 (2); 1125 (6)

8—76

10—2085 (5)

13—1088 (1); 1266 (5); 3034
14—1254>; 1535

18—2643

19—1128>; 1129>


Ex 4


4—2449>
6—1867
10—1067 (2)
11—2093
19—2085>
22—609 (5);
2826 (2)
24—2912
25—490; 657


Ex 6


1515 (b); 2403;


38—2643
6—1883 (9)
21—2700°; 2818
Ex 6
3—1535; 2300 (2)
7—2039>
12—1067 (2)
30—657 (4)


Ex 7


4—1128>
11—942 (1)
16—2643
19—524 (3); 2311 (6)
Ex 8
9—1239 (3)
15—1338
18—942 (1)
19—1111>
22—2477 (1)
24—1120


Ex 9
1—2405 (5)
38—2094>
16—2406>
27—2559
Ex 10
7—2406 (1); 2819
8—2643
23—1891
24—2405 (9)


Ex 11
1—1128>
2—1257
3—1067 (2)


Ex 12
2—541
6—1103 (2)
7—1929 (2)
21—2022>; 2257>
34—877>
36—2086
37—-1056; 1065 (5); 2539>
41—1055
43—1853 (b)
48—656? ;
Ex 13
2—1114; 2453 (4); 2682 (1)
6—2257 (7)
7—2167
9—127>; 2393 (3)
14— 2532 (b)
19—976 (1); 2591>
Ex 14
2—913>; 2050; 2086>; 2396 (1)
19—395
21—2539 (4); 2540?


Ex 15
4—2086>
8—2540; 2841 (1)
11—1535>; 2682 (1)
18—1800 (1)
27—2087 (5)

Ex 16
1—2087 (5)
12—2015 (3)
13—2301 (4)
141147
22—2632>
27— 2634

Ex 17
2—2943
7—2301>; 2303 (4)
8—1066 (1)
11—912
14—2169

Ex 18
11—1535


12—108; 1674 (3); 2643 (11)


Ex 18—continued
21—1287>; 1675 (5)
26—208

Ex 19
4—885; 1858; 2643 (1)
5—1922 (3); 2682 (1)
6—1800 (1); 2439
8—2019 (3)
15—1003 (7)
16—2997 (2)


Ex 20
1—26; 1020 (a2); 1332 (1); 2090
2—2065
3—202
4—1535 (4)
5—1376; 1858
6—1933 (2); 2946 (4)
8—2632> 3
10—2469 (4)
12—1095 (5); 2944 (1)
13—2667 (5)
17—733»
20—110
22—2201
24—109; 839 (7); 1589; 2643 (2);

2644 (7); 2897

25—110 (1)

Ex 21
2—1331 (1); 2635 (2)
6—341; 1270 (2); 2301 (5)
7—863
8—2555>
12—2305 (3)
15—1331 (1)
20—764
22—1418
25—2455>


Ex 22


7.10—1332 (1)
18—1964
20—1858
26—2409; 2917>
27—421>. 877 (b)
Ex 23
10—74 (1)
11—2090°; 2635
14—542; 1255 (tz)
16—3024 (2)
19—2052>
29—2147>
32—764; 3008
Ex 24
3—1858; 2653 (2); 2655 (1)
4—108; 463 (1b); 2643 (1)
6—2846»
7—556; 731 (3)
8—2022; 2025; 2668


! 17—2802>


3410 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
Ex 25 Ex 34 Lev 11—continued
52814 5—1237 35—2530
8—883; 1079 8—3110 (2) 44—1404
9—234 (1); 2264> 9—2129 Lev 18
22—1852 (2); 2303 12—3008° 10—2515>
33—100 (b) 17—244 131867 (3)
Ex 27 18—2257° 45—1896
22—3024 (2) 47-9449
9-234 (2) 26—2052 Luv 14
20—2181>; 2182 29—3005?
es Bx $6 14-886 (1)
1—2440 (1); 2444 (3) 25—736' (16); 2841 34-1868 (2)
32841 (1) 35—3077° =
eae Ease 11—14
12—2439; 2445 (2) 32894 ae
20—3041 (3) Ex 39
29—2020 ee Lev 16
30—2019 (4) aeae 1—327
31—2442 (3) ern 2—671 (9); 1079
36—2900° ee 4-326
40—495 (b) 12—112 (2)
Ex 29 Lev 1 ae
1—2643 (3) 2—1857 33—326>
2—5152 3—2644 (5) Lev 17
9—495 (b) 14—476 sae
18—2818 Luv 2 sae
pceeae 4—516 (3) 10—1857
44—2682 (1) 142247
45—1079 Lev 18
Lrv 3 19—2111°
Ex 30 11—1857 21—2074 (2)
6—245 Lev 4 Lev 19
9—112 1—2645 (c) 2—1404?
11—322 (1); 2080» 3—2439 (2) 15488 (b)
12—2022; 2531 Lev 6 17—1351 (2)
oes 12666 (5) 18—1022 (b); 1029; 21332
17—1309 19—2712>
Ex 31 Luv 6 23—657 (4)
18—1111> 1—2666 (5) 26—2466 (1)
27—1320 (2)
Ex 32 Lev 7 28657; 1127 (b); 2455°
1—2643 (4) 12—1857 31—944
2—127 (1) 38—1870 (2) ees
5—544 (5) Lev 8 ;
7722 82019 (b) 2—2074; 2390
9—2129; 2854 9—2900° 6—2466 (1)
12—2019> 10—343 (2) 10—1096 (8); 2508 (1)
14—2727 (11) 23—886 (1) 22—2592 (3)
26—2449> 26—516 27— 690 (2)
29—1333 Lay 9 Lev 21
aa 222440 (4) 5380; 1320 (4)
a 182156
Ex 33 Ley 10
1—10; 2682" Lev 22
1—2665° i
32129» 4529 10—2556 (4)
. b
4—2202 9—881; 2864! Lev 23
7—2303; 2449 (1II) Luv 11 5—1103
11—2462 42864 8—2257
18—1237 5—1339 10.23—1103
20—1316°; 2723 (3) 13—885> 1422476


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


3411


Lev 23—continued


15—2257 (7)
34—1854
40—2236 (3)


Lev 24
11—3017"
14— 2853 (6)
16—1858
19—2504>


Lev 25
1—1870
2—2635>
6—74 (1)
8—542
9—305 (4)
12—74 (2)
15—1756 (2)
18—1757
238—1468°
25—2427 (4)
26—2541
32—757>
34—75 (7)
39—2301 (5)
47—1272
48—2555 (3)
51—2022
Lev 26
1—1454 (b)
4—505 (8); 2526 (3)
5—3051
11—2837>
16—78; 487
22—2147>
23—2545?.
31—2818
34—2635 (4)
38—2164 (12)
41—1079
42—75 (6)
46—2023; 1870
Lev 27
14—2682 (1)
16—75 (4)
17—1756 (2)
31—2530°
34—1870


Nul
18—2295
20—610>

Nu 3
11—1113°
12—2682 (1)
40—2531°
43—2167°
51—2022; 2541

Nu 4
8—2814
19—2019 (4)


Nu 5
11—1572; 2169>; 2591
14—2842
Nu 6
1—1320 (3); 2124»
3—881
18—2645
22—2440 (4)
238—1913 (2)
Nu 8
5—390°
7—2169»
19—2020
Nu 9
1—2166 (1)
Nu 10
3—2168
10—1108 (1)
14—2168 (8)
35—245; 2190 (5)


Nv 11
1—3034 (1)
51514 (3); 2311 (6)
10—3113 (1)
| 25—2842

Nu 12
1—769; 2556; 3152>
3—2090
6—2462; 2577 (1); 2578 (3);

2581>

8—1237

Nu 13
22—2169>
23—1123
28—662 (2)
29-120
383—84; 148 (8)

Nu 14
18—1021 (a)
20—322
29—323
42—243 (b)
45—2302>


Nu 15
30—1292 (3); 2651; 2666 (5)
32—2169
37—2917°

Nu 16
3—2019 (4)
10—839
22—2497 (4)

Nv 17
2—244 (4)
10—3116

Nv 18
2—1868 (b)
3—2307°; 2448 (1)


Nu 18—continued


6—2020
19—2556
21—757
380—76 (b)
Nv 19
38—2169>
8—390>
11—2169»
14—1533
Nu 20
1—2166; 2303 (4)
5—2169
11—2843
12—2682»
22-1421 (3)
28—2300 (b)


Nu 21
8—1455 (6)
9—2789>


‘142169


17—2830»
27—120; 2470
29—1255
Nu 22
5—293 (b)
34—2559 (2)
Nu 23
5—378 (2)
10—975; 1623
13—2168 (2)
19—2337>; 3034 (3)
22—3085
23—2466 (2)
Nu 24
2—310 (8); 378 (2); 2460 (2)
5—-108
7—311 (9); 2169
8—3085
17—308; 629 (3); 2702; 2848 (5)
21—2138>
Nv 26
1—2778 (1)
Nu 27
8—526; 2554 (1)
14-2682
16—2495 (4); 2497 (4)
17—2763»
Nu 28
19—2257 (7)
Nu 29
7—822 (3)
Nv 31
16—1770
49—2168 (4)
Nu 32
10—322 (b)


3412 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
Nv 33 Dr 11—continued Dr 20
2—2164 (2) 14—505 (3) 1256 (6)
7—2050 16—202 10—764
38—2; 2300 (3); 2302° 20—2900" 16—35; 1536; 2306 (8)
55—2974 Hata Saad
Nu 35 3—2212 {—2651
5—2634> 5—1265 9—2645 (IV)
19—764; 2555 (3) 6—2897° 12—418 (6)
31—2697 8—2167 (3) 15—478 (b)
32—2546 (3) 10—838; 839° 17—2453
33—322 (b) 23—2837? 22-1662 (1)
30—764 23—2567 (4)
Dri Dr 13 Dr 22
28—234 (b); 550 (2); 662 (2) 1—875 6—2138°
17—3034 (1) nese:
Dr 4
Dr 14 122917"
7—2574 raaay
19—2081>; 2514 " eee)
30—2558> Eee 22—2508 (1)
32—2065; 2311 (5) Tee 23-1998
21—2052 aaa
Bute Bees 15—1856
Rea (a); 2168 (2) 28—2427 (4) eee
(1) Dr 15 :
19—1257; 2133
img 12635 (2)
18—1095> pare Dr 24
Pea) 11—101 (8) 1—864 (b); 2592 (3)
Dr 6 12—2427 (4); 2666 (4) 12-2409
4—741; 1088; 1933 15—2541 ced
51029 17—341 14—1022
pas nee 16—36; 838; 2665 (2)
72104 (2) fees 20—2181»; 2185 (2)?
8—127> 8—2257 (7) Dr 26
9—2900> 18—726 2—1856
14—202 19—488 (b) 4—1022; 13675; 2102
16—2301> 21—108 (b); 2643 (2) 5—526
25—2591> 222.934; 1454> 9—1125 (b); 2779»
Dr7 Dr 17 Dr 26
2—1536; 3008» 2—1858 12—2427 (4)
3—1129» 3-—2514>
6—613 (4); 1922 (3) 72853 (6) Daat
94—2112 8—208 5—839>; 2896 (4)
25—2942> 14—1800 (3); 2306 11—890
oar 16—1423 (3) Dr 28
3—2943> Dr 18 1—973 (1); 2665
4—1125 (b) 6—2449>; 2450 13—2903°
9—2044° 8—2264 22486
Dr9 9—296; 942; 944 27—301 (d)
2-84 (6) 10—1963 (b); 2466 (1); 3098 28—1961 (1)
oi pae i 11—2761> 35—1104
Perret 15—617 (III); 2022; 2040; | 37-2470 (3)
2462 (3); 2517; 2578 (3); | 49--885°
Dr 10 2921 (8) 58—3017°
6—2300 (b) 18-2093; 2578 59—1376
ae (2) 21—2461 Dr 29
Dr 19 2—2168 (2)
Dr it 12546 (3) 5—837
8—973 (1) 6—2555 (3) 23—520»7
10—1126; 1493 14—2212 27—3118 (1)
11—2525" 15—1670 (1) 29—2104 (2); 2312


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Dr 30


6—657 (3)
11— 2666 (4)
Dr 31
9—463; 555°; 836 (6)
10—2635 (3)
19—2093
22—840
24—1854 (4)
26—1886 (14)


Dr 32
2—505
4—1266 (b)
6—608 (2); 3089 (2)
7—2310 (3)
11—885»
138—2184>
14—1796>
15—1623; 3035 (5)
22—978; 2761>
34—2709
Dr 33
2—2998
3—1125>
12—2780>
16—532?
19—735
21—1859
27—975; 1011 (2); 1460 (3);
3037
Dr 34
7—911 (7)
10—2462; 2577 (2); 2578 (3)


JosH 2
1—2525
16—2212>


JosH 3
15—1745 (2); 2212 (2)

JosH 4
3—1745 (6)


Jos 5
2—656>
3—657"
11—-2247>
15—404 (3); 1125»
JosH 6
1—2786>
16—2525
26—722 (1); 1389; 2713
Josu 7
5—3075
20—2559 (2)
21—687 (1); 2076; 2234
26—2665>


Jos 8
30—890; 1858


Josu 9
4—510
23—1226
JosH 10
12—448 (3)
24—1126; 2129
33—2232 (d)
JosH 11
1—1750 (8)
212299 (2)
JosH 18
3—2768
5—3000»
JosH 15
44—2227
JosH 16
10—1223>; 2232 (d)
JosH 17
14— 506 (b)
JosH 18
7—2450
10—1884 (11)
"Jos 20
3—2555
JosH 22
9—108
29—838
JosH 24
14-1514"


26—2089 (1); 2920 (2)


Jas 1
1—3040°

Jas 2
2—3008?
7—1427

Jas 4
8—3100>
18—1557>; 2556

Jas 5
2—-1055
14—3116
15—2710
17—687 (2)
19—2229 (2)
23—2037


24—1558; 2556
30—735 (5); 884
Jas 6
4—1055
11—1227
34-—2842
36—332
Jus 7
1—2082
21227 (5)
13—405; 2576
22—2168 (4)


3413
Jes 8
2—1234»
14— 468 (c)
22—1517"
23—2965»
24—1777; 2918
25—877>
27—675; 1456?
Jas 9


7—29 (III); 1085; 1754
8—2184>; 2243 (1)


9—1534 (6)
13—3088 (2)
37—2033
538—2052

Jas 10

1—884>; 1775

Jas 11
24—1255 (a)
30—1256
34—1777
39—1587

Jes 14

6—2842
18—240; 1367

Jas 16

3—212

8—13894>
15—600; 2168 (4)

Jes 16

4— 2676
21—2456 (6)
31—1518

Jas 17

6—1776

7—2449>
138—2450

Jas 18
19—2093
27—2044>

Jas 19
16—1482 (4)
19—83088 (2)

Jas 20
16—1169 (2)
26—1099>

Ruth 1

1—2214 (8)

Rury 2
14—2247>
17—2214 (8)

RutH 3
3—877>

7—2214 (3)
13—1272>


3414 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
Rorn 4 1812 . 18 28

4—2541 11—4 1—296 (1)
6—2556 3—690 (2)
72779 ‘ pees 7—598; 3097
112524 apiece 9—2466 (1); 2819°

Boaoe 9—2466 (1); 2819"
1S1 ae 15—2761°

3—2893> RESSEOn er 18 29

re 41— ; 618;
20-—478; 2677 Saar eee e ane) 4—2536
24—2450° 18 15 1 8 30
182 3—2698 (5) 6—2489

1—2093; 3100° eee ye ao 1831
18—8; 1455 242559 (2), 10—2377 (2)
19—2450° sar 11—530 (3)
25—2019 (1) ae
272450; 2451; 3131 29 —2337>; 2558; 3034 (3) oe

30—2700 (3) ;
183 33-763 18—512

1—2462 (3) area 19—2700 (4)
19—2461 (6) 23885"

1—2462 (5) Se 5
184 5—838 eae:

1—2891 (4) 6—2020 14— (2)

32450 14—66 (2); 2680 283

8—1255 (a) 20—3088 35—1099
20—2050 1817 284

185 7-—2234 9—2535>

2—2377 17—2247° 285

6—2403 aa 22921 (9)

186 aes o 6—1614 (4); 1823»

1—2231 (3) 8—1609 (3)

8—377 (6) 18 18 20—3075

9—593; 1336; 2189 (5) 5—2093 286
21—12 20—2555? 7—3113

187 21—2819» 14—8; 1170

5—2019% 18 19 20—2048

6—4 18—2462 (4) ao .2034
17—838 1S 20 287

ee 6—1442 sas (4)

6—2462; 2698 (5) 27—541 52030 (6)

eee 18 21 72940
ae (3) 1—2804 11—2040 (1)
peat a = 5—1003 (7) 12—1458 (4); 1537 (5); 2464 (2)

—~289 (2); 2093 13—1961 (1) 14—2042>; 2827
189 14-418 (4) 288

42215 (2) 18 23 11—2941»

6—2462 (3) 10—1129> 17—3131 (5)

9—2019 (3); 2713; 2921 (7) 19—1334 289
11—1391 28—2699 (11) 728980

18 10 18 24 11—2556"

6—2579 3-—1125> 25 10
eee (1) 13—2470 (2) 4—418; 2751»
12—2470 (2) 18 26 28 14
25—1884 (12); 2551 (1) 13—2757 (4) 2—3039>
27—2918>; 2919 18—510°; ora 15—2521

= Ds
eae 41—1125>; 3072 a aes

6—2699» 18 26 1—2243"

14—2557> 20—1118>; 2254 8—504; 1129


28 12—continued
13—2799 (6)
15—2783>
16—1099°
27—2521?

28—2112
30—2074 (2)
31—118; 763
28 18
18—878 (3)
21—2555 (3)
28—3088
258 14
3—2093
11—2555 (3)
26—1320?
28 15
7—57 (1)
30—403°
25 16
6—1111
23—2198°
258 17
8—417>
17—954
25—2109
27—118
28—2247>


21—768


24—2034
28 21
1—1226
8—1376; 2556
19—1276
28 22
16—594
28 23
4—671 (9); 2464 (2)
28 24
1—3158 (4)
2—2919
17-1021 (a)
24—2641 (6)
25—109 (5)


tKi1


9—954; 3155
50—109 (4)


1K 2


19—2514
27—2450°


1K3
4—2823 (1); 2894?


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


3415


1K4
4—3130 (6)
21—2918>
23—1124
25—3051
29—24708; 3089 (2)


1K 65

6—687 (2)

1K6
1—1775>
15—2930 (3)

1K7
9—527

1K 8
4—2893 (1); 2894 (3)
21—24.4»
27—310 (8); 2190
63—2449

1K9
7—2470 (3)
11—3008 (2)?
16—551 (5)

1 K 10
1—1170 (7)
15—687 (2)
18—3000°
22-—2197%
25—2918°
27—2798

1K 11
5—1255 (2)
15—912 (13)
23—436
41—1885

1K 12
10—1111
14—2551°
16—1593 (3)
21—2462 (5)
25—124
26—1255 (ii)
28—109 (9)
30-—1594 (6)

1K 13
2—744
4—3098°
11—2183°

1K 14
3—516 (5)
7—2462 (5)
25—912 (15); 2359

1K 15
2—10
323102

1K 16
1—2462 (5)
25—2193 (4)


1 K 16—continued


31—1675
34—12; 1389; 2075; 2713
1K 17
1—2461
21—976
1 K 18
19—2898»
21—1255 (2); 1583 (7)
26—1964 (6)
28—1857; 2462 (4)
40—763
44—670; 3085 (2)
1K 19
11—1538 (7)
16—934 (1)
21—1183
1 K 20
31—1343
34—570 (1); 687 (3); 857 (16);
2192 (3)
37—2462 (4)
1K 24
29—2461"
1K 22
20—66 (2)
29—80
342106
48—687 (2)
2K


2—346 (5); 348
8—736; 877 (4)
9—579

2K 2
9—935 (3)
11975 (1); 1460 (11)
12—596. (7)

2K 3
11—412 (3)
13—1580
15—2460 (2) 2579


2K 4

8—1182
19—2879»
23—2462 (5); 2910 (2)
34—976

2K 5
7—1867 (1)
17—108>
18—1255 (i); 2594
20—1182°

2K6
122461
25—287 (4)

2K7
2—315 (4)


3416 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
2K 8 2 K 20—continued 1 Ch 18
11—267 12—367 3-85; 2894°
16—932 (7) 18—2030 5—2768
ae 9 20—1609 (4); 2225 (3) 8—1112
11—1961 (1) 2K 21 Igoe}
22-1964 38—2081> 1 Ch 14
27—2229 (2) 6—345?; 1963 7—1255 (it)
2K 10 fone (6) : 1 Ch 17
15—2535 (2) 2K 22 1—2120
18—1585 (8) 8—464 (9); 556; 838 (9); 1853; | 21—2541
20-—2682 (1) 1883 1 Ch 19
22—601 Bey | 42751»
2Ku 2 K 23 1 Ch 21
4— 2379» 2—464 (g); 1753 (8) 1—3158
122416» 4—1258 (4); 2040 (1); 2081" 16208
gets 5—298 (3); 299 ‘
N 7 aaae 1 Ch 23
5—570 (2); 1346 (2); 1577 82934 27—1885
14—332; 596; 1576 (2) 10—2638> 1 Ch 24
19—2666 (3) Tee 14-2918
. 15—2184
2h 14 (3) 1 Ch 26
9—1085; 2243 (1) 2 K 24
24—143 (1
10—1239 18—1687 ee)
11—115; 2231 (3) 15-—2514 1 Ch 27
22—115 (6) 20—573 (10) 24—1885
res —2182
25—122° Brie ae 28—218
2K 16 7—764 1 Ch 28
3—345»; 2638 12—574 (14) 3—2940°
6—2588 16—3079 11—234 (1); 2264
8—841 (3) 27—1577" 19—2895>
2K 11 1 Ch 29
3—2747> ge 18—1292
4—912 (17); 1428 (b) 16—2109; 3148 20—3111
6—2693 18—1185 (6) 22-3130 (6)
9—2284 1Ch4 24—2453
16—298 (3); 2514? 21—736 29—1884
26—1428; 2869 (3) 232233
27—1255 (a) x
1 Ch 6 2Chi
30—299 (5); 2869 (1
Se) (1) 5—2898 (1) 3—2894 (3)
31—2638
es 26—570 (2) 7—2823 (5)
eae | 16—687 (2)
as 1Ch7 -
5990; 2
4839 (7); 1386 (2); 1455 (6); | 5° 980 oe
2132; 2234; 2738» = : 6—2190 (3)
29—504
9—2747° oe 2 Ch 3
172522» eet 1—2930 (4); 3152 (5)
26—361 (8) rae
2k 19 1 Ch 9 2 Ch 5
11-2443 3—2894 (3)
Be 7028 22—2921 (7
9—912 (17) Bea i 2 Ch 6
13—231 (17); 2722 (2) on 7—2941
28—2155> 1 Ch 11 2 Ch 9
29—3051 6—1609 (3)
Seay 17—3074 ag!
: 2
71109 ©) 1 Ch 12 ae eae
8—1388 8—1169 (2)
9—2981> | 182460 (2) 2 Ch 14
11-841 32—1542 (4) 11—663>; 2182; 3088:


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


3417


2 Ch 12
2—912 (15)
3—913?

2 Ch 13
5—2556>

2 Ch 14
9—912 (16)

2 Ch 16
7—2921 (7)
8—912 (16)
9—1128
12—262; 2666 (3)
14-529; 530; 744

2 Ch 18
3—2047

2 Ch 19
10—2921 (6)

2 Ch 20
24-2168 (4)
36—687 (2)


2 Ch 21
18—511
19—884>

2 Ch 24
7—818 (4)
20—2460 (2); 3129>

2 Ch 28
3—2453 (4)

2 Ch 29


24—2536
25—2096; 2462 (5)


2 Ch 32
28—2182
30—1609 (4); 2225 (3)
31—1386 (4); 841 (2)


2 Ch 33
6—1963>
11—1978 (1); 1979 (4)
2 Ch 34
8—1752
14—1883>
2 Ch 36
138—2854
21—75 (7)
Ear 1
1—368
Ezr 2
3—610>
36—1076 (8)
59—2712»
62—2295
65—2805


69—535


Ezr 3
13—966
Ezr 4
7—260°; 361 (8)
10—2151
13—2919 (2)
14—729>; 1123; 2556
: Ear 5
17—1886>
Ezr 6
15—575 (19)
Ezr 7
10—908 (5)
27—2430>
Eze 8
23—2430°
Ezr 9
1—575 (20)
11—1376 (2)
Ezr 10
6—1099>
19—728
Neu 1
9—2558>
NEH 2
4—2430
6—2131>
13—1598>
Nex 3
5—2129>
NEH 4
| 1—856 (10)
| 4—2430>
NEH 5
7—2666 (4)
8—2541
17—2898>
18—495
NEH 6
| 7—2433 (5)
Nrn 7
61—2712»
64—2295
NEH 8
1—827; 2104
8—556; 1834 (11); 2911 (4)
NEH 9
6—2478
7—613 (4); 2477 (1)
29—2780>
30-—2579
Neu 10
28—576
31—2635 (4)


New 10—continued
32—2918
34—1104
38—1857>


New 12
22—2131 (5)


_ Nea 13
3—2087 (2)
5—2182
15—53e
22——2682 (1)
26—1096 (9)
28—556 (2)


Est 1
5—1008 (8)
10—3088 (2)


Est 2
20—2556>


Est 3
10—2709 (3)


Est 5
1—1009
Est 7
8—1086
9—1337
Est 9
24—1957 (1)


Jos 1

1—1679>; 1681

4—384>

5—1680 (1); 2642 (7)

6—2694 (4); 2695 (2)

JoB 2

1—2826?

3—1685>

4—2814
11—1682

Jos 3

5—485

8—310 (5)

9—308 (7)
23—1682 (4)
24—3075

Jos 4

3—1682 (1)

7—934

9—2841 (1)
14—495>
21—2948

Jos 5

1—1682»

27—934

Jos 6
5—514
6—1682 (2); 2204


3418 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
Jos 6—continued Jos 19—continued Jos 32
16—2819° 23—1683>; 1885> 3—930°
25—2560° 2422976: 2900 19—1684 (1); 3087 (4)
30—2348 25—67 (IIL); 976 (3); 1260°; 1460 Jon 33
Jos 7 ee ania oa 42495 (2); 2497 (7); 2838 (3)
17—1682>; 2056 oy Z 14—1684 (1)
19—2846 Jos 20 24—1460 (8); 2531
21—1782 5—67 oes
JoB 9 29—3157 132479
6—315 (2) Jos 21 37—1686
7—801 (d) 5—1684 (2) Jon 36
9—311 (10); 3132 17—553 16—523
ean Jos 22 27-315 (5)
s 6—2409 Jos 387
32—1683 (4) es
33—799>; 2018 (1); 2019 (1) : 5—696
23—1683 9—313 (1); 3083
Londo Jon 23 16—315 (6)
8--2497 sti oaue 17—3086 (3)
ioe At 10—67 (2); 1684 (3) Jon 38
We 4 b
ee a te
a 2—1687 7—308
fae sage 3.9—2409 9—2874
: 10—2752 12-3026
doe 4 ae 14—2708 (1)
6—2712 22—314>
9—2479 gee
73152 31—811 (10); 312°
12—269 9992: 3132
122144 (4) 32299";
17—1687 33—301>
25-881 (IV) hese) Flats
Jon 18 LOR a gages,
3—1683 (1) 3—2497 (4) 26—3088°
23-1782 8—168¢4 (3) 27—885%
27 —2455» Jos 28
4
28—1868 1—2044 ee oor
Jon 14 7—1091» ane (2)
7—1683 (3) 12—408 (4) 4—2093
13—2563 22—8 10—2202
14—976 (3) Boe eG) 16—1917*
16—377 (4 anes
(4) 281686 (3) 21—2544 (2)
17—2709 24—21 55>
Jos 15 Jos 29 Jos 41
41683" 2—1888 (11) Perr
12—3088° 3—553 5476: 1168
19—1687 7—2474 (3) 182130
27—1086 9 .10—20938
24—2052
33—1122 (4); 2185 (2) 12-2494 ee
OB
Jos. 10 SE Le: 1—1685
4—1683¢ Jos 30 5—2559
10—2093 41781 6—2558
Tee 19 200 7—034; 1685>; 2642 (7)
15—2093 25—2837° 8—2019 (2)
Jos 18 Jop 31 10—1687; 1693 (a)
6—553 1—25 (5)
132814 13—2494 Ps 2
15—522" 20—1917> 1—2518
Jor 19 26-314; 1891; 2081 7—2042>; 2464; 2826
9—1236» 35—2780 8—2826
20—2814 40—930 9—2426>


Ps 4
5—2649 (2)
6—1460 (3)
Ps 6
5—2494 (8)
Ps 7
8—2493
12—2558>
Ps 8
1—1265
8—1111>
4—2829
Ps 9
17—975; 1251
Ps 10
11—2192 (6)
Ps il
1—476
6—522>; 2819»
Ps 18
1— 1086
Ps 14
1—819; 1251
Ps 15
1—1404
2—3026>
Ps 16
2—1460 (38)
7—1797
8—976 (2); 2518
9—1906
10—615; 1888»; 2337>
11—975 (2); 2563


Ps 17
1—2493
15—976 (2); 2499 (12); 2563

Ps 18
2—1537; 3035(5)
5—2819>
20—2493
28—553; 952 (2)
31—1258>
34—416>

Ps 19


1—2574 (2); 3124 (1)
4-—1894
12—2192 (6)
13—2493>
Ps 22
1—2433 (3)
15—2093
21—3020
27—322 (3); 1022%
Ps 23
2—2763>; 3075
5—1821 (7)


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Sey
Ps 24 Ps 42
2—316 (7) 2—2837
3—1404 (2); 2508 4—3110 (2)
4—2494 9—3035 (5)
10-1129 @) Ps 44
@) 14—2470 (3)
Ps 26 | 172493
7—2019 (1) | 283—1259 (3)
14—728 (1); 2104 (2) | Bevis
pee 122978
Ps 49
Feat 3—2476 (3)
coe 7~2531; 2555 (3)
Ps 28 8—2837 (2)
1—1266 (6) 14—976 (2); 2502
4—83084 15—2563
Ps 30 Ps 50
3—2337> 5—2649 (2)
9—2494 (8) 11—476®
13—1857
Ps 31 23—2430 (3)
1—1089>
Ps 61
Ba 32 325592; 2591>
1—1464 (3) 5—2798 (3)
2—1462 62192
5—2019 (1) 7—667>
Ps 33 10-2550
16—2649 (2)
1474; 2021; 3014 (5
aay ae 2 172559; 2842 (3); 2845
18—1782 Ps 53
Ps 34 1—1251
8—2917> Ps 56
111102" 5— 8114
24—1089> 8—510>; 2923>
Ps 57
Ps 35
11—2493 8—2430 (3)
13—1099° Ps 58
17—1918; 3020° 4—886 (2)
20-—2515 Ps 59
21—2093 5—431>
Ps 36 Ps 65
5—1089° 4—613
6—3034 (3) 5—2189 (6)
9—1891 (c) Ps 66
Ps 37 10—27938
232482 (3); 2483 Ps 68
35—-977% 11—2433 (5)
37—975 13—871>; 3088
Ps 38 Ps 69
7—1917" 11—2470 (3)
13—882 222898»
Ps 39 Ps 71
2—882 | 3-305 (5)
13—2494 eg 98
Ps 40 22494
62019 (1); 886 (1)? 4—2020 (5)


3419


3420 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
Ps 72—continued Ps 98 Ps 119—continued
5—3802b 8—665b 100—131
6—2526 (5) 9—977> 130—1891 (a)
18—2189 (6) Ps 99 133—2493
Ps 73 3—2492 Ps 121
3—67 (1) Ps 104 6—302 (5)
11—2571 (10) 7—2855? Ps 122
18—977>; 2502 Ps 102 3—691
21—1797 j 4 —3998> Ps 124
24—976 (2); 2499 (12); 2563 6—2206; 22976 ia dy ian ecoa ies
25—1537 72839 ~ ion
Ps 75 8—1961 (1) Ps 126
5—2129 26—3034 (4) 2—1598 (1)
Ps 76 Ps 108 Ps 126
2—2663 1—2430 (3) 4—2838>
Ps 78 5—885P Ps 127
18—2943 8—2019 (1) 5—2516>
60—2769; 2891 (4) 12—1134 (6) Ps 129
Ps 79 Ps 104 3--38; 2409; 2704
33075 15—1351 (2); 3088> 6—1293°
6—3113 (1) 19—303> Ps 131
12-504» 23—1891 2—3076°
Ps 80 29-—2497 (4); 2562 (2) Ps 133
1—310 (8); 2440 (3) Ps 105 2—2441
17—2829 11—2264 Ps 136
at 222719» 6—316 (7)
3-303 33—1123 15—1516; 2086°
6—413 (1) Ps 106 Ps 137
12—298 (2) 40 —3034 23085»
13—2167 (e) Ps 107 3—2095>
Ps 83 9—2837> 5— 2492 (4)
16—514 6—2093>
14—506
20—2021 8-—763
eos 37—3051 Pa 429
32839 3
Ps 85 Ps 110 5—2190 (6)
425580 | 1-265 (IX); 1478 (7); 2129; | 8—2761>
ae | 2518 9—304; 3088>
scenic ® 3—2202 13—1797>
rs 4—2028> 21—2494 (7)
Ps 89 ere 23—2192 (6); 2493
—— 'b
a 1.9—1323 Ps 140
Hand Ps 115 5—2819°
1—1467 (3)
2—1012 (10) 1—1323 , a
ee 17—-2494 (8) 9—2819>
3 9
esti Ps 116 Ps 142
6—2349>2 1—1029 (a) 7—2456 (7)
11—133 (1) 15—2434» Ps 143
Ps 94 Pa 118 11—1089> ©
32571 (10) 14—2189 (6) Ps 146
7-—2192 (6) 22—722 (2) 3—3033%
Ps 96 Ps 119 18—2574
13—977> 30—3026 Ps 147
45—18815 4—307
Ps 97 67—2484 (5) 5—3033>
7—1270 (1) 83—3088> 10—1865
10—1933 (2); 3113 (4) 96—517; 523 19—2574


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Ps 148
8—3046

Prov 1
6—2471
7—426>
9—127»
20—3091

Prov 2
7—2478>

Prov 3


3—3009 (2); 3114
6-—2478>; 2482 (3)
21—2478 (4)


Prov 4
23—2496 (6)


Prov 5
15—3075


Prov 6
1—2872
13—1111; 1125>
21—127>


Prov 7
38—3114
14—2666>
20—303°
23—2819>


Prov 8
5—2798
14—2474 (3)
22—2021; 2472>; 3091 (7)


Prov 9
10—2472»
17—3075


Prov 10
2—2474 (2)


Prov 11
4—101>
20—3034
25—1881
31—2474 (2)


Prov 12
2—2478
4—495»
19—3026>
21—2482 (3)
22—3034 (1)


Proy 13
12—3009
14—2819>
15—1337


Prov 14
10—1489
14—376>
15—2798
30—495°; 813


3421


Prov 15
4—3009>
19—2975

Prov 16
4—2478 (4)
32—2842
338—593

Prov 17
8—127»
11—3006»
12—417»


Prov 18
1—2474
7—2819
20—2093
Prov 19


15—2817
21— 3034 (3)


Prov 20


14—3090°
27—2495 (2)


Prov 21


18—886 (2)
20—2182

Prov 22
6—908 (4)
19—2476 (3)
23—1486 (8)
28—2212

Prov 23
10—2212
23—3025 (1); 30265
29—881
31—1918

Prov 24


18—3090°
20—553
31—2975

Prov 26
8—307; 2710
4—2545
6—3091 (5)
18—2210 (7)
21—2526 (5); 3086 (4)
28—2842

Prov 26
1—2820
2—2839; 2874>
7—1865
13—2471
18—1961 (1)
23—2545>

Prov 27
22—514>


Prov 28


9—886 (2)


Prov 29
2--334 (1)
18—3057>

Prov 30
4-—1260)
7—78
17—885>; 2533»

Prov 31
1—3090 (3)


Eccu 1
2—895 (2)
7—315 (6)
9—2546 (1)
17—1961 (1)

Eccu 2
1—895 (2)
6—1493

Ecct 3
1—895 (2); 2478>
11—421

Eccu 5
1—1125>
18—895>

Eccu 7
6—508>; 2975
17—3090»

Eccu 8
4—2833 (3)
12—812>

Eccu 9
2—593>; 3090 (5)
7—3088 (2)

Ecct 10
19—3088 (2)

Eccu 11
4—670 (6)
9—978


Cant 1
7—2837>
14—432>; 807 (2)
Cant 2
1—1893°; 2750
4—384>
7—2508 (4)
11—2526 (4)


Cant 3
2—2508>
6—2427>

Cant 4
1—1249>
5—1179; 1893
11—2052
12—2709


3422 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
Cant 6 Isa 6—continued Isa 15
1—381° 8—2019 (3); 3014 (5) 2—418 (5)
3—878 9—2517 (2) 7—3085°
Cant 7 10—886 (2) Isa 16
5—579; 1320 (5) eee 2—259
Gines Isa 7 14—1395
6—2708 (1); 2709 ane are Isa 17
; 6—81 (4)
8—2555 (3) 99465 6—2185 (2)
10—2040; 2789» agrees
Isat 14478; 1458 (2); 2464 (g); | 182975 2D)
6—1676> 2518?; 2725 (3); 3051; 3053° Isa 18
10—2581 (2) 18—1121; 1423 2—736 (13); 3122
11—1020; 1538 (2); 2559>; 2648»; | 299-1391 (8); 2751» 4—914>
2652°; 2683 (1) ;
13—341 See Isa 19
16—1042 (1) 1—1885>; 2297» 1—1454 (4)
18—1292 (3); 2465; 2547 5—2791 (2) 6—524
19—2175? 8—2040 7—736
222793; 3087% 138—2682» 9—3077°
23-—488> 16—2463 10—1117
95—2545> 19296; 612; 690; 2102; 2466 | 14-981 (IV)
Isa 2 (1); 2562 (3) 18—302 (2); 912 (20); 1491;
Isa 9 2926»
recall 25609 (5)
2—9772; 2046 6—31; 1458 (4); 2040; 2453;
3—1690>; 2581 (2) 2465 (8); 2780 Isa 20
42409 10—521> 1—2693
6—687 (3) 12—1294» 2—403; 2112
10—1236 Isa 10 Isa 21
181454 (4) 31936 39207
22—-2155>; 2189 5299): 1257 (5) 6—1311 (I)
Isa 3 10—1454 (4) Isa 22
2—1964 14—612 13—2666°
6—1518 (4) 17—1891 (3); 2975 (21) 15—2891 (1)
10—2502 20—2592 18—1168>
11—812 ise 14 22—1793; 2780
ea ee 1—1623 (4); 2020 (5); 2123 23—1236"
Perea) 22040 Isa 28
cee 42093 32768
Isa 5 5—877 (4); 19175 18—3003 (4)
1—78; 1085; 2243 (2) (as ans Isa 24
2—8087 (2) —384 (2); ae
8 —2592 (3) 11—1458> ieee Gs)
10—38 14—2465 (8) Isa 26
11—881 Isa 13 6—976 (4); 3087 (4)
12—880° 8—2207 7—3047
14-1236 10—312? Isa 26
— . b
ae Re gees one 43034 (3); 3035 (5)
993087 19—976 (4); 986 (1); 1888;
23488» Isa 14 2499 (4); 2563; 2665°
25—3113 (1) Sree) Isa 27
26—384 (2) Pane 1—309 (2); 311 (9)
9—2761> ;
Isa 6 12—299 (5) Isa 28
1—61 (4); 2648» 13—701 1—881
3—1129 14—671 (9) 2—3075
4—1466> 15—975 41109 (4)
5—1404 23—484> 9—3076
6—2684> | 30—2557° 14—13876


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


3423


Isa 28—continwed


16—2519°
23—2409; 2476 (3)
24—1341; 2243 (2)
29—2474 (3)


Isa 29


4—612; 690

8—1440
10—2817»
11—2709»
15—2192 (6)
16—2426>
23—2682>


Isa 30
1—2666 (3)
8—1885>
10—2921 (7)
14—2425»; 2426>
15—1386 (3); 2465
24—2469>
27—3017>
28—1572
33—522
Isa 31
1—1257 (5)
3—2189 (3)
7—1454 (4)
Isa 32
1—1387


2—3075
11—2924


Isa 33
13—2479
14—2864>
17—1387>
21—523; 524 (3)
Isa 34
4—308 (8)
7—3084»
11—484>; 2145 (5); 2297>
13—828
14-369; 2144
15—2736°; 2737 (3)


Isa 36
7—2066; 2247»
8—2479>


Isa 36


3—289 (1)
16—527 (4)


Isa 37


16—310 (8)
22—-2461
27—1293>
29—2155>
30—3051
38—2750


Isa 38
8—841; 2981>
12—2948; 2977
14—2872
17—1134 (6)
21—1109 (6); 1122»
22—494
Isa 39
1— 367
Isa 40
1—678
5—1238
11—504; 1258 (6); 2764
13—2056
22—315 (3)
27—1781»
28—1011 (2); 2189 (4); 3033
Isa 41
4—3034
7—737
8—2020 (6); 2740 (6)
10—1089
22—1129
25—2424>
Isa 42
1—613 (5); 1258 (4); 2518;
2579
4—977 (2)
6—1089"; 2020 (6); 2592
8—1238 (7); 1258 (4)
9—1129
22—2819>
25—3113 (1)
Isa 43
22479; 3075
9g9—1129
10—2020 (6)
Isa 44
1—2020 (6)
6—3034
8—1258 (4); 1266 (6)
24—1 507%
25—300 (3)
Isa 46
5—2484 (2)


7—66 (I); 1042>; 2485; 2695
(2); 3158 (8)
g—2426>
13—1089
15—739
21—1782; 2065
22-—613 (5)
23—1258 (4)
Isa 46
1—299 (5); 418
4—2479>
11—477; 3034 (3)


Isa 47
2—1865
8—1929»
9.11—1964 (4)
18—308 (3); 332 (6)


Isa 48
4—514; 2129>; 2804
10—2545
21—1932 (2)
Isa 49
1—822 (8); 1258
2—2020 (6)
4—617
6—2235
10—2247
Isa 60
3—485


4—2020 (6); 2578 (4); 2740>
6—418 (6)
11—978 (3)
Isa 51
16—1353 (6)
17—881 (IV)
20—144


Isa 62
11—323; 2507°
12—2479»
13—67 (4); 2041
15—2547


Isa 53
38—37>
4—67 (4)
5—617; 1021; 1464
6—72
7—882; 1662 (c); 2023; 2025
8—1577>
10—2639; 2651 (11)
11—1306
12—1663


Isa 64
14—2479»


Isa 65
1—510°; 2052; 3088 (2)
11—2021
12—665>

Isa 56
1—2632»
3—2468
10—882
11—2763>


Isa 57
2—975
4-—2093
8—2156
15—1012°; 2547
19—546»


3424 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
Isa 58 Jer 3 Jer 13
3—24 3—1128 11—877 (4)
8—1238 (7) 8—376e 13—881 (IV)
9—1111 14—2558" 18—2514
Isa 59 16—327° 21—2207
3—2348 JER 4 23—2547
soe ia a
Be eaeinn 3—1307 (5) Jer 14
11—1597> 4—2409»
Isa 60 21—384 (2) 7—376>
11892 (4) 22—3089 (2) 142579
5—2542> 25—477 19—2019 (3)
7—1236
oe b Jer 5 Jer 15
8—2395 5—3127
Isa 61 17—1123 Jer 16
1-618; 2020?; 2433 (5); 2456 | 24505 (3) 11—1589 (6)
(7); 2518; 3014 (5) 26—1143* 16—1115
3—1321 (7) Jur 6 19—1258 (3)
8—2648> 1—2924 (1) Jer 17
Isa 62 De 1—1885»; 2297; 29008; 3114;
4—2508 (4) 14—1349 31192
11—1932 (2) 20—2559" 6—2247>
28—514 FEA
Isa 63 a 10—2710
29—2545 iaoeA
1—1089»; 2592; 3087 (2
91982 (2); 3014 (5) 2 Juss! 18—2632»
10-2849 12—2769; 2891 (4); 2804 232854
16—1589 26-2649
Isa 64 {8—2514b
Jzr 18
62524" 21—2643 (1); 2648 (b); 2897 (5)
82.4260 291538; o66G ’ 2—89; 2424s, 2496; 2461»
Isa 65 28—3026° eres (2)
= 11113"; 1256 (e); 2666 =
1-609 (5) 3 (e) 22-2819»
4—861 (22) Jer 8
52155"; 2666° 6—2588 Jer 19
11—299 (4); 593; 1152 7—2863>; 2874» 2—89 =
16—115® 8—1082 (2); 1590; 3089 (2) 5—1113°; 2075 (4)
17—977 (2); 1354 (9) 11—1349 11—2426>
21—8051 Jer 9 Jer 20
Isa 66 33026" 22456 (5)
1—2190 (3) 17—530 7—2460
7—2207 25—657 (8) 9—2433 (3)
18-322 (8) 26—418; 657 (4) pais
22—977 (2) wee a0
24—723; 978. 13—1022
11590 (b) 23—2207
ra co nn ai
52495 (b) 172788 Jur 23
cae 20—2948 2—2921 (9)
11—308 24—2113 (1) 5—2020 (5); 2040°
18—28975 6—2465
Inn 2 due 9—881 (IV); 20475
2—997» 6—2433 (5) 13—2672°
13—659 (3) 13—1256 16—2459; 2579
18—2768 15—2897* 23—2192 (6)
22—2820° 20—1589 24—2190°
28—1256 (iti) Jer 12 25—2460 (3)
32—2201" 2—17972 29—706
33—3011 9—1444 33—528


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS 3425
Jer 24 JER 36 Lam 3—continued
1—573; 1577 °(3) 1—2463 (6) 27—3127
2—1109 (4) 2—2248 29—2093
7—2547° 23—2900°; 31222 nied
9—2470 (3) 30—3147> 2—2426»
JER 26 JER 37
52559 (3) 5—578 (11) Ezx 1
10—553; 2052° 1B = 722 08:() eis ; ‘
121590 (6) ae 3—2460 (2); 2578 (4); 2579
15—1074 21—2578 (4) Eee #
25—922 (17) 10—376 (3); 3122»
Jer 26 pute Ezk 3
se 3—1962 (1); 2522
6—2769 14—2460 (2); 2579
10—2933 Jer 41 24—1072
18—2409» 5—1510 (b) 26—2578?
JER 28 JER 43 Ezx 4
16—2461 7—912 (18) 1—2900°; 3120
8—2359 (3) 9—417>
JER 29 9—2903 12—882>
1—1577 (3) Jur 44 amas
5—1071 (b) 12050; 2239 7 Ezx 6
Jer 30 6—8113 (1) = ee
15—913 (22) 2K
2—2463 (6
as , 17—2081 (6); 2514° 12—75
: 22—2711>
13-2096 30—912 (19); 2903
JER 46 Ezx 8
deat 112026 3.11—1455 (4)
5—3051 14—2050° 12—592; 1452; 2192
9—609 (5) 20—1367” 14—2908
15—2517 Jun 47 16—2514>
25—2837> = 17—2156
29-977 (b); 1824>; 2470 (2); Ezx 9
Jer 48
2665 (2) 3—2455
31—468 (2); 925 (III); 2022; | 11—2818; 3087 (4) 92192
2517; 2666 (4) 28—2395° Bux 11
32—729 JER 49
332547 24-2207 52460 (2)
34-2665» 31—2947° Ezx 12
35—301 (b) 32—1320 (2) 8.11—2461
37—307 (0) 35--922 (17) 222470 (2)
38—2666 (6) Jer 51 Ezx 13
Jer 32 20—575 (18). 1—2047>
22456 (5) 59—573 (10) 2—1080; 2459 (1)
14—1886 (14); 2228; 2900 Jor 62 eee! eote
38—2547> 21—1111
39—468 (2) 31—1577° Ezx 14
1—2878 (2)
Jer 33 Lam 1 6—2558"
11—2649 eee 14—1679>; 1687 (3); 2563; 2665
15—2020 (5) ee (2)
16—2465 ah Fux 16
18—2041 11—1236 (3); 1906 pnerk
22—306 (6) 12—3088 (2) 10—377; 2201°
25—301 (b) 141824»; 2578 (4) 111878
Jer 36 Lam 3 31—1395
6-881; 2535 (2) 15—484; 3110 pherasl
16—2554 (1) 25—2180 B18


3426 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
Ezx 17 Ezx 29 Ezx 46

1—2471> 19—29038 18327
22243 (1) ee 19—2650 (4)
17—2787 (2) eee 21—2257°
18—728 aa ae 22-1080
22—1079 Ezx 46
283—1080 Ezx 31 1775»

Ezx 18 4-316 (7) Ezx 47

2—977>; 1081; 2470 (2); 2665 | 17—2630 (1) 1—1078 (d)

(2) ; Ezx 33 9—1115
7—2409 1—2921 (8) 12—2026
Ezx 19 11—1042; 2559» Ezx 48

= 15—2409 12—1076 (2)

Ae Dae i) 20—2665 (2)

Ez 20 22—2093; 2579 Dnu 1

1—2878 (2) 32—1072 1—785 (5)
Amba 2666 Ezx 34 3—2030
eee 627038 42702"; 3096»

- 2320405 8—881
Ez 21 26—1080 11—2030

10—2236" ae

Ezx 36 Dwi 2
21—296"2; 331 (1); 2466 (1) * NL
13—2164 (iz)

26—1080 1—2576
27—2040>; 2768 pao HCE Baez 3—875
: 25—890 (3); 2547 (1); 2548» ioctoe

Ezx 22 31—2666 (4) sae

18—514; 2044; 2545> Exx 37 41—2426°
See 1—976 (4); 2579 44—977; 1026 (1); 1805

15—1074> Dnu 3
BEzx 23 242040 21—878 (4)

Atos Ezx 38

3—517>; 2923 ue

4—2181 11—1140 3—1012 (10)
12675 Teese. 23—223
25886 (1); 2155 Le 27—1042
33—881 (IV) eae 30—2128 (5)
41—2015 (III) Ezx 39 35—2189 (5); 2479; 2483 (4)

Ezx 24 4—1080" Dnu 6
t

22461 | 21-1238 1—368 (40)
11—2627» 27—2682° 10—1552
15—1071» zx 40 11433»

17—1125" 12579 25—2032
25—1072 21078 (d) Dnu 6

Ezx 25 3—2545 10—2430°
16—2378 (III) 388—2649 28—786
Ezx 26 Ezx 42 Dnu 7
ee 16—2545 2—786 (2)
ee 3—2829»
Ezx 27 Ezx 43 7—154»

7—884 1—1078 10—301 (1)
12—2044° 2—1237 (6) 13—162>; 977; 1630; 2041 (b);
138—535 Ezx 44 2346
172237 14—1026 (1); 1805 (3)

4—1075
= 25—306
22-2520 ie
Ezx 28 9—656°; 1077 (d) Du 8
13—608 (3) 15—2875 1—786
25—2682° 20—408 (5) 5—91 (1); 92 (b)
26—3051 21—881 7—93 (7)


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Dnu 8—continued
8—456 (2)
9—154>
183—306; 982»
15—2581>
17—2829>
21—456 (3)
25—2453>


Dn 9
1—81
2—460 (1); 556; 1882 (1)
24—2709
25—2039
27—982


Dn 10

1—786

2—1099 (b)
10—2235

15—882

16—2207
20—456 (2)
21—2453>


Dnt 11


28—456 (4)
31—376; 982>
Dnu 12
1—723; 787; 976 (5); 978 (3);
2499 (12); 2502; 2563; 2665+
4-—2709> :
6—306 (7)
11—982>


Hos 1
5—512
Hos 2
1—2464
$—2112
6—1428
8—1256
12—1123
14—99>
15-37


Hos 3
1—2527?
4—1456
5—2040


Hos 4
1—1426; 1427; 3026»
12-269 (4); 331 (1); 2842
14—1391 (8); 2666>


Hos 5
10—8075


Hos 6
1-122; 2465
2—976 (4)
3—215; 505 (3)
4—545


Hos 6—continued


6—1020 (c); 1588 (2); 2559>;
26486; 2652; 2683 (1);
2845

Hos 7

1—26725

Hos 8
5—1448
12—1480; 1588 (2)

Hos 9

1.9—722

7—2579

10—1109 (4)

Hos 10

5—542; 1448


11—669>; 2102; 2409»
12—102>; 1307 (5)
14—2748

Hos 11
1—2683 (1)
2—545
4—1572
12—1090

Hos 12
1—2183
2—1554 (4)
6—2558>
11—545
12—102>

Hos 13
2—5AQb; 545?
8—417>; 584 (2)
14-976 (4)


Hos 14
2—546>; 3112
38—1428
4-376; 2547'; 3034 (1)


JorL 1
2—1688 (2)
7—11238
8—3051>
13—1099>
14-—2682 (1)


JoEL 2

2—671 (8)

13—2202; 2648; 3034 (1)
17—1698 (d); 2020
20—1690 (8)
28—2517 (3); 2548>; 2579
30—309
82—324 (4)


Jorn 3


1—1693

6—1305
10—2409>
14—1694 (f)
18—2052; 2778 (2)


3427

Am i
1—2461
2—764
5—2702
11—123»

Am 2
7—1448
8—880»; 2409
12—881

Am 3


2—613 (5); 977; 2665 (2); 3113
(1)
6—66 (1); 2695 (2)
7—124 (5); 1180
8—2460; 2719 (2)
10—545
12—121 (4)
13—123>
15—79 (7)
Am 4
4—124>
6—505 (3)
11—123>
Am 6
6—123
8—311 (10); 313 (2)
15—2666 (4)
16—530
18—977; 2465
21—124; 1891 (8); 1594 (3);
2652; 2666>; 2684 (5)
24—3075
25—298 (1)?; 1020 (c); 2897 (5)
26—372 (10)
Am 6
1—128
6—880>
7—384>
12—2409>
18—122 (3)
Am 7
1—2093
2—2019 (8)
38—38034
12—124 (5)
13—542>; 1537 (6)
14125; 2460 (4); 2877
15—125
16—123>
Am 8
5—124
10—418>


Am 9

2—2189 (5)

6—315 (6)

9—977

11-122; 2040; 2464 (3)
12—2112

13—2409

14—305)


3428


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


OB
1—2878 (4)
10—2174 (3)


Jon 1
2—2433 (5)
17—3082>
Jon 3
3—540 (4)
8—2558°
10—2558


Mic 1
1—2578 (4)
16—885

Mic 3
38—614
5—2093; 2466»
8—2579
11—488>
12—2046

Mic 4


1—2046"
2—2581 (2)
38—2409>
4—1109; 3051
5—1255 (a)
8—2197
18—514

Mic 6
1—2464 (3)
2—2040
3—1458 (4)
11—2046"

Mic 6
5—2778 (1)


6—2019 (1); 2638; 2652; 2684 |


(5)
7—2046>
8—1257; 2648; 2666 (4); 2799
(7)
9—1089>; 2476 (3)
15—2181>
16—2193 (4)
Mic 7
1—1109 (4)
4—2975
6—2556
11—2046
16—2093
18—1292 (3)


Naw 1
8—2151
15—2111

Naw 2
5—2787>
G—2151
11—292>


Naa 3
1—292>
5—2112
8—295; 2110


Has 1
1—2578 (4)
138—1782


Has 2
1—2578 (4)
4—1313; 2465; 2519»
14—1238; 2665>
18—1577


Has 3
5—494>
11—449 (10)
16—495°
17—1108>


ZerxH 1
2—1753 (3)
8—3144
12—1752°
, 15—671 (8)


Zeru 2


5—2378 (III)
11—3146 (2)
14—485


Zeru 3


13—977
| 14—3146


Hae 1
1—1078 (c)


Hae 2
5—3014 (5)
6—629; 833; 1318 (4)
7—832°


10—1318
23—2040

ZecH 1
1—8187 (3)
6—2461>

Zecu 3


1—1748 (1); 2695 (2)


9—327
10—1109 (2); 3051
Zecu 4
6—2842»
14—2443
ZECH 6
1— 3187 (3)
9—3088»


8—1078 (c); 2040; 2041.


Zecu 6
1~— 8034 (3); 31375
9—1748
11—2041
138—1748; 2443


ZecH 7
11—2780°
12—556; 2579
ZecH 8
6—2189 (4)
8—1089>
23—1258 (3)
ZEcH 9
9—2040b; 2348; 2464 (3)
10—233 (3); 416>
18—1305; 2465 (8); 3138>
17—2763; 3088
ZecH 10
4—233 (3)
11—2702
Zecu 11
12—1766 (4)
ZecuH 12
1—2495 (4)
38—1169 (2)
4—1961°(1)
Zecw 13
6—2462 (4)
7—2519
9—2545
Zeca 14
5—121 (6)
16—609 (5); 977
20—2666 (6)


Mat il
7—2416
9—2020

Mau 3
1— 833; 1631
2—2547>; 2820°
5—1022; 1395; 1964
6—3034


10—315 (4)
16—1694°
Mau 4
2—304
6—2562
Mri
‘| 16—3052


18—3016; 3055 (1)
19—1632 (3); 1998
20—1410°

21-618; 1134 (10); 1265
222479 (2); 2518>


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Mr 1—continued
23—2518
24—1741
25—519; 2003


Mr 2


1—2848
2—1633 (3)

5—2479; 2518
6—2453

7—1134 (10); 1633
11—618>

16—1741 (c); 1962 (2)
17—1291 (5); 2517
19—1381>

23—2123


Mr 3

2—2558>; 2657

3—2479

4—736 (17); 876 (2); 877 (4);
1909 (5)

6—388

7—396"; 1635; 2571 (6)

8—2558>

9—2665 (2); 2666 (1)

11—387; 394 (3); 3992; 401 (4);
618>; 2548>

12—990°; 2502

14—1635; 1710

15—1846>; 2176

16—396>; 1410; 3016

17—609 (2); 2827 (5); 3055»

35—2683


Mr 4
1—50 (3); 154 (8); 1635; 1806
(4); 2122>

8—2827 (5); 2943 (5)
41476; 1635; 1757; 2346
5—2944

7.10—1635 (3)

13—1639 (2)

17—1263; 1639 (8); 2434
18—1117
23—1640°; 1805; 2063


MrT 6
1—2734
3—426; 2559>; 2734 (2); 2842
6—1291 (5); 1440
8—2547
9—2293>
11—419»


13—2664>; 2700°

17—72 (3); 336 (2); 1096 (11);
1260°; 1844>; 1880; 2519

18—1857>; 3125>

19—1475>; 1845

20-—102 (a)

21—782; 2800

22-853; 2523; 3038

23—1133; 1928 (d); 2652 (1)


Mr 5—continued
24—2536°; 2652 (1); 2656
27—2946»

28—1340; 2509
29—2030; 2735 (3)
32—865>; 1329; 1999»
34—2172>; 2173 (4)
36-—1321 (7)
37—2009"; 3126 (2)
38—1643?; 2504»
39—600
40—877 (3)
41—2970
43—1029>; 1278; 1845 (f); 2138; |
2683?
45—2668
46—2920>
48—1261 (1)?; 1262; 1782; 2321
(3)
Mr 6


1—101>; 1782;
3111°

5—2668 (7)

7—1964 (6); 2559»

9—1261; 12625;
2190

10—628; 1630

11—777

12—2668

13—138

16—26

17—2063

19—2627

22—2667 (5); 2805

24—1972>

27—2850

32—609 (2)

33—26; 1278; 2482 (3)?; 2541>;
2801 (11)


Mr 7

1—2735 (c)
6—1928 (d); 2652 (1)
7—1815; 2431
11—609 (2);

2338; 2347
| 121029"; 1845
| 142668 (7)
22—989
23-990; 1130; 2503
24—527 (5)
26—804
29—336 (2); 618; 2021¢

Mr 8

4—619; 2652>
6—2207°
11-—610°; 1262 (5); 2667 (2)
14—2210 (7)
16—1067>
17—2742 (7)
20—1645"; 2829


2429; 2735;


1490; 19205;


1261 (1); 1264;


3429


Mr 8—continued
22-812»
23—448 (6)
27—2064 (6)
32-1166
Mr 9
2—423 (2); 1135
6—336 (c); 2236
8—1796 (2)
10—1641
11—2009»
13—1096 (11); 2652 (1)
14—26; 1104
16—1148 (1)
17—509>; 2814
20—128; 1374
23—513 (6); 2668 (7)
29—1067
32—882>
35—1646 (4)
Mr 10
5—2667 (4)
6—2320>
11—1004 (1)
12—1096 (10)
13—397
14—1125%; 1433 (5)
17—197 (4)
22-—2112>
23—983>; 16465; 1792 (1)
25—423
28—986>; 992 (6); 2497 (3); 2501>
29—1131; 2839
30—1320 (3); 2189 (5)
32—336%; 2021»
35—520°; 1933
37—1785 (1)
38—761>
39—1889 (1)
41—2058; 2113
42—1029%; 1433 (5)
Mr il
1—1646>
3—20426
4—2063; 2064
9—2434 (6)
11—1644; 1711 (2); 2667 (3)
12—3051»
16—1168>
19—881; 2009; 2668 (8); 29205;
3088; 3091 (5)
20—2504
21—2427>
222502
23—1315 (6)
25—348; 2105; 2431; 2479»
27—609; 618; 1261; 1889 (7);
2021>; 2827 (7); 3016 (10)
28—336>; 458 (2); 2022; 2347
29—1439 (c); 2922 (II); 3127


3430 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
Mr 12 Mr 15—continued Mr 19—continued
1—1845 (2) 26—2667 (4) 5—1037>
6—3111 (4) 36—2431° 6—1095
8—14 (2) 37—1144 8—764
10—3098" 40—2006 9—865"; 1999 (4)
18—2742 (7) 13—2432
22-82 Mae eee
23—114 2—3077 16—1846>
24154; 423; 1068 aoe 28—990; 1354 (8); 2503; 2546
28—1067; 1134 (9); 1263: 3016» | 52363 (4) (1); 2562
31—486; 1412 bap 29—1889 (1); 2112
399502 13—323; 1628; 2830 (2)
33—1703; 2652 (1) 14—2042° Mr 20
34—2347 16—609 (2); 741 (2); 1262; | 1—1654>; 1782
38—1644; 2565 (1) 2042°; 2827 (5) 3—534 (2)
40—1115 (2) 17—624 (2); 10675; 1119 (5) 15—2805
41—1728; 2502 18—482; 651; 6527; 1315 (7); | 18—619
42—2067; 2515 1648 (5); 2350; 2667 (4) 19—2565 (1)
43—828 19—474°; 1050; 1133 (5); 17935; | 20—1486 (11)
46—518>; 1741 (c); 2002 1794; 1795 (4); 1796 (4) 22—394 (3)
21—2565 (1) 25—335 (3); 1028
ao 22—1649; 2043 26—482 (1); 1294»
enon 24-619; 761; 8815; 1785 (1) | 28—1135 (12); 1785 (1); 2022;
11—1805°; 2021>; 2105; 2244 25—1889 (1); 2541> 2043; 2531; 2653; 2837
ee 27—609 (2); 2571 (9) 29—406>
18—2244 28—1262 (5
19—2694 e Mr 21
22—612» Mr 17 9—2042
24—2053; 2479» 2—1891> 12—383>; 1846>
30—1976 (3) 4—2898 18—1109 (4)
31—2101> 5—609 (2) 19—1655 (4)
33—1862°; 2243 (1) 9—619; 2565 (1) 22—2431
35—1479> 11—2562 23—336°
37—154> 19—1349 (2) 25—394
39—980 20—2102; 2189 (4) 29—2558>
40—616 (1); 3038 21—26; 2432 31—1340
41—989> 23—2043 33—2346
AT—1115° 24—2176; 2918> 34—2251 (4)
54—2021 27—1649>; 1846>; 2080° 42619
: 43—1262 (5)
55—519; 1632 Mr 18 nae
Mr 14 2—2668 (6)
2—20420 3—399?; 1785 Mr 22
5—1646 (1) 4—1439 (c) 4—3854
6—1169 (5) 6—397; 2052>; 2129 5—1998°
13—452> 8—990°; 1889 (1); 2668 11—2548
15—515 10—610 12—882
20—1144; 2015 11—619; 2320° 14—2010 (2)
23—2431b 12—78 16—1380; 1383°
24—2207 15—1050; 1133 17—1847; 2920 (4)
36—128 17—651; 654°; 2667 (4); 2920» | 28 —2563°; 2659
51—1660 (3) 18—474>; 653; 1796; 2350 25—2661
19—75 29—468>; 1476 (5)
Mr 16 20—336> 30—494
1—1846 (a) 21—1133; 2244 (5) 31—972 (1)
2—412>; 1628 (3); 2363; 3004 | 9, 61 32—975
11—1847 (4) 34—1133 (3) 35—1846 (c); 2133
14—2726 (8) 35—1133 (5); 2668 37—835>; 1029 (3); 2056 (3)
16—2429 39—19336
19—1028 Mr 19 40—2946»
20—3038° 1—1096 (10) 42—20420
23—2102° 3—865; 1340; 1845 442346
24—2320> 4—468 (3); 2416 (1) 45—1656 (2)


Mr 23


1—1845

2—336 (2)

3—2667 (4)

4—458 (2); 474»

7—2665

8—2350

12—1439 (c)

13—1028

15—206°; 1656; 2468

172682 (2)

222172»

23—136; 1088; 2364; 2591 (1);
2799 (7)

24—2129>; 2864

27—2222 (7)

33—2219 (1)

34—2058°

35—3129>

38—983

39—619


Mr 24

» 3-980

4—982>

5—619

6—2968>

8—981 (2)

18—877 (3)

24—942; 1887 (5); 2129>
27—986 (4)

28—886

29—833; 983; 1792 (1)
30—263 (1); 616 (1); 2829°
32—1109»

36—1792>; 2345; 3016 (10)
41—516 (6); 736 (8); 2052
48—1042

49-880; 881 (3)

Mr 25

27—383>; 2080?

31—616 (1); 20215; 2346; 2502>;

2829 (3)

41—743; 2502; 2503; 3038

46—1889; 2571 (8); 2668


Mr 26


2—619
5—2661 (2)
6—2795
8—2320
11—2421
12—2346>
17—1658 (1)
20—385 (2)
23516; 2015; 2258 (10)
24-2043
26—2022
27—766>; 1928
28—323; 489 (3); 7312; 1135 (12);
1785 (1); 2652; 2653 (2);
2654 (3)


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Mr 26—continued
29-1925 (2); 1927 (a); 2637
30—1323; 2430
36—2432 (2)

388—2497

39—2479>

47—726 (4)

53—1766>

54—1476>

57—1660 (4)

59—1670 (6)

61—1637>

62—1671 (8)

63—609 (2); 1845 (d);
2173 (4); 2346

64—263 (1); 983%;
2829>

65—2827>

66—1310

67—1169; 2660; 2742 (7)

69—1661

70—2172>

71—2123

72—1887 (4)


20420;


2251 (IT1);


Mr 27


22458

3—2558°; 2559 (2)
41661 (c); 2559 (2)
6—89

72425

9—1766 (4)
17—2885 (3)
19—1662 (2)
27—1173

35—1169 (3)
38—2072

39—529

42-2365; 2943>
46—891>; 2347 (1); 2432 (3)
48—1446>

50—489; 2445
51—2892 (1)
52—1664

54—609 (1); 2827 (4)
62—2437

63—1664; 2565 (1)
66—531 (3); 2709 (3)


Mr 28


10—2188
142458
16—2368° é
18—336°; 394%; 395; 396%; 616;
1666 (2); 2021>; 2829 (9)


19-388; 391 (4); 3925; 653;
742; 1100; 1899; 2053;
2346; 2637 (3); 2842; 2922
(II); 3011 (2); 3017; 3020°;
3021 (22)

20—266


3431
Mx 1
1—1281
4—1134 (7); 2558
7—1125»


8—387; 394 (3); 619 (4); 2548»
10—390; 1410; 3016
11—609 (2)

12—1635; 2943
15—1420 (2); 258%;
26572; 2667 (2)

16—1117; 1639 (3)

21—3111>
22—336 (2)
24—828%; 2123
27—2021
34—2668 (8)
45—1640>


25592;


MK 2
38—2236>
4—423 (2); 2222 (7)
5—1640>; 2668?
8—2346
10—336 (c); 20215; 2022
17—2783>
18—2668>
19—1641
21—26; 1148 (1)
22509; 2814; 3087 (4)
23—3073 (8)
26—8; 85
27—1004; 1029 (a); 1642 (a)
28—2631 (3); 2829; 2946>


Mk 3

1—3098>

4—1642>; 1858
5—2571 (6); 3113 (4)
6—1284 (3); 1380; 1383
13—1710

14—2058; 2199
17—1707
21—1412; 2002
22—423; 2694 (3)
28—486; 1412
29—782; 2502>
30—1133
31—518>; 2002
34—1645


Mx 4


11—2105

12—2244; 2471 (3)
17—2324 (A)
26—1806 (6); 2479»
32—2101>


Mx 5
9—1645 (2); 2004
12—2564 (4)
15—2820>
21—1284
30—1646 (3)


3432


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Mx 5—continued
38—531 (6)
41—2904


Mk 6
5—1486>
6—1646 (4)
8—377; 517; 1433 (5)
9—2431 (1)
18—2783>
18—526
21—478
22—1169>
Mx 7
1—2363; 3073 (3)
2—3038
3—412>; 2507>; 3004>
4—390; 394?
6—2851>
7—389
10—2582 (3)
18—1847 (4)
19—819
20—1647
22—2805
26—2886°
32—882>
838—2846
384—2432
Mx 8


15—1383>; 1648 (4)

22—488; 1070; 1645°
23—1648°

27—2021

29—619 (4); 2827 (5)
31—1284>; 2022; 2346; 2565 (1)
34—2657

38—990; 2043


Mx 9

1—1262 (5)
5—2898

7—609 (2)
9—2565 (1); 3055°
12—2022; 2562
17—882>

29—829>
31—619 (4)
33—1649>
35—2667 (4)
38—1707
41—1438 (5)
42—881>; 2052; 2129
43—7220: 2502
50—966>; 2664>


Mx 10
2—1999 (5)
5—1477
15—2291
17—1654>
21—2668


Mx 10—continued


25—2129>
32—2022
338—619
34—2565
35—1654>
388—394 (3)
42—335 (3)
45—1135 (12); 2022; 2530 (1);
26537; 2830 (3)
46—406°
Mx 11
1—2021>
12—1109 (5)
14—1655 (4)
15—137°
21—767>
28—336°
30—394 (3)


Mx 12
6—336°

8—2022
12—1656 (a)
13-—1380; 1383°
14—1847; 2920 (4)
18—2563 (IID)
20—2661 (2)
24—1476 (5)
25—986; 2565
28—2133
29—1933 (2)
30—2056
31—1846 (c)
36—7542; 1475
38—2665
40—2705
41—383; 605 (5)
44—1657


Mx 13

2—2851>

3—76 (1)

5—983

6—877 (3); 983»

7—2250°

8—981 (2); 1307 (5)
22—986; 1887 (5)
26—2043
28—1109%
30—982; 1262 (5); 2251 (4)
32486; 989; 1792; 2345%;

2828 (8); 3016 (10)

39—2693 (2)


Mx 14


38—2795
4—2320
7—2421
8—2022; 2346>
12—1658 (1)
16—2021>


MK 14—continued
22—2022; 2432 (2); 2668>
23—1928
24—731 (2); 2025;

2653 (2); 2655 (1)
27—2519
36—59
43—726 (4)
51—2178»
58—2565 (1)
61— 2346
62—2043; 2290 (1)
66—983
67—2123
72—2349


2652 = (1);


Mx 15


14—1661>
16—1173>
17—1404>
22—2886>
23—3087>
26—2021>
27—2972
29—78 (5)
34-2347; 2482 (3)
36—1446>
37—489
38—2892
39—609 (1)
42—2437
44—762

Mx 16
9—184; 396; 751 (c)
11—2567>
15391 (4); 394; 2053; 2637
16—395
17—2996>
18—2415
19—263 (2); 615


Lx 1
1—753>

2—1936 (2)

3—3053 (2)

5—2445 (1)
10—112; 1434
14—477 (1)
15—393>
17—155
31—694 (4); 2335 (17)
382—1198 (2)
35—1410°;

3016
389—3054 (2)
46-2497
48—3102 (1)
538—517 (2)
68—2042
77—1134 (10)
79—324
80—1709


1630; 2827 (4);


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Lx 2
1—332?; 2600 (1)
2—45; 16326; 1741
7—519; 1483; 2003
8—1470 (5); 2222 (7)
21—1846
24—1633 (2)
25—1005; 1631; 1806 (1); 2042
27—1114
35—1632 (3)
40—1634
46—726 (3); 1859
49—2346
51—2003»
52—1290°; 1291 (3)


Lx 3


12458

2—137

3—2558>

7—2571 (6)

11—877 (3)

12—2789>; 2920»

15—2042°

16—394 (3); 401 (4);
2548; 2684»

21—2479>; 3016

22—609 (2); 1410»

27—3147 (2)

38—141>; 146°; 609 (1); 2826 (2)


Lx 4

1—154>; 14115; 1635 (1)
3—29438 (5)

4—1476; 1635 (3); 2346
5—2944

6—2696 (3)

8—1635>

12—1635 (3) ©

16—823; 1639 (2)
18—2439

26—3132>
32—336 (2)
34—2123

35—1067"; 1640
38—2063

41—828


1125»;


Lx 5


1—1639 (3)
2—1117
18-423 (2); 22365
24—336
27—1641
36—26 (6)
37—500>; 2814
38—881
39—3087 (5)


LK 6


6—3098"
11—1961 (2)
20—419>; 2427 (3); 2736


LK 6—continued


22—1050

26—2429

27—525 (2); 3091 (5)
29—600; 877°
37—1132


Lx 7

5—2229; 2622
25—2525?
29—2920>
30—396>
32—1168>
34—2009; 23465;

(2); 3091 (5)
36—1135; 1644 (d)
37—2004?; 2806
44—414>- 1125; 3072>
46—1004
47—2668 (7)
50—2667; 3102


Lx 8
2—2006 (V)
10—2105; 2244
16—423 (3)
19—518>; 1741 (c)
28—828
35—2820°


2920; 3088


Lx 9

1—1067"
20—2827 (5)
21—1648 (5)
22—2565 (1)
24—1889 (1); 2820
388—2898
34—2222
35—609 (2)
45—618
49.54—1707
55—2842
58—1645>
62—1645>; 24095


Lx 10


4—2665

7—-1030; 1395
10—2133

15—13815 (6)
18—2667 (3); 2695
21—348°; 1412; 2668 (7); 3091

(5)
22—2592 (4)
27—2056 (4)
29—2667
38—2005?; 2006
42-2015
LK 11

1—2479»
2—1920°; 2431 (1)
7—423 (3)
8—1462


3433
Lx 11—continued

18—1028; 2347
15—423
20—1111>; 2668; 3016°
21—2532; 2667 (3)
26—2004
29—1309; 1728; 2347
31—2515
34—2805
388—389; 390 (2)
41—101>
43—2665
49—2058; 3092
§1—8129>

Lx 12
6—2839>
7—1320 (3); 2189 (5)
8—336>
10—486; 1412
16—1861
25—2850
31—26 (2)
32—1262; 1420 (2); 2668 (6)
35—2068 (2)
36—1815
42—1795 (5); 2854
45—881


47-—83 (1); 1309; 2504 (4)
50—394 (3); 2176 (3)
55—3086 (3)


Lx 13

1—2397; 2559
2—813

6—1109 (5)
7—1108 (1)
15—1981>
16—2694 (8)
19—2101>
23—2503>
29—1262 (5)
32—1673 (7)

Lx 14

7—1652 (c)
8—3091 (5)
11—1028>; 1440
18—885 (2)
15—2015 (4)
16—2479
26—1343»; 1933 (2)
28—234 (1)
34—2700


Lx 15
423206; 2542 (5)
11—2244 (5)
13—707 (2); 2264
16—307>
18—609 (2)
19—610
20—1291 (5); 2668 (7)


3434


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Lx 15—continued
21—1133 (4); 1309
22—2594>
24—2548
28—1133 (3)

32—812


Lx 16


1—1653; 1861
3—425 (5)

6—474

8—3089

9—992 (4)

13—1972°

14—2705

15—1292

16—3051

18—1999 (5)

19—1461 (1); 2243; 2502; 3076
20—494; 1867; 2427

23—992; 993; 1315 (5)


Lx 17


2—2129

4—1133 (3)

6—2102

8—881

10—2667

11—1653>

20—1806>; 2178

24—616; 986 (4); 2667 (3)

29—§22»

32—1931

383—2320

34—423 (3)

385—516 (6); 736 (8)

Lx 18

1—72 (3)

2—1781»

3—2887>

7—1918°

8—172>; 616

9—1309; 2668
29205

12—1104; 2364 (4)

13—1291 (5); 1785; 2467 -(1);
2654 (2)

14—1440

15—2668 (6)

16—610; 2429

18—406>

22—707 (2)

23—2559 (2)

25—2129

30—1889 (1)

338—2565 (1)

34—618; 2043


Lx 19


(7); 2715»;


5—-B129
8—1142";
2920


2504; 2801 (13);


Lx 19—continued
9—2667 (3); 2668 (6)
10—323; 2320; 2921
11—1655; 1806 (5); 2053>
12—616 (1)
13—2426
14—115>
20—2875
23—383?; 3842 _
38—2298 (5)
43—883 (5)?


Lx 20


1—1039

2—336°

19—1656 (a)
20—2458; 2920 (4)
22—1847

23—734

27—2563 (III)
29—2661 (2)
35—494; 986»; 3109
36—610; 2563
46—2665
47—2705


Lx 21
2—2067
18—1320 (3)
29—1109>
32—2251 (4)
34—880; 881

LK 22
3—2694
6—1658>
15—2347
18—754>; 3088 (2)
19—751; 1659; 1921 (1); 1925;

2022; 2346>; 2637

20—731"; 2652 (1); 2653; 2789>
24—1658>2
25—335 (3)
27—3073 (3)
28—1411>; 2943
29—2346
30—26672
31—2695
37—323; 2043
39—2432 (2)
44—2875
52—1669 (2)
53—1640; 1659 (3)
66—1671 (9)
67—2827>
69—983>; 2251 (III)


Lx 23
2—1672 (4); 1803
4—2429
6—1662
32—2972
34—1135; 1309; 2432 (3)


Lx 23—continued
43-1315; 2246 (3)
45—2892 (1)

46—489; 2497 (7)
47—2429
48—1664


-51—1806 (1)


54—2487
56—2633

Lx 24
11—2904
16—493»
21—2043 (3)
25—1285 (VIL);

2653

27—2065 (4)
28—263 (2)
39—614 (2); 2346»
44460 (2); 1476; 1844»; 2519
46—1135 (12); 2053
47—2558; 2657
49—2346; 2997
51—615; 2432 (4)


1477; 2523;


53—705
Jni
1—426>; 692 (4); 14515; 1716;
1801»; 19145; 2043; 2342


(2); 24795; 2480; 3026

38—1699 (2)

4—17025; 1891 (c)

9—302 (5); 458 (4); 618

10—3109 (4)

11—2025

12—609 (2); 624 (7); 6925; 1703;
2112; 2827; 2836; 3099

13—418; 17042; 1784

14—1634; 1649 (a); 1667 (5);
1892; 1916; 2196; 2892 (1);
3005; 3020; 3035

16—1149

17—1847 (4); 1852>; 3026

18—504; 618; 692 (4);
1632; 2342

19—389

20—66

21—2042»

25—2547>

27—1125>

29—1135 (12); 1701 (1); 1710;
1711; 1822»; 2653 (1)

32—1410>; 3016

40—619 (4)

41—2039>

45—2121; 2368; 2798

46—2123

48—1109 (2)

49—621; 741

Jn 2


1—1637; 2002
8—2627; 2854


1100;


JIN 2—continued


10—881

11—-1705 (2)

15—1846

19—615; 1660; 1916; 2343;
2565 (1); 2851>

23—2112>

24—1792 (1)

Jn 3

1—397>; 1637 (3); 2141>

3—395; 396; 609 (2); 10380
(4)?; 1703; 2547 (2); 2801
(11)

5—396 (4); 1413; 1701; 1711
(2) ‘

6—399 (4)

7—898 (2); 2550

12—887%

18—2340>; 2344

14—2562


16—147>; 323>; 1030 (2); 12615;
1262; 1638; 1698 (2); 1932;
2025; 2196; 2542 (5); 2559;
2592; 2828 (11); 3020

17—1037%; 1705 (4)

19—1699; 1701 (1)

26—1710

29—1641

30—800

33—2709»

34—618; 1701

35—1261

36—812; 1135; 1702 (1); 2502»;
2504 (3); 2571 (6)


Jn 4


3—1638

6—1699 (3)

9—158

14—510>; 2025

19—2058>
20—2851> ;
21—613 (3); 1404»; 2719 (1)
22—124>; 2574

23—1263 (6)

24—1697 (1); 1823 (3); 2946»
25—621>; 2039; 2042
34—2176 (2)

48—2789>

Jn 6

1—2507 (1)

2—423 (2); 1610 (9)

6—1713 (2)

14—1134 (10); 1641»
171261 (1); 1395; 2481
18—968; 1261; 1475»;

2829>; 3020°

19336; 1642; 2176
20—609 (2); 610 (5)
22—987 (3); 990; 2828 (11)
24—1889>; 2801 (11)


2345;


a


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


3435


Jn 6—continued

26—1030 (3); 1697 (2); 1703 (3)

27—-336>; 799

28—616; 976 (5); 1444>; 2251
(2); 2564

29—53 (2); 990

35—1892 (3)

36—609 (2)

39—1476>; 2710

40—1699; 2549 (IV); 3085»

41—1238 (2)

44—2429


Jn 6
4—1261>
6—2368>
14—2042>
26—1922 (2); 1927 (1)
27—2709>
33 .538—323
35—517; 1030 (3); 1440
37—926 (V)
39—980; 2564
40—616
44—1704
45—1704 (2); 2517 (1)
47—619>
48—2025
51—1413; 1923 (4)
53—489 (3); 1889 (3); 1925 (4)
60—1726>
62—2344
63—1704b; 2495 (2)
64—1642>
66—1630; 2922
68—624 (2)
71—1765>


Jn 7


3—519; 1666 (f); 1726
17—227 (9); 26708; 3025; 3027
191846 (d)

23—1475>

27-2042»

35-—1295

37—1413; 2025; 2142

38—1650°; 2670>

39—264>; 2549

46—336 (2)

49—1846>; 3091

53—2203 (4)


Jn 8


1—1650 (c); 2509
3—2004

11—10375; 1134 (10); 1340
12—2025; 2670°

15—990

19—2345

23—2344»

24812; 2570

29—609 (2)


JN 8—continued
32—2550 (6); 2694 (3); 30262;
3027
33—2541 (2)
34—1881»
36—2686 (2)
42—1262; 2345
44—492 (5); 610
46—2344
5383—609 (3)
58-2344 (VI); 3016 (11)


Jn 9
2—67 (5); 2484 (5)
3—813; 1705 (2)
6—2846
22—1050
25—624 (2)
39—1705 (4)
41—2670>


Jn 10
3—2764
42757
7—869
9—1651 (e)
10—323; 2541 (2); 2592 (4);
2801 (11); 2802; 2828 (11)
11—2497 (7)
12—78; 2763>
15—2837%
17—323; 609 (2); 615 (3); 1923
(4); 2176 (3); 2445; 3055»
18—336°; 2025
22—1726°
26—1704
28—2398>+ 2502b
29—926 (V)
30—1261»;
(11)
33—2827e
34—1475; 1844>; 2582 (3)
36—609 (2); 2682
37—2065


1264; 23457; 3016


JN 11
1—2000°
2—2004>
5—2006

20—2005>
25—619 (5);
(12); 2564
27—2042>
34—2006
41— 2432
44—878>: 2566
47—619 (5); 1860 (3)
52—1702; 2562


JN 12


8125; 987; 2499


1 —2004>
2—2015 (4)
3—2426>


3436


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


JN 12—continued
7—2005°
8—2421
138—2236 (3)
16—618
20—1295; 1657 (e)
23—2025
24—619 (5)
31—323>; 2670 (1)
32—1638; 2562; 2592
34—2043>; 2830 (2)
41—2742 (7)
* 42—1050
438—2429
45—2345
46—2670>
48—1705 (4)
49—2176


Jn 18


1~3072'; 3073 (2)

2—2694»

41125

5—412 (4)

7—2485 (7)

14526; 619 (5); 1929; 2670 (1)
30—1658>

341933; 2946

38—2670°


Jn 14


1—2480

2—615"

3—1706

6—323 (2); 609 (2); 987; 1261;
2025; 2550 (6); 3026

8—2368?

9—323; 609 (2); 1261>; 2345

10—1703>; 2828 (11)

16—336>; 401; 1264 (8); 1413%;
1701; 2245 (6); 2549; 3017

18—486; 983%

19—1011; 1700 (5)

20—1030 (3)

21—1261"; 1263

26—618

28—2345

30—2670 (1); 2605


Jn 15
1—1697; 17037; 2670
2—2484 (5)
3—2542 (4); 2549
5—1068 (4)
9—609 (2)
10—609 (3);
12—2946>
13—619 (5); 1923 (4)
16—2199»
22—1701 (1)
25—2582 (3)
26—618; 1413; 3017


1030; 1263; 1703


Jn 16


2—1050

5—3017

7264»;
(6)

8—708; 2560"

11—492 (5)

12—618?; 1785; 2105

13—400

14—1264°

15—618

24—1030

27—1932

28—9345

29—2105


615 (5); 1414; 2245


Jn 17
1—2482 (1)
2—323; 1890 (3)
3—1889 (2); 2849 (9); 3014 (6)
4—615>
5—609 (2); 23445
8—2345
11—1263>
12—1766®; 23205
15—1005 (4)
17—2654 (6); 2683 (3)
19—1702; 1923 (4); 2431; 2682
(2); 2685 (1); 30262
20—1030
21—1264
22—2344
23—1703 (3)?; 1704; 1932
26—609 (2)
Jn 18
J—2432
38—1669
12.24—137%
13—1670 (8)
19—137>; 1660>; 1670 (5)
22—1845
28—1215»
29—1672 (3)
31—726; 1661 (c)
36—655; 18036
37—1704; 1705 (4); 1803; 30267
38—3025 (1)
Jn 19
5—1662 (3); 2344
7—1661>; 2345
10—1672 (2)
14—1658 (1); 1928 (4); 24372
19—2123
23—878 (4)
25—106; 519%; 520;
2001 (4); 2002 (4)
28—1663 (e)
29—1446>
30—2837>
31—1865; 1928 (5)
34—489; 762; 1246; 1663 (f)


1561 (2);


Jn 19—continued


38—1664 (2)
39—2142 (8); 2426>


Jn 20

6—2566

14—493b

17—263 (2); 615; 1664 (1); 2827
(6); 2828 (11)

19—2633

21—1796 (2); 2199°

22—1412

23—2350; 2569"

24—614 (2)

25—2455>

28—74]1 (2); 2344

31—466; 867 (2); 1286; 1792;
1889 (2); 2342»; 2343>


Jn 21


3—1117
15—1823; 1932
182349»
19—2352 (2)
22—616; 16662
25—1631


Acts 1


3—2063

5—394 (3); 401 (1); 2548

6—754 (3)

7—1792>

8—966 (2); 18045; 2053

9—263>; 615

11—494; 616; 1668 (7); 2054»

12—2634

14—520; 2002 (5); 2003 (IV)

15—2112; 2668 (8); 2744

16—1479

20—482

25—2058

Acts 2

3—2684°

4—1415>; 29975

9—922 (18)

10—2622

14—2996 (4)

16—1695

17—-401; 987; 2517 (3)

20—2518

23—2191 (5)

24—2518>

27—13815 (3); 2837

28—1131

32—615 (8); 1664 (/)

338—265 (IX); 266 (5)

36—619 (6); 1803; 2043; 2653
(3)

388—395; 398 (2); 1786; 2350;
2558; 2559 (3); 2637 (3);
2657

39—388; 396 (4)


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


3437


Acts 2—continued
41—626 (4); 2567 (4); 2637
42—1283 (2); 1850; 1925 (3);

1927; 26376; 2789>
46—69 (1); 1919 (4); 3111


Acts 3

2—1176>

13—2022 (2); 2043°

18—2519; 2653 (3)

19—983; 986 (2); 1786; 2546 (1);
2558>; 2657

20—616 (1); 2547

21—694; 991; 16965; 2503;
2562

22—2022>

26—2517>


Acts 4

1—2660 (6)
2—986>

3—726 (4)

6—90 (2)

10—2064 (3); 2653 (3)
11—619 (6)
18—1448>; 3038
18—2112»

19—2433
25—1479>
27—2022; 2043>
28—1130 (4)
34—691
36—405>
37—691


Acts 5

3—2842>

4—691

6—529»2

9—75>

10—529

11—651 (2)
17—726 (4)
21—2719>

30—2653 (3)
81—2558>
36—2972
37—45 (b); 2920 (4)


Acts 6
1—70; 479; 482 (2)


3—2057°; 2851? -
5—1243 (5); 2142>; 2368°


9—94 (3)

13—1660>

15—2852 (5); 3005°
Acts 7

2—2852; 2853 (6)

4—18 (II)

6—911 (6)


22—463 (1b); 2084>; 2702;
30965


T


37—2022»

38—1847 (1)
48—310 (8)
51—2854

58—2023

55—615»

58—2271 (2); 22786


Acts 8


1—2368>
2—529»
7—2844
9—3097 (1)
12—482 (2)
17—401°
27—768?; 1032 (3)
30—2022 (2)
32—619 (6); 882
35—2043>
37—742

38—390


Acts 9


1—2278; 2362»
4—1797

5-—2279

7—882

8—2279»
11—2916 (8)
18—1070; 2701°
20-—2287; 2828 (10)
30—2275; 2280?
35—2558 (3)
37—529°

43—736 (17); 2908


Acts 10


1—2622

6—736 (17); 2908
11—401

15—520; 819; 1879>
25—61 (5)
28—1215»
34—2350
36—2043>
38—1411; 2022
43—619 (6); 1786
46—2996?


Acts 11


1—2060; 2281 (4)
3—1215"
15—2996>
16—394 (3); 2548
18—401

19-206 (1); 2368
20—486?; 1796 (3)
26—621 (1)
27—479>; 622 (3)
30—2437


Acts 7—continued


i Acts 12


4—2513
12—1986"; 2006 (VI)
17—2349>


Acts 13

1—45; 479
5—2662 (3); 1986>
6—404>

7—45; 2620 (1)
9—2278

13—1987

14— 2633
24—2558?
32—2518

385—1478>

38—619 (6)
48—2348; 2468 (3)
44—2350°

50—45

51—1125>


Acts 14
2—65
6—45; 2576
9—2278
11—1944 (2)
12—2277
18—45
14—2058
15—1260 (3); 2256
17—2574
20—831 (3)
21—2922 (II)
23—2437 (2)


Acts 16

1—482 (2); 2282 (6)

2—204; 2437 (2)

4—480 (3)

7—721»

9—2370 (3)
10—2625 (2); 2943
11—2350
13—1561>
20—1796 (3); 2469 (4)
21—2468 (2)
28—1920 (5); 2631 (4)
29—2142>
35—2278>
39—1987; 2662 (3)
41—2280 (3)

Acts 16

1—831 (3)

3—657>

4—480 (3)

6—2283>
12—2371
18—2633; 2878 (1)


14—1943>; 2977>; 3127 (2)


15—396 (4)


16—296 (1); 689 (1); 2511>


3438


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Acts 16—continued


17—2370
20—45
22—661>
35—45; 1672 (2)
Acts 17
3—619 (6)
4—2966>
5—1880>
6—45
7—2606
9—2712
16—2275 (4)
17—320
18—348>; 964; 1272?; 2855 (5)
22—2871
23—1260 (3); 3037°
25-3112
26—147>; 1093>
27—1012>; 2191>; 2574
28—59 (3); 1465; 309; 609 (1);
692>; 1262; 1451; 2190 (3);
2480; 2836
29—1252 (3); 1269
30—2043>; 2549
_ 2799 (8)
31—1783; 2340>


Acts 18

2—1626 (b)
3—2967

4—2633

3—667°

8—396 (4)

12—45; 2596; 2620
14—207 (4)
18—2285 (9); 2386
25-—394 (3)


(2); 2559»;


Acts 19

1—1710 (3)
3—389>

4—2558>

5—742

6—401>; 2996
8—2348
10—2977>
11—2844

12—876>

138—1068

19—300 (3)
21—1155; 2615 (2)
29—1173 (4)
31—45; 282
33—90 (3)
35—308>; 3001
37—2942>

39—651


Acts 20


2—1450 (4)
7—1919 (3); 2633


Acts 20—continued
15—2051>
16—3111°
17—480 (8); 653>; 958 (3); 1837
(2); 2967; 3023>
19—2943
21—1783 (3); 2558; 2657
24—1281
29-1445 (6)
30—2259 (1)
32—2682»
35—1910>; 2844>
37—2129»
Acts 21
8-—480 (4)
9—2058>
138—2657>
20—207; 1847>


«| 21—2125>


23—2278

25—2469 (4)

26—2652 (1)

28—3023 (2)

29—2253>

39—661 (2); 2916 (8)
Acts 22

3—1859"; 2916 (8)

6—1891>

10—2279>

16—393; 395; 2684» .

20—2851 (2)

21—2291 (2); 2480

23—883

24—1672 (2)

25—2704

28—661>; 2273 (2)
Acts 23

1—129 (3); 661 (3)

5—1070; 2974

6—973 (2); 2278

8—163 (4); 2363 (3); 2659; 2660

11—208

24-2458

25—967 (6)

272614

35—2428 (1)


Acts 24


1—2458
2—2477

5—622 (2); 2193
6—2253"; 3028 (2)
10—1 105»

15—99>; 976 (5)
25—881 (3); 2929
272374 (V)


Acts 25


10—1672 (2)
11—2138; 2614
14—2606


Acts 26


5—2557; 2864
9—707 (2)

JO—2271 (2); 2278>
11— 1961 (2)
13—2279

14—1248>; 1796; 2278 (7)
18—398; 2682»; 2695
20—2558 (3)
25—2820>
28—100%; 2348
380—2458

Acts 27

9—327

11—745 (5)
14—1089>; 3086 (5)
17—2886>


Acts 28

2—403
4—2277>
7—45>; 2501
8—884>
10—1350 (3)
138—2510°
15—2622 (1)
16—258>
380—1284>
31— 537 (4)


Rom 1

1—2058

3—742; 2023; 2340

4—53 (3); 623 (2); 1664();
2043; 2569 (8); 2656 (2)

5—2175>; 2657; 2669>

7—2292 (1)

10—319

13—206>; 982>

14—815

15—1040

16—1281

17—2519>

18—1042; 1135; 1260 (3); 2023;
2570 (3); 2571 (6); 2655»;
2656; 3026>

20—1015 (1); 1269; 2191»; 2430
(8); 2574; 2575

21—2429

23—1239 (3)

25—302>

28—2560>


Rom 2
38—2571 (6)
4—2559>; 2657
5—2502; 2570 (2)
7—1461
9—2837>
13-1782; 1848 (2)
15—708; 1093>
16—990; 2287 (VI)


Rom 2—continued
19—2468>


22—2942>
28—2696>
29—2429


: Rom 3

1—2668 (1)

2—1478 (8)

38—1090 (2)

8—2291 (5); 2485 (7)

9—322 (3)

10—1782>

19—708; 926; 1847 (3); 2582 (3)

20—1784 (5); 2559

21—1464 (3); 1880; 22875; 2288

22—1783 (3)

24—323; 1291 (8); 1292 (7);
2024; 2653; 2655 (2)

25—620; 1133; 1135; 2023;
2177; 2467; 2656; 2669 (6);
2892 (3)

26—692>; 1782b


Rom 4


4—1291 (3)
5—1465; 1784; 2669
6—419 (1)


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS 3439
Rom 6—continued Rom 9
32684 3—130
4—387; 390; 304; 615; 652*;| 459 (1); 610 (5); 2556°
742>; 2668; 2685 (8) 52023; 2090 (1); 23405;
5—2564 2617 (3); 3018
6—493 (3); 1975 (3); 2024; | 72519
2685 (1) 10—2535
7—1849 (9) 11925; 1130; 1549
11—398 (1); 1070 142435
12—492 (2) 18—927; 1338
13—2658 (4) 20—9267; 2426
14—2509 222571 (6)
17—205 (a) 30—2669°
191008 (7) 32-458 (4)
23-493
‘ Rom 10
Rom 7 3—1465°
1—1849; 2291 (3) 41851; 2291 (1)
4— 2669? 6—1914 (1)
7—493 (3); 2278 (7); 2289 (2) | 9-742
13—1783 13—2669°
221975 (2) 17—399
23—398 (1); 2454>; 25417 18982
24—493; 2670 (8) wut
25—2056 (2); 2292 (6) een
Rom 8 4-925; 2581
1—599; 1849; 1974 (8); 1975 | 5—1281 @)
8—2842


7—2654>

8—1462>

11—399; 27095
13—2574

14—2339>

15—1848 (6); 2571 (6)
25—1783>; 2569 (8)


Rom 6
1—2467 (2); 2669 (6)
3—2670 (8)
4—1068>
5—525 (2);
2845 (2)
5.8—1262
6—2669>
8—2655°; 2656
9—2536°; 2571 (6); 2668 (1)
10—1135 (12); 20235; 2654 (2)
11—321>; 2537 (d)
12—322»; 973 (3); 1093; 2498 (9)?
18—1310
14—3029 (3)
17— 1463»
18—991; 14645;
2800 (9)
19—2176 (3)
20—1048; 1291 (3);
2292
21—2340


1783; 1933 (1);


1465; 2657;


1848 (6);


Rom 6
1—2292 (2); 2617 (5); 2670 (8);
3011 ({1)
2—2291 (5); 2669 (4)


(1); 2715; 2800

2—615; 1416; 2495 (2); 2541;
2550

3—1119"; 1783; 1880; 20400;
2291 (5); 2548 (3)

72023; 2721

9—925 (III); 2542 (4);
26692; 26844

10—987 (3); 1461 (2); 2550

11—620; 987 (3); 2564

12—59

132669 (3); 2670 (8)

14-608; 610

15—2556°; 2683 (2); 2842?

16—2274; 2842’; 3035; 3099

17—609 (2); 2654 (7)

19—988; 2801 (11)

21—60; 495 (2); 1881>; 2548>

22—981 (2); 2542 (3)

23—973 (3); 1416

24—2668 (1)

26—1374; 14875; 26176

28—2480; 2482 (3)

29-625; 927; 1130; 1131; 1451;
2435 (4)

30—2799 (5)

31—2329; 2592>

32—2655>; 2801 (12)

33—1784 (5)

34—264; 615%; 1783>; 2024

35—2543°

37—701

38—2454>

39—1263; 2686 (2)


2544;


9—2864; 2898>
17—2185 (5); 3091»
24—1293
25—458; 983; 1090; 2105
26—2519; 2668 (1)
28—2537 (c)
29—545>
30—3033
32—2562; 2657
33—926
36—740 (4); 2480


Rom 12
1—2446 (3); 2498 (10); 2657;
2845
2—1098>;
3109
5—652 (2); 2292 (1)
6—2059; 2843>
8—479; 2060; 2844>
13—1483 (7); 2427 (4)
19—3113 (2)
20—1024>


2801 (11); 3006;


Rom 13
1—1850; 2138
3—2429
8—814; 1849 (13); 19335; 2291
(1)
10—2668 (2)


Rom 14
5—1920 (5)
8—2683 (2)


3440


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


Rom 14—continued
10—616 (2)
12—33
13—881>
15—19335
20—819
23—1309"


Rom 15


4—1481 (14)
8—1090 (2)
10—1478"
16-2657 (3); 2683
182844
19-982»; 14492
23—206 (2)
24—2260
26—2427 (4)
28—2709»


Rom 16


11433 (7); 2614 (2); 3103 (6)
2—2060; 2662
6—2001 (5)
7-132 (a); 2058
8 —432

10—538 (7)
11—2120

13—90 (1); 2625»
18—492 (1)
19—2798
20—2129; 2695
22—1070
23—1433 (6); 2854
25—2105


1 Cor 1

2—652 (4); 2593;

26832; 2685 (1)
3—2043>
§—2292 (1)
12—201
13—389
14-897 (5)
16—396 (4)
17—2339>
18—761>; 2427»
22—2789>
23-626 (4) ;
30—618; 1465; 2024


2682 (2);


1 Cor 2
1—2105; 2967>
5—1444 (5)
6—3091>
10-3020
12—2686; 2845 (1)
13—461; 2580»
14—1816; 2721; 2845»
15—1957 (1)
16—2056; 2684»


1 Cor 3
1—1119; 1975 (1); 2105; 26825;
2842»
2—2052
4—201
13—799; 2669
14—2658
15—990
17—2670 (8)
21—691
1 Cor 4
5—~2429; 2572 (11); 2669
6—1110
8—1173 (4)
9—1179»
121133 (2)
13—2180»
15—399; 2702
17—1023


1 Cor 6
1—1051
5—654 (4); 2670 (8)
7—798>; 889; 1823; 1923 (4);
2024; 2653; 2685 (8)
9—195
10—1005 (4)


1 Cor 6
1—2353 (1)
7—818; 877
9—2250 (4)
11—395; 2548; 2684>
13—2564; 2565
16—1478>
17—2550
19—2669 (8); 2892 (1)
20—2024; 2532


1 Cor 7
7—2278»
8—1088 (4)
9—2929»
10—1999 (5); 2290 (1)
11— 2536
12—2682»
14—393>
15—866 (2); 1999>
23—2024; 2532
26—981 (2)
35—2819


1 Cor 8
1—1242 (2)
3—1130
4—3014 (6)
5—2023; 2326 (18)
6—1914 (1); 2024; 3019
S—881> ;
9—2867
' LI—2329
13—716


1 Cor 9
1— 203 (4); 2279
2—2709>
5—519; 5205; 2278; 2349>
§—2102»
10—2409"
15—2339»
16—2433 (3)
24—1172 (e); 1173
26—88; 1172>
27—492 (2); 1172 ();
2560; 2669


1 Cor 10


1—395 (3); 2637
2—394 (3)
42843: 2845
5—2292 (2)
11—980

12—26692
13—1090%; 2943
14-1448
16—487; 688 (1);
17—1728 (d)
20—€90 (3); 2292 (2)
21— 2898»


2329;


1659; 19276


1 Cor 11

2—3004 (2); 3047
5—1348 (6)
7-146 (4);

1914 (1)
8.9—53 (4)
10—134 (6)
15—733
20—70 (5)
21—880>


989;


| 23—70; 618; 2789>


24—1659; 1929; 2022; 2637 (2)
25—731 (2); 2653 (2)
26—2658
27—1310; 1922 (3)
28—1929
29—1927 (c); 2292 (2)
30—-992 (6); 2670 (S)

1 Cor 12
3—130; 624 (2); 2684 (5)
4—3019 (16)
10—28443; 2996
12—2030; 2542 (3)
13—389; 401; 492 (2); 25496
18—2497
242929
27—652
28—2843


1 Cor 13
1—2996>
2—467 (c); 1242 (2)
3—744
4—1439>
11—2997 (5)
13—1420 (4)


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


3441


1 Cor 14

1—2059

2—2996 (1)
5—1415°

9—88b

11—402»

18—2997 (5)
21—2582 (3)
23—1448>
24—3112

26—2059

29—2843»

37—1483?; 1975 (1); 2580 (6)
40—655 (5); 816


1 Cor 16
1—2569 (8)
3—323>; 623; 742; 1664 (f);
2291 (4); 2568; 2569 (8)
5—928 (11)
6—2668 (8)
7—520
13—399
15—2054
17—2367>
21—811>; 973 (3); 1463; 2340;
2503
22—53 (2); 991; 1093; 2023;
2498 (9); 2562; 2684
23—987; 1315; 2249 (1); 2565
24—1805; 2023; 2053; 2504 (5)
27—2546 (1)
29—392 (2); 397 (6); 2292 (2)
31—2686
32—189 (3); 1172 (3)
35—615; 988>; 2089 (6)
37—1461 (3)
40—587>
41—307 (3)
44—492 (4); 493>; 1451; 2338
45—50; 53 (3); 1914 (1); 2495
(2); 2497»
46—1975 (1); 2121»
47—989>; 1015; 2340>
49—988
50—1119 (5); 1804;
2250 (4); 2564
52—257
54—2582 (3)


1 Cor 16


2105»;


1—2633

2—1919 (3)

8—3111
12—201
22—1051


2 Cor 1
1— 2685 (1)
4—1481; 2245 (2)
8—2969
10—2670 (8); 2694


2 Cor 1—continued


20—1090°

22—1416; 2709

23—2173 (4)
2 Cor 2

5~1051

6—2670 (8)

11—2694>

14—257; 2818; 3022>

15—2700°
2 Cor 3

33114

5—398 (1); 733 (9)

9—1465


15—1285 (VII)
17-1264 (8); 2669 (4); 26842
18—988; 1451; 2288; 2851 (4)


2 Cor 4


2—2105

4—1451?; 2023; 2694"; 3109

6—399; 1451 (2); 2279 (3)

7—719; 853 (6); 988; 2202";
2426; 2497 (3)

10—2564

16—145 (b); 1974 (2); 1975 (2)

17—988


2 Cor 5


1146 (5); 719; 988%; 989
(VII); 2497 (3); 2564 (4)

2—-670; 992 (6)

3—2563 (5)

6—1315

8—1461

10—990>; 25022; 2669

112348; 2949»

14—1933 (1); 2657?

16—-2279; 22875; 2289 (3)

17—398 (1); 742; 2548 (8);
25502; 2633; 2669 (4)

18—321>; 620 (2); 1135 (12);
2023; 2467; 2537 (2)

19—323>; 1135; 2655?

20—115; 2434 (9)

21—72 (2); 1464; 1465; 1630;
2040>; 2654 (5); 2656


2 Cor 6
2—1478?; 2502?
10—2427 (3)
11—2093
16—2892 (1)


2 Cor 7


1—323; 2685?
§—2558>
9—2559?


10—1133 (4)
14—888


2 Cor 8
2—2373 (4)
5—~2657 (3)
9—2043>; 2340 (2); 2427
16—3023>


' 18—406; 1936%; 2394; 2429


2 Cor 9
8—2339>
9—2427 (8)


2 Cor 10
38—257
4—2789
9—2267>; 2277>

2 Cor 11
38—492 (5); 3101 (7)
8—2373 (4)
14—2184
15—2694»
24—661>
25—2777 (3)
26—2401 (2)
32—218


2 Cor 12
4—2281 (4)
6—734
7—1070; 2670 (8);
2974
8—2432 (2)
9—1292 (7)
11—2350
16—1309


2694 (3);


2 Cor 13
2—2267>
4—-2842
5—2560>
11—1023 (1)
14—435>; 742;

3019; 3020


1417; 2023;


Gat 1


10-2348; 2429

11—2281 (4)

12—1999 (5)

15—1457>; 1481»

19—519

20—2173 (4)

21—2275

GaL 2

4—495 (2)

5—3026

6—1461; 2966

7—2058

10—2427 (4)

112278"; 2350

12—207 (3)

20323"; 2024; 2291 (5); 2548;
2550 (6); 2656 (2); 2669 (4);
2683 (2); 26845; 2685 (1)


3442 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS

Gau 3 Gat 6 Epp 4
1—3097° 1—1975 (1); 2670 (8); 2801 (13); | 1—956 (2); 2683
2—1850 2842 4—1914 (1)
6—1465° 6—2292 (1) 5394
7—399 7—67 (5); 2502; 2570 6—1262; 2288
8—1089 8—692>; 722>; 987 (3) 8—264; 265 (IX); 1478
11—1318 (2) 11—2974 9—2340>
13—761 (4); 2024; 2289 (3); | 14-7615; 2024 13—610°; 10238; 1149


25322; 2541; 2654;  2655?;
2656
14—2657; 2669 (3)
15—729>; 1464; 1927 (2)
16—1478"; 2363 (6);
2712;
19—616°; 1782>; 2023
21—1783 (1)
23—59 (1)
24-865; 1020 (1); 2702>
26—2836
27—389; 398 (2); 2670 (8)
28—1106°; 2817 (6)


Gat 4


2—1850; 2854

3—495 (2); 1783; 2625 (2)

4492 (4); 610 (5); 626; 1149;
1464; 1627; 2023>; 2340

5—59 (1); 2024; 2274; 2532;
2556; 2654

6—609 (2); 2550 (4); 2669 (4);
2683 (2)

9—426

10—1920 (5)

12—2974

14—2277

17—65»

19—2684>

21—21; 98; 1317 (6); 1510 (6);
2292 (6)

22—1490 (3); 2691

242977

25—1317 (6)

29—1509 (3)


Ga 6


1—58 (II); 495 (2)

3—2469 (4)

5—990°

6—467 (c);
(4); 2657

7—3026

1128676

13—627 (2)

16—401; 2669 (3); 26852

17—1119°

19—1042; 1416»

20—1377

21—881; 2250 (4); 2669

22—1918; 1933 (1); 2261>; 2291
(1); 2857 (1); 2509 (6);
2684>

24—761>; 2668 (2)


2519>;


1567; 1784; 2631


15—398 (1); 7425; 2548 (3)
16—925>
17—2455>


Epa 1
1—1837>
3—1130?
4—613 (2); 2435 (4)
5—2556>
7—2024;
2654
8—467 (1)
9—2562
10—957; 991; 1094; 2503; 2504;
2654 (2).
18—27092
14—401>; 2550 (4)
18—38025>
19—615; 1023
20—264; 615»?
22—2030
23—1140


2531; 2541; 2634;


Era 2

1—801 (7); 812; 2548 (8)
2—88>; 2497 (7)

3—399 (4); 1975 (1); 2056; 2571

(6); 2668 (2); 2798 (3)

5—398 (1)

6—264; 615; 1933; 2564
8—926
11—957>; 1838 (3)
12—2574
13—2654 (2)
14—3023°
15—953
16—761>; 2023; 2538 (3)
19—1804; 2273 (2)
20—482 (1)

Era 3

J1—956 (2)

3—101; 2105

5—467 (1)

10—2454>; 2455

11—692 (8); 243855
13—1238 (2)

14—1101

15—2548>

16—1975 (2)

18—517

19—1914 (1)

20—2189 (6)

21—1199>; 1892 (4)


15—2030; 2684>; 3026
16—492 (3)
17—2548>; 2668 (2)
18—2056; 3025
21—3025°

22—399; 1975 (3)
23-2842

24—146 (5)
26—3113 (4)
29-533
30—2709%; 2842»
321024»


Epu 5

1—609 (3); 3099

2—2024; 22912; 2685 (8); 2700;
2818

38—2662

4—1624

5—2250

6—2023>; 2571 (6)

14-1478

18—401; 881

19—2845

22—2509 (6)

23—2030

25—651 (3)

26—394 (4); 3957; 398 (2); 399;
652 (4); 2684

27-3114

32—2105; 2636°


Epu 6


4397; 2280 (3) °
5—2817 (6)
6—1070°
12492 (4);
28.420
15-—2437
16—2789
18—2328
19—2093; 2105


1173 (2); 1352;


Puin 1


7.122374

12—2484 (6)

132259; 2374; 24975;
26220

21—1461

23—992 (6); 1315

27—661 (3); 2372; 2497

28—2320

29—2657 (2)


2429;


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS 3443


PHIL 2: Cou 2 1 THeEss 4


2—2497 (7) 1—1119 (8) 1—2669
5—336>; 2338 (1p. 2374 (4); | 2—2105 3—2684 (5); 2685 (8); 2967
2658 (4); 2683 (3); 2684; | 3—1914 (1) 43049
3056 (3) 5—257 6—2571 (7)
6—264 (3); 420; 615; 1293;| 6—2685 (8) 8—2669 (3)
2023"; 2176 (2); 24575; | 8—207 (5); 2383; 2625; 3004 (3) | 13380; 987; 992
3035 9—1264 (8); 1269; 1451(4);2341 | 14-283; 2567 (5)
7—1632°; 1667; 1792? 10—1149 (3) - 15—2457
9—468 (2); 2504 (5) 11396; 677; 1633 (2); 2292 (2) | 16—981 (1); 986; 1315; 2364 (4);
12—2685 (8) 12—387; 390; 391; 2670 (8) 2565; 2777 (3)
13—398 15—2289 (1); 3022 17989; 2054
19—2260° 16—1920 (5); 2631 (4) recess
20—2374 18—1440; 2056; 2557 aoe
222985 (21) 19—2273 (2) acters
24—2366 (1) 202288 Weaeee
21—197 (2); 1242 (1) OS
anaes Cou 3 10—2683 |
1—657 (3); 696>; 2370» Bs 12—2060
5—1850>; 2276 (5); 2469 L328 eee 142685
= 3—988?; 2024; 2550
oe 5—1448; 2030; 2256; 2668 (2) | 20—2059; 2843>
9—987; 1465 62023: 2871. (6) a “" | 23-2496 (5); 2562 (2); 2683 (3);
Rea e . . ? ? * ‘
ee (2)5 2069; 2688 2) | 14 146 (5); 1451; 2548 hla
14545; 1172 (f); 2457 11—402 5 Thee 4
ae 12—1404 (4) seeadss
20—264 (3); 615; 661 (3); 98se; | 15-1173 62571 (7)
989>; 2273 (2); 2372 ae ae 720881
21493»; 973 (3); 1317 (6); | 2#—1070 10616 (1)
1451; 1796; 2338; 2564 Cou 4 ee
10-1939 (4)
Puiu 4 16—195; 958 (4); 1837 (3); 2267] , oo.) re anesr4
33103 (4); 3127 (1) aie
as 1 Tuess 1 3—154 (2); 1957: 23208
8—2429» nee es
ea anes _ 23019 (16) 6—984"; 2969 (1)
ae b 72105»
ee) owas (1) 9—986; 2604
. Ib + .
aes i aa ce eta 9—707 (2); 2054»; 2558 (3) 10—-3026>
; 10—264 (4); 2571 (6) 13—742; 3019 (16)
153004 (2)
Cot 1 1 Tuess 2 areekes
6—982> 22370 Peers
7—955 4—2434 (2) SS soi
9—2056> 6—2429 Gaetan)
11—1918> 8—2841 (1) oma
13—2250 (4); 2532° 13-2669" ae
142024 15—2567 (5) ee
15—1113'; 1450 (2); 1451 (3); | 162571 (6)
1914>; 20236; 2288; 3020° | 172967 ee,
16—2455; 2481 18—1571>; 2694 (3) :
18—426>; 2290 (1) 192249 4943 (2); 1085; 1242 (8)
19—1149; 2341 20—1238 (2) Sere oe
‘ be = . . ae :
a 761»; 991; 2538 (4); ee eee
21—1135 (12); 2023 3981 (2) 13-2799 (6)
2467 (5); 2687 (3) 9—2969 15—1090°; 1091
,
25—467 (1) 11—2567 (5) 18—480
26—2105?; 2550 (5) 122685 ee)


27—1247 (8); 1461 (2) 13—986; 2684 (7) 20—1051; 2670 (8)


3444 INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS
1 Tm 2 2 Tm 3 He 2—continued
1—1484 1—980 14—492 (5); 2532 (a); 2694 (3)
212942 2—1243 15—2654 (4); 2854
42549 (2); 2559; 2562 5—1270 16—2670 (2)
5616; 2023; 2532; 3014 (6) 6—2261 17-1091; 2439 (2); 2445; 2467;
6—2024; 2654 8—2560> 2536; 2654; 2656 (3)
92202; 2820 12—2327 (21) one
123103 (4) 15—300; 468>
13—53 (4) 16—1474 (1); 1482 (17) ts
14—492 (5); 3101 (7) Sea Eee
15—607?; 3100° <
ates oe ca (4) 9—2943
2—654>; 881 (3); 1433 (7); | 3—886 (2) uae
982002 ’ "| 41085 2—398 (3); 2929
4—1293> 8—1173; 2268> 6—3033
6—2157 11—2985 (19) 12—2496°
9—2105 13669; 1886 (14); 2247® 13—1467 (2)


15—2260>; 3026
16—264 (5); 982>; 2105; 2261>;
2341; 2430; 2636 (1)


1 Tim 4
2—2710
3-197; 520; 1242 (1)
7—1085; 1172
10—2562
14—480


1 Tm 6


10—1125°; 1433 (7); 3073
17—654"
18—1483 (18); 2102»
19—480 (6)
233088 (2)
1 Tm 6
7—2258"
9—2819>
10—1182>
12—742
1§—2423
16—692?; 1891
18—2427
20—830; 1240; 1242 (3); 2702


2 Tim i
6—480
9—1130
10—34 (2); 1461; 2341
138—742
14—830


2 Tim 2


3-257
5—1172

7—2056°

11—742; 2261»
13—1090; 1698 (4)
17—91 (5); 1173
18—1444 (3)

19—2112>; 24856; 2709»
20—2202: 2426»


14—91 (6)
16—2325°
17—982"
20—3023
21—2501; 27106


Tir 1
2—1090°
5—655; 2437 (2)
7—881 (3)
8—1433 (7)
14— 1085
15—2056 (2)
16—2560»

Tir 2
2—881; 2820>
7—1294
11—2562; 2669
13—2341

Tit 3
5—394 (4); 3953; 398 (2); 925

(111)

8—1090°
10—1051; 13772


He 1
1—335 (Il); 467 (1); 618;
1047; 2019 (3); 2024


2—692 (4)
3—264; 615>; 14515; 1914 (2);

2337>; 2654 (7)
5—3055 (1)
6—1633; 2196
7—1478
8—2341 (1)
10—3034 (2)

He 2

2—324; 1851 (2); 2023
4—2064 (4); 2844
5—980
9—264 (IV); 2341; 2657
10—333; 2024


14—264 (IV); 2043>; 2446
15—265°; 2024; 2415; 2670 (2);
2943


He 6

1— 265»; 2024; 2439 (1); 2440
(3)

2—2653 (3)
4—2445
7—72 (1); 2342 (3); 2432 (2)
8—2025; 2176 (2); 2670 (2)
9-—333; 2175
12—2052; 2625 (2); 2843>
13—1069
14—2720

He 6
1—266 (7); 398; 742
2—385 (1); 389; 2200
4—486; 2244; 2329
6—319>
8—2560°
12—1549>
13—2173 (4)
18—266 (7); 1462
19—326>; 2777 (3)
20—264; 333; 11315


He 7
3—230 (12); 2440; 29285
4—2445 (2)
5—2987>
9—2444 (4)
14—2028>
16—943 (1); 2341%; 2446
21—2558°
22—2872
24—265 (4)
25—322 (2); 2025; 2670 (2)
26—1630»


27—2445
Hr 8
1— 265»
2—2025
38—2024; 2440


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


3445


He 8—continued
6—616>; 732.(7); 25496; 2654
7—2653 (3)

8—2517

He 9
5—2467 (1)
$—2892 (1)
9—396; 3029 (1)
10—394; 2545»


11-731 (4); 980; 1405 (4);
2670 (2)
12—264; 265»; 2531»; 2654


(1.6); 2656 (3)
142176 (3); 2445; 2670 (2)
15-616; 729>; 732 (5); 2274
16—2950


22—2025

23—2538 (4); 3029

24-322 (2); 326; 396; 1110;
1488

26—2177


27—989>; 2503
28—616 (1); 1464


Hx 10

1-31 (d); 266 (7); 326; 980;
1135; 1851; 2653 (3); 3029
(1)

22654 (6)

3—1134 (8)

5—492 (2)

7—2025

12—615>

13—266 (7)

14-1928

19—290; 2656 (3); 2892 (1)

22—393; 395; 2684>

23—1090>

26—2244; 2329; 3026

29—1291; 2571 (8); 2682; 31136

32—1449

39—2320>; 2837


He 11
1—1088 (4)
3—318>; 738; 1214; 2640 (1)
4—5
5—3007
6—319>; 2430
9—1555
11—1090°; 2691°
13—975 (2)
21—1552
24—2360
27—2084 (4)
31—2525
32—2675 (2); 2677
37—170°; 1250
He 12
1—992 (3); 1172 (e)
2-333; 615>; 1111>


He 12—continued
6—1932 (2)
$—413>
9—2841 (2)
14—2685 (1)
18—485; 2997 (2)
22—980
23—654; 2563 (5); 2837
24—323; 6166; 2025
26-—833
27—1858 (7)
28—468 (2); 991 (IX)


Hx 13

2—1433 (7)
4—520
9—1360»

12—2025

15—546>

16—2845

23—29850


Jas 1

1—2022»

2—2943?

5--2480 (5)
11—3086 (5)
13—1042
14--1094
17—802 (6); 303
18—3992; 2022»;

(6); 3026
21—2837>; 2871
25—1851 (5); 1881>
Q7—2427 (4); 2557


Jas 2
1—1786; 20225; 2342 (111)
2—2594; 3111>
3—1126
5—991 (TX); 2421; 2480 (5)
8—1851>; 2133
10—1310
14—1088; 1785 (4); 2427 (4)
192291.
20-2523
22—1567
23—2517
26—2497 (3)


Jas 3


2548>; 2550


2—533
6—2122; 3083
9—146 (3)
14—3026
15—887 (4)
18—2293


; Jas 4
3—116
7—2695

11—533; 1851"


Jas 5
3-980; 26275
7—2480 (5)
8—616 (1); 2054
11—1687 (8); 2402
12—1851 (5)
14—480 (3)
15—2783>
17—933; 2256


1 Peri

2—323>; 620; 1130 (4); 2023;
2683; 2847; 3019

3—925 (IIT); 1460 (III)
5—980; 1840
6—2943
7—2351 (A)
8—2329
9—395
11-2342 (III); 2457; 2480 (5)
12-1482; 2350 (5)


17—3113P

I8—1823; 2024; 2434>; 25316;
2541; 2653 (3)

19—2654

20—1130 (4)

22-—3026

23—397; 399; 2549; 2550;
2712>

1 Per 2
2—2052; 2549
4—1795P


52023; 2445; 2446 (3); 2845
8—1130°

9—652 (4); 1404 (4); 2354 (5)
11—1037; 2350


142429


19—2353 (2)
20— 2658 (4)
21—323; 625; 1852 (6); 2023
22—1630%; 2656 (4)
24—1464
1 Per 3


4—2202

6—269 1>

12—2325%; 2480 (5)

152682"

16—2670 (3)

17—2657 (2)

18—323>; 2023; 2177; . 2342;
2354 (6); 2456; 2653 (3);
2656 (4); 2658 (4)

19200; 992 (5);
2563 (5)

21-393; 394;
2548?

22—615?


2503 (3);


395; 398 (2);


1 Per 4
3—207 (4); 1448
6—992 (5)?; 2457


3446


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


1 Per 4—continued
9—1433 (7)
10—2843
11—2199 (3)
12—2623
13—2351 (4); 2581
19—1090>


1 Per 6
1—1718>; 2437 (2)
4—1173
5—2353>
9—525 (2)
183—2350 (5)


2 Peri


1—2342

2—2357 (1)

4—692 (3)

6—881 (3)

10—1130

11—991 (IX); 2250. (4)
13—2356 (6)
16—1085; 2357; 3005.
19—308; 1474 (2); 2582 (3)
20—2579; 2580 (6)
21—1479


2 Per 2

1—1377

2—3026

4—2457; 2694 (4)
5—2433 (4)
10—1003 (7)
12-1243

15—379 (4)
16—1961>
18—99>; 101
20—2357 (1)


2 Per 3
1—2350 (5)
2—185
3—~1668 (7)
5—2357%
6—1354 (9)
10—2624 (1)
12—986; 2054
18—1353 (5)
14—2846>
16—460 (2); 3114
18—2357 (1)


1 Jn 1

11667 (5); 1914
2—1702"; 1705 (2)
3—1703%
5—1243 (5); 1697 (3); 1891 (8)
6—2684 (7)
7-323; 1704;

2654 (6)


1929; 2025;


1 Jn 1—continued

8—1698; 1701 (1); 1713 (3);

2686 (2); 2712>
9—1090>
20—2056 (3)

1 Jn 2

1—2245°; 2246 (7); 2654 (2)
2323; 324; 1488; 1702; 2025;

2467; 2656 (4); 2657
4—1713 (1); 3025»
5—1263>
9—1698
18—2342>; 2695
15—1933 (2)
17—1706; 1717 (4)
18—983 (3); 1705 (4); 1840
19—1704>
20—401; 1700; 1701; 1704»
21—1712»
22—155 (3); 1699 (4) .
27—1703 (6); 30262
28—616


1 Jn 3


1—1263

2—609 (3); 1451; 1703; 1706
4—1701 (1); 1852 (6); 2798 (1)
5—323>; 1630; 2025; 2344
6—1698 (4)

7—1243>; 1782
8—1713 (3)

9—1708 (4); 2684;
27122; 2806 (2)
10—609 (3); 610; 19335; 2549

16—1698; 1702>
17—2421; 2427 (4)


1 Jn 4

1—2694; 2843>

2—624 (2); 1700; 2342>; 2343
(2)

3—155 (3)

6—1243 (4); 1714

7—1713; 1933 (1)

8—51; 1698 (2); 1932

9—1263; 1698°; 1700 (5); 1705
(2); 2196; 3020

10—3235; 1702; 2025;
2656 (4)

13—1701

18—-2686

19—1263>


2686;


2467;


1 Jn 5
1—398; 1704; 2806 (2)
3—609 (2); 1933 (2)
4—2695
5—1700
6—489; 1663 (f); 1699 (4)
10—3099>
13—1714 (III); 2549»
16—486


1 In 5—continued


17—1701 (1)
20-—1700°; 2342


2 Jn
6—1933 (2)
7—155 (3); 23842»
10—1051
12—736 (13)


JUDE
1—519
4—1291 (3); 2023; 2342 (IID)
5—2480 (5)
6—2694 (4)
7—990°; 2571 (7)
12—69; 670 (2)
14—457 (1); 616 (1)
19—2721
20—3019>
23 —1868; 2846°


Rev 1
1—2582 (2)
3—2582 (2); 2586 (1)
4—2587; 3019>; 3034
5—323>; 1091; 2177; 2653 (6);
2654; 2684>
6—482 (b)
7—616
10—1919 (2); 2633
12—312
183—620>
18—2025
20—308; 553; 2105; 2636 (1)


Rev 2
1—967>
2—983; 2058>
5—553; 2586 (2)
6—1243>
7—2246 (4); 3009°
8—2587
9—2427; 2696°
10—2325 (18); 2326 (15)
13—2892 (1)
15—983>; 2143
18—2828 (10)
20—1676 (b); 2977
24—1243 (b)
27—2426>


Rev 3


4—2112

7—1795 (b); 2366; 3026
8—2325 (13)

9—2696>

14—426>; 677 (b); 2025
17—2427>

20—869

21—2025


INDEX OF SCRIPTURE TEXTS


3447


Rev 4


6—604 (7)
7—1074


Rev 6


1—376 (2); 2709 (3); 3122>
6—620°; 2053

9323; 2025; 2531>; 2845
12—2587

17—2171»


Rev 6


9—1315?, 2563
10—2571 (7); 3026


11—2564 (4)
13—308 (8)
16—2025>; 2571 (6)

Rev 7
2—2709%
3—172 (b); 1128
4—2455>
9—1173; 1315; 2236 (3); 2542

(3); 2593

10—2025
14— 2654 (6); 2684»
17—510°

Rev 8
10—308>
11—3110

Rev 9
1—201>
4—2455>; 2709+
11—3; 201?
17—522

Rev 10


4— 2709"


Rev 11
1—982>; 2345
8—2821>; 2842; 2846
15—991 (IX); 1805; 2250 (4)
18—2571 (6)
Rev 12
1—2081>
3—155 (4)
§6—2003 (b)
7—2583 (1); 2696 (4)
9—492 (5); 2694>; 2695
10—2250 (4)
12—976 (5)
13—207
Rev 13
1—145 (4)
3—984 (b)?; 2586
8—2025>; 2519; 25435
14—2586 (3)
16—3124 (3)
18—985; 2138; 2584>
Rev 14
1—3124 (3)
3—2845
4—1003 (7)
10—2571 (6)
11—990°
Rev 15
2—1315; 2091
3—2430; 2845; 3026
Rev 16
19—2571 (6)
Rev 17
5—358; 2105; 3114; 3124 3)
7—2636 (1)
8—984 (b)?; 23205


Rev 17—continued
9—985
11—2586>
12—1799 (b)
14—613 (2); 2025
18—2553>


Rev 18
21—2052>


Rev 19
9—3026
10—618; 2044
11—1091
13—1914>; 1916
15—2571 (6)
16—2025
20—2694>


Rev 20
1—987
38—2709 (3)
4—2563
5—2565?
8—1965>
10—990>; 2695
12—2502
13—1315 (4)

Rev 21
1—2546 (1)
2—1622
8—1887 (2)

Rev 22
2—2026; 3009°; 3010
7—2586 (1)
8—61; 2583 (2)
11—2502
13—2587
16—308
18—2582 (2)


FOAN
aN
SIAN
238
Psy
yyAN
mPaN


TPPAN
DUMAy
MIDAN
2D7aN
Dray
SNA
TAN
PAN
DP AN
Aas
Ory
WPAN
P2278
TAR


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


x

2; 6; 474; 11008;
22649; 25548

see 21S

34

8342; 1086+

2>; 2015; 834°

201>

38085*

745; 2847>


8 2030
8 Gb


9°; 55°
7b
Qa; 541


\


9"; 13884
ge


| 108


$108


10°
ie


890; 21304; 24208.»

566°

see SWAN

13>

13

10°

ite

11

129; 434>

12»

see TON

7b

995 15748

7b

1254; 12652; 12675;
2189


“aN
oyay
IWAN

ous ay
“AAN
“HAN
War
Dabwhay
Dibwas.
“ISS


ona }p PRS
mbna bas
ava Sax
mvs Sas
igs


ik


pas!


MEDS
TI27) TaN
Pals
APAN
DDN
PAPAIN


1423»
12%; 184; 15328
12
138
13


| 13%; 16238


| ase; 254
7b

1105

5b; 24078
30475


56; 20138; 2407"

G6

6"

62

494°; 5918; 7228,
1893>; 1984>;
2007°; 2758>;
28568; 29998;
30792; 3155°


| 478; 2050; 2862
30826


32
5912; 890°


| 1a; 188


745°; 2847>
Ase; 24054
890°
1446»
2427
12678
12678; 24008


$ 2400°


188

22>; 1739»
188

3448


see “WAN
see DUSWAN
71>


: 69"
¢ 698; 19579
$ 5288; 887>; 31274


11232; 21706; 2218


78°
§ 2076>


905»


$ 6584; 2419; 24208;


25277; 25448
5418; 14198; 25278
1250"; 12512
382"


$595"; 2408"


20672; 30462
54>

1447>

1447

see DoS


1264; 12662; 19198;
2007; 2389;
2908"


$ 60°


1050*; 1167; 1278);
2154°%; 2775;
31134


$48


2524»; 28618

48>; 49>; 548; 140%;
144>; 1453; 287°;
488? ; 819>; 20153;
23374; 24048;
2835>; 28618;
3109

675; 1254>; 2524>


ae | 49h; 800


2856>;
2861» >


56»


28578;


t 49>; 54%; 144; 6672;


7249 ; 887°; 13079;
1442>; 18265;
2000*


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3449
"TOTS see “HAIN Saat 21775 aN 1445
“ATS 54>; 21338 DDN 2595"; 2867; 30328; “ATR 877%
DEIN 649 te TIDTN 20308
nfaTe RS Pare STN 3439; 1152; 12488
eae | 25248 TIN 733; 15488; 1941>; oe i :
278 19420 DIN 1081>
REVOTS 56° “TIN 3042» "TN 658; 886
TTS 2821° DTA 2045*; 3042» TINY FIR 30438
TTR: see PITS “IN 1041 “AA may 345
TRE 54° aN see 38 "278 2206"
PIS ee SyN 11248 TPITN 3428
1264>; 12668;, TIA ON 1043 TIN 2868
17808; 1919 DAN 1265¢ PINTN 246>
PES Ty 57 “DAN 3032 TIN 4179; 14185; 1826%;
he b
Bae lee DN) 1438b; 2421s; gee
WRITN Doe | 2935; 30338 “TTITS 1085*

PIE MISN 58" mow 1124» my so heen
Hee ae 1351; 1436;
DPN 58" “DN 21880 1799; 2554» |

EPSIN 588 PN 12798; 2193"; 21948; MN 7398; 868b; 15483.b;

IN 1418b; 2315% 2453 26975; 3084>
IN 54>; 541b; 29756 TUS 340°; 473"; 14698; ANTS | con
ne 2156>; 21939; 78>; 80"
SAN 55° 3045» Bhat)
“TR 2975 SN 2196" TETN 83>
JDTIN 788"; 20778 Du 21948 STN 11138
JIOTIN 61> "IN 2194 TIN 11175; 20139; 2089;
TS 900° THIN 3038 as
FITIN 1235; 19848; 2814" mapa RUG
a Tiny 87
ITS | 432»; 11462; 1931; | “PER }2197 ee
amy} 1984 | apix abe
amy 19348 iN EAN 87
say 19346 "gg | 3082" “InN 3768; 1375>
: iF : ; "
many 1931» DIN see ik nin 2554>; 28133 |
i ie TON 13352; 2422>
THR 2181 XIN 2540; 587; 28638; ne
TIT 788 3007; 3008# THe 81
NMR 812 “AN 301; 517%; 829; "TAN 87>
“IAN 916" 952>; 11205; Sane
Ria te 1890°; 1892 cae ee
ome 2047 MAN 18%; 589%; 3039" ee
Sm 701%; 14175; 2181; eenecran es OI 87
2887>; 28885; *. OIMN 872
2947» SSN 3039> oon .
mba 218i SEN 3040" Hees
Ls} ae fi
MaroTy 2181" TES so eee aye
g ta) b

map eo 2181" TATA BRT 83
DST HIN 11135; 3040° APTS see TN
Bien B 278 see MTN meet a

ay a; TITPTN 83

SNTN 30328 2994": 3070°; yea ae 88

b

... (509°; 6908; 8625; 3104 VTS 85

a) 9442; 1094; TR 1395 TEP TS 83?
sy] 2177>; 24663;


98148; 30978


"BTN 1070>


DIOMN 86


3450 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


TASS 84
POTN 85°
FINN 85°
zal
84>
TTR
YIN 84
AIPMN 85°
DPN 85>; 611s
TOD NN 86"
ATP TN 83e
DPMS 840
DITN 86
“ATTN 86"
ITTY 86
“DD NN 86
“WN 86
SSMS 86e
22MM 87
“OmN 87
TMARMN 2856
NOATN 36>
"2008 80°
818"; 820°; 1375;
2557
AON 3769; 11215


“TIN 83>; 862; 2865


"J
J
pe he |
te 'G I
©
& 9


ey

myo | 80°; 260*; 3126"

DIway

“INDO 131b

WOON 547>; 5488; 14236;
2093 :

TON 3175; 20748

ON 1111

AGN 317>

MON 1865*


"SY 1511%>; 1548";
308426; 30998


26979


1% 3


a8
ans
TDN 952>
TR 540°


TEN 882; 4776; 1091»;
1548; 18149


Joss


38 1679»
DATS 1675
PR
TDN
QPS
Sag Ny 1446»
MIN 18242
mDN
TOPS
SYN 2268; 8172.b; 1265b;
14355; 21713;

25276
bon | 817%; 2527>- 25978.


1438>


|sec TN


rs 30664; 3155»;
3156


TAN 817
jos
Foy
a)
PDAN 88
mdsx
nas
DDN
Doe
mp2
DON 933
yaxp ds 22476
Tow see FON
MS"N 8179; 13938; 2488";
2830"
DS see DVN
nox 2949»
TON
* 11102; 14238; 2949%
TAN
DAN 9408
PR 14678; 1821+
STDIN 15742
mE SN
* + 30802
MPS
WR 145°; 593°; S19;
10952; 11063;
12799; 1432>;
14424; 1508>;
1541>; 1971%:
23375; 24118;
2555%; 2835»:
3072*; 31002
MVA-W NW 1508
NVR 1508; 15112
SM 209»; 10708
DUTW NW 15119


al


939°; 29492


923+ >


2935»


"WN see THY
"IN 1543"
SPER 154325

VAN 15432

EPS | 1012; 13375

AS
DIN 5415; 10126

JN 588; 1438>; 28728

ATR 37>

“TPN 763°

WN 36

SON 7045; 11452

Pgs 2013°


Sox
fe | 1543 3032¢
>P8
mMDDN 11476
“PN 1442>
TWIN 372
Sm 11292; 1250; 12518;
12548; 1264>;
1265; 12678;
1278; 12948;
1493; 1530>;
15328; 15498;
1553; 1555»;
18799; 21718;
2188; 21898;
2389; 29493;
30349
Sm 1126; 24118
nbe OR


oe loz 1264>; 12678


Sama Sk 9236
Baye see Ws
DYAN 96>; 2097>

“TON 923
APPR 923"
MON 56°; 7675;
2172?
TION 916; 2171; 24078;
- 29498
TDN 1265
TEN 21719; 2949
TIN 18798; 24750
ON see moN
DwTSN 133; 6008; 1129;
1202; 12503;
12515; 12548;
1260°; 1264;
1265%>; 1268;
1270%; 1294».
14388; 14540;
15338; 1779>;
2835>; 29618


1265>;


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3451


mig
OR
DAN
ss


abehsy
mapa FDS
aby


1254#; 1264>; 1265;
1779; 2012»

5415; 939%

99>; 9395; 2033>;
20828; 21715;
2172; = 2407%>;
29025; 29493;
3128+

99>; 21718; 24075

ggb

8822; 1289%; 1308);
2779°

112

940


1110>


RTE 928"
SEN 928
te


DEEN 9208
Timon b
mn


TPEN 929»
TIPE 928»

MPD 25279; 2756; 29038
eel
7e +659; 930°

aa
ea
NUT oN
PPATS |on0%
“PPM
NATIER 929"
Ta ay 930"
DYSN 1258"; 14548
TPA 923»
POTN 929"
ATI" 920°
~ppr7oN 929»
DN 929
TH"SN 9342
Spree 923°
AMD EN 9348
AE" 9388; 1743
PP y |
TPES
NPP 923
D pw go>; 9299; 1579"
ABN 9348; 937°
MUN 937
yryrer 9388; 1743>
a7 9298


}oase


WBN 937
DWN 934>; 1743
LEW 937
MON see MANN
DON 474»; gga
DON see De’
DEN see MAN
DON 8825; 1461>
BraASN 96>; 2097


TIAN 3084"
TPR see PIN
"Sk see "TDN

DPIDN 9398

Tees 939"

MODS 938
“ION 924»

TmyPPN g24e

“TIVON 939>

“YPN g24>

ROPER

mapas

THIS 9239; 939>
DEN 583; 7349; 8828;
912°; 9275; 1056";
17999; 27932;
2975°

see BTN

939%

see JDP ON

9388

9388


939>


944>


ty joao


DMN 939
MMW SN 2488; 2830"


DS 663; 778%; 20923;
2554>


TAR 1335; 1967"
mMAR see TAN


MVAN 1174; 765°; 2045";
3079 ‘


FAN 118; 2153; 3091


VAR 115; 1087>


Ayvay 1087; 1088° ; 30258;
TAN 3047
VWAR 120%; 125°
“AN 116°
FPN see PIN
JOR 290%; 766%; 10882;
2170°; 25569;
2871»
JAN 115; 3047%
yAR 115>; 25568
NR 2398>
32
see TION


DAN 1823+; 2872°
VOR 724°

"YON 1288
a


ATER
“WAN 2108; 340>; 588;
5918; 1484;
21128; 24598;
2972»
“As 24592
WAN 1822>
“YAN 1458°
TyAR
myo
TYAN 14662
sox 1192
mr yas
vet 113e
WATER
SEWN 126


TAN 1088; 24149; 30258;
3047


“EVAN 1178
WN see rhs


2839>


TIN 495%; 1354; 2512
TON see NIN
SR see IN
WIN 145%; 9538; 11064;
20838; 23374;
24119; 3109


MPR 13079
MTN 128
% 2731

"DN 27749; 2775


3452


INDEX


OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


PAD™ON
“HES
aR


“DN
“DN
mDN
TDN
“EN
TDN
DIER
PrPS


abst
dex
Lopy


S136


27318
695>

3113?
13849
1306>


1106; 11818;
190625; 19075
1459; 2783>


| 2041>


261»
2066; 2423"
3828; 2456


} 110s


405°; 28632

266°; 2089>

1177; 11999; 17378;
21168; 2534>;
2538>

262>

see SON

288; 316°; 2863°

2056>

286>

267; 474>; 1340>;
2200>


3058?


9715

1006

135>; 1085»; 11265;
19188; 2155;
21565; 31134;
3126"

see “TDN

962»


see TID N
| srs 9629; 14556


161

207>

523>; 5949: 2595;
28678; 3074

gee "DN

2177


9625


SOTEN
"NOTES
a
nN Ps
“NES
DrES
Pasy
jasy
Fars
DUN
PEN
oRN


see JD"N

136°; 9432; 1438>
956"

2156

2737>; 27388; 3051
2867


jer


D8 161°


22088
963%>; 9648
1612


}r61


joes


963>
2587


1070


1111*>; 3079
721»; 21542
2505; 606°
28645

13388

3440


8 3.42; 997%


2206>

512b; 5135; 5898

30082 >

2859; 2860

592; 12495; 3155»;
3156"

211>

238; 18958

115

211

829°; 3063>

see DREW ma


1907; 19084»;
2405


315b; 14378
2618
2268


\aos 5 1142


11418
940°; 1545>; 30778


4178; 3078>

1344*

2.509%

377°; 6738

675%; 7099;
2509

238?

238°

261

2508


8848;


yates
7S
ras
TET
mS
TPIS
TAN 266>
MIN 221>; 30768
TIS 576>; 19839; 22638;


24119; 25309;
3075».


MAIN 576; 3075>
MIAN 848>
4


2618


15; 2429; 605"; 18868


225>


as:
5 1895% >; 3083"
canis


Sys
DEIN
os
"TY
NNT
m3
mS
ms
FS
OTN
TIN


2418; 1596>; 1895¢


2415
2418

see “IN
3083"
see TWIN
241
241%


818°; 2263>; 24599;
3007°

1126°; 1918; 2263>

969"; 28188

18148

s see MDIAN

233°

8 238>

§ 2228; 2206; 2885>

14384; 2208


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3453


“BW 222"; 224"
"HOW 25h
TPS 2240
TIN 224>; 266; 22018
PY see ams;
MBM 1338>; 1339"
me


TUS 3154; 316°; 586;
7244; 8874; 1281";
1307*; 17895;
1826>; 27808;
3075>; 31062;
3108»

RIAN 261>

“MN 3041»

nin}

a, S224; 2478

OTs’


WIN 454>; 997»
WR 1112; 2864>
SAWN 267
JUN 997°
YawN 267
SVBBN 1508
“YX 2867
MIWN 2122; 2762); 2867°
SAIN 2676
mostwye
riyOBn
BY 1112
MBX 2639%>; 2643
TWN 1458; 526%; 10409;
1095°; 1106;


1339>; 1426s;
2555"; 3100


“WS ee ; 290%; 12738;
1569>


|20805 2400%>


| 260%; 2728
“37dN


“TITS 269>; 13118

NAWN 269°

TUN see TIEN

MB MEN 1117; 14268; 25278
ees hers; 997*; 30508
DUN


rac)


TEDW 2696
ADDN 1228>
SWS 1307; 2008
DUN
P1102"; 1309; 2179»
DUS
DUN 745; 1102"; 20208;
2639"; 3010"
MIWX 2179»


mywy
ses | 20838; 2145"; 29828;
TPS | 30748
nvjavy


IIBN 24128
TBR 270
JPWN 9978
862; 3097°
882b; 2515
TIEN 270°
ABW 1118>
PUN 269


|a6ses ; 12489; 1308> |


409"; 1438; 1439
NX see TWN

SWE 263°

MENTWN 2678

108; 268; 1307>;


1386"; 1390;

MEN] 14525; 1454>;

swe] 1533>; 22124;

" "}) 22279; 22348;
2527»


TIN 269%
SRS 2878
SRDS
ANDY
“ERED 9978
SUT 27128
FNP 997>
TaMwy
yrange 9974
manus

me 1438>; 2725>; 2911*

NON see TN

SyanN 1012°


NS
laer
x

8


Bs)
oy [54

DON 1012»
Sans
DAYOAN $1375
Dany

“IS 1036

FINN 1036; 13952
DUIMN 318°


a
“NB 4249; 6589; 2401;
3081*
ANE 658"
RIND 4242
DIN AND 4246
TNR 424°,
MINND 4246
“TNT 4240


"NS TTD IND 4248; 1316; 1821"


aw ANA 424>


“392 MONS


"MANA 424>
WND 6b: 672>
TVDNA 672; 12939; 21559
DWN 12938; 3050"
M22 2105; 1070+
"22 4216
SEB 349%; 3508; 1590";
2765>; 2771%;
2995%b
2179»


670°; 935%; 1839%;
2524»


“2B 160%; 402%; 513°;
5185; 18948;
28508

NJB 1105¢

TTB 4238

TB 4238

DTT 99>; 2985»; 2999s

IB 316; 2221>; 2744»

MEAD 4179; 28598

PTR 4238

PIB 514


3454


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


Wi
ama
om3
>a3
mgtD
niana
ya
pa
ngs
xin


x13
Ta
"12
"2
baa
Da
maa
“73
ya


yaa
mpi
“3


wa


Ta

m3
mv
pia
“na
a
omna


472>; 474»

2309

676%; 19842; 24298
3049"

418>; 583>

4278

4940

1145; 18676; 29508
1145*; 1867


3289; 728; 1107>;
1221*; 12485;
3075»;


see Qa, 233

535

535»

416»

528°; 541»

see 92

5282

see "32

709%; 11118; 18943;
2790; 27918

§12>

171»

658°;. 2401>; 2506;
2820; 3081"

700%; 8208; 27489;
28352

503>; 2439

578°; 27038

4852

459>


jar


see DNA

1050°; 2469»

27>; 2109; 6125;
925%»; 1050;
3074*; 3127


see WMD
378; 4407


2908; 578; 700°;
Q711> °
578>
2559
432>: 441»;
28378
11238; 2170


454>


4923;


pr


pa
mp3
m2
m2
ma


DE Ma
OND
2X3 ma
"7a m3
me 2
"ma
Sue ma
mn?33ma
yay ma
ENT MZ
23230 Ma


whe
myowa


cen ma
“ATR MB
PP Teo ma


_ a
rhapyan


nisaya na
PeIT "3
maya Ma
py m3
V3 M3
mown ma
“awa
nba ma
yn ms
“> MR
bm? ma
mypP2 m3
myee 3
my m3
nyz m3
“pz ma
obs ma
“Aye m3
yp ma


766%; 8518; 939%;
11055; 14842;
1964); 1985;
21995; 24865;
28135; 29218;
3089

518b; 2018

21912; 30898

905>

11379; 22082


4165; 4428; 10945;
1185; 1417>;
14184; 1434>;
2554"; 2930"

443°


4429; 443b; 444b
4438
443
4432
445>
445p
443
443b
445»
445»


|44om


445»
450>
450°; 1098"
450>


444
443
4433;
4468
452
452b
446"
4468
443
4492
449"
4505;
4420
442°
2752
450»
4518
450


446


1866>


+


aaa
arya
RB] 13
WO m2
7p ra
wey m3
manna
R23

“D2


“22


my33
m153
mP23
nao2
mPa
723
773
mPa


“ENDY22
soa

Da
SyP03


D349;


454°
451>
451*


452


452>

452>

375>; 2093

1113°; 2405»; 2452»;
2453°

1103%;
13438;
2905>


478%; 2452>


11145»;
26448;


1109; 1122°
421

491»

2452

421; 547>; 5488
547°; 5488
see mviza
491»

440°; 472
24118

4278

379»

473»

473»

473»

379°; 7040
4748


a 2949>


4748
2919>


381; 433»
4114

875%; 2469>
4318; 3037%


357>; 486°;
7005; 10865;
2469>; 28194;
2929; 2995+»
2877


1208
4318
4314
3782; 473


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


Ped 379%
Saas te peio
wee? len; 4338
“EDN
O23 474°


VAR 139085; 15174;


15392;
mn
oma
maa 3049°
bya maa 381°
j2 715; 383%; 401°;
433>; 474»; 5285;
606; 678"; 2554>;
2759; 2826
Ta 434s
BINS 145°
DIPAN TD 434
“ANTTD 439«
435°
4340


145>; 5272 b: 19683;
2894>
435»


474»
4398
4380
4388
4388
4388
382; 383"


773
ape
mmr 73


"32
"372
pip 2p 434°
TA 527
73)
\a3


| soe»; 2835"


Wi?
TP? AD 435°:
Dua 593*
Pas 438°
"IB 438¢
NyDa
my33
“APP
mTOR
"02
toh)
mye
2
mwa


harae


4340
4416

440°

2838"; 3050"
494>

23588

458; 19974


ova
ra bya
73 593
mya
yon ya
mibya
anat Spa
17 972


Desa
yin bya
“AyD 29a

Dx }p ova


3455
439° SYA 733>; 1153
4919; 15478 DYA 1153; 1935
418 pa 2875
458>; 19978 Mpya 512
171>; 288%; 3458; "ZB 1106>
346°; 347>; 348b; Sed ee ear et,
560%; 7419; 883°; See aoe 1204
1254>; 14275; TZ 2219
14284; 15338; TID «5122: 22ZI19e
1535; 15958»; boop
1689*; 19978; PRPS 378; 509; 7648;
2007%; 23378; 2425>; 28148
2389; 2555¢ mpapa 3788
593° “P2P2 378
346"; 347% “PD 5288
2
346°; 3474 MPpa 528
347%; 2067" DPD 316>; 517; 668;
346° 3045¢
103°; 417# Dpa 427°; 8735; 2032;
346; 3488; 1120 a
NIP2 316°
3478 se
ea7® mene iiae pa06e
346°; 347° 2407; 3045"
347% PR? 41>
423° “EB 1472>; 1799; 2710¢
417° “PR 583°; 584
347% “pS 798>; 1375; 2082;
3476 2083*
a4e Mypa 2704
347° wpa 1472
3480 "2B 667%; 668>; 2041°
3476 2 433
: "2
347 * | s082»
347" 2
2 ND 145°; 612; 613°;
os 738% >: 10462:
3488 12028; 19688
348" ae
te” $2036
526 1783
11254 "NID see "WIS 12
348 TINTS 439°
3486 “a3 11438
3488 “IMB 13195; 24058
2000 TIS 439°
20008 TIID 612; 613
a 4596 JD 407*; 487°
3050" WAND 5126; 1111°
1122; 21968 mina 111°
459° anna 440»
aie
. jam rama 478


m3
m3
ma
m™:2
ny
ma


mma
773


73
ba
28273
m3


na


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


341>; 13488; 14928;
21815; 3027>

410°

1086; 11488

see T™2

439>

4408

401°


Fh ase; 21548


3098; 404s

439»

244>; 4408; 4605;
6999; 7272; 728%>;
729; 7309; 7318;
746%; 2556>;
3008

2820


22>; 4855;
18152

1815*

1815*

402>

4398; 4875; 6588;
18812; 2419»

658°; 11175; 1610>;
18088; 2419>;
27918

439>

439°

12352; 18925; 2859

402»

4048

2974

2856°; 28578


667"; 668°; 11438;
19815; 2506

477°

4418

4948; 2256

478»

381>

381»; 2178; 2544>;
28182; 28408

Alls

All

20398


287>; 1118); 24338;
28135; 28148;
2837

see TIS


4878;


nwa


na


na
Dyna
dana
mand
moana
mn
aa
matrns
vans
yay-na
pwns


3a


346%; 6128;
1595*>;
29618


2108; 663; 20458;
2554; 3001°

414; 11138; 30808

452; 4548

4548

1967; 3051"

19675

4838

444b- 1972

4162

4838

4168

4168»


700°;
27488;


a


3 2875»


1222


3 10508; 2875°


10508; 2875>

340°; 1272; 16832;
18108; 20228;
24162; 25308

16°; 25069; 25558;
3036°

1799*; 20799; 20808;
2530>

4118; 5058;
2594

1390"


9418;


3 4179; 5688


19075; 1908»


a}
~ $829; 12512
aa
NDI 5688; 1985"; 20008
mag 1049>
725 1050"; 1369


7738
PS are)
m3}
wna
3

a

ar


1150>


2 1180>


1123°

511; 2525»

20522; 2513>; 25148;
2554»; 3102¢

709%; 764>; 2860;
2861>

511

6728; 1180

1180>

see M2323

1180°

760>


11508; 11808; 1392;
1945°; 2013°


128
1392®>


4 724>; 1224>; 12258;


2082
1225; 1392>
494>; 1120°
1225»

1050

1454

145%; 1180
1224>

see T1733
1151

1821; 20672
1224»

1487+

7108

1152+
11518; 1152
3007>

1308


m3
7 113908
maa
SNOB 503°; 511%; 1826»;
18948
"ehad | 5034 5118; 6723;
maa 1826»
MDA 1459; 255>; 312:
4912; 5938; 1224>-
12645; 12678;
13084; 1570>;
1606; 21898;
3045°


mya
m2


}2008+ ; 2063¢


"asa; 1150%; 1152


“Ti \ rage; 1o0des 1380
boy! 2026; 2441»


73 see 13


INDEX OF HEBREW AND


ARAMAIC WORDS


3457


1248>; 1797

1153

1153

A 1153°

383°

1249"

IA 522>; 1050°; 196535
1146

1226; 21572

see 33

see mana

1181

1226«

33.316; 769

12268; 1228»

12282

485>

669°; 11065; 20078
3 1181>


N


: }r1s2e


1106; 1366; 13675
2757»

1181>; 1366; 1367*
1181»

1181»

11828

766»

20262

393 1442»

344 12508; 1907; 1908»
a 1273°

mA 492

Wy 12908

ye fais; 13412; 23198
me
ma
nae | 560» + 8558; 10522
m4

pu
aE |


mn
mma
nm


492°; 722>
12738; 2980%>


1273
1310°

vy 84>
TIDNA 492; 722°

a eee + 1895*; 2467°;
my! 3083"
“ha 1895¢


TR 30838
Sya-na 13108
ou
wy
TA 20938
“BTA 30076
TTA 7695; 24155; 2751»
Ta 1179»
STR 704>; 747>; 3051¢
QA 14738; 1907>; 19085;
22369
1180°
862»
1179; 12228
29369


669»


Dy
"3
mie
my73
wa
aie)
ana see yrs
Mg 432°
"TMA see TY
Sing
am
nem
DOA 1153°

“TIA 1153°

"h see 3

Ry ee 1394#; 19092;

3 3045*

M5 2804
yirma 1228»
TTA 11628

baa
Sha
rity
mp3
a


| 1233"


671»


|1755


see TDR
12328
5912; 18935; 2408
"4 see
ywra 1219
Sa 13505; 3081>
DA soe MP
aba 1320°
Yai 1229»
baba 2597; 3082"
Sy53. 1163"; 12319; 3082;
‘o see also Sa2a0 ma


1275*; 13489; 2415°;
24169; 2814°
2813°; 2814*


riba


se


+


'TID% 658; 4599; 8528;
10525; 2196>;
2415>; 258155


mba see mig
ma
my
Mpa 511
Siba
BF]
mid} 569°
m2}. 2751»
TMB 123 45
yirdy! 29008
nby
: jan 11639; 2594
a
rignby
mibnoa
my
m2
383
228
"228
77053
753


jrase


\e12


2597%>;


7248
1167; 1183°; 2377
1167
12764
688"; 25979; 3081»
11548
1229>
833°
8978; 11638; 1229>;
1350
“I>} 1229; 12315; 2068°
D3 19839; 2475>; 3126"
7a 2429; 26279
“08 7658
3 1173
DMA 4354
Sa 4456; 1173»
mb503 8178
aa 1231
9A 511; 3076°
SIM} 547b; 5842; 13398
“5109 1183
Synbyagy 168°
“yp 1276
re |
¥ EFT 111836
way Ta
11749; 1808*
AIA 7488; 29728
333-2972
M233 748°
Meh 1215%


3458 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


_ 7 1174*


T14 182»; 518°; 554;
560°


# 3007*
3


JI24 3007'; 3008»


1232


mph 1248
D9 GP; 8185; 2541+
S94 11502
AWA 2535
TIP) 2535"
WPA 1150°
DMya 1175
D3 1390"
1D] 22375; 2827; 3049°
"pA 1279
mA 622»; 1279»
ar) ere 24688; 25562;
ny) 2865%>; 2866
a see “V4
RB 12175
373 27068
343 11758
mInIa 2129
"BINA 12328
TVA 6055; 12175; 30816
m3 see ia
my
.* 720988; 21298
m4
MMS 1219; 1470s
DFS 1218
"J"3 see A
Ta 3419; 2998"


Di
as \osm; 495>
D7


"1a 11752
7 606%; 7228; 2196;
2975
7a see ae
23 8499
1A 605
A -1217
WI 1219"
TBI 1049
DWY 1219


jou
ants
“ws
Dy


vas

ws
RED

na

"enn m3
“en Ans
"na

Dna
nwa
aia)
yor


PARA
385
axit
TIN
aN!
ANT
a5

bala
nat
mist
m5
737
my


awe
“27
ma
m227
meat
mne24
pay
p27
p23
“27


12198

522°; 1219»

269°; 1220

4929; 1175; 1219;

2525; 27818

1175; 1219»
1280*; 12818
12322

11779; 2045¢; 3086


| 1178 1232


12329; 20958
12328
24888
1221»
11789; 1221»


4
2399
577°


867>


577°; 13542.»
477»; 1121; 3062>
see TINT


417
818%; 2814°


4238; 813%; 14238


8726


6042; 813°; 1405%.»;
2198; 2930%
2931"; 29328;
29336; 2938?

843


1109; 1122; 14262

843>

see mndat ma

668>; 13388

28214

1121; 13388

174; 1253"; 19838;
21124; 2198»:
24119; 24598;
2515*; 2550>

65%; 4234; 496; 5338;
577»; 679°; 7308;
789°; 8179; 883;
905°; 14394;
19824; 20095;


2422; 24599;
2534»; 2581;
2839"; 31059
MAT 2094; 23488; 24039;
2405¢
a7 see TT
TID 943; 2200°
m7 see TINA
mat 2774»
"927 843°
mIS7 776
WIT 11234; 1418>; 237%;
3050"
mwST 528; 776
3\ 776"; 7778; 1114;
yxvt 11158; 3082°
TT 1114; 11158; 3082"
TT 776; 2389"
23% 310°; 3070>
PT 720°; 722
ANT 2813>
TI 2923
MTT 12488
mya 810
DTT 816°


NVIT 819°
agi see IN
27 2399
347 see 35
97 11152
TINT 11168; 1419
Ti? 48h 1981; 25559;
5 3035"


SN 412; 4138; 5419;
1793?; 24238
n fa0®
TTT 3326; 2555"
wt ge7e
IAIN 867
"JIT 1981
“TAT 867>
MIT 1468
MYT 27838»
MIT 2506; 3072
"13 1086°


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3459


YT see TT]
MBIT 14199; 1839>
TANT 882
POAT see PHBT
331 3075
“I 3816
a0
. ?70P; 11998
a5
“tr
. 8692; 13268
ans


NIT 8839
ot
wn
oy


25115; 29755; 31568


WOT 2055"
"J 12678
VO" | gaat
ean
393 1115?
m3 47>; 26978; 2738"
St 14698
ant 7% 866°
7 }051"; 2408
ra
PI 1965*
m1 849°
NID"T 849°
mp" see N24
py 1136; 27878
a eh
wom :
a 8546/2511"; 3155 ;
yor
yo
ND 526?
NDT 706
M37 523°
"Dt 2527»
i371
77
S53 24209; 24274


TDI 13206; 2399; 24208;
29774


| 2538


m"57 820»


TmPOT 513°
323 941
1271 849
ViDds 778
P27 11075; 1468
Mpbs 11075; 1468
mSI 8699; 1175; 1435;
1861; 3122
DY 488; 490°; 675%;
730%; 1272;
24049; 3050
TAY 694>; 1098; 2794»;
2972»
mi 145; 1469; 1098;
12649; 14508;
1983
DN} 10948; 11266
TAT 2854»
pot 8g2b
MYO 8498; 2593
my" 2923
POD 769°
pyei
pygn
pea
77 781°
Sey see DNM37
m3 787
MATT 84g
"77 787>


778%; 929»


32 Ty 787
YI 2198
SRT 8342
JP 1069"
my} 766"; 1815; 21919;
2581>; 2702
TPDT 869°
PT 883!
pi 767°
Top 849
PRT 526
“PT 819
“I 676; 1984°
“7 see “7


Fay 1248"


INI 788°
VITVI 29748; 2975
DIN 2838«
“iV 1881; 2874
WITT 788°
JTF 12489; 2975
JIT 706"; 769%; 799%;
1421>; 19828;
22005; 22633;
24115; 8075+
Wrap yt 7888; 2077
DIT 246°
IJ 788°
ViPT1 789"
WIT 578%; 6879; 10495;
1472; 25158
NWT 522>
NWT 12939; 13758; 29478
"J 27»
I 1101°
my 19838
I 12938; 29478


|s70»


T
MNT 78>; 13115
“VINT see TIT


=

z |5es 3045»

Es

gn 394°

: | 1367

TINT 13078; 14569; 2026;
21028

mim 2026


3797 2026

FAM 1389; 20268; 24888;
28224

“QT 1316
“30
yO
TI 1314
MIVTIN 1314
Foyt 1314
“IM 14678
nnn
pvn

Im 2103

MOI 1006"; 1314°


\1s10


|1316+


3460


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


678>; 724; 1086
33 1050°; 1235; 1278
TW 1235>

tm see oad

1314


| 1208 1535°

t

1235; 1278>; 1402>
1418>

14038

14038

1403

14038

1403¢

see NN

540>; 2122; 21558

1403

78>

852

1417%

2590°

14319; 2759

1424*; 14319; 1743%; |
2.202"

14316

14348

1087; 1204; 1254>;
1267>; 13368;
1535"; 2515>

540>

1405; 1438; 22088;
2930"; 29315»;
2932>; 2933>; |
2935; 2938>

8008

1374»

1393"; 3080


27678 i


anysin
man
mn
nn
mn
omin
“an
on
pan
an
yavin
pein


movin
svmin
mn


mo
on


33m
Tey
pm
nya
‘mn


\as0m 1141*; 13958 |
mE ;


mp" 3075


522%; 706°; 1051»;
11215; 11418;
12484; 13448;

* 2919; 30762

30075

76925; 29948


4912; 5878;
11054;
13233;
1941;
2256>


680°;
12394;
14459; |
1960°; |


Ma Pay
man
Bran
7290

yan
ai
7220
Er
m0
ma
nan
33
ED
rs
rpa
aa
an
ey
Fatal
vn
my
an
Mw
Dn
ae


“F
are


1


see mp>%a


1 1395


1 1343


[er fl
1393+


13708


1325»

1324+

see NNT)

697°; 764»; 1306>


17>; 691>; 1325»;
21546; 25908


13325
1332>

see 3720
see 7279
see an
1324


589+


1395

25565

1393*; 26282

1374

5948; 706°; 11478

see ~spbby

see PIP

1066; 12258; 1376;
1392,

1421; 1810; 3076

1337

2888; 7468; 2094+

5; 696"

2625

14215

13378

5174


302"; 665%; 14919;
14928
1392


13378
1342


20725
1456"


+
3046»
28715; 30448


29599
"S 3044>
) 3045
3058"
) 2961»; 3046
1 3046>


;

1548; 22018; 3099;
3133>

585°; 1375>; 1376%;
1559%; 2745?

9449; 31354

31288

3128>; 3134

312886
ET 51360; 3133

wT

SAT 423>; 1120°;

TAT 3128

“MAT 3128

i

a 4238 ; 3134
oat

qrotat

pea jy 31358
TOT

sgb0aT
mat
mat


1473*


31355

1065

26399 ; 26425; 2643;
2644>; 3132»

3128>

31342

31348

3135*

see Saat

yoat see prorat
Jat 1153
3 1793»
IT 2438>
mT 11068

111%; 7099; 1087>;
12749; 20458;
30778

3131

2773»; 2921»

NT 24112

WT see TT

1542; 2399»

1542>


"BY
Apt
xpat
Sat
oat


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3461


wT
y
D TAT 3159»
mmr 3155
my 72i>
AT 25250
“AT 2108>; 2865"; 2866»
NIT 3133"
SHIT 2561*; 27375; 27388;
3109"
ment 3155¢
‘YT 541; 7249; 31538
TT 17; 30840
NTT 30849; 31538
AMT 31532
NT 31534
D"F 3148»
MT 3152>
MH"T 3152>
apy
PT +5149; 1112
pt


MT 1122>; 2181>; 21840;
2185>


TPE 31488
MDT 668
ADT 1470°
FMDIDT 709%; 764>; 12324;
28609; 28622
MDT 1971» |
“NDT 3128; 3129
“DT 3128; 31292
A2T 522>; 1971>; 25578; |
3128°; 31342
“31 ae 325579; 2701;
npr! 31405
“2T 1106»; 1971°
FBT 503; 2030; 23938;
2538¢
“DT 31492


"27
mee |suas 31368
WN eT


SST 1239»
ney? 1423
mp2
MPT 3149°


stay | 7455; 7479; 9538;
“1 1880>; 3083>;
MAT) gy 4g»


jase»


=


mar
mat
at
prar
AT
“AT
myey
my
Dat
“aT
Vet


wat
“aT
myeT
myat
myat
“OT
Tet
a3T
may


my


et Baw i
Ng


a 2156+; a


31328


3143"


896; 14562; 29726

592>; 24298

592>; 1249; 3149>;
3155>; 3156°

see “VOT

see TITAT

441b+ 2029»

see QT

see myer

3128; 31495; 3150"

3149»

2903

746>; 748>; 13395;
1426; 1470>;
2525>

3132"


14262


1 2874>


3128"

1069*

8198

1145>

764>

2428; 2401>; 2817

see MPT

715; 130°; 13815;
4182; 923>; 12874;
2183>; 2719>

715

2044"; 2506; 2545


1 76226


3147°
3132; 31474
1097; 1456»; 2864»


* 12460; 27800 b


T see PMT
T 868°


2773»


mT 3146>
WI 31474
TINT 3147
DY 1120; 2781; 2929
mgt 1542
UT 246>; 2501
IT 580°; 2712>; 2982>
I 2519»
D4T see DIMT
as
‘ 11228; 2501>
PT
myst see bal
Put 2846>
“TT 7628; 2819
wa 31475
MT 2838; 30798
MART 31338
DMT 31488
“NT 3148


-_
nt


am 504»
a5m 1402»
mam 15862
NAN 778
“Anm 5999; 13132


man ;
re > P1811; 1402»


Dam 2179»; 2408; 30076
3828; 6728; 709>;
bay | 7249; 9812; 13442;


3
Fl 19940. 99078:
ban] 24920:


28360
Sam 2408>


2623>;


SSR 4219; 2774; 27758
26236; 2750»

13138

11218

13118

6915; 724»; 942b


691>; 949>; 1354;
1964>; 2079
“aM 1106


3462 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS
MIDI 2846 MIM 14199; 14418; 29728; mT 1346
paces mo oe FUT 1388; 2588»
a 1365*; 1366 se ae FngT_ 25818; 3045%; 30576
eked "YT 1288; 1402 ee,
an aes z "PTT 4919; 1839%; 2875
“a 1354” ete IT 1388
; : : “111368; 522°; 11368; TY] 889: 704>; 724%:
a a b
WAM 13495; 2237°; 2658 aul a207e6; 3007 | pry Daan sues:
Fam 2237° Sam 14399 13388; Bones
1103; 1123%; 13178; : 2569>; 2871;
MB | "22878; 2630" PAM 2458; 2688 3045
A | 28228 ma 11379; 1140 “PIM 14028
337 13169; 1907; 1908 DIM 24022 npn
Ne 1316s TM 672°; 13445; 2779» wepm
may DEAn 1441» a iae 13858; 1402°
Aa 5878; 1103%; 14059; yan ae 1136; 1446>; cee
28208 yn! git a
“on : pele 5132; 523;
= =n a: a
ae 7} aos 676%: 1441» sm) 14195; 1441
w $2549 : NUM 321%>; 668%; 11015;
my shin 1929; 2179;
nn aa |85e 2506
"577 13192 jin see FIN Fa NOM 1101>; 1306
“3m 13178 sn see "A NOM 2179>; 2806"
mPa 1319" “NM. 6762; 1442 AND 2639
Bley TaAg TTT 1388; 14429 mNPo a a
THI 1313 DTM 1394>; 1442 PROM] o7ggp ” :
“Ty 517 YTD 1344 DQM 1384
“IT 5862; 1315? wn 13438 Maw 581
Sa 1126 mam 14438 TWAT 11229; 17899; 3082>
Sn 3108 “TM 14438 wir 1343b
“D1 1315" pwan NOI 1343>
PII 1366>; 29748 ey Sym 13.43%
SPIT 1388; 2981s oun ND ON 13430
“TIT] 312; 591>; 1455>; Dyan "TT 979; 145; 208%;
1490°; 1998» : en 14439 418°; 503°; 6045;
yp wor ar = a a
" ae cy ’ 5]
wom 1145 nae ae 19068; 21895;
= - 24959; 30099;
UT 7318; 2140 ee 30848 :
WIN 303°; 14039; 20813; bynin an
2140; 28113; To {12664
29820 MYT 2156*; 24119; 25818; mv
4 s 2712> a
mya 1314 eae: SN 1389
rw 1314 es T7899; 11705; 11718;
z mth 631»; 6749; 783; 1337>; 2469»;
main 1402 1152; 14393; 24719; 25153;
b: ae a
DAT 314»; 6565; 694> eel ; 25815; 2591 :
TIT 4185; 421>; 18888;
Ty 1266" SNF see DSTO T "25159; 2538;
TAM] 599°; 1040*; 12668; vn : 2558°; 2587
13454; 30015) age my 1905
3049; 3083° TT 2581; 3057
span maa 411s; 13452 PATH 21568; 25816 =n ey cee ecae.
2 on : ;
stint 14398 aN 1347° 2937>


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3463


Son see DIN
Som 3828; 4918; 11279;
12799; 2590>;
3005; 3045»;
3057; 3076
m2" 528°
on
* 113708
pron
72" 13928
VB 182; 554>
py
504>; 510; 5115;
=| es i
pin
my" 1394¢
orn
bon
71 20938; 29175
TIDD 11169; 14198
TP" 1313?
m2 1313
Sybo 6768
EDIT 2813; 30898
EDM 336%; 7656; 766s;
783>; 789°; 28688;
30898; 3098¢
TVD 1124>; 15414; 21918;
24719; 2474b;
; 3089"; 30978
sn 1313
to see Dn
SR see tn
TN] 1369; 26278; 2706"
abr | 4415; 1099; 1101;
f7J 11105; 12948;
3271] 13708; 1999
abr 1123; 2051»
masm 1370
san>r 1370
mpaor 11638
tom 715; 3108
27} 1370
“OF 1106; 1906*; 19075;
20749; 3076
mam 1439
m 1370"
mor 578; 854°; 1305>;
13064; 14683;
1675>; 22078»;
27838
mb 5178
‘Sn
ma * | rae
pon


13945


pon
>A
Vor 14378; 2412
mor 1321»
"SET 8549; 1305; 1306;
27838
595m 2095"; 20978
re | oom; 1127
ribo J 1007)
SOM 4268; 4858; 517%;
747>; 818%; 2458:
3036
Som 2458


nbSN see Tinhn
mom 874; 13708
WOT] 1119>; 2596
yor) 13742
nom 593
abn 13702
SM 19429; 25538


1405


ae {13708


Ve 1797; 19174»
PeM 8602; 2422»
Pom 1468; 2422»
Pom 1322
MPO 13078; 2247>
"per 1370
mpen
aTEpoM
mpem 1370°


nee |1s70°
DT 1289; 1323; 2069;
2556
mM 68>; 1352
NA see MAN
Ba
t
TAT] 4339; 820°; 19415;
1942
832; 2534; 3074


| 1370>; 13928


1123; 2052+


“art )
dee [2Alse; 24188
we


man 301°
bean 1326°
Soran
ayn
yam 14522


| 1392»


son | 2878; 678; 9415;
ee 1332>; 1350>;


‘Varl| 2052
mvan

. 7 49556
nian


DAM 1106>; 1906; 19078;
2688>; 28192
14308
667>
6958; 24020
24028
13248
1454»; 1533>; 25276
TM 3051
M1 763>; 778
I 883e; 11229; 13068;
1832"; 2469>
73h 3051"; 30878
"YAM 2878; 6768; 1141>
3086
3086>
see sien
“OT 6679; 1350; 14188;
20008; 2817>;
30802
“Y9T} 242°; 6679; 24015;
2817>
TVET 126%; 1374
won
nen
Wgn 2590
Wor 255*; 13405; 2590"
me see wen
MQM} 509; 28148; 3088+
mar 1324>
nian see nen
rv] 9412; 13254
sx man 13262
TT 1275; 11028; 12925;
1374»
IT 1374»
1 2948>
TEM 136; 1336"
D7 958"; 13368; 1374
FUT 1336>
MAIN 5368
DIT 9408
SN" 1336°
TT 25g b
3271 3005


hur


3464


INDEX


OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


1617


I 8165; 19515; 1952;


1953*

1145°; 14715; 2156;
3063

1332

114782


1292»; 1490»; 2035;
24028


1378; 1333"
1333
1333


}120 ; 13338


1335°

8188;12709;1445%>;
30362

2458

1107°; 2866+

13368

1934°

7474; 12789; 12798;
12922; 1781>;
17998; 1934»;
2035; 24028;
25558


3 1342°


14248

1002; 1270; 14283;
1527>; 1540»;
20449; 2658>;
2659>; 2661>


1 2863*>


583*; 14738; 1907;
1908%

1907; 1908°

21022

2422

2590°; 3007°; 30082

667

439; 1821+

13842

896°

14714

5872; 669b

566°; 5915; 669»;
1441»; 1998

1343"

1441»

1334»

1421"

1344


8208; 13438; 3096>

7 27>; 820%; 2408»;
28115

3 1375*

“DM 20742; 22938

2678; 700°

18759

7 1875"

I 1336

13898


YT 2528; 789»; 1293;
2746»
TR see PAN
a)
* 13858; 20078
arn
“iz 1347°
mma wien 1347
PAL 20508
"YT 2050; 2078>
mAnyan yy
“ANN
“MET 1122; 12938; 13759;
1864°
TEM 504; 18399
TEM 246; 18392.
VEN 3829; 1293
VEN 1293
Teh PRET
TAH XBT
TIINNM 3054; 11039; 20958;
20978


1343°


|13e7- B


aay

“yun

zn
“EM 725°; 1346>; 2889,
2932; 2933¢:
30012; 3049»

1346

13478

1347

1388°

1388; 1793%.>

1388

13475; 1811

340; 13478; 17908

13474

13474

1346


1346>


FETE
mye WET
DAD AT
men
wen
oar
man
msn
nye sn
MoI AYN
We Ts


Spry “EM 1347"
pl see p'}
PM 7063; 769; 883»;
1852% >; 20168;
22018
mpm 5si>
TPM 769%; 2201*
NEP 1321°
PPM 1289>; 1858>;2156°;
27029; 27439;
31192
PRM 2710
ppt
ppain
pM 27108
“PM 2710"
4h see “in
“TI see “AN


1370°; 1439°


aba t
** tsee FI
“an


II 252>; 3415; 1815>;
2012
IM 815"; 833"
aM 1352"
MAW] 331>
RPE | 337


4250; 745; 1473;
1907; 1908" .


11458

577°; 13378

1340>

669°; 1145; 1306
13392


2
yin see Fn mB
wan 13415
"PANT 1341°
yy ieee 12748; 1341»;
yu 1967; 29768
“AMT 1339
OM 13399
“TI 1108
DIT 31198
WIN 2297>
OW see ON
DUNT 15689; 3125
“Wi see NIN


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


3465


“ni ae 1421>; 2154,


sain} -2974>
on
* 13770; 748e
on
a> bai
Pe Aen OTOn
TORT
ToT 1339»
ry


| 1128 13415; 2052
my
We 886; 13074
"DT -3046>
TI 1437
D1 see DING
DWT 11175; 11328; 1341+
slat beret a ilae
— Se ae

DWI 11158; 1421»

DM 13398; 25534
May 1422
pron 1378

pesany 13788
Wa 2784

TUT 13376

770 see 70

"AM 14238
mah 14238
“BPI 1340

301; 452>;
13418;


14918;
2856"


OW 15438; 2423; 2405
mon
mow

SOM 485%; 819; 25255;

30897
2710; 2982»; 3089
13399
8349; 19178
see YM
382°
‘see POW
1793; 3050
1239>
2247>; 3001"
887>


1421>; 14564; 20078; |
2293>; 24098;


665>;
1376>;
21938;


on
rOy3


|isan


ah
n


28136; 3027;
3105; 31198


on
won


1376>

81s

11328; 15075; 27818
1421


580% >;
3105¢


13418

5948; 1909

581>; 769°; 13412

1339%; 13778

765°; 7668; 8408;
940%; 1005%;
11275; 14568;
1462>; 2813;
2972»; 29758

7672

1342

1342»


1384


1968>;


1342

13842

2293>

1342>

see DUO

1126>

789°; 2177

2016

1842>

see pwn

see DUDIN

5848

13884>

927; 20448; 28598;
2860

2454

138424

517); 5184; 10602;
24428; 30416

5849; 852


} 1110


see ROW .
5788; 588°; 12938
14434

1384; 1395
1113*; 1350°
2597

1395?


29496

2874

28748

1384

427; 430°; 9438;
2708

see nonin

66%; 16745; 2525s;
2556"

849

159;
700

1343


523"; 594;


re)
111°
2887
2887°
383°
418°
418; 29248
1307°
MD 111g
% 29808
8512
29240
YO 25948; 2743»
2 28878
DQ 25949; 27088
2 29022
541b; 29248
2887»
ay {1087 ; 25062

J 7
“Any 1235»

“WIQ 667%>; 6684; 2506"


a0 4415; 5118; 600;
1110; 12778;
1278; 12798;
17998; 2990"


30D 10875; 1277%°;
12798


AMPA Di 2990"
mao
wpa

myO 28418
mm 2408
MDVAW 11479; 2392; 23938
“MD 13926
mM 1490


|2024e ; 29908»


3466 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS
yOD 13078 DA 15738 pn
“i 940° "OD? 15739 TANT? | 24gge
mR 6678; 20008 “m3 14468 wen
Sw 840; 22578 yin? 15478 "J? see 17
NOD 6715; 6742; 2846> tra? see WI? aT 116°
DoNdy 1898; 2925 Day 522>; 769%; 2867 mT) 1573
moo 1899» bah see bist ayy 15748
nbn 29258 Dam 5a; 15465; 28678; mvp 1573"
2e :
yey 2904 ae Pedy DRI 1573?
= b re nod? 16778
ND 8189; 3035 pybs) 1446s ae ; .
MN 1110; 3035 IT) 65%; 588; 696%;
ih Da" 1442 7668; 851°; 852%;
ele) 13898 man" 5262 944%; 10945;
s bs A130 Sie 11053; 11305;
pa ae PRB? 15478 15575; 20738;
DID 818+; 30364 spa" 15478 2581>; 2702>;
ae Ey Bie Ib + b
YD 748; 2712 rma 14460 : a ; 2921
:
ae be b- ‘
DPD 65%; 426%; 25346; DE? 1546 Sey
2917 “5m 6908
yy 503; 2917; 3og9 | PTR? 15738 oe .
a i ; ; TID 1919; 19695; 22308
MED 2874" v2" ;
=f Sane A? 173; 1232; 12488
MEY 1334>; 3079" eA sr 320°
; TPS" 1060 ae
gee — 1446 soe BOE
TRU 28740 A wT 15842
bp0 1132 me oe Ty 1574>
TONY 569°; 2000%; 3123 ae 1442 Wier 1575
. a oe) a
TEL 2055; 2009 wae 1695 ATT) 1586
ABU 2111 WIN 1448° TPM 17575317588; 17639;
"I 2836 797 1305; 13069; 2836" 17658
DID 2533? “a2 15585 TTI 1586*; 16759; 1778"
TY 18615; 2439 771819» meeyt) 16759; 1778
MDI 25332 “5599 16952 mi 1250*; 1267; 15359;
gee ay 19199; 20568;
"2B7) 29149 _ P32 1086° 26015; 20618
RYTUT AT a 1229; 1350°; | mygsy mr 1583
4 a 4
ba) ™ a
en SD 5048; 511s; 523%, ; ee MIM 1584
2 Bed : 7419; 769%; 1333>; | W2PIS TW 15842
ee - ae a
MrT 546 Fee ek occas | SIO mint 1asae
WPIIN ; ; ;
Wik 2742>; 2836>;| Maw mm 1584
mae a ‘a. A
TN) 1559 : 2947 sari 15848
ssw as ja " ‘a ‘:
abe 1559*; 2450 MENT! 1447 Wa 1577; 1743°
ny b oii b :
. ae 523>; 524%> ee ms 2429°; 2964» Ee cag
5 523; 5242-b: TIT? 699"; 24298; 2964; sod :
min] 552%; 11208; 2965 ; arwy) 1877
ec) RE) oe Srp sre in
iy soeeme : “—T ay 15802
ro 1447>; 1557
aaa teas yay" DDI? 1586
arth “197 DAT 15808
“INN 1572 yit2 1557» WNP 1580; 17306
no" 24128 yrs? 15575 maya 1574»


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


yyy 1574>
yA 1574
Prin? 1584
mim 1580; 1736
yaoi 15838
nyawin? 1581°
mim 1424"; 1583; 1624";
yeim 1626°; 174325


DEW 14319; 1581>; 1582";
1583"; 2759°
Sebbrn 1574s
Dom 2856;
2862%»


28578


ym
mam
axt 16779

mys 1678; 16958
TINT 16788

Sip 14489; 168885
tsar

es | 15750; 1679"
we


a> 14919
asr 1688
ear | azar 1546>;17568;
bahJ 21008
Sam 28678; 3074»
Day 1756
san 1755"
“ptr 1756
nmr 1695¢
377 1695; 1730
man see TQ)
yp 17278
mp3 17278
sey 15808; 1727
agi" 1688"
Soy 1586"
pi 715; 705%; 7779;
797°; 798%; 799%;
1389>; 20499;
29829; 30779;
3126"
Wy 1572
amir 1580"
wg 8718; 1727; 1730
mai” 2395"
ny) 15725
pin 29478
mpi 513°; 2947


|1558


pee m7
mp


rh
apt
man
moay
aba
tyr
par
mp
mt
ni
aaa
nt
“on avn
m0
no
nme
opr
on
ae
mn


arn
Dae
“ONT
mrERyy
mam


away
SIM
Sem:
mam
NPT
mpm
aePTM
mim
Sm
oem


| 1730: 2488; 2830


1730*»
1736; 17378
1753>

1695*

1688

1679°

1584»

17278

2525»; 2982
1732

1732"

1580°; 17328; 1736
17812

17438

17438

17438

17438

17542

16778

1545»

1572>


7 1545°


|rers>


2874»


T1545


15455
9937; 16775
16778
1677*
1586"
3037>


| 1558>


1558>

1574

see DN"
1558

15598

10718; 15748


| 1574>
1559


|15748; 1586"


3467


“ST 15748
TMT 789; 833
mam 15748
orm 1419»
Der? 15585; 1573
“ON PTT? 1558°
“NOM? 81785; 25978;
30668; 3155°
"ANT 1558?
DMEM 1558"
“ONT? 1559
DNB 1558
WM 1183
wm? 1183
MN? 1558"
MH" 435>; 1276; 12778;
2813; 3011
May? 17548
may? 1754
me.
mom
“NU? 1544; 16758
777 879%; 1896; 30864;
3088*
J? 1334s
Sis: see OSs
mPAD? see 717777


1788


D2 170°; 2415; 7998;
2018; 2408>;
2534>; 25358;
2560°
m37D7 see 71997
ro) 1547»
35) 3288
baat
m73R
5717997 1573"
mig37
mF)
WUT | 15778
man
D2 4185; 426; 522%;
8215; 1183;
20349; 20503;


2295; 30078
92 5126; 606%; 1317
MI32 12328

yio2 1559°

wo) 14188; 2815

2? 1121»; 1221; 1248


“7


3468


=H
Sy
ma
pe}


9"
No"
nz
722
ayn
aye)
aye
m3?
amin
pa?
m2?
os
pa?
Pp2?
ant?
pis.
“D7
sho"
m0"
aAn}z"ap
no?
307
”
yarn
7
"7
ny
Dy
mm
—2
7)
oy
NT
WD?


27018

553%; 583°; 14738;
1907; 1908»

128; 1547; 2026;
20375; 2145»;
2153; 2538»;
2706%; 28388;
30824

128°; 2093


1586>
1586>


128"; 1333; 1567>;
1865; 25915;
2838°

1568*; 27452


"| 1456


1568*
1461; 16778
1461°
1466"


| 1508


see D3?


97b


* 1588"


513>; 29478
}2206e; 2697+


11415; 1307>
411+
1508
1511>


1150°; 21169; 2459


2545>
2780
15478
7064


Jee 7


2780°
1675
1675¢


* 1546e; 15598


1675+
1546
1546+


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


“197
7192
uy

Dy)
“—

oy

23
oy
oy


R20?
mem
D277
mz?

37


So.


ay"
ye)
apy
nape
TRE
aw?


my
mae WT
ey
mB
"wy?
wy
st

mp?

mp"


| 1546+; 15722


704»

15749; 15865

see 7

1675"

288>

7058

592b: 8175b; 12494;


1557; 1559>;
3156


\gu7s0; 12405 1545+


1559»

1548? ; 2203; 2205»;
26972; 3084»

1568"

658; 1086; 1121°


64>; 704>; 11418;
1308


1549"; 15568
1545"; 1549

435>; 1547; 1559»
1132"; 13778; 1545;

1812b; 3001°

1569>

1545

1572; 21978

1546

15462

1546*; 15718

14912

1087; 1568°
1087; 1278»


|yraie


518"
1569+


7 1569+
7 1569
1 15874


2773
1568>


) 14919; 15879; 16778
1 14918


1049>; 1107; 1221;
12488; 1542»:
1603°: 3081°;
3128

533


By
rns
ara s
Paral


ax?
73)
ae?
ap?
ORE?
aie
oy Tp?
mR?
Sp?
TOR?
mp?
mrp?
=I
DyAPR?
DyIp?
TR
airs
ar
wp?
OR?
NNR
xT
Sahl


aT
ay
may
a7


1968"

1545; 2181»

1545»

4228; 591>; 2863"

1493»; 1843b

3154

see JX?

1337

145°; 1098>; 19682;
2425; 28648

1144; 14568; 16762

2030*


1545; 1676>
3086>


1586>

1357>

17278

1559»

1586>

1727

1559»

1586

1586

17278

17274

340°

1235; 2434»

1418

1143

1727

1586; 1727>

see 1)?

11022 ;2156*; 2587;
2949» '

11028

1492>

1492

1569>

12279; 1595¢

1593*

1595

831>; 12219; 12485

15708; 1587>


7 660°; 17328; 1765
5

1852>; 2921
5


> 1595
> 15708


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


3469


xen
* 11622
ne
Rowan
1596"; 1966"; 2078;
DIZ | a663e
powann
M7? 303%; 15874; 20818;
2982


My? 3038; 2081+
in) see in)
pm 15958

Serarry 1587%
DW? 1570
DET 15926
ayy) 1570"
"2 1592"


aaah
nn
ap
man
nov
nian
mI 7675; 2889
mi) 15938
JI 4119; 4929; 191795;
27466; 2972
NPT 2785"; 2972;
MIT? 503°
mya 1570°
may see mia
"Oy 1587>
mre" | 1587 15888; 2529
wey
yy 1306
DNB? 1492>
py? 2846
Py 1293
TPN see PPT
Tipy 2051»
Dyp I 1736"
WY | 13698;24208; 2422;
wr) 2426"; 2868
myy 14686
2240
aU" 99; 14689; 2743>;
2813°
ANAW? 1622
maw3 3p" 17438


15928


1591+


3:3 TOP soe
353 "a0"
Maw 1508
"30? 15719
D2 "ay
ond “yo
pnw? 1570"
Paw 1508
MUPRW? 1743
a?
a0)
m0 15118
TOM? 1622°
“ye 1508; 15118
yw" 1622>; 17438»;
17498
pr 1493


\1s71*


ul 14919; 1571°


= | 15008
ba ie


3°07 see ne
mun
we"
Syn? 16238
Twa 831>; 16220»
nie? see MNO Ma
ww? 130°
iw) 1622
mw 1509
NAW 1509"
SRTBD 1509
“SRI 1510°
nee "|1510°


1542>


wy.
"ya 1510°
JW? 282; 1570*; 2817
JW? 443; 1507%; 27618
mW 16225; 2761*
YW? 340%; 820; 14248;
2700
“9 1509"
mo
eyes
TDW? 2856; 28579; 2860;
2862?
mpw? 1511
“WwW? 2406
"W? 1622°
7" 2027; 25918


‘} 1495>; 1622


“WwW 15708; 1623°;2027>;
2591; 2864°
SN? 1623
TONE? 1622"
FANW 1623"
“Dww? 1541>
“IM? 21112; 22078; 2399";
2743*; 2780%;
2847»; 3077
pin? 1101°; 2202
“AF? 2530"
sm? 10508; 1571+
mom? 1543; 1674
TMM 1543>
Seam) 15715
AMT 7; 255786
“Mm? 709%; 10508; 16748;
2557; 3098"
NWN 1543?
TIVE 17; 25906
Fam? 1674"
anm 896; 1050+
"an? 1543
TIN? 1543
DPM 1543; 15934
mm? 1674*,


3
AND 2207%6
AND 1306"; 2207%>
17>; 522; 595;
1236; 12398;
32 1294°; Nee
wa) 1354-8, 1a18h;
1905; 2154;
28188
35 1306¢
“> see Ta2
MID 1354°
Ap ee 1236; 1253;
ap] 1418»; 1906"
TMITNAD 5806; 2850+
DID 536
JIBD 536
DAD 1148"; 3072
“aD 5995
122 3076"
mIAaD 2976"
WAD 1126"; 1215; 1822
MSD 1822»


3470 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


JORD 1149
“ID 2401»; 2425>; 30758
“DTP 709%; 28585; 2860
WAP?PTTD 599"
MD 1395
Mm> 1086
TID 13495; 1354»
yD 756; 794>; 2436;
24398; 2441»;
24439; 24508;
2454>; 2624;
31298
SAD 650°; 765
YaiD 253; 254*
mw see DD
SnD 6968; 1126; 1308;
1403>
JID 650; 765>; 1098;
2027; 22008
am 6968
DD 511°; 766°; 22069;
24256
“AD 1149>
“4D see 7D
yey-> 709
wy> 773; 1507
WIAD 7675; 768; 7695;
~ 10318
“UND 768; 7699; 2145>;
31465
rownD 7699
yO 768»
myn {768°
miD
mma
STD 18328; 1887
NaTD 37>; 614»
"DID 7348
3D 37>
=| 2 1106; 1826;


7708


4 190685; 19078;
M3 | 2999» ,
“ITD 769
SID 2208
WMD 432; 8308; 11054
"D 588>; 1062; 1126;
1438
FITD 2528; 6069; 1279;
2108
77" 612
wW3 eee 51436; 1843»;
sap] 22379; 27018


sd
"22
mg"D 13256
M9" 311>; 312%; 3138;
314
"D> 25308
"PD see “AND
“D> 6555; 656°; 6605;
807; 19308;
1966>; 20768;
22108; 2406;
24079; 29042


655»


bb
Sip
NOD 11278; 2569°
NOD 2456
aN>? 611
mes) 2712
a> “5419; 867
35> 5418
MOYES Ip 541°
m2 704; 9438; 10868;
mbp Se: 11998;
MbD 2846
aD 412; 413°; 5388;
600°
"31> 6018
"TDD 601
mo 718; 539
mrn5> 6748
"SD 2548; 2619; 377%;
580%; 11508;
1483>; 16755;
20978; 2425»;
27649; 2867»;
30499; 30728
m3 1797>; 2553
yo? 611
33 704
Syb> 1117>;
2639" >
SBSD 5416
SoD Lie
54> 600°
DDD 2675; 700°
77993 611"
mB22 700°


|sa5e; 7058; 14398


2320>;


madd $5468,


Ome> 6115; 1219>


wip
bsayaP)
yo> 765%; 11238
“AD 485"
7D 410; 1118>; 12408;
14385; 1886;
18879; 2180;
22959; 2404>;
2688>
MED 553>
19D 6608; 7912; 2095;
20979; 2101«
"PMID 7018; 1577
“22D 602"


jor ; 2070°


D2D 549°; 12028; 3002s;
3004>
22 602°
> 3002
m2 721°
TID 8879; 9439; 1143;
2814>; 3088>
nimpp jours: 656%; 165°;
mp2 2706
RO?
92
RQ2 ee 32710; 2862;
mop! 2976
MOD 6695; 7338
MOD see NOD
MOD see NOD
MOD 733°
D9OD 311>; 312%; 3138;
314»; 444°; 6059;
704»; 11245»
502 7008; 1917%>
T1293 700
"SDD 541>; 1813>
FPOd 612
i202 604
MDOP 605?
DMLOD 4581»
DOD 2415»
MOQ 1117; 11229; 28408
DOD 332b


TOD 581>;1447>; 20762;
23959; 2792;
27938


| 0s


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3471


NOD 581 “SAND 579 mN> 1861; 1868


DPD 1305; 1306"; 2486>
TD 13335; 1334>; 13358;
1404; 22358;
2203°; 2846
BID 2596
TBD 513°
“ADD 11474
ODD 4178
“PD 18959; 18968; 3049%
TPHD 602°
SDD 870>
JBD 1097°
BED 599%; 2235¢
“HP 1375; 321%>; 6685;
1069%; 11325;
1133; 2019°;
20205; 20363;
2401>; 2506;
25315; 25368;


"BD 520°; 1279; 20228;
2401"; 2530%>;
2531%>; 26513;
2655%; 26974;
2817>; 3049>

“BD 326


say "DD 602°


FIED 242>; 327°; 10638;
20368
“MDD
“inn?
"PDD 568°
“D2 5692; 11509; 1822>;
2527>


|568; 115%


ae \709 3 3080
i)


NDBID 1343¢
72 5338
2IND 603; 739
TInD 1375¢
""D 578>; 2379; 27878
m2 603
S592 694»; 1864°
Dd7> 2661°
 WMADID 576
DDD 576; 1423>
TPIDD 4198; 547°; 5488;
2875
“AD 579°
S 3D 675%; 8842
DIDID 579%; 2523»


rma) 579
3D 1104; 1865
IND 1865°
" DBID 7238
WIP 2013
wy Bee wah
NTBID 580°
MD 728%; 7469; 769;
10864; 1966>;
2256; 3008°
“EID 255>; 6038; 2379%>
APD 1822; 3155»
MawD 18226
“Tw 589>; 605; 2147>;
memtba| gage 20804
"TWD 862>
SD 3428; 13440
SUD 439; 815°; 1105
MWD 1964>; 3097
t@> 30976
“WD 896>; 9682; 11228
FINWD 896; 9682; 1277%
BMP 723>; 831; 3119
IMD 24879; 2628°
sore |608%; 1814>
WMD 6128; 1814*
DMD 1985
DMD 7095; 12748; 3078
M3MP | 699; 8768; 8778;
ning! 19848


UMD 246>; 721>; 2780;
3037+


mD 762+>
“ND 762%>; 7638
mp 514

MND 5238; 723>


>


11278;2156; 24118;
2961»


1887*; 1909


my> 1306


nixd Bee p>
DMD 18215
nid |
~ $1121; 23198
pix! :
DAN? 1868
“ay X> 1426°; 19078
mara 8D 1426; 1907
2> 376%; 4495; 523»;
577°; 678°; 1350;
1351>; 20568;
3089s
Mana? 1864
32> 3039
232 724>; 1350; 2496
> | 11148; 1144»; 11458;
1466>; 18643;
26398 >


“i (1895*; 30838


y22 111
Ey
6768; 1145°; 1862°

ya?

a> 1819*

422
73 }1862>
733?
Tiyn> 24218
TIA> 1881; 27688
M23 301°; see also 833
TMz2 520%; 2981»
mpa> see M2129
yu32 1862>; 3000
"pn? 18828
t3? 259%; 678>
wap

wad see wand

35 19108; 30808

55 1909
sq see 27 Xd
arid 1117; 1235¢
a

F 113488

nz2
pram) 1865

"m2 18216

ome 942

xD see ND


3472 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


ard
rx? bi336
Db)


TAD 1935"
eat)
at)
mI> 7419; 1865>; 1868
wd 100%»; 19428; 23488
mm ee 24088; 28988;

mb! 2900; 2901
mom
nine
wmi> 14238

wid 7338; 1929>
Ter 1931"

m2 1868

“2

wpb


“mry> 309%; 1868°


| 193s


|193e


lease»


| 1a07 1910°; 2094»
pe


Vi> 115%; 831>; 2072;
2703°
nin gee rer
TI 3098
m> 2122
me see TD


“m> 600%; 1572


pm> 514> 1118>; 11228;
27678
om> see pu?


~am> 18215
piam> 1821»
yo 2193


wWm> g62>; 942; 1964>;
2594»


wm> 126; 8879; 1964>;
21998


od 94a»

w> 1821; 2102
mv? 1106>; 1906; 1907
pwive 1868

wed 11325; 3027


ot
22 | 798°; 20508; 21458; |
rind 2256>
xr"
mrt" 3692; 2206; 26978
wd 18215; 18228;
1895*>; 18962
We 18208
TNE? 1919
“Ta? 2581»; 2813; 29218
para
ynad
Ja2 1823
AY 831>; 1843>; 2072;
27038
472 2708"
4F> 20726
mI9> 18198
V2 1s2zie
Mayd 11679; 3109; 3110"
Bad ore 1112; 18258;
spb! 2999
mimg> 1839
122 2703
VzE2 2703¢
Dip? 1822
Mp? 533°; 1107
mp2 866; 1087
“Mp? 1893¢
wp? 1234
PR? 18395; 1907
Wp> 1293¢
> 1145>
TW) sae, arer; 4740;
>> 10438; 29940;


1865?


miss} 3078"
TDW 591; 1308; 14705;
27478


D> 1840°;28562; 28576;
2859"; 2860

yO? 2814

ye) 18408

FE2 1868; 3080+


2
DTANTA 28634


“NA 12942:17802; 28398:
3048
mya


| 13256; 1440*; 20138
mae


bei see S70


oe Gy |asor ; 490°; 2846¢


MAINA 1101»; 2156>
a Sa)
“Nn

mura

m2

PIN 829>
yrvia_ 379°
PNA see TNA

MeeNya 1815

mbdyva 1147*

yas 11278

“YAN'A 12608; 1699"

“ND 1145>; 18688
ANA sce TN2

3A 1156

TINA 7674

mea see “INA
sina 12732; 3082°
Syay 11205
ya" 3081>
“mA 2045°

mya 7008; 1419>
mpn 1144>
"2272 2016>
Bice ee

zara! 1140%>; 2045°

maya 1148

naa 2045%

mwa 494>

7A see 470 3

wa 1962
p70
‘a7

aya |3s0; 2003; 2050;
baa 2222°; 2501>

SRT 1962
Sa 1137*; 1544>; 1603>;


1610; 19629;
RA] 300°


daa see DIN

M2777 see 270
DNDN 2050
“yD 3y72 2050"
a7 1965


1890°


| 1340 2027


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC


WORDS


3473


“02
ANE +2398


We
my 405


2930 “7A 1965; 2255»


mim 3415
DHA 2784


MDI 555%; 8964; 10068;
18259; 2507»;
2597"; 2628»;
2910*; 3058


322 820°
elem 253°; 2626;
maa 2701%>; 27894
MIA 24029; 2808>
m7972 341»
739%) 2051
MDA 669; 29762

a)
» fats 20162; 2850


i}
BTA 831; 27072; 2838
TTD 20168; 2044>


TPA 2016°; 20459; 25458;
28503; 29188;
29948; 3010
maaTA 1275


viv 1961>
raistinya)
aye

"J 6114; 13375; 1961;

2018"

TTA 5144; 2049+
W779 2049
TPA 896; 1008; 2485»
"g7T 5148; 2049%>
m2 2083«
wT 1961
TATA 882>; 19615
myo 1961> |

TTA 2016

0 see ST

MTA see TT
WTA 6874; 2050*; 2184¢
NOTA 1325


2398?


mp \3g1>; 1438; 1439
mp
mama 352
POA 2028
Sepa 2028


pas
1343°; 25344
nrat al
Dyoeta 1965°
MBN 24562
“W%) 944»; 11024; 13438
“W72 see Wi
“52 863; 872; 1997»
“1a 1966"


>>v a0
$3 Un | 19675; 24392


axa 1810;
22078


20695;


nana
manna $2069; 20726
maria) -
Seta see D172
yt
yta
nyt 17995; 1810°
DAA 402°; 3126
MDVD 3829; 1354; 28508;


1810


3126
bua
ban

pain (858s 1127"
ca


mab4a 20735

masa 1542; 1799
m1 656°

m4 486; 2075°
DvVA see DNA

y7% see [1720

myo% 1307°
son

m9 +2083; 3127
moa


MOND 598; 599%; 722b;
8524; 866%; 25352


TON ag

minoia

PVA) 930. 7018; 11038;
2.822%; 2887;

c gaee

nypina

ra

myDA


gol al


2063"; 2789"; 3104»


xz | 12734;2093>; 22058;
nya! 30475; 3081


prin
1338; 28642
p3a

spa 1112

mpi 1351»

mpi (1231; 13528;


14416>; 21808;
BRA) 3007 ”


“2 5948


myn
ayia
2976"
aya


atta


xia
NT $0118¢: 20828; 25336
Fa {11 331%; 2525


Bae see 877
mean
myo
mepia 1468
ma muti 2082
"moet 2081»
wd 1105+


{080°


maw 314
maa 4085; 764; 800;
84>
nin
nye
a2 MMA 2102; 2488; 28314
sma 24378
MATA 106; 110%; 1522;
15342
372 3086
MIA 2069>
mnre
nT?
“99T2 2538"
cide
1119; 14198
m33ra
MSTA 312; 3135; 24076
MATA 1880; 30978
“ara 24876
myara 14199
MATA 2820¢


}eor; 811; 2746+


| 126 ; 1288


3474


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


————


TIT 1097; 2976"
MITA 313%; 2155
TATA 310; 3112; 312;
3139; 314°
TPA 888; 3082"
Pye 511
mma 1999
NIA 665°
maa 515>; 22378
TIT! 15%; 490%; 1999
MIM. 6942
Tia 1344>
Servs
oxen
aya 19678
Sarma 1967¢
mb>ina see mina SAN
TIM 2581
movi 19675
NTA 2028
TUT 2515>; 2587%
“TA 1153>; 2028
non 1468°;1965>; 19679;
mora! 27839
mem 585"
jira 1967
“ora 19678
aera 1815
mpora 19075
mpoma 22169; 27148
MdMA 1965>; 2488>; 28316
“niga 2028
Tarra 1934
Sara 2402
MPM 3825; 5849; 3070>
TTT 1966
Dom. 1966
moma
a lasasy 25584
nga
Dora 483+
pal
_ | (23199; 24208
sora
moma 19678
META 2049
pm 4740
“ID 13642; 2083"
mB IA 2012


{2028


moma |
7 F 100838
one
See tee 7679; 840;
nate 2975
Mima 1966»
TTA 5875; 11138; 22378;


28208
NOD 2976
513>; 1185»; 2596>;
27028; 2847>;
30102
TOA 422%; 479; 530s;
1905>
272 4028


yaya }3007%


PMO 30478
“A 2525
ww
fe } 1986 2465"
men
77072 2008
"329 2008
N27 20178
TI" 2016


PP WANA 20288


amr "a 2045
ND™ 2045
SND" 20478; 20488
TD"A 2045>; 20462
AVDA 2045>; 2047
SO 523>; 20482
BA 20374;3072'; 30743;
3075¢
ya 2051s
7 567%)
O°" 7338
MIP A see MVD
ioe }aoare; 20388
nova
Dati 2066
Belin oa 20174; 2406;
sin 24074; 27518
qe 2038
DY 20376
yw 2037
AN 709°; 3098


ayo
25NDD +1306"; 22078; 2836
maya
apa 17
N7BD 1959
"DBD 1959
“BD 1293
m3,
m0
m2
m5"
"22 1959"
13" 1959
mye"
m2>2
Sido 1279»
Sb’ 2321"
yap 3007%
oz
apa $2048
was"
nyee%
napa
wap” see D797
mraz 2049+
"D2 1959
m35% see M22
D772 518°
D322 3010°
MO7) 733+
MDBP 1959>
72%) 30722
"72 20499
SE" 2016
aw; |au7as;2ta0e 526252;
bitoa} 2867
T2072 2867
DMDA 2488; 24914
WMP 19695; 2083
DY see bya)


nd%p | 11065; 11488; 1149;
Y) 2438: 2461b:


24028; 2836>


410%; 2016; 2028


2757


11158


xo

wba $5338
‘ba

1 see NibD
my> 7049


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


SNP
soya"
m9
a77D29


7049; 2743


115°; 1825; 1253;
2039


533%; 583; 12798;
2178*; 25140;
28675; 3105>

1969


5228


535; 24118
see xa


2055% >


1122>; 2664»


491»; 19728; 2029>


2624»

1470"
1470*>; 1910"
1972

29298


729; 11238; 2524»;
253926; 26248;
26642


Q774>; 2775

406

3069°; 30725

820>

667"

2028

789; 11108; 24712

704»; 1799>; 19688;
2553"

777; 12545; 12888;
13255; 1569%;
15875; 1799>;
18082»; 19712»;


2029>; 26248;
2758>; 3152>


612%; 2074
2051


a 2513>; 2624"


2553*; 26249


19715
19714


hors; 2028


pry?
my
yao
DP?"
nia>
n3272
nadia
"oon


ie
re)
me
SS]
1370
my,
my
my")
mye
mina
Palabra)
mage
eh by-)
Pt)
nvr
ma


58"; 2028
19712

1971"; 2028»
19718

2074

2513>; 25148
1325¢

20518


2 1248; 2976"


20302; 2853


2 5036; 600; 15722;


2439
2525»


2820; 2994


413>
2662; 3072"


2 26243.»


3086
19732
1982+


2016; 24114


2097


2422>


2032+

see M30

see N10

723»

1981"; 2426; 3078»
829>

1983°

19779; 20332; 2453>;


2561»; 27324;
2854


25455
4174


| 550; 553%


ama


ree
. minve


nz
nna
polar


0
ae)
pata
m2
m9"
709
base


et


24428;
2539%>; 26428;
26445; 26458;
2652"; 27328

see MUNI


2033"; see also "2FT
minyan


2031
1976>


2033; see also "2TT
a niaProrm


5935; 1152"; 20622
see 70

205 7%

2062

2321°

830°


2443>;


1436»


D972 2779"
Dyya 77


DIVMA 5829; 2095; 20978;


21014
mh see M9
myya 19778
"879 1980"


raya]
pote 3010°


30


Dads $2898


nino?
nyo
p72
no
m5
npr”


503; 669°
24218
20078
30478
2974»
3004°


"D 3086>


1336"; 2889"
1450; 30479
25208; 2863; 3007¢


301°; 585"; 29492;
3075»


= 3075>


T7892 }21112


nye
myaieg


3476 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


Dd 1086
“YO 585°; 2398>
NIBD'A 2469
MNBo! 1793
“EDA 14672; 20672; 29044
mIBO 2067+
“0% 382:
nincia see TID
DOM 2555
M2272 6678; 2000
“23%
: }aazs; 2255
may
barn 580°; 1334*; 3070;
3075?


ci fia


7393 312°; 314°; 7779;
8208; 14689


mW") 432>; 4929; 5114;
2838"
my 5118


ahaa)
TID
wm
TP)
TA 19849
7%
ane


11279; 1136; 2012>


829; 1313"; 19842


2°32 669"; 670"; 876"
Dy" see TP"

We
wy.
mre
"WPA see "PWD


658+; 30812


"2 19458
A 746°; 11413.
D9 12738


TIDY" 892; 2662; 606;
12734; 1310>;
1376; 1392;
1935>; 2185;


2703>; 31538


MPV 5192; 819%>; 841>-


2863"

ic oo 892; 2703¢
Dap

TQ" 2180>

JDO 9439; 14848
m7 1150°
792 see NWA
72. 19462
“EID 2994; 2998»
“27% 341>

“Wa 2467»


ssp" | 888; 1945>; 1995»;
20352; 30024;


T2722) 3063; 3082
2 1945; 20138


14449; 2016
MIWA 254>; 25308
1945>


3072"; 3105
"WT 1149; 1945>


we} ase; 1945


2905>; 2987>


mUAD? see nua.
JD 1986"
nya
77” * 4.2038
myap
mB 20948
YD 2012
bp 1117
mpB
L. (576; 2625>
men
VR 342°
“PS 1325»; 2062%
Vp 514»
MPD 2129
Mp see MDM


"A 5859; 5988; 829>;


53833; 8179; 2196;


DMD. 1793 -
FEA 776%; 777%; 1436”


xxia see sya
2872 13925; 30713


AE 1136>; 1392>; 2398;
2407°
TIDE 1385; 3319; 4449;
927; 13863;
1390>; 14509;
14528; 14549->;
15335; 1808?;
2177; 22278;
22342; 2398>;
3154»
mak 2045+


MDB) 25240
7370 $8308


see TAR}
ya 9412


TB 515>; 5179; 1122;
1862; 22568»


2
S270 15288
zal


mya $1136; 1140


TIIYA 679>; 18529»; 22018;
2434


510°


* 72398


sips | 5282; 1106"; 1136;
"3 25959; 27868;
“HRB | 97870"


* £1106"; 11386°>


“TUBA, 526>; 1127
my 254°
MdR 4329; 510°
Mee 2095"; 20979; 21018
MDA 841"; 1080
DB 422°


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3477


—_———-


“Wy 2068"

MBYA 2068»; 2069"; 30742
MBX 1350; 2068; 21278
FBR! 13898

pe9 see pix
MPD see TA

“22 22079; 2864"
MRD see WPL


DUD 4249; 9069; 13249;
1826%; 20694;
2145; 3003¢
PD 26240


TAP 1946; 2998
APD 1325>; 1948
MIp'2 1969"


aa | 3260; 594>; 26865
romps 1969"
mp2
mp7 $2419»; 24209
Nips
MIP! 2419; 2561"
bhp.
ppp | 444s; 7248; 147%;


: 1942>; 22105;
™21P2 | 24028; 2743»
map


“APR | 658°; 15425; 3081;
apa 3082*
MnP. 3072
mp
np
bipyal
nope
mip 2051"
wpa 2545»
MP2 581»; 1109"


587>; 5882


1335°; 2596>; 2847°


ci | sce Dips


m9


ihe |58; 584+
Mpa
AIP 20512
“PP 1968"
yixp’s).
. ppia -721>; 2998»
npzp
PP? 704»; 2399
“p'9 see Tp"


RPA 701%; 708%; 2534%;
2911+


MIPS 5939; 10419; 1336>
tpia see tpia
TOP 765°
“a gate 588°; 13549;
my) 2000
ava]
aye
NT 1919
nw see TMI
Tv
THN73
TINTS 207; 208; 7249;
11365; 1278>;
1981>; 22646;
25819»
TINT 1234*; 25819; 30575
me 760°
FANT? see PNW Tw
mBN VS
midry
TUNA 1348"; 2454»
“372 2909
yaya 723>
pare 542>; 2847
a7%0 see 37a
mMyayO 2545
3779 3138
772 2036
=" 2036
2081° A
54>; 1125"; 1306";
1984»; 2486
m7A see myo
TI 2037>
mina 5238
aia 8498; 1369"; 1390
pia 20378
yin 2523
an see IA
nye see man
mina 1996
my 2408"
pave see PURO ma
WI) 2295
"79 583°
bpava-9 2036
TINA 1153; 2007"; 2486
syam™79 2036"
meno see mana


loro2®


\20ae


1985+


D7". 2001; 2066¢
3PY2 595; 2658»


M327 5958; 596°
m5 72 20359; 3002"


Mga 815>; 1105*; 13098;
2066"; 28688
mony 20362
"n24'2 2037"
NID 1999>
reyya 584s
moyy7a 1984>
NBO 766°; 767°; 1349;
1350*
wand 1141
779 1306>
EVO 341
p79 525°
py 5258
mp yA 2183
“77 4836; 612>; 1306"
ae 483>; 484"
aay)
myt9
TITAN 5483b; 11672
mina
"1770 2034>; 2035
MW2 see THNTO
mn? 2035"
ww 2006>
NUD see nog
Nipa 528>; 1488>; 1559;
20079; 2198>;
24738; 2581°;
2919»; 2942>
NWA 10495; 3041s
DRW%D 2066
TENT 2358


myivya 528; 6745; 1117>;
1228; 20898


SUD see 20
mv see mart.
MYBwA 2204»
SH 1136>; 1139%; 1140°
aw 2066
mB 2790
mura 19778; 2083
min 7412
aan 2038


3478 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS
PE op Yawn 2066 "2m 2009>
natn my" 1307 is
Beach mana | 2008; 31415
marta 970°; 1941» WeWA 1307>; 2180»; IN
mas : 2465» >; 30742 oun ois
vin MGW 97; 594; 22018; eee
cme 3074 mpm 2067¢
ah a a ;
Bi 2016 MW 519%; 6742; 2066; myn 2067°
"2 17558 2200»
i mmm 2009
mura 138; 22088 MWD 503° ae
mia 2181; 2183 BywA 2066 en |z01a*
ae fates 2186 MNBW 1094>; 11018; ae
ae 5 1799; 25548;
mre 2556; 27018 5
i ee aa Se my 1248
2 2082 2; 883%; ;
eee 11365; 1256°; RD 2153"
me \ra 1852»; 1858; IN) 509; 526; 1249»;
nop ae ae mys | 20529; 28144;
a] : a Shs A be sad
Ze ar) 25919” mass) 28280) pee
__ TBR seo "hn retin 2757 TN? 421»
aMM"s 2038 pire 519; 9290; ag53b TYR 4215; 678
MA 136>; 981>; 14118; : * ‘ re ®
1626%; 2039 >; FRE BEE 108: eee
2441> Dpwa 3079 BN? 1559>; 2578; 2581»
7 aa Oy ee sapwra 1435 DN} 517°
: #3 2459" ; SD 4850
THA 2006; 2038 eee 2070: : > 1306; 1307
apt 4229. eRe a .
7 eft * :2999° TPN 1306
mW” see MDW n2py gh oes
Sapa 2488; 2491» MTT 3086+ ee oie
DPW see DIB MIWA 2095*; 20972 ae Sepik
MDW 592; 1452b; 1455; “yw 2067 ca oe
2394; 3096 mp na : a} 2126>; 2127
}PWA 1313; 18179; 2887»; daa cleo NIA? 405»
2888>; 288gb:. ps =r ‘
29488 d ; mp yw 20072 Tass ale?
mbes 30638 nye7g 2237" paella:
Sua 694>; 1289; 24690; wep 1105 eee nm
oes, 2471»; mata 384> WETS} 72127
ea eee FMD 4084; 2337 eet
Wp 3799; 535>; 780»; “ETT
11705; 16814; yar 2866 ae
ie | oo. ee RPE} 2120
2475%>; 24760; | MARTI IEMA 20458 eo
2806» syuama 20452 Tha 21412
Sina 535° movin 2045 Bera
wibwn see Biby Dn? sce Ma DEL e arora
Dbw 2038 mama 695; 20168; 290048 1447>; 2183):
minabia 2038 mybn7a 600» mone
bur 2038 mybna 600 2461>: 25784:
mabey | 20380 iE see i 25818
analy THO 8684; 1917 > TNA} 2466>
mew 20395 FH’ 171; 872»; 2008 mina?
2 ri }21266
‘gwd 1101» TUNA 12289; 2008 m3
mp2 2066 "m2 -2067> 232 1086*; 2156>; 3098


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3479


509>; 660°; 1117%;

19425; 2095s;

2) 20979; 21018;

5} 24015; 28144;

30498; 30515;
3088"

Sap 112455; 2107
TID) 4915; 576>; 722
mdg7 11240>
MADR} 1880"
wba 2126
NINWIZ? 552°
Wap 2141°


332 724»; 2130*; 22108;
25380,


DD -4595; 588>; 24582;
2550°


2 24388
3 952e
FInd 20822; 2154>; 2773>
TID) 1279»


y9 | 569"; 606%; 20402;
") 24438>; 24548;


TI! 2626
m3733
# "Ff 124ggb
nr


722 2029; 2813
) 522; 1336; 2403
33224025; 24038;
283625
m3? 2403
3 2403
2 2756
way 1049%>; 29178
Wa? 522; 1338
1) 1350°
a) 11452
a) 1145
2108°


11458; 2639%;
2644; 3058*


TBD 2129
2124


1050


1228

FJ 160°; 1110%; 2721%;
3035"

TI) 695%; 2204°

DMT) 18819; 21548; 2454°

772 1228

TT 4928


Be Pee 264.4%;
syyy)  2805%; 30588
3712 580°

"mld 869; 13078

m7) 8698

Son


al | 52s; 2108>
227)


pu) 514°

STD 25240.5

“iD 25952; 2866

> 523%; 524=b; 5526;
897>; 11208;
2145>; 25958;
2866"


MND 8518

3532 21088

mgia 2126>; 21542

"THD 12219; 2402; 3044
© fase
>

ee

MAD 699%; 21179

pn


: juss 2561»
m3


mrn 2154>
m™}) Qi119; 2462


13138; 2757>


13

v joussn; 21708
yp

DAD 1584


v3 11488


mvqis 2153°


Bae } 1104
my}

ND 1112

TT) 2846


mT?
5 > jorzes 30508


°


S12 1120°; 2867

DT 1675; 21568; 2594»
Pip 943°

pla 778°

“T) 703°; 7628; 2721»
Bae 762°; 763%;
ah 18012

"aM? 2109

TI) 1308?

DAM} 2109; 21325
samy 2109


TS") 2488
“7T) 2155»
5m) 1308; 13776
4419; 523; 5244;
6034; 11209;
13695; 13944;
oh 1606; 17988;
272) 18085; 1813%;
mbp| 1966; 2422%;
FoF 1 95959: 27928;
2836; 2866;
30459; 31514
mbn2 13775; 1468


Senor 2109¢


~azt} 2131
21539; 2558%"
D2 2109
) 2131
21098
1343


py


ny as ate


}10%


WM) 862>; 9428; 1068;
2109; 27372»
WM? 9b; 1279; 4278; 4280;
8625; 873°; 14928;
21329; 2703>;
2737%; 27388
swim) 2109»
mum 416>; 5149; 5899;
708%; 11108;
11119; 21324;
27375; 3027°
2 21328
> 13869; 2132°; 2737
9 2743
MM) 2109>; 2515
MU? 68; 511; 798;
816; 24598
TID") 5899; 674; 22988
myn) 21392
30) 6742
m1) 2847°
3 2140"
2 13076
my") 2147
WO} 541>; 2153*


“y

my (517; 5526; 1825;
B 21348

a)


m2


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


3480
md) 2840" VALI? 13662; 2974 Tt) 11205; 3050°
TD) 288"; 665%; 11412 "Y) 349>; 512; 606; MIE? see WY}
m2) 13° ee noe ME) 170; 11419; 2205;
m2} 706%; 1823 1967>; 2316"; ee aes
1D} 2129; 2360" 2816?; 3127 *? trae; 943%; 23238
7159 588; 21080 TAD 1967>;2106>;21078; 733
fe 2316; 2960>; boips'd
653 2868" 3051 "anaes 2180b; 2398°
D2} 1279» 093 21078 ae?
ia a
DD} 2590; 3076 TIA? 2126 ws oe 7
MD) 851"; 1105* 7222 2107" 487 02) ; apse
“D3 979; 2467; 2865%> m32 1118=; 3000 iB) 1120 Bs
"12] 978; 11288; 13395; MW. see MIT ee
22054; 2467»: mS 20318: a155° aac
2865" > pale “Y1_513>; 1633; 22218
m2 9438 ope elas np) 210°; 435°; 1106;
Sema. 21330 D OWI! 2134s 21125
sbymay 2133 er See Lee
mbes 1598 mps 2155" MBP? 1106; 1971>
q Tt wot, be 8,
‘Va? 1866° 7B 143°; 1224>+ 21336 epics aa
Slices? i “p) 7348
“10) 1866 28; he
: ; » —" b
"22 see WIN%9: Se ers Hane ee
: i a ‘ rats b
792 1866; 21478 wey Olle HE Gene TD
sna JH2 2856; 2857"; 28608; Peete:
* bouan 2861" "Dp
Biles bp) 576; 1002; 11488; wy [88 i as
DIN) 1866; 21478 3005 ces
. ap
“win 2147 552 see S7D} ve Pb zon; 14718
D3 15849; 2415; 27769; wD) 507° VR
3070 was 2545 Dp? 340%>; 25878
TBO} 585 2 50; 145; 208; DP} 2512»
0} 328 418; 491>; 7398: 13. 19 see 3
710} see NW: ieee ae dana 2134
JO} 882s; 1441>; 24540 1881*; 18889; | a¥yte D902 2134
. . 2 1 as be .
JO} 2454>; 2743 Ee TTD 2840
303 20564; 22630;
ED a, be 45+ ? , mh see bab)
sop | 208s 2648 23378. 6: 24086" hee
a 2495°; 2496»; m2
90} 141s 2562>; 25639; gees Js
ee es me a laze; a54s; agg
3028; 3085" 5 254; ;
Mp2 2126" Sees 418%; 528; 580%;
mys 2153> ad 728%; 1049%;
: : mpd 1123 1107); 1132;
sedans MIMD? 2133" NYZ] 1183"; 11490;
§ : , - 75 ane 1 bs ‘ais
me te DIME] 21198 _ On| pau ties
OBL 2779" TMD 2118; 2119» 1890%; 23999;
, eee, am 24545; 2469;
pe _ Va 11208; 1345 2561; 2903;
O71 4218 Yi 1392>; 1443»; 27436 2942>; 3046
May1 2106" 33) see 3°Z) ND) 1484°
"AY 2118" 2) 830° NW] 1049>
7922 2106» m2 2625> ND? see RW?
"MOT2 2106 M23 see MZ MND] see MNW)


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


3481


TMB) 741%; 8168; 1049>;
1865; 3041>


wt
3) 26265; 2689>;
“( 3046"
TW? 2080"
ow) see TBR
MPD) 1813>
JW. 1865; 3041>
32 3041"
T2702 591°
DW? 5929; 1826"
Taw; 1455; 486>; 5188;
592%; 9738; 14748;
24958
mw 490°
D2 797>; 798; 2143»
pt) 1813>; 1814
PY | 201s 254»; 1340»;
pur 1488>
“2 8854
Mam see 2°32
iM} see PNY
MDD 5%; 769>
am


ann


man}


535>; 22632; 3007;
3075


pm
* +2825>
py


JM} 2139; 2825p

FMP 2052"

JE) 1735; 2109; 728»;
820; 1144»;
1228; 1232>;
13954; 1859;
1865>; 19685;
2178*; 2825»

JM} 2120*; 2450

ONIN) 21219; 2139


3)

m) 517°

m2 27015; 3081°
m2 316

m2 2153


-
Mw


931"; 1123>; 27088;
3080

503

20168

2629; 3088

2710>

3086»

2629

6565; 694>; 706;
1107*

\656e


11218
29720
1132*; 1437#; 29728


: | 20950; 20978


2783
528>

1060"
2783
2783


|2636+


2636#
31108
3110
5842; 709
2294»
263°


8305; 1289; 19657;
26262


5842; 669; 2558%;


28642


876%; 1111"; 18949 |


2821»

1083; 2200; 29057
2178*

2456

2820°

‘376

see 1°70

1441"

132; 1681»; 21054
2821

2868"

2837"

138°


mp aI
MB WIO
NPB"
m370
70

Te


2095"; 2097°


9149; 27448


DAD
1422>; 28742»
Bp


TOW 1423; 1985*


“OVO 28748
DO 242°; 704>; 10525;
1117>; 2538>;


28718; 3078%
mio 696; 943
MEN 28715; 3083


“WO gi6b; 8192; 9938;
srw) 12488; 2838"


TAMD 671°; 2524»
"IO -2180°
“MO 687; 1995»
WD 2035>
“M2 3002; 3004»
MIMD 2035>
nnd 1984>
379
350
yD 541»; 2813»
mate)
ro
PS 2802+
"3" 2805
"J" 2802»
DN" 2805»
NIH 28126
RPO
RTI"O
NUD see MIO


| 880+


2790°


|a7es


PD (5419; 11169; 1119%;
an} 14198; 29378:
TP) 94930: 29740:
m0 | - 3073» ”


JO 829>; 2292»


TDQ 503; 829>; 22926;
2948"


ring
m9
mia ming 2869"
"30 28708


| 2869"


3482 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS
iad eres TD see MO“ IP “70 2732
720 TAO om
Tu ee } 13426; 27218 * |son5; 1037*; 2180°
7230 2711" TED I
S30 896>; 1125¢ . "ID. -2720 TIO 2438
S90 1124%>; 11258; TROD 2690 FID 1929; 23778; 2408"
Pec 2837" DD 2091; 20928; 3109 MBINO 513°
aie es |s00r; 11258 DQ see DID “BIO 29740
le "25D 2813¢ "2D 376
2D 64>; 6038; 24508;
2753>; 27542: WO 2545 TH? | 9710; 3089"
2853>; 30085; DVD 513° a at)
Mee BY 21988 “AND 2743
pe eee 7° | 2198 PRP | 430
be a § a AS az
DD 412; 413 = ont
ce Ale BID 513° “Dd 669"
b
a s 72? | 2020; 30834 TOP | a7g0
ees mp mone
12) 2096; 2488; 2963" BO 1175: 1435; 1436"; “IMO 2813"
abd 2690
abo MBO 704; 1350 y
2663"; 2664»
Sie) ; ree 2701 DY 670%; 1132
"20 mp “IBY 695»; 2409»; 27425;
1° lore MOPS 18678; 2701 : 3110"
: ; 339 mn
jbo MPD 27749; 27752 ies a on
8; 5 11823;
MD 1132; 11338 “ABO 7092; 2856b; 28572: fi 4 0 be
i : poe ; 1983>; 2738>;
"dD see 120 = a ; : 28158; 2825%
TP2D 2662 ooo Cos
Ber ameee DO 5878 aig Tay 21750
Tere |aeas bs | hele mls a
iba) sine PEP | agsp yee 494>; 4958;
ee pow ah 2742»
YD 7379; 1119; 2032; ies a
22164; 2593>; “BO 2565; 336°; 7235; may 1762
25964; 2713%; 813b; 9026; 903% b: a 3
Sea 1815»; 1886; jiigy 46?
ae 20002; 2689»: PIB 495"
mipbrran® [2714 27046; 27548; “ISD 4s
ty ey a i ® babes a
mYeD 1473+; 19074; 1908 182>; 495; 4963; SNUIRy 4
med 11115; 11228 spp] 503%>; 729%; nq
DD 2340+ seep) 20st TOs sng |e
; MVPD | 1812; 24878; sie
422 "790 2674» 2597%; 31238 729 727 890°
“79D 2947:; 3050" S729 2721» 133 72Z |
TQ 1337° . TIIDO see IDE shop Tay
m 2 "7120 a viay
M20 2717 MBO 2722 2F | so4ge; 2408?
BD) hie") nay
** +1109; 1455° T boos5e: 2721»
220 oD “ADD
: oi * +5859; 14848
TRIO 2719 nypd 2836 127
TID see TNO "OD 1354» WAP 6678; 1865»
DPBIO 2681" 370 2974» DMAP 6672; 2408
TID 53206 Dane 518P "ay
ces ies : * bears; 2000
7D 27208 PID 2693" "29


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3483


m3y 2742»
329 973; 4598; 7286;
1127%; 1183>;
12485; 13558;
20815; 22053;
2255; 3076"
NBD 459
"32 226%; 4599; 890°;
1354>; 1758
MBP 11274»
“AY 1855"; 14469; 1513;
15148
memay 3b
TAay 894»
mA 232
Way 26240
nay
miay
nay
may >3829; 709»; 2623»
may
aay 19340
any 1934
M337 1472
NA 7375; 2874.6
D139 2594>
BaP 54200


M297 734°; 905>; 1367;
1905»; 29998


may 5816


Fay 905%; 9068
“Y 120; 10414; 13388;
1395»; 2323;
2411
WY 748; 8979; 11105;
18522-b; 3099


ay see Ty

IP 48b

M77 182; 653>; 700°;
7018; 3099


joo7as


witty b14475


my 2446; 9052; 10635; »


1578

"TY 2201
eee 4g
we

PP 55°
RUT 55>
WD 568
min 56


“59 56>
DPT 62
722 152°; 8208; 897>
“ID 3068
NIT 56>
TID 57
489; 259b
22054
“19 259°; 1086°; 22008
“TY 5842-b; 8990
“17 8990
DST 62>
WY 11229; 1866
RW see M39
=n 21758
D359 ggge
3 2180"


iz | 200605 20978


MI 87>; 760; 23488
mI 340>
may

: | ara; 14694; 1544»
Soby
TMP see PY
Dy 340>
ny

| 380%; 2132
my

Say 103; 734°; 10498

Sw 181g>

d47 sce DY

727)

a
217 714695; 3083
mbiy
mby
ny see my
ed 348?
by


130; 705"; 10105;
nbhy| 1011; 10413;
‘+ 23238; 25045;
ney) so259: 3106%
3108
719 10708


ard {aso 1468; 14698;
jing) 2504"; 2798


Ty 883b


TAY 10862; 11218; 11426
DAY 425°; 7449; 1149»
np


"DW 955°

VP 13432; 3042s,

"AY 340%; 25278

“99 593; 21119; 2834»

“AD 377; 18629; 24228:
2709; 2813%;
28148

“19 487>

ay see sy

My 2868

"NW 3042

TD 3438


TP 11239; 124g>- 12490:
1797%


°


1087; 30725
344°

“3TY 344>

Myy 3456; 11788
TOY 345e


x
x
D 342b; 21440
3
y


THY 342b; 13376; 1338

TTY 342°
ITTY 344

“IZ 3043

NTP 30486
DR TY 344>
DRYP 3044b
“OND 30442

my
THR
NDT 344>
MYOTY 344>; 345

WIP 3456
TINQTY 22022

pry 1106

NPT 2708

TPTY. 3448

“IY 1374

MIP 13748

“TZ 1040%; 1081»; 3100


|s043+ b


3484


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


NWP 1082"
DRY 342"
my


we 13742
ny |


MTP 1082"
TYP 1864; 2743»
“1 1085
DRUNP 345¢
mT
wy Ns
DPM 345°
smty 1179
wy 2297
MOP 259>
Py 2052"
TO OY 2130; 2819
mboy 4140
. TOY 1086
"Oy 7628
MIQPZ 3174; 762%;
18018
minwy 317+
“IN Moy 317


ma mis
ax


FW MWY 3288; 2779»
Ww

NIy

my

D3°2 8ggr"

my

v7

oy

wy


|sam ; 3043»


7638;


}sase


87>; 885; 1319»


see "J
14498
11214; 2525


4758; 1142; 14448;
2533>


1010°
1545*
14499
1449


poy
Dyn


TY 8g8b; 210%; 2679;
3428; 658°; 6745;
7240: 941>; 1042;
1069>; 1085>;
1150>; 2196>;
24388; 30815
1 PP 945


DD PY 9450


ANT py
at Py
“apy
NTPA PP 952
MI PP 952
“ARM PY 952>
“Tat P 13406


943


TPP 942; 1346»
mrbay ye 944
Dan PY 953
ya7 PP 953
Way PP 54>


D’M PY 1548°
mB PY 954>
ony 1086°
MEY 955°
87>; 132; 171»:
2118; 2885; 662":
665=>; 1136;
.
P| is378: 1376»:
"J} 14918; 14928;
may | 1596; 18100;
“F) 91918: 25450,
2552>: 30018;


3074; 3134>
WY 2878; 673e>
NT 14918
TY 14919; 15708
moan Wy 2664>


mAMa7y 666?
14938


wy
“YP 1492
Dy? 14918
wm) VP 1492"
way WP 1493"
be faux; 313; 314b
wy


my see F
MABDy 36°; 2092%
2737>; 2840
1106; 1906; 1907;
; 2092»
OP 28a
Dy 37
JOY 35
MODy 37
"OY 35>; 579%;
2854>
35>; 579»


21788;


TRF 2178
BIWPD 559; 2737>; 27389
Sy 585; 678; 728;


1136>; 15598;
2411; 2779»;
29615

oy

: |2076e; 31268

Sip

NDP 3033"

339 2848

mb 522; 605; 797%;
1107; 12218;
12484; 12678;
1392%; 26398;
30468


m2y 1861>


266; 26395; 26418;
2642b; 26438;
26448
miby 112
myep
m7
Tee
Wee

MPI 14249; 21449; 3045»

Y 2348»

“SY 28>; 1370b

“PY 591

moby see mby

MSY 266; 501; 1437;
30398

FEY 19°; 1205; 12508;
12515; 1254;
1264>; 12679;

; 13908
S9SD 1149»

np"2y


mby
may


lon


jor ; 112


122 see TPF
SOP 26>; 8188;
30368
bby see Sbiy
moby see mipby
15602
BBY see Ddty


MAY 891>; 1458; 1967:
3051
yra>y 100°
MVa2Y 20969; 24880»
nian"by see Jad mya


1234»;


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


way
mag
a Eyoby
yop
sway


Savoy
may
ony
pry
Seay
NV OD
33y"a7
svani“ay
ap "a7
ny
“sia?
many


oT


89%; 90°; 98>

2590

1086°

117*; 5848; 11214:
12158; 1570>;
1586; 15933;
23198

210°; 1559°; 1968;
25589; 27435;
2745>

see TVA


1338; 2415; 3033


| 1984>; 2398


117>; 7948;
1931


117%
1188
1208
11g
1178
1178
117°
1178
117%
1334»; 27528
117%
1106+
30078
1306>
112»
112»
112»
1457


7978;


1354


9 1148


112°


4398; 777; 1583%>;
18082»; 20923;
25608; 27514;
2784%; 3045%>

30458

2035"


10678; 2188>; 22578;
27524; 3080°


9 12778


2191>
125»
1263-

see OP


3485


NT 113
“Ws 114
"OWT 114
272 128
23D 1122; 2527"; 3050
329 8208
MBP 3>; 818%; 1051%;
10994; 1215%;
24202; 2488;
2831°; 30368;
3099"
TIP 1285; 24200
|
** 120278; 24208
17
2737 160°
MP 1215>; 20274
TBD 1439; 20278
"29 66"
"29 -2420%b; 24278
"29 3038"
TPT 1280
TY see WY
DY? 136
7097 5339; 896; 30078
Dy 132
DAI7 129
72922 61>; 120°
727 3318; 522>; 862;
942); 2033»
127 129°; 670
"99 1298
TID 129
8 | 5a»
ay
m37 513°
P27 5895; 29998
“"pP2 128°
“29 132°
Woy 698"; 11326; 2093%
wry 2504»; 3010°
Ty 130%; 4428; 2748»
mang? 130°
nin}


“mang


| 1308 + 144»


D OY 1780%; 2140>; 3086"


bpd


2438?


SPY 940; 13925; 3027°
Spy 2196"
"DY 2198


a3y
my
"Ba NST


uy


y37
“Ly
mB
ap?
apy

. app
map
MR?
“py
"py
apy
pape
Prapy
TRE
"p?
“Pp?
"RP
aap?
yee
wp


797%

817

955

817%.b; 8879
883"; 887"

see MOP) N73
9649; 2198"
964°

see MIB


> 1335; 13749; 21838;


2778; 2847>:
2854>; 29728:
30098; 3155®
1305"; 13062; 15479;
1968°; 3110;
3114
24968


65"


| 1082


1447>; 2818

669°

491b; 4938:
1081»

495»; 1144»

17


495»;


10822
669>; 2569


}rov ; 28228


15494
15498


| 1367


28688

see Ipy MD
2594>

894; 1549
760°

309°; 760°
88b

1402

916

406°

2703°

27>; 9168
760°; 2348


3486


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


Opp 1449


“J 87>; 211°; 944°; see
also "9


“YW 968
SY 945°; 2178; 2408>


SIP 1489; 2056>; 20838;
28728; 30023;
30378


Jaus


AP 798
ay 1041°; 2056? ;30722;
30779; 3104?
BOY 1120; 14734; 2404"
29 |2201% 2533 >;
26978
MII 211>; 592; 5938;
8015; 831>; 899»;
1041; 24078
MAID 2408
VII 886; 2408
78
aaa.
“maw 2250
TIP 221>; 2878
MAY 2013+; 2111"
many
mz
“NY 2879; 25449
TW 8648; 21119; 3035»
bey
ay)
DY 2486; 2868
wry
Ww
spay 259°; 2908+
ay
"17 969%
Vr 2949
JI 259>; 694>; 10068;
10108; 11492;
22008
JAP 10108; 1144; 2467
DIP 3035
MSP 1131>; 3035
DI 2407
DAY see DUT
DAY see DANY
Dw


: }1350°
me


3085>


}1150°


jour


TON 13099; 2486>; 28688;
3089*
yo 2407»


TIP 968>
“WY psee PITY


“UPA 259%
Day 5178
may 21298; 22028; 28548
MEN 22022
SEY 13078
"PAY 246»
IY 8528
Dry 4228; 21818
wy 2091; 20928
APY 12039; 13758


MWY 522; 7045; 1051>;
1098; 11213;
1149; 12214;
1968>; 20276;
21788; 22482


: 3105>
bamiby 262


Wy 971»
et | 2005; 29478


nw 272
mw 262
Woy 2679
pwy 2116; 2198>
pwr 9979; 2116
puy ooze
pwr 1069


“wy 2590°
“wy see wy
mee
Tye
wwy 704
mwy 2773»
TMINBP 2708; 584°
ae biked rs 27534
rnw?
MMW 270; 2389


jain; 29488


“AD see TTY
“Ny 30075; 3008


RE | 1240s 25275


a
“AP 11179
“EY 328°
mn 317
PMP 130°
qnZ 317
"my 3202
ead
wENy
"InY 2204»
SeIMyY 2204»
poy 1306%; 1337°
VRP MY 1036; 1543
AMY 17>; 1145
Y 10134
mInZ 1m


5

TASB 721; 25134
“NB 12398

ANB 1278»
TINE
mb
TINE
TINB 22478
M3B 1108


513»


Dap 14842; 1490°
JIB 593?
DN VIB 22078
“3B 1086
“3B 576>; 722»


TIP 2022s;
2531; 25418


DREIB 22940
“ALTTIB 2294»
FB 2207+


2530%b;


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3487


TB 33>; 6748; 6795;
728° ; 8992; 20938;
24225; 2814»;
3096


TSB
mR
mp 490°
WAS 2392; 25118

Sew 2511

BDO 24239
JAD 674; 1087; 12346;

1793"; 2208
Sip 417°
“3B 2506"
PIB 2506"
MIND 25018
PAB 1150>
TPN 1306
SD 2156
“Ap
er qas }2506>
mp
TINND 2392; 25068; 3086°
ROB 24218
"MAB 2501; 25112
TD 11119; 1274
TID 441>
im?) 1441%%; 2408;
2819"
“TB 11029; 2856
TIME 5692; 1289; 1969;
2681%; 2986>;


}2501*


2987
DMD 671>; 672
MMB 1146*; 2401°; 2681°


sgta mop 474»; 22078


mmmp 1146

MTOB 709%; 28565; 2857*
“TOD 28619; 2862"
wD 518; 1325>


MOI™P 23669; 23946
TD 1925°


Maro WB 2396"


D5°B 2366"
wi)
talB
TAB 674

OMDB 768; 14218; 2385


2247*


V"B 2400"
wD 2400
Timp 2402


JB 512%; 1231; 24250;
3049"


DMAY MISE 1443; 2410


N>B 1337; 13892; 2001°;
2062; 24039;
28059; 3104°
NSD 2062>; 3104>
MOND see TR
MONDD see “ONDER mbIm
35 2296; 2866
3DB 2296
NDB 2296; 25958; 2866;
2899%; 3074»
MYDD 2595
® see wad
WIPD 2398°
mibp 2744»
NSD 22358; 23582
"bp 22975
IT2B 316°; 24096
NMSH 2398
WDB 2742»
mop 11499
wep 22978
vb>p see wp
mop see mote
"Q2B 2236>; 2358
"SB 2399"
SyrmB 2236%; 2358


glob) =)
ne |2296»


I)
* 122965


|
wi
AC ee
ES


1148


lef
ws
iva
ahha


Ssbp 7559
Top 859>
Sop 22088
mbm 2296°


ve | ‘D man
Dos 3795; 2701»


meeSp 1102%; 1423¢ |
wop 449


muU>p 2208; 23762

B 2026; 2297;
2376%>; 29638

® 22078

B 255>; 22978; 237926

BR 2093

2237

B 706%; 797

5 see OD

B 721>; 7228; 11378;
1435°; 16076


Syep


"2B seo JHE


O38 7235; 1085; 1127%;
1131°; 11414;
12539; 1354>;
1418>; 23374;
24387; 25615;
27678

“OB 2932>


28


|2208 23580


| 709" 3 2860°; 286155


B 22988
JOB 2400
B 2400"
TOD 1334
MOD 962%; 1323
B 889°; 2256
MOD 2255; 2365>
MOD 1823
S9OB 581%; 2512>
JOD 22559
SOB 25126
SOB 5815; 14508; 2512»


PPOD
77 +2097
PARPOR
MBSD 2401>
195).
* +22078
a>)
“AYD 2319%
“JB see ID
OY 1968°; 3105
SY 8179; 12215; 1968>
TBD 3063
"OEE 23580
Dyp


| 160 ; 22008; 3083


3488


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


TIZB 517>; 2154
MYSE 1110"
TMexp 2864
TEE see TED 2
“PB 210°; 680°; 6888;
1968"; 22000;
2205>
IPP see TPP


MPP 595"; 769"; 2180;
30588
Tipp 2296


: | pase


MpE 2295
TPB 3089
TIPE 2296
TPP 1289; 18529»;
2180; 3134
IPP 1286); 1815»
TPE 935>; 1286»


2 | sao»


7 }sm


ANTE see NWND
DB 2400


22478


IB 316>; 2744>
IIB 2093


DIMI 89Gb; 11322; 21998;
22463; 2248»;
2831


MIB 7348; 1367>; 17998;
22478


see NID
} oso; 2712> -


TMB 2255
DOME 22558

“WINE 22375; 24239; 24256
WIP see 275
TTB 30018; 3049»
JMB 3049

"TD 23238

TPIB 5175; 11202
TAB 1120; 30508
DID 5949

“IB 1278»
NTN see WN


DB see TB

PIB 2533»

TID 763°

MDAB 1336"; 30474
NOW 22480

FIP 2248»

OTB 20328; 3038

OID 2202


OID 20328; 2329; 2335+


TONE 6678
“DIB 23358


ID 3409; 1055; 21118


IB 19072

TIP 1055»
MIA 2359
DIDNT MIB 2359>
md; my


sone | 2360
42) mb


wor 1118>; 2248>; 2365>


JINP WW 2360; 24008
MBTE 3162; 2365»


VIB 517; 695%; 1143;


1968+


VIB 514°; 1173; 2320


“ETD 2365
DET 2320"


PoP 5179; 5259; 25418


PIB 762°
“IB 746"


2846»
WIP 20329; 2854»
1B 882b; 2320
WIAD 14238; 2032b
NAD 22516

B 897; 1038>
DAND 2154

WE 1069»
TAITWD 22558
WE 340°; 2179
BH 2798; 3006
MOP 1118; 18948
MAWE 1118"; 3000


b>)
= | 1308 14364


"NDB see “HE
DIME 896


TMB 99>; 816*; 27129;


27984


WP 6142; 859; 1147;


DNINE 2358*


MANE 2358
MIMD 517>; 2196
TINE 8695; 1175; 1435b;
2196
TNMD 2358"
sme
“mp
"RDP
S"P9MD 2856
MPN 27989
SMB 512>; 513%; 1819;
2590
brome 760°
DME 2401»
MB 55°; 286>; 27376;
27388
DIME 2263+
"OIMB 2263¢
MOB 517


11258; 2798"


x
TNE see MW
JANE see JRE
SNE 1931>
ad 584%»; 1829b-


FINy 2756; 27588
RENE 1542
3¥ 1106; 1905»;
19064; 19078;
2999»
254>; 1254>; 1264»;
R33] 12675; 14330:
mae] 19199; 2188;
2742; 3148»
mxhy :
ery nae
py


MRE 1326; 28752
ME see Taiz
PUBE 1443

WAX 25975; 3085"


"DR 1449; 817%; 11798;
1235»; 31550;
31568
NY 3148
MPA 3148>
TRAE 81725; 11798; 25978
DI2E see ‘E MIDE


INDEX


¥ 1444
Yaz 833
VaR 1443; 3148
Day 1443>
ABZ 1350>
5288
18868
IX 3140
MTZ 1370°
JZ see THY
pmy 31295
DOTY 31498
PIE 1264; 12675; 18589;
25919; 27953;
3129»
JZ 1267; 1782>; 3129»
PUY 1781>; 1782>; 2591+
MPTZ 1781; 20739; 2501;
2681»


rosy
ve R | 808; 31418


VP TS
SOY 21326
Oe 1311
“wie 20499; 21559; 2200°


TUDE | 13258; 3154>


8047>


TIE 2108; 11279; 2200;
22018; 3150>


TUTE 695°
pI 10998
ale } 1108

“AZ 3158>
Dix 22278
mae
2 a1 3158; 31592
my

mpie 3156"

“Diy see TA


OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


“piw 3156
V1x 1120%; 2766»
pix 136°
288; 10985; 1136%;
saz} 12545; 1264>;
1569>; 21894:
~| 25969; 28568:
3146; 3159"
“hE see WZ
“IZ see ANTE
TMZ 1136
py see INTE
See 31599
“TW 3159°
my 676+
NZ see NTE
mime 22475
TITS 2247>
PZ 1168; 13179; 14938;
18435; 2072»
pMy 1843b; 27038
“mz 3154»
“AE 2879; 676


"EY 15489. >; 27748;
2775>; 30768;
30848


Y 14408; 3047>
| soa
m7
vx
he
THR 406%; 831>; 1548;
3084>

TPE 29sB>

FE 3150°
Ny
Ny
"3B 5826; 26978
“IR 3152

m7" see TAX


farses


}si4oe


7.
ies } x10 2408*; 3153
yz


my"E 11206


MEY 1288; 1146>; 19079;
29176


px see x>px
SOY 1158; 14368; 2207%>
Sy 2745»
mde 3149"
roy


“| 5176: 678; 2027
Ha aye


3489


MSE 2237
rmi>ye 764; 22375
MMDy 5048; 54>
22% 510%; 1907
“DBPSE 1348
DSY 145%; 146%; 1109;
1136%; 1264;
1450%; 14525;
14548; 2766


yey 3132
myge2 2746"
myaez 3131
wyeY 3133>
y>oE 1323
DoE 64>; 25909; 3142>
7m lar 591; 1861°;
nyey 25902
mee 3igib
“IMD2¥ 31438
mydy 31438


DEDE 1907; 1908; 2095";
20978; 2101*


Poe 31438
“EE 3149>
DE see DZ
NAY 2595»; 29738
NOX 2973
“OR 382; 2875;
31278
TAY 1320; 1907; 3047


PML 5289; 6719; 11236;
2527
mex 513°
Ay
TE
DAY 2595»
“OE 3104
3143
DYVAY 3143+
MYA 513>; 1390
max 769°
7X 30662; 3150" »
JB 2974»


hia | see Ny
mz


TPZ 252; 2538; 728;
11165; 14199;
2787%

“'D% 1435; 1609"; 3074;
30758


7246;


}si2; 513%; 733


3490 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


P| coz» Hee Sao NMP | ozs; 19420
aie 7X see PY MSEVS
my px TIP 7622
"3 aay a MIP 582"
airy $3419; 878; 1343 2p 'y x :
mee “E\64>; 1368; 944»; eae
: “S55 sy! 1870; 28642 wrap | 352; 182; 1264»;
WE see PE ; "14032; 1596;
TI 841s; 1343; 2067 “E3146 DR | 2078; 26612>
A ay = 4
MIyY 2423 =) 1119; 30300 ITIP 286082
METZ 3075 4 MmITIp 782; 1107>
“WE 522» TIE | 3 4qp wp 2661¢
“E2206 nT IP 160+; 888; 2438
TIPE 1578; 1865¢ TIE 64>; 1611; 3010 ;
ite ; r sip (130%; 888%; 10419;
MYX 1052 THANE 31489 mys) L141; 17895)
TTR 30478 myINE 3147 Urea) Cli aO er Une
YE 3131 Te a 528%; 28568; TP, 2438
; i soy! 3147 TOTP 160
WE 3153 aml
weet | sie TF | aan: 3147 GRE eee Eure
Duy “"y ists 11368; 17898;
PIL 764>; 1490° DI 1422 sfatp! 2026°
“YE 3154 MP 1422» map 1790°-
mPY 3074 TPE 1422; 3132; 31579 ONT 1789
BF 5146 “NPE 3157 sDTP see HNP
"Dy MIVAY 1422; 18678; 18688 “DTP 762%; 13485; 2263¢
ab>h4 1141; 1275; 2506; “Ip 1798*
TF | or55e; 31328 :
wy , 2545 Tp 17908
© ‘i 1b oi -
“PY 31462 ne ae AIP 1798
‘ i ; mi np "
MEE | 14305 2838b; 3152 3049" Baga
nby : : . meee WIP 816; 818; 1323;
pesaee es Sue 1408>; 2681>;
mopy 7640 sown My 31335; 3147 26822
PMEY 3152> OZ 3132; 3133 WIR 1790°
DMP 21279; 3157+ SID 326>; 1403; 14059»;
TIDY 8419; 8699 P 1596; 26865;
DX 10068; 13899; 21554; XD : ees
711 i } 1559; 22978 WIP 703%; 1132; 1788;
“DY sce TEE a 1789°; 1971);
Le = MNP 22978; 26978 2007; 2821>
ee | 938% 31448 2p 17889 DIp see wip
eee 2089; 3132 Map 2013" 27a Wy 1788
Lind = ae , map 4328; 20138 mwp 746>; 1339>; 22114;
ae ae bs eb « b
eas pe pttig 8 ; FAP 80%; 22935; 3149 2682+; 2821
“EY ; ace TIP 899
DDE 612%; 2295° : | 287; 25242 Sas 6510
FEXDY 3085 MRF =
“MDE. 11435; 1249" 2aR 612; 613° “mR ete egcwave
=F }
MPDp 511; 875 :
“PE 11439 72R MIpMp 894; 1816>; 24338;
Ae cee nhne YER 1177; 1350>; 2415» 26.49
i
VIX 11475; 24048 PRBAP 1788 mnbmp 17918
TIDY 2774"; 31522 “SR 5382+ Dip 1816
VIBE 21115 MAP see TAP “Hip, 1816


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3491
Phone; 2044>; 30809 Pe 1791» Tip 379°; 5135; 5449;
R VP 2710>; 2870>; 2982» one aa oe
Vaip 253 IMAP 1286 2780; 2847;
MR 2263» YP) 171>; 3028; 11678; 3079
MIP 2016 Spi Leal, Tzp 1791; 3032
’ i “{ 19805; 20078; ND 170
DP 1306; 28704 TYP! 2720; 30018 “lf
bp (105855 109485 18925; Yn es TP 1221; 1279»; 2590°
REL aTBEt 22006 | gam opp 808 TT ia
< 29778 ; ‘ Poe Map 1791»
. . 417930
msp 1816 iat) fe BOP 1964
Dp 944>; 24619; 25278 wp 18138 DDR 862+; 1964»; 3097
MIP 13699; 2850 yup 1813+ MOY 1322, 1469»
TIP 728>; 21178 “Ep 1813 mQFP 17918
Dip 1810; 1816 3p 1789 TPePR 1986
PP | 0s 3B see d4p MIR 5958; 854°; 24080
np Mop 4112; 10068; 2247 uP see Hp
VIP 6; 2870 Pop 700°; 27488 NDP 766°
TP | 335 734°; 9434; MMP 5419 elec
yp) 1821%; 2974» “bp 1789 spp | 484°; 4858; 13679;
: 2 : sip) 24218) 24228;
Mey 1907 mM2p 1791 P| 2697
“Np 849%; 2840 NO"2p 1791» TBP 260°; 13678; 2138;
am Sop 1006+; 1349"; 18926 24229; 26979;
ye P harm 1167; 14379 Soe z piee 2736; 27378:
re Mieeenel 2738"
AMwAp 18182 Oop 2072 VER 24900
SDP 2403 mob 2072 YR 504%; 14678
TIMP 1446>; 26390. Dep si YP see Pip
ramap 1793 Dp 1335>; 2889 DEP 510
yop 11 D2 252° TEP 2716
TR fwp 1136 Typ | 503°; 5229; 5239;
wine, | 1321" map 2847 899°; 11479;
Phe Sys 1791» MEP| 14679; 27800
AQP 760° ies aA MEP 2513
‘ jvap 1789
QP 1446; 2321» oe MBP 11179; 1123
, b (214098; 2974 MEP 569°; 1308; 2454>;
“WP 1446 eae PR ae ;
RP 18144 nop 1111; 11228 myzp 58255; 1797
miup a wap 3114 VRP 940°; 1797
HOP 1790° Vep 1334° ee 513°; iia
rep 1550° swap 2140 cup 11219; 1145
rk MP 510>; 11216
~IP 2710; 2870 JPR 4948; 2138" Reet ae
b>
op Rep 955"; 2797> VER 316%; 2415
ven [304 NID 533" “EP 2093>; 25349; 27808
wip see wrap NIP 1264; 1267 yey re
PP 538; 1789 TIP 955s; 12675; 15726 ae OS
TPP 1798; 1824°; 18368; TMP 328%; 533; 538; Baler eee
z He fe 8; 1336%;
24139: 3145» 583; 12214;
ne ; 1789>; 21179; Pee eS
PP | 799 2422; 25068; iene
“Pp 28726 NIP 1818; 2254


3492


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


AIP 13349; 2126"; 2639%

AIP 746°; 1490°; 25108;
29478

a4p see ap

JEP 709°; 1059"; 18649;
21776; 2396";
2639" b; 26448

DIP 341°

MIP 133%; 2108; 4179

mp see mp

pa 13348; 1810;

sop! 21268; 2132

eee 11479; 1446;

map) 28608.

Tp 1816>; 1817

Mp 17908

mm

pee | 380»

RP

“TIMP 1817°

“IP 705

TN P 2433

MMP 662°; 665>; 18115

mip 1765>; 17938


misn mp 1sir


Dv) AMP
py np
mPOTANP
“BOT


DINMP 1811


| 1811+


ju»; 1812


VIR 2773"

TIP 1131; 1322; 1392;
14225; 17563;
20958; 2097


MET PIP 1793


DIP 665°

DAP see DP

Sd 7p 1125

DIP 670°

Ip 2524

DRIP 510%; 1435%; 17909
“PIP 1790

WIP 4349; 4918

MEP 1790

JEIP 1790"

Wp 2866>; 2867
NP 765%; 1122"
ABP 328°
MWR 11175; 2425"
MUP 1337; 1338


a 7


TBP 655; 1306°; 1337°;
13549; 28548
MBP 1338°
jPwp 18138
MOWP 1793; 2076%%;
2304>; 23058
mvpip 2701
“WP 474>; 6909; 19688;
3007%
“WP 699; 3007
MBP 2529; 2527


¥


ba)
TN] 65%; 2088; 4775;
8518; 9975; 1068;
1234>; 12674;
20278; 24114;
25818; 2921>
TINA 1308"; 13419; 2459;
25818; 27138
FIN 2572
"JAAN 2573%
TPAN] 25736
“ND 11798
TIN) 25349


Dy"

“| 1449; 165°; 584;
DUN; 22185: 2511;
pf 25899; 3037»;

“| 3084»; 31568


mivas} 709%»; 2529%; 28608;


miaw) 2861?
WN 3822; 569°; 6068;
691»; 897; 11138;


11275; 13183;
13905: >; 24008;
24159; 2441>:
2454>; 2623>;
2982; 3024».
3025°


oN
as
WN see 74
PUR | 11138; 11275; 1136;
yo 1607
“ye 1808
TUN 4268; 6064; 11138 >;
1200°; 24532
30175; 5692; 1294s;
13075; 1569»;
1981»; 25220:
27759
Aa" 1981+
M229 2159"
429 2909"


| 1166


TID) 333°; 334; 1350°;
19076

TID] 2520; 2522

a4
sin
3°24 27815

“MD 589°; 21295
PMB 25220

MEA 2590
WA7DI 1962>; 25228


Jars; 2159"


OMIO~AT 25226


ya 1183
27 1142»
a 20799; 2534»
V22 723
Mpz 1 2534>
MPWIT 2522»
339 669°
THI 1145»
TH4 2154»
DO 376>; 1248*; 27109;
2814»
S99 523>; 1121>; 11258;
134498; 18653;
2257
Dyn 25978.
Day 2910°
2546»
2094»
8608
20768


TI 3047
DTT 282>; 2817%
aT) 1121»
2871>
2525»


"11364

247 see 14

mV} 2545"

TT 880
man

ee 2597
many
MT} 9522; 1306


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3493


TIN _68b; 88b; 4862; 5188;
7088; 7240; 9738;


10748; 1253;
18505; 13513;
14065; 14743;
18885; 19183;


20568; 2496»;
24979; 2515%>;
2562>; 25633;
28188; 28378;


DI" 518; 709%; 10492;
1232>; 13698;
2527°

maa 26278
9 paca
ee T+ 25976
“niga?

yA 764»

77 13075; 2379>; 24238

WIT 2420; 2426>

DM see UN

mI 26278

r
: |40m ; 21058
inl
mT. «1097
FAT 2588
VT} 2454
“T2399
OT) 3083
41) 24549; 2626+; 3049
any 5174
a4
am
m7 5178; 5232
SIT} 1881; 21449; 2525


| 5030 + 2550°


me
ane | apsae
nan
BE asso

om)


DYN] 25512
MSA see Nia
mI 2052
24rm see 307
DAM 2552; 2553"
pn}
pm}
OT] 1167
Smt 10498; 2523>; 25242


DI 18°; 695%; 2035%;
24028


1097


Bm) 492; 5118; 695;
24024; 2525b:
29474
") 4925; 5115; 24538
=
| 1208
a
) 24026
4120+ 415¢; 3072°
3073
") see pm
T) 494>; 14678
") 2780
WOT 1145
a")
|eoee + 7068; 2522»
a


35! 25359

72) 25908

™"] 2700°; 2701; 2818"
Oo) see DR

yn) see 27
mp
* "+13078
neq

4
a: | 851; 2594»
net
pv 941°


Py
941>+ 1106"; 25238
Pr


mp) 941

77) 6768; 2846+
om
Or
om
J 487; 1861»; 2947
7 29478

339 29478

335 595

237) 2535

TP" 2535; 2536+

2159 604"

DAD) | 12028; 12798; 2590;
w24 28688

32) 1086; 2075


13482


52% 687; 24275; 3002"


S59 2523»


m52) 20358; 3002; 3004;
3005*


WI 5489; 1221*


ae 1569; 1593+; 24080;


WS) 4198; 5476; 1423»;
2093>; 2875>
BA see Wi}
DY see DR
DI 258; 1569b; 2438;
2527
see DI
le 454>; 1390"; 2527
M27 31099


imam | 24170; 25573 25930;
Te 35948


ani

gy ¥ 115918; 2528; 25298
a3 72)

mas 2522

m7) 25292

m7 1309


TAD 5475; 5488; 1424;
19854
AMIDA 2557
DW 1049; 2504; 3109"
TO7 see fea
77p Tor 2594
way 743
743°
"2557
)


Sm) 25299
mone)
Dp

mmo mg) 2528
TD see TMZ
T1098"
MID". 7645; 1755"; 2594>
23 «764»
27 1278
MI 2594>
JED 4825; 4839; 2561*
DD 29298
3 64>; 540°; 7488;
10415; 1042>;
1043% >; 13548;
14425; 2122;
2155°; 2798>;
30835; see also
me


2528"


3494 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS
oy AO a DeME) 2560? DE) | so50; 6728; 1781°
yum} 2132; 2553" T7D 2559» on
D5 2122; 30842 MIO 27740 Mar") 2595
a7) 1097 WEI 1141
297 10978; 1440 MB 28476 yw and iy
F274 10978 V2 2076; 2395+ aNw 3873
MP7 1102 RZ) 966° Gary 27%; 974b; 992d;
TP) 5239; 584°; 631>; MY} 27>; 3219; 8203; yep} 18708) 19.05%;
1375%; 22588; 20948; 25362; r{ 2401; 2761
27632; 28258; 29878 SaNW 26778; 2607%; 27515;
eur see also ral 27>. 820. 1102; f 2790*
iy] | 12928; 2408; “SIND 26976
my) 1146 a ee FING 14239; 2154°
Mm 11068; 2825 mz pear 14188; cox bad
"7 2572 ser 25958 . (282; 704; 1305;
DRAW 25258; 2573% sae ntaes PSY 1472; "18659;
may) 26278 ee byyh) 23589; 2761%;
Ree ratees TXT 2076 ie 3096"
nena DY 671>; 2588 aye 2752"
MBX 671; 1984; 22990, oNW see 2ANW
D7 1106 25958 xoxd 1365
FP 6738; 896> YE 5239; 526 aeyw
m4 2093 PD 1438; 1439 ae)
m5y7 2445: ph 28468 Senbsd
Dy 7092; 1145» 2p7 26248 ens 25%
nye | 2977 basen TRE 888 -
plies PART 2624" RW 19625; 22376
ee 2520 ee "BD 2557
>a PP) 2527 “NW 492°; 1118>; 18108;
TAT 25208; 2545° TMP 695%; 2321» 2122>; 28378
Per?” } 2520 MP 28409; 3086 TINY 1118; 1810
oon TPA 695»; 6999 TMINW 27584; 3043°
W923 675; 1145° MOP 699° anv AN 2752
ce 517%; 1042»; 14428 IP 315%); 3106 MIND 25574»
BPI 700; 88g» Ppt 516 MNW 8495; 10502; 18678;
815%; 9745; 12240; DDS 767 _ 2594»
NPD] 25320 2533" = 2527; 2553" eae
aye abe ee ol 52595 674 7093; Se
ay Pia als Me gigi eoegae TDD 560%; 16989; 27525
TNE) 13495; 2026" Dw 2156 Be 2856; 28578
PANE 13509 SE) 698" 238 | 750 27814
SND 2532b; 2559> DB) 3084 Reve
ME) 766>; 1086; 1447; yw 3037 may
ae; GO|. nvenaliesicadeas;| Tekan as
eects 30842,» nyay
_ es me) 494>; 671>; 2561» TPAD 28g; 21726
TD see ME mp) 1203 Sea 560° 1603
TB) 2559 PImy 5899 may
MPD 510° TH 49405 MaB 2429


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3495


U3 3010+

wae 722): 1185; 18012;
2596>; 2701:
2702; 2847»:
30108


waw 541>; 2753>
"ay 569°; 1052
.2 2779"
"a 27799
aa 1117
7a 1117
TID 569°


mad see Maw
NDAD see NBO
Maa 599°; 2140

Daw 1865

bay
may
DISBD 2819
m2aw 513


pa
as jaruis; 2767°
raya)


} 50a 1120°; 2767


aw 56%; 424>; 28644
v20 ae 52753; 2767%;
wo) 29828; 3078°


3 a0 see DIU
Doyaw 27448
Yao 940°; 3078"
Vee 136
“3? | ars; 523
720
AID 533°; 1442"; 17808;


2512>
wy | 5142; 523%; 737%;
"1 14420; 2512;
WY) 9753»
BNBP 2753; 2912
586%; 587%; 1780°;
2629>
MEW 1780%; 2318; 2629;
2634>; 28223;
2982
Finaw 2629»; 2634»; 2822


W 2745

2746»

® 1049
T9970; 1448; 26450
8 970°

a 27138

TWEE 124880; 2767%;
mhay! 29106

bath 2513

daw) 2513

338 1941; 1960

a4)


Be jim; 2237°; 2923
sw


“na


TH 530; 690°
1 13414
“TB 1266; 28468
7242; 1286>; 13078;
1826; 30848;
31578
MTB 2101»
"3) 100°; 145%; 1129»;
12508; 12518;
1254%; 1264»;
- 12678; 2188:
2393"; 30348
IN TY 2756>
DTD 2784s
nT 486°
mp Tw
o* "+4862; 2051
eet
TITY 4912; 2530


sip | 5835; 10499; 1249>;
“1 1822>; 18238;
"W] 3155P ;
“mm 15742


DM 7099; 24428; 2779»;
2856; 28573;
28619; 2862

yy 303; 744>

ww 3045°

NID 2751; 2766"


Siw 340; 5225; 706;
12325; 12484;
1417; 16939;
2588>; 25582>


said 376
ani 2779
nai 376>
qa 2779
Said 2779"
paid 27798


40 see TH
TNB 3409; 694>; 7249
my 2751»


DIN Ty 2751>


mid 27819
mm 2781
srw 2781>
rm 2781>
wn 2774»
aw 27048
y7Y 1106
yw
mw
ndiy
rby
‘iy
smpyid 2868>
Sau} 2814»; 20052
577>; 6882; 7285;
vie] face! tlaee
psy] 1968; 2200>;
2550; 2756>;
29112
mv 11228; 1175»
sald
{2779
ait
spat 27828
Dw 2681>
mmanid 2681°
yy 764»
yr 764>
3B 2590>
ve ee 1e10%s 2778;
2 a
NIN 27812
Syma
bya


Ba |s6o; 24220
“yw

any 526

JEW 2779"

WDD see PW MIG


Dw ae 605"; 20958;


| 51m


27799; 28218


| ana, 1144*; 2781


spit) 2097

pw 1394>; 18658;
2780»; 2972

“1B 27828


shi) 583; 3155?
Prd see pw


3496 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


NOW 2751
pow


Wiggs»; 19858;
yw | 2872»
maw
JB"S 2782
“pywW 27839; 2872>
my po
prptii) }2488>; 28318
many


pUw see purd
mom 273838
sr 1894>; 30288
Sim 520°
SMW 520°; 12288
21772
Mh 2587>; 31108


P| 1843; 2072»; 27034
mp


MB 4949; 24058
orn 587

Sw 189586
MgIny 2196»
amw 27078
MEMY 705%; 1108
VOD 1895°; 3083¢


pm 8315; 20726
pow 1843; 2814»
pm 2814

phiy see pnw
“IM 4549


“OW 797>; 799: 800;
13938; 2082>


mW 2758
Dyn 2746
mnow 2837
mow 1101»

722; 1440; 2401>
n “ip 1248¢

sft 2778

pet
pt 2704
WOW 64>; 1343; 2693
THW 64>; 2693


pe 2813*
mow 3072


is |


ts
iy ve, 120% 22058


y
CG Gs
.


“yt 256>; 2180>; 2438»:
_ 81238
"DW 2778»
Nw 10508
Nw 2751
ew
PD
maw 675»
SW 1893; 2407
RTD 2778
TID 348; 5328; 695°;
8408; 2026*;27814
min 2026+
“ard
“ind $1298; 2145»
iat
mind im 2768
0 27748; 2775
rab)


| ares 2774°; 28068


ry
stonyh 2768s 27608; 2887"
Sy
ew
yoy 527698
ow
yaw 2770
¢ (819; 1570>; 20978;
TW ] o413>; 24145;
ay 24878; 2830°;
28319
wr 1984
sw 2777»
pow
pow
mu 2108; 259°;
1985

row 2074»

Jw 24399; 29746
2D 2804>; 2817+
ma>zw 580°

3DW 27110»
SADW 1929»


lori
19683;


a  } 805 2876»
ay


nv


me Lae
nou


T2Y 2394; 30748
yaw 1815»
> 1395"
J20 2765


Spb 2813; 2368; 2921»;
30898; 3097°


Sdu) 406°; 439>
221 | 24150; 2486; 29118;
boy! 3089"
mabzp see M220
m3 1929
DDW 4548; 2082


mod 1556"; 27554;
278025; 27838;
3001#
mMAPW 2780>
"pW 2756


J2W 883b; 2758


TR 883>; 14689; 2132;
2758>


8795; 18968; 30638
“pw 2818°
“BW 10984; 1395*; 1541»;
3063+
“UW 879; 18968; 3086>
“5U) see “at
VNU 2767; 2768
FMPB sso->
Sw 970°
TSP 8see
Sw 22008
abd 1864>
SY 2819»
Tbe see mb
mou see mbyw
nZMPW 1117>; 3046»


SSD see Td
"oro
mby
niby ee 1098*; 1272;
oat 13054; 13508:
DOB | o2930


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS 3497
maby see MMA>D | Te arose mow 2674
yw 2747 ag "by 2663
dbp re? | araoe ng 8338; 1050°
wy! meaty rag 1906%>; 19079;
eee . b
nye noxpaey 2747 Uae
F S . * . . be ‘he
mbdw see 1b "ow see "bw Tey sper Peace Y
. . ?
mow 210%; 529; 27218 a2) 2759" vy]
mbw 27219; 2790: Boy 2750 pastry |?
M2 2662+; 2758; 2899% woe see Wi yaw Ort) 526; 8519; 10885;
CU | som 2721; 2758 naw 2769" Sake ace
mow! 2791° mao 2746 27938; 2795»;
min 2768 mod see why 2877>; 2923>;
ie: nyritaer 31108
“n> b niws
Bae cores i ISTE yab 2759
W>Y 2767; 28980» nice A Na
udw) sg6e Syombdth. see bended ies
ubw 20088 Dy 4118; 10949; 1253); ae
és Qe. 27598 sOW 2759>
udv) 2626 eas et
, ne Naw 535° QU 27488
io ae
pie 2626 Basic ee eee
Aa i myret 27690 MPP 2759"
ee : Swhiv Wa 2770; 27939; 27948;
WY see 120 bite > 1888 etal a7o5e
oq) a. b - a ‘ abiyal's) a
Sh sins ams ay | ae set se
5 eae: -
an 14848; 20163; “SND 1864> ee 2759
we 20954; 20978; syaw 2748 Tee
uy 2790 “pt 283° men 2760
Lbiah EY . ° ‘1 a
wt ans =I sce DNA myaw 2769
aeee ee byrnath 2677; 2678; 27618 MAP 97; 1367; _ 1791";
n2>W 2747 sate orion 21775; 30748
bo 24390 : eae: “YE 875%; 2760; 27698;
om my7p 866>; 1094" 3087>
CPW 943s; 22939 may 1098 “raw 2256°
Det 1305 ma 600°; 1755+ “ab see "AW
mow 551%; 2639 mina 1755 ma 30749
now 23200; 26638; 2746> wet 2556 yaa 27718
pow see Dive mun 2556°; 2635 FIVQgw 26712; 2672»; 2760%
pbu} 2768 “aD 2749» yvae
oe : ae ote
neW see DID yIMAw 2760 PRT
rradid 2663> noway 2625» YAY 2770"
maby 8768; 2663 plata Nae Batis 2760°
ee j{ 1438; ST)
misbt) 2822 maw oa ae e oe
snob 2663" rnyay 2006; 2488 nina yP see NvayMay
eares “A 549; 27499; 2858; muynw 27699; 27714
midbw 2759" . 98602; 28623; eee
a % ; “Vw 2673
“aby 2663 _. 2974? ae
ane maa 7 man 2770
wb 2759 , (2761 eee
: : naa WW 301; 596>; 1376;
weed 2768 mb 422%; 6699; 876%; 2675%; 27719;
Sevabw 27599; 2761 11478; 2917° 30822


3498 INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


PMs 2675
“OD 2675; 27719
“Ia 2749»
"MOY 2781
7 7379; 1127; 1544»;
16228; 27618;
30008
NID 944>; 13496
NIB see pW
3N76 27716
TN 1343
“UNI 27619


Mw CNW) 542°; 870; 17569;
2634>; 26358;
2904>; 29618;
298285; 3024»;


3025*; 3126"
TIN 31268
nye
Spy]
Dyan 1544>
"3 8849; 2701; 31099
"7 2961"
78
sry
SOND 27715»
yow 671s
TD 798; 14349; 2982
“wey “bp
msi ln
TIWIY 1804; 2867»


hagi7


| a720% 27612


ID) o1453:
27139; 3084"


myyw 2713
Sow 1334>; 14048
oye see byw


~S>yY 2745:
mbyw 2745

IB 7822; 820%»

ayy see AID

D 27452
“yw 1423
“ID 2515
“TY 1320


690%; 1248; 14249;
snp | 1533; 1548°;
"i 1797; 21448;
26978;


“YH 416°; 1175; 1325»;
1607; 2062»;
27585; 27698;


29862; '30456
“JD see wt


“PP | 5% 1320*; 1423
avy } :


“9 see Ww
mvp 2929»
mop
mip

oy
wy

mynye

TED 14238
ny)
mqyw 2752» °
pw 27452

mee
nyww
THEI 2745»
VEIW 782; 820>


“Nit


4058; 11228; 27218


|see mw


1896" 3 2779»


ay


TMD 495°; 1202"; 13359;
1967; 2556>:


3082


DPW 3409; 698°; 725%;
12875; 17595;
1771; 1772:
1965%; 2200°;
24089; 2534>;


3010°
ODD 1965°
DW 2750
TIRED |
ANTS Y
JOD 27748
"Dy see ‘Dy
DB 27822
FDO 558; 27370
“TDD 2690°; 2750"
"BW 1087»
JPW 2756
m2pw 20302
Spwd 3; 1439; 30458


762%


MDW) 382; 3832; 5049;
522; 523°; 899:


D 3b; 411°
opm 411
 38lb; 4119; 724;
17635; 1934>;
21979; 22098;
22209; 22278;
2377>; 24073;
. 27629; 3045
mp 403%; 418°; 1896°
DEW 2749
mia 28062
yw 3007°
TDW -GO8>; 1339%; 2596;
2749»
yew 17
"YDY 27748
PEW see PEP
“pw 12782
“Dw 2763
“pit see TDW
mypw 1175
mp 27748
“pw 22939;. 2624>
W 943»; 14195
D 1865
Y 18436
W 100%; 11238
iss 1999>


15>; 16; 6128; 834°


up 1447>; 19659; 2515;
2743


DPW 2535>; 30798

Spt 6059; 2032>; 2076;
2078%>; 2758%>:
30818


Dpy

maps

MIMD W 1404; 23648

Vpw 6; 16

Vpw 15%; 8348

TRY see PPV

PRY 208; 1788b; 25308

“PW 746>; 748>; 1105;
1887*; 2876»

“i? 569°; 606; 12898;
1307; 1929>;
2438>; 2453%;
2454>; 26264
2690; 27328;
29174; 3134»

"WD 2122: see also “W


11239; 28775


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


3499


1352; 22.476

27648

Y 2701b

2742»

18949; 2178s 31198

1821; 2454b: 25132;
26908

576

512; 5138

2738

27518

1840; 2779.6

1840; 2750»

27514


my
wy
Pw
me
yw
Paints)
ree |
. | 1895?
reels
mIW 27320
oy
ee |re0n; 770°
now
"ai 2690»
"TW 27508
a 513>
sy 2692»
mip
ee |a7s2e
wy
ye
pw
TIT +253»; 2549; 1340
mo
mp yw
yw
ry
np
maw
Dow
sw


| asia»


1110°; 1395»

1456®; 1941; 1942

2693»

287 1°

7449; 2692+; 2732";
2737

26928 ; 2703; 27325;
27372

518°; 522; 744°

4253; 7399; 7435;
744%

1395


2836; 3050


MpwW 1305
SW 944>
7B 2122»


oy
~ 7 + 510P: 26238»: 27642
wo


MWD 5899
TW 27425; 3063

675>; 1111; 189494;
1984; 19854;
2089>; 2790;
27914

“SAWD 27660

ie


wy


Y 27518
27662
9 2813
Y 1590; 2765»
5} 27668


pop
joe


D see 7"


27519
676"

2743»
1141>


5) 880»
9 30720»; 30778


see DED
19715; 1980
27668


man
main
an


el
2am
Dan
>a
13m


"an
min
rae)
yan
roan
TORR
oop rien
nan
TPNIB
79208 mien
natn
“01n
syn


1136
29108
512
2422
1153; 25878


21912; 3089


345°; 21725; 2901;
2902"

700°; 7478

31062

see ban

486>

588>; 14249; 28665;
2867>

29804

11095; 11368; 2264»

2887>

2965*


2980>


see MAINA
23999
705°


ane
"ITA “NY 2766?


n


tal

: ja; 1307

mn)

38M 6>

TART see XT

ann | 143°; 1449; 5849;
ee 30845; 3155>;

NW] 91560 :

TINT) 1941>; 19425

Dox


|eum; 2973"
DNI 2208°
Dn see Dorn
wn
APRN
TPN 1354°
TibD MINT 28874
ANT 1985°


| 1108; 11228


ee}
17 $29028
“an
DYIR 2980
Wim 665%; 700>; 831%;
9415; 11363;
2156>; 2309¢
pinm | 265; 315'; 3169;
4 8179; 30815;
DAM)  g1066: 31088
men


24293; 2487
monn


1125
DAM see DIM
mpm 1147
"M1986; 2704
Son
Dan
7p 22M 3027"
TPM see PIM
mpm 1354>
nanin
mann


30276


| 2900»


3500


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


aan
mn
yn
BRS)
“DIM
nan
mtn
vain
aydin
ny>in
myon
marin
magn
myzin
men
nopin


nap
bab}
“rn
an


2429°; 2639"; 2644>

2704» >

5112; 1417>; 20508;
see also 77

see "24


1058"; 1183>; 11998;
1200; 1494»


675b; 676%; 8849;
2701; 29948;
3109*


15>; 8348


504%; 12732; 1542;
2205"


2981

594>; 831>; 25303;
3002+

5044; 583>; 871>

408°; 480>; 5558;
9024; 12565;
1536; 1539»;
1852%>; 18548;
1857>;. 19834;


2298>; 2581»;
2582"

1128*; 2467; 25560;
2865%:>; 2866


1682; 2474>; 2475p;
24768; 30898


746>. '748b
2902»
1306; 2783¢


2143?
2902
2924
2902+


2902>; 2903


1313
2903"; 29102


376; 3778; 24228;
2709; 27108;
2814*; 2902>


28505; 29025; 3037°


PIRI
salais)
xen
Non
ee
* (3125; 28388; 29298
yen
"27" 2929
WAT) 2929+
"E"M 2990"
ven
Be \o140»; 3086
orn
NVM 2986"
OM 2986 |
DVN see VIM
Wn 1249
qn
bac)
TPIT 1098>; 2710°
"2h
In
MbDT™ 2321°
PPO 23218
MPM 675>; 8844; 1146
j2T 968; 3037
j2m 29042; 2993°
3M 1350°
Dax Sm 2924
mydm 3007"
siprbn
“won
5D 2819°
mem see N23n
mn see TIDAM
mom 1335»
TISh) 2925


1789


2928


rave


2294


} 20050; 2965


swoon Sm 29258


Sm 2515»
Sbm 9412
DST 1150"
“abt 2004¢
ri2%) DIA 2928"
nbn see yon
mepoh 254°
“won see WD
DMT 5338


DI 2320; 2407#; 2515;
30378
DM 14849; 23218; 2798"


NAM see TN
mam 1484
man 2001"


TYAT 3729; 5415; 29089;
2964>


Svan
dion
mon
myn)
TOT 2929


POM 112>; 705%; 1057;
10632; 2323


DAM 2320>; 2804>; 2846;
3141


DCAM 14844; 3040°
JOM 1403%; 2569°
Siam see >72M
Der 704»

TAR see JOD
TIAN 2972>; 2983e
TAM see TAN
p'T) 29299; 2983
DPA 2983


jars


| 12548 + 2794»


YT 665>; 1123->; 1350°;
22358; 2907°
“an 2236>
“tan
mian
“OT see ain
Pave
PER be67
pyran
“ANAM 483>; 1350>
pyen


pen


| 2235


see PTA


TIT 2550°
TTA 8739; 30824
mYWM 514>
MDT 2639%.>; 26436
“MBE 515°
MATA 2908


4278; 428>; 873°;
1548%>; 21449;


PRR) 9525; 26979;

mem) 27079; 27375
3075>; 30828;
3084°


INDEX OF HEBREW AND ARAMAIC WORDS


3501


MIQWIM 592%; 1826»; 1906"»;
20749; 2874
am 6?
Magn see Mayin
MYT 7484; 970; 27128
ode | s000»
wn
mbyT| 1349»; 3074>
DIDYM 348; 826°
MITT 1103¢; 1354>
Breas
EPe ts)
SYM 1815»; 2533>
nA 20958; 2097; 21018
TINEA
ne |514%; 1235
meen
TMDE 20925; 11232; 22205;
29092.»
SEM 1125"; 3038
DBI 2999
TPM 11258; 1681
MDEM 2393; 24879
NoDM 2985
TDM 2887
MDM 2999>


“MDM 2765>


lasers; 2908»


RAPT


TNIM see MNTIN
TIPM -1419°; 2981"
DPM 2924

wipH


sen |2024


|esen; 943
MER

DPM 2032; 29249
TPR 896>; 2200°


YPh 490°; 665°; 2399s;
287 2°


“IPM see PH

APM 3334; 334°
MEpM see MD PM

"Mm see TM

TENIM 2909>

TIM see Win
MATA 28175
MPN 13874; 2986"
Wee eae 2177>;
mgam) 2639">; 2643
TNM 89>; 305
MEVIM 2026

TPM 1405

TIT 2948»


2986


2999


see MAINA


417%


1175»; 2769%; 2986°


"2986


1270; 1390®; 14472;
1455"; 1551

29878

29498

27749; 2856"; 2857%;
28624; 29148;
2965"

1289; 2132; 29868;
29878


"29174


2917

764»; 2154
see 2AM
5238: 9408
see PIMPRTON
see TMB
2917
orn


INDEX OF GREEK WORDS


dBveoos, 26>; 5114; 992>

ayader, 7d, 1014

dyaddlaors, 1755%

dyardw, 19328

drydarn, 69>; 525>; 596; 597%; 6804;
959"; 18298; 1933

dyannrés, 432>

dyyapedw, 695°

&yyedos, 1325; 2025; 19136

ayiac pds, 2681>

dyos, 1404"; 2686>

dyveoros, 3037°

dyopatw, 533°

dyopatos, 4119; 2522

dypaga, 72*

drywvla, 71>

dydv, 71>; 11715

dddmavos (LXX), 595%

ddnuovéw, 1354>

ddixla, B7IRP

ddbxepyos, 5828; 7248; 2560

dduvrov, 65

dip, 88°

&Beos, 318>

dberéw, 137°

Gdns, 1314»; 27618

dté.os, 1010; 1041

aldas, 2748>

alua, 489

alveyua, 7893; 1170

alpw, 1823

atpeots, 13778; 2711>

alcOyrhpiov, 2720>

aisxuvn (LXX), 3468

alréw, 282>; 425>

airla, 581>

aidyv, 65>; 705; 980; 10105; 24558;
3108¢

aldveos, 990; 9915; 10105; 10419;
1702>; 2502

dxdvOcvos, 763%

axépasos, 27989

axpBys, 1069

axplies, 8928

axupbw, 137°

addBacrtpor, 898; 5128

addorwp, 1150

drelgo, 1388

ddexropogwvla, 7T98b

adjGea, 10902; (LXX) 14848;
16989; 1712>

adnOHs, 1090

ddyOevds, 10908; 17128; 1716"


adrddoow, 321>
adAnyopéw, 21>; 98>
&ddyyopla, 97>
Gos, 9898
adorprerloxomos, 533°
dddbrptos, 974
ddoryos, 5:26
ddcos, 268?
ada, 103
adda, 11438
dpaptrdve, 2798
apdprnua, 1016>
dpapria, 10165; 2498
dulavros, 30378
dvaBrérw, 68%
dvdbeua, 130%
avdOnpua, 1228»
dvarraupsw, 688
dvdoracis, 986?
dvarrpogy, 7065; 1828>
dvarory}, 800°; 888>
dviparodiorys, 7475
dvjp, 145°; 8195; 14428; 28068
avOpaxed, 671»
&vépag, 671>
&vOpwiros, 144; 819>
dvdtraros, 830>
dviornut, 9868
dvoula, 1093*; 1469%; 1713>
dvouos, 1859
dvox%, 1126>
dvrl5ucos, 64>; 26935
dvr l@eos, 155°
dvrlxenuat, 64>
dvr Anus, 13748
dvtidutpov, 26542
dvrlruros, 396°
dvrlxperros, 154»
dmadyéw, 1105*
drapxy, 11149; 1416
dmavyacpa, 5228; 1451>; 1914>
dmelGera, 3033
darehevGepor, 18818
dmioria, 3033"
dmirros, 1467%
ardérys, 5119
dardovs, 2805
drobyxn, 405%
dmoxadtarw, 2581>
droxddupis, 981>; 983; 22499
dmoxardoracts, 9919; 17565; 25465;
2562

daéxpudos, 1799

3502


*Aroddtwr, 201°

drrodotw, 3945

dmohtpwots, 20245
dromopraios (L.XX), 343°
darogrdcvov, 865%

daroorody (LXX), 409%
dméaTodos, 202>

dmorruyéw, GP

daddera, 780; 9912; 2320?
apytpior, 2395"; 2792>
dpiotepbs, 1334

dpirrov, 385°; 849>

dppa, 595%

dprayya, 2457

dpraypés, 12939; 24575; 2595
dppaBor, 4019; 886; 1416>
dpaevoxolrys, 26°

dponv, 145°

dpros, 514>

épxnyos, 333°; 5692; 24534; 2700
dpxerplkrduvos, 385°; 26278
épxwv, 665°; 2453
acédyea, 1003"; 1839>
doxés, 509>; 2814
domddados, 286>

domovdos, 30248

doodpior, 1098

doretos, 1087

dorHp, 308>

daovvOeros, 17464

&ogadrros (LXX), 2401
&raxros, 855%

&romos, 1165

addy, 24298

atrdpxeca, 22752

adréuaros, 33°

d&eots, 11382; 25576
apinm, 24%

apex véopas, 22


Bator, 5148

Banrifo, 385>; 3864; 3874; 3885;
390%; 394%; 395; 3999; 4155;
17108; 3011

Bdariopa, 385°; 3885; 3899; 3945

Bawricpds, 385>; 388>; 3899; 3948

Bdwrw, 385; 386°; 3899; 3909;
3948

BdpBapos, 4025

Bdpos, 528

Barredo, 2553?

Backalyw, 4585; 3097

Baros (LXX), 532


INDEX OF GREEK WORDS


3503


Barradoyéw, 1964>; 2559»
Béékvypa, 16°
Bdedvecopuat, 6>

Bijza, 1661»

Bracrys, 3051

AiBrlory, 459%; 25978
BiBros, 495%

BLBos yevécews, 1183>
BIBXos 74s fps, 503"
Bios, 1889+

Brac dypla, 485?
Bovdevrys, 723%; 2689>
BotAnua, 30852
BotAouat, 3085*

Bporés, 145%

Bp&ors, 26275

Btéacos, 876°

Bwyds, 106>


yduos (LXX), 385%

yeved, 11999

yevéora, 4788

yéveots, 477°

yevvdw, 398>; 426%; 1410>; 17032

yepovala, 2719»

yépupa, 5228

ywionw, 37>; 99; 11309; 1698

yrooca, 2996

yhwoo dxouov, 377°

yeas, 3029; 6775; 959%; 1240;
1241; 1242; 1245>; -2260>;
2702

yuurrds, 37°

yéns, 7489; 942; 1964>

youos, 5298

ypdupa, 4749; 597>

Ypapparets, 27045; 30015


Sarpdreov, 689%; 827%; 8299
balywr, 827>

Sdvevov, 814%

Saravdw, 595°

bénois, 2430

bet, 427%

Setr vor, 385°

dered Sw, 426

deomérys, 1919
Sevrepdrpwros, 2634>
dyvdpiov, 830°

did, 395?

didBodos, 35%; 64>; 957>
diddnua, 762

Siadyjxn, 460°; 729°; 731°
Seaxovéw, 56>; 800>
Siaxovla, 56%; 800>
didxovos, 800°; 3103
diadadéw, 23%

Siarelrw, 586%
Siapepliw, 6715

didvora, 2056"

Seacropd, 855°
Siagnpl fw, 23°


didadua, 2096; 2488>


ddaxrixds, 1899%

SbacKkarla, 866°

biSdoKados, 851>

6dax4, 867°

SlSpaxpa, 1649>

Gl5wpu, 64>

Srarpéw (LXX), 5a

dixardw, 17825; 17849; 1786

Scxalwpa, 1782

dlkn (LXX), 24034

dtomer ys, 17812

didpOwors, 2545>

Atécxovpor, 8518

dixooracla, 13779

blyuxos, 870%

dbypua, 4619; 8682

Soxrud fw, 99>; 210%

béfa, 146°; 8499; 991>; (LXX)
12365; 1238; 1239

Sovrela, 495%

Sobdos, 495°; 8002

50x 4, 385%

dpdxwv, 4276; 8738

Spaxuy (LXX), 872; 23952

Sbvapar, 13°

dbvayis, 119; 3339;
2427>; 3057

burdorns, 333°; 24239


403°; 20638;


éyyacrpbyvbos(LXX), 690°; 9448

éyeipw, 539; 9868; 992°

éyxalvia, Ta, 816°

éyxevrpltw, 1292»

€évos, 12158

€0o0s, 769%

eldwrdGutos, 715%

elxwv, 1456; 146%; 14515; 14546;
1914

elpyyn, 22938

els, 386; 3875; 3952

éx, 386°

éxarovrdpxys, 588%

éxxrnola, 2899; 6519; 893; 1648>;
2292

éxhéyw, 613°

éxdext és, 925%

éxdory}, 925»

éxoragts, 3005

éxdrys (LXX), 533°

édeGre, 2546"

éréyxw, 2560° .

€denuoctvy, 101; 425>

eos, 2035


“EdAgy, 1295%


‘EAMAnvoras, 1295°
édrls, 1087>
éumopebouat, 533°
év, 387*; 395°
évOupeouat, 2972
évavrés, 3126
évoxos, 782; 1310*


évragid fw, 5298
évtuyxdvw, 1484>
éEaryopdtw, 59°; 2655>
ilar nut, 441%; 3097
éEopxigw, 1067

éEovela, 333°; 17815; 2427>; 30578
ékwrepixds, 179>

érdvw, 103°

éreparnua, 395%

érlyeos, 8875; 24974
érlyvwors, 18164
émcelxeca, 668; 1215>
émceccys, 1215°

érlGeois xetpar, 1335*
émBuyéw, 1086
ércOuula, 698°; 19428
émuxahéw, 208*

éridéyw, 613°

érvobaros, 1364>; 1921"; 30608
érlexoros, 478>; 4829; 18999; 1902>
éxiatpépw, 7065; 2558
éxisrpopy, 706°
érurlOygus, 54°

émipdvera, 981; 2054>; 2249; 2700>
énéarys, 4278

émoupdvios, 587%; 957; 959"; 1352>
érwpls (LXX), 9629
épyacla, 533°; 1153
épnula, 832°

Zpynyos, 832%

pigos, 12499

Eppwoo, 10988

écomtpov, 12349
écwrepexds, 179%; 1808
Erepos, 989

eros, 3126"

evayyédtov, 1039; 1281
evayyehaT Hs, 1039
evdokew, 99>

edbéws, 1993

eb60s, 5B5P

ebhaBéouae (LX X), 3419
eddoyla, 487%; 5114
ebvodxos, 10379
evrreploraros, 441%

edrrpéa Sexros, 276
edpaxtawy, 1039°

etrefhs, 840°
etordayxvos, 2402
eboxnudvws, 816%
etrparedia, 16242
edxapirria, 1924>
ebdvupos, 1334°

éx6pés, 1135; 2537%


fdw, 979

ipdow, 65°

fw, 1702; 1889°
g@ov, 73>; 418>


tyryeuwv, 24539; 24588
‘yéouar, 2972


3504


INDEX OF GREEK WORDS


Hos, 1013>
qruta, 71


Odvaros, 811%

Gata, 56%

Bearplew, 1179%
Oéarpov, 11738; 1179
Geérys, 1269

Betov, 12694

Gédnpa., 3085%

GAw, 3085"

Genédos, 11415
Geoxpatla, 2965
Oebrrvevatos, 1473>
Gedrys, 12698
Geparrevw, 13498; 2394
Onplov, 418

Onoavpés (LX X), 2545; 3008"
Ortyis, 662; 136°
AopuBéw, 578

OpbuBos, 490>
Ovsathpior, 588%
Ovués, 1017; 2571
Ovudw, 1472»
Guocagrjpeov, 106>


tdouat, 13499; 2394°

larpds, 2393>

(éar, 1913>

Yécos, 9684; 2745°

lepeds, 24398

terepos (LXX), 78°; 1108

Ddexouat, 3215; 26542

Oacpes, 17174; 24678

tracrihpiovr, 242; 20363;
24678; 26178; 2656

tudrvov, 876°

Yoos, 75>; 968"

lodpuxos, 2497>

toxvs, 114

toxvw, 13>; 3408


(LXX)


xa@aiperts, 2789"

kabdarw, 418

kabapliw, 394

xabapés, 6674

cablor nus, 4799; 655
kaGortxds, 583%

xabbrov, 5834

watvés, 19759; 2140

cax@s, 116°

xddapos, 2297>

xdumdos, 548%

cavdy, 5548

capdla, 1350; 13512
capdioyvderns, 1351>

kapros TOv yekéwy (LX X), 546”
caradrddoow, 2635>

cardduua, 13085; 14338; 1470
xardpa, 7674

karapyéw, 154

katarouh, 696>


kar fyopos, 35%
carhywp, 2693
carnxéw, 1991>


| carnxlfw, 582>


carowrpliw, 427%
xdromrpov, 4278

kavx dower, 1239>

cavx nua, 1235>; 1239>
xévrpov, 1248>; (LXX) 24034
kevtuplwv, 5889

xévwors, 17928

xepdyiov, 2401>

xepdriov, 1443

«Rvoos, 3010

khpvé, 24339

«Aros, 3082>

xBwrds, 242%: 605°; 1883>
x6dpa, 660°; 2098
xevipa, 6608; 2097>
khddos, 514%

khdopa, 11448

«hijua, 5148

«Mots, 545

«Alyy, 422

codpdvrys, 1098»; 2067>


‘kouvbs, 6882; 690P


cocvavla, 6528; 688>; 7055; 1703;
1924»; 1927

kowvwvixds, 6885; 705°

xolrn, 422>; 591>

cddages, 25715

kohdovptov, 10708

kohduBtorys, 594°

xédmos, 22>; 416>; 743>

xépn, 2108

xoopyéw, 61>

xécpos, 980; 1704"; 17825; 3108

xovaTwola, 1308

xdguvos, 413

xpdBBaros, 422>

xpdoredov, 504%; 13748; 19079

xpéas, 1118>

kplua, 7819

xptcraddos, 764°

Krfivos, 4192; 583

«rlows, 738%

«tlopa, 740>

kriorys, 740%

xudlcov, 766>

curds, 19682

xupla, 7736; 9259

xuptaxds, 19108; 19194

Kupios, 1254>; (LX X) 1268"; 19199;
28062

xuptérns, 869"

cwewtetov, 566°


haxrifw, 17979
auBdvw, 27>

ammds, 1825%

rads (LXX), 12154
ameerys (LXX), 348>


Reroupyla, 18285; 2742>
Nexdvy (LXX), 511>
Nerrév, 16578; 2067°
ABarwrds, 5884

Aewds, 2348

hoyla, 674"

Norylfouat, 1462>

Myeor, 18845; 1910

Aéyos, 1884>; 1911>; 31054
Nyos évdidGeros, 1913°
Abyos wpopopexds, 1913>
dyxy, 252>

Aowuds, 2348

dourpdv, 394>; 398P; 1844
rotw, 149; 394>; 30734
Nrpov, 20228; 25306; (LXX) 25314
Aux vla, 552>

Nix vos, 552>; 1825; 18925
dbw, 248; 1716


paryeto, 2795>

paryla, 2795»

pdryos, 404>

padnrhs, B51>

udyris, 860°; 863°; 942>

udorié, 2402>

ndxarpa, 251»

peyadavxéw, 513°

peytot aves, 19198

ué0n, 880°

wédav, 14698

wédhet, 578%

Hédkw, 188

Héve, 98; 1703>

wéptuva, 577°

neolrys, 616°; 2018

wera Bdddw, 594*

perdbeots, 30078

Herapédopat, 2558

Meravodw, 2558>

ueracxnparifw, 5949

perotxeola (LXX), 569>

wh yévorro (LXX), 10975; 11278

pusdwrés, 1395°

pov}, 99; 1983

povoryerjs, 11135; 21968

Hopoy, 1098

uiBos, 943°; 10854

puoripiovy, 1924»:
2636>

pwpds, 11259; 25238


21048; 2105;


véos, 19752; 2140>
veda, A2Q1>

vewkdpos, 6014

vies, 348

vnorela, 10998

ver hp, 412°

virrw, 148; 3073
v6Gos, 413>

voultw, 2972>

vouixds, 18599; 2704


vopadiddoxados, 2704
vouobérns, 1858

vopos, 1844>

vécos, 854%

vods, 2056"; 27215; 3094
vuppady, 522%


‘Enpalvw, 2399>


byKos, 529%

olkoderrér ys, 1438
olxovdyos, 152%; 591>
olxovuévy, 887°; 1353>; 2600"; 3109"
bre€pos, 991°

butrla, 7068

duobvpaddy, 33>

dpolwpa, 146°

épolwors, 1455; 146°
duodovyéw, 6998

bvap, 874°

61h, 585

épy4, 2571

épxlfw, 56%

éppavés, 6792; 1101°
borpaxov, 2202»

éperH, 435%; 814%; 883>
épetdnua, 1309°

bus, 427%

éxvpwpa, 11379; 1140°


wdOnua, 1158>

mé6os, 14726

madaywryds, 10203; 17832; 2702>

matdela, 598%; 8529; 2571»

madlov, 606; 7815

matdloxy, 4959; 781°

wats, 512>

mérat, 1790>

tadivyeverla, 13549;
25628

mavdoxetov, 1470°

maviyyupts, 289%

mavoupyla, 734°

tavotpyos, 734%

mavroxpdrwp, 1009; 1267; 2188°

nwapdBacts, 2798>

mwapaBor}, 24695

mapayyerta, 595°

mapddecos, 152°; 1174*; 2248?

mapadldmpu, 4546

mapadyxy, 830%

mapaxaréw, 678>

mapaxdryors, 704°; 1051>

mapdaxdyTos, 65%; 679%; 14889; 2245°

wapaxnyrep, 22452

mapadrayh, 302%

napacxev}, 798%; 24378; 2982*

maparlOnpt, 680%

rapaxphua, 19935

mdpects, 1132%; 2557°

mdporxos, 11289; 1828>; 2467>

mrapouuta, 1170*; 2469>


2503°; 25465;


‘INDEX OF GREEK WORDS


3505


mdpowvos, 514b

wapovola, 1657"; 20545; 22498; 24389

mappyola, 494»

nacropoptov(L XX), 27478

waoxa, 8899; 22569

marpid, 1094>; 18940

relOu, 2348

meipdtea, 288>

mévys, 24219; 24278

jwevT nkooT}, 23188

menalOnais, 700°

mepiBdraov, 733%

meplepyos, 533%; 7679

mepuxeparala, 2515; 253»

meprotoros, 2294>

mepuroltnats, 2294>

mepioods, 176; 64>

meplynua, 2180°

mwéragos, 878

wérpa, 1648; 1795>

wérpos, 1648>; 1795>

wydtkos, 1070

mlum pnt, 418

murebw, 432°

mlores, 10875; 1090*

meorés, 958°; 1090*

miorés 6 Abyos, 10912

alrupa (LXX), 13>

whavirys, 308

wheovagu, 17°

wreovext éw, G4

mreovetla, 733%; 10694

whyyh, 2402>

mAnpdw, 24615

wrhpwopa, 677°; 960; 1148>; 12449;
1245*; 2275>

avetua, 398; 399; 14065; 2121>;
2721%; 3094>

avevpaTixds, 989%; 27218

mvoh wis (LXX), 24957

qodw, 9906

monr#s, 2410

moitros, 860°

rowphy, 6546

moluvn, 584°

molumov, 584°

row}, 2697

méns, 662°

monrdépxns, 665°

modirela, 688P

modlrevpa, 661

wonirys, 661"

movnpds, 19214; 2805°

mropvela, 1339>

wépmn, 526%

moppvpa, 884%

morhpiov, 487°; 766°; 1924?

wéros, 580"

mpairdpiov, 1777; 2428°

mpdkis, 39%; 817°

mpaos, 2027%

tpdoow, 990%


mpeoBela, 115°

mpec Bevw, 115°

mpeaBbrepos, 479%; 654"; 9244; 1828b;
2437%

wpecBirys, 715

npivos (LX X), 14052

mpoyweoKkw, 1128; 1130°

mpoyvwots, 11289; 2435%

mpdbpouos, 1131

mpbdects, 2435"; 25108; 27678

mpbvaa, 2476

mpodpicpds, 2435

mpocayayy, 27%

Tpocavar Onur, 699%

mpogdéxouar, 1026>

mpocevy}, 2469

mpooruros, 2467>

mpockepddatov, 769%; 2776"

mpocxuvéw, 60%; 615

mpocgopd, 1923>

mpbowrov, 23374

awpopyrns, 14089; 24648

mpopyrela, 2464%

mrpopyretbw, 2464"

mpwroKxadedpla, 606>

mpwrokhola, 722%

mpwrordkia, 478; 2452>

mpwrbroxos; 519%; 676>;
18299; 21968

mreptytov, 24008

wr Gua, 576; 722> :

mrwxés, 426°; 24218; 24278

moyug, 14>

muddy, 1175

muperds, 490>; (LXX) 1108"

wupbw, 532%


11138;


paBdodxos, 45%; 2732>
paxd, 25238

parrifw, 385°; 386"; 394°
Ajua, 3105

poupala, 252»


odBBarov, 2629; 29828
caBBdrov 656s, 2634
capBixn, 20999

cavdddov, 2779>

cavls, 24072

sapydvn, 413°

capxixds, 5809; 989°; 1119";
odpxivos, 580%; 11195
adp£, 492; 580°; 1118
ceanudtouar, 19415; 19612
cepvirys, 1294

onpetov, 2063

aiayav, 600%

orxdptot, 2884

alxepa, 879»

ondviadov, 14415

oxjvos, 2497%

oxvipes (LXX), 1240"
oxddoy, 760°; 2277


27218


3506

gopbs, 472>

govddpioy, 210; 878
oretpa, 258°; 382>; 5889; 1669"
omexovdAdrwp, 1051; 1308*
omepparixds, 19175
omepuordyos, 348b; 22752
orpratoy, 585>
omhayxvligouat, 6952
omdayxvov, 5112; 6952
orovdy, 5785

orarip, 1649; 2394»
araupds, 760; 26528
orepéwpua (LXX), 315>
orépavos, 762>

orfGos, 517>

oriBds, 514%

orlypa, 227°

orlhBw, 1234>

aroxelov, 927; 24559; 2624>
oroxdgw, BBP

orparnyés, 45%; 569°
orparomeddpxys, 2585; 569%; 13082
ovuBotdov, 723P

atbuBouros, 723>

cvupmAnpdw, 2318»

obyuduros, 2290

oupnguvéw, 75>

obypuyxos, 2497

cuvaywy}, 893

ouvédpiov, 7235; 2688>; 2719
ouveldnors, TO1>

obveots, 2056

avykupla, 593>

ovvex%, 136%

ctsowpos, 492%

ogparyls, 27089

ogvdpdy, 136°

ogupis, 413

oxijua, 1098

oxlopa, 27024 ;
apa, 4929; 4936; 989"; 20563; 22758
wr hp, 27008

curnpla, 1786%; 23206
swppootyyn, 13048


rap(tjetor, 669%
ramewvés, 1439>


INDEX OF GREEK WORDS


ramevoppoctvy, 1439
Tamervdw, 3b

Tdoow, 55%

téxvoy, 6074; 6087; 17038
Teretdw, 2686*

rerewwr 9s, 1111>

rédos, 3010°

Tépas, 2063%

rerpddiov, 2513*

Tepespla, 2571»

Téxos, 383>; 1488; 30428
tpdmeva, 383»

Tparetirns, 383°; 384"
Tpaxnrl{w, 2196»

Tpor}, 302>

Tpbxos THs yerécews, 725%; 30834
Tuptavifeo, 2704»

timos, 396%

tup dbs, 487>

réxn (LXX), 593°


tados, 1233"

bBpes, 13042

viodegla, 589; 2556>
ulés, 608

buvos, 14453

vraKoy, 2175"
brepox}, 333°
brnpérys, 8008; 1986; 2689
brepupdw, 614
brddqua, 2779
brdxpiois, 721; 14459
brroxperys, 1445
drouorh, 1918
brécracis, 2337%


gaivddgrns, 669
pavepdw; 2581>
garracta, 101%
gappaxela, 1964»
gépw, 1823*

pnut, 66°

Pbsyyos, 1894
pradergla, 525»
davros, 1003*
grréw, 4326; 1932°


gpldynua, 1814*

procopla, 2383°

gépos, 3010>

goprlayv, 528°

péap, 4240

gpovéw, 2972>
guraxripior, 126; 2392>
guvdaxh (LXX), 538°; 2982%
gurdpxns, 2393
pvddoow, 128%

~&s, 18928

gurlifo, 14499


xalpw, 967%; 1291; 17199

xapaxrhp, 10699; 14515;
1468+

xdpak, 383; 2789"

xaplivouar, 1133°

xdpis, 27>; 12908; 2035»

xdpirua, 1228; 1349>

xdopa, 1310

xeipoTovew,
2199

xiMapxos, 257; 258; 569>

xiT ev, 876%

xoixds, 989P

xpnuariopnés, 2581>

xpioriaviopuds, 622

xpioriavés, 621>

Xpiords, 14119

xplw, 138°

xpdbvos, 629

xwarés, 1968


(LXX)


479; 613>; 6558;


Warrhpiov, 2098?

pevddxpirros, 628

pry rocky (LXX), 375

wuxy, 2085; 13515; 18899; 27218;
3004°

yuxexéds, 492; 989°; 19748; 21215;
27215


avéopat, 533%
dpa, 1434%
apispnévos, 834%


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


ABANAURIVME iii) scutes She eee vi
ABRAHAM'S OAK...........0.....0000.. ii
ABSALOM’S PILLAR AND ToMBs or St. JAMES
AND ZacHanrias (Full Page)........... i.
Apsatom’s ToMB...................... i
Acropouis AND ArEopaGcus, ATHENS i
ADDER Ai ee gat Rs 5. ee age eo iv.
AGRICULTURE—
1. Bringing Home the Barley Harvest . i.
2. Egyptian Threshing-floor.......... v.
3. Field of Boaz............0........ i.
4, Going to Market.................. i.
5. Going to Market................. iii.
6. Implements of Agriculture......... i.
7. Market-place at Jaffa............. i.
8. Modern Syrian Wine Press (Full
Pama) As er eet Ce tei eA eas v.
9. Olive Press at, Banias near Dan (Full
Page) iene bea een beens iv.
10. Plowing near Nazareth............ iv.


11. Plowing in Syria with Yoke of Oxen v.


12. Priest-king and God of Cultivation. . iii.
13. Primitive Plowing................ at
14. Reaping and Binding Sheaves...... iv.
15. Sheep at Dothan (Full Page)... ... . iii.
16. Shepherd of Bethany............. ii.
17. Shepherd and Sheep.............. iv.
18. The Shepherd’s Field and Field of
IBOA Biss 22a he a keh a gets i.
19. Syrian Plow, Yoke and Pick....... iv.
20. Threshing Instrument with Sharp
Meath! nukes Pelham ne
21. Threshing with Oxen..... be Pececaneea de i.
22. Yoke of Ancient Plow............. Vv.
AHURAY MAZDA socio d roma Ret Rea iv.
Ain Jipy, Looxina SouTH... .......... ii.
ALABASTER BOXES.........-.0.--000005- i.
ATGUMAT REE costed dna Yelaun ams cutee i
ALMOND TREE... ...-0000 0000 eee i
INTOMS Eee Cet eas earns eet eh eae i
ALPHABET—
1. The Paestos Disk, Face A......... 1
2. Primitive Alphabets (Insert)....... 1.
3. Primitive Signs Like A............ rs
4. Table Showing Script of Semitic Lan-
PUAL ESE esha oaks choral teh Leek iv.
Arar oF BURNT OFFERING AND ALTAR OF
INCENSE fara teenies eae ee ead anes i.
ALTARS—
1. Altar of Burnt Offering and Altar of
TnGenises. Acc 5st eno as oi
Qo Caimi Altar. cc os ahead ie re
3. WirerAltarse.: £22 occacucanatey nex as iv.
4. Incense Altars of Sandstone Found
in the Rock Shrine at Sinai...... 1.


5. Rock Altar from Taanach......... i. 109
6. Rock Altar at Tell el-Mutasellim—
Megiddo (Full Page)............ iii. 1390
7. Stone Altar of Gezer.............. i. 108
AMICUS: RUPUS:.60.00 ile oe ek ace es iii. 2079
Anarnotu, Jeremiay’s Birtupiace (Full

Pare) este ad acsivs ttciny eens eae Matas ee iii. 1588
ANcIENT AQUEDUCT AT SMYRNA.......... iv. 2818
Ancient AstaTIC CROWNS.............. ii. 762
ANCIENT EGypTIaN BASKETS............ i. 413
Ancient Eeyptian Hincss. te . li, 1898
Ancient Ecyprian Parrin care ON Ciom

Cull Page) son) O88 uae eiacenen Le vss ii. 914
Ancient Ecyptian TemMpLe—Pui ae (Full

Page) is an cet taat ede Nees tty seas sie neeeaes ii. 1034
ANCIENT Horns AND CurvEeD Trumpets... v. 3025
Anciunt Manuscrirr on Papyrus. (In-

BENG) te Pt ee as Ree Re ek iii. 2238
ANCIENT OIL PRESSES...............-. iv. 2182
ANCIENT PaINTING OF AN EGYPTIAN PRIN-

cess (Full Page).................-.-. iv. 2360
Ancien? Porrery (Full Page)........... iv. 2424
ANCIENT SEALS FROM ORIGINALS IN THE

British MUSEUM.............-...05. iv. 2708
ANIMALS—

VecAG MOR: 28. atieole Poin sated Wet dnb vatdee iv. 2737
2. Antelope.............0.-000000005 i. 144
Bw, =) o ee entree ew tac a Seay. ea arr ae grea i, 286
4. Assegata Mill................... i. 287
5. Asshur-bani-pal Hunting.......... i. 294
6. Assyrian Lion Hunt.............. iii. 1441
7. Bas-relief of Lion Hunt........... iv. 2150
8. Bats bars 2. 0a ee aban te i. 414
9, Bitand Bridle................... i. 482

10. Broad-tailed Sheep. . oo... dv. 2757

11. Bronze Goat Head froin Tello. eee i. 859

12. Camels at the Sea of Galilee....... i. 548

13s Cattle: f.cso0. thes sea teat i. 584

14. Chameleon...................05. i. 592

15. Chamois: Persian Wild Goat or

Pasane ae ye cocina Oe cracks easae i. 592

16. Elephant’s Tusks Brought to Thoth-

Mes eee ek nee lene iii, 1544

17. Fighting with Wild Beasts......... ii. 1172

TS SZHOX tee ee ee ree es ah a Oe tate ii. 1144

LO2kGazelles.. sc eee eee sh tters ates ii. 1179

DO GCA ZOMG 22 ves shail ajics Rbade Megas os iv. 2597

Dts GeckOnn eet ad 2) ae iii, 1906

22. Group of Conies................. ii, 698

23. Hittite Lion, Boghaz-keuy; at the

feTeion Gate” 12.4 ao kasloaeksenahete see i. 278

24, Hooded Snake. va! <O5

25. Hunting Deer in an n Enclosed Field.. iii, 1441

26. Jackal. . tetas oo ade ene SM LOAD.

27. Leopard . De egg ee ee ete eee iii. 1866


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


Pe baad U0) «aes a gr ee ili, 1895
29. Monkey from the Peccneecne Mo- ;
SACU Beste, nse eitestaval anita amine Mes i. 160
30. Pariah Dog at Beirut............. ji. 867
31. Plowing in Syria with Yoke of Oxen vy. 3127
32. Sheep at Dothan (Full Page).. - li. 1738
33. Shells of Murex trunculus at Sidon: iv. 2510
34. Shepherd and Sheep.............. ty: 2763
35. Syrian Bear................20005- i. 417
36. Threshing with Oxen.............. i. 77
37. Wild Goat of Sinai............... ii. 1249
SOW OLE cn 8 Stroy ye oes v. 3099
39. Young Camels Grazing............ i. 547
ANISH Seti hel bee eb S Sed eee i. 136
ANTELOPE 25000009 bc Diels Holes Meu au aa 1, 144
Anti-LeBanon: Soux-Wapy-Barrana... iii. 1862
APHRODITEs ont seed geese dearest nhiaes es li. 1298
APPROACHES TO A CITY................- i. 663
ARABIM BAL: 22 ocarst C14 oe tam kice saad iii, 2014
ARABS—
1. Arab Meal....... 0.0.0.0... 0000000 iii, 2014
2 Arabeentsie. Sia ax acite ceon tis v. 2948
3. Arab Women Preparing Bread...... i. 516
4, Bedawin of Moab................ ii. 2070
5. Modern Arab Marriage Procession. .iii. 1997
6. Modern Arabs. i. 215
7. Modern Arabs Encamped _ in “the
Valley of Achor................ i, 214
8. Modern Arab Village............. iii. 1487
9. Showing “‘Shed”’ of Arab Loom..... v. 3078
ARAB Dam Nee ee rn are asics ok ater eh wntee Poe v. 2948
ARaB WoMEN PREPARING BREAD........ i. 516
Aramaic, GREEK AND LatTIn WRITING IN
Common Use IN PALESTINE IN GOSPEL
TRAMEBS ioe wie RN a! 8 oe aed a OR iE v. 3125
ARARADS los Bits ars, ee oh Par ate wrote ae i. 247
ARCHES oF ANCIENT AQUEDUCT AT ANTIOCH
(MulliPage): a. 2eh le oe lahat neha tns i. 658
ARCHITECTURE—
1. Absalom’s Pillar and Tombs of St.
James and Zacharias (Full Page).. 234
2. Areopagus at Athens.............. i. 289
3. Artificial Mound, Marsovan Plain;
Possibly Hittite................ i. 280
4. City Wall at Gezer............... ii, 1222
BS Coliseum 5,6. 2 sehen sek a 2605
6. Colonnade at Amman (Rabbah). . 2521
7. Doorway with Voluted Slabs oe
Machish ec! ioe Sees eee ee i, 235
8. Elevation of House from Court..... iii, 1486
9. Extremity of the Grand Colonnade
BE GELasain Hen. eilets mca simnees hie ays ji, 1218
10. Ezekiel’s Temple Plan............ v. 2935
11. Front Elevation of Temple........ v. 2938
12. Great Court Including Royal Build-
BS ea eee em ete atone apa v. 2982
-13. Hittite Lion, Boghaz-keuy; at the
*TioniGabe heehee Cea eaten i. 278
14. Hittite Warrior, Boghaz-keuy...... i. 278
15. Interior of Vizir Khan, Aleppo... .. ii. 1470
16. Isometric Sketch of a House at Gezer.iii. 1435
17, Jewish Temple of Leontopolis...... i, 285


18. Lintel Stones............ 00 eee i.
19. Lion Gate at Boghaz-keuy........- iti.
20. Modern City of Es Salt........... i.
21. Monuments in Assur, Discovered by
the Germans.............0+++-: iv.
22. Obelisk at On... 2... eee iv.
23. Obelisk of Thothmes I. . ii.
24. Old Jisr el-Mujamia, Roman Bridge
across the Upper Jordan River
(Pull Page) 3: voce cuit cushy iv.
25. Painted Tombs of Marissa......... i.
26. Palace of Omri and Ahab at Samaria iv.
Dor PAant Heo nas oxo. leo ae coe eA iv.
28. Pillars and Hollow Stone of the High
Place at Gezer......2...--.050% iii.
29. Plan of the Baths in the Castle at
GeOZEr 1S ee EAs es i
30. Plan of House.............---5065 ili
31. Plan of the Library at Nineveh... ..iv
32. Plan of Pergamon...............- iii.
33. Plan of Solomon’s Temple......... v.
34: Robinson’s Arch...............00- iii.
35. Roman Forum................... iv.
36. Ruins at Amman—Fagade of Thea-
DOD re kena date a byanng das wees wiv.
37. Ruins of One of Herod’s Temples in
Samaria. oc oc essed ed ah yet iii.
38. Ruins in Samaria...............-. iv.
39. St. Stephen’s Gate................ iii.
40. Solomon’s Temple—Schick’s Model
(Mull Page): one cee etic v.
41. Streets of a Jewish City........... i.
42, Synagogue at Kefr Berim.......... i.
43. Theater at Gerasa................ ii.
44, Tomb of Zechariah............... i.
45. Tower of Antonia................. ii.
46. Tower of David.................. iii.
47. Traditional House of Ananias...... ii.


48. Traditional House of Simon the


49. Traditional Megiddo—Ruins of
Palace and Public Buildings (Full
Page) sires chee nce sense ene nee, ean iii.
50. Triple Gate—German Excavations
at Nablus (Full Page).......... ii.
AREOPAGUS AT ATHENS................5 i.
ARM-CHAIR OR THRONE................. v.
Armor, ARMs— :
1. Assyrian Bronze Knives........... iii.
2. Battle-axes and Spears............ i.
3. Bows, Arrows and Quiver......... i.
4. Breastplate..........-.......000- i,
5. Egyptian Slinger................. i.
6. Egyptian Stone Knives............ iii.
7. Egyptian Swords................. 15,
8. Greaves and Sandals.............. i.
9. Group of Ancient Arms........... i.
10. Heavy-armed Greek Soldier........ i.
V1 Helmets cee ea es oes nes i.
12. Hittite Warrior—Boghaz-keuy...... i.
13. Hittite Warrior—Senjirli.......... iii.
14, Persian Warriors................. iv.
15. Shield, Sword and Girdle.......... i


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


MaARSsOVAN


ARTIFICIAL Movunp, PLAIN;
PossIBLy HITTITE. ....... 00.00. i.

Ascent to Ar: Para to Exian’s TRANS-
LATION 3c sciitstea dts tice ane be Meee ae eke i
CNB Pelest faa! ihc wie SN Cn oa ys i se OS ae i
ASHTORDTH 0. lsc waseeccniae urna as i
PAS PoE sik Ar ocbna tec nls Cecpaya he users oe TL i.
Asses aT A MILL. PON, necro eas
ASSHUR-BANI-PAL enriae. edi are Pudsey Be oes Ua i.


ASSHUR-BANI-PAL’s Account oF His Res-
TORATION OF THE STAGE-TOWER AT


NIPRU Riz ode ras ener seen ont tee eens i
AssYRIA—
1. Asshur-bani-pal Hunting.......... i.


2. Asshur-bani-pal’s Account of His
Restoration of the Stage-tower at


NIPPUTS. Hi cyt. nh intien oye re
3. Assyrian Armed Galley in Motion..

A. Neey man AXics 04 alae act esoeh Oe a 8 i.

5, Assyrian Balance................. i.

6. Assyrian Book................... i.

7. Assyrian Bronze Knives........... iii.

8. Assyrian Chariot................. ole

9. Assyrian Duleimer................ iii.

10. Assyrian Fringed Garment......... il.

11. Assyrian Glass Bottles............ i.

12. Assyrian King in His Chariot...... i
18. Assyrian King Placing His Foot on

the Neck of an Enemy. . arte bs

14. Assyrian Lion Hunt.............. iii.

15. Assyrian Manner of Wearing Hair. . ii.

16. Assyrian Ring with Wings......... i.

17. Assyrian Standards and Banners... . 1.
18. Bas-relief of Sennacherib Besieging

Weachisht 2: see iy aueeme Saku iv.

19. Brick Stamp of Sargon I.......... i.
20. Bronze and Stone Weights Used in

Nineveh: 5. ce few god esterase Vv.

21. Egyptian and Assyrian Bracelets... . i.
22. Jehu’s Tribute—from Obelisk of

Shalmaneser..............-.5.. iii.

23. Monolith of Shalmaneser II........ i.
24. Monuments in Assur, Discovered by

the Germans..........-...-.00-5 iv.

25. Plan of the Library at Nineveh... . .iv
26. Presentation of Umman-igas to His

Subjects by the Assyrian General. ii,

27. Procession of Assyrian Musicians. . . iii.

28. Sargon in His War Chariot........ ae
29. Sennacherib on His Throne before

Tachish'n.0 202 segecte eAieatie acne iii,

30. Tiglath-pileserI............--.555 Vv.

AssyRIAN ARMED GALLEY IN MomTION.....iv.

ASSYRIANIAX dc cagiau Dawe eke teas i.

ASSYRIAN BALANCE... ..--- 000000 eee i.

AsSYRIAN BOOK.........00000 0500 eee i.

ASSYRIAN BronzE KNIVES.........-.--- iii.

ASSYRIAN CHARIOT. ..........-0 00050505 i.

AssyRIAN DULCIMER. Shore eeanree LL

AssyRIAN FRINGED GARMENT. TAs eee ka Ie ii.

Assyrian Guass BoTTues...........-+-- i.


AssyRIaAN KinG IN His CHARIOT.......-- i,


280


87


286
271
286
287
294


3509
Assyrian Kine Piacineg His Foor on THE
Neck oF AN ENEMY...........0000 005 ii. 1126
Assyrian Lion Hunt..........-....-55 iii. 1441
AssyRIAN MANNER OF WrarinG Hair. ... it. 1320
ASSYRIAN RING witH WINGS............ i. 304
ASSYRIAN STANDARDS AND BANNERS...... i. 384
AsTRONOMY—
1. Assyrian Ring with Wings......... i. 304
2. Corona of Minimum Type......... i. 303
3. East—A Corner of the Milky Way . i. 306
4. East—Star Swarms............... i. 3807
5. Heaven, The Earth and the Abysses
(Schiaparelli’s Hebrew World).... i. 315
6. Hercules and Draco.............. i. 309
7. Hydra and the Neighboring Con-
stellations................-.00. i. 310
8. Ophinchus and the Neighboring Con-
stellations...............0.000. j. 310
9. South—The Pleiades............. i. 311
10. Stars of the Plough, as the Winnew-
IngoMana cc eek! lone i. 318
11. Worshipping Heavenly Bodies...... i. 370
12. Worshipping the Lunar Deity...... i. 371
ATHENA PROMACHOS..........-0 0000-005 ii, 1298
ATTITUNES— ;
1S BOWIDE sas fiat aie ned Leena i. 330
2. Giving a Blessing...............-- i. 329
3. Kissing the Hand................. 1. 329
4K neelings 2 cin ie aes cant setae i. 330
5. Supplication: “Falling at the Feet” i. 330
6. Washing before Eating............ i. 412
AWS rar G nda ceraset ee ote a shane net Ee i. 341
IN XTEG I ees esters eel oh RE APA Se wd Se cdl i. 341
BAAD Oeea. dunes des cas Yee i. 3845
BaBYLON—
1. Babylonian Idols................. i. 369
2. Boundary Stone of Nebuchadnezzar
Deb eee aerate ete xis eR ene ares: ane iv. 2128
3. Brick Bearing the Name of Nebu-
chadrezzar............--000005 i. 352
4. Bronze Goat Head from Tello...... i. 359
5. Building Inscription of Nabopolassar i. 356
6. Building Inscription of Nebuchad-
VOZZAL sisted va tea tedium om eae i. 3849
7. Clay Tablet with Seal Inscription... i. 364
8. The Deluge Tablet............... i. 374
OQ; Hae Secs Sa ole nee etme es i. 370
10. From an Engraving on a Babylonian
Cylinder Representing the Sun God
and One of His Priests. 1. 371
11. Fragments of Inscribed Vases ‘of the
Early Sumerian Period.......... i. 360
12. Mound Covering Nippur Tower.... i. 349
TBs Neboviee: se sce tv enarn oe, Meccy:, Heeb i. 371
14. Seal Cylinders................... 1 368
15. Silver Vase of Entemena.......... i. 359
16. Statue of Gudea from Tello....... i. 362
17. Stone Object Containing an Inscrip-
: tion of Nebuchadrezzar I. ... 1, 358
18. Terra-cotta Cylinder Containing the
History of the Capture of Babylon
by Cyrus the Great............. i, 575


3510


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


19. Tomb of Cyrus.................5. iv. 2336
' 20. Worshipping Heavenly Bodies...... i. 370

21. Worshipping the Lunar Deity...... i. 371
BaBYLONIAN IDOLS. ..........00.00.00005 1. 369
BAGHSCRIP yi a4 08h toed Ga See eeeth i. 377
BakING BREAD ON STONES.............. 111. 2013
BALANCE (FROM EGypTiAN Toms)........ i. 380
Bank: Money CHANGER............... i. 383
BANK OF THE NILE, ON THE............iv. 2145
BANNERS AND STANDARDS—

‘1. Assyrian Standards and Banners.... i. 384

2. Egyptian Standards.............. i. 384

3. Roman Standards or Banners... ... v. 3070

Bas-RELIEF OF Lion HUNT............. iv. 2150
Bas-RELIEF OF SENNACHERIB BESIEGING

VG ACHISH: ©7305 facades eas fi eee ease iv. 2150
Barsine at THE Norta END oF THE Dap

Sra, THE Movuntains oF Moas IN THE

BACKGROUND. ........0-000000 cece ii. 806
BaATTERING-RAM.. 0.000.002. 2e2eeeeeee iv. 2787
BatTrLE-AXES AND SPEARS.............-. 1. 252
Barris oF BETH-HORON................ 1. 447
BATS MARS ez ies Sted: an Hae gaoee Aad i. 414
BAZAAR AT JAFFA: 60:6 6b cede teens ili. 1995
BEARDED DARNEL...........0 000000 e ee v. 2910
BEARDS ote tetas eee RISE E S ee ememnee eat i. 418
Bepovuins Piayine on Primitive Instru-

MENTS. yr ahr oO Gon Ban ihe, Senet: lit. 2097
BEDSTEAD Ss sts erties aha het eed os dee ae i, 422
Beps oF WHITE MARL AND SILT NEAR THE

Dmap Spray. of 62.5 ood ote ee is i. 213
BEDAWIN OF MoaB...............2-20-- iii. 2070
BEERSHEBA, OVERLOOKING THE DESERT

(Full Page) i. 424
BETHANY.2% scaraciny Mieennatiere Me ayten i. 442
BREUER  H0 op ct seer. cay ucm eaeh bho i, 444
BETHPHAGE. 00... occ eee i. 451
Brrps—

1. Bird Sign: Above a Four-horse
Chariot, Driven by a Goddess,
Appears an Eagle Flying........ ii. 1300

2 UBIGbertn 208 easy oso Adve, cles sce 1. 484

See Gormoranty ec! foo) aro lag Sedat ae i. 720

pA GPANIO eet and AE EA cain RIGS SWE eae i. 737

5. Egyptian Fowler...............5. ii, 1143

6. Gier-eagle.. 0.0... cee eee ii. 1228

he CC Cad, Worn Bates nace eetewen Anca are aNd li. 1235

STH ErOne 2 ise yo aie a aes on wag Aes ili. 1384

Qe HOO pOe sscacv hk eas ee ee iii, 1419

10: Kestrel <2 Asc See ee eee ii, 1845

V1: -Ostrichéss 2...360-ccaNeh ey acne iv. 2203

PUD Owl 2 obese ee eee a tee iv. 2205
»-48. Partridge..............-0.---0000. iv. 2255

VAN Pele ans. cece ey eyes a kate agen ges iv. 2297

/15. Pigeons iv. 2395

TOM @ ial oc occa ths a ee cutee ea eats iv. 2512

DAS Raven et cee uae ole sh ghee mis iv. 2533

18. Short-toed Eagle li, 885

TOMS PaITOW. cd. hue, oases ca UeeeteE eal ates v. 2839

DOM OCOPR Kg 2 Lee cote BION 1s ae v. 2863

21. Swift. . . Vv. 2874

22, Turtle-dove....... 00.6... 0. cee i, 872


Birp Sien: Apove a Four-HoRsE CHARIOT,
Driven By a Gopprss, APPEARS AN


EAGLE FLYING. ......... 0002 cee eee ii.
Bit anp BRIDLE. ..........2 000 eee i
BITTERN acne Renee ie ininale Fares i
BLACK-FIGURED VASE PAINTING.......... ii.
BLowPIPE AND SMALL FURNACE.......... iv.
Boguaz-KEvy: Tue Huittrire Forrress

CaLLEp YENIGE KALEH..............- ii.
Booxs—

J. Assyrian Book.............-.0555 i.
2. Egyptian Roll and Case...........iv
3. Old Egyptian Bookease........... iii.
_ 4, Plan of the Library at Nineveh..... iv.


. A Reader with a Roll............. i.


5

6. Samaritan High Priest with Scroll.. .iv

7. Terra-cotta Cylinder Containing the
History of the Capture of Babylon


by Cyrus the Great............. i.
8. A Writer, His Palette, and a Papyrus
<1 eee re PR a eee ee rie i
BorrLes—
1. Assyrian Glass Bottles............ 1
2. Bottles of Skins.................. i.
3. Glass Bottles...............02... ii.
4, Water Carriers with Skin Bottles... i.
Bort ies oF SKINS. Be i
Botnpary STONE OF p NesuonapnmzaR 16
BOWING shy, Aa ccda NY Se an ene eee i
Bows, ARRowWs AND QUIVER............. i.
BoxinG with THE Cestus.............. 11
BREAD—
1. Arab Women Preparing Bread...... i.
2. Baking Bread on Stones........... iil.
3. Egyptian Cakes or Loaves of Bread. i.
4, Egyptians Kneading Dough with
Their Feet.............0...0055 i.
5. Egyptians Kneading Dough with
Their Hands................... i.
BREASTPLATE. 0.0.00 20 e eee i.
BREECHES OF THE Hicu PRIEST.......... i.
Brick Bearinc THE Name or NEBUCHAD-
REZTAR etl have GeseM ct uies oe ER we i.
Brick Stamp oF SarGconl.............. i
BripGEs—
1. Natural Bridge at Lebanon. i.


2. Old Jisr el-Mujamia, Roman Brides
across Upper Jordan River ull


PROC) Get tee eae eta ee iv.
3. Roman Bridge over the Halys...... i.
Brineine Home tHE Bariey Harvest.. i.
BROAD-TAILED SHEEP.................. wiv.
Bronze Goat Hbap FRoM TELLO........ i.
BronzE Pane, From Patace GaTE at
BALAWAT Oyster aaah mite adnan da en FED i
Bronze aNd STonz WEIGHTS oe IN
ININB VER nace a fair cele aee ie aie a aires v
Brook CHERITH.... 2.2.2... eee eee eae lv
TRROWNGANT © stich cee aceon hoi gn sence ats i.


Burip1nq Inscription oF NaBOPOLASSAR . i.


Burtpine Inscription oF NEBUCHADREZ-


DARED A ork ohn Genesee bok Pee een i.


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


Buriar—
1. Burial Procession...... Pa er eee 1.
2. Cutting the Flesh. . ey Jd
3. Interments in hes Second Burial
Cave at Gezer................. iv.
4. Mourners About a Couch on Which
Rests the Body of the Dead...... ii.
5. Sacrificed Infant Buried in a Jar at
GOZED css abot ae on ii
BurIAu PROCESSION. .........0 000000005 i
CATRNSAT TAR Hs ee Wiiae ohh ee en i.
CAMELS AT THE SEA OF GALILEE......... 1.
CANA OF GALILEE.......... 00000000 eee i.
CaNnaLs—
1. Canals in Egypt.................. i.
2. Ship-canal at Corinth............. il.
CANALS IN FIGYPT. 2... eee i.
CAPR Re ese a tree at 2 ies Seated Se te iid
CARMEL OF JUDAH... .....-.2.000000005 i
CaroB TREE......... Seat teehee acon Res iii.
Carp Founp IN THE Sta oF GALILEE..... il.
GASSTA ST 2 ent ER eel tens Winton ert i
CaraPULt For HuruinG Missiuus....... iv
CATT i Vet Po: eee Rann ee eee cence i
Cave IN LEBANON CONVERTED INTO A
SHRIND e).ficsei addins icntid ude ad a St nosh i
Caves—
1. Cave in Lebanon Converted into a
Shrine shee eee ees i


2. Cenotaph over Tomb of Sarah in
Mosque of Hebron above Cave of


Machpelah (Full Page).......... iii.


3. Grotto of Jeremiah—“ Gordon’s Cal-


VAT YC icon sche Bigs, RE Sa i.


5. Interments in the Second Burial Cave


Bt GOTER oe eens etic tas Gane iv.


6. Mosque over the Cave of Machpelah


at Hebron........--..0000 see: il.
7. Plan of the Cave-dwellings at Gezer ili.
8. Signs of the Cave-dwellers......... v.
9


. Stream Issuing from Cave at Afka,


Tebanons, orn ckernag tee ene i.


Crpars or LEBANON AT THE BESHERRI


CROW Bc rei a are tats adi) eeedinneomcetc’ 1.


CENOoTAPH oVER TomMB oF SaRaH IN
Mosque or HEBRON ABOVE CAVE OF


Macuprtan (Full Page).........-.-- iii.
CENSERS nce at Seah nee le nae i.
CHAMELEON : 2.062.054 Gs esc eee 1.


Cuamois: Perstan Witp Goat or Pasane i.


CHANNEL oF Wapy Mounavwat, as It


Ewrers THE Deap SEA........-.-+--- ii.
Cuorazin—Rvins or Jewish SYNAGOGUE

(ONLY RUINS ExTANT) (Full Page)... ... v.
Crmapen oF ZION... 0... ee v.


Crrizs AND VILLAGES—
1. Anathoth, Jeremiah’s Birthplace (Full
Page) ;


2. Approaches toa City..........-5, i,


3511
3. Beersheba, Overlooking the Desert
(HullePage)ss hea oe mena eed i, 424
4, Chorazin—Iuins of Jewish Syna-
gogue (only ruins extant) (Full
PARE) ie te c8 sewrectnuttertatne ga aetna ae v. 2378
5. City Gate... 6... eee i. 664
6. City Wall at Gezer..........0.... li. 1222
eT AAGAZ A 6 oh tea ee eee esate Rais a 1178
8. General View of Petra (Full Page). .iv. 2714
9. Ground Plan of Olympia.......... li. 1299
10. Modern Arab Village............. iii, 1437
11. Modern City of Es Salt........... i. 234
12. Modern Jerusalem................ ili. 1621
13. Nablus and Mount Ebal.......... iv. 2755
14. Ruins at Amman—Facade of Thea-
HOR ei) elds ee en ee a ott aan sta he iv. 2521
15. Ruins of Ancient Corinth with Acro-
Corinthus in Background........ ii. 711
16. Streets of a Jewish City........... i. 234
17.Tell el Hesy v:cc0 o.oo eet es 1. 663
18. Tell Hum—Traditional Capernaum
(Pull Page). scien ee ees i. 567
19. Tell Sandahannah................ i. 662
20. Traditional Megiddo—Ruins of
Palace and Public Buildings (Full
Page) ote cian eh ae anes ili, 2028
21. Walls of Tell ej Judeideh.......... i. 664
CSITRON G2. 28 hssyatiys tabdvass peraiuimnON sade iate a ii. 1278
Ciny Gate ee Ree ore a eames i. 664
Crry Wau. at GEzER. . ae ... il. 1222
Cuay TABLET WITH Seat, INSCRIPTION. . i. 364
CLOTHES-MOTH... 2.0.02 ccc eee ei 2091
Covt or HammuraBl (Insert)........... ili. 1854
Coins—
1. Amicus Rufus.............-0.005- iii. 2079
2. Bank: Money Changer............ 1. 383
3. Chalkous of Pontius Pilate........ lili. 2080
4, Coin of Agrippa...............64. iti. 2079
5. Coin of Alexander Struck at Accho .ii1. 2077
6. Coin of Antigonus................ i. 553
7. Coin of Antiochus IV of Syria...... iii. 2077
8. Coin of Antoninus Pius, Showing
JANCHOM se eat ah ead he Sat iv. 2777
9. Coin of Aradus..............-.04- ili. 2077
10. Coin of Ariarathes V, Philometer,
King of Cappadocia............ i. 568
11. Coin of Augustus................. i. 3382
12. Coin of Cyprus under Emperor
Cladding 2... iota Es li. 772
18. Coin of Cyrene................0.. ii. 773
14, Coin of Elis—Zeus of Pheidias...... ii. 1297
15. Coin of the Herods. . lil. 2079
16. Coin of Licinius, Roman Emperor i in
ther iast tans <fi aotteoser et ceaane i. 281
17. Coin of Macedonia............... iil, 1956
18. Coin of Philippi.................. iv. 2369
19. Coin of Ptolemy Soter............ iii, 2078
90. Coin of Rhodes.................. iv. 2589
91. Coin of Sardis.................0... iv. 2692
22. Coin Showing Image of Diana...... ii. 961
93. Coin of Sidon..............0.00.. iii, 2077
24, Coin of Sidon............0.-e0 ue, iv. 2786


3512
25. Coin of Tarsus................... v.
26% Com OF D yrs awe es dae ih Ged ce Vv.
20s Comiof Pyrex cc coe ble ei ili.
28. Coin of Vespasian, Representing Ju-
daea Mourning for Her Se iv.
29. Denarius of Tiberius.............. i
30. Denarius of Ribahius. ere tog ee ee iii.
31. Half-shekel, Year 1, 141 (?) BC... . iii
32. Isthmian Crowns................. ii.
33. Mite of John Hyrcanus........... iii.
34. Octodrachm (Egyptian Talent) of
Ptolemy Aa %.08 hte mat fhe iv.
35. One-fourth Shekel................ iii.
36. Reverse of a Coin.of Aelia Capito-
Vin) ee eed ec eet iii.
37. Reverse of a Coin of Antigonus.. . . iii.
38. Roman Ccin Commemorating View
tory over the Jews............. ilk.
39. Shekel, Simon Bar-cochba......... ie
40. Shekel, Year 4, 138-7 (?) BC...... iii.
41. Tetradrachm (Attic Talent) of An-
tiochus III. a i.
42. Tetradrachm of ANishistits Seniale af
Antioch... 0.0.00... cece eee eee ii.
43. Tetradrachm (Ptolemaic Talent) of
Alexander Balas............... i.
44, Trumpets on a Coin from Bar-cochba iii.
AS MEVICAT sy 8 oy epi a asc sh ial Pee hor et iii.
COLISEUM. .s.23 0h see epee a iv.
COLOCYNTH i... Said aa Riad dees gga ii.
CoLONNADE AT AMMAN (RaBBAH)........ ly.


ComMBAT BETWEEN Kine ANv Evi Spirit. iv.


Common EayptiAN WRITING DURING THE


or ABRAHAM
CoNSTRUCTION OF TABERNACLE, ACCORDING


TO: FERGUSSON i .-0:c5. 2p ened efi ees v
Convent GARDEN, SINAI............... iv.
CORMORAND 5:0). ps seannaran Dose anaes i.
Corn anD Pam Trees IN GosHEN.. 2.
Corner oF WALL OF TeRcsarew | FROM

Kipron Vauuey (Full Page)........... iii.
Corona oF Minimum TYPE............ one
Covucu Bev with Heap Rest........... i.
IGRAINE Ae sen Satie avert ate a Rate aan, aged i
Cross-SECTION OF NILOMETER........... iv
Cross-sECTIONS—

1. Cross-section of Nilometer......... iv.

2. Geological Cross-section of Southern
Pal@Stine’s eels POA i ie es eRe tk od i.

3. Map and Longitudinal Section of the
Wea diese. 2. \s ssc ate aera il.

+. Section from the Mediterranean to
Moab (after Lartet)............ ii.
5. Transverse Section of the Dead Sca. ii.
GUM Nes 0h S08 ee See Nig eas eee ii
CuNEIFORM TABLET FROM BoGHAZ-KEUY.. 1.
CUTTING THE FLESH. .................0. ii.
DRG ON fs, soc pelt, seen Rey Mae i
Date PauM WITH FRUIT. ,,...... 0.0000 iv


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


2915
3032
2080


2236
830
2080


. 2078


1173
2079


2499
2079


2080
2079


2080
2080
2078


159


2080


91
2098
2078
2605
1287
2521
2333


. 8125


. 8124


. 2890


2804
720
1280


1602
303
422
737


iv. 2146


2146
212
803

1216
804
766
281
770


776


iv. 2235


Drab Sza—
1. Bathing at the North End of the
Dead Sea, the Mountains of Moab
in the Background............- ii.
2. Beds of White Marl and Silt near the
Dead! Searvicis ace ent are tego ess i.
3. Channel of Wady Muhauwat, as It
Enters the Dead Sea............ li.
4. Jebel Usdum from the South, Looking
over the Mud Flat Covered by the
Sea in High Water.............- ii.
5. Map and Longitudinal Section of the
Desid? Sean: sea who eene ace wtaeees ii
6. North End of the Dead Sea, Border-
ing the Plain of Jericho. . i
7. Salt Cliffs on the East Side of Jebel
scares ret ot tute ees Veta oe ii
8. Section from the Mediterranean to
Moab (after Lartet)............ ii.
9. Shells from Ancient Bed of the Salt
DOA ae. sR on Steen bere i
10. Shore Line at Southwest Corner of
the Dead Sea.................. ii.
11. Transverse Section of the Dead Sea. ii.
12. View from Ain Jidy, Looking South. ii.
13. View from the Heights behind Ma-
BAA eat rte hayh sate ael ee ay ii
14. View from Mount of Olives Over-
looking the Dead Sea (Full Page). ii.
Deuce Tasiet, THE................. ay
DENARIUS OF TIBERIUS............00005 il.
Desert or Epom, IN THE.............. ii
MEV TAIN Ais ihc sheNS 6 satel est ie act al ea aoe ii
Drerine Sxins IN Vats oF SUMACH....... V-
Discus THROWER..............20-0000 ii.
Doorway WITH Vo.uTEp SiaBs at La-


DovusLe Pipz wiITH ACCOMPANIMENT OF


CLAPPING OF HANDS .................. iii
Dress—

1. Ancient Asiatic Crowns........... ii.

2. Ancient Painting of an eae
Princess (Full Page). . ite AVS
3. Assyrian Fringed Garment, Ae ii.
4. Bags: Serip es i teehee San as i.
5. Breeches of the High Priest........ i.
6. Dress of Egyptian Priests......... iv.
7. Egyptian Amulets and Earrings... . i.
8. Egyptian Anklets................ i.
9. Egyptian and Assyrian Bracelets.... i.
10. Egyptian Sandals................. iv.

11. Egyptian Signet Rings and Impres-
sions Made from Them.......... iv.

12. Fringed Skirts from Tomb at Bab-el
Melookiiic omens see eerate il.
13. Median Dress................0.... iii.
14. Modern Druse Headdress.......... ii.
15. Native of Jericho................. ii.
16. Painting at Beni Hassan.......... ii.
17. Phylacteries for Head and Arm..... iv.
18. Sandals.....: err i ee re eae ate ii.


806
213


805


801
803
802
807

1216
213
802
804
808
809
802
374
830
832
843

2908

1172


235
870


iii. 2099


762


2360
1146
377
518
2440
127
136
518
2779


2504


1146
2017
878
876
877
2393
879


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


19. Sculpture on Behistun Rock....... ii.
20. Shepherd of Bethany............. ii.

21. Woman’s MHeaddress and Veil
(Modern) ............. 2. eee eee ii.
Dress or Ecyptian Prizsts. inhtns scar
Drzssina Hips 1N A SYRIAN TANNERY ONS
DRUMS chose ett aye ten ache avec tage Seema t iii
Dry Wapy in Epom i
ELA t Se a 2a ae a oe Re i
East—A CorNER OF THE Minky Way.... i.
Hast—STar SWARMS............-000005 i.
EASTERN WATERPOTS.......00-00 eee eee v.
BONY Ai A iettetoeetehe oti aotetud ate ate ii

Eeyrpt—

1, Ancient Egyptian Baskets......... i.
2. Ancient Egyptian Hinges.......... iii.

3. Ancient Egyptian Paintings on
Cloth (Full Page).............. ii,

4. Ancient Egyptian Temple—Philae
(Full Page) ©: 2. cree seas ii,

5. Ancient Painting of an Egyptian
Princess (Full Page)............ iv.
6. Balance (from Egyptian Tomb).... i.
7. On the Bank of the Nile........... iv.
8. Canalsin Egypt.................. i,

9. Common Egyptian Writing during
the Bondage................... v.

10. Common Egyptian Writing in the
Time of Abraham..............- v.
11. Dress of Egyptian Priests......... iv.
12s Drums: 35h seek haSie eee neds iii
13. Egyptian Amulets and Earrings... . i.
14. Egyptian Anklets...............-. i,
15. Egyptian and Assyrian Bracelets.... i.
16. Egyptian Ax.............0-0-0 00+ i.
17. Egyptian Bellows...........--..-- i.
18. Egyptian Cakes or Loaves of Bread. i.
19. Egyptian Cart.........-......--- i.
20. Egyptian Cymbals................. iii.

21. Egyptian Dance—from Tomb at
Thebesie os eaisteaats pee ening ii.
22. Egyptian Fowler.........-.--+-+- ii.
23. Egyptian Fuller.......-..--..+-+- ii.
24. Egyptian Key........-----+-+00+> iii.

25. Egyptians Kneading Dough with
Their Peetecic ces ae skeen et i.
26. Egyptians Kneading Dough with ;
Their Hands.......-...------6- i.
27. Egyptian Lyre Held Horizontally. . . iit
28. Egyptian Manner of Wearing Hair . ii.
29. Egyptian Roll and Case.........-. iv.
30. Egyptian Sandals..............--- iv.

31. Egyptian Signet Rings and Impres-.
sions Made from Them........-. iv.
82. Egyptian Slinger......-----+----- i.
33. Egyptian Standards........-..-.- i.
34. Egyptian Stone Knives........-.-- iii.
35. Egyptian Swords..........--+--+- i.
36. Egyptian Threshing-floor.......... Vv.
37. Egyptian Throne..............+-- Vi


. Egyptian War Chariot............ i.


3513
39. Egyptian Water Wheel............ iii, 1493
40. Elephant’s Tusks Brought to Thoth-
b47 121-4 0 0 RAE aren mac ere iii, 1544
41, First Cataract of the Nile......... ii, 907
42. Great Pyramid of Khufu.......... ii. 908
43. High Priest (Egyptian) ys a eetharae iv. 2441
44, “Israel” Stele in Museum at Cairo
Ghall Page) ek eine ee She iii, 1516
45. King Merenptah................. ii, 912
46. Large Foot Press (Egyptian)....... v. 3087
47. Map of Ancient Alexandria........ i. 94
48. Modern Egyptian Writing Materials v. 3119
49. Obelisk at On... 0... 2. cece eee iv. 2193
50. Obelisk of Thothmes I. .. ii 909
51. Octodrachm (Egyptian Talent) of
Ptolemy:IT: Sis202 24 3ch0..1aeke iv. 2499
52. Old Egyptian Bookease........... iii. 1886
HSr Pharaohs Acad hese sh ga dey eee ee et iv. 2359
54, Plan of Egyptian Garden with House,
Temple or Chapel, Vineyard, Tanks
of Water or Ponds, and Summer
FIOUSEB it encore hee ee See a ii. 1174
55. Potters at Work (Egyptian)....... iv. 2424
56. Scarab with Name of Amenhotep
II, from Gezer................ ii. 1223
BTA Betde les. cae tee orate ao taitcs bers ii. 910
58. Statue of Rameses II at Luqsor..... ii. 911
59. Statue of Rameses II at Memphis... iii. 2031
60. Various Forms of Egyptian Harps. .iii. 2009
Ecyprian AMULETS AND Earrines....... i. 127
EGyptTian ANKLETS...........-0000005- i, 136
Eeyptian AND ASSYRIAN BRACELETS...... i. 513
HIGYPTIANGAR t8s0 note ot a ea esate. i. 341
EGypTiaAN BELLOWS.........-.....-0005 i. 432
Eeyptian Cakes on Loaves oF BrEAv. .. 1. 516
FGYpTian CART... 0.2.0... e eee eee 1, 581
EigypTian CYMBALS...........0..-00005 iii. 2101
Eaypman Dance—rrom Toms oF THERES ii. 1169
EXGyptTiaN FOWLER..........-..0-00005 ii, 1143
EigypTiaNn FULLER............2-.0-004. ii. 1148
HWGYPTIAN BY. occ ew esanee ane ili. 1794
Eypttan Lyre HeLp HorizonvTa.ty.. fee 2097
Ecyptian ManNER OF WEARING Paes i. 1320
Eeypttan Rott AnD CaSE.............- iv. 2597
EGypTian SANDALS... 0.0... eee eee ee iv. 2779
Eeyptian Sicnet Rines anp Impressions
Maver rroM THEM...............0--- iv. 2594
Eeyretians Kneapine DoucH with THEIR
PRET 3 sch c.2 Ae Ales Bh Seed aN g nea Lees i. 515
Eacyptians Kweapine Doucs with THEIR
TANDS 2x 5 ch dn Sek Phe ee eet aeoe i. 515
EigypTian SLINGER..............-.0006- i. 252
E.aypTian STANDARDS................-- 1. 384
E.oypT1an STONE KNIVES. .............- iii, 1815
Ea@ypTian SWORDS...............00 000s i. 252
EaypTiAN THRESHING-FLOOR............ V. 2976
EGypTIAN THRONE...............2-0-5 v. 2976
EGyptian War CHARIOT................ 1. 595
EGyptiaAN WaTER WHEEL............... iii. 1493
Exam, EvamMires—
1. The Installation of Umman-igas.... ii. 920
2. Last Stand of Te-umman.......... li. 921


3514


Ss INeramsSini ss sos kid nek leg na eas ele ii.


4. Presentation of Umman-igas to His


Subjects by the Assyrian General. ii.


5. The Spinning Woman............. ii.
ELEPHANT’s Tusks Broucut ro THOTHMES
DET ah hep e Pecte ee Ss ee cea She ni
Exevation oF Housgs From Court....... ili
SHINSDOR eh ein, SOS Pee AN Norn ete ares il
SGNEGIEDY Site suct towne co cpeenery a treme eat i.


ENGRAVING ON A BanyLONIAN CYLINDER
REPRESENTING THE SUN Gop AnD ONE


oF His Primsts, From an............ 1
ENTRANCE TO KoUYUNUJIK...........-.-- iv.
ENTRANCE TO THE SIK...........-.26... iv.
EXcavATING FOR CUNEIFORM TABLETS AT

BOGHAZ-KBUY. 30 3. See ae eek ae i.
ExcavaTIons—

1. Excavating for Cuneiform Tablets at
Boghaz-keuy............-. 0.005 i.
2. Excavations at Jericho............ iv.


3. Excavations on Southeastern Hill of


Jerusalem (Full Page)........... iv.


4, Plan Showing Results of Warren’s
Excavations at ‘‘“Robinson’s Arch”’ iii


5. Stamped Jar-handles Excavated at
a, OZER 2 Peed tothe ate ees iv.
6. Triple Gate—German Excavations
at Nablus (Full Page)........... ii.
EXcAVATIONS AT JERICHO......:--..-.-- iv.
Excavations on SouTHEastern Hun oF
JerusaLem (Full Page)............... iv.
ExtT&rior oF GARDEN ToMB............ i.
ExTerion oF PoTTERY.....-..-0.-0.00-55 iv.
EXTREMITY OF THE GRAND COLONNADE AT
GMRABA: Ss RAS Med aie: Set ea As ii
Ezexie’s TEMPLE PLAN............... V-


FacstMiLe or Copex Epurarmi Rescrip-


TUS set oe ais Sosa hoe ea aa Vv.
FacSIMILE OF CopEX SINAITICUS......... v
FacsimILE MinuscuLte MANUSCRIPT...... Vv
PRMD OF BOAZ esse nls esuste eater el wean i
EG a oe cree ce eat cite he ere Rae We Muaieed g ii
FigHTinG wiTH Witp Bwasts............ ii.
WIRD CATTARS iy rrtan cece ee eae iv.
First Cataract oF THE NILE. fe ii.
Fisners MENDING THEIR Nets - BY THE Sue

OF GALILEE 282.) Machete eRe a eas il.
FisHms oF THE Sua oF GALILEE.......... il.
FisHinc—


1. Carp Found in the Sea of Galilee... ii.


2. Fishers Mending Their Nets by the


Sea of Galilee................5. ii.

3. Fishes of the Sea of Galilee........ i.

4. Fishing on the Sea of Galilee....... ii.

LAK: te ee Aah ee hres te tas ii

FOOTHRAGCE i... 4-0 2 eta See EAs ii.
Forreicn Captives Emptoyep In Maxine

Bricks av THEBES. .......0..... 000005 a

FounnaTion Sacririce Founp at GEZER.. i.

Fountain at Askar. es seciead 2


Fountain AT KHAN Munven, Uae. Bre ass i.


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


919


921
922


i. 1544
iii. 1436


944
945


371
2149
2714


277


NORE. siete Pencils sel Sn Itt cert Mee sot Banaras ii. 1144
FRaGMENTS oF InscrisED VASES OF THE
Eariy SUMERIAN PERIOD.......-.---- i. 360
FRANKINCENSE.. 0000-0 eee ees ii, 1144
Frincep Sxirts FRoM Toms aT BaB-EL
IMEELOOK va niahs hoes ere ea a ee aoe ii. 1146
Front ELEVATION OF TEMPLE........-- v. 2938
GaMEs—
1. Boxing with the Cestus........... ii. 1172
2. Discus Thrower... . 2.6.00. 00.0005 ii, 1172
3. Fighting with Wild Beasts......... ii. 1172
A ROOGR BCC fee pe ee ae eee ii. 1173
5. Isthmian Crowns. ...........--05- ii. 1173
6. Ruins at Amman—Fagade of
Theater xc.) crs teee tito eia eas iv. 2521
7. Theater at Gerasa... 00.0.0... 00055 ii. 1171
ADAG eR ia alas Herne Gee apise tea gites ii. 1178
CFAZBLLI gues. ohana aus eee yeas ii. 1179
GECKO esi TA tere ete ta OnE etc e ii. 1906
GEHENNA AND AKELDAMA.......-..---- iii. 1394
GENERAL View or Petra (Full Page)..... iv. 2714
GEOLOGICAL CROSS-SECTION OF SOUTHERN
PALESTINE ot acai ees ee ela i. 212
Gxotocican Map or Brsia Lanps (Insert). ii. 1216
GETHSEMANE. 0.000.000 0c eee ii, 1221
GEZER—
1. City Wall at Gezer............+-- ii. 1222
2. Foundation Sacrifice Found at Gezer i. 550
3. Hebrew Inscribed Tablet from Gezer i. 105
4, High Place of the Cave-dwellers at
CRETET A Sees BM sie als AR ere Ge iv. 2234
5. “Household God” from Gezer...... iii. 1455
6. Interments in the Second Burial Cave
Bi GOZO sk ai cada cei csca pee ene bee iv. 22382
7. Isometric Sketch of a House at
Geter viene aaa a ee ae eee he as iii. 1485
8. Lamp and Bowls Discovered at
GOLEM ore ele Nbc sate eee gail iv. 2234
9. Pillars and Hollow Stone of the High
Place at Gezer.............005. iii, 1391
10. Plan of the Baths in the Castle at
Gegerticc 42 cans aero k sah a 414
11. Plan of the Cave-dwellings at Gezer. .iii. 1485
12. Reservoir at Gezer................ i. 658
13. Sacrificed Infant Buried in a Jar at
GrezeTe cee: Teese laa ake te Seoaereates li. 1224
14. Scarab with Name of Amenhotep III,
from: GeZer.-2iccnei keen eds ii. 1223
15. Scries of Baths in the Castle at Gezer 7. 415
16. Stamped Jar-handles Excavated at
GOTeR s o8 issn ios tet ee iv. 2233
17. Stone Altar of Gezer.........0..... i. 108
“Gipron’s Fountain” 1N THE PLAIN oF
MSDRARLON |... ce cortde-deef oa eae Pe hes li. 993
GINRGAGLE Sc aa caaceares de ee ii, 1228
Giving 4 BLESSING. ........-..0...-0-. 1 829
GUASS:BOTTLES <f.5 03% 5.4 caren kaon Rodale tas: li. 1233
GiGABS VASES) 0%: 0) eke eg eras ve. L. 1233
GD Be aie ate eo ee eee Oca ii, 1235
Gop Amon Hoxtnine CaprivE THE CITIES
or JuDAH FoR SHISHAK, THE.......... iv. 2778


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS 3515
Gone To MARKET................0.0.. i. 534 | Heap or rue Brarpep Dionysus........ ii. 1300
GoInc TO MARKET................0..., iii. 1996 | Hmap From Oup Samsoun.............. i. 277
GoLnEN CANDLESTICK.................. 1, 553 | Heaps or Amoritrs, AKIN To NortH
Great Court, INcLtupiInag Royau Buitp- APRICAIN' cst hice, Nite ore co eh wens i. 119
INGS ceteiieenies Snteecaadiaes event hee 4 ak ona v. 2932 | Hraps or PHILISTINES.................. iv. 2378
Great Pyramip oF Kuuru............. i. 908 | HeatHen Derries—
“Tus Great SEA” UNDER THE TEMPLE... i. 658 1. Ahura Mazda.................... iv. 2332
GREAVES AND SANDAIS................. i. 254 2: APDEOMILE sce eee auc daar ji. 1298
GREECE— 3. Ashtoreth.....0.........000.000. i. 271
1. Acropolis and Areopagus, Athens... i. 319 4. Athena Promachos............... ii. 1298
2. Aphrodite................00.000. ii. 1298 Ded Saal ae Srv Reece orth Mest en oO i. 345
8. Areopagus at Athens.............. i. 239 6. Babylonian Idols................. i. 369
4. Athena Promachos. . . ii, 1298 7. Coin of Elis—Zeus of Pheidias...... ii, 1297
5. Bird Sign: hove: a Routers 8 Dagon de eects Carte var wees ii. 776
Chariot, Driven by a Goddess, Oe SATAN.» lecdicl egos Glee Cada aya ee ii. 843
‘Apnears an Eagle Flying........ ji. 1300 LO: AG aicsavin Gaps cote nals Merion. td at Reet i. 370
6. Black-figured Vase Painting........ il, 1302 11. From an Engraving on a Babylonian
7. Coin of Elis—Zeus of Pheidias...... ii, 1297 Cylinder Representing the Sun
8. Ground Plan of Olympia........... ii, 1299 God and One of His Priests...... i. 3871
9. Head of the Bearded Dionysus. .... ii. 1300 12. The God Amon Holding Captive the
10. Heavy-armed Greek Soldier........ i. 251 Cities of Judah for Shishak...... iv. 2778
11. Isthmian Crowns................. ii. 1173 13. Head of the Bearded Dionysus..... ii. 1300
12. Mourners about a Couch on Which 14. ‘“‘Household God” from Gezer..... .ili. 1455
Rests the Body of the Dead...... ii, 1303 15 NebOi. eesti tend aad. noe eee vases i. 371
13. Orestes Pursued by Two Erinyes.... ii. 1304 16. Priest-king and God of Cultivation iii. 1399
14. Persian Satrap Dictating Terms to 17. River-god. . sed laa arti ore eens 1 OOO
Grecian Chiefs at the Gate of a 18. Storm-god Tessupas. . wees Hi, 1401
City. (Bas-relief from Lycian 19. Worshipping Heavenly Bodies Pesce od i. 370
Monument.). . . di. 1176 20. Worshipping the Lunar Deity...... i. 371
15. Plan of the Precingis: Be Apollo's 21. Zeus from Mylasa................ il. 1297
Temple at Delphi.............. ii. 1301 | Heaven, THE EartH ano THE ABYSSES
16. Purifieation...................0.- ii. 1302 (SCHIAPARELLI’S HEBREW WORLD)..... i. 315
V7 OR iVer-20d vifind oon tauide sata snd ii. 1300 | Heavy-anmen GREEK SOLDIER.......... i. 251
18. Ruins of Ancient Corinth with Acro- Hesrew Inscripep Tastet rromM Gezer. i. 105
Corinthus in Background........ ii. 711 | Hetguts BEHIND Masapa............... ii. 809
19. Ruins of Eleusis.................. i: 1303) | HSIMBP ccc: pe oere nea dares eee ees i, 253
20. Ship-canal at Corinth............. ii. 710 | Hercunps anp Draco.................. i. 3809
21. Temple of Jupiter at Athens. Tz S200 BRON yec3 cece dats otter age ae Re Beene iii, 1384
22. Tetradrachm (Attic Talent) of yee HIEROGLYPHIC WRITING................ v. 3118
tiochus LT: .23. 0 ise. cea: ak i. 159 | Hich Piack oF THE CAVE-DWELLERS AT
23. Votive Offering................... li. 1802 GEZUR a sae cfidihe aateee ee ere oer ighs iv. 2234
24, Zeus from Mylasa................ ii. 1297 | Hranw Primst...............2..002 000 iv. 2441
Greek Papyrus Containing MarTrHEw Hints aNnD VALLEYS OF JERUSALEM WITH
1:1-9.12.18.14-20.............2.-00.- iv. 2241 MopEern NAMES..............0.0000- ili. 1599
Grotro or JerEmMIan—“Gordon’s Cal- Hittite Kine anp DavGHTER........... iii, 1898
Marys ei eater Rh crs Oe nena ii. 1276 } Hitrire Lion, BocHaz-KEvy; AT THE
Grounp Pian of OLYMPIA.............5 ii. 1299 “SELON: GATE eecnte nike Ac eae ee: i, 278
Grounp Pian (oF TABERNACLE), ACCORD- Hirrires—
IN GTOMA BLL seek atid Moe ttnodtcahavace v. 2889 1. Boghaz-keuy: The Hittite Fortress
Group oF ANCIENT ARMS.............-- i. 251 Called Yenige Kaleh............ ii. 1138
GRouP OF CONIES.........-0.0 00.00 ee ee ii. 698 2. Hittite King and Daughter........ i. 1398
Group or LEPERS BEGGING............- iti. 1867 8. Hittite Lion, Boghaz-keuy; at the
STON Gate! gies face austen nite eee i, 278
Har-sHEKEL, Year 1, 141 (?) BC.......iii. 2078 4. Hittite Sculptures, Yasili-kaya (1).. i. 279
Hanmonaar 5. Hittite Sculptures, Yasili-kaya (2).. i. 279
1. Code of Hammurabi (Insert)....... iii, 1854 6. Hittite Warrior—Boghaz-keuy..... i 278
2. Hammurabi Receiving the Laws... . ii. 1328 7. Hittite Warrior—Senjirli.......... in. 1400
3. Text of the Code of Hammurabi... . ii. 1329 8. Inscription and Mutilated Figure 7
Hamuurasi ReceIvine THE Laws....... ii, 1828 from Jerabis.....-.....-....... iii, 1401
Hien Soc oe Meta tele iv. 2505 | 9. Passage-frieze, Yasili-kaya......... ili, 1399
Harp, Lyre anp Dovusie Pips with MEN 10. Priest-king and God of Cultivation. . iii. 1399
AND WoMEN SINGING. .......-.....005 iii, 2095 11. Storm-god Tessupas. . veeeee ee li, 1401


3516 INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Hirrite Scuterures, YASILI-KAYA....... 1. 279 12. “Israel” Stele in Museum at Cairo
Hirrire Warrion—BoGHaz-KEUY....... i, 278 (FullyPage)i ee. Paitin tt oe: iii. 1516
Hirtire WARRIOR—SENJIRLI............ iii. 1400 13. Moabite Stone. ...........0.00 06. iii. 2071
Hoonen SNAKE... .. 6. eee i, 55 14. Monolith of Shalmaneser IT........ i. 436
TRO OR OM Syste see eet ett day ane Wen ae ili, 1419 15. Niches and Tablets at Banias (Full :
Hovss— Papeete tcwin trate dens i. 536
1. Doorway with Voluted Slabs at ; 16. Signs of the Cave-dwellers......... v. 3121
Leachish:.. 28s ts.ste os eesti i. 235 17. Siloam Inscription—Writing at Jeru-
2. Elevation of House from Court..... iii. 1486 salem at Time of Hezekiah...... v. 3120
3. The Inn of the Good Samaritan . i. 64 18. Stone Object Containing an Inscrip-
4, Isometric Sketch of a House: at tion of Nebuchadrezzar I....... i. 353
Geren coke fe Plo 8 ili, 1435 19. Title on the Cross................ v. 2988
5. Living-room of House............. ii, 1436 20. Warning Tablet of Herod’s Temple iv. 2254
6. Palace of Omri and Ahab at Samariaiv. 2192 | Insects—
7. Plan of House.................--- iii. 1436 1. Brown Ant... 2.0... cece eee eee i. 189
8. Traditional House of Ananias...... ii. 780 2. Clothes-moth.................065 ili. 2091
9. Traditional House of Simon the Tan- Be LOCUS inactive: Bee mere att fasten iii, 1908
TELS Pe ce oR Re VERSO ares te SAR iii. 1732 4. Scarlet Insect.............--0004 v. 3109
10. Traditional Megiddo—Ruins of SeScorplon cs aaccvar cance cade ates iv. 2703
Palace and Public Buildings (Full GSK Worms sc Mere eee ea iv. 2791
PAS 6) Asis eNaeareaa tena eed: iii. 2028 ToSpider at secs even ee sae ce ade ee Va OAD
Tle Wand ow ois f obs eee ie oe iii, 1436 8. Sticks of Dried Locusts on Sculptures
“HovuseHotp Gop” FROM GEZER........ iii, 1455 from Kouyunjik................ iii. 1908
Human Bopy— InsTALLATION OF UmMan-Icas, THE...... ti. 920
1. Assyrian Manner of Wearing Hair. . ii. 13820 InTERIOR OF GARDEN TOMB............. i. 531
OM Bearden rs pane antes aa a ei i. 418 | Iyrerior oF PoTTERY.................. iv. 2425
3. Egyptian Manner of Wearing Hair.. ii. 1820 | Inr#RIon or Tomp ar Marissa.......... iv. 2228
4, Group of Lepers Begging. . . iii, 1867 | Ivrerror or Tomas or THE Kings....... 3. 531
5. Modern Jew of Jericho ith Tone Interior or Vizir Kuan, ALEPPO....... iii. 1470
Sidesockse. tee ee ke ii. 1821 | InTeERMENTS In THE SEconD Burtau Cave
6. Painted Eyes.............0.0005. ii. 1070 ATSGEZER gaan cii viet cree ne Sa eeu iv. 2232
Huntina Deer in AN ENcLosep Fre. ..iii. 1441 | Isomerric Sxercu or a House ar Gazer iii. 1435
Hypra anp THE Nercuporina ConsTEet- “IsrarL” STELE IN Museum aT. Carro
TATIONS eee ES ne ee, ee j. 310 (Full Page) Adieu Sehgal a tas dacae ah Someta a tae ay saa Seen aa iii, 1516
ISTHMIAN CROWNS... 6... ee cee eee eee ii, 1173
ImpLeMENTs OF AGRICULTURE..........- i 675 ee
Impression OF A SEAL CYLINDER........ Wi 291 , JABBOK, THE... 1.1. ee eee ii, 1546
Incensn ALTARS OF SANDSTONE Feunn. NCR ATA. ce sta inctas,vastllneet Okan he Saws whe ae in. 1548
In THE Rock SHRINE ATSINAL......... i. 109 | Jacon’s WEE Lie tee Son ates Breet oe ii. 1556
INK-WELLS AWD Prn-case wits Inx-weut iii. 1469 | JEBEL Uspum From tae Sours, Looxine
Inn oF THE Goon SaMarivTaN, THE...... i, 64 an ene aay Fiat CovERED BY THE Ee
Inscripep TABLET IMPRESSED WITH SEALS iv. 2152 oe cha vce Soe CuNLS e eET Maxept
Tce eT Onci ee Meat oMten Hietan ion Jenu’s TRIBUTE—FROM OBELISK OF SHAL-
he MANESE Raf taxes isc idne itunes ee ii, 1584
; JMRABION ho het se ated Merde ee ante ete iii, 1401 Tere rakee
NSCRIP TIONG rx ; 1. Citadel of Zion...............-.-- v. 8151
1. Asshur-bani-pal’s Account of His 2. Corner of Wall of Jerusalem from
Restoration of the Stage-tower at : Kidron Valley (Full Page)....... iii. 1602
NIppur.. 2.6... eee e eee i, 294 3. Excavations on Southeastern Hill of
2. Brick Bearing the Name of Nebu- Jerusalem (Full Page)........... iv. 2226
chadrezzar..........-.-..-.00. i, 352 4. Front Elevation of Temple........ v. 2938
8. Brick Stamp of SargonI.......... i, 361 5. Great Court, Including Royal Build-
4, Building Inscription of Nabopolassar i. 356 INS ne ete eb ence ued v. 2982
5. Building Inscription of Necbuchad- 6. “The Great Sea” under the Temple . i. 658
remzarIT.............4. penne j. 349 7, Hills and Valleys of Jerusalem with
6. Clay Tablet with Seal Inscription .. i. 364 Modern Names................ iti, 1599
7. Cuneiform Tablet from Boghaz-keuy i. 281 8. Jerusalem Beggars................ 1. 425
8. The Deluge Tablet............... i. 374 9. Jerusalem of the Jebusites, as Cap-
9. Hebrew Inscribed Tabletfrom Gezer i. 105 tured by David................ iil, 1614
10. Inscribed Tablet Impressed with 10. Kidron, Looking Southeast from the
Seals eeu epee he ees iv. 2152 Wall of Jerusalem.............. iii. 1798
11. Inscription and Mutilated Figure Il. Letter from the Governor of Jerusa-
from Jerabis................... ili. 1401 3120


lem about 1875 BC............. v.


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


3517

12. Modern Jerusalem................ ii, 1621 6. Figure 13......... anor e t Ponr Saat iii, 1826

13. Plan of the Environs of Jerusalem... iti. 1611 7. Lamp and Bowls Discovered at

14. Plan Showing Results of Warren’s Gazer. a. Morare, em ese Go aoa iv. 2234

Excavations at ‘‘Robinson’s Arch” iii. 1612 8. Stamped Jar-handles, Lamp and

15. Plan of Solomon’s Temple... ...... v. 2931 : Iron Implements from Tombs at

16. Pools of Solomon. ................ i. 659 Beit Jibrin... 00000000000 cee iv. 2297

17. Probable Course of Solomon’s Wall. iii. 1607 | Lamps: Figures 1-14............. iii. 1825-1826

18. Probable Course of the Three Walls Lares Foot Press (EGyrrtan)........ /,. ¥. 8087

Described by Josephus. . dil, 1605 | Large Vine arJericno................ v. 3050
19. Probable Course of Walls aud Posi- Last Stanp or Te-uMMAN.............. di. 921

tion of the Principal Gates from Laterau View or TABERNACLE, ACCORDING

Hezekiah till Long after Nehemiah iii. 1606 TO KENNEDY 6 3c: Shae oe ees v. 2888

20. ‘“‘Robinson’s Arch”. .............. UES IGIS" | GREK: oe bee ok ok ccs Ak eS ait iii. 1864

21. St. Stephen’s Gate............... MU 16082]! emer iti se. thee these See Re i ya oe iii. 1866

22. Semi-diagrammatic Plan of “War- AUHOPARD (#052 it Mish Ms A Roady old el) ey iii. 1866

ren’s Shaft”? and Other Rock Pas- LETTER FROM THE GOVERNOR OF JERUSA-
SAP CBee Pe hens ee te odie es iii. 1608 LEM ABOUT 1875 BC.................. v. 3120

23. Siloam Inscription—Writing at Je- LinreL STONES... 000... eee i, 236

rusalem at the Time of Hezekiah... v. 3120 | Lion. 0.0.0.0. cc cece ee ccc eee ee ee iii. 1895

24. Slope of Zion—Tyropoeon Valley at Lion Gats ar BoGHaz-KEUY . dil, 1396

RICH coc cett ment arenes hoa VesS 151 Tree cee chase eneas nena ee tec eens ooh ees iti, 1905
25. Solomon’s Temple—Schick’s Model Livine-room or Housk................. iii. 1436
(Bull: Rage) 2 taad Mihi vee doe V32930" | LOcust sna ownage ea acess iii. 1908
26. Tower of David.................. iii. 1619 | LoopHoLEs rHRoucH Wuica ARRows
27. Typical Grove of Olive Trees at WERE DHOTE) fois fs he kaise ane ne iv. 2765
Jerusalem. ..........0..000000- iv. 2184 | Lyre HELD PERPENDICULARLY.......... ili. 2097
28. “Up to Jerusalem’”’ from the Inn of
the Good Samaritan............ IVs, 2122: MAGDALA e032 46, iad oats a rs ea ee iene ili. 1962

29. Warning Tablet of Herod’s Temple .iv. 2254 | Maxine a Papyrus BoavT.............. iv. 2775

30. The Water-supply................ iii. 1609 | MaNDRAKE................220000200005 lit. 1981
JERUSALEM BEGGARS. ...............-.- i, 425 | Manuscripts— ;

JERUSALEM OF THE JEBUSITES, AS CAPTURED 1. Ancient Manuscripts on Papyrus

BYADAVIDi folate epee eek eigen ae iii. 1614 Clisert)ecsemar mines vc aewatoen irs iii. 2238
JEWELRY— 2. Code of Hammurabi (Insert)....... ili. 1854

1. Ancient Asiatic Crowns........... ii. 762 3. Facsimile of Codex Ephraemi Re-
2. Ancient Seals from Originals in the BCHIPCUS! Sots See wre ene v. 2953
British Museum................ iv. 2708 4, Facsimile of Codex Sinaiticus....... v. 2951
3. Egyptian Amulets and Earrings.... i. 127 5. Facsimile Minuscule Manuscript.... v. 2954
4, Egyptian Anklets................. i. 136 6. Greek Papyrus Containing Matthew
5. Egyptian and Assyrian Bracelets.... 1. 513 T1912 1S 14-20 hice oes iv. 2241
6. Egyptian Signet Rings and Taree: 7. New Sayings of Jesus............. iv. 2241
sions Made from Them.........- iv. 2594 8. Section of Codex Washingtoniensis—
Jewish Mnemonic FRincEs, 9TH CENTURY Mark 1:1-7 (Insert)............ v. 2952

BC eet ieee ed ee aa Nira aks v. 3117 9. Timotheus Papyrus............... iv. 2240
JEWIsH TEMPLE OF LEONTOPOLIS........ i. 235 | Map or ANcIENT ALEXANDRIA.......... i. 94
JorpAN LEAVING THE SEA oF GALILEE... .11i. 1733 | Map anp LONGITUDINAL SECTION OF THE
‘“JosHua’s Oak”’—a TEREBINTH......... iv. 2172 DBAD SEA 5342 te cac0. eenads & ele hah ii. 803

Maps, Pians anp Diacrams—
FEB STRE Loe ice ace oe ore ee eee ghee nae ii. 1345 1. Battle of Beth-horon.............. i. 447
Kiron, Looxine SourTHEAST FROM THE 2. Construction of Tabernacle, accord-

Wau oF JERUSALEM.............--5- iii. 1798 ing to Fergusson............... v. 2890
King MERENPTAH............-6----55- ii. 912 3. Cross-section of Nilometer......... iv. 2146
Kissina tHE HAND..........-.00-200 00% i. 329 4. Elevation of House from Court..... iii, 1436
IENWELING 6 js. iide cities Be Ree ve i, 330 5. Ezekiel’s Temple Plan............ v. 2935

6. Front Elevation of Temple......./ v. 2938
Lame AND Bows DiscovERED at GEZER.’.iv. 2234 7. Geological Cross-section of Southern

Lamps— Palestine ’s.4. 628 65 h ecae ye fects i. 212
Li Mipuresel s 2 chc ce edree eee eat iii, 1825 8. Geological Map of Bible Lands

2. Figures 3, 4,6, 14............... ii, 1825 Glrisert) ss 2 c0ts. ca km eevee hse wed weds ji. 1216
SeSPIGUre? Ofek anu arn sate a atte a itil, 1825 -9. Great Court, Including Royal Build-

4, Figures 7,8,9,10,11............. iii. 1826 ings Jerusalem)................ v. 2932

fn echich Aes iii, 1826 10. Ground Plan of Olympia.......... ii. 1299


5. Figure 12....


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


3518
11. Ground Plan (of Tabernacle), accord-
IMpetowKelh ck Se os wy enc ica ts v. 2889
12. Hills and Valleys of Jerusalem with
Modern Names. : . li. 1599
13. Isometrie Sketch BE a House at
GeZerecoe ens sonnei se iii. 1435
14. Jerusalem of the Jebusites, as Cap-
tured by David................ im. 1614
15. Lateral View of Tabernacle, accord-
ing to Kennedy................ v. 2888
16. Map of Ancient Alexandria. . i. 94
17. Map and Longitudinal Section: et
the Dead Sea... ..............- li. 803
18. Mount Sinai and the ee Val-
VeYiSree iis eee is, DAU Ia ates eta Iv. 2802
19. Plan of the Baths in the Castle at
GOZEP e2oh har eens wah ou coe ee the i. 414
20. Plan of the Cave-dwellings at Gezer.ii. 1435
21. Plan of Egyptian Garden with House,
Temple or Chapel, Vineyard,
Tanks of Water or Ponds, and
Summer Houses................ ii. 1174
22. Plan of the Environs of Jerusalem. .iii. 1611
23. Plan of House.................... iii. 1436
24. Plan of the Library at Nineveh... ..iv. 2151
25. Plan of Pergamon................ iii. 1885
26. Plan of the Precincts of Apollo’s
Temple at Delphi.............. ii. 1301
27. Plan Showing Results of Warren's
Excavations at ‘Robinson’s Arch” iii, 1612
28. Plan of Solomon’s Temple......... v. 29381
29. Probable Course of Solomon’s Wall. iii. 1607
30. Probable Course of the Three Walls
Described by Josephus. . tii. 1605
31. Probable Course of Walls and ‘Posi:
tion of the Principal Gates from
Hezekiah till Long after Nehemiah.iii. 1606
32. Section from the Mediterranean to
Moab (after Lartet)............ ii. 1216
33. Semi-diagrammatic Plan of ‘‘War-
ren’s Shaft’? and Other Rock Pas-
SAD CS cca nn ae alive pena a aes iii. 1608
34. Serpentine Course of Siloam Aque-
GUICE Ghee ne ties Ste ean eae iv. 2791
35. Sketch Map of the Environs of He-
bron to Show the Various Pro-
posed Sites of Mamre. . ii. 1973
36. Tabernacle—Schick’s Model ‘(Pull
Page) eeutoved ay cot ClO ti ooo eset v. 2890
37. Solomon’s Temple—Schick’s Model
(Pull Page) en oven ain Sak ee v. 2930
38. Transverse Section of the Dead Sea. . ii. 804
39. The Water-supply (of Jerusalem). . .ili. 1609
MARKET-PLACE AT JAFFA.............5 i. 533
IIA SE acetal We ta oe Pose Mes Peat gag i. 421
Marrress WITH PILLOW................ i, 422
Mepian DRESS... 2... ee iii. 2017
MESSAGE: STICKS 2. Sg. pide ewe v. 3116
IVETE Dp Secs va nonce he iirae ish alarey ood ret ii. 2055
Mirror or PotisHep BRonze........... li. 1234
Mire or Joun Hyrcanvus.............5. iii. 2079
MIZPAH li Bae OE sstthelstnd & an ii. 2069


Moasirs STONE... 2.0. iii.
Movern ARAB MARRIAGE Procsssion.. . . bi
Movpirn ARABS.........00 000020 e eres i.
Movrern Arass ENCAMPED IN THE VALLEY
ORCA CHOR®. fit gecs es ee Sec gyn weet coe i
Mopern ARAB VILLAGE... ......2-.-055 ili
Mopern Cart...... 0... ees i
Movrrn Crry or Es Satt.........--.-- i.
Mopern Drusr HEADDRESS...........- ii.
Mopern Eeyptian WritING MATERIALS . V.
MovERN JERUSALEM............0-0005- li.
Mopsrn Jew or JERICHO wiITH Lone Sipz
LOCKS: 38 kcinlae Nees etn ees ii
Movern ORIENTAL BASKETS........--.- 1.


MopeErn Syrian WiNE Press (Full Page). . v
Movrrn TraFric ON THE HAtys River... 1.
MosaMMEDANS PRAYING IN THE Moscue


AT DAMASCUS. ......-0-0 6-002 0 eee eee i.
Monkny FROM THE PRAENESTINE Mosaic . i.
MowotitH oF SHALMANESERII.......... i.
Monuments in Assur DIscOVERED BY THE

GERMANS soe a acre te eral aN cunt See ek iv
Mosque oVER THE CAVE oF MACHPELAH AT

IEBRONG set esi ee ee a eh nets ii
Movunp Coverine Nippur Towrr....... i.
MountaIns—

1. Anti-Lebanon: Souk-Wady-Barrada ui.

DS ATAT AGH sty sts eet ed. ee atte ame 1.

3. Ascent to Ai: Path to Elijah’s Trans-
NadlOmM is ote ir egies Sette aia i.


4. Bathing at the North End of the
Dead Sea, the Mountains of Moab
in the Background.............. ii.

5. Convent Garden, Simai............ iv.

6. Jebel Usdum from the South, Looking
over the Mud Flat Covered by the


Sea in High Water.............. il.
T2Mount Bball. cc. tele ees ii.
8. Mount Gerizim with Shechem...... ii.
9. Mount Nebo from the Spring Ain .
Nebak ics caitutecin tannaiaa eek + iv
10. Mount of Olives from the Golden
Gates at i ay eee eB iv
11. Mount Sinai and the Adjacent Val-
lOVSia cee ee ee ee eae iv.
12. Mount Tabor..................5. Vv
13. Nablus and Mount Ebal.......... iv
14. Ras-es-Safsafeh.................. Iv.
15. Traditional Mount of the Precipi-
tation near Nazareth............ iv.
16. View from Mount of Olives ek aaa
ing the Dead Sea (Full Page)..
17. View from Top of Mount Sinai ull
PSG6) eviesies Metre eee tion ete nee iv.
MOUNT: EBAD se0:5 Stith wilh Heccons B oath age ii.
Mount GEriziM with SHECHEM. ah
-Mounr N&Bo FROM THE SPRING Arn Nuns, iv.
Mount oF OLIVES FROM THE GOLDEN Gare iv.
Mounr of Ouves OVERLOOKING THE
Deap Sua (Full Page)................ il.
Moont SINAI AND THE ADJACENT VALLEYS iv.
Mount TaBoR. ......0 00... 0e cece eee v.


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS 3519

Mourners AaBpouT A CoucH oN WHICH Orientau Barper, AN................. i. 403
Rssts tHE Bopy of THE DEaD........ i. 1803 | Osrracon wits Lugn 22:70f........... iv. 2203

Mousic— OSTRICH ES #1 238.3 herd Wet nae bu Lhe das iv. 2203
1. Ancient Horns and Curved Trum- Ovrer Banks oF THE DELTA OF THE JoR-

Pets ais es Sees oe SL ree, v. 3025 DAI Seed ioe ote Sait eat an hae Ae iii. 1735
2. Assyrian Dulcimer................ MLS 2098) | CO Wi et. copa oa ea Bh Savers aes iv. 2205
3. Bedouins Playing on Primitive In-

struments..................... iii. 2097 | Parstos Disk, Face A, Tup............ i, 104
4, Double Pipe with Accompaniment PAINTED YN VES 40) eee tlemnrn ela che ii. 1070

of Clapping of Hands........... ii. 2099 | Parnrep Tomes oF Manissa............ i. 286
5s, OPUS ser tence tee Se te Ae ht Ta iii. 2100 | Parntinc ar Bent Hassan............. ii. 877
6. Egyptian Cymbals................ iii. 2101 | Pauace or Omri aND AHAB AT SAMARIA.. .iv. 2192
7. Egyptian Lyre Held Horizontally... .iii. 2097 | PanrHEoN................ ccc cceceecee iv. 2621
8. Harp, Lyre and Double Pipe with Papyrus ANTIQUORUM ...........-.0055 iv. 2239

Men and Women Singing........ iii, 2095 | Papyrus Marsu witn Boat............ Vv. 8121
9. Lyre Held Perpendicularly......... iii. 2097 | Panian Doc ar BEIRUT................ ii. 867
10. Musical Party................... ili. 2096 | Parrutan HoRSEMEN................0.. iv. 2252
11. Procession of Assyrian Musicians. . iii. 2097 | PaRTRIDGE.............00. 000 cceeueeee iv. 2255
12. Sistraiy ce ceeyee dk naan See hk iii. 2101 | Part or Rock or BEHISTUN............. iv. 2329
13. Straight Trumpets................ iii. 2100 | Passacn-FriezE, YASILI-KAYA........... iii. 1399
14. Three Bearded Men with Lyres.....iii, 2095 | Pass or MicHMasH..................... iii, 2048
T5zeDimbreliiees ey eee nes eae Mis: 21O) | SPRLIGAN 550 tee deta Bogle fate iv. 2297
16. Trumpets on a Coin from Bar- PrERs1a—

Coch bai fc khs ted ei alee bes iii. 2098 1. Ahura Mazda............-0.-005- iv. 2332
17. Various Forms of Egyptian Harps. . . iii. 2099 2. Chamois: Persian Wild Goat or

Musica PARTY... 0.0.0.0 cee cece ees “iii, 2096 Pasang....--..-..... eee eee i. 592

IMUBTARD (des, eiathlxtoe yearns fii, 2102 3. Persian Satrap Dictating Terms to

MYRRH ee Noo AM nhac, Sitinay epi iii, 2103 Grecian oes A ue ane of a

ee City. (Bas-relie rom yelan

MYnrins foc. e Skah ea ce ee iii, 2103 Men ca ake On a aaa

Nasius anp Mount EBAL.............. iv. 2755 © Permian Weaxicrs yaa baleen Rea eae

INAPHTA IDs 1 Siectcu eee bin, Idi danseecplaane iv. 2119 5. Terra-cotta Cylinder Containing the

s History of the Capture of Babylon

NARAM-SIN. 0... eee ii. 919 by Gyrus the Great ....+...5--. i B75

NARDY wae bet peas eee ouraie tied v. 2840 6. Tomb of Cyrus.............-..--- iv. 2336

Native OF JERICHO... ........-.00-0005 i. 876 Persian Satrap Dictatinc Terms ro

Naruran Brivce at LEBANON.......... 1. 585 Grecian CHIEFS AT THE GATE oF A CITY.

NAZARETH, FROM THE Roap TO THE PLAIN (Bas-RELIEF FROM Lycian MoNnuMENT.). ii. 1176
OF ESDRAELON........------ 5-2-0 W. 2124 | persian WARRIORS..............00-0.- iv. 2336

NBBO eens srs Maa ee teeth hae eee Moncenred ZC 371 | parstme Witenes thar. aoe e iv. 2378

INGER Obie cele hk Ree cs on aren ne neers iv. 21359 |e ere al ee Fae Otel ty a en iv. 2359

New Sayinas oF JESUS...........0-.05- iv. 2241 Pay orsii ne Fon TGA aN OEA ee oe iv. 2393

Niches anp Tasuers av Bantas (Full PIGEONS rock ese tery ete he ia iv. 2395
Page) Si aan eae as Lea ae 1 586 | Pircrms Barnine In THE JORDAN....... iv. 2219

Norra Enp or THE Duan Sea, BorpErinc © PruiaRs AND Houiow Srons oF THE Hick
THE PLAIN OF JERICHO...........+---. 11. 802 PLACE AT GEZER........ ccc cece eee iii, 1391

Pins Forest aT BEIRUT. .............0. iv. 2399

Oax at GILEAD, THE SINDEEYAN......... iv. 2171 | prgpacntio NUT... 0.00.00 cece cece eee ee iv. 2170

OBELISK ATON. 0.22. eee eee iv. 2193 | pramn or SHARON.............00-0 00-0. iv. 2751

OBELISK OF THOTHMES I...............- ti. 909 | Prawn or THE BaTus IN THE CASTLE AT

OctopRacuM (EGYPTIAN TALENT) oF Proi- CRT Roman ieee ee ee ctotern ge Teteee i. 414
BMYODD hi che vce tee nc een eames “....dv. 2499 PLAN OF THE CAVE-DWELLINGS AT GEZER. iii. 1435

Ow Eeyrtian Booxcase. : . iii, 1886 | Puan of Ecyprian Garpen wita Hovuss,

Oxtp Jisr eL-Musamia, Roman Bariwas TEMPLE OR CHAPEL, VINEYARD, TANKS
ackoss THE Uprer Jorpan River (Full or WaTER oR Ponps AND SUMMER “%
Page) specie tail Riemer tay iv. 2602 HOUSES tte ose ee ih oe ee il, 1174

OE ee ee eh en Le Sai ee lean: iv. 2185 | Puan or THE ENVIRONS OF JERUSALEM iii. 1611

Ourve Press av Banias Near Dan (Full PLANE TREE... 0... eee eee iv. 2407
Page) iia tiinte- eee es REP oes iv. 2184 | Puan or House...........-..-- 20s ee iii. 1436

ONE-FOURTH SHEKEL...........5----055 iii. 2079 | Pian or THE Liprary at NINEVEH....... iv. 2151

OpHincnus anp THE NEIGHBORING Con- PLAN OF PERGAMON.......-..--.-----+- iii. 1885
STELLATIONS. 0.000.000 2c cece eens i. 310 | Prawn or THE Precincrs of APoLLo’s .

Orestes Pursvep BY Two Ertyves...... ii. 1304 |. Tempne at DeLPHI.......-.--..-..-. ii. 1301


3520


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


Pian SHowine RESULTS OF WARREN’S Ex-


cavaTions at ‘‘Roprnson’s Arce’... . iii. 1612
Pian oF Sotomon’s TEMPLE............ V. 2981
PLants—

EA ISO WS ala cesta 6 oR at Se eS i. 186
2. Bearded Darnel.................. v. 2910
CADET Seay HN aed tice racn eta MO Net iii, 1445
4s Cassia sac Sr Peas Soak Sete i. 582
5. Coloeynth...........0......000.. ji. 1287
6 Cummins 4.8 acs allttenae eas Sates ii. 766
TASB AR eh ne cee, Vr arash My hs aes Nas, ees ee ii. 1118
8. Frankincense. Sof Aone een bas
9. Large Vine at Jericho: wueeaeee We 8050

TO: heekte tS ee een ote a eR iii. 1864

Hee Bertie sg atyere test teiy ase ep eset iii. 1866

12! Mian dr alee ose eee. oc. ky Be hos ewes athe ill, 1981

TB SMM eters tease cleo cove te tou, snes li. 2055

14. Mustard....................... 1. 2102 |

TOA Mig rr hist 2 Som ee ceeata oe ae il. 2103

TOx Myrtle: 2. J ccicchttictae nha catemeeen iii. 2103

TF IN Brite cee 2S Be ots ante len eta ge v. 2840

18. Papyrus Antiquorum..........0... iv. 2239

NOSIRGGA tor Ne el PN le 2 oe oo ate ath iv. 2544

20. Retem Bush................0.005 tii, 1781

DT ROCKeP OSE scissors eee ea i ii. 2103

DD SRUC Paonia neon lags deere tee ve eaennoees iv. 2625

QS OAMTOM) eels o15 05 ee. a oot ee aon hes iv. 2661

24, Wormwood... ..........00..0 2008 v. 3109
PLOWING NEAR NAZARETH. ci dv. 2221
PLOWING IN SYRIA WITH een OF Onn: . Vv. 3127
POMEGRANATE... 0.00.02 c cee ee iv. 2417
Poon oF BETHESDA... 0.0.0.0 000. 002 eee ee i. 445
Poou oF HEZEKIAH............ 0000-0005 iii. 1386
PooLs OF SOLOMON. .........00 0c eee ee i. 659
PottTrrR’s WHEEL STILL USED IN PALESTINE

AND! OYRIA ts. h. fs-2e eae wee rod iv. 2424
Porters at Work (EGyYprian). . .....1v. 2424


PRESENTATION OF Ue TO eee


SUBJECTS BY THE ASSYRIAN GENERAL. ii. 921
PRIEST-KING AND Gop oF CULTIVATION. . .iil., 1399
Primitive ALPHABETS (Insert)........... i. 104
PRIMITIVE PLOWING.......-..0-00.000008 i, 76
Primitive Signs Like A................ i. 104
PRoBABLE CourRsE OF SOLOMON’s WALL ..iii. 1607
PropaBLe Course OF THE THREE WALLS

DEscRIBED BY JOSEPHUS.............. ili. 1605
PROBABLE CoURSE OF WALLS AND PosITION

oF THE PRINCIPAL GaTrs FRoM H2EzeE-

KIAH TILL LONG AFTER NEHEMIAH... .. . iii: 1606
ProcEssion oF ASsyRIAN MUSICIANS..... iii, 2097
PURIFICATION 3.262063 2.cbea ils ee pee ii. 1802
QUATLE cia cali) gaa Sale doe edie bh ae iv. 2512
QUP Ue ERB bcs Yo eke ig eB chains v. 3117
RacHEL’s Toms iv. 2524
RAS-ES-SAFSAFEH.. 0.0... eee iv. 2803
RRAVBNE Cetics weit So eae earths iv. 2533
Reaper with A Row, A................ Lh 499
ReEaPiInG AND BINDING SHEAVES......... iv. 2534
ReEciininc on CoucHEs...............- li. 2015
UID as eee cota tend Meroe eee ets chee iv. 2544


Reservoir av GHZER..... 6.6. eee i,
IRBTEMOBUSH 0455 cece + ed ane iii.
Reversz or a Coin oF AELIA CaPITOLINA iii.


Reverse or a Coin oF ANTIGONUS....... iii.
RIVER=GOD! 03 9 ek era tye cea ed il.
RIvER JORDAN, THE. ... 0.0... 0.000 eee iii
Rivers—
1. Abana River... .....6... 0000 cae ii.
2. On the Bank of the Nile........... iv
3. Brook Cherith.................5. iv
4. Cross-section of Nilometer......... iv.
5. First Cataract of the Nile......... =
6. Jordan Leaving the Sea of Galilee..
7. Kidron, Looking Southeast from hee
Wall of Jerusalem.............. lil.
8. Modern Traffic on the Halys River.. i


9. Natural Bridge at Lebanon........ i.
10. Old Jisr el-Mujamia, Roman Bridge
across the Upper Jordan River


(PullPage) iy odes Cie ecoes d iv.

11. Outer Banks of the Delta of the Jor-
aT Ste Se eaten Me Rte hale ili
12. Pilgrims Bathing in the Jordan. ... .iv.
Is River-fodic ss Sees et ii.
14. The River Jordan................ iii.
15. Roman Bridge over the Halys...... i.

16. Sources of the Jordan at Dan (Full
PAGO) acat ee vii ly takc pee een ek Red ii.

17. Stream Issuing from Cave at Afka,
ebanon:<s2 8 foe eee i

18. Traditional Site of the Brook Che-
Pith eer te le lor Fae tatite Ye i.

19. Water Wheel on River Orontes at
Antioch (Full Page)............ i.
Ropinson’s ARCH...........--00000-0es lil.
Rock ALTAR FROM TAANACH. & Ses

Rock AuTarR aT TELL er-Murasnrem—
Meaipvo (Full Page)................. iii.
Rock-cuT AQUEDUCT. .............0000. i.
Rock oF MASADA...... 0.2.00. eee ee iv.
ROCK=ROSEY f25. oan Sie aaa Oe oa TALE ui.
Rock Tomss at AMASIA..............-- iv.
Roman BripGk OVER THE HaLys........ i.

Roman Corin CoMMEMORATING VICTORY
OVER THE JEWS.........-000 cee eee ee iii.
Roman ForuM.............-.02-00-...1V.
RoMAN SCOURGES. ........0. 0.00 eee iv.
Roman SHIP, FROM Toms aT PoMPEII.....iv.
Roman STANDARDS OR BANNERS......... v.

RomE—

1. Coliseum... 0.6... ee eee iv.
DIN GF Omak Rebecca dace Ree RS iv.


3. Old Jisr el-Mujamia, Roman Bridge
across the Upper Jordan River


(FullyPage) i278 tar. anfateorrneabies iv.
4. Pantheon) eee ca fae hans nes iv.
5. Roman Bridge over the Halys...... i.
6. Roman Forum.................-. iv.
7. Roman Scourges..........600.005 iv.
8. Roman Ship, from Tomb at Pompeii iv.
9. Roman Standards or Banners. ..... v.


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


3521


Ruinep Cuurcu at KoRIET............. li.
Ruins aT AMMAN—Facave oF THEATER. | iv.


Ruins or Ancient CorIntH witH Acro-


1812
2521


711


li. 1303


iii. 1380
iv. 2671


107
107
2334
550


109
109


1390


1224
108


li, 1224
- 3006


iv. 2661


CorRINTHUS IN BacKGROUND........... ii.
Ruins or ELSUSIS..................... il
Ruins of One oF Heron’s Tempies IN

DAMAR LA 2 2 rnchont tes nents or te ats ata iti
Ruins In SAMARIA... 2.0.0... eee iv
SacRIFICE—

1. Altar of Burnt Offering and Altar of
INCONSEs oy ch ie eek eds Pa ene 04 i.
2: Cairn Altar fon. dase Coors tila i.
3) Mire Altarain ci: . ic cee te eA ial iv.
4. Foundation Sacrifice Found at Gezer i.
5. Incense Altars of Sandstone Found
in the Rock Shrine at Sinai...... i.
6. Rock Altar from Taanach......... i.
7. Rock Altar at Tell el-Mutasellim—
Megiddo (Full Page)............ iii.
8. Sacrificed Infant Buried in a Jar at
GS ZET ee Snes eee eee ees li.
9. Stone Altar of Gezer.............. i.
SacriFicep InFaNT BurRIED IN A JAR aT

GRZER ht a le ii
SarED AND JEBEL JERMUK . v
SAFFRON }.62 0) sige sien ee eee iv
St. Mary’s WELL At NazarReTH......... ii.
St. SvepHen’s GATE.................000 iii.
SaLt Cuirrs oN THE East Swe oF JEBEL

MUSDOM es Riel th sod hsaes tases Sete ii
SamMaria—

1. Mount Ebal Pinas Papas Ok ii.
2. Mount Gerizim with Shechem...... ii.
3. Nablus and Mount Ebal........... iv.
4. Palace of Omri and Ahab at Samaria iv.
5. Ruins of One of Herod’s Temples in
Samaria) c.ccGs ope Gaerne iii.
6. Ruins in Samaria.............-... iv.
7. Samaritan High Priest with Scroll.
8. Triple Gate—German Excavations Re
Nablus (Full Page)............. li.
Samariran Hicu Priest witH ScROLL. .. .iv.
GANDATS ors Ux wed cee Land dicen esta Bs a il
Sarcon IN His WaR CHARIOT........... iv.
Scarasp with Name or AmenuortepP III,

FROM GEZER..... 0.02 ees il.
ScaRueT INSECT... .. 0.020000 0 eee eens Vv.
Scripe’s PALETTE.......-.----0 020s eee lil.
ScriBes WITH UTENSILS..........0.+--.V-
SCORPION (5c) scscehetn cone wee see ee A iv.
ScuLPTURE ON BenisTUN Rock........-. ii.
ScuLPTURE, PAINTING, ETC—

1. Ahura Mazda..........0.00 00 eee iv.
2. Ancient Egyptian Paintings on Cloth

(Full Page)... eck eae ii.
8. Ancient Painting of an aaa

Princess (Full Page). . ey a
4. Aphrodite...........6--2-0-2 eee ik.
5. Asshur-bani-pal Hunting.......... i.
6. Assyrian King in His Chariot...... i.
vi


. Assyrian King Placing His Foot on


the Neck of an Enemy.......... ii.


874
1603


807


890
1218
2755
2192


ii. 13880


2671


iv. 2313


1138
2313

879
2693


1223
3109
1469
3123
2703

877


2332
914
2360
1298
294
292


1126


8. Athena Promachos............... ii.
9. Bas-relief of Lion Hunt............ iv.
10. Bas-relief of Sennacherib Besieging
Lach ish 7..ticee ects a en Sage a iv.
11. Bird Sign: Above a Four-horse


Appears an Eagle Flying........ ii.
12. Black-figured Vase Painting........ ii.
13. Bronze Goat Head from Tello...... i.
14. Bronze Panel from Palace Gate at
Bala wats: isceccqe toad Gees i
15. Combat between King and Evil
SpIritcie a concn tara ee a iv
16. Egyptian Dance—from Tomb at
Thebess...-5 gassed 0d bois, os antes ii
17. Entrance to Kouyunjik........... iv.
18. Fragments of Inscribed Vases of the
Early Sumerian Period.......... i.
19. The God Amon Holding Captive the
Cities of Judah for Shishak...... iv.
20. Golden Candlestick............... i.
21. Great Pyramid of Khufu.......... ii.
22. Hammurabi Receiving the Laws... . ii.
29 EAN GING sede foal dicta btehdeeras acest iv
24. Head of the Bearded Dionysus. .... ii
25. Head from Old Samsoun. i,
26. Heads of Amorites, Akin to ‘North
PALTICAN tess csc nh ew aru ta i.”
27. Heads of Philistines............... iv
28. Hittite King and Daughter... .... . iii.
29. Hittite Lion, Boghaz-keuy; at the
Lion Gater eves ih ndtecn a tices i.
30. Hittite Sculptures, Yasili-kaya (1).. i.


31. Hittite Sculptures, Yasili-kaya (2).. i.
32. Hittite Warrior—Boghaz-keuy.... . i.
33. Hittite Warrior—Senjirli.......... lil.
34. “Household God” from Gezer...... iii.
35. Impression of a Seal Cylinder...... i.
36. The Installation of Umman-igas.... ii.
37. Jehu’s Tribute—from Obelisk of
Shalmaneser................2.. iii.
38. King Merenptah................. ii,
39. Last Stand of Te-umman.......... ii.
40. Monkey from the Praenestine Mo-
BAC rire ot Coen cima Ra wmares i.
41. Monolith of Shalmaneser IT........ i.
42. Monuments in Assur, Discovered by
the Germans.................-. iv.
43. Naram-Sin........ 0.00. - eee il.
44, Obelisk at On...... 0.2.0... eee iv.
45. Obelisk of ThothmesI............ ii.
46. Orestes Pursued by Two Erinyes.. .. ii.
47. Painting at Beni Hassan.......... ii.
48. Parthian Horsemen..............- iv.
49. Passage-frieze, Yasili-kaya......... iii.
50. Persian Satrap Dictating Terms to
Grecian Chiefs at the Gate of a
City. (Bas-relief from Lycian
Monument.)...-......-000000005 ii.
51. Philistine Wagons................ iv.
52. Presentation of Umman-igas to His


Chariot, Driven by a Goddess,


Subjects by the Assyrian General. ii.


1298
2150


2150
1300
1302

359


291


. 2833


ii. 1169


2149


360


2778
553
908

1328


iv. 2505
ii. 1300


277


119


iv. 2378


1398


278
279
279
278
1400
1455
291
920


1584
912
921


160
436


2765
919
2193
909
1304
877
2252
1399


1176
2378


921


3522


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


53. Rivero sever pe pheailava cee es ii. 1300

54. Sculpture on Behistun Rock....... li. 877

55. Sennacherib on His Throne before
Wsachish®: 2A0e4.¥0 Bone ae, fase iii, 1820

56. Siege of a City... 0... 0.0.0... eee ii, 1139 |

57. Silver Vase of Entemena.......... i. 359

58. The Spinning Woman............. ii. 922

59. Statue of Gudea from Tello........ i. 362

60. Statue of Rameses II at Lugqsor.... ee 911

61. Statue of Rameses II at Memphis.. .iii. 2031

62. Sticks of Dried Locusts on Salsas

from Kouyunjik................ iii, 1908

63. A Subject People Paying Tribute... v. 3011

64. Tiglath-pileserI.................. v. 2981

65. Zeusfrom Mylasa................ ii, 1297
Sua oF GALILEB. «0.2... eee ii, 1165
SEAL CYLINDERS... 0... eee eee i. 363
SEALED STONE aT ENTRANCE To A ToMB. .iv. 2709
Section or CopEX WAsHINGTONIENSIS—

Mark 1:1-7 (Insert).........0.002... 1. Ve. 2952
SEcTION FROM THE MEDITERRANEAN TO

Moas (AFTER LaRTET). . . i. 1216
SEMI-DIAGRAMMATIC PLAN ¢ OF * CW ARREN’S

Sarr” anp OTHER Rock PassaGgs.. . . iii. 1608
SENNACHERIB ON His THRONE BEFORE

WGACHISH 2: yee S dis aa ee hae iii. 1820
Series oF BATHS IN THE CasTLE ATGEZER. ji. 415
SERPENTINE Course oF S1LoaM AQugDuctT.iv. 2791
DET yoy anna aces te ne oe Rue, li. 910
SHeep at Doruan (Full Page)...........- ii. 1738
SHEKEL, Simon Bar-cocHBa............. iii. 2080
SHEKEL, Year 4, 188-7 (?) BC. ......... iii. 2078
SHELLS FRom ANCIENT Bep or THE SALT

SHARIA ROS. & ghar nae let cy ina ts i. 213
SHELLS oF Murex trunculus aT SIDON..... iv. 2510
SHEPHERD OF BETHANY..........-...-4+ ii. 876
SHEPHERD AND SHEEP. ee . lv. 2763
SHEPHERD’s FIELD AND RD. oF Bar!

STB eure eeu toSw thc aye owe uae tine tees i, 450
SHIELD, SworD AND GIRDLE............. i. 253
SHIP-CANAL AT CORINTH. .........0..0005 ii. 710
Suips anp Boats—

1. Assyrian Armed Galley in Moines iv. 2775
2. Coin of Antoninus Pius, Showing
ANCHORS i cch Ae obs Pak tae iv. 2777
3. Making a Papyrus Boat........... iv. 2775
4. Modern Traffic on the Halys River.. i. 280
5. Papyrus Marsh with Boat......... v. 3121
6. Roman Ship, from Tomb at Pompeii iv. 2776
7. Ship-canal at Corinth............. li, 710
8. Ships Drawn up on Coast of Black
eae sess one Webasst ett taeda chatevan i. 483
SHITTIM WOOD. ....... 0. eee eee i. 27
Suore Ling at SOUTHWEST CORNER OF THE

BAD! SRA2 cece cee nce A Aveta tiae Meee anes ii. 802
SHORT-TOED BAGLE........0.0000000 000% ti. 885
Suowine “SuHep” or Aras Loom........ vy. 3078
Suowine Upricut Loom................ v. 8078
SIEGE: OR A CITY: 2.0.00. 3. oes dae Bees ii, 1189
SIGNS OF THE CAVE-DWELLERS........... v. 3121
SIUK WORM .08 43. ni li Sie 2s Sans Strange iv. 2791
Sitoam Inscriprion—WRitING at JERU-

SALEM AT THE TIME OF HEZEKIAH...... v. 3120


SItvEeR Vase or ENTEMENA..........+- i
DISTRAM stray ae Ana tani tanr nat Moats iit
Site or ANCIENT JERICHO........0.00055 iii.
Sxetcu Map oF tHE ENvInoNs oF HEBRON


to SHow tHE Various Proposep SITES
OP MAMRE: 3 Oc005 52 ond Aka ea al aioe iii
Stave Bearing CovereD DisHES.......- ii.
Store or Zion—TyYRoPoroN VALLEY aT
RIGHT 26s sci Aish cae a Sen Acta ee ated Vv
SNakEs—
VSPAG GOR: 2 ila c-¥ne ts dba dohe line ward iv.
DAN SP oe ait tien crise thie Mlccewa hi Me retar ances i.
8. Hooded Snake... ........00 00 eee i.
Sotomon’s TempLe—Scuicx’s Move (Full
PSPC) i oeord a Piven in ee neti ee eNotes v.
Sources or tHE Jorpan ar Dan (Full
Pape er id cant ees fas tinea reece oars ii.
Souru—Tue PLEIADES............-0005 i
SPARROW :2e6. 2.0. hE whee asec ela eh hee v
SPIDER keds ed Aodeutdo dad ee tackles Vv
SPINDEBS feck Some Wace citi tee he v
SPiInNING WoMAN, THE...........-004 0 li.


StampeD JAR-HANDLES ExcavaTED AT


Stamped JAR-HANDLES, Lamp anD Iron
IMPLEMENTS FROM TomBs at Berit J1z-


TRIN Ssh seceeecsews sachs hmeatgd te alae hee aus vastioale wates iv.
Stars oF THE PLOUGH, AS THE WINNOWING
TANG pote hs eee neg as BARn re he A i
StatuE oF GUDEA FROM TELLO.......... i.
Stature oF Ramesses IT ar Luqsor....... ii.
Starve oF Ramesses II at MEMPHIS...... iil.
Sticks oF Drizp Locusts on SCULPTURES
FROM KOUYUNJIK.... 0-20-0020 ce eee lil.
Stone ALTAR oF GEZER. . eens i.
Strong ORJEcT ConTarNING A AN + INSCRIPTION
oF NEBUCHADREZZARI.............-. 1
SToNE IN QuaRRIES AT BAALBEK......... iv
STORE yoshi Sie niente a oe A aie oie Vv
SrorM-Gop TESSUPAS..........0..000005 iii
SrraigHt TRUMPETS........0...0..00005 ili.
Srream Issuing From Cave at Arka,
TEMBANON ec. Vestn oe his een 1
SrrReets oF A JEWISH CITY.............. i.
Supsecr Propie Payine Tripute, A..... v.
SuNRIsE ON THE SEA OF Gauze (Full
Page) hth Meru ee Satias se ah ay nase! ii.
SuppLicaTION: “FALLING AT THE FEET”... i.
SWIFT rei aitnnig i Mare oe ta ak Vv
Sycamine on Brack MULBERRY......... V.
SYCOMORE: Mle. Pas ea be deers v.
Synacocusr at Kerr Berim............. i.
SYRIAN BHAR i ela demand Ronee a Radeon i.
Syrian Ptow, YoKE aNp Pick..........iv.
TABERNACLE—
VO @ensersin ns torah woke tine a4 i.
2. Construction of Tabernacle, accord-
ing to Fergusson............--. v.
83. Golden Candlestick. .............. i.


4. Ground Plan (of Tabernacle) accord-


INE TOMO ers Pegs deen v.


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


5. Lateral View of Tabernacle, accord-


ing to Kennedy..............4. v.
6. Tabernacle—Schick’s Model (Full
PARE) omsteck tel ahdntee Rewiss wae Decbe v.
Taste anp Covcues wiTH Seats Noum-
BERED IN ORDER OF Rank. i . iii.
TaBLE SHOWING, Script OF Searric ‘Lane
GUAGES..... BOT ie cee ears on iv.
Ttets—
1. Brick Stamp of SargonI.......... i.
2. Clay Tablet with Seal Inscription...
3. Cuneiform Tablet from Boghaz-keuy i.
4, The Deluge Tablet................ i.
5. Excavating for Cuneiform Tablets at
Boghaz-keuy.............200005 i.
6. Hebrew Inscribed Tablet from Gezer i.
7. Inscribed Tablet Impressed with
Deas ec Ss at te tet nase Ao iv.
8. “Israel” Stele in Museum at Cairo
(Hull Page)i.c. Ache ake re iii.
9. Moabite Stone................... iii,
10. Niches and Tablets at Banias (Full
AREY) Keeani te tantra ere eae eee ae 1,
11. Warning Tablet of Herod’s Temple. iv.
TELL BLWESY oc beste anak ca ci acnne eae a 1
Tetu Houm—TrabitionaL CaPERNAUM
(Pull Page) osc jascce ee oied guna aea i i.
TELL SANDAHANNAH..........-0-0.0000- i.
TRLEVLAANACH ©. cnn oGicee vance eae Toa nad iii.
Tempies, HearHen—
1. Ancient Egyptian Temple—Philae
(Bull Page) seas bee een oes ii.
2. Cenotaph over Tomb of Sarah in
Mosque of Hebron above Cave of
Machpelah (Full Page).......... iii.
3. Mohammedans Praying in the
Mosque at Damascus........... ii.
4. Mosque over the Cave of Machpelah
at ReDrOD ss ies conde ws Wise Soke eee il.
5. Plan of the Precincts of Apollo’s
Temple at Delphi.............. ii.
6. Temple of Jupiter at Athens....... i.
7. Temple of Tirhakah at Napata..... ii.
TreMPLE oF JUPITER AT ATHENS.......... i.
TremPLe, THE—
1. Ezekiel’s Temple Plan............ v.
2. Front Elevation of Temple......... v.
3. Great Court Including Royal Build-
TPG feces tenet erneete eee cecal v.
4. “The Great Sea” under the Temple. i.
5. Plan of Solomon’s Temple......... v.
6. Solomon’s Temple—Schick’s Model
(Full Page)... 2.00... eee eee eee Vv.
7. Warning Tablet of Herod’s Temple. iv.
TEMPLE OF TIRHAKAH AT NAPATA........ ii.
TrrRa-corra CYLINDER CONTAINING THE
History oF THE CaPrure or BabyLon
BY CYRUS THE GREAT.......-..6.0.0-- i.
Trrrapracam (Artic Tatenr) op ANTIO-
CHUSHLD thc ence ene tees eee ne i.
TreTRADRACHM oF Avucusrus StRucK aT
IRNTIOCH . aSs no Petco cae eee Neel: iii.


2888
2890
2015
2314
361
364
281
374


277
105


2152


1516
2071


536
2254
663


567
662
1390


1034


1960


1220


1365


1301
320
1032
320


2935
2938


2932
658
2931


2930
2254
1032


3523
TETRADRACHM (PTotEMaIc TALENT) oF
ALEXANDER BALAS........0ceceeeeeee i, 91
Text or THE CopE or HAMMURABI....... ii, 1329
THEATER AT GERASA.. 2... eee eee eee ii. 1171
Turee BearpED MEN wiTH LYRES....... lil. 2095
Turesuing INsTRUMENT WITH SHARP
PTE RITH Red. pIN Nee, is Rotini te inset de: i. 76
THRESHING WITH OXEN....... ccc ceeeee 1s Ok
THROUGH THE Rocks av JOPPA.......... ti. 1732
THYINE WOOD....... 00. cece cence nee ee v. 2978
PTIBERUAS 6 -se7.chaidecs se ake eeatite  ioiatas v. 2978
TIGLATH-PILESERI..........0..000000 ee v. 2981
DIMBREL Ps, ¢ tesa oes e Aukee ies nde WM A PP ii, 2101
TIMOTHEUS PAPYRUS............00-0005 iv. 2240
TITLE ON THE CROSS.... 0.00200 0-0 seus v. 2988
"LOMBKOP CYRUS ees nsod cei lett eee ces dae iv. 2336
TomBs—
1. Absalom’s Pillar and Tombs of St.
James and Zacharias (Full Page).. 234
2. Absalom’s Tomb..............--- i. 24
3. Balance (from Egyptian Tomb)..... i. 380
4, Cenotaph over Tomb of Sarah in
Mosque of Hebron above Cave of
Machpelah (Full Page).......... iii. 1960
5. Egyptian Dance—from Tomb at
MH ebES ss 2o. bes sitreicie hore stu e mies ii. 1169
6. Exterior of Garden Tomb......... i. 531
7. Fringed Skirts from Tomb at Bab-el
Mel06k 25 tac eloaeed oe bee ii. 1146
8. Interior of Garden Tomb.......... i. 531
9. Interior of Tomb at Marissa....... iv. 2228
10. Interior of Tombs of the Kings..... i, 531
11. Painted Tombs of Marissa......... i. 236
12, Rachel’s Tomb..........-..00006- iv. 2524
13. Rock Tombs at Amasia........... iv. 2418
14, Roman Ship, from Tomb at Pompeii. iv. 2776
15. Sealed Stone at Entrance to a Tomb iv. 2709
16. Stamped Jar-handles, Lamp and
Tron Implements from Tombs at
Bett Jibrinesao2 ies eee es iv. 2227
17. Tomb of Cyrus........... 0.000005 iv. 2336
18. Tomb of Zechariah............... i. 236
19. Tombs of the Kings.............. i. 5380
20. Traditional Tomb of Lazarus...... iii. 1860
Tomps oF THE KINGS...............---5 i. 530
Toms or ZECHARIAH.............-.-040- i, 236
TooLts—
Ti) Assyrian Axe tte hes ala thd i. 341
2. Assyrian Bronze Knives........... iii, 1815
DA WIS it hsde uns ushathers, wares auetsmeioiatsese 1. 3841
BMG EE sk kbc te eed tiauats stated el aan ies i. 341
5. Mey puanvA Xe caro tner uke i, 341
6. Egyptian Key.................-6. iii. 1794
7. Egyptian Stone Knives............ iii. 1815
8. Seribe’s Palette...............00. iii, 1469
OeSpindlesiaset seri aoe aes ee es v. 2841
TowER CF ANTONIA... ....-0-000 00000 ii. 1140
TowER OF DAVID.....-.-000 0c cee eee ee ii. 1619
TRADES AND CRAFTS—
1. Ancient Oil Presses............... iv. 2182
2, Ancient Pottery (Full Page)....... iv. 2424
3. Bank: Money Changer............ i. 383


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


3524

4. Blowpipe and Small Furnace....... iv. 2545
5. Dipping Skins in Vats of Sumach... v. 2908
6. Dressing Hides in a Syrian Tannery v. 2909
7. Egyptian Bellows................ i. 482
8. Egyptian Fowler................. ii. 1143
9. Egyptian Fuller.................. ii, 1148

10. Egyptians Kneading Dough with
Wher: Meets. 08 catia nastier be vats i. 515

11. Egyptians Kneading Dough with
Their Hands................... i. 515
12. Exterior of Pottery. . iv. 2426

13. Fishers Mending Their Nets by the
Sea of Galilee.................. ji. 1116
14. Fishing on the Sea of Galilee....... ii. 1166

15. Foreign Captives Employed in Mak-
ing Bricks at Thebes............ i, 521

16. Interior of Pottery............... iv. 2425

17. Large Foot Press (Egyptian)....... v. 3087

18. Making a Papyrus Boat........... iv. 2775

19. Modern Syrian Wine Press (Full

PAQe accesses fate Net th ce Pen eh in v. 3086

20. Olive Press at Banias near Dan (Full

Page) stoke shu tek ea Meae de mikes: iv. 2184
21. An Oriental Barber............... i. 403
22. Potter’s Wheel Still Used in Palestine

and Syma vicc soe cde ek ea ees os iv. 2424

23. Potters at Work (Egyptian)....... iv. 2424

24. Showing “Shed” of Arab Loom..... v. 3078

25. Showing Upright Loom........... v. 8078

262 Spindless. seit isne chee ours v. 2841

27. The Spinning Woman............. ji. 922

28. A Vendor of Water (Full Page)..... v. 3074

29. Water Carriers with Skin Bottles. .. i. 510

30. Weaving (Figure 1)............... v. 3077

31. Weaving (Figure 2)............... v. 3077

32. Women at a Modern Mill......... lii, 2052
TRADITIONAL House OF ANANIAS........ ii. 780
TrapitionaL House or Simon THE TANNER iii. 1732
TraviTionAL Mrecippo—Rvns oF Pauace

AND Pusiic Buitpines (Full Page)..... iii. 2028
TrapitionaL Mount oF THE PRECIPITA-

TION NEAR NAZARETH. iv, 2221
TRADITIONAL SITE OF THE Brook Cusnirn. i. 603
TrRapvITIONAL Toms oF LazaRUS......... iii. 1860
TRANSVERSE SECTION oF THE Dean SzEa... ii. 804
TREES—

1. Abraham’s Oak..............65.- ii. 1366
2. Algum Tree...... 0.00... cere eee i. 96
3. Almond Tree........... eB ss i. 100
Ae LAGOS ile: bandos i Reed Meese alee i. 103
5 Catob. Trees wun sees eae iii, 1448
6. Cedars of Lebanon at the Besherri

GROVE iste ose Ae ees 4s i. 586
y feos © 1 0) oleae nee ee etme a 1278
8. Corn and Palm Trees in Goshen. ... ii. 1280
9. Date Palm with Fruit............. iv. 2235

LO: EBONY thet toads game: Bete re okie ii, 894

TMA ips 0 eet hop, eater Sree sulle ii. 1109

12. “Joshua’s Oak”—a Terebinth...... iv. 2172

13. Oak at Gilead, the Sindeeyan...... iv. 2171

LA OMY Cas sige ae etd oo ten celtelend on ccttes itv. 2185

15. Pine Forest at Beirut.............iv. 2399


16. Pistachio Nut...........0ce cece ee iv. 2170

fee Plane Sear oe toe tk ura eesratita iv. 2407

18. Pomegranate....... 0.2.0.0. iv. 2417

19. Shittim Wood................0005 i. 27

20. Sycamine or Black Mulberry....... v. 2876

21 Syeomore 2) 25, ob eke ee v. 2877

22. Thyine Wood.................05- v. 2978

23. Typical Grove of Olive Trees at Je-

Tusglemy 25 tain wae eaten oe iv. 2184
TRIPLE GaTE—GERMAN EXCAVATIONS AT

Nasuus (Full Page)..............-... ii, 1138
TRUMPETS ON A Coin From BaR-cocHBa. . ili. 2098
TEURTLEAD OVE 1-25 tat ililan Hii kee aes uu. 872
TyrpicaL GRovE oF O.ive TREES AT JERU-

SALEM 026 455 sagare eacee sigh a RADE cnn Raho iv. 2184
SDS soars sear aa Bate tes ee roare a acceso rarks v. 3030
“Up to JERUSALEM” FROM THE INN OF

THE Goop SAMARITAN...............- iv. 2122
UTENSILS AND FURNITURE—

1. Alabaster Boxes...............005 i. 512
2. Ancient Egyptian Baskets......... i, 413
3. Ancient Egyptian Hinges.......... iii. 1393
4. Ancient Seals from Originals in the

British Museum................ iv. 2708
5. Arab Lenty oct aaban a Gea ees v. 2948
6. Arm-chair or Throne.............. v. 2977
CCASSYVTIADVA KAR tere Oe witha aed See i. 341
8. Assyrian Balance................. i. 380
9. Assyrian Bronze Knives........... iii, 1815

10. Assyrian Glass Bottles............ i. 510

VD CA WIS eee Se oe a cet. aes Seas i. 341

TI AAKOB AC Satie Bie cenich hark kaon re i. 341

IBMBedstead 52s hoo sec eteea ates i. 422

14. Bottles of Skins.................. i. 510

15. Bronze and Stone Weate Used in

Nineveh. . elem Soe leet eke tere Me OOLD.

16;, Censersatincctotedioe ouaitnir wien i. 588

17. Couch Bed with Head Rest........ i. 422

18. Eastern Waterpots............... v. 3075

19. Egyptian Ax.................000. i. 341

20. Egyptian Bellows................ 1. 482

21. Egyptian Key.................... iii. 1794

22. Egyptian Roll and Case........... iv. 2597

23. Egyptian Stone Knives............ iii, 1815

24, Egyptian Throne................. v. 2976

25. Glass Bottles................000- li. 1233

26: ‘Glass/ Vases: < cs .e fai cae Med oes es ii. 1233

27. Golden Candlestick............... i. 553

28. Ink-wells and Pen-case with Ink-well iii. 1469

29. Lamp and Bowls Discovered at

Geezer iiss she berate eon toh es iv. 2234

30. Lamps: Figures 1-14........ ili, 1825-1826

Blk lab ie cea ae Shares senate MR ae i. 421

32. Mattress with Pillow............. i. 422

33. Mirror of Polished Bronze......... ii, 1234

84. Modern Egyptian Writing Materials. v. 3119

35. Modern Oriental Baskets.......... i. 413

86. Old Egyptian Bookease........... iii. 1886

87. Reclining on Couches............. iii, 2015

88. Scribe’s Palette... ...........05.. ili. 1469

89. Seribes with Utensils.............. v. 3123


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


40. Silver Vase of Entemena.......... i.
41. Slave Bearing Covered Dishes...... ii.
42 “Spindles +..¢.25:5. 60-00 S09 eta ewe as v.


43. Stamped Jar-handles Excavated at


Ge mer eee AS isint a rae rte iv.


44. Stamped Jar-handles, Lamp and
: Iron Implements from Tombs at


Beit: Jibrin: gsc ede a es iv.
45. Table and Couches with Seats Num-
bered in Order of Rank......... lil.
46. A Vendor of Water (Full Page).....v
47, Washing before Eating............ i.
- 48. Water Carriers with Skin Bottles... i.
49. A Writer, His Palette, and a Papyrus
DEY =Y: | Ce On ead ras PT a a
VALLEY OF AIJALON... 1... 6.000 eee i.
VALLEY OF JEHOSHAPHAT............... ii.
VALLEYS—
1. Corner of Wall of Jerusalem from
Kidron Valley (Full Page)....... iii.
2. Hills and Valleys of Jerusalem with
Modern Names..... . Hi.
3. Modern Arabs Hacecived in “the
Valley of Achor...... i.
4. Mount Sinai and the ‘Adiaccut Vals
ley Siti Melis Mo Acanane eed ane iv.
5. Slope of Zion—Tyropocon Naley at
Righter sweetest res v.
6. Valley of Aijalon................. i.
7. Valley of Jehoshaphat............. iii.
Various Forms or Eayptian Harps..... iii.
VEHICLES—
1. Assyrian Chariot..........--..... 1.
2. Assyrian King in His Chariot...... i.
8. Egyptian Cart...........----055- i.
4, Egyptian War Chariot............ 1.
B LAT LOM ccc ee nda eee Le cna eta ae ili
6. Modern Cart.......0-.. 000s sees i.
7. Philistine Wagons................ iv.
8. Sargon in His War Chariot.......- iv.
Venvor or Water, A (Full Page)....... Vv.


View From AIN Jipy, Looxine Sours. ... ii.
View From THe HricHTs BEHIND Masapa. ii.


‘View From Mount oF OLIVEs OVERLOOK-


ING THE Dap SEA (Full Page)........ ii.
View From Top or Mount Siar (Full
Pape) ee. ix eeh i aeeteskatien line Sine iv.
Views or Bratz Lanps—
1. Abana River..........--0- 020 eos ii.
2. Ain Jidy, Looking South.......... ii.
3. Anathoth, Jeremiah’s Birthplace
(Full Page)... 00... ee eee iii,
:. 4, Arches of Ancient Aqueduct at An-
tioch (Full Page)......--.----+- i.
~'5, Bank of the Nile............--5-5 iv.
6. Bazaar at Jaffa.........------ 506 iii.
7. Beersheba, Overlooking the Desert —
(Full Page)... 6.0... 0s eee eee eee 1.
8. Bethany........-.-..00e seen i.
GuiBethelestr ccc am tater etean tine i.
10. Bethphage.........-..-.0: eee eee i.


‘11.


12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.


34.
35.
36.
37.
38.


39.


40.
41.


42.
43.
44,
45.
46.
47,
48.


49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.


55.
56.


57.
58.


59.


60.


Boghaz-keuy: The Hittite Fortress
Called Yenige Kaleh............ ii.
Camels at the Sea of Galilee....... i.
Cana of Galilee.............2...- 4
Canals in Egypt.................. i,
Carmel of Judah................. i.
Citadel of Zion................... Vv.
Convent Garden, Sinai............ iv.
In the Desert of Edom............ i.
Daothanss so 2 acces awa eee ii
Dry Wady in Edom 1
PONG OL py on Se hs OE A Mao es ii
VONS PCTs oie. ke ie Ps ened ee ii.
Entrance to the Sik............... iv.
Field ‘of Boag. one 2a iis Baye i.
The Fountain at Khan Minyeh..... i.
Gehenna and Akeldama. ti
General View of Petra (Full Bae). viv.
Gethsemane..............025--05 ii.
Going to Market..............-.. i.
Group of Lepers Begging.......... iii.
Heights behind Masada........... ii.
The Jabbokvs...00 050 Baas 2 or een es iil.
Jebel Usdum from the South, Looking
over the Mud Flat Covered by the
Sea at High Water............. ii.
Mardalar 20. ese A oes Ds iii.
Market-place at Jaffa............. i,
IMS Z Dabs dis 0 nace eich + epineee iil.
Mound Covering Nippur Tower.... i.
Mount of Olives from the Golden
Gates toes Amcnhaatsstn terete ee ae iv
Mount of Olives eas the
Dead Sea (Full Page). . ae te
Naphtalitnc nok favinitnd tea eaten iv.
Nazareth, from the Road to the Plain
of Esdraelon..............+..5- iv.
Part of Rock of Behistun.......... iv.
Pass of Michmash.............--- iii.
Plain of Sharon...............--+ iv.
Pool of Bethesda...............-- i.
Rock of Masada.................. lv.
Ruined Church at Kuriet.......... iil,
Ruins of Ancient Corinth with Acro-
Corinthus in the Background... .. ii
Ruins of Eleusis...............--5 ii.
Ruins in Samaria..............--- iv.
Safed and Jebel Jermuk........... v.
Gea of Galilee..........--.....00- ii.
Series of Baths in the Castle at Gezer. i.
The Shepherd’s Field and Field of
Boag ee Gite ao eae ae i,
Site of Ancient Jericho............ iii.
Slope of Zion—Tyropoeon Valley at
PRight 5 i5 Bet ie Eine et a v.
Stone in Quarries at Baalbek...... .iv.
Sunrise over the Sea of Galilee (Full
Page) cca icaecatinene rie eM iran ii.
Tell Hum—Traditional Capernaum
(RulliPage) (ines esse shores i,
Tell Taanach........-. 0.00 e eee iii.


3525


1138
548
548
§52
579

3151

2804
832
870
524
944
945

2714
491
567

1394

2714

1221
534

1867
809

1546


801
1962
533
2069
349


iv. 2187


802
2119


2124
2329
2048
2751

445
27388
1812


711
1303
2671
3006
1165

415


450
1592


3151
2513


1166


567
1390


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


61. Through the Rocks at Joppa....... iti.
O22 PibeTias ch eee alas ue ee ees v.
63. Traditional Megiddo—Ruins of Pal-
ace and Public Buildings (Full
Page) . til,
64. Traditional Site of Brook Cherith..
Obs, Py Pee ax ck de veer aah enone sia ae v
66. “Up to Jerusalem” from the Inn of
the Good Samaritan...... wiv.
67. View from Top of Mount ini ‘(Full
PaGe) Seepesiecred osuctried OMEN ete oes iv.
68. Wadi-ul-Ain (Presumed Site of
Geran) e oles s Seth coh tad, low awke i.
69. Waters of Merom................ lil.
70. Wilderness of Judaea............. iii.
71. Wilderness of Judaea............. v.
Too Vera ikhast 52 sects ces Sys oes. oon ee lv.
73. Young Camels Grazing............ i.
ViraGin’s Fount, THE.................. i.
VOTIVE OFFERING... 0.00... it.
Want-uL-AINn (PRESUMED SITE oF GERAR) i.
Wats or TELL EJ JUDEIDEH.......... is
War—
1. Assyrian Armed Galley in Motion.
2. Assyrian King Placing His Foot on
the Neck of an EFnemy.......... ii.
3. Assyrian Standards and Banners. i.
4, Bas-relief of Sennacherib Besieging
Thachish: 1.0.42 2% ti 2 eee asl iv.
5. Battering-ram................0.. iv.
6. Battle-axes and Spears............ i.
7. Bows, Arrows and Quiver......... i,
8. Breastplate... .............22.... i.
9. Catapult for Hurling Missiles...... iv
10. Egyptian Slinger................. i.
1l. Egyptian Standards.............. 1.
12. Egyptian Swords................. i.
13. Egyptian War Chariot............ i,
14. Greaves and Sandals.............. i.
15. Group of Ancient Arms........... i.
16. Heavy-armed Greek Soldier....... “16
17.Helmet a) S ial eel thon okies: i,
18. Hittite Warrior—Boghaz-keuy..... if
19. Hittite Warrior—Senjirli.......... hii.
20. Loopholes through Which Arrows
Were Shot...............22.05. lv.
21. Persian Warriors................. lv.
22. Roman Standards or Banners...... v.
23. Sargon in His War Chariot........ iv.
24. Shield, Sword, and Girdle......... i.
25. Siege of a City... 0... cee ee eee i.
26. A Subject People Paying Tribute... v.


Warning TaBiet of Herop’s Temp se. ..iv.


WASHING BEFORE EATING


Warer Carriers WIth Skin Borties.... i.
Waters or Merom. a on Li
WATER-SUPPLY (OF JRRUSALEM), Tea Seige iil.
Water Wurst on River ORONTES aT

Awriocn (Full Page).......0.2...0....0 4
WEAVING—


1. Showing “Shed” of Arab Loom..... v.


1732
2978


2028
603


. 8030


2122


2802


524
2037
1757
3064
2330

547
1229
1302


524
664


lv. 2775


1126
384


2150
2787
252
252
253


iv. 2788


252
384
252
595
254
251
251
253
278
1400


2765
2336
3070
2693

253
1139
3011
2254

412

510
2037
1609


158


3078


2. Showing Upright Loom..........- v. 3078
Se DDINGLES sk. rane ccse eek ee A pathleMe lint y. 2841
4. The Spinning Woman............. ii. 922
5. Weaving (Figurel)..............- vy. 3077
6. Weaving (Figure 2)..............- v. 3077
WEIGHTS AND MEasuRESs—
1. Assyrian Balance................- : 380
2. Balance (from Egyptian Tomb). . 380
3. Bronze and Stone Weights eed 4 in .
Ninevehe. s..2.st de eee hee Baresi v. 8079
4. Weights of Phoenician Standard. . . 3080
WELL or ABRAHAM AT BEERSHEBA (Full.
Page) leo cyen denne worden awn ie tetes. ae i. 18
WELLS, RESERVOIRS AND FouNTAINS—
1. Ancient Aqueduct at Smyrna....... iv. 2818
2. Arches of Ancient Aqueduct at An-
tioch (Full Page)............... i. 658
3. Fountain at Askar. ............... v. 2876
4. The Fountain at Khan Minyeh.. 1. 567
5. “Gideon’s Fountain” in the Plain of
Esdraelon.................2... H. 998
6. Jacob’s: Well... sce hues tee ee ili. 1556
7. Plan of the Baths in the Castle at
GEZETA CS nt Pes cond atts ea Elan i. 414
8. Pool of Bethesda................. i. 445
9. Pool of Hezekiah................- ii, 1386
10. Pools of Solomon...............-- i. 659
1l. Reservoir at Gezer............... i 658
12. Rock-cut Aqueduct............... i. 659
13. St. Mary’s Well at Nazareth....... ii. 874-
14. Series of Bathsin the Castleat Gezer. 1. 415
15. Serpentine Course of Siloam Aque-
AUC Pena Ac Raccmhetty tend an casket iv. 2791
16. The Virgin’s Fount............... a 1229
17. The Water-supply (of Jerusalem). . .ii1. 1609
18. Well of Abraham at Beersheba ull
Page) icc as inasaaavonles dete she i. 18
WILDERNESS OF JUDABA......-........-. iii. 1757
WILDERNESS OF JUDABA..............-5 v. 3064
Wiip Goat oF SINAL.. 0... eee ii. 1249
WINDOW orice te oe iene nam wee iii, 1436
WWE ds Ma eng Aah ae ey ere wae at v. 8099
Woman’s Heappress AND VEIL (MopERN). ii. 877
Women at A Moprern MILL............. ili, 2052
Worp-siens Usep spy Tewa INDIANS..... vy. 3118
WORMWOOD. 2... 06... eee eee eens v. 3109
WorsuirPinc HEaveNLy Bopizs......... i. 370
WorsHIpPInNG THE LuNAR DEITY......... i, 371
Wrrrrr, His Patstre, anp A Papyrus
DERAR WAS. oe. oy Arata ns 3 Bie Renee: i. 496
WritInc—
1. Aramaic, Greek and Latin Writing
in Common Use in Palestine in
Gospel Times.................. v. 3125
2. Ancient Manuscripts on Papyrus
(INSET). Jenne Sane. Rae ease: li. 2238
3. Asshur-bani-pal’s Account of His
Restoration of the Stage-tower at
INI PPUnser sas tan fete eancatences ... 1 294
4, Assyrian Book. ; i. 497
5. Boundary Stone or Webuehedieasss
Do eae RAGE Nya tre e oyeonle 28 tansy eae Iv. 2128


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS


6. Brick Stamp of Sargon I........... i.
7. Building Inscription of Nabopolassar i.
8. Building Inscription of Nebuchad-
Pezzar Wy 2 octet cord eee i.
9. Clay Tablet with Seal Inscription.... i.
10. Code of Hammurabi (Insert)....... iii.
11. Common Egyptian Writing during
the Bondage. .................. Vv.
12. Common Egyptian Writing in the
Time of Abraham. uv.
13. Cuneiform Tablet from Bester ksuy i.
14. The Deluge Tablet............... i.
15. Egyptian Roll and Case........... iv.
16. From an Engraving on a Babylonian
Cylinder Representing the Sun
God and One of His Priests. ..... i,
17. Facsimile of Codex Ephraemi Re-
SCIIPCUSS. 6-4 he Welk tore Star. v.
18. Facsimile of Codex Sinaiticus...... v.
19. Facsimile Minuscule Manuscript... . v.
20. Fragments of Inscribed Vases of the
Early Sumerian Period.......... i
21. Greek Papyrus Containing Matthew
1:1-9.12.13.14-20........00.... iv.
22. Hebrew Inscribed Tablet from Gezer. i.
23. Hieroglyphic Writing............. Vv.
24. Impression of a Seal Cylinder...... i.
25. Ink-wells and Pen-case with Ink-
Well ates ON ater ess eee iii
26. Inscribed Tablet Impressed with
Sealsinze .2.2anedatiacnte eee reek iv
27. Inscription and Mutilated Figure
from Jerabis..............6505- iii.
28. The Installation of Umman-igas. .. . ii.
29. “Israel” Stele in Museum at Cairo
(FullyPage) .-.ccics nrc et res iii.
30. Jewish Mnemonic Fringes......... Vv.
31. Last Stand of Te-umman.......... ii.
32. Letter from the Governor of Jerusa-
lem about 1875 BC.........-...V-
33. Message Sticks...........----+--5 v.
34. Moabite Stone............----0-+ ii.
35. Modern Egyptian Writing Mate-


Valence ened. 4 ete wk areas Vv.


361
356


349
364
1854


3125


3124
281
374

2597


371


2953
2951
2954


360


2241
105
3118
291


. 1469


. 2152


1401
920


1516
3117
921


3120
3116
2071


3119


3527
36. New Sayings of Jesus. viv. 2241
37. Niches and Tablets ve Banias (Full
Pageyin A Mak soucter vain wane ectesy aes i. 536
38. Ostracon with Luke 22:70f........ iv. 2203
39. The Paestos Disk, Face A......... i. 104
40. Papyrus Antiquorum. .....0.5.644- iv. 2239
41. Presentation of Umman-igas to His
Subjects by the Assyrian General. ii. 921
42. Primitive Alphabets (Insert)....... i. 104
43. Primitive Signs Like A............ i. 104
44, The Quipui... oc. ones eee eerie v. 3117
45. A Reader with a Roll............. i. 499
46. Samaritan High Priest with Scroll...iv. 2313
47. Scribe’s Palette...............05. ii. 1469
48. Scribes with Utensils.............- v. 3123
49. Seal Cylinders. . are . i, 363
50. Section of Codex Washingtonienss—
Mark 1:1-7 (Insert). . veee. Ve 2952
51. Signs of the Cayosdwellars: reall ale y. 3121
52. Siloam Inscription—Writing at Jeru-
salem at the Time of Hezekiah... v. 3120
53. Stone Object Containing an tasnrin:
tion of NebuchadrezzarI........ i. 353
54. Table Showing Script of Semitic
Languages. 1.6.6... eee eee ee iv. 2314
55. Terra-cotta Cylinder Containing the
History of the Capture of Babylon
by Cyrus the Great. ...........- i. 575
56. Text of the Code of Hammurabi... . ii. 1329
57. Timotheus Papyrus...........---: iv. 2240
58. Title on the Cross..........--.--. v. 2988
59. Warning Tablet of Herod’s Temple. iv. 2254
60. Word-signs Used by Tewa Indians. . v. 3118
61. Worshipping Heavenly Bodies... .. i. 370
62. Worshipping the Lunar Deity...... i. 371
63. A Writer, His Palette, and a Papyrus
Lignin et Maa ge et enn ee i. 496
YEZDIKHAST. 0.0. ee iv. 2330
Yoxs or ANCIENT PLOW..........-----+ v. 3126
Youne CaMELS GRAZING. .....--..--0-% i. 547
ZEUS FROM MYLASA... 1.6.0 eee eee eee ii. 1297


ADP oP &


INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE


LIST OF MAPS


. The Ancient World and the Descendants of


Noah


. Sinai and Palestine, Showing Israel’s Journeys


through the Desert


. Canaan at the Time of the Conquest

. Canaan as Divided among the Twelve Tribes
. Babylonian Empire

. Persian Empire

. Grecian Empire


8. Roman Empire
9. The Dominions of David and Solomon
10. The Kingdoms of Judah and Israel
11. Palestine in the Times of the New Testament
12. Missionary Journeys of St. Paul
13. Environs of Jerusalem
14. Galilee
15. Ancient Jerusalem
16. Modern Jerusalem


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF BIBLICAL PLACE-NAMES PROPERLY LOCATED BY- MAP
NUMBER FOLLOWED BY KEY NUMERALS AND LETTERS


Notrs.—Numerals following place-name preceding dash (—-) denote the map eet
following the dash indicate the location of the name on the map; thus, Abana River.


The numeral and letter
.4, 10, 11I—6A; 9—4F, appears


on maps 4, 10, and 11 at space 6A and also on map 9 at space 4F.


A
Abana River.............4, 10, 11—6A; 9—4F
Abdon. 4 .... 4—8C
‘Aliedijeu. ... 14—5G
Abel- beth-maacah . .....4, 10, 11—4C; 9—4F
Abel-meholah.............4, 10—4F
Abel-shittim . ...3, 44H
Abez. ....4—8E
Abiad, “Wady dl. .. .2—5E
Abila. ieee Ves
Rate alti tists oc etek
Abimael..........0........ 1—7F
Absalom, Tomb of........15--5D
Abu Dis. ......13—4F
Abu el Hamam, Wady. ....13—3L
Abu esh Sheba, Kh.. ..14—3B
Abumudauwar............14—7J
Abu Said, Wady...........14—6N
Abu Shusheh, Kh..........14—4C
re ae Church.........16—1A
Accad . Winey ae eet -6D
Acco, see Ptolemais be tight 3, 4, 10, 11—38D; 2—

6A; 9—3G

Achaias cress shite st: 2 onaesek 8, 12—4C
Achor, Valley of.. ...18—6D
Achshaph. . Loe... 4—38D
Achzib (Bedippa).-. eke cs aan semnieh 3, 4, 11—38C
ACAI Mien cc che teat the 1eden re 15—3C
Adame sy oe ot. 4—4G
Adamah..... ...4—4E; 11—4C
Adamah Macieh)s. ...14—4F
Adamah, see agra ...14—5H
Adami...... wee. 4—4E
Adami (Adama). Nah smear 14—5H
Adasa (Adaseh)........... 13—3D
Adaseh, see Adasa.........18—38D
Adjlun, Wady............11—4G


Adoraim.................4—33
ee: touepadteeneel2=O6
Adriatic Sea. ...12—-8A
Adullam. _. .4,10—35; 3—21
Adana: ...4—8H; 1383—5E
Aegyptus tee. 8—5E
Atrieate iuckints v atick oid ok 8—3E
Agrippa, Palace of......... 15—4D
Ahlab. . eee (0
oe Kh. ‘al... ...18—5E; 14—4M
Ai. _.8, 4, 10, 11—8H; 2—
6C
Ai, Hai, Aiath (Kh. baie 13—4C
Aijjalon. . : .. 4—3H
Aijalon, Malley on ..3—1B; 3—2H
Ailbun. Mah occ 2 dea
OanWady else. 40). an
Ain ’Arik, Wady..........3—2A
Ain Atan........ .....18—2H
Ain ed Duk, see Docus Redes cee 13—6C
Ain el Feshkhah.......... 13—7G
Ain el Ghuweir........... 13—7J5
Ain el Kuderat............2-—4F
Ain el Kuseimeh.......... 2—4F
Ain el Mudauwerah........14—4D
Ain el-Muweileh Cees:
Well). . a ..2—4F
Ain el Weibeh (Eidesh ». .2—6F
Ain et Tannur............ 13—7G
Ain et Tineh.. ...14—5C
Ain et Trabeh.. ..13—7F


Ain Haud, see En Sheiicgh. 13—4F
Ain Jalud, see Well of Harod 14—-2K


Ain Kadeis (Kadesh)....... 2—4F

Ain Kana................ 14—1F
Ain Karim, see Beth-car?.. .183—2F
Ain Mahil, see Nahallal. .. .14-—2F


3528


Ain Sha'in?, see Shihon.. .
Ain Sinia


Ain Yebrud


Ajalon. . Radial
Akabah, Gulf of. ets, Mien
Akbara. Shenae in seach
Alabina...
Aksa. .
Akur.


Alexandria............,


Almodad.................
710) at eae oe eee a
ANUS Rese os Srey 9, i Se
Alya, Wady
Amad intel sate: hhh
Amalekites.............
AMMA thas, yh ae ee ee
Ammon................
Ammonites.............
Ammonium..............
Amorites................
Amphipolis.............
Amud, Wadyel..........
Amwas, see Emmaus..... .


Amygdalon, Pool of........


Anathoth
Anathoth (Anata).........
Ancient Road.............
ANC Pay A Reh tenes
ANGI oe er ee
Anti-Lebanon.............
Antioch.................


Antiochia.
antinatris: ts ota
Antonia Praétoriuin: tet eee
Antonia, Tower of

Aphekee noe stn Be


Apollonia................


Appenine Mts.............
Appii Forum
Arabah, Wady el.........
ATADIOM o clec: cn ee cu leeasuua’
Arabian Gulf.
Arabian Sea. : :
Arab Protestant ‘Ghurehe woh


INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE 3529
.14~—2F Arad... o.oo... ....8,4, 10, 1I—2K; 9—3]
183—3A Aral Sea... ...1—7C
ia. .14—2K Aram. ...1—6D
13—4B Aram or n Syzn. ....9—-6D
183—4E Araxes River. . .. .6—4B
11—4C Arbela. . .. 1I—4E and 6E
..4—8E; 10—3H Arbela (irbid): pamela 2 14—4D
2—5I AT CHICAS eh eae te 4—3H; 13—2C
.14—4A Archipelago.............. 12—6C
4—4M Argob.................,.8, 10-70; 46D; 9
16—5C —5F
13—1F Ariana. : ....6—6C; 7—6B
13—4E ’Arish, Wady el (River of
9—5B Egypt) Re eee cea he pee cites 2—4E
..6, 7—-2C; 7—6A and | Armenia................. 5, 6, 7~4B; 8—6C
5C; 12--8G Armenian Convent........16—3D
1—6F Armenian Quarter.........16—3D
.10—3C Ar-moab................. 4,10—4K; 9—4I
24d Arnon River.............. 3, 10—5J; 2—7D; 4—
13—4H 4K; 9-41
..4—3C Arnon River, see Wady el
aT Maybe cent eet aa
.11I—4E Aroer....................2—7D; 3—8J; 4—-5K
..4, 10, 11—5G and 2L; 9—8I and
..3-6H; 9—5I i 41; 10—5J; 11—
.7—2C | 2L, 5H and 5K
.2—6D Ar of Moab..............3—-53
.. 12—5B Arphaxad................ 1—6E
.14—4C and 7K Ar (Rabbath-moab)....... 11—dk
.11—2H Arrabet el Buttauf........ 14—2C
15—38C Arrub, Wady el.......... 13—3J
4—2K Arvad. ...9—4D
4—4E Ascension, ( Chureh ‘of the. ..16—7C
14—33 Ashdod. ..3-11; 4-1H; 10—
1—4E 2H
13—3E Ashdod (Azotus)..........11—1J
.183—4E Asher. ... 4—8C
10—3H Ashik, Kh. ‘ale ...14—-7E
13-—4E Ashkelon . ..4, 11—1J; 8—I1I; 10
3—1B —l1H
12—9B Ashkenaz................1-—6D
4—3F Ashtaroth................8—5E
4—3K Ashtaroth-karnaim........3, 4, 10-—6D
4, 11—5A Asia. .8—5D; 12—7C
.7—8C; 9—4B; 12— Aasenie “Plain oe 4Sehel al
8C and 10D Butitauf). . tessa ee 14-2D
_. 8—8D Aghure 4 oe keep
11-24 Assos. . 12—6C
15—4B ae .....5--4B; 7—-4C
16—4B Assyrians, Camp of ae ...15—2C
3, 4-5E; 9—4G; 10 | Ataroth. Levees es B41; 4-8H
—5D P| na GUE he =|
11—2G; 12—5B and | Athens.................. 12—5D
5G Attalige cer 308 kB nse wd 12—8D
12—2B Attara, see Baal Tamar... .13—3C
12—1A Audjeh River. /...........11--2G
.2—6F Aujehiel tii cn 3 eta othe 2—5E
5, 6, 7—4D; 1, 8—6E | Aulam .. 1444G
... 6—8D Auranitis................-11-—6C
. 1—5E Austrian eee Dates cn gene 16—4B
.16—-2A Auwad. ....3—1B
14—6J . Auwaj, Wady dl. . . 13—5F


Arab, Wadyel............


3530 INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE
Awanish, el ..14-7D Bene-berak...............4-2G
Asean eneias.. 4 ove 38—2I1; 4—2J Beni Naim, see Janum..... 13—2I1
Aziriyeh, see Bethany ..... 13—4F Benjamin . . .. 4-380
Azmaveth (Hizmeh).......13—4D Beracah, Valley of. . 138—2J
Azotus ?, Mount (Birez Zeit) .13—3A Berean cue See 12—5B
Azotus, see Ashdod........11—1J Bered ec elena nes 9—3I
Berenice.................12—8G
B Berothah.................9—-8E
Baalath..................8—1A; 13—1B Berytus. . ...12—10F
Baalbek . ... 9-48 Bethabara, : .. 11-4
Bead : .. 4—-5C Bethabara?- ” Beth barab
Baal- Racor. (Teli Means .....18—4A (Makht Abarah)........ 14—5K
Baal-meon.. . wees 443; 11—5S Beth-anath............... 4—4C
Baal-shalisha. .. 10—3G Beth-anoth............... 4—3J
Baal Tamar (AtGra), ..13—3C Beth-anoth (Kh. Beit Ainun).13—2K
Baal Zephon..............2—2F Bethany. . oe . 11-38
Babel....................1-6D Bethany (Azitiyeh). . .. 13—4F
Babylon. . ....5, T—4C Beth-baal-meon . ..8—51
Babvionin.« ........5, 6, 7—4C Bene Raho uc ae ceec= ate
Seay Empite, wees. B—4C; 6—8C Beth-barah, Bethabara ?
Bactriana . ..6, 7—6B (Makht Abarah)........ 14—5K
Bahr Lut, see ‘Dead en .. 18—7K Beth-car? (Ain Karim)... ..13—2F
Bahr ae see Lake of Beth- races Mates ag a= 2EP
Tiberias. heed ...14—6E Bethel. . 3, 4, 9, 10 11—3H;
Bamoth- Baal ee ee ae 4—4J 2—6C
Barium..................12—2B Bethel, Luz (Beitin)....... 13—4B
Barrack..................16—8D Bether (Bittir)............18—2G
Bashan..................3-6D; 4—5C; 10— | Bethesda, Poolof......... 16—5B
6C Beth-haran............... 3, 4 4H
Bashan, Conquest of ..... ..8—5E Beth-hoglah. . . .....4, 11-40
Bashan, Hills of. ..........9-—5G Beth-horon.............. 3, 11—3H; 3—2B
Bassas, Wady.............13-4K Beth-horon and Vicinity... .3—2B
Beeroth..................8, 48H Beth-jeshimoth.......... 3, 44H
Beeroth (Bireh)...........18—8C Bethlehem...............4, 11—3J; 9, 10—3H;
Beersheba................3, 4, 10, 11—2K; 2— 4—3E; 12—10G;
5E; 9—3I 2—6D
Beisan, see Beth-shean . .14—4M Bethlehem (Beit Lahm). . ..183—3G
Beit et Foe see Beth- Beth-nimrah............. 3, 4, 11—4H
anoth. vecee eee ees LB—IK Bethphage.............. 11—3H
Beit Mpan: BAS Stee dthaiea 18—2D Bethphage ? oa et gu ..13—4F
Beit Fejjar. . vee L325 Beth-rehob . weeees 8, 4-40; 2-7A
Beit Hannina, Waly. ..13—3E Bethsaida................11—4D
Beit Iksa.............0.5. 13—3E Bethsaida-Julias......... 11—5D; 14--6B
Beitin, see Bethel, Luz... ..183—4B Beth-shean...............8, 4-4F; 9—4G; 10
Beit Izza.. ..13—2D —4E
Beit Jala, see  Gallim. ..13—3G Beth-shean (Beisan).......14—4N
Beit Jubr. . _.18—7D Beth-shemesh............ 4, 10—2H; 11—4D
Beit Tahivce ase Bethlehem 133 Beth-shittah . wee. 4-46
Beit Likia. ..8—1C; 13—1D Beth-shittah (Ghat tans: SiO 14—3K
Beit Mizza, Kh, see Moran. 13—2E Beth-tappuah. . A—3J
Beit Sahar. . .183—3G Beth-zacharias he ‘sit
Beit Skaria, Kh. ., see ie Bethe Skaria). . 18—2H
wacharias....... .183—2H Beth-zur . Pattee 4, 10—3J
Beit Sufafa............. | 13—3F Beth-zur (Boitgin)s: .. 1—1K
Beit-sur, see Beth-zur...... 138—1K Betonimy . s.r eete ks 3—4H
Beit Surik................ 13—2E Betsaanim ? coat el re 14—4F
Beit Tamir. a ... 183-38 Bezek. me ..4, 11—4F; 3—2H
Beit Tul, see Feil .18—1E Besar. Sete cette eters ee  B-5I; 44K; 9-4
Beitunia. . ...138—2C Bezetha..................16—4B
Beit Ur el Folia. ....38—2B Biar, ses Oe eeeatic A scdctndoceee 13—2H
Bale Tahias..,...4eSe2B Bileam . ade BE
Belus River..........005- 11—3D Bileam or ilearie. . 3 8F


INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE


3531


Bireh, see Beeroth. ...... ..183—38C

Bireh, Wady el..... gh tis dean 14—53

Bireinyel 5. 8.44 bette 2—5F

Bir-es Suk. 34 ..13—5F

Bir ez Zeit, see e Mt. ‘Anotis?: 13—3A

Birket es Sultan...........16—2E

Birket Mamila............16—1C

Bir Nebala...............13—3D

Bithynia.............,...6, 7—2B; 8—5C; 12
—8B

Bittir, see Bether..........18—2G

Biyar Mayein............. 2—5F

Black Sea................1-5C; 6—8A; 12—
9A

Boeotia. . .. 8—4C

Bohan, Stone of. Seog ee ee 13—7F

Bosphorus. ............... 6—2B; 12—7A

Boundary Line between Tur-

key and Exgypt..........2—5F

Bozkath.................4-23

Bosrahs eid? os heeds cette 2,10—7E; 4, 11—4M;
3—7F; 9—4J

Breikut, Kh............... 13—2J

Breka...................14—7F

Britannia................8—2A

Brook Besor..............11—1K

Brundisium...............12—3B

IBrusatei. on cheno eek 12—7B

Bukeia, el................18-6G

Burak; el pon22 2. esa 13—2H

Burkah . 13—4C

Byblos, see Gebal Meee: 9—4C

Byzantium, see Constanti-

nople..............-..-12—7B
Cc

Cabbon te ash

Cable, sities acencrey ite 4, 10—3D; 9—3G; 11
—4C

Cabura..............-...7-6C

Caesarea.................11-—2F; 12—10C and
10F

Caesarea Philippi......... 11—4C

Caiaphas, House of........16—3E

Gainer PN ante ey ae 4—3K

Calah. . .1—6D

Callirhoe . 1143

Calneh.................-.1-6D

Calvary ?. Prada mM Mas Gee 15—4A

Cana. ; .. 11—3E

Cana? (Kh. errs ..14—1D


Cana of Galilee oes Kenna)14-2F


Canaan. . 1—5D; 2—6C

Cxfisanites: Pe ite t cg OM _-2-6B; 3—3D and 4G

Capernaum...........---- j1—4D

Capernaum aie Minieh).. . 14—5C

Caphtorim. . . _.1—4D

Cappadocia.........-..--- 6, 7—8B; 8—5C; 12
—10C

Carchemish...............5—8B

Caria... 0... e eee eee. 6, 7—2B; 12—7D

Carmania................6, 75D


Carmel........ ooo... 4, 11-8K; 9—3I

Carmel, Mount...........3, 4, 11—2D; 9—3G;
10—3D

Carmelites’ Convent... .....16—7C

Carthage...............-. 8—3D

Casluhim.................1—5E

Caspian Sea.............. 1—7D; 6—4B

Caucasus, Mount.. .6—4B


Cedron or Peidcon Brook
(Wady en Nar)......... 183—5G

Central Campaign.........

Chephar-hammon-ai? (Kefr


ANG) erie ese 13—4B

Chephirah. . 3, 43H

Chephirah Gefiveh).. ..18—1E

Chesalon.........-..-.-.- 4—3H

Chesulloth...............4—8E

Chesulloth (Iksal). . 14—1G

Chinnereth. . wo... 1I-4E

Chinnereth, Sea oh, ...4, 10—4D; 2-74;
3—4E; 9—4G; 14
—6D

Chios. .. . 12—6C

Ghorazin : ...11—4D

Chorazin (Kermazeh)). ..14—5B

Chozeba (Kh. Tei Dae. .13—2K

Christian Cemetery........16—3E

Church of the Tomb of the

Virgin.................16—6B

Cilicia...................6, 7—3B; 8—5D; 12
—10D

Citadel..................15-2D

Claud ete sig va Shearer eens 12—5E

Cnidus ....12—7D

Colossae. . , .......12—7D

Conquest of Bashan RN, 38—5E

Conquest of Gilead. . ..3—51


Constantinople (Byzantium) 12—7B


Corinth. . ..12—5D

a at MRE ST 2)

Crete....................7-2B; 8—4D; 12—
5E

Cush. ...1—5F and 6E

Cyprus ..6—-2C; 8—5D; 9—
1D; 12—9F

Cyrene........... 060.000 12—4G

D
Daberath . Li... 4—8E
Daberath (Deburieh). .. 2. 14-26

WDACIAM sn eeeaetleus hele hOB

Damascus...............-4, 11—6A; 5—3B; 6
=3Cr 9-48 10—
7A; 12—10F

Damascus Gate...........16—3B

Damieh, see Adamah...... 14—4F

‘Damietta................2—1D

Dan............0+++++.+.4, 10--5B; 4—2H and
3C; 9-4F; 11—
4C; 12—10F

Dan or Laish.............8—4B; 4—5B

Daphne...........--...--12—10D


3532 INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE
Dar el Jerir, Wady........ 13—5B Ekseir, Wady el. ..........14—6J
David Street............. 16—3C Ele SS hE octet leds. eae I—6E
David’s Tomb............ 5—3C; 16—3E Pathe Stes cto waa Oe 2—6H; 9—3L
Dead Sea (Bahr Lut), see lealehete. 24. sale plectech 3—5H
Salt Sea. .... 0.22.2. 000. 11—4K; 12—10G; 13 | Eleasa. . oe he IT
I —TK Elen-beth- haman. . woo... 10-38H
Debitcis cite ees oe ens A, eee 38—2J; 13 Eleutheropolis............11—2J
: = Whins siete son; wow saan (esol
Deburieh, see Daberath. ...14—2G Elishah................ 1- 8D
Decapolis................11—5E Elon 43H
Dele eee herusoge ae Sd ae oa
poe ....9—5D <
Ly hea a hl Emmaus. . oo... 14
aoe esh Sheikh . ...13—1F Emmaus (mwas): eters 11—2H
ai poe sees 14-26 Emmaus? (Kulanieh)...... 138—2E
Deir eee a Kh... : rere Encampment by the Red
ec chet at Dea 8 Cee ee Re oT
Dekakin, Wally arn "15_er 1a (0) eae eer er ee ; 9--8G;
aa oe ee is Hy a: Be Engannim _.. 4—2J and 3F
Eee ady € : econ Engedi ..4, 11—4K; 9—81; 10
er Dele iene cian bene ees —
3 —4,
Derb el Hajj or Pilgrim English Cem ter ee
Route to Mecca 2—4H E ad aan
vou pacar are En-hagar ................4--4C
Dibont. ie cisco oie es 4, ae 2—TD; 10 | wn-rimmon............. _.4, 10—2K
ies En-tappuah.............. 4—38G
nate or Dimon 7 ca Entrance of Hamath?......9—4D
Di cee aes ep ere ees Ephesus................. 12—6D
ane a meta Bid gee 3 5E Ephraim ... ...4, 11—-38G
NO OE eee MN er poem, Mount . ...8, 4, 10, 11—3G
Docus (Ain ed Duk).. ..183—6C Erech . 1—6E
Roman a. ae a: 14D Eriha, see ‘J ericho a aiet tags 13—7D
oe ie coer 6 3A Erythraean Sea ...........6—6D
Beatie a. OOM ER Gee aa % “33 Esh-sheh, Wady..........14—5K
ahs 4 pe ark ena ree ee area ae were 11—_2H
OTs eee eho). date in sagt ios Batata. 6B ; ea , — Estemoa. ; 43K
Dorylaion................ 12—7B oe (Uftas\ 2. % Cae ae
Dothan........ ..8, 4, 10, 1I—3F; 2— e : ;
6B :
TGC CNRS ec crc Sore oa 15—5D Etham, Wilderness of..... ae
Duer, ed. .... 14-66 Ethiopia. . ; eee
Duscban: 14_6F Et-Tih, Desert ‘of (Pan). 24H
ie Eughib. . ..14—7E
Duk t kafr-akib . .. 14—7C
aneaes 123A Euphrates ‘River (Great
eae sp River). . ..5, 6—4C; 9—6B
E | Ezion-geber. . idea ..9—8L
Ebal, Mount.............2-6C; 4—8G; 11— | F
4G i :
Eber.....................1—5D ee eee,
Ecbhatana............0-5: 5—5B; 6—4C Baek Ca agN R gre
Sor ncang 7, Faria, Wady el............ 3-36; 11W4G
Ecdippa, see Achzib....... 11—3 :
13: i Con ae Re 3—4L; 9—4J; 10-21 | Fetyat, Wady es.......... 14—7B
ager Camelot ea et onc 2—7G Fejjas, Wady.............14—5G
zB Ferry .. 14—6G
Edrei....................8, 4-65
Fglon...........0..-006.-4, I-20; 321 Feshkhab, Ras. . 13—7G
Egnatia, Via..............12—4B Fikrah, Wady el. . ateae
eval yi 2—1G: 5-30: 62D: First Wall................15—8D
fee uae elie 720; 12—8H 3 Fish Gate................15—8C
Egypt, River of, see Wady Frank Mountain, see Hero-
el UATIghi. ek eos 2—AB dium (Jebel Fureidis) .. ..183—3H
Eidun (Dium or Dieu)... ..8—5E Preka fot evokes ree h. ae 14—6K
Ekron............... ...8, 4, 10, 11—2H; 9— | French Pilgrims’ Ho........16—2B
3H Fuleh, el...... 14-1J


INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE


G
Gaash River..............11--8G
Galea et ocala on
Gadaras teicn 8 bik 11—4E
Gadara (Mukes)..........14--7H
ee eee cee eee
Galatia. . ...8—5C; 12—9B
Galilee. : ...11—4D
Galilee, Sea of, ...11—4D; 14—6D
Gallia... ...8—2B
Gallim (Beit Sale .13—3G
Gamala. _11—4E
Gamala? (Kulat al Figen .14—7E
Garden Tomb............ 15—4A; 16—4A
Gath....................8-21; 9—3H; 11—
2H
Gath-hepher. . ..8—3E
Gath Hepher ? Gl Meshed). 14—1F
Gath-libnah . . 423; 10—2H
Galante aa oA 1==60)
Gaza....................B, 4, 10, 13-13; 2— |
5D; 9—21
Geb ase eee ee hae 10, 11—3H; 10—3F
Geba, Gaba, Gibeah (Jeba).13—4D
Gebal (Byblos)............9—4C; 12—10E
Gederah Seu Oe As —3D)
Gederoth . .. 4-20
Gedor. ..3—3I; 4-3)
Gedor (Kh. Jedi)... het hte Pete 13—1J
Gennath Gate. .....15—3D
Gennesaret, Lake ee aroma 14—6D
Gennesaret, Plain of (el
Ghuweir)...............14—5C
Gerarcenirh been iee os 2—5D; 4—-1K; 9—
21; 10—13
Gerasa .. 1I—5F
Gergesasns: cei hase oes 11—5D
Gergesenes? (Kersa).......14—7D
Gerizim, Mount..........- 4,11—8G; 2—6C
German Church. ..........16—3C
Germania................8—8B
Geshun ances ents a eee 9—4F
Geshurites................8—5D; 4—-5C
Gether..................:1-5D
Gethsemane..............16-—-6B
Gezer. . as _. 42H; 9—3H
Ghar, Wady al J... .13—4L
Ghuweir, el; see “Plain of
Gennesaret. .14—5C
Ghuweir, Wady.. pieces ae ee) :
Gibbethon...........--5- 4—3H; 10—3F
Gibeahensieeicccsehos Peas 4, 11—3H and 3J
Gibeah (Jeba). . ...18—1H
Gibeah (Jebia) . . ..138—-1D
Gibeoneries 4 ocean cee 3, 4, 9, 10, 11—3H
Gibeon (el Jib)..........-- 13—3D
Gihon...............-.--15—5E
Gilboaeie ice he tend 11—4E
Gilboa, Mount............10, 11—4F; 2—6B;
4—3F; 9—-3G
Gilead. .....--.-...-....-4, 10-—5F; 3—5G;


9—4G


3533


Gilead, Mount...........


Gilgal ee ceaae eden


Giloh (Kh. Jala).........
Gischala


Golden Gate.

Gomer.......

Gophna Ophni Gna)

Gordium . Hains Jay

Goshen, Td af Aa eh ath ial
River......

Great Sea (Mediterranean).


Grecia.

Grecian enn:
Greece. uae
Greek Gathaerinrie!


Greek and Latin Quarter’ ‘
H

Hadad-rimmon...........

Hadashah .

Hadoram . .


Haemus Mountains.


Muweileh..............
Hai, Kh.el..............


Aiath. .
Halhul. . a
Halhul (Hulhal). .
Halys, River......
Hamam, Wadyel........
Hamathie. cecum oes
Hamis, Wady
Hammath................
Hammeh, el,

Amatha
Hammi, el.
Hammon.
Harod, Well if (Ain Jalud).
Harosheth
Hasbeiyah
Hattin. co eee
Fauranins: a beaten heh
Hauisany..ca.. awe tae
Havilah........-.--00 00
Havoth Jair.........-.--
Hlazar-enan. ...... 6.00664.
Hazeroth
Hazim, shies Ol et 25 scx anes
Hazor. . ae Re


Hazor (Kh. Hazzur). .
Hazzur, Kh., see Hasor,
Hebron.


eh
..12-4D


2-7C; 4-4G; 3, ll


—5G


3, 4, 10, 11I—4H; 8,


10—3G; 2—7C; 9
—3H; 10—2G


.13—1J


11—4C


_.4—2H; 10—-2G


3, 4, 10, 11—8D


..15—5C
.1—5C


13—3B


F _.7—-8B


Great River, see Euphrates


9—6A
4, 10-2D; 9, lI—
2E; 1—4D; 2—4C;
3-1E
6, 7—2B


16—6C


.16—3C


4—3E


1. ADS
..1—6F


Hagar’s Well, see Ain el-


2—4F


.183—4D
Haiyan, Kh., see ee Hai,


. 13—4C
4-35


..138—1K

_.5, 6—3B; 12—9B
"14—-5D

.9—5C and 5D


14—2K
3, 4-—-8E; 11—4C


.4—6D


..8, 4, 10, 11—4C; 10—


8G; 11—1J and 3H


..13—3E


..8, 10, 11—3J; 9—8I


INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE


3534
Hebron, see Kiriath-arba...2—6D; 4—3J; 13—
2L

Pela me? 2. WO ioseiawaeney 9—6B
Helbon ceeeeeee  O-—4E; 10—6A
Heliopolis................9--4E
Helkath..................4—8D
Hellespont...............6—2B
Heraclea.................12—8A
Hermon, Mount.......... 4, 10, 11—5B; 9—4F
Herodium. : 11— 3d
Herodium ebel. Furia

or Frank Mountain)... ..13—3H
Herod’s Gate... .... 16-44
Herod’s Monument........15—2E
Herod’s Palace............15—8D
Herod’s Tombs. ..........16—2E
Heshbon.................3, 4, 10 11—5H; 2—

7C; 94H

Hezekiah, Pool of......... 16—3C
Hezron..................4-—2M
Hibernia.................8—-1A
Hierapolis................12—7C
Hill Country.............11--8K
Hindi, Wady abu......... 13—4F
Hinnom...... ...... 13—3F
Hinnom, Valley oft. ..15—2E and 2F
Hippicus................. 15—3D
Hippos (Susiyeh).......... 14—7E
pe oee eee Ba oe rit, ads 8—1C
Hivites. ..2—6B; 9—4F
Hirmetia see Aamaveth .13—4D


Holy Sepulchre, Church: of


the. .16—3C
Homendes Umm J anil). 14—5G
Hor ?, Mount. .9—-4E
Hor ?, Mount, see Jebel

Nebi Harun............ 2—6F
Hor, Mount, see Jebel Ma-

derah. ..2—6F
TOTO De cht Ss oshertenet Bn ce 2—4J
Hormah a wees e. SIL; 9—BI
Hormah ? (Zephath) .. ee 4—38M
Hot Spring. . : .. 14—6N
Hukkok. 44D
Hukkok (Yakuk).. ......14-4B
Hul. eis ee OU
Hulhel, see » Halhul. ee 13—1K
Husasah, Wady...........183—5L and 4K

I

Ibleam . ... 4—4E; 11—3E
Ibleam or + Biles. ...... 0—3F
Ibleam (Yebla)........... 14—4J
ibn, Kh..................8—-1B
Ibn es Seba...............8-—1B
Iconium.. ... 12—8C
Tjon. . .......4, 10—4B; 9—4F
Tksal, see e Chesulloth. ......14—1G
Tilyricums wet. caer books 8—3C; 12—3A
India nas ..6, 7—7C
Indus River..............6, 7—6C
Ipsus...........-0--..4...7—2B


Irbid, see Arbela..........14—4D

Tron. 3 . 4—-4C

Irpeel ? Gaal) .13—3D

Israel. . : wo... 10—4E

Israel, Mountains ‘of oe re 11—4F

Israelites, Journey of... ....8—5K

Tssachars sida eyed ies 4—4E

Issus ..7—8B; 12—10D

MGA ai sess sty ater nen ces 8—3C

Ttalysic aed oe 12 2B

Tturea...................11--6C

J

Jabbok, see Wady Zerka....11—5G

Jabbok River............ 2—7C; 3—4G; 4—
5G

Jabbuule.. kn se he 14—5K

Jabes, Wady.............. 11—5F

Jabesh-gilead............. 4, 10—5F; 3—4F;
9—4G

Jabneel..................4—2H and 4E; 11—
4C

Jabneel ? aig Loe ae 14—4G

Jabneh. ...10—2H

Jacob’s Well. . ......-11—3G

Jaffa Gate. i ed as

Jahaz?................... 4—5H and 5K; 38—
5d

Jala, Kh., see Giloh........18—1J

Jamnia. . 11I—2H

aOR eA he oa

Janohah . .. 4-44

Janum. Patri, eee —— OU

Janum (Beni Naim) bgt ae 13—2L

Japhia. . cece eee ee ee 4—8E

Jarken, Wady. . veeeeees.. L1—2H

Jarmuk River.............11—5E

Jarmuth.................8—21; 4—8F and 2J;

: 10—3H

Jattir........ .4-3K

DAN AMG ctitircetc Ai Daa een aed ATD

Jazer....... ........8, 4, 11—5H

Jeba, see Geba, Gaba,

Gibeah.. weet... 13—4D
Jeba, see Gibeahe Pe rrared ina 0a
Jebel ’Araif el-Nakah...... 2—4G
Jebel Baten el Hawa, see

Mount of Offense........16—6E
Jebel Duhy............... 14—2H
Jebel el-Megrah. . ...2—5G6
Jebel et Tor, see “Mount

Tabor 2s. S. .14—3G
Jebel et Tor, see “Mount e

Olives.................15, 16—7C
Jebel Fureidis, see Hero-

dium (Frank Mountain) ..13—3H
Jebel Kuruntul........... 13—6D
Jebel Maderah (Mount

TON) 6 istry xcept ia ie 2—6F
Jebel Nebi Harun (Mount

TOR) tes Mat oer 2 OE
Jebel Shihan..............11-—5K


INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE


Jebel Toran..............
Jebia, see Gibeah.......
Jebusit.c. re been fie,
Jebus, see Jerusalem.......


Jebusites. ;
Jedireh, see e Gederah.


Jedur, Kh., see Gedor.. oo


Jefat, Kh, see Jiphthah?


Jotapata. .


Jehoshaphat, "Valley of of. nae
Jehu: ck cad eet


Jeradat, Wady el..........


Jerafeh, Wady el. .


Jeremiah’s Grotto.........
Jerfan, Wady............
Jericho........... 0.0...


Jericho (Eriha)........
Jeruel, Wilderness of......
Jerusalem...............


Jerusalem (El Kuds)... .
Jerusalem (Jebus)......
Jerusalem, see Salem......
Jeshanah .............


Jessarah, Wady..........
Jethlah (Beit Tul)........
Jewish Cemetery.........
Jewish Colony...........
Jewish Quarter.........
Jews’ Wailing Place.......
JOZLCCL Ms Ak ROR scr ds fat


Jezreel (Zerin).........
Jezreel, Valley of Se


Jalud). . .
Jib, el, see Gibena.
Jihar, Wady el .


.13—5H


3, 4, 10, 11-4H; 2—
6C; 93H
13—7D


.10—3J; 13—4K
9, 10,


11-3H; 5,
6—3C; 12—10G

13—3F

43H


.2—6D


10—3G
4—3K


.13—7K
.13—1E
.16—4F and 6D
.16—2E and 3A


16—4D


16—4D
4, 11—3E5;


4—3K;
9—38G; 10 4E
14—1K


..14--3K
..18—38D


.13—3K


Jiphthah ?, Tetepats: (Kh.


Jelat) es ss ae hate
Jisr el Mujamiyeh.........
Jobab sb: oe eas
Jogbehah..............
Jokneam..........------


Joktheel.. 0.0... ....0055
A 0) 0) 0: rr


Jordan River...........--


Jotopata. .


Tibb Wiest Khe.


4—5G


.3, 4, 10—3E


j1—6F


4, 10—2H
3, 4, 10, 2G; 2—


5C; 93H; 12~
10G


.3, 4, 10, 1I—4F; 2—


7B; 3—4C; 4—5B;


9—3H; 12—10G;
14—6A and 6K
...11—8D
..14—5B


5, 7—8C; 6—2C; 8—
5D; 11—3J; 12—
10G


3535
Judah. ... 4-33; 10—2J
Judah, Motttains ae ..3—3I
Judah, Wilderness of....... 9—3I
Jufna, see one pee . .13—3B
Juttah . Pees . 4, 113K
K
Kabu, el. . .183—2G
Kadesh, see on ‘Kade .2—4F
Kadesh ?, see Ain el Weibch .2—6F
Kadish, see Kedesh. .......14—-5F
Kady, Wadyel........... 13—2L
Kala ’at el-‘Akabah .......2—€H
Kala ’at el ‘Arish .........2—4E
Kala ’at en Nakhl........ 2—4H
Kana, Kh., see Cana.......14—-1D
Kanah. . 4, 11—8C
Kanah, Bade: 4-26
Warnalim si: se.cecint atte ies 11—5E
Kaukab el Hawa . 14-55
WKedesh. cysts tpMedakatebe 10, 11—4C; 9—3F
Kedesh (Kadish).......... 14—-5F
Kedesh-naphtali.......... 3, 44C
Kedron, Brook. ........... 10—4H; 11—3J
Kefireh, see Chephirah..... 13—1E
Kefr Ana, see Chephar-ham-
MOD=Al Peso Se ese 13—4B
Kefr Anan............... 14—3B
Kefr et Tor, see pescdne sits 13—4F
Kefr Harib. . ..14—7E
Kefr Kama. .14—3F
Kefr Henna: see Cana “gt
GalileGz acc cave eee 14—2F
Kefr Malik...............18—5A
Kefr Misr................14-8H
Kefr Sabt................14—-8F
Keilah................... 4-23; 11—3J
Kenathencsn 22 ahs oleae 9—5G; 10—7D
Keniset er-Rawat......... 13—3G
Kerak Kir-moab..........11—5L
Kerak, see Tarichaea.. .....14—-6F
Kerazeh, see Chorazin.. ....14—5B
Kerek, Brook............ 11—5L
Werloth.s.4 2. 30eeceeec ins 4—3K, 10—7E
Kersa, see Gergesenes?.....14—7D
Kiblem, Wady el..........8—1A
Kidron, Brook............ 3—4I
Kidron or Cedron, Brook
(Wady en Nar)......... 18—5G
Kidron, Valley of the...... 16—5D
Karte meta aoe eke ts 2—7E
Kiriathaim . . wie ee ee BBL; 4-45
Kiriath-arba (Hebron), pe 2—6D; 4—3I5
Kiriath-jearim . . ....8—81; 4-3H
Kiriath-sephar. . 4—-2K
Kirjath? (Kuryet ot Enab). 13—2E
Kir-moab. . : ..8—4K; 4—4L; 9—
41; 10—5K
Kishon, Brook............8-~8E; 4—3D; ll—
3E
Kithlish. ...........0--65- 4—2J
Kitron. 2.0... ccc eee ee 3, 4--3D


3536


INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE


Kittim...................1-5D; 9-10
Khamaseh, Kh. el.........18—1G

Khan et Tujjar........... 14—3F
Khneizir.................14--7H
Khudr, el................18—2G
Khuli, el, see Hebron, Kir-


jath-arba............... 13—2L
Khurbetha...............3—1B
Khurbet-hellabi........... 3—2A
Khureitun, Kh. el......... 18—4J
Kolt, Wady..............11-4H
aba ei? ene te, con tata 18—2A
Kubeibeh, el... ........... 13—2D


Kuds, el, see Jerusalem... ..13—3F
Kueiziba, Kh., see Chozeba. 183—2K
Kulanieh, see Emmaus?.. . .13—2E
Kulat el Hosn, see Gamala? 14—7E
Kumran, Kh..............18—7F


Kumran, Wady...........18—7F
Kurm Atrad, Kh.......... 13—6F
Kurn Hattin............. 14—4E
Kuryet et Enab, see Kir-

Se Wy gene te ee ere meee ea 13—2E
Kustul .13—2E

L
Lachish................-.8, 4, 10, 11—2J; 9—31
Tahman: <2 d kein eek 4—2J
Laish, see Dan..... ...3—4B; 4—5B
Laodicea wees eee L2—7CE
Tiaseaencs tue oe tha te 12—5E
Lasharon, see Sharon....... 11—2G
Lebanon, Mount.......... 4, 10, 11—4A; 9—4E
Lebonah... eee ccee eee 10, 11—-3G
Lehabimis 4.) 20g. 1—4D
Leontes River............ 4,10, 11—4B; 94E
Tabuahin Vs, cuts tos ueeetedy LI BI o 31
iby aac cae Ske ee 8—4E; 12—5H
Libyan Desert............ 1—4E
Difta tose teu ected ee 18—3E
Little Hermon............ 11—3E
TiOd eu ecgine Aedeit nines 10—2G
Lower Beth-horon......... 4, 10—3H; 13—1C
Loz yiths-elis ce he ee ged 13—1F
Bubieltch2 Peo 2 itt a ees 14—3E
WD IM 4. eon aaa deeus acd Seats 1—4E
Budier ea hs-e che attest ee§ 1—8D and 5D
WGN. % bess bee ea eee 1—8D
TU 2 esac: es are atthe na teens 4—4B
Vy CG A ee cet SS as ROME 12—7D
cn eee ae RC 4, 11—2H
Ty diaieg 5 ete cea nee Hae 6, 7—2B
VGyStrar nce eas ivipl eh tan DS 12—8D
M

Maachah..............-.. 9—6F
Maachathites.............- 4—5C
Maa en. cece gett te set 14—6J
Maarath................. 4—3J
Macedonia ............-.. 7—2B; 8—4C; 12—


IAG EVs [73 Rrra eon eee ere 1—7D

Madher.-:<.-0 soo veoee set 14—4G

Madin, see Madon?....... 14—4D

Madon? (Madin)......... 14—4D

Magdalen. ccccgeecc oud 1i—4D

Magdala (Mejdel)........ 14—4D

Magog ic M.ia! fits phone nes 1—7C
Mahanaim............... 3, 4, 10—5F; 2—7B;

9—4G
Mahometan Quarter....... 16—4B


Makht Abarah, see Beth-


barah, Bethabara?.......14—5K
Makkedah............... 3—21; 4—2H; 11—2J
Maktul, Wady............ 14—4B
Malhah, see Manahath.....183—3F
Malick, Wadyel.......... 13—6C
Malih, Wady el........... 11—4F
Malta, see Melita......... 12—1D
Mamre, Plain of.......... 13—1L
Manahath (Malhah)....... 13—3F
Manasseh...........2..-- 4—3F and 6D
Mansurah, el............. 14—3B
Maen iti a tietite fa han ne 4,10, 11—8K
Marah (Wells of Moses) ...2—2G
Mare Atlanticum.......... 8—1B
Mare Caspium............ 8—6B; 7—4B
Mare Internum........... 8—4D
Mar Elias................ 13—3G
Mareshah................ 10, 11—2J
Mariamne Tower.......... 15—3C
Marrina, Kh., see Meronoth 13—1J
Mar Saba..........2..... 18—5G
Masada tial hehe 11—4K
Mash vi acatteestaan acres 1—6D
Maspha, Mizpah (Neby
Samwil)..............-. 13—2D
Mauritania............... 8—1D
Mazar,el........-....... 14—-2M
Medeba...............4-- 4,11—5J; 3—5I; 9—
4H; 10—5H
Mediavs. 2st iatiekae oat 6, 7—4C; 5—5B
Medineh, Wady..........- 13—4D
Mediterranean Sea, see Great
Senne tate eee ne 4, 10—-2D; 2—4C;
3—1E; 11—2E; 12
—4F
Megiddo..............04. 3, 4, 10, 11—3E; 9—
8G
Mejdel, see Magdala....... 14—4D
Melita (Malta)........... 12—1D
Memphis................. 1—5E; 5—8C; 6—2C
Menaa, Kh..........-.--- 3—1B
Mendah.............--.4- 14—7K
Menka, Wadyel..........138—4J
Merom, Waters of......... 4,10—5C; 2—7A; 3
—4C
Meronoth (Kh. Marrina).. .13—1J -
Meri, cree Re hare ene uieet 7—6B
Mesadiyeh, el ............14--6C
Meshiaten 2 ccese nn San ucts 1—6E
Meshash, Wady........... 13—5J
Meshech................- 1—6C


INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE


Meshed, el, see Gath Heph-


CT ee aie op ivele OMe IN aah, 14—-1F
Mesopotamia............. 5—4B; 8—6D
Messina io: 0) a3) sides beget: 12—2C
Mezeirat el Kibliyeh....... 13—2B
Michmash................ 43H
Michmash (Mukhmas)..... 13—4C
Midditierr dic cace te ctei$ 4—3J
Midian. 3.2. nailer 384 ce 2—61
Midianites............... 3—6J; 9—6G
Migdal-gad............... 4—1J
Mirdoll ict: Pawetetiesy vate 2—1F
Migdol, el................ 4—4C6
Mikyal, Kh. el............ 14—7H
Miletuss:..5 Stiga Shee! 12—6D
Minieh, Kh., see Caper-
NAUM: hs Seba s 14—5C
Miristan................- 16—3C
Mishal!s:s soak toate sndhen 4—3D
Mitylene................. 12—6C
Mizpahi fi. acacia ees a8 4—3H
Mizpeh.........00.000 005 4—5F; 10—3H; 11—
6E

Mizraitas. oso ek hea bakes 1—5E; 2—1G

Moabeeas a vole cath eae 3.4, 10-11 = 5K: 2—
7E; 9-41

Mocotis. se..3 so eoeli eky 6—3A

M6818: 2) Anne tad Sa 8—4C; 12—5A

Mojib, Wady el, or River

ATNON GS: Sy pangre-cies amen 11—5K
Moladah.. o.vi.ec1¢. 0544 4, 10, 11—8L; 9~—3I
Moriah.................- 16—5C
Mosque iscccageng eae? 16—5C
Mount Zion Strect......... 16—3D
Mozah (Kh. Beit Mizza). ..13—2E
Muallak, Wady el......... 13—5K
Mughar, el............... 14—3B
Mujedda, el.............. 14—4N
Mukelik, Wady..........- 13—6F
Mukes, see Gadara........ 14—7H
Mukhmas, see Michmash. . .13—4C
Mukhraba.............--- 14—7K
Mukta el Juss, Wady......13—5K
Muntar, el............--- 13—5G
Muruvssus, Kh. el.......-. 18—5F; 14—4K
Musheirfi, el...........-.- 14—7J
Musurr, Wady..........-- 13—2H
IMT a so Meath eke Meh el net 12—8D
Mysia......0...---0- ee eee 6, 7—2B; 12—6B

N
Naarath ss) 2.20.0. eee 4—4H
Nahalal® <2ot-esa kasd 3—3E
Nahallal?............--.- 4—3E
Nahallal? (Ain Mahil)..... 14—2F
Nahr Jalud, see Valley of

Jesreeli tia ks 14—3K
INAiN en Litcanere eosin see 11—4E
Nain (Nein)...........--- 14—2H
Naphtali........-.--.50-. 4—4C6
Naphtuhim............... 1—4E


Naples. ....--0.0- eee eee 12—1B


3537

Nar, Wady en, see Brook

Kidron or Cedron........ 13—5G
Nasirah, en, see Nazareth...14—-1G
Naurah, en, see Anaharath ? 14—3J
Nazarethy . sersica crt ec aac 11—3E; 12—10F
Nazareth (en Nasirah).....14—-1G
Neapolis « ociescnen ctten.d ck 12—5B
Nebo, Mount............. 3, 4, 10, 11—5H; 2—

7D; 9—4H

Neby Musa.............- 13—7E
Neby Salti.. cctiant? tee 14—I1F
Neby Samwil, see Maspha,

Migpah’s ise ced cic te esarne 13—2D
Negeb, The............... 4—2L
Nelelii 2 ht gee eas 4—3D
Nein, see Nain........... 14—2H
Nekebice nc aiSa tas o inaees 4—4E
New Bazaar.............. 16—2C
New Greek Convent....... 16—3B
Nez noes euyce re aes 4—2J; 11—3J
Nicomedia............... 12—7B
Nicopolis................. 12—4C
Nile, Mouth of the........ 2—-1D
Nile River...............5—8D
INSMPINe esse ecard Saeed 14—3D
Nineveh. .....1—6D; 5—4B
Nobah, see e Kenath . 9—4G
Noricume + S2aeigs.ann Oui 58 -8-3B
Northern Campaign....... 3—4F
Numidia................. 8—2D

oO

Obalocedion tees ee 1—6F
Offense, Mount of (Jebel

Baten el Hawa)......... 16—6E
OMS POGM bse eis. see eters Res 16—4F
Olives, Mount of.........- 13—4F; 11—3H
Olives, Mount of (Jebel et

SUT) evened) baie acetates 15, 16—7C
Omar’s Mosque........... 16—38C
ONO esd eee eet eA 4,10—2G
Ophel?. fuses hse Bee 16—4D
OphinPet ieee ase ee 1—6F; 5—4E
Ophrah. . : 4,10—38G
Ophrah Ephraim ee Tai-

yibeh).. ‘ . .13—5B
Orontes River. PN ae oe eae a 9—4C
Osh el Ghurab (Rock Oreb ?) 13—7C
Oxus River...............6—6B; 7—5B

P

Palmyra, see Tadmor...... 9—6D
Pamphylia............--5 12—8D
Pamphylia, Sea of........- 12—8D
Pannonia.......... eee eee 8—4B
Paphlagonia............-- 6—2B; 7—3B; 12—9A
Paphosviss . ay ctl ee ese 12—9E
Paral d-t ite een Staats 13—5D
Paran, see Desert of Et-Tih. .2—4H
Paran, Wilderness of....... 9—-1L
Parthiaia2.ccigete wees cent 6, 7—5C; 8—6C
PAUAT A af oinse cots dl sedis Bate once 12—7D


3538 INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE
Pathrusim................ 1—5E Raman ne cients os bce 4, 10, 11—3H and 4D
PatM Os. ssct0v Seabee a oes 12—6D Ramah (er Ram).......... 183—3D
Pellaieics ok peiseasna Ganon 11—4F Ramah (Rameh).......... 142A
Pelusium..............005 2—2E Ram Allah..............- 13—38C
Pelusium, Bay of.......... 2—2E Rameh, see Ramah........ 14—2A
Penuel:?., sors. Sete achy ieade hake 4,10, 11—4G Ram, er, see Ramah....... 13—3D
Peraeavies wet Recess wide 11—5H Ramilehiy. jel aks ne 11—2H
Pere are, eensh owiehe Based 12—8D Ramoth-gilead........... 3, 4, 10, 11—5G; 9—
Pergamos................ 12—6C 41
Perigzites.. 02... 000.0000. 2—6C Ramoth-mizpeh........... 4—5E
Persepolis... ............. 6, 7—5C Raphia, see Tell Refah..... 2—4E
Persia’ ciel iy fi ean pees 66) 1-06 Ras Mersid............... 183—6M
Persian Empire........... 6 Ras es Shukf.............18—6M :
Persian Gulf.............. 1—7E; 6~4D Red Sea... .:.... 0... eae 2—5L; 7—3D; 9—3L;
Pessinus.............0005 12—8C 12—9H.
Petrate f25 0) centage eee 2—7F Regnum Antiochi.........12—9D
Pharpar River............ 4,10, 11—6B; 9—4F | Regnum Polemonis........ 12—10B
Phasaelus.............0. 15—2C Rehobwcct Gescns ar Sees 9—5E
Phasis River..............- 6—4B Rehoboth. ............-.. 1—5D; 4—1L
PHONIC Os cao eagate SoG esas Aah 7—3C Reinehy-ers..4-..0 sf 14—1F
Phiala, Lake.............. 11—5C Rephaim, Valley of........ i8—3F
Philadelphia. ............. 12—7C Rephidim................ 2—4J
Philippi? ss 22h .cacacre hace 12—5B TOSCO i OG dee de haa I—6D
Philistia..........0........ 4—lJ Reuben..............0--- 4—4J
Philistim................. 1—5E Rezepns ctaieu air yee Raeea ee 9—7C
Philistines................ 2—5D; 3—2H; 9—2I | Rhaetia.................. 8—3B
Phoenicia.............0.. 9—4E; 11—8C; 12— | Rhegium................. 12—2C

10F Rhodes. cee lead wees ek 12—7E
PhOeHIG i eles Head aaa 12—5E Riblahieccs ca gcvket ee cae 9—5D; 11—5B
Phrygia desig sacheaa peat 6, 7—2B; 12—7C Rimmon..............--- 4—3D and 3H; 10—
Pipes aac otc atannas 1—4E 4D; 11—2K
Pi-hahiroth............... 2—1G Rimmon Dimnah (Rum-
Pilgrim Road to Mecca or MANNED) a. eee 14—1E

Derb el Hajj. .......... 2—4H; 11—6K Riphath ss wick dees: 1—4C

Pillars of Hercules......... 8—1C Roek Oreb ? (Osh el Ghurab) 13—7C
Pirathon 3...2aeedes as been 4—3F Rock Rimmon (Rummon). .13—5B
Pisgah, Mount............ 4—4J Roma (Kh. Rumah)....... 14—1E
PISidlannas act eda naan tes 12—8D Roman Empire....... 1548
Pithomay Seo" dans wise 2—1F Roman Road............. 11—5K
Plain, Sea of the..........3—4I Tome. Soest Sota eo 8—8C; 12—1A
PONtUS he seas awe dee daa 6, 7—8B; 8—5C; 12 | Ruad I... 22... ee 9—4D

—9A Rumah, Kh., see Roma... .14—1E
Pontus Euxinus........... 6, 7—8A; 8—5C Rummaneh, see Rimmon
Pontus Galaticus.......... 12—9B Dimnah................ 14-1E
Protestant School......... 16—3E Rummaneh, Wady........ 14-2E
Propontis Teh A ieee ctig ata 12—7B Rummon, see Rock Rim-
PPC CTI tes sae ate, boas tind acta 5—3B TTL Tiere eta ait in et Ne 13—5B
Ptolemais................12—10F Russian Hospice.......... 16—1A |
Ptolemais (Acco).......... 11—3D Russian Mission.......... 16—1B
Puteolic cc. evs ed 12—1B

S) ;

R Sabeans...............00. 5—3E and 4E
Raamah.................1—7E DAUR asks eS atteccasee Sea certes lose’ 1—6F
Raamses?.............0. 2—1F Sabteca..............000- 1—6G
Rab baliy: xs ents Moe eves 3—5H; 4—2J Get ioe fa em A ee ve 183—1H
Rabbath-ammon.......... 4, 10, 11—5H; 9—4H | Sahel el Ahma, see Bet-
Rabbath-moab, sce Ar..... 11—5K saanim...........ec cee 14-4F
Rabbithen 203 4 ice eheees 4—3F Sahel el Buttauf, see Plain
Rachael’s Tomb........... 13—3G of Asochis.............. 14—2D
Ra-fal, see Irpeel?......... 13—3D Sakhni, Kh. es........... 14—6J
Rakka thin siceacleetetetcts 4—4D Salamis?) cies aes 12—9E
Rakkonie cess: eens tae 4—2G Saléahie cs tx. waartes ote 9—5G


INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE


3539


Salem (Jerusalem)......... 2—6D

Dah. 052 dear ceree neces ee 11—4F

Salmona, Cape............ 12—6E

Salt Sea (Dead Sea)....... 11—4K; 2—7D; 4—
43; 9—81

Samaria. ..............005 6, 7—3C; 10, 11—3F;
8—5D; 9—3H; 12
—10G

Samieh, Wady............18—5A

Samos te ea ees, 12—6D

Samrah eos siti sew, ee os 14—6F

Saphir ..c; cance meg hae oo 11—1J

Sardinia... 06.6.5 cers n 8—3C

Sardis: =< 2c4 as ol sao te 12—7C

Sarepta.... 00.00... ce eee 11—3B

DAVIS sri ee se ei anne eens cree 13—1E

Sarmatia..............-.- 8—5A

SarON a ayd seach Ble Mee 14—4F

Schaib, Wady............. 11—4H

Scythia.............0000- 1—8C; 6—4A; 8—
6B

Scythopolis............... 11—4E; 14—4M

Sea of Galilee, see Lake Ti-

beriae: ses cog cas tasee 11—4D

Sea of the Plain........... 4—4K; 10—4J

Seba nik Oa ene oatacees eee 1—5F; 5—3E

Sechu? (Kh. Suweikeh)... .183—3C

Second Wall.............. 15—3C

Seffurieh, see Sepphoris.....14—1E

Seir, Mount.............- 2—7F; 9—3J

Seiyadel csc i vanecet eee 14—5F

Sela 2a ie. 6 oa eines 9—3I

Seleucia...........-..000. 7—8B and 4C; 12—
9D and 10D

Seli, Wady.............-- 1140

Selwadscccc lend eee 13—4A

Semakh.............-.-4- 14—6G6

Semakh, Wadyes.........14--7D

Sephar?, Mount.......... 1—7F

Sepphoris..............-- 11—3E

Sepphoris (Seffurich)....... 14—1E

Seveneh..............--55 6—2D

Shaalabbin...........---- 4, 10—3H.

Shafals fof si saetieten ee 1383—3E

Shalem. .......----00eeee 11—4F

Shalim once tctecete 2—6C; 4~-38G

Shariat el-Menadrieh, see

River Yarmuk.........- 14—6G

Sharon (Lasharon).......-. 11—2G

Sharon, Plain of.......-..- 3, 4, 10, 11—2F

Shebaeeie.d ei cna da bee tees 1—6E and 6F; 5—
4B and 5C

Shechem........--..--+-- 3, 4, 10, 11-—8G; 2—
6C; 93H

Shehab, Wady esh.......-- 3—2B

Sheleph.....----- eee ee eee 1—6F

Shemesh, En (Ain Haud). . .138—4F

Shemsin, Kh.........----- 14—5G

Shephelah..........---.-- 4—2J

Sherafat..........-.-005- 13—3F

Sherrar, Wady esh........- 14—3H

Shihon (Ain Sha‘in?) ...... 14—2F


Shiloh 3 vescwsass vias bate


.3, 4, 10, 11—4G; 9—


3H
Shimron ..8, 4-35
BHAT 8.6.5 ech ee oes 1—6D
Shittime...c.4.205 ose 11—4H
Shketyit p05. scar heed 14—7C
Shukf, Wady esh.......... 13—6M
Shunem.................. 4, 10, 11—4E; 9—3G
Shunem (Solam).......... 14—2J
Shushan (Susa)........... 5—5C; 6—4C
Shutta, see Beth-shittah ...14—3K
Siair, see Zior............. 13—2K
Sicilian ad ew seers eae ee 8—3C
SiGil yi deg ke a ad a eS 12—1C
Sidon My. eye goles ae 4,10,11—4A; 1—5D;
9—3F; 12—10F
Sidonians................ 4—4B
Sidr, Wady es............ 14—3J
Sikkeh, Wady es..........18—1F
Siklab, Wady............. 146M
Siloam, Poolof........... 15, 16—4F
Siloam, Village of ......... 16—5E
Simeon...............06- 4—2L
Sin, Wilderness of......... 2—35
Sinai, Mount.............2—43
Sinai, Wilderness of........ 2—45
Single Gate.........5..... 15—5D
Sinim ie; Sas ees Ae 1—12D


Sinnabris (Sinn en Nabrah).


14—5F


Sinn en Nabrah, sce Sinna-


Sogdiana........-....-00-
Solam, see Shunem.......


4—2J and 3K; 10—
3d
6, 7—6B


.14—2J


Sorek, Brook ...........-. 11—1J

Southern Campaign....... 3—21

Spain, see Hispania........ 8—iCc

St. Paul’s Bay............12—1D

St. Stephen’s Gate......... 16—5B

Succoth ? is... cee ae eres 4, 10 11—4F; 2—1F
and 7C; 94H

S622 tic nataey ede s 2—2G

Suez, Gulf of....... . 2-27

Sufia guso kaki dee Siewes 3—1A

Sukhoi: oss. Sepals ee 14—1C

Sukiyeh, Wadyes......... 13—4M

Sumrah, Kh. es...........- 13—6G

Surar, Wady............. 13—2F

Susa, see Shushan......... 5—5C; 6—4C

SlsiandycicRee a sree 6, 7—4C

Susiyeh, see Hippos........14—7E

Suweikeh, see Sechu?...... 13—3C

Suweinit, Wady........... 13—5D


3540 INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE
Dy Charice, «i. ccceaercsrae 11—3F Tiberias Rakkath (Tuba-
Syracuse................. 8—3D; 12—2D PLY 8) Sveti A teense anaes 14—5E
DV LLaveeees clone acted teenie eho 6, 7—8C; 5—3B; 8— | Tigris River.............. 5, 6—4C; 8—6D
5D; 12—10E Timnath................. 4, 10, 11—2H; 4—-3G
Syria or Aram... ......... 9—6D Timnath-serah............ 4—3G
Syrian Desert............. 9—6F Tiphsah (Thapsacus)....... 9—7B
Mipsah iis eats shied 2 4—3G; 10—3F
T Tiras 32 52a 1—5C
Taanach................. 3, 4, 10—3E; 9—3G | Tireh,et................. 13—2D
Maanathy 2. c.c5surnsenns 4—4G Mizar aa. cuca ne eee 3, 4, 10, 11—3F; 9—
FAD Ai arin Succ ntyaveeaninesua aces 2—6H 3G
Tabghah, et.............. 14—5C Titus, Wall of Circumvalla-
Tabor, Mount............ 2—6B; 4—4E; 11— TOD 6 reset cecncays train e 15—2D
38E Tob, Land of............. 4—4H
Tabor, Mount (Jebel et Tor) 14—3G Togarmah®. v.00 tenses 1—5D
Tadmor (Palmyra) ........ 9—6D Tombs of the Prophets. .... 16—7D
Tahpanhes............... 2—1E ‘Pophell 3.6 sisectarssndeeh wade 4,11—4M; 2—7E
Taiyibeh, et..............14-—3J CP OTAN i cette cra Bawa ah Sh yis 14—2E
Taiyibeh, et, see Ophrah Tower Psephinus.......... 15—1B
Ephraim ..............- 13—5B Triple Gate............... 15—5D
Tamireh, Wady........... 13—4H Dripolis <2; 2 .t0.0 een es va 9—4D; 12—10E
Tanto. osetia oi cst as 2—21h FETOAS Seated Re cok to 12—6C
Pappuab sf sec mci eh hae 11—4G Tubal saeco se ene & 1—5D
Parentum ccf. scsi cece eho 12—3B Tubania (Ain Tubaun)..... 14—2K
Tarentum Gulf........... 12—3B Tubariya, see Tiberias Rak-
Tarichaea? (Kerak)....... 14—6F Kathe... eee eee ee 14—5E
TESLSESSUS fescue diese aoa 8—1C Tubk Amriyeh............ 13—6G
Parshighicn jie. vucanietiet: 1—2C Tuffah, Wady et.......... 14—8C
TTATSUS: ila overs dass ohana 12—9D Tyre are gece Neh aay SanSeital Gas Ma tiee te Beg Ja si 3, 4, 7, 10, 11—38C;
Taurus Mountains......... 12—9D 9—3F; 12—10F; 8
Pa vilimn ssc usieearea tee Rhee 12—9B —5D
TEKO8: pinged head oye ed 4—3J Tyropoeon Valley... ......15—8B
Tekoa (Kh. Tekua)........ 13—33 U
Tekosh ns ne MSR | CIBER VOE oo ses sss ssssee 6-40
Tekua, Kh., see Tekoa... ..13—3J Ummah. ... Stich RAMU see 4—3C
Teli Asur, see Baal-hazor. ..13—4A Umm daniel; see Ho-
Ahi eee 13—3E monoea?...........000. 14—5G
2 Umm Taba, Kh........... 183—3G
Tell el Wawiyat........... 14—1D U Beth-h 3-9B- 4 3H: 13
Tell es Sultan............. 13—7D ee arta a —1¢ s
ell Cth ai. svete dada ty ene 13—4C .
Pell Hammes Bcciepubeigecsuiateayte 14—6N vee cle: eS Uthe . Het, Peek
pper Conduit............ 16—2C
TellHum...... Sera reee 14—5C Upper Pool of Gihon....... 16—1C
Tell Refah (Raphia)....... 2—455 Titaa see Bian 13-—-3H
,sce Ktam...........
Tell Zaraa................ 14—73 ie he ee oa 1—5E
Temple...............05- 15—5C Waals wake wh ee 1—6F
Temple Area............. 16—5C
Temple Street............ 16—4C Vv
Thapsacus, see Tiphsah..... 9—7B Valley of Kidron....:.....15—5D
ThE ACH oe esas eaten ays 6—2D Virgin’s Fount............ 16—5E
Thebegi h.4 ccc epee eee 4,11—3F
Thessalonica.............. 12—5B WwW
Thad Weal. sje sdennue ee 15—2B Wakkas............0.004. 14—7F
FLUTE C Cae anes Roane cations 7—2B; 12—6A War, Wady el............ 13—4H
EBTAC IAC as ease Se ceeded 8—4C Warmuk River............ 3—5E
Three Taverns..........-.- 12—1A Water Gate.............. 15—5E
MEN atira: sss oei ersten teen 12—7C Welejeh, el............... 13—2G
Tiberlas secs ee oc cae on 11—4D Women’s Tower..........- 15—3A
Tiberias, Lake (Bahr Tu-
bariya)................14-6E Y
Tiberias, Lake (Sea of Gali- Yakuk, see Hukkok....... 14—4B
Wee) nh teene ee eee h eres 5 11—4D Yarmuk River............ 4—5E; 10—5D


INDEX TO THE ATLAS OF THE LANDS OF THE BIBLE 3541


Yarmuk River (Shariat el-


Menadrieh)............. 14—6G
Yebla, see Ibleam......... 14—4J
Webride oie ee .eacn hates 13—4A
Yemma, see Jabneel....... 14—4G
V Gig ib sated So ela 13—2M

Z
Zanoah. 2.2.2.0... 00005, 4—2J
ZaPHON .:Aercias eee ake 4—4E
Zaphon Amatha (el Ham-

INCH sees ttn es seen tenet 14—7G
Zarephath................ 4—3B; 10—3A
Zaretan. 60... cee eee 11—4F
Zarthan Pec siiee seks Res 10—4G
Leda ar esciie Sion steel ete aael 14—7K
Zebulun................0. 4,11—3D
Zephath, see Hormah?..... 4—3M
Zephathah, Wady......... 11—23
DCT: eae, ey tee. webs wit 14—5E


Zerin, see Jezreel.......... 14-1K

Zerka Maan, Wady........ 11—5J

Zerka, Wady, or Jabbok....11—5G

oA (6 Vir s Rea ae eee ae eer er 44D

Bika} i Seki tea aee deca ake 4—2L; 9—3I1
Zin, Wilderness of......... 9—3K

ZAOWN sche onc icin Mundo eae oes 15—4E; 16—3D
Zion Gate... 6.6... cee eee 16—3E

Zion, Mount............. 15—3D

Zior (Siair)... 02... 0.6.6 13—2K

ZIP oir deceit ES eae RRS 4,10, 11—3K
Zoan....... Coal cat Taliep 2—1E

DOAr tis iia cuites sieccintand 11—4L

ZLobah Pai tne aie eenatt 9—4E
Zoheleth............0000- 15—5E

DOVE Sete teed lentes ch eo 4—2H; 10—3H


“IL ‘odeaigg "0g eouereneg-premoH ogy Aq “gt6l BUTtAdoD


€


9 ov S oe v
ar a
YydIMuaey «worl, apnyZwuey


os


zeWayngs :
oun EW
| Wer,
&
a ( [a
JY es
ey Nu
~~


S3TIW BLOLYLS


of


i SER TTT TO" sjyuepuassag sways


“OT “HOD
ov HVON 4O SINVONGOSHC
HHL UNV


QTHOM LNAIONV


NS


aa aes IL oft OL


a3.


3


SINAI
AND
PALESTINE


SHOWING ISRAEL'S JOURNEYS
THROUGH THE DESERT


GR EAT


SE


A


SEA OF
CHINNERE? 9
ss ;


tte


Mouth
y of Nile
"See coli


Bay of


Pelusium


Rake wee Aro


pid we


1 TERRANEAN)


= of
Tell Relah,
(Raphea)*


cGosHEN {
_Suceoth?


; 6
L~w ©
Ke


Pithom ‘ ¢BaalZephon


Whgdot |


Pi-bahirotO


‘Ain el Muweiteh


(Hagar's re


‘Ain el Kuseimeho


W el ‘Ain
°


“Aim el-


OF


nderat © <


Big
éricho


oan


0 Wady el Abiad
= ofl -Aujen
6 El Brreto


Se


Jebel


crak


Hor),


Ayhel Weibch


Kadesh?)”


nv
t Marah
dts of Mares)


oie Cie erg
(Paran)


, 8
Sate


ten Nakbl


OH OMS


Akabah


brant


q Alush?


¢ Rephidim


Nn


$
‘ ae gn 7
as


20 4G
et oor


10 0
Ss <2
BIATUTE MILES


FANS TN My


i


Copyright, 1915, by The Howard- Severance Co., Chicago, th


c


ae Copyright, 1915. by The Howard-Severance Co. Chicago, IU.


$ 36


East


from Greeawsch


Sse > ia q
SS aang
a0e0 rBeit Ur et Tahta


ul


‘{1-HORONE?
Peit Ure! el Foka


gu elt


SUA


fr e feJabesb- au 1


EES URS"


ae
‘3


i Z Ps i oe
St nfl ea
m Letty ay ; »


z Hecsrenst


&
ae ad
yi


pot


ariatbatm


ae (ee.


‘Hormah @ =


At the time of
the Conquest.


,


EXPLANATION


Portiona of Palestine conquered {=~ s)
Portions remaining unconquered (=2Sz)


Canaamte-towns unconquered, underliaed __


Battle-fielda designated by
Canaanite Royal Cities


33


3¢


Damascus


Hamm:


‘ona ek En!


no }=OUmmah


he y
WS Baal-gad
-yehob 2
GESHURITES


A S H\A N


Nahalialg,
‘Shimmron ‘paths thos Haabngs


Sane


MIANASSEH


Ashtafoth ysis
ey a
ir


Golan o HAVOTH JAIR


LAND. OF Tos”
Ee Ramoth,tmzpe
=


Lessa


Ate


pens


af nels


@ Jehud
Timnath o


Bene-berako


f ‘Ono?


c —
teSh-gilead
al


oMahanaim?


Mizpeh


SLEMt. Gllead


Gaal


ie)


Migdal-
Ashke!


_ Egleno


Lachish © g
\Stozkath x ithit


ag


BIE: Noa


90 Gibeal


Mil Ne,


9 eaatabbia
hd VET N


pGibeo


ue
see


ELAH i
\SHEPH An ce
= Canons] U AS ‘oH.
more


‘Janu


o Apel-shittem
oBeth-haran odazer
< o Heshbon


F(t Pisgah
péinoth. baal °


Medeba,


* 9 Aroer.
CH
"On OS@haz?


Sogo
ny Ar-moab


CANAAN


as divided among
THE TWELVE TRIBES


9 5 19 15


70 Hormahs
(Zephai


20


ae =
STATUTE MILES


Longitudy East from Greenwich
36
6 BUCKLEY CHICAGO


Copyright, 1915,


hy The Howard- Severance Co., Chicago, Hl.


ene
EDTA f San”


i
oShyshan
+ (Suse)


BABYLONIAN
EMPIRE


SHEBA


é Sabeans:
Sabeans West . 7
“|. Longitude East from Greenwich


= ir?
Ophir? aes


=


40


Copyright, 1915, by The Howard-Severance Co., Chicago, II!.


POMS


f d a
Si 1 Da
Samarfa 0 f
Ju0AEA Gs
erugalem


wa


Lady
ee
7


a
AS


/


Theba
Seveneh}


ws
>»
wt
cy
7
Co
XS
aa?


PERSIAN
| EMPIRE


Longit ie Est from_ reenwich
5 0, 6


Copyright, 1915, by The Howard-Severance Co., Chicago, Ill.


ordium
5 WE


—~Bo » Selstein


ae


Seleucia
iby,


Se a


GRECIAN


EMPIRE


Longitude East from Greenwich 1


60 6 770


Copyright, 1915, by The Howard-Severance Co., Chicago, Ml,


cr a


MOESIA
ua RACIA


ROMAN


EMPIRE


Longitade, from Greenwich


4) 0


Copyright, 1915, by The Howard. Severance Co., Chicago, wn,


2


a4 mane ; 38° 397
= = SESH
S HH gene =?
ARS a he é>)
~~ * =
A tne ie a ’
oe] a,
3%
ai
H a f
PE oS STEN 2 ;
B of A co Aleppo H fi
36 3
MOT ies
py gonrnr I
sab
iI ac ® Helam? Tiphsab |
Rezeph > I]
c
8 aarti a
KITT me 4 Gebal hy
oh, {
35 " hte, ny
3 i
Arvadl EA Ne
ql Ruad I, a i
2) Aujradnce ™ i {
4 D
| 4
E t 34
i Vv Berathn E
aX
Sidon
' ¢ Wermon BAMASCUS
oi x i im Geanh Nuty oe t i | F
|
hi
l i}
i
33 ||-—— | © at Maachah Ee
Mynagy TM 2g eae, i
Mt.Carmel Hills of Bagnan fl
i > > }
G Kenath ° é & /
Nobuh & $ f G
Cee, ’Saleah
&) Mahanaim ° %
l abesl)-gilead 4
Ww c
ear H
W%
oS Ramoth-giiead
32 s go = N i 32
# © Rabbath-ammon H
shbon i
Nebo 5 4
|
>
fe)
\
i
ty ra
a oa fare .
a7
4
eo ea t
“an Rs
si en wind !
_ilin 3
soit ~
wus ate! * |
I ; THE DOMINIONS l
30 |||. OF a
; K
k DAVID and SOLOMON
i 49 0 20 40 60 i
STATUTE MILES
i
ci L
28 Longitude East from Greenwich cs
——=s ——
3s 1 Seg 2 38 3 364 53% 6 38 7


Copyright, 1915. by The Howard- Severance Co., Chicago, Il,


30


33


30


Bhs


Copyright, 1915, by The Howard- Severance Co., Chicago, TL.


1 a0 2 ae 3
eee of
Zarephath/o
‘Leontggt
i
| fae
i
f
My
: Sin
! ~ Piet So
i & :
So
No
No
h
|
di
i ‘
G
| i ‘
| Hee o7g Sovge See
| Sor THe
Jabneh EkronShaalabt wos
oktheel y
Abhelon o
J
30'
K
Kir-moab |
THE KINGDOMS OF
L
JUDAH anDdISRAEL f>
I
2 § - 1S: 20 25 20 38
STATUTE MILES
M
l _ f Longitude East frém Greenwich
== <= ee
1 2 2 35 3 4 3 5 7 : 5


PALESTINE
IN THE TIMES OF


||. THE NEW TESTAMENT


STATUTE MILES:


&


OCieKareg Philippi
.Phiala 08
Poggi


Achzibfu 7
(Ecdipps jf.”


°
Bethaaida Juha;


GP LAKE ynie§  GHlan
5 z i


IBER.


irbel:

jinne

Mt. Tabor pint’
Tab Ohio, ~.G
aes) Nal


Jaraer


Prscarealy ap


j °
Apotlamaf® — ayclfonm so
fR.av 2
4 fo}
J are Mount Citeod
F A (Lasharoa eat 533 Moun eo
Joppaf> Beharoa ) t , wo ~ 4 famoth gilead
7 abbath ammo!
Lyddao 2’ Jazer 9 if
Ramleh o g


Ekron


uv ° ~~ Emmaus
2th gn (Amwas }?


Eshtaol §


“Gath ERUSA


Ashdod Tirmnath
(Azotus fY Le phar, ERT
° 5 Sh 2: ity:
Hazor oLibnab rf. el
ead Ny,


LEM


H 9.
| Asbketonf salir Gi


" ig
Ealon'ieut Fapolis? ‘


& Mai


ay
7 a


Sore S Tachish
Sf supa &,


a Gass
eS


H
pimasdir® ay i
| wh
f Lae TN i %


20 Ne Air
Beersheba Arad “eet hs, ff ©(Rabbath-moaby S
9 : “COUNTRYS & re)


Aroer, 9


yy
"A
Zoat


Tophel \@
fn


Ze red


o Bozrah


_Longitude East from Greenwich]


5 a6


Copyright, 1915, by The Howard-Severance Co., Chicago, Ill,


ntl
INI Tih
a)


MAIN


“oy
%, My,


"y ",
Minny en,
Hine


o Barium


Tar catum


48rundisium


P Tarentum


Syracuse


MAIAP SHOWING THE


MISSIONARY JOURNEYS OF ST. PAUL


EXPLANATION


PAUL'S FIRST MISSIONARY JOURNEY. A. 0
PAUL'S SECOND MISSIONARY JOURNEY. A. 0


PAUL’S THIRD MISSIONARY JOURNEY. A. O.


PAUL'S VOYAGE TO ROME


ao 80 89 ta 120 stn


45--46
50--54


54--58
60--61


“ayo


G


paseaig pS


CLAUDAS


q ‘\


ee ihe
Apollonia


NE


22


Longitude


5 24


Copzright, 1915, by The Howard-Severance Co., Chicago, II.


\


A

. oP
at ting xs

Mum ple

cals —

p pRUPONTIS

Dex
s } ad)


uP
of


MITYLEN


CHIO


a:
wg g
Aa)


%


9 Dorytaion


a


4 Pern i. iaeariae PAS am te rag fy
aN SEC *OuRND) ea
‘ Pergamos see s
RETA Y S&S  NLov A
LE é Thyatira ¥ a


’
/ Pessinus
°


® Laodicea.


Sect


pr
Pamper


Na
i Alexandria op
{
\
i
i
; EB G x¥ P
t
+ t
ast from Greenwich t


vay


Uuceity CHreaco


10


1 6
Explanation 5 ef, \ T
3000 Feet x 3 ENVIRONS OF


(ssa : (Cs as JERUSALEM


1500


Bible and Ancient Names shown thus Ramah


oO iohenkar aa (ee Modern Names shown thus (er Ram)
(Kefr ana N Ruilroads ~4+++4+-44 floads


Ia ih Yeorua Ne \ SCALE OF MILES


a Eahraim

ye a 2 bh)
[ane zy owen ut
Parr! el


we sat ay


cir Dian


ena i, Hai Aiath f == . Rock Oreb?


| (Bireb,
\ <<
eden?


by (Kh. Sulweikeh ) a oo No
rpoel é ; Job. Kyruntul a Y Telles


\(Osh et Ghygab!


ene OS ’\ Satta
— \ . uN , \ richo|
Ne eae J / 7 NS yiha) |


Mr oO
(ij. Beek aman : 2 ae
‘Beit Izza ‘ y eS, ie =) Natl
‘ Cer Oo (el dib) aS ‘ y ; i
29:70, i (> ci Azmaveth a ay, z |
5 iS ¢


(Jebia ) . t
el Kuberbeh> as li fizmeh }


2020)


~ Hazorof
Sy Ah Aazeur )


ry Sn
Bein Suri odtemeth, Almot
2 pethta ~~ yy { Beit thesa 4
BewtTi 4 1s ae Anathbth


Kirjath? Mozah (Analas
Ao Kuniit et Wea Beit Mized ee


Ct Aisayfijen


LS,
2330
°, S ee
0 Dew as nw (Miof Olives


Khel Muruseus
RUSALEW 2/Bethphage?———_\
(EL[KUDS) 7 Ss Kefret’ er) oEn Shemesh
fi Bethany (Ain Haud)
(Azuriych) (ca


‘


ae. /stifafa .
Eelel Weleich Bar Biiasfo 9 Sir een


—C "
CBether\ SKA. Uri Thole


(Biter), alli [Rachael's
(Ber Tomb


Se

Khel Khamase \ OHausan i
IN

<a 58


el Kinds bet Sahar \, Keniset er-Kawat


“Eta alate Sey
. \Beit Tamir


is
in/Atan


rade) oe,


sj Sek
‘\ 5 Khe Rerean
Wilderness of


Beth-anoth
aay Re ie Ainut ya,


Plain of Mamre


Ras es Shukf},
227,


Copyright, 1915, by The Howard-Severance Co., Chicago, UI. QLERLEY Emu, LHICACO


Explanation
3000 Feet
2900
1500
1000
Sin)
0
71000


ye) Hum
wbphah


SEA OF GALILEE


‘fet Mudauwerah 108 13!


fits
inane W
eo


\ pCana-ol~Galile:
| \Gath Hepher ,7 2<\ ‘ Kefr Kenna)
| (el Meahed) é


fi Khar ot|Tujiar
F O
6 [4


OKefr Kama


W. et Hamam


LAKE OF GENNESARET (6Bergesen


} {
82 (Kérsay


4 °
138 el Hamme


SEA OF CHINNERETH


LAKE OF TIBERIAS
tga Khel Asi


(BAHR TUBARIYA)
3


_ 98
682 feet below the
Mediterranean Sea


1}


ioe Enel
i


N,


havath?


Jezreel p
(Zervn)


iA
Na
i
oy


Biwree


oe 4
Fa 4 c


Kh, el, Miky


(


xe
4 Fait
a
Wtiar ef Mujamiyeh/


i
Nn
| Maad SS


| (A birmadde a iou s : >


SS
CQel Musheirfi
TALE


if \~¢ acon


. 0g Sakhhi
ukhraba


GALILEE


Bible and Ancient Names shown thus Beth-shenn
Modern Names shown thus (Bersan)


Raitroads ++pt+++++4 ‘Roads


SCALE OF MILES
i pa


? 3 4


oHot(Spring


\6 Tou Hania


20! 2


Copyright, 1915, by The Howard-Severance Co., Chicago, Ill.


BUCKLEY ENG.,CHIGAGO


No. 15 and 16


6


x a


Oe LED . ANCIENT


ngs


AHS =
NS JES ee JERUSALEM


ty }) Mil


foun : = TDN

nM \ a
HH i

me S ; | q

< 8 Se rr

: _ “


ify


7.


ulin


\
A ee:
— = A SS A “SEY
Ss z


SS
wr
Ss


NS


of David?
= in
a
oS
—


aw
Re NY


ge


:


Ui}


Abba Or ANS
SNA ay
Palacé,o


Ly
oS: Hy
Mp Se
oe
8


|


ee
LAW y
aii . cat HD 5

/diterG ip Ly
ZION FOES TZ
z NS gs, Ze


S


4


9 ys
Apa a oye


a


a = Uy, > af asi {
SS a :


_ O $ OPH PN
De stain Uppy
eetiguain, “PS
= 2 SB LU
We


JERUSALEM a


The figures denote the height in feet


TL Sill,


above the Mediterranean Sea J


pa Apel


j ra)
Da museus
| Gag


fae
Zee hire!


CNP i so / :
PRE, ‘
LEK Cutie. Wily q o 4
Al Dat
é 3 |
Uf


SMe
A Oe
4


\
ANS
Wy i NY


MAN
Zz NW
mt


a Reve = 2 WS ig Ss ith eo
ae : IN RZ WN


=


IN MIR
ea bivcar thin NC LOO
a
Z ww) HN oS


Copyright, 1915, by The Howard-Severance Co., Chicago, Il. CucRttr, enc,,evieaca


" re
pant Seat


Spurr ease eeereenaea


ae tabes bregbes=


Ric ieferia ae


awe ue tue
media
