The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, Vol. 1
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/the-international-standard-bible-encyclopedia-volume-4_202608>. Public domain.

Sete
oar ©


ee
{ dt
-


in §


i i Me
silo Sega an
ee ce

He soe ts


ice


a
fit ih


a ety ttt pnt at
Rel z
Fa Reta i:

aneatner t)


eet
putt A
ae

eae


vse
cares
ry


oa


f
Ms it Fh 4
Hi i sy hi Het
na i
Uy heat)
a i ett
if it i tt


=
4
i
Z
m4
O
O


UNIVERSITY


LIBRARY


Cornell University Libra


The International standard Bible encyclo


Cornell University


Library


The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.


There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924008045423


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD
BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


THE
INTERNATIONAL STANDARD
BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


JAMES ORR, M.A., D.D., Genera Eprror


JOHN L. NUELSEN, D.D., LL.D.
EDGAR Y. MULLINS, D.D., LL.D.


ASSISTANT EDITORS


MORRIS O. EVANS, D.D., Ps.D., Manacine Eprror


VOLUME I
A—CLEMENCY


- CHICAGO
THE HOWARD-SEVERANCE COMPANY
1915
5


Copyricut, 1915, By
Tue Howarp-Severancs Comp any


All Rights of Translation and
Reproduction Reserved


International Copyright Secured


The Publishers supply this Eneyclopaedia only through
authorized salos-agents. Booksellers cannot cltain it,


Printed by the Lakeside Press
Types cast and set by the University of Chicago Press
Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.


PREFACE


In presenting to the public in completed form the volumes which comprise Tar INTERNATIONAL
Stanparp Bipte Encycioraepra it is fitting that an explanation should be given of the reasons for
the appearance of so comprehensive a work, of its distinctive character and aims, and that some
mention should be made of the principles by which the Publishers and Editors have been guided in
its preparation.

Most readers are aware that the last twenty years have been marked on both sides of the Atlantic
—but in Britain chiefly—by a remarkable productivity in dictionaries and encyclopaedias of the
Bible. Prior to that time the need of a new departure in Bible dictionaries had become acutely felt.
The age was one of transition, of vast and rapid progress in knowledge, and the old aids to the study
of the sacred Book no longer satisfied. The movement then already in process has gone forward
steadily since, with the result that something like a revolution has taken place in our knowledge of
Biblical antiquity and still more in the prevailing methods of approaching and dealing with Biblical
subjects. While thus new needs have been created, the task of those entrusted with the preparation
of new dictionaries and encyclopaedias of the Bible has been rendered increasingly difficult. It is
a byword that things in theology are just now very much in flux. The old landmarks are disappearing
or at least are being considerably shifted. The Bible is passing through the ordeal of a remorseless
and revolutionary criticism, and the singular fact is that conclusions which decades ago would have
been condemned as subversive of all faith in its authority are now naturalized in large sections of the
Church as the last and surest results of scholarship, to question which is well-nigh to put one’s self
beyond the pale of consideration—almost as if one denied the Copernican theory of the universe.

The impulse to meet these new conditions has given rise, as above stated, to the preparation of
numerous Biblical dictionaries and encyclopaedias, the chief of which have already taken their places
as standard works in this department of scholarship. It is in no spirit of rivalry to these existing
works that the present Encyclopaedia is produced. Able and scholarly as these earlier undertakings
are, it is believed that there is room for yet another work of the kind, conceived on distinct lines,
embodying the best scholarship and newest knowledge, yet somewhat less technical in character than
the existing larger works, adapted more directly to the needs of the average pastor and Bible student,
and therefore serving a purpose which the others do not so adequately fulfil, There are other con-
siderations which have had weight in determining upon a production of this new work.

As its title indicates, this Encyclopaedia aims at being ‘‘International.”” On the one hand, it
may be claimed that, because it has been produced on American soil, and in considerable part under
American care, it has been able to draw from a wider area, and to incorporate the fruits of a fuller
and more representative American scholarship, than is possible in any British work; while on the
other hand its connection through its chief editor with the Old World enables it to reap not less the

Vil


viii PREFACE


benefits of some of the best learning of Britain and its Colonies, as well as of the Continent of Europe.
How far this has been accomplished will appear farther on.

The choice of the word Encyclopaedia as the principal one in the title of this work has also been
made with a definite purpose. While very complete in its definition of words and terms as a
dictionary, the larger function of the work planned by its projectors was to group and arrange data
and information after the manner of anencyclopaedia. It will be observed, therefore, that the latter
term more accurately describes the completed work.

An important question in connection with a new reference work of this kind is the attitude to be
assumed by its writers toward matters fundamental to the newer learning, in so far as the latter deals
with the structure, critical treatment, inspiration, and authority of the Bible. Scholarship alone
cannot be the deciding factor here, for the scholarship of different minds leads to widely different
conclusions, determined often by the ultimate presuppositions on which the treatment of a subject is
based. ‘The spirit so widely prevalent in our day which rejects the idea of the supernatural in nature
and history, and the criticism which proceeds on that basis, must reach entirely different results from
those attained by that attitude of mind and heart which reverently accepts a true revelation of God
in the history of Isracl and in Christ. It is the former spirit which eviscerates Christianity of most
of the vital truths which the Church, resting on Scripture, has always regarded as of its essence. With
such a spirit, and with the treatment of Biblical subjects resulting from it, the present Encyclopaedia
disclaims all sympathy. In fact, its general attitude may be described as that of a reasonable con-
servatism. In harmony with most, though not all, recent works of the kind, this Encyclopaedia is
positive and constructive in New Testament criticism and doctrine; on the other hand, while acknowl-
edging the rights of a reverent Old Testament criticism, and welcoming any aids which such criticism
may bring to the better understanding of the sacred Word, it differs from most of these ultra-modern
works either in declining to accept the views of, or in adopting a more cautious attitude toward, the |
advanced Wellhausen school. Notwithstanding, the aim throughout has been to secure fairness of
statement of all subjects on which marked differences of opinion prevail, and in such cases—e.g.,
Baptism, the Eucharist, questions of church government, theories of criticism, etc.—it has been
provided that the divergent views be presented in separate articles, cach article being prepared by a
leading exponent of the view set forth therein.

In harmony with the practical and authoritative character of the Encyclopaedia the greatest
pains have been taken to secure comprehensiveness and completeness in its presentation of all Biblical
matters, and in its fulness of typical Scriptural references on all subjects dealt with. In scope the
work embraces the Old and New Testaments and the Apocrypha, together with all related subjects
of Language, Text, Literature (apocalyptic, apocryphal, sub-apostolic, etc.), Archaeology, historical
and religious environment—whatever, in short, may throw light on the meaning and message of the
sacred Book. The aim has been that nothing great or small conducing to this end shall be omitted.
History of peoples and religions, Ethnology, Geography, Topography, Biography, Arts and Crafts,
Manners and Customs, Family Life, Natural History, Agriculture, War, Shipping, Ritual, Laws,
Sects, Music, and all else pertaining to the outer and inner life of the people of the Bible, and therefore
throwing light upon the meaning of the original writers, are amply and minutely treated. Proper
names are explained and their occurrences in the Bible and Apocrypha noted. Large space has been
devoted to the meanings and uses of the more ordinary, as well as of rarer and obsolete, English words
with special reference to their Hebrew and Greek originals and to the variations of usage in the
Authorized Version and the Revised Versions. Careful attention has been given to the figurative
uses of words in connection with all subjects where such uses occur. This feature alone of the Ency-
clopaedia will render it of special value to ministers, teachers, and the rank and file of students of the
Bible.


PREFACE ix


Such being the general character and design of the Encyclopaedia, its preparation was entrusted
to a staff of Editors and assistants whose scholarly attainments and known sympathy with the objects
to be attained furnished a guarantee that these plans would be effectively carried out in the com-
pleted work. As General and Consulting Editor the Publishers secured the services of the Reverend
Professor James Orr, D.D., of the United Free Church College, Glasgow, Scotland, and with him
were conjoined as Associate Editors the Reverend President Edgar Y. Mullins, D.D., of the Southern
Baptist Theological Seminary, Louisville, Kentucky, and the Reverend Bishop John L. Nuelsen, D.D.,
of the Methodist Episcopal Church, now of Zurich, Switzerland. The duties of Managing Editor
were committed to the Reverend Morris O. Evans, D.D., of Cincinnati, Ohio; on him and his corps of
skilled assistants has fallen the onerous task of seeing the work carried safely through the press. To
the General and Managing Editors fell the preparation of the necessary lists of subjects and their
grouping and classification ; then, in conjunction with the Associate Editors, the assignment of these
to suitable contributors. In this connection special care was exercised to give the work a genuinely
international and representative character, not only by selecting contributors distinguished in their
several departments from both sides of the Atlantic, and from the British Colonies and the Continent,
but by seeing that these were chosen from the various sections of the Christian Church and, moreover,
that in so far as possible the writers should be those altogether qualified to produce the most satis-
factory articles possible on the subjects assigned to them within the space allotted. In all, nearly
two hundred contributors, many of them scholars of the highest rank, have been employed upon this
work during the past six years. Over one hundred of these contributors are residents of the United
States, about sixty of Great Britain and Continental Europe, and the rest, of Canada, Syria, India,
Australia, and other countries. Inspection of the Index of Contributors will show how largely all
Churches in the respective countries are represented in this Encyclopaedia. Anglicans, Baptists,
Congregationalists, Lutherans, Methodists, Presbyterians, with those of still other communions,
diverse in name but united in the faith of the one Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ and laboring in the
interests of His Kingdom, have all willingly lent their aid in the production of this truly ecumenical
work. Valued assistance also has been unstintingly rendered by a number of Jewishauthors. A large
proportion of the writers are scholars engaged in professorial work in leading Universities, Seminaries,
and Colleges—a fact which greatly enhances the responsible and representative character of their
contributions.

It is not possible, and the attempt would be invidious, to particularize the share of the several
writers in a work which is the product of so many scholarly pens. An examination of the Encyclo-
paedia itself will reveal to the most critical eye such a wealth of scholarly articles as has seldom been
made available to those in need of such a work. It will be sufficient to say that it was desired at the
outset by the promoters of this Encyclopaedia that special prominence should be given to Archae-
ology and the most recent findings of Exploration, in their bearings on the Bible, and on the lands and
civilizations with which Biblical history is connected (Egypt, Babylonia, Assyria, Palestine, Hittites,
etc.). How fully this end has been attained is seen in the fact that a large number of the foremost
authorities on Archaeology are contributors to these pages. In this connection deep regret must
be expressed for the severe loss sustained to Biblical knowledge in general and to this Encyclopaedia
through the lamented death, while the work was progressing, of Colonel C. R. Conder, whose acquaint-
ance with Biblical Archaeology and Palestinian Topography, equaled by few and surpassed by none,
made his services of such special value. It is, however, a gratification that, before his decease,
Colonel Conder had completed most of the articles for the Encyclopaedia assigned to him.

Tn the treatment of the wide range of subjects opened up by the Natural History of the Bible,
with kindred subjects relating to the Geology, Mineralogy, Agriculture, Trades and Industries, etc.,
also the Topography of Palestine, this Encyclopaedia is largely indebted to Palestinian contributors


x PREFACE


whose names occupy prominent places in the list. However, the Birds of the Bible are dealt with by
a noted American writer, Mrs. Gene Stratton-Porter, whose stories and bird books have charmed
multitudes of people all around the world. The abundant articles on Eastern customs, food, trades,
marriage, family relationships, etc., are principally the work of American contributors.

Embracing in the two Testaments well-nigh every species of literature, the Bible gives rise, even
in external respects, to a multitude of questions which it is required of an adequate Encyclopaedia
to answer. Such are questions of language, of manuscripts, of text, of internal arrangement, of the
growth of the Canon, of Versions, of vicissitudes of literary history, then of chronology as frame-
work, of diversity of contents, leading up to history and biography; all finally merging in the wider
questions with which criticism proper has to deal. It is the aim of the present work to yield reliable
and satisfactory information on all these important subjects. In several articles, such as ‘‘ Religion in
Ancient Greece,” by Dr. A. Fairbanks, of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts, and ‘‘The
Roman Empire and Christianity,” by Dr. 8. Angus, the aim has been to give the true perspective
and atmosphere to the Bible history. It is of the first importance that the reader should realize the
background and salient features of that history—have a clear conception of the mythological sys-
tems and ancient world-powers with which Christianity had to contend and which it was destined
to supplant. Several illustrations also will be found to serve the same end.

The center of interest in the Bible must ever be the Lord Jesus Christ, to the consideration of
whose life and teaching, as enshrined in the Gospels, and to the significance of whose Person, mission,
and saving work, as further unfolded in the Epistles, large space in this Encyclopaedia is necessarily
devoted. It was with great diffidence, and a deep sense of the responsibility of the task, that the
principal article on Jesus Christ was undertaken by the General Editor. The treatment of the subject
is guided by the conviction that, while critical discussion cannot be ignored, a simple and straight-
forward presentation of the narrative of this transcendent life, in its proper historical and chrono-
logical setting, is itself the best antidote to the vagaries of much current speculation, and the endeavor
is made to give the article throughout a character which will render it informatory and helpful to the
average Biblical student. The same author is responsible for the articles on the Bible and on Criti-
cism. On the latter subject, however, another article from a different standpoint is appended to the
one by the General Editor.

The articles on the greater doctrines and on doctrinal and ethical themes generally, as drawn
from both Old and New Testaments, cover a wide range, and in all of these several departments of
Biblical learning most painstaking effort has been put forth with such results as an examination of the
Encyclopaedia itself cannot fail to reveal.

It is essential to a good encyclopaedia that in addition to its scholarly execution it possess dis-
tinetive outstanding features for the convenience and information of those who consult it. This
Encyclopaedia is particularly characterized by the following features:


J. Fulness. It has been the design of the Editors that every word in the Bible and the Apoc-
rypha having a distinct Scriptural meaning should appear in this work; and also that all the doctrines
of the Bible, the principal terms of Biblical criticism and related subjects of profane history, biog-
raphy, geography, social life of the peoples, and the industries, sciences, literature, etc., should be
included and given proper treatment. A much greater number of words and subjects are defined
and treated in this Encyclopaedia than in any other work of its kind, as will be seen by comparison.


II. Authority. In order that those who use such a work may be assured of its trustworthiness
it is necessary that the subject-matter should be identified with its authors. Therefore every article
in this Encyclopaedia, of sufficient length to be regarded as more than a mere definition or notice,
appears over the signature of its author.: Items of less than one hundred words are not signed, as


PREFACE xi


so many signatures to short and relatively unimportant paragraphs would serve no valuable purpose,
but would give a monotonous appearance to a page. It will be noted that the authors responsible
for all the major subjects were selected and requested to write upon those particular themes because
of their marked ability and recognized authority in the special departments of Biblical learning to
which their articles helong.


III. Accessibility. More frequently than otherwise those who consult an encyclopaedia desire
to obtain information on only one or two points in an article and have neither the time nor inclination
to read it throughout its entire length. To aid such busy readers, therefore, a uniform division of
articles by the employment of headings and subheadings has been adopted. The principal divisions
of articles are indicated by captions in bold-faced italics.
appears a secondary class of numerical headings known as cut-in heads, the text-matter being in-
dented for their insertion. An illustration of these two headings follows: :


Subordinate to this first class of divisions


if. The Ordinance.—The ‘‘seats of doctrine,’
i.e. the Scripture texts which must be employed for
determining every essential part of.

1. Source _ the teaching of Scripture regarding the


. controverted is no reason why a doctrine should
not be established from them. No doctrine of the
Christian religion could be established, if every text
of Scripture had to be withdrawn from the argument,


and Norm second sacrament of the Christian
of the Doc- church, are the words of institution
trine of the recorded in Mt 26 26-28; Mk 14 22-
Eucharist 24; Lk 22 19.20; 1 Cor 11 23-25.

Valuable statements, chiefly concern-
ing the proper use of the sacrament, are found in
1 Cor 10 15 ff; 11 20ff. That these texts are


so soon as it had become controverted. Jn 6 32-
59 does not treat of this ordinance, because (1)
the ordinance must be dated from the night of the
betrayal, which was considerably after the Lord’s
discourse at Capernaum; (2) because this passage
speaks of “eating the flesh,’’ not the body, of the
Son of man, and of drinking ‘“‘his blood,” in such


The cut-in heads are followed by a third class of subject divisions indicated by plain Arabic
The reader will be further aided by
a fourth class of subdivisions composed of the letters of the alphabet arranged in the following
style: (a), (b), (c), ete. Ina few exceptional instances other special methods of subdividing articles
have been provided to suit particular cases. The principal divisions and subdivisions of each leading


numerals enclosed in parentheses as follows: (1), (2), (3).


article appear in tabulated form as an outline or analysis immediately preceding the article itself,
so that one may observe at a mere glance the general method of treatment of any particular subject,
and also the relative place in the article in which any feature is located.


IV. Illustrations. A large number of pictures, maps and charts, particularly adapted to illus-
trating the text, serve the purposes both of instruction and embellishment. While some of the
illustrations are necessarily copied or redrawn from familiar subjects, by far the larger number are
reproductions of recent photographs. Many of these latter were obtained by the Publishers through
their own special representatives who either made the photographs themselves or collected them from
many available sources at great outlay of time and money. The Editors and Publishers are under
special obligation to many authors and interested friends who have procured from others or loaned
from their own private collections many rare pictures which have been used. Among others who
have thus unselfishly aided in the production of this work special mention should be made of the
following persons: the Reverend A. E. Breen, D.D., of Rochester, New York; Professor Albert T.
Clay, of Yale University; Professor A. E. Day, of the Syrian Protestant College, Beirut, Syria;
Professor A. C. Dickie, Manchester, England; the Reverend William Ewing, D.D., Edinburgh,
Scotland; Dr. Arthur Fairbanks, Director of the Museum of Tine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts; the
Reverend M. G. Kyle, LL.D., Professor in Xenia Theological Seminary, Xenia, Ohio; Dr. E. C.
Richardson, Librarian at Princeton University; the Reverend Professor George L. Robinson, of
McCormick Theological Seminary, Chicago; the Reverend Professor G. H. Trever, D.D., of
Gammon School of Theology, Atlanta, Georgia; and Mrs. W. J. Williams, Cincinnati, Ohio.


xil PREFACE


V. Maps. At some places in the text maps are used for illustration. The colored maps, which
comprise an atlas, are grouped at the close of the fifth volume for convenience in reference. They
have been drawn under the immediate supervision of the Reverend Professor George L. Robinson,
of McCormick Theological Seminary, Chicago. The index, which precedes the atlas, renders the
location of all identified places easy.


VI. Cross-References and Indexes. Although the alphabetical arrangement of an encyclo-
paedia enables one using it readily to locate its principal subjects, it is possible to obtain all the infor-
mation concerning any theme only by an acquaintance with all the articles in which that theme
appears. A system of cross-references extensively used throughout this work leads the reader to the
various articles which give information on any given theme or subject. A little overlapping or
repetition has occasionally been allowed to save readers the trouble of referring too frequently from
one article to another. To aid further those who use this work to locate immediately any fact or
particular contained in the Encyclopaedia there are seven indexes as follows: J. Contributors;
II. General Subjects; III. Scripture Texts; IV. Hebrew and Aramaic Words; V. Greek Words;
VI. Illustrations; VII. Index to the Atlas. ,

In the pronunciation of proper names and English words the international character of the
work has not been overlooked. Great care has also been exercised in view of the doubts and diffi-
culties attaching to the derivation of proper names. The American Standard Edition of the Revised
Version of the Bible, copyright 1901 by Thomas Nelson & Sons, New York, by consent of the
owners of the copyright, has been made the standard English text of the Biblical quotations and
references where not otherwise indicated; the writers, however, have enjoyed full liberty in the use
of other versions or in giving their own translations and paraphrases.

The Editors and Publishers have not spared time, painstaking care or expense in their efforts
to produce an Encyclopaedia in every way adequate to the exacting requirements of teachers in
colleges and theological seminaries and Bible schools, clergymen, and all others who desire to be
familiar with the Holy Scriptures and those themes of doctrine, criticism, and scholarship which are
directly related to them.


Am PEFSt


Am Tab
Amurru


anc.
Ant
AOF


Ap Lit
Apoc

Apos Const
app.

A


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS


I. GENERAL
Codex Sinaiticus C
Codex Alexandrinus ¢, cir
 Abhoth, Pirké CAG
according Can
at the place CAp
Ancient Hebrew Tradition cc
American Journal of Semitic Lan- | CE
guages and Literatures ef
American Journal of Theology ch(s)
Akkadian CH
others Chald
Alexandrian CH (St P)
American Palestine Exploration Fund | CI
Statement cIé
Tell el-Amarna Letters CIL
Clay, Amurru, the Home of the | CIS
Northern Semites cod., codd
ancient comm (s)
Josephus, Antiquities CoT
Winckler, Altorientalische  For-
schungen CRT
Apocalyptic Literature
Apocrypha d.
Apostolical Constitutions D
appendix D:
Aquila DB
Arabic DCA
Aramaic DCB
article DCE
American Standard Revised Version
American Revised Version, margin Did
Anglo-Saxon disc.
Assyrian doct.
theoretical or unidentified forms DOG
Altes Testament E
Authorized Version (1611) E,
born E.
Codex Vaticanus EB
Babylonian ed, edd
Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew | Eerd St
and English Lexicon of the OT Egyp
Bezold, Catalogue of the Cuneiform | Eanl
Tablets in the Ko(u)yunjik Collec- | Enc Brit
tion of the British Museum enl.
Biblical ep., epp.
Josephus, Jewish Wars EPC
Book
Robinson, Biblical Researches ERE
Bibliotheca Sacra
Bible Student and Teacher ERV .
G. A. Smith, Book of the Twelve | ERVm
Prophets esp.
Biblical World ET


xiii


Codex Ephraemi

circa, about

Smith, Chaldean Account cf Genesis

Canaanite

Josephus, Against Apion

Covenant Code

Cyclopedia of Education

compare

chapter(s)

Code of Hammurabi

Chaldaic :

Conybeare and Howson, St. Paul

Corpus Inscriptionum

Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum

Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum

Corpus Inscriptionum Semiticarum

codex, codices

commentary, commentaries

Schrader, The Cuneiform Inscrip-
tions and the OT

Craig, Assyrian and Babylonian Re-
ligtous Texts

died, denarius (penny)

Deuteronomist, or Codex Bezae

Later Deuteronomistic editors

Smith, Dictionary of the Bible

Dictionary of Christian Antiquities

Dictionary of Christian Biography

Hastings, Dictionary of Christ and
the Gospels

Didache

discovered,

doctrine

Deutsche Orientalische Gesellschaft

Elohist

Later additions to E

East

Encyclopaedia Biblica

edition, editions

Eerdmans, Studien

Egyptian

Einlettung

Encyclopaedia Britannica (11th ed)

enlarged

epistle, epistles

Wiener, Essays in
Criticism

Hastings, Encyclopaedia of Religion
and Ethics

English Revised Version

English Revised Version, margin

especially

English translation


Pentateuchal


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


XIV
et al. and others JD Jastrow, Dictionary of the Targumim,
EV English Versions of the Bible Talmudim and Midrashic Literature
expl. exploration JDT Jahrbiicher fir deutsche T heologie
Expos The Expositor Jeh Jehovah (Yahweh)
Expos T Expository Times Jerus Jerusalem :
f, ff following (verse, or verses, page, etc) | Jew Enc Jewish Encyclopedia
fem. feminine Jos Josephus
fig. figurative(ly) jour. journal
fl. flourished JPT Jahrbticher fiir protestantische Theo-
Fr. French logie
fr from JQR Jewish Quarterly Review
fr. fragment JRAS Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
ft. foot, feet KAT Schrader, Die Keilinschrifien und
gal(s) gallon(s) das Alte Testament
GAP Buhl, Geographie des alien Paldstina KB Keilinschrifiliche Bibliothek (Schra-~
GAS Smith, Modern Criticism and the der, editor)
Preaching of the OT Kkeré and
GB or Gins- Ginsburg, New Massoretico-Critical Kethibh See art. TEXT of THE OT
burg’s Bible Text of the Hebrew Bible KGF Schrader, Keilinschriften und Ge-
GBA Winckler, Geschichte Babyloniens u. schichtsforschung
Assyriens Kim Kimhi
gen. genitive L, Hl. line, lines
Ger. German lang. language
GGA Géttingische gelehrte Anzeigen Lat Latin
GGN Géttingische gelehrie Nachrichten LB Thomson, The Land and the Book
GJV Schiirer, Geschichte des Jtidischen | LBR Robinson, Later Biblical Researches
Volkes (4th ed) lic. or loc. cit. in the place cited
Gr Greek lect lecture
GVI Stade, Geschichte des Volkes Israel lex. lexicon
H Law of Holiness (Lev 17-26) lit. literature, or literally
HA Hebrdische Archdologie (Benzinger; | LOT Driver, Introduction to the Literature
Nowack) of the OT
HCM Sayce, Higher Criticism and the | LOTB Clay, Light on the OT from Babel
Monuments LTIM Edersheim, Life and Times of Jesus
HDB Hastings, Dictionary of the Bible (five the Messiah
volumes) LXX Septuagint
HDB,1vol Hastings, Dictionary of the Bible (single | m or mg margin
volume) Maim Maimonides
HE Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica masc. masculine
Heb Hebrew Masp Maspero, Dawn of Civilization
Hel Hellenistic MDO-G Winekler, Mitteilungen der Deutschen
Hex Hexateuch Orient-Gesellschaft
HGHL Smith, Historical Geography of the | ME Middle English
Holy Land Midr Midrash
HI Kuenen, History of Israel to the Fall | Mish Mishna
of the Jewish State mod. modern
Hiph. Hiphil MS Moabite Stone
Hithp Hithpael MS(S8) Manuscript(s)
AS The Hibbert Journal T Mas(s)oretic Text. See art. Text or
HJP Schirer, History of the Jewish People THE OT
in the Time of Jesus Christ N. North
Hor Heb Lightfoot, Horae Hebraicae n. note
HPM McCurdy, History, Prophecy and | n.d. no date
the Monuments NHB Tristram, Natural History of the
HPN Gray, Studies in Hebrew Proper Bible
Names NHWB Levy, Neuhebrdisches und chaldé-
ib or ibid same place isches Worterbuch
ICC International Critical Commentary NKZ Neue Kirchliche Zeitschrift
id same person or author no. number
ideo. ideogram N.O. Natural Order
IJG Wellhausen, Israelitische und jidische | NT New Testament
Geschichte obs. obsolete
IL Stevenson, Index-Lexicons to OT and | obv obverse
' oc Transactions of the International
impf. imperfect Congress of Orientalisis
infra below OE Old English
in loc. in the place cited OHL Oxford Hebrew Lexicon; see BDB
inser. inscription OLZ Orientalistische Literatur-Zeitung
intrans intransitive om. omitted
intro(s) introduction (s) Onk Onkelos (Targum)
introd. introductory Onom or OS Eusebius, Onomasticon—Onom Sacr
J Jahwist OP |. Wiener, Origin of the Pentateuch
Jy Later additions to J op. cit. in the work quoted ;
JAOS Journal of the American Oriental | OT Old Testament
Soctety OT (Sept or
JBL Journal of Biblical Literature and LXX Swete, OT in Greek according to Sept


Exegesis


OTIC


Smith, OT in Jewish Church


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA xv


part. or ptep.
pass.

PB

PEP

PEFSt

Pent

Pers

Pesh

PHI


Phili(s)
Phoen
pl., plur.
PN


POT
PRE


pref.
prim.
prob
ps(s)
PS
PSBA


Pseudep
PTR


SBOT
Sch-Herz


SCOT


sec.
Sem

Sept or LXX
ser.


Sin


Priestly Code

Secondary Priestly Writers

Palestine

Proceedings of the American Oriental
Society

paragraph

parallel

participle

passive

Polychrome Bible

Palestine Exploration Fund Memoirs

PEF Quarterly Statement :

Pentateuch

Persian

Peshito, Peshitta

Wellhausen, Prolegomena to the His-
tory of Israel

Philistine(s)

Phoenician

plural

Cheyne, Complete List of the Proper
Names in the OT and NT

Orr, The Problem of the Old Testament

Hauck-Herzog, Realencyklopddie fiir
protestantische T heologie und Kirche

preface

primitive

probably

psalm (s)

Wiener, Pentateuchal Studies

Proceedings of the Society of Biblical
Archaeology

Pseudepigrapha

Princeton Theological Review

quoted by

which see

redactor or editor

root

Revue biblique

See PRE

revised, or reviewed

Schiele-Zscharnack, Religion in
Geschichte und Gegenwart

Roman

Records of the Past

Revue sémitique

Revised Version (English and Amer-
ican)

Revised Version, margin

South

shilling

Samaritan

Miller, Sacred Books of the East

Wiener, Studies in Biblical Law

Sacred Books of the Old Testament

The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclo-
pedia of Religious Knowledge

Wright, Scientific Confirmation of
the OT History

section

Semitic

Septuagint

series

Sinaitic


sing.
SK


sq.
StBD
subst.
S.v.
SWP
Syr


t
Talm
text.


singular

Studien und Kritiken

square, or the following

Standard Buble Dictionary

substantive

under the word

Memoirs of the Survey of Western
Palestine

Syriac

times

Talmud

textual


qe), Targ(s) Targum(s)


LZ
TMH


WH
WZ(KM)


Z
ZA


Zahn NT
ZATW
ZDMG
ZDPV
ZK
ZEW
ZNTW


ZWT


Theologische Literaturzeitung

J. Dahse, Yextkritische Materialen
zur Hexateuchfrage

translation, or translate

translated

translations

Textus Receptus of the NT. See
art. Text oF THE NT

transitive

Tregelles

Theologische Studien und Kritiken

Transactions of the Society of Biblical
Archaeology

Theologisch Tijdschrift

Untersuchungen

as above

versus

Codex Venetus

verse

verses

version, versions

Vulgate (Jerome’s Latin Bible, 390—
405 AD)

vice versa

West

Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians

Western Asiatic Inscriptions

Wellhausen, The Composition of the
Hexateuch

Wright, Grammar of the Arabic Lan-


guage

Westcott and Hort, The New Testa-
ment in Greek

Wiener Zeitschrift fir die Kunde des
Morgenlandes

Zeitschrift

Zeitschrift fiir Assyriologie und ver-
wandte Gebiete

Zahn, Introduction to the New Tes-
tament

Zeitschrift fiir alitestamentliche Wis-
senschaft

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgen-
ldndischen Gesellschaft

Zeitschrift des Deutschen Paldstina-
Vereins

Zeitschrift fiir Keilschriftforschung

Zeitschrift fiir kirchliche Wissenschoft

Zeitschrift fiir neutestamentliche Wis-
senschaft

Zeitschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Theo-
logie


xvi THE INTERNATIONAL LON DARD oe ees


II. BOOKS OF THE BIBLE
OLD TESTAMENT


Gen _—_ Genesis 2K 2 Kings Cant Canticles, or Am Amos
Ex Exodus 1Ch 1 Chronicles | Soug of Solo- Ob Obadiah
Lev _ Leviticus 2Ch 2 Chronicles mon Jon Jonah
Nu Numbers Ear Ezra Isa Isaiah Mic Micah
Dt Deuteronomy Neh Nehemiah Jer Jeremiah Nah Nahum
Josh = Joshua Est Esther Lam Lamentations -Hab Habakkuk
Jgs Judges Job Ezk Ezekiel : Zeph Zephaniah
Ruth Ps Psalms Dnil Daniel Hag Haggai
18 1 Samuel Prov Proverbs Hos Hosea Zee Zechariah
28 2 Samuel Eccl _—_ Ecclesiastes Joel Mal Malachi
1K 1 Kings
APOCRYPHA
1 Esd_ 1 Esdras Wisd Wisdom ofSolo- ' Ep Jer Epistle of Bel Bel and the
2Esd 2 Esdras mon Jeremy Dragon
Tob Tobit Sir, or Sirach, or Ec-| Three Song of the PrManPrayer of Ma-
Jth Judith Ecelus clesiasticus Three Holy nasses
Ad Est Additions to Es- Children 1 Macc 1 Maccabees
ther, or Rest Bar Baruch Sus Susanna ? 2 Macc 2 Maccabees
of Esther
NEW TESTAMENT
Mt Matthew 2Cor 2Corinthians | 1Tim 1 Timothy 2Pet 2 Peter
Mk Mark Gal Galatians 2 Tim 2 Timothy 1 Jn 1 John
Lk Luke Eph Ephesians Tit Titus 2Jn 2John
Jn John Phil Philippians Philem Philemon 3 Jn 3 John
Acts Col Colossians He Hebrews Jude
Rom Romans 1 Thess 1 Thessalonians | Jas James Rev Revelation


1 Cor 1 Corinthians 2 Thess 2 Thessalonians | 1 Pet 1 Peter


III. PSEUDEPIGRAPHA


Apoc Bar Apocalypse of Baruch, Syriac (2 | En (Slav) Enoch, Slavonic Book of (Book of


Baruch in Charles) the Secrets of Enoch, 2 Enoch in
Apoc Bar Apocalypse of Baruch, Greek (3 Charles)
(Gr) Baruch in Charles) Jub or Bk
Ase Isa Ascension of Isaiah Jub Jubilees, Book of
Asm M Assumption of Moses Ps Sol Psalms of Solomon
En Enoch, Ethiopic Book of (1 Enoch in | Sib Or Sibylline Oracles
Charles, Apoc and Pseudep) XII P : Testament(s) of the Twelve Pairiachs


See also arts. ApocaLyrtic Livrerarurr; ApocRYPBA.


> Nour .—In the references to the Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, no uniform attempt at completeness has
een made


KEY TO ENGLISH PRONUNCIATION


a as in fate a) as in old

i ceo is far 6 {ee orb
4 ces fare Oo oe not
a ee be fat 6 vas obey
a “ fall ol oe oil

4 * “ senate oO Te eee
ch  «" church ara “ « book
dé “© verdure ou HAE Sania
é “me sh oc ship
é «© event th thing
€ “ met th “ot Wig
é Pee to © culture
g "G0 a arene

I  « toe a 66 an
i cae pin u tee but
u “ * man ti HOE seve
n (ng sound) ‘' “ single y «© yet
fi “ “© cayion (kan’yun)


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA xvii


SCHEME OF HEBREW TRANSLITERATION


CONSONANTS (ENGLISH VALUES)
& ’ (soundless) ’aleph ™ bh (guttural h) héth.


Bp pe
ab béth U t (intense t) lath © %) ph (=f)
=a bh (=v) Magy. yodh = V ¢ (almost ts) cadhé
1g gimel 5 7 k kaph P k (intense k)  aph
3 gh (aspirated g) 5 a kh (= Ger. ch) Ser résh
Id daleth biel lamedh Ds sin
“dh (=th in the) Om mem 0 sh shin
mh he afraen nian rit law
‘ w (or v) waw (var) cs samekh DM th (as in thing)
7 2 zayin Y ‘(apeculiar guttural) ‘ayin


VOWELS (CONTINENTAL VALUES)


LONG SHORT VERY SHORT

as ht © sh
EO - Ses mo i a 2 00N mt oTh 7 (furtive)
a @ 1 6 wt aeiiooiou @ i6hy Br Ok 8


Nore.—In particular cases, where a distinction should be made between a naturally long and
a tone-long vowel, the signs 4 and — are used, respectively. In other cases the macron (-) is used
to indicate “full” writing (i.e. with 4 or °) rather than the actual quantity, of which such writing
is ordinarily a sign. In some instances 1 represents ">, whether the * is consonantal or vocal in
origin. Where shewa’ (:) is not sounded it is not represented. Where the vowel is not marked, it
is understood to be short.

To represent the definite article ha- (or ha-) is used without indicating the doubling of the
following consonant where this occurs. In other instances where it is necessary to separate a prefix
from a stem a hyphen is employed. See also art. ALPHABET.


PRONUNCIATION OF HEBREW NAMES IN THE ENGLISH BIBLE


General rule—Usage in the pronunciation of Hebrew names in English has developed after the
analogy of Greek and Latin proper names, without any regard for the pronunciation of the Hebrew
originals, either as represented in the Masoretic Text or as theoretically reconstructed.

Spelling. —The spelling of these names, especially of the best known, deviates widely from any
system of uniform transliteration that can be devised. Its evolution must be traced through the
attrition of the Greek and Latin endings in the Vulgate forms, based in turn on the Septuagint
versions. Thus “Solomon” and ‘‘Moses” have retained Greek endings that have no counterpart
in the Hebrew sh¢lomah and mésheh; “Gomorrah” and “Gaza” have an initial vowel that represents
the closest approximation that the Greek alphabet furnished for the peculiar guttural », elsewhere
represented by a rough breathing or h (as in “Hebrew,” “Hai”). The second r in “Gomorrah” is
likewise due to the Greek spelling £4 and not to the Hebrew ". The loss of an A in Aaron (ahdrén)
and of A in Isaac (yichak) must be explained in the same way. The first vowel in each of the words
“Solomon,” “Samuel,” “Sodom,” “Gomorrah,” ‘‘Pharisee,” “Debir,”’ and similar words, takes the
place of a practically soundless shewa’, which had no exact equivalent in Greek. In form, then, the
Hebrew names in the Bible are to all intents and purposes Greek.

Accentuation.—The accentuation, however, is based on the Latin scheme, never on the Hebrew
or Greek. That is to say: the last syllable is never accented; the second last is, if long, or if the
word has only two syllables; the third from the end is accented in all other cases. Thus in each of the
following names the accent differs from that of the Hebrew: Deb’o-rah (debharah’); Ab’i-dan or
A-bi’dan (abhidhan’) ; Dan’iel (danv’él’) ; Sol’o-mon (sh¢lémah’) ; Sod’om (s*dhom) ; Sam’u-el (shemi’él’) ;
Ke’naz (kenaz); A-bed’ne-go (‘dbhédh-negha’); Che’mosh (kemash); De’bir (debhir). It will be
noticed that in many of these words the syllable accented in English is not a syllable at all in Hebrew,
but a part of a syllable in which there is no vowel but a mere breath.


xviii THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Vowels.—In determining the length of a vowel, etymology must be ignored and position in a
word considered. Thus, in general, a vowel that closes a syllable is long, whereas one followed by
a consonant in the same syllable is short. English models seem to be followed in this matter and
the concepts “long” and “short” carry with them the qualitative changes customary in English.
Thus short @ is pronounced as in ‘‘cat,” and not as a merely less drawn-out a. Authorities differ on
the pronunciation of ai in Scriptural names (e.g. ‘‘Sinai”); thus the Imperial Dictionary prefers 4,
Webster and others 7. 7-final is always long (as in Cozbi, Cushi, Malachi, and Zimri).

Consonants.—Each of the consonants, excepting c, s, and #, has but a single sound, its ordinary
English sound. g is always hard, as in “go,” excepting in the word “Bethphage,” which has been
more thoroughly Graecized than Old Testament words. th is pronounced as in “thin”; ch as k,
excepting in the name “Rachel,” where it has the sound heard in the word “church”; ph is sounded
f. c, s, and ¢ are governed by the English rules. ¢ is always hard (sounded as k) except before e,
t, and y. Thus ‘‘Cinneroth” has the soft sound (s).  s as an initial vowel of a word or syllable is
sounded as in the word “sit.” Between two vowels or at the end of a word after e, 1, m, n, or r it is
pronounced as z (e.g. “Moses” [pronounced “mozez”], “Solomon,” “Israel” [s soft, but oftenest
given as z, “Isaac” [s as z]). The tendency to pronounce si and ¢7 in obscure positions as sh is recog-
nized by some, but this combination is not common in Biblical names. The pronunciation of ¢ before
th, as in “Matthew, ” is by some authorities disposed of by assimilating the ¢ to the th.

Conclusion.—Though Hebrew scholars have recently displayed a tendency to permit the pro-
nunciation of the Hebrew according to the Masora to influence that of Bible names in English by
giving preference to forms that show the greatest resemblance to the Hebrew (as in the name ‘‘ Beza-
leel,”” Hebrew b¢cal’él, pronounced in English “bé-z4l/é-8l” or “béz’a-lél,” former preferred), we must
bear in mind that though these names are derived from the Hebrew they are spelled as if derived from
Latin or Greek, accented as if Latin, and pronounced so far as separate letters are concerned as if
native English words.


GREEK PRONUNCIATION


Form Name Transliteration Eng. Pronunciation Phonetic Value
A oa ddrga alpha alfa ain “far,” “man”
B B Biira beta ba’ta b
r ¥ yaya. gamma gam'a g in “go”
A é bAra delta det’ ta d
E oe 2 Widdy epsilon ep’ si-lon éin “set”
Z ¢ tira zeta 2a’ta dzin “adze”
H 7 ira eta a ta a (German) or ein “prey”
e 6 Ora theta tha'ta thi in ‘thin”
I t lara iota : é-6' ta Zin “pique,” “pin”
K «x Kwa kappa kap'a k
A nN Adupsa lambda tam'da t
bee po mu moo; mii m
N y vb nu noo; nit n
iol gE ez xi ksé; 2% ks
(6) ° 3 pexpdr omicron om't-kron 6in ae sbay®
lo og we pi pe p
P p pa rho ré T
= os olypa sigma sig’ma sin “see”
T T Tad tau tou tin “ten”
T ov B pordy upsilon ap’ si-lon u (French and Welsh) or German v
6’ ¢ gt phi fé ph=
x x xt chi khé (kh =Ger ch) ch (German and Welsh)
vv y yi psi psé ps
Qo wo & péya omega 6’me-ga 6 in “so”


a, 4, and v are sometimes long, sometimes short.


The diphthongs are:


ae as in “aisle”’

et as in ‘‘eight”’

ot as in “toil”

av as ow in “out”

ev and yv as € or ay, hence roughly speaking =u or di (no exact equivalents in English)
ov asin ‘ ‘group’


ut as in “quit”


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA xix


and the following so-called improper diphthongs a, Gi, y, &, w, 61. The second vowel is called “iota
subscript,” and is not sounded in pronouncing these forms, which equal 4, 2, and 6, respectively.

Consonants.—The consonants are in general equal to their English equivalents, except that a
single y, g, is always hard; £, z, is a dz-sound as in “adze,” rather than the simple z as in “‘zeal”;
6, th, is always the surd aspirate as in “thin,” never pronounced like the th of “this”; o, s,s, is always
a sibilant as in “so,” never the z-sound as in “ease”; y,ch,is a strong palatal aspirate like ch of Ger-
man “Ich,” “Buch,” or the Welsh “eich,” “uwch,” etc. A special note must be made of y, g,
preceding a palatal (x, k, y, 9, x, ch), as in this case the first g is nasalized, e.g. dyyedos, dggelos, is pro-
nounced “‘aZgelos’’ (“‘an’ge-los”). It might be noted further that an initial p, r, is always aspirated.

Transhiteration.—In this Encyclopaedia it has been the practice to transliterate letter for letter:
a=a, B=5, etc; even the gamma nasal has been so transliterated instead of using an 2 or § character.
Further, the long forms of a, 7, and u have not been indicated, and a, n, , have been transliterated as
a, , 6, respectively, since the “iota subscript”? was not pronounced in sounding the diphthongs (e.g.
aipéw, hairéé, but airia, aitia). Only the rough and not the smooth vowels are indicated.

Accentuation.—The Greek has three accents: (1) the acute (’), as in Oeds, theds=a rising pitch
in the voice; (2) the grave (‘), as in rév Gedy, ton theén =a falling pitch in the voice; (3) the circumflex
(*), as in rod Ged, tox theoi=a, rising and falling pitch in the voice. The grave occurs only on the
last syllable and is merely a way of indicating that other words follow (in the same clause or sentence)
a word which has an acute accent on the final syllable, e.g. 7d, #6 (‘the’), but when followed by
another word, 76 épyov, t6 érgon (“the work”). The Greek accent was originally a musical or pitch
accent rather than a stress accent as in English, and the acute, grave, and circumflex accents were
doubtless differentiated. In indicating the accents in this Encyclopaedia, however, the stress alone
is considered, and all accents are so indicated, whether acute, grave, or circumflex; e.g. 76 épyov rod
is transliterated t6 érgon poid and not td érgon poid.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD
BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


A.—See ALEPH; ALPHABET.
AALAR, a’a-lar. See ALuar.


AARON, 4r’un, sometimes pronounced ar’on
(FIWIN, ’ahdron—LXX 'Aapdv, Aarén, meaning
uncertain: Gesenius suggests ‘‘mountaineer’’;
Fiirst, “enlightened’’; others give “‘rich,” “fiuent.?
Cheyne mentions Redslob’s “ingenious conjecture’
of ha~’dron—“‘the ark”—with its mythical, priestly
significance, HB s.v.): Probably eldest son of
Amram (Ex 6 20), and according to the uniform

genealogical lists (Ex 6 16-20; 1 Ch
1. Family 6 1-3), the fourth from Levi. This

however is not certainly fixed, since
there are frequent omissions from the Heb lists of
names which are not prominent in the line of de-
scent. For the corresponding period from Levi to
Aaron the Judah list has six names (Ruth 4 18-20;
1 Ch 2). Levi and his family were zealous, even
to violence (Gen 34 25; Ex 32 26), for the national
honor and religion, and Aaron no doubt inherited
his full portion of this spirit. His mother’s name
was Jochebed, who was also of the Levitical family
(Ex 6 20). Miriam, his sister, was several years
older, since she was set to watch the novel cradle
of the infant brother Moses, at whose birth Aaron
was three years old (Ex 7 7).

When Moses fied from Egypt, Aaron remained

to share the hardships of his people, and possibly

to render them some service; for we
2. Becomes are told that Moses intreated of God
Moses’ his brother’s coéperation in his mis-
Assistant sion to Pharaoh and to Israel, and

that Aaron went out to meet his
returning brother, as the time of deliverance drew
near (Ex 4 27). While Moses, whose great gifts
lay along other lines, was slow of speech (Ex 4 10),
Aaron was a ready spokesman, and became his
brother's representative, being called his “mouth”
(Ex 416) and his “prophet” (Ex 71). After
their meeting in the wilderness the two brothers
returned together to Egypt on the hazardous mis-
sion to which Jehovah had called them (Ex 4
27-31). At first they appealed to their own nation,
recalling the ancient promises and declaring the
imminent deliverance, Aaron being the spokesman.
But the heart of the people, hopeless by reason of
the hard bondage and heavy with the care of
material things, did not incline to them. The two
brothers then forced the issue by appealing directly
to Pharaoh himself, Aaron still speaking for his
brother (Ex 6 10-13). _ He also performed, at
Moses’ direction, the miracles which confounded
Pharaoh and his magicians. With Hur, he held up
Moses’ hands, in order that the ‘rod of God might
be lifted up,’ during the fight with Amalek (Ex


17 10.12).


A


_Aaron next comes into prominence when at
Sinai he is one of the elders and representatives of
his tribe to approach nearer to the
3. An Elder Mount than the people in general
5 were allowed to do, and to see the
manifested glory of God (Ex 24 1.9.10). A few
days later, when Moses, attended by his “‘minister’’
Joshua, went up into the mountain, Aaron exer-
cised some kind of headship over the people in his
absence. Despairing of seeing again their leader,
who had disappeared into the mystery of commun-
ion with the invisible God, they appealed to Aaron
to prepare them more tangible gods, and to lead them
back to Egypt (Ex 32). Aaron never appears as
the strong, heroic character which his brother was;
and here at Sinai he revealed his weaker nature,
yielding to the demands of the people and per-
mitting the making of the golden bullock. That
he must however have yielded reluctantly, is evi-
dent from the ready zeal of his tribesmen, whose
leader he was, to stay and to avenge the apostasy
by rushing to arms and falling mightily upon the
idolaters at the call of Moses (Ex 32 26-28).
In connection with the planning and _ erection
of the tabernacle (‘the Tent’’), Aaron and his sons
being chosen for the official priest-
4. High hood, elaborate and symbolical vest-
Priest ments were prepared for them (Ex 28);
: and after the erection and dedication
of the tabernacle, he and his sons were formally
inducted into the sacred office (Lev 8). It appears
that Aaron alone was anointed with the holy oil
(Lev 8 12), but his sons were included with him
in the duty of caring for sacrificial rites and things.
They served in receiving and presenting the vari-
ous offerings, and could enter and serve in the first
chamber of the tabernacle; but Aaron alone, the
high priest, the Mediator of the Old Covenant,
could enter into the Holy of Holies, and that only
once a year, on the great Day of Atonement
(Lev 16°12-14).
After the departure of Israel from Sinai, Aaron
joined his sister Miriam in a protest against the
authority of Moses (Nu 12), which


5. Rebels they asserted to be_ self-assumed.
Against For this rebellion Miriam was smit-
‘| Moses ten with leprosy, but was made whole


again, when, at the pleading of Aaron,
Moses interceded with God for her. The sacred
office of Aaron, requiring physical, moral and cere-
monial cleanness of the strictest order, seems to
have made him immune from this form of punish-
ment. Somewhat later (Nu 16) he himself, along
with Moses, became the object of a revolt of his
own tribe in conspiracy with leaders of Dan and
Reuben. This rebellion was subdued and the
authority of Moses and Aaron vindicated by the


Aaronites
Abase


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


2


miraculous overthrow of the rebels. As they were
being destroyed by the plague, Aaron, at Moses’
command, rushed into their midst with the lighted
censer, and the destruction was stayed. The Divine
will in choosing Aaron and his family to the
priesthood was then fully attested by the mirac-
ulous budding of his rod, when, together with
rods representing the other tribes, it was placed
and left overnight in the sanctuary (Nu 17). See
Aaron’s Ron.

After this event Aaron does not come prominently
into view until the time of his death, near the close
of the Wilderness period. Because of the impa-
tience, or unbelief, of Moses and Aaron at Meri-
bah (Nu 20 12), the two brothers are prohibited
from entering Canaan; and shortly after the last
camp at Kadesh was broken, as the people jour-
neyed eastward to the plains of Moab, Aaron died
on Mount Hor. In three passages this event is
recorded: the more detailed account in Nu 20, a
second incidental record in the list of stations of
the wanderings in the wilderness (Nu 33 38.39),
and a third casual reference (Dt 10 6) in an address
of Moses. These are not in the least contradictory
or inharmonious. The dramatic scene is fully pre-
sented in Nu-20: Moses, Aaron and Eleazar go up
to Mount Hor in the people’s sight; Aaron is
divested of his robes of office, which are formally

put upon his eldest living son; Aaron
6. Further dies before the Lord in the Mount
History at the age of 123, and is given burial

by his two mourning relatives, who
then return to the camp without the firstand great
high priest; when the people understand that he is
no more, they show both grief and love by thirty
days of mourning. The passage in Nu 33 records
the event of his death just after the list of stations
in the general vicinity of Mount Hor; while Moses
in Dt 10 states from which of these stations, viz.
Moserah, that remarkable funeral procession made
its way to Mount Hor. In the records we find,
not contradiction and perplexity, but simplicity and
unity. It is not within the view of this article to
present modern displacements and rearrangements
of the Aaronic history; it is concerned with the
records as they are, and as they contain the faith
of the OT writers in the origin in Aaron of their
priestly order.

Aaron married Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab,
and sister of Nahshon, prince of the tribe of Judah,

who bore him four sons: Nadab, Abihu,
7. Priestly Eleazar and Ithamar. The sacrilegious
Succession act and consequent judicial death

of Nadab and Abihu are recorded in
Lev 10. Eleazar and Ithamar were more pious and
reverent; and from them descended the long line
of priests to whom was committed the ceremonial
law of Israel, the succession changing from one
branch to the other with certain crises in the
nation. At his death Aaron was succeeded by his
oldest living son, Eleazar (Nu 20 28; Dt 10 6).

: Epwarp Mack

AARONITES, 4r’on-its (JT7N9, Ieahdron, lit.
“belonging to Aaron’’): A word used in AV, but
not in the revised versions, to translate the proper
name Aaron in two instances where it denotes a
family and not merely a person (1 Ch 12 27; 27
17). It is equivalent to the phrases ‘‘sons of
Aaron,” “house of Aaron,” frequently used in the
OT. According to the books of Josh and Ch the
“sons of Aaron’ were distinguished from the other
Levites from the time of Joshua (e.g. Josh 21
4.10.13; 1Ch 6 54).


AARON’S ROD (Nu 17 and He 9 4): Immedi-
ately after the incidents connected with the rebellion
of Korah, Dathan and Abiram against the leader-


ship of Moses and the priestly primacy of Aaron
(Nu 16), it became necessary to indicate and
emphasize the Divine appointment of Aaron.
Therefore, at the command of Jehovah, Moses
directs that twelve almond rods, one for each tribe
with the prince’s name engraved thereon, be placed
within the Tent of the.Testimony. When Moses
entered the tent the following day, he found that
Aaron’s rod had budded, blossomed and borne
fruit, “‘the three stages of vegetable life being thus
simultaneously visible.’ When the miraculous
sign was seen by the people, they accepted it as
final; nor was there ever again any question of
Aaron’s priestly right. The rod was kept ‘‘before
the testimony”. in the sanctuary ever after as a
token of the Divine will (17 10). The writer of
He, probably following a later Jewish tradition,
mentions the rod as kept in the Holy of Holies
within the ark (He 9 4; cf 1 K 8 9). See Priust,
III. Evwarp Mack


AB (RN or AN, ’abh or ’abh, the Heb and Aram.
word for “father’): It is a very common word in
the OT; this art. notes only certain uses of it. It
is used both in the singular and in the plural to
denote a grandfather or more remote ancestors
(e.g. Jer 35 16.15). The father of a people or
tribe is its founder, not, as is frequently assumed,
its progenitor. In this sense Abraham is father
to the Israelites (see, for example, Gen 17 11—14.27),
Isaac and Jacob and the heads of families being
fathers in the same modified sense. The cases
of Ishmael, Moab, etc, are similar. The tradi-
tional originator of a craft is the father of those
who practise the craft (e.g. Gen 4 20.21.22).
Sennacherib uses the term ‘my fathers’’ of his
predecessors on the throne of Assyria, though these
were not his ancestors (2 K 19 12). The term is
used to express worth and_ affection irrespective
of bldod relation (e.g. 2 K 18 14). A ruler or
leader is spoken of as a father. God is father. A
frequent use of the word is that in the composition
of proper names, e.g. Abinadab, ‘my father is
noble.” See Asi.

The Aram. word in its definite form is used three
times in the NT (Mk 14 36; Rom 8 15; Gal
4 6), the phrase being in each case “Abba, Father,”
addressed to God. In this phrase the word ‘‘Father”
is added, apparently, not as a mere tr, nor to indi-
cate that Abba is thought of as a proper name of
Deity, but as a term of pleading and of endear-
ment. See also ABBA. Wiis J. BeecuEer


AB (38, ’abh): The name of the fifth month
in the Heb calendar, the month beginning in our
July. The name does not appear in the Bible, but
Jos gives it to the month in which Aaron died
(Ant, IV, iv, 6; cf Nu 88 38).


ABACUC, ab’a-kuk (Lat Abacuc): The form given
the name of the prophet Habakkuk in 2 Esd 1 40.


ABADDON, a-bad’on (A7AN , dbhaddin, “ruin,”
“perdition,” “destruction”): Though “destruction”
is commonly used in translating ’abhaddén, the stem


| idea is intransitive rather than passive—the idea of


perishing, going to ruin, being in a ruined state,
rather than that of being ruined, being destroyed.
The word occurs six times in the OT, always
as a place name in the sense in which Sheol is a
place name. It denotes, in certain aspects, the
world of the dead as constructed in the Heb imagi-
nation. It is a common mistake to understand
such expressions in a too mechanical way. Like
ourselves, the men of the earlier ages had to use
picture language when they spoke of the conditions
that existed after death, however their picturing


3 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Aaronites
Abase


of the matter may have differed from ours. In
three instances Abaddon is parallel with Sheol
(Job 26 6; Prov 15 11; 27 20). In one instance
it is parallel with death, in one with the grave and
in the remaining instance the parallel phrase is
“root out all mine increase” (Job 28 22; Ps 88 11;
Job 31 12). In this last passage the place idea
comes nearer to vanishing in an abstract concep-
tion than in the other passages.

Abaddon belongs to the realm of the mysterious.
Only God understands it (Job 26 6; Prov 16 11).
It is the world of the dead in its utterly dismal,
destructive, dreadful aspect, not in those more
cheerful aspects in which activities are conceived
of as in progress there. In Abaddon there are no
declarations of God’s lovingkindness (Ps 88 11).

In a slight degree the OT presentations person-
alize Abaddon. It is a synonym for insatiableness
(Prov 27 20). It has possibilities of information
mediate between those of “all living” and those
of God (Job 28 22).

In the NT the word occurs once (Rev 9 11),
the personalization becoming sharp. Abaddon
is here not the world of the dead, but the angel,
who reigns over it. The Gr equivalent of his
name is given as Apollyon. Under this name
Bunyan presents him in the Pilgrim’s Progress,
and Christendom has doubtless been more in-
terested in this presentation of the matter than
in any other.

In some treatments Abaddon is connected with
the evil spirit Asmodeus of Tobit (e.g. 3 8), and
with the destroyer mentioned in Wisd (18 25; cf 22),
and through these with a large body of rabbinical
folklore; but these efforts are simply groundless.
See APOLLYON. Wis J. BEEcHsr


ABADIAS, ab-a-di’as (Gr ’APaSlas); Mentioned
in 1 Esd 8 35 as the son of Jezelus, of the sons of
Joab, returned with Ezra from the captivity; and
in Ezr 8 9 called ‘‘Obadiah the son of Jehiel.”’


ABAGARUS, a-bag’a-rus. See Apaarus.


ABAGTHA, a-bag’tha (RINJAN, ’dbhagh*tha’, per-
haps meaning “fortunate one”): One of the seven
eunuchs, or “chamberlains,” of Xerxes mentioned
in Est 1 10. The name is Persian, and is one of
the many Pers marks in the Book of Est.


ABANAH, ab’a-na, a-ba’na (M328, ‘dbhdnah
[Kethibh, LXX, Vulg]), or AMANA (T3"28, *émanah
[Keré, Pesh, Tg]; AV Abana [ARVm Amana],
RV ABANAH [RVm Amanah]): Mentioned in
2 K 6 12, along with the Puspar (q.v.), as one
of the principal rivers of Damascus. The reading
Amana (meaning possibly the “constant,” or
perennial stream) is on the whole preferable. Both
forms of the name may have been in use, as the
interchange of an aspirated _b (bh=v) and m is
not without parallel (cf Evil-merodach=Amil-


. is identified with the Chrysorrhoas
(“golden stream”) of the Greeks, the modern Nahr
Barada (the “cold”), which rises in the Anti-
Lebanon, one of its sources, the Ain Barada, being
near the village of Zebedani, and flows in a southerly
and then southeasterly direction toward Damascus.
A few miles southeast of Suk Wady Barada (the
ancient Abila; see ABILENE) the volume of the
stream is more than doubled by a torrent of clear,
cold water from the beautifully situated spring
‘Ain Fijeh (Gr tay, pegé, “fountain’’), after which
it flows through a picturesque gorge till it reaches
Damascus, whose many fountains and gardens it
supplies liberally with water. In the neighbor-
hood of Damascus a number of streams branch off


from the parent river, and spread out like an open-
ing fan on the surrounding plain. The Barada,
along with the streams which it feeds, loses itself
in the marshes of the Meadow Lakes about 18 miles
E. of the city.

The water of the Barada, though not perfectly
wholesome in the city itself, is for the most part
clear and cool; its course is picturesque, and its
value to Damascus, as the source alike of fertility
and of charm, is inestimable. C. H. THomson


ABARIM, ab’a-rim, a-ba’rim (DY72Y, ‘ébhdrim):
The stem idea is that of going across a space or a
dividing line, or for example ariver. It is the same
stem that appears in the familiar phrase ‘‘beyond
Jordan,” used to denote the region E. of the Jor-
dan, and Hellenized in the name Peraea. This
fact affords the most natural éxplanation of the
phrases ‘the mountains of the Abarim’ (Nu 33
47.48); ‘this mountain-country of the Abarim’
(Nu 27 12; Dt 32 49); Iye-abarim, which means
“Heaps of the Abarim,” or ‘Mounds of the Abarim”’
(Nu 21 11; 83 44). In Nu 33 45 this station is
called simply Iyim, “Mounds.” It is to be dis-
tinguished from the place of the same name in
southern Judah (Josh 15 29). The name Abarim,
without the article, occurs in Jer (22 20 RV,
where AV translates “the passages’), where it
seems to be the name of a region, on the same foot-
ing with the names Lebanon and Bashan, doubtless
the region referred to in Nu and Dt. There is no
reason for changing the vowels in Ezk 39 11, in
order to make that another occurrence of the same
name.

When the people of Abraham lived in Canaan,
before they went to Egypt to sojourn, they spoke
of the region east of the Jordan as “‘beyond Jor-
dan.” Looking across the Jordan and the Dead
Sea they designated the mountain country they
saw there as ‘the Beyond mountains.” They con-
tinued to use these geographical terms when they
came out of Egypt. We have no means of knowing
to how extensive a region they applied the name.
The passages speak of the mountain country of
Abarim where Moses died, including Nebo, as
situated back from the river Jordan in its lowest
reaches; and of the Mounds of the Abarim as
farther to the southeast, so that the Israelites
passed them when making their détour around the
agricultural parts of Edom, before they crossed the
Arnon. Whether the name Abarim should be
applied to the parts -of the eastern hill country
farther to the north is a question on which we lack
evidence. Witus J. BEECHER


ABASE, a-bas’: The English rendition of >pw,
shaphél (Job 40 11; Ezk 21 26), and of its deriva-
tive Day she¢phal (Dnl 4 37) =‘‘bring down,”
“debase,” ‘humble’; of 722, ‘dndh (Isa 81 4)=
“abase self,” “afflict,” ‘‘chasten self,” ‘deal
harshly with,” ete; and of rtarewsw, tapeindd=
“to depress’; fig. ‘to humiliate” (in condition or
heart): “abase,” ‘bring low,” ‘humble self”
(Phil 4 12). The word is always employed to
indicate what should be done to or by him who
nurtures a spirit and exhibits a demeanor contrary
to the laudable humility which is a natural fruit of
religion. Such a person is warned that the most
extravagant audacity will not daunt Jehovah nor
abate His vengeance (Isa 31 4), and good men are
exhorted to employ their powers to bring him low
(Job 40 11; Ezk 21 26). If men are not able
to curb the arrogant, God is (Dnl 4 37); and He
has so constituted the world, that sinful arrogance
must fall (Mt 28 12 AV; Lk 14 11 AV, 18 14
AY). Frank E. Hirsca


Abate
Abel-cheramim


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 4


ABATE, a-bat’: Used six times in OT for five


different Heb words, signifying “to diminish,”’
‘“veduce,” “assuage”; of the Flood (Gen 8 8); of
strength (Dt 34 7); of pecuniary value (Lev 27 18);
of wrath (Jgs 8 3); of fire (Nu 11 2).


ABBA, ab’a (4BBa, NBN, ’abba’, Hebraic-Chald,
“Father’’): In Jewish and old-Christian prayers,
a name by which God was addressed, then in
oriental churches a title of bishops and patriarchs.
So Jesus addresses God in prayer (Mt 11 25.26;
26 39.42; Lk 10 21; 22 42; 23 34; Jn 11 41; 12
27; 17 24.25). In Mk 14 36; Rom 8 15, and Gal
4 6 6 rarnp, ho patér, is appended even in direct
address, in an emphatic sense. Servants were not
permitted to use the appellation in addressing the
head of the house. See Delitzsch on Rom 8 15;
ef G. Dalman, Gram. des jud.-paldst.' Aramdisch,
etc, § 40, c. 3. J. E. Harry


ABDA, ab’da (8332, ‘abhda’, perhaps, by abbre-
viation, ‘‘servant of Jeh”): (1) The father of
Adoniram, King Solomon’s superintendent of forced
labor (1 K 4 6). (2) A Levite mentioned in the
statistical note in Neh (11 17). This ‘‘Abda the
son of Shammua”’ is in the partly duplicate
passage inl Ch (9 16) called “Obadiah the son of
Shemaiah.”’


ABDEEL, ab‘dé-el ONTaz, ‘abhd®’él, ‘servant
of God”): The father of Shelemiah, one of the offi-
cers whom King Jehoiakim commanded to arrest
Baruch, the scribe, and Jeremiah the prophet
(Jer 36 26).


ABDI, ab’di C732, ‘abhdi, probably by abbre-
viation ‘“‘servant of Jeh”): A Levite, father of
Kishi and grandfather of King David’s singer
Ethan (1 Ch 6 44; cf 16 17). This makes Abdi
a contemporary of Saul the king. (2) A Levite,
father of the Kish who was in service at the begin-
ning of the reign of Hezekiah (2 Ch 29 12). Some
mistakenly identify this Abdi with the former.
(38) A man who in Ezra’s time had married a
foreign wife (Ezr 10 26). Not a Levite, but ‘‘of
the sons of Elam.”


ABDIAS, ab-di’as (2 Esd 1 39=Obadiah): One
of the Minor Prophets. Mentioned with Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob and the Minor Prophets who shall be
given as leaders to the “‘nation from the east”’ which
is to overthrow Israel (cf OBantagH).


ABDIEL, ab’di-el OR TR, ‘abhdVél, “‘servant
of God”): A Gadite who lived in Gilead or in Ba-
shan, and whose name was reckoned in genealogies
of the time of Jotham, king of Judah, or of Jero-
boam II, king of Israel (1 Ch 5 15-17).


ABDON, ab’don (j1722, ‘abhdon, perhaps
“service; ’ABSav, Abdén):

(1) A judge of Israel for eight years (Jgs 12 13-
15). The account says that he was the son of
Hillel the Pirathonite, and that he was buried in
Pirathon in the land of Ephraim. No mention is
made of great public services rendered by him, but
it is said that he had seventy well-mounted sons
and grandsons. So far as we can judge, he was
placed in office as a wealthy elderly man, and per-
formed the routine duties acceptably. Very
likely his two next predecessors Ibzan and Elon
were men of the same type.

An effort has been made to identify Abdon with
the Bedan mentioned in 1 § 12 11, but the iden-
tification is precarious.

A certain importance attaches to Abdon from


the fact that he is the last judge mentioned in the
continuous account (Jgs 2 6—13 1) in the Book of
Jgs. After the account of him follows the state-
ment that Israel was delivered into the hands of the
Philistines forty years, and with that statement
the continuous account closes and the series of per-
sonal stories begins—the stories of Samson,- of
Micah and his Levite, of the Benjamite civil war,
followed in our English Bibles by the stories of
Ruth and of the childhood of Samuel. With the
close of this last story (1 S 4 18) the narrative of
public affairs is resumed, at a point when Israel is
making a desperate effort, at the close of the forty
years of Eli, to throw off the Philistine yoke. A
large part of one’s views of the history of the
period of the Judges will depend on the way in
which he combines these events. My own view
is that the forty years of Jgs 13 1 andof I S 4 18
are the same; that at the death of Abdon the
Philistines asserted themselves as overlords of
Israel; that it was a part of their policy to suppress
nationality in Israel; that they abolished the office
of judge, and changed the high-priesthood to an-
,other family, making Eli high priest; that Eli
was sufficiently competent so that many of the
functions of national judge drifted into his hands.
It should be noted that the regaining of inde-
pendence was signalized by the reéstablishment
of the office of judge, with Samuel as incumbent
(1 8 7 6 and context). This view takes into the
account that the narrative concerning Samson is
detachable, like the narratives that follow, Samson
belonging to an earlier period. See Samson.

(2) The son of Jeiel and his wife Maacah (1 Ch 8
30; 9 36). Jeiel is described as the ‘“‘father of
Gibeon,” perhaps the founder of the Israelitish
community there. This Abdon is described as
brother to Ner, the grandfather of King Saul.

(3) One of the messengers sent by King Josiah to
Huldah the prophetess (2 Ch 34 20); called Achbor
in 2 K 22 12.

(4) One of many men of Benjamin mentioned as
dwelling in Jerus (1 Ch 8 23), possibly in Nehe-
miah’s time, though the date is not clear.

. Wiis J. BrecHer

ABDON, ab’don (J1732, ‘abhdan, perhaps “‘serv-
ice”): One of the four Levitical cities in the tribe
of Asher (Josh 21 30; 1 Ch 6 74). Probably the
same with Ebron (in AV “Hebron’’) in Josh 19 28,
where some copies have the reading Abdon. Now
called Abdeh, a few miles from the Mediterranean
and about fifteen miles south of Tyre.


_ ABED-NEGO, a-bed’né-go (Heb and Aram.
42) TB, ‘ubhedh negho; Dnl 3 29, 853) IBY, ‘abhedh
negha’): According to many, the nego is an inten-
tional corruption of Nebo, the name of a Bab god,
arising from the desire of the Heb scribes to avoid
the giving of a heathen name to a hero of their
faith. The name, according to this view, would
mean “‘servant of Nebo.” Inasmuch as ‘dbhédh
is a tr of the Bab ‘arad, it seems more probable
that nego also must be a tr of some Bab word.
The goddess Ishtar is by the Babylonians called
“the morning star’ and “‘the perfect light” (négittu
gitmaltu). The morning star is called by the
Aramaeans nogah, ‘the shining one,” a word derived
from the root negah, the equivalent of the Bab
nagu, “to shine.” Abed-nego, according to this
interpretation, would be the tr of Arad-Ishtar, a
not uncommon_name_ among the Assyrians and
Babylonians. Canon Johns gives this as the name
of more than thirty Assyrians, who are mentioned
on the tablets cited by him in Vol. III of his great
work entitled Assyrian Deeds and Documents.
It means “‘servant of Ishtar.’’


5 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Abate
Abel-cheramim


Abed-nego was one of the three companions of
Daniel, and was the name imposed upon the Hebrew
Azariah by Nebuchadnezzar (Dnl 1 7). Having
refused, along with his friends, to eat the provisions
of the king’s table, he was fed and flourished upon
pulse and water. Having successfully passed his
examinations and escaped the death with which
the wise men of Babylon were threatened, he was
appointed at the request of Daniel along with his
companions over the affairs of the province of
Babylon (Dnl 2). Having refused to bow down
to the image which Nebuchadnezzar had set up,
he was cast into the burning fiery furnace, and
after his triumphant delivery he was caused by the
king to prosper in the province of Babylon (Dnl 3).
The three friends are referred to by name in 1 Macc
2 59, and by implication in He 11 33.34.

R. Dick Wiison

ABEL, S’bel (037), hebhel; "ABed, Abel; WH
Hébel; etymology uncertain. Some tr “a breath,”
“vapor,” “‘transitoriness,’ which are suggestive
of his brief existence and tragic end; others take
it to be a variant of Jabal, yabhal, “shepherd” or
“herdman,”’ Gen 4 20. Cf Assyr ablu and Bab
abil, ‘‘son’’): The second son of Adam and Eve.


The absence of the vb. hdradh (Gen 4 2; cf ver 1) °


has been taken to imply, perhaps truly, that Cain
and Abel were twins.
“Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a
tiller of the ground,” thus representing the two
fundamental pursuits of civilized life,
1A the two earliest subdivisions of the
Shepherd human race. On the Heb tradition
of the superiority of the pastoral over
agricultural and city life, see Expos T, V, 351 ff.
The narrative may possibly bear witness to the
primitive idea that pastoral life was more pleasing
to Jeh than husbandry.
“In process of time,’’ the two brothers came in a
solemn manner to sacrifice unto Jeh, in order to
express their gratitude to Him whose
2.A tenants they were in the land (vs 3.4.
Worshipper See Sacriricz). How Jeh signified
His acceptance of the one offering and
rejection of the other, we are not told. That it
was due to the difference in the material of the sac-
rifice or in their manner of offering was probably
the belief among the early Israelites, who regarded
animal offerings as superior to cereal offerings.
Both kinds, however, were fully in accord with Heb
law and custom. It has been suggested that the
LXX rendering of 4 7 makes Cain’s offence a
ritual one, the offering not being “correctly” made
or rightly divided, and hence rejected as irregular.
“If thou makest a proper offering, but dost not cut
in pieces rightly, art thou not in fault? Be still!”
The LXX evidently took the rebuke to turn upon
Cain’s neglect to prepare: his offering according to
strict ceremonial requirements. é:¢Ans, diélés (LXX
in loc.), however, implies MN} (MM), nathah
(nattah), and would only apply to animal sacrifices.
Cf Ex 29 17; Lev 8 20; Jgs 19 29; 1 K 18 23;
and see Cauca.
The true reason for the Divine preference is
doubtless to be found in the disposition of the
brothers (see Cary). Well-doing con-
3. A sisted not in the outward offering


Righteous (4 7) butin the right state of mind and
Man fecling. The acceptability depends


on the inner motives and moral char-
acters of the offerers. ‘By faith Abel offered unto
God a more excellent (abundant, pletona] sacrifice
than Cain” (He 11 4). The ‘more abundant
sacrifice,’ Westcott thinks, “suggests the deeper
gratitude of Abel, and shows a fuller sense of the
claims of God” to the best. Cain’s “works [the


collective expression of his inner life] were evil,
and his brother’s righteous’ (1 Jn 3 12). “It
would be an outrage if the gods looked to gifts
and sacrifices and not to the soul” (Alcibiades
II.149E.150A). Cain’s heart was no longer pure;
it had a criminal propensity, springing from envy
and jealousy, which rendered both his offering
and person unacceptable. His evil works and
hatred of his brother culminated in the act of mur-
der, specifically evoked by the opposite character of
Abel’s works and the acceptance of his offering.
The evil man cannot endure the sight of goodness
in another.

Abel ranks as the first martyr (Mt 23 35),
whose blood cried for vengeance (Gen 4 10; cf


Rev 6 9.10) and brought despair
4. A (Gen 4 183), whereas that of Jesus
Martyr appeals to God for forgiveness and


speaks peace (He 12 24) and is pre-

ferred before Abel’s.

The first two brothers in history stand as the
types and representatives of the two main and
5. A Type enduring divisions of mankind, and
i YP© bear witness to the absolute antithesis
and eternal enmity between good and evil.

M. O. Evans

ABEL, 4’bel OA’, ’abhél, ‘“meadow’”’): A word
used in several compound names of places. It
appears by itself as the name of a city concerned
in the rebellion of Sheba (2 S 20 14; cf 18),
though it is there probably an abridgment of the
name Abel-beth-maacah. In 1 8S 6 18, where the
Heb has “the great meadow,’”’ and the Gr “‘the
grat nore AV translates ‘‘the great stone of

el.


ABEL-BETH-MAACAH, &’bel-beth-ma/a-ka
(MpVA MD DAN, 'abhel beth matdkhah, “the
meadow of the house of Maacah’): The name
appears in this form in 1 K 15 20 and 2 K 15 29.
In 2 S 20 15 (Heb) ‘it is Abel-beth-hammaacah
(Maacah with the article). In ver 14 of that
chapter it appears as Beth-maacah, and in vs 14
and 18 as Abel.

In 2 S it is spoken of as the city, far to the north,
where Joab besieged Sheba, the son of Bichri. In
2 K it is mentioned, along with Ijon and other
places, as a city in Naphtali captured hy Tiglath-
pileser, king of Assyria. The capture appears
also in the records of Tiglath-pileser. In 1 K it is
mentioned with Ijon and Dan and “‘all the land of
Naphtali” as being smitten by Benhadad of Da-
mascus in the time of Baasha. f

In the account in Ch parallel to this last (2 Ch
16 4) the cities mentioned are Ijon, Dan, Abel-
maim. Abel-maim is either another name for
Abel-beth-maacah, or the name of another place
in the same vicinity.

The prevailing identification of Abel-beth-maacah
is with Abil, a few miles W. of Dan, on a height
overlooking the Jordan near its sources. The
adjacent region is rich agriculturally, and the
scenery and the water supply are especially fine.
Ahel-maim, ‘meadow of water,” is not an imapt
designation for it. Wiuus J. BEECHER


ABEL-CHERAMIM, a’bel-ker’a-mim (23
DTD , *abhél keramim, “meadow of vineyards’’):
Acity mentioned in the RV in Jgs 11 33, along with
Aroer, Minnith, and ‘twenty citics,” in summa-
rizing Jephthah’s campaign against the Ammonites.
AV translates “the plain of the vineyards.” The
site has not been identified, though Eusebius and
Jerome speak of it as in their time a village about
seven Roman miles from the Ammonite city of
Rabbah.


Abel-maim
Abiathar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 6


ABEL-MAIM, 4’bel-ma‘im (0% DAX, ’abhal
mayim, “meadow of water’). See ABEL-BETH-
MAACAH.


ABEL-MEHOLAH, 4’bel-mé-ho’lah (28
nina, ‘abhél mehalah, “meadow of dancing”):


The residence of Elisha the prophet (1 K 19 16). -


When Gideon and his 300 broke their pitchers in
the camp of Midian, the Midianites in their first
panic fled down the valley of Jezreel and the
Jordan “toward Zererah” (Jgs 7 22).  Zererah
(Zeredah) is Zarethan (2 Ch 4 17; ef 1 K 7 46),
separated from Succoth by the clay ground where
Solomon made castings for the temple. The wing
of the Midianites whom Gideon pursued crossed
the Jordan at Succoth (Jgs 8 4 ff). This would
indicate that Abel-meholah was thought of as a
tract of country with a ‘“‘border,’”’ W. of the Jordan,
some miles 8. of Beth-shean, in the territory either
of Issachar or West Manasseh.

Abel-meholah is also mentioned in connection
with the jurisdiction of Baana, one of Solomon’s
twelve commissary officers (1 K 4 12) as below
deze with Beth-shean and Zarethan in the same
ist.

Jerome and Eusebius speak of Abel-meholah as
a tract of country and a town in the Jordan valley,
about ten Rom miles S. of Beth-shean. At just
that point the name seems to be perpetuated in
that of the Wady Malih, and Abel-meholah is
commonly located near where that Wady, or the
neighboring Wady Helweh, comes down into the
Jordan valley.

Presumably Adriel the Meholathite (1 8 18 19;
28 21 8) was a resident of Abel-meholah.

Wituis J. BEECHER

ABEL-MIZRAIM, a’bel-miz’ra4-im (0712 Sax,
’abhél micrayim, “meadow of Egypt’): A name
given to ‘“‘the threshing floor of Atad,” E. of the
Jordan and N. of the Dead-Sea, because Joseph
and his funeral party from Egypt there held their
mourning over Jacob (Gen 50 11). The name is
a pun. The Canaanite residents saw the ’ébhel,
“the mourning,’ and therefore that place was
called ’abhél migrayim.

It is remarkable that the funeral should have
taken this circuitous route, instead of going directly
from Egypt to Hebron. Possibly a reason may be
found as we obtain additional details in Egyp his-
tory. The explanations which consist in changing
the text, or in substituting the North Arabian
Mugri for Micrayim, are unsatisfactory.

Wiis J. BEECHER

ABEL-SHITTIM, 4’bel-shit’tim (DDT Sax,
’abhél ha-shittim, “the meadow of the Acacias’’):
The name appears only in Nu 33 49; but the
name Shittim is used to denote the same locality
(Nu 25 1; Josh 2 1; 3.1; Mic 6 5). The name
always has the art., and the best expression of it
in English would be “the Acacias.” ‘The valley
of the Acacias’ (Joel 3 18 [4 18]) is, apparently, a
different locality.

For many weeks before crossing the Jordan,
Israel was encamped in the roundout of the Jor-
dan valley, N. of the Dead Sea, E. of the river.
The notices iu the Bible, supplemented by those
in Jos and Ensebius and Jerome, indicate that the
camping region was many miles in extent, the
southern limit being Beth-jeshimoth, toward the
Dead Sea, while Abel of the Acacias was the
northern limit and the headquarters. The head-
quarters are often spoken of as E. of the Jordan
at Jericho (e.g. Nu 22 1; 26 3.63). During the
stay there occurred the Balaam incident (Nu 22-
24), and the harlotry with Moab and Midian
(Nu 25) and the war with Midian (Nu 31), in


both of which Phinehas distinguished himself. It
was from the Acacias that Joshua sent out the
spies, and that Israel afterward moved down to
the river for the crossing. Micah aptly calls upon
Jehovah’s people to remember all that happened
to them from the time when they reached the
Acacias to the time when Jehovah had brought
them safely across the river to Gilgal. ;
Jos is correct in saying that Abel of the Acacias
is the place from which the Deuteronomic law pur- .
ports to have been given. In his time the name
survived as Abila, a not very important town
situated there. He says that it was “sixty fur-
longs from Abila to the Jordan,” that is a little
more than seven English miles (Ani, IV, viii, 1
and V,i, 1; BJ, IV, vii, 6). There seems to be a
consensus for locating the site at Kefrein, near
where the wady of that name comes down into the
Jordan valley. Wiis J. BEECHER


ABEZ, a’bez: Used in AV (Josh 19 20) for Eszz,
which see.


ABGAR, ab‘gar, ABGARUS, ab-ga’rus, ABAGA-
RUS, a-bag’a-rus ("AByapos, Abgaros): Written
also Agbarus and Augarus. A king of Edessa. A
name common to several kings (toparchs) of Edessa,
Mesopotamia. One of these, Abgar, a son of
Uchomo, the seventeenth (14th?) of twenty kings,
according to the legend (H#,i.13) sent a letter to
Jesus, professing belief in His Messiahship and
asking Him to come and heal him from an incurable
disease (leprosy?), inviting Him at the same time
to take refuge from His enemies in his city, ‘which
is enough for us both.” Jesus answering the letter
blessed him, because he had believed on Him with-
out having seen Him, and promised to send one of
His disciples after He had risen from the dead.
The apostle Thomas sent Judas Thaddeus, one of
the Seventy, who healed him (Cod. Apoc. NT).

A. L. Brestica
HOR, ab-hor’: “To cast away,’ “reject,”
“despise,” ‘defy,’ “‘contemn,” “loathe,” etc. (1)
Trin the OT from the following Heb words amongst
others: MND (ba’ash), “to be or to become stink-
ing” (1 8 27 12; 2 S 16 21); 593 (ga'al), “to east
away as unclean,” “to loathe’; cf Ezk 16 5 AV;
Tp (kde), “to loathe,” “to fear” (Ex 112 m; 1K
11 25; Isa 7 16); PPW (shakac), “to detest’’ (Ps
22 24); ANT) (a’abh), APTA (ta‘abh), “to contemn”
(Dt 23 7); JIS (déra’on), “an object of con-
tempt,” ‘‘an abhorring” (Isa 66 24; Dnl 12 2 m).
(2) Trt in the NT from the following Gr words:
bdeliissomat, which is derived from bdéé, ‘‘to stink”
(Rom 2 22); aposiugéd, derived from stugéd, ‘to

hate,” ‘to shrink from” (Rom 12 9).

: A. L. Brestica

ABI, a’bi ("AN , ’ébht): The name of the mother
of King Hezekiah, as given in 2 K 18 2. Most
naturally explained as a contraction of Abijah
(‘Jehovah is a father,” or “is my father’’), found
in the || passage in 2 Ch 291. The spelling in
the oldest tr® seems to indicate that '#bA7 is not a
copyist’s error, but a genuine contracted form.
She is spoken of as the daughter of Zechariah, and
was of course the wife of Ahaz.


ABI, 4’bi, in the composition of names ("AX,
"abhi, “father”): The Heb words 'abh, “father,” and
‘ah, “brother,” are used in the forming of names,
both at the beginning and at the end of words,
e.g. Abram (“exalted one’), Joah (“Jehovah is
brother”), Ahab (‘father’s brother’). At the
beginning of a word, however, the modified forms
abhi and ’dht are the ones commonly used, e.g.


7 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Abel-maim
Abiathar


Ahimelech (‘‘king’s brother”) and Abimelech (by
the same analogy “king’s father’’).

These forms have characteristics which compli-
cate the question of their use in proper names. Es-
pecially since the publication in 1896 of Studies in
Hebrew Proper Names, by G. Buchanan Gray, the
attention of scholars has been called to this matter,
without the reaching of any perfect consensus of
opinion.

The word ’ébhi may be a nominative with an
archaic ending (‘father’), or in the construct
state (“father-of”), or the form with the suffix
(“my father”). Hence a proper name constructed
with it may supposably be either a clause or a
sentence; if it is a sentence, either of the two words
may be either subject or predicate. That is to
say, the name Abimelech may supposably mean
either ‘father of a king,” or “‘a king is father,” or
“a father is king,” or “my father is king,” or “a
king is my father.” Further, the clause “father
of a king’” may have as many variations of mean-
ing as there are varieties of the grammatical genitive.
Further still, it is claimed that either the word
father or the word king may, in a name, bea desig-
nation of a deity. This gives a very large number
of supposable meanings from which, in any case,
to select the intended meaning.

The older scholarship regarded all these names
as construct clauses. For example, Abidan is
‘father of a judge.” It explained different in-
stances as being different varieties of the genitive
construction; for instance, Abihail, “father of
might,” means mighty father. The woman’s
name Abigail, “father of exultation,’ denotes one
whose father is exultant. Abishai, “father of
Jesse,’’ denotes one to whom Jesse is father, and
so with Abihud, ‘father of Judah,” Abiel, ‘father
of God,” Abijah, ‘father of Jehovah.’ See the
cases in detail in Gesenius’ Lexicon.

The more recent scholarship regards most or
all of the instances as sentences. In some cases it
regards the second element in a name as a verb
or adj. instead of a noun; but that is not impor-
tant, inasmuch as in Heb the genitive construction
might persist, even with the verb or adj. But in
the five instances last given the explanation, “my
father is exultation,”’ “is Jesse,’ “is Judah,” ‘is
God,” “is Jehovah,” certainly gives the meaning in
a more natural way than by explaining these names
as construct clauses. f

There is sharp conflict over the question whether
we ought: to regard the suffix pronoun as present
in these names—whether the five instances should
not rather be tr? Jehovah is father, God is father,
Judah is father, Jesse is father, exultation is father.
The question is raised whether the same rule pre-
vails when the second word is a name or a desig-
nation of Deity as prevails in other cases. Should
we explain one instance as meaning ‘“‘my father is
Jesse,” and another as ‘God is father’?

A satisfactory discussion of this is possible only
under a comprehensive study of Bible names.
The argument is more or less complicated by the
fact that each scholar looks to see what bearing
it may have on the critical theories he holds. In
the Hebrew Lexicon of Dr. Francis Brown the
explanations exclude the construct theory; in
most of the instances they treat a name as 2 sen-
tence with “my father” as the subject; when the
second part of the name is a designation of Deity
they commonly make that the subject, and either
exclude the pronoun or give it as an alternative.
For most persons the safe method is to remember
that the final decision is not yet reached, and to
consider each name by itself, counting the explana-
tion of it an open question. See Namzs, Proper.

The investigations concerning Sem proper names,


both in and out of the Bible, have interesting theo-
logical -bearings. It has always been recognized
that words for father and brother, when combined
in proper names with Yah, Yahu, El, Baal, or other
proper names of a Deity, indicated some relation
of the person named, or of his tribe, with the
Deity. It is now held, though with many differ-
ences of opinion, that in the forming of proper
names many other words, e.g. the words for king
lord, strength, beauty, and others, are also used
as designations of Deity or of some particular
Deity; and that the words father, brother, and the
like may have the same use. To a certain extent
the proper names are so many propositions in
theology. It is technically possible to go very
far in inferring that the people who formed such
names thought of Deity or of some particular
Deity as the father, the kinsman, the ruler, the
champion, the strength, the glory of the tribe or of
the individual. In particular one might infer the
existence of a widely diffused doctrine of the father-
hood of God. It is doubtless superfluous to add
that at present one ought to be very cautious in
drawing or accepting inferences in this part of the
field of human study. Wiis J. BeecHER


ABIA, a-bi’a, ABIAH, a-bi’ah: Variants for ApisaH,
which see.


ABI-ALBON, ab-i-al’bon, a’bi-al’bon (71229 "28
’ébht ‘alebhén, meaning not known. Gesenius
infers from the Arab. a stem which would give the
meaning “father of strength,” and this is at worst
not quite so groundless as the conjectures which
explain ‘alebhon as a textual misreading for ’a
or ba‘al): Abi-albon the Arbathite was one of
David’s listed heroes (2 8 23 31), called Abiel
the Arbathite in 1 Ch 11 32. Presumably he was
from Beth-arabah (Josh 15 6.61; 18 22).


ABIASAPH, a-bi’a-saf, ab-i-d’saf (AON ARN , ’dbhi-
’asaph, ‘my father has gathered’’): A descendant
of Kohath the son of Levi (Ex 6 24; 1 Ch 6 23.37
[8.22]; 9 19). In Ch the name is TODAN, ’ebh-
yasaph, which seems to be a mere variant spelling.
The Sam version has the same form in Ex. The
list in Ex terminates with Abiasaph, who is to be
regarded as the contemporary of Phinehas, the
grandson of Aaron. The two lists in 1 Ch 6 lead
up to the prophet Samuel and the singing com-
panies which David is said to have organized. The
list in 1 Ch 9 leads up to the Korahite porters
of the time of Nehemiah. Apparently all the lists
intentionally omit names, just names enough being
given in each to indicate the line.

Witus J. BrecHEer

ABIATHAR, a-bi’a-thar, ab-i-a’thar (ANAS,
’ebhyathar, “father of super-excellence,” or, ‘‘the
super-excellent one is father.” With changed phrase-
ology these are the explanations commonly given,
though “a father remains” would be more in accord
with the ordinary use of the stem yathar. The pious
Abiathar was still conscious that he had a Father,
even after the butchery of his human relatives) :

The Scriptures represent that Abiathar was de-
scended from Phinehas the son of Eli, and through

him from Ithamar the son of Aaron;


1. The that he was the son of Ahimelech the
Biblical head priest at Nob who, with his
Account associates, was put to death by King


Saul for alleged conspiracy with
David; that he had two sons, Ahimelech and Jona-
than, the former of whom was, in Abiathar’s life-
time, prominent in the priestly service (1 S 21
1-9; 22 7#; 2S 8 17; 16 27 ff; 1 Ch 18 16; 24
3.6.31). See AHIMELECH; AHITUB.


Abiathar
Abigail


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 8


Abiathar escaped from the massacre of the priests
at, Nob, and fled to David, carrying the ephod with
him. This was a great accession to David’s
strength. Public feehng in Israel was outraged
by the slaughter of the priests, and turned strongly
against Saul. The heir of the priesthood, and in
his care the holy ephod, were now with David, and
the fact gave to his cause prestige, and a certain
character of legitimacy. David also felt bitterly
his having been the unwilling cause of the death of


Abiathar’s relatives, and this made his heart warm:


toward his friend. Presumably, also, there was a
deep religious sympathy between them.

Abiathar seems to have been at once recognized
as David’s priest, the medium of consultation with
Jehovah through the ephod (1 § 22 20-23; 23
6.9; 30 7.8). He was at the head of the priest-
hood, along with Zadok (1 Ch 15 11), when David,
after his conquests (1 Ch 135; cf 25 6),
brought the ark to Jerus. The two men are men-
tioned together as high priests eight times in the
narrative of the rebellion of Absalom (2 § 16 24 ff),
and are so mentioned in the last list of David's
heads of departments (2 8 20 25). Ahiathar
joined with Adonijah in his attempt to seize the
throne (1 K 1 7-42), and was for this deposed
from the priesthood, though he was treated with
consideration on account of his early comrade-
ship with David (1 K 2 26.27). Possibly he
remained high priest emeritus, as Zadok and
Abiathar still appear as priests in the lists of the
heads of departments for Solomon’s reign{1 K 4 4).
Particularly apt is the passage in Ps 55 12-14,
if one regards it as referring to the relations of
David and Abiathar in the time of Adonijah.

There are two additional facts which, in view of
the close relations between David and Abiathar,
must be regarded as significant. One is that Zadok,
Abiathar’s junior, is uniformly mentioned first,
in all the many passages in which the two are men-
tioned together, and is treated as the one who is
especially responsible. Turn to the narrative,
and see how marked this is. The other similarly
significant fact is that in certain especially respon-
sible matters (1 Ch 24, 18 16; 25817) the
interests of the line of Ithamar are represented,
not by Abiathar, but by his son Ahimelech. There
must have been something in the character of Abia-
thar to account for these facts, as well as for his
deserting David for Adonijah. “To sketch his
character might be a work for the imagination
rather than for critical inference; but it seems clear
that though he was a man worthy of the friendship
of David, he yet had weaknesses or misfortunes
that partially incapacitated him.

The characteristic priestly function of Abiathar
is thus expressed by Solomon: ‘Because thou
barest the ark of the Lord Jehovah before David
my father’ (1 K 2 26). By its tense the verb
denotes not a habitual act, but the function of
ark-bearing, taken as a whole. Zadok and Abia-
thar, as high priests, had charge of the bringing of
the ark to Jerus (1 Ch 15 11). We are not told
whether it was again moved during the reign of
David. Necessarily the priestly superintendence of
the ark implies that of the sacrifices and_ services
that were connected with the ark. The details in
Kings indicate the existence of much of the cere-
monial described in the Pent, while numerous
additional Pentateuchal details are mentioned in


A priestly function much emphasized is that of
obtaining answers from God through the -ephod
(1 § 28 6.9; 30 7). The word ephod (see 1 $2
18; 28614) does not necessarily denote the
priestly vestment with the Urim and Thummim
(e.g. Lev 8 7.8), but if anyone denies that this


was the ephod of the priest Abiathar, the burden
of proof rests upon him. This is not the place for
inquiring as to the method of obtaining divine
revelations through the ephod. ;

Abiathar’s landed estate was at Anathoth in
Benjamin (1 K 2 26), one of the cities assigned to
the sons of Aaron (Josh 21 18). .

Apart from the men who are expressly said to be
descendants of Aaron, this part of the narrative
mentions priests three times. David’s sons were
priests (2 8 8 18). This is of a piece with David’s
garrying the ark on a new cart (2 S 6), before he
had been taught by the death of Uzza. “And
also Ira the Jairite was priest to the king” (2 8 20
26 ERV). “And Zabud the son of Nathan was
priest, friend of the king’ (1 K 45 ERV). These
instances seem to indicate that David and Solomon
had each a private chaplain. As to the descent
and function of these two ‘‘priests’” we have not a
word of information, and it is illegitimate to im-
agine details concerning them which bring them
into conflict with the rest of the record.

No one will dispute that the account thus far
given is that of the Bible record as it stands.

Critics of certain schools, however,
2. Critical do not accept the facts as thus re-
Opinions corded. If a person is committed to
Concerning the tradition that the Deuteronomic
Abiathar and the priestly ideas of the Pent

first originated some centuries later
than Abiathar, and if he makes that tradition the
standard by which to test his critical conclusions,
he must of course regard the Biblical account of
Abiathar as unhistorical. Either the record dis-
proves the tradition or the tradition disproves the
record. There is no third alternative. The men
who accept the current critical theories understand
this, and they have two ways of defending the
theories against the record. In some instances they
use devices for discrediting the record; in other
instances they resort to harmonizing hypotheses,
changing the record so as to make it agree with the
theory. Without here discussing these matters,
we must barely note some of their bearings in the
case of Abiathar.

For example, to get rid of the testimony of Jesus
(Mk 2 26) to the effect that Abiathar was high
priest and that the sanctuary at Nob was “the
house of God,” it is affirmed that either Jesus or
the evangelist is here mistaken. The proof alleged
for this is that Abiathar’s service as priest did not
begin till at least a few days later than the incident
referred to. This is merely finical, though it is an
argument that is gravely used by some scholars.

Men affirm that the statements of the record as
to the descent of the line of Eli from Ithamar are
untrue; that on the contrary we must conjecture
that Abiathar claimed descent from Eleazar, his
line being the alleged senior line of that family,
that the senior line became extinct at his death,
Zadok being of a junior line, if indeed he inherited
any of the blood of Aaron. In making such affir-
mations as these, men deny the Bible statements
as resting On insufficient evidence, and substitute
for them other statements which, confessedly, rest
on no evidence at all.

_All such procedure is incorrect. Many are sus-
picious of statements found in the Books of Ch;
that gives them no right to use their suspicions as
if they were perceptions of fact. Supposably one
may think the record unsatisfactory, and may be
within his rights in thinking so, but that does not
authorize him to change the record except on the
basis of evidence of some kind. If we treat the
record of the times of Abiathar as fairness demands
that a record be treated in a court of justice, or a
scientific investigation, or a business proposition,


9 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Abiathar
Abigail


or a medical case, we will accept the facts sub-
stantially as they are found in 8 and K and Ch
and Mk. Wiis J. Brecuer


ABIB, 4/bib (A"3N, *abhibA, young ear of barley
or. other grain, Ex 9 31; Lev 2 14): The first
month of the Israelitish year, called Nisan in Neh
2 1; Est 3 7, is Abib in Ex 13 4; 23 15; 34 18;
ef Dt 16 1. Abib is not properly a name of a
month, but part of a descriptive phrase, ‘the month
of young ears of grain.” This may indicate the
Israelitish way of determining the new year (Ex
12 2), the year beginning with the new moon
nearest or next preceding this stage of the growth
of the barley. The year thus indicated was prac-
tically the same with the old Bab year, and pre-
sumably came in with Abraham. The Penta-
teuchal laws do not introduce it, though they define
it, perhaps to distinguish it from the Egyp wander-
ing year. See CaLenpar. Wiis J. BrecHER


ABIDA, a-bi’da (YAN, 'dbhidha', “father of
knowledge,” or “my father knows’): A son of
Midian and grandson of Abraham and Keturah
(Gen 25 4; 1 Ch 1 33). Abidah in AV in Gen.


ABIDAH, a-bi’dah: Used in AV in Gen 26 4 for
Apip4, which see.


ABIDAN, a-bi‘dan (JP3N, 'abhidhdn, “father is
judge”): Abidan, son of Gideoni, was a ‘prince’
of the children of Benjamin (Nu 2 22; 10 24).
He was chosen to represent his tribe at the census
in the wilderness of Sinai (Nu 1 11). When, on
the erection, anointing and sanctification of the
Tabernacle, the heads of Israel offered, Abidan
offered on the ninth day (Nu 7 60.65).


ABIDE, a-bid’: OE word signifying progressively
to “await,” “remain,” “lodge,” “sojourn,” “dwell,”’
“continue,” “endure”; represented richly in OT
(AV) by 12 Heb and in NT by as many Gr words.
In RV displaced often by words meaning “‘to so-
journ,” ‘dwell,’ “encamp.” The Heb and Gr
originals in most frequent use are 20", ‘yashabh,
“to dwell’; pévw, ménd, “to remain.” “A. [sit or
tarry] ye here” (Gen 22 5); “The earth a. [con-
tinueth] forever’ (Eccl 1 4); ‘Who can a. [bear
or endure] the day?” (Mal 3 2); “Afflictions a.
[await] me” (Acts 20 23). The past tense abode,
in frequent use, has the same meaning. ‘His bow
a. [remained] in strength” (Gen 49 24); “There he
a.” (dwelt) (Jn 10 40). :

Abode, as a noun (Gr por%, moné) twice in
NT: “make our a. with him” (Jn 14 23); ‘‘man-
sions,” RVm “abiding-places” (Jn 14 2). The soul
of the true disciple and heaven are dwelling-places
of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.

‘Dwicat M. Pratr

ABIEL, a’bi-el, ab’yel, a-bi’el OMAN, “abhi’el,
“my father is God,” or “God is father’):

(1) A descendant of Benjamin the son of Jacob.
Father of Kish the father of King Saul, and also,
apparently, the father of Ner the father of Saul’s
general, Abner (1 § 9 1; 14 51).

(2) One of David’s mighty men (1 Ch 11 32),
called ABI1-ALBON, which see, in 2 § 23 31.


ABIEZER, ab-i-é’zer, 4-bi-e’-zer (WJP"AN , 'dbht-
‘ezer, “father of help,” or “my father is help.”
Iezer, Jezerite [in AV Jeezer, Jeezerite], is Abiezer
with the letter béh omitted):

(1) A descendant of Joseph the son of Jacob, and
head of one of the families of Manasseh that settled
W. of the Jordan (Nu 26 30; Josh 17 1-6; 1 Ch
7 14-19). As he was great uncle to Zelophehad’s


daughters, who brought a case before Moses (Nu
36), he must have been an old man at the time of
the conquest. He was the son of Gilead the son
of Machir, in the sense of being a more remote
descendant, for Machir had sons before the death
of Joseph (Gen 50 23). The Machir that possessed
Gilead and Bashan because he was ‘‘a man of war’
was the Manassite family of Machir, with Jair as
its great general (Josh 17 1; 13 30.81; Nu 32 39-
41; Dt 3 12-15). To Abiezer and other sons of
Gilead territory was assigned W. of the Jordan.

In later generations the name survived as that
of the family to which Gideon belonged, and per-
haps also of the region which they occupied (Jgs
6 34; 8 2). They are also called Abiezrites (Jgs 6
11.24; 8 32). The region was W. of Shechem, with
Ophrah for its principal city.

(2) One of David’s mighty men, “the Anatho-
thite”’ (2 S 23 27; 1 Ch 11 28), who was also
one of David's month-by-month captains, his month
being the ninth (1 Ch 27 12).

Wiis J. BEECHER

ABIEZRITE, ab-i-ez’-rit, 4-bi-ez’rit: The Gentile
adj. of ABrnzmr, which see.


ABIGAIL, ab‘-gal, ABIGAL, ab‘i-gal (73°38,
‘abhighayil, or DINAN, ‘dbhighal, three times, or
SuAaN, 'dbhaghayil, once, or DUAN, 'abhighayil,
once; “father,” or “cause of joy’’):

(1) The wife of Nabal, a rich shepherd of southern
Judaea, whose home was Maon (1 § 26 2.3);
shortly after Nabal’s death she became the wife
of David. Nabal grazed his flocks in or along the
Southern Wilderness, where David and his men
protected them from marauding tribes, so that not
a sheep was lost. When Nabal was sheep-shearing
and feasting at Carmel (in Judaea), David sent
messengers requesting provisions for himself and
men. But Nabal, who was a churlish fellow,
answered the messengers insultingly and sent them
away empty-handed. David, angered by such
mean ingratitude, gathered his 400 warriors and
set out to destroy Nabal and all he had (1 S 25 22).
Meanwhile Abigail, a woman ‘‘of good understand-
ing, and of a beautiful countenance” (ver 3),
heard of the rebuff given the men of David by her
husband; and fearing what vengeance David in
his wrath might work, she gathered a considerable
present of food (ver 18), and hastened to meet the
approaching soldiers. Her beautiful_and prudent
words, as also her fair face, so won David that he
desisted from his vengeful purpose and accepted
her gift (vs 32-35). When Abigail told Nabal
of his narrow escape, he was stricken with fear, and
died ten days afterward. Shortly after this David
took Abigail to be his wife, although about the
same time, probably a little before, he had also
taken Ahinoam (ver 43); and these two_were
with him in Gath (1 8 27 3). After David
became king in Hebron, Abigail bore him his second
son, Chileab (2 S 3 3) or Daniel, as he is called
in 1 Ch 3 1.

(2) Sister of David and mother of Amasa, at one
time commander of David’s army (1 Ch 2 16.17;
Abigal 2 S 17 25). In the first passage she is
called David’s sister, along with Zeruiah; while in
the second she is called the “daughter of Nahash.”
Several explanations of this connection with
Nahash have been suggested, any one of which
would be sufficient to remove contradiction:
(1) That Nahash was another name of Jesse, as in
Isa 14 29, mish-shoresh na@hdsh yéeé’ (Kim); (2) That
Nahash was the wife of Jesse and by him mother of
Abigail, which is least probable; (3) That Nahash,
the father of Abigail and Zeruiah, having died, his
widow became the wife of Jesse, and bore sons to


Abihail
Abimelech


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 10


him; (4) That the text of 2 S 17 25 has been cor-
rupted, “daughter of Nahash” having crept into
the text. At all events she was the sister of
David by the same mother. Epwarp Mack


ABIHAIL, ab‘i-hal (MAN dbhthayil; in some
MSS SEMAN *dbhthayil, when feminine, but best
reading is the former: ‘‘father, or cause, of strength”):
Five persons in the OT are called by this name:
(1) A Levite and the father of Zuriel, who in the
Wilderness was head of the house of Merari, Levi’s
youngest son (Nu 3 35); (2) The wife of Abishur,
a man of the tribe of Judah, in the line of Hazron
and Jerahmeel (1 Ch 2 29); (3) One of the heads
of the tribe of Gad, who dwelt in Gilead of Bashan
(1 Ch 5 14); (4) Either a wife of Rehoboam, king
of Judah, or mother of his wife Mahalath, aceord-
ing to the interpretation of the text (2 Ch 11 18);
probably the latter view is eorrect, since there is
no conjunction in the text, and since the following
ver (19) contemplates only one wife as already
mentioned. This being true, she was the wife of
Jerimath, a son of David, and daughter of Eliab,
David’s eldest brother. It is interesting to note
this frequent intermarriage in the Davidic house;
(5) Father of Queen Esther, who became wife of
Xerxes (Biblical Ahasuerus) king of Persia, after the
removal of the former queen, Vashti (Est 2 15;
9 29). He was uncle of Mordecai.

Eywarp Mack

ABIHU, a-br’hi (WPAN, 'abhthw, “father he
is,” or “my father he is”): Second son of Aaron,
the high priest (Ex 6 23). With his older brother
Nadab he ‘died before Jehovah,’ when the two
“offered strange fire’ (Lev 10 1.2). It may be
inferred from the emphatic prohibition of wine
or strong drink, laid upon the priests immediately
after this tragedy, that the two brothers were going
to their priestly functions in an intoxicated con-
dition (Lev 10 8-11). Their death is mentioned
three times in subsequent records (Nu 3 4; 26 61;
1 Ch 24 2).


ABIHUD, a-bi’/hud (TWWAN, 'dbhihidh, “father
of majesty,” or “my father is majesty,” though
some regard the second part as the proper name
Judah): The son of Bela the oldest son of Benja-
min (1 Ch 8 3).


ABIJAH, a-bi’ja (MAN or WPAN [2 Ch 13 20.21),
abhiyah or ’dbhiyadha, “my father is Jehovah,” or
“Jehovah is father’): The name of six or more
men and two women in the OT.

(1) The seventh son of Becher the son of Benja-
min (1 Ch 7 8).

(2) The second son of the prophet Samuel (1 §
8 2; 1 Ch 6 28 [6 13)). f

(3) The eighth among “the holy captains and
captains of God” appointed by lot by David in
connection with the priestly courses (1 Ch 24 10).
Compare ‘Zacharias of the course of Abijah”
(Lk 1 5).

(4) Ason of Jeroboam I of Israel (1 KK 14 1-18).
The narrative describes his sickness and his mother’s
visit to the prophet Ahijah. He is spoken of as
the one member of the house of Jeroboam in whom
there was “found some good thing toward Jehovah.”
With his death the hope of the dynasty perished.

(5) The son and successor of Rehoboam king of
Judah (1 Ch 3 10; 2 Ch 11 20—14 1). As to the
variant name Abijam (1 K 14 31; 15 1.7.8) see
ABIJAM.

The statements concerning Abijah’s mother
afford great opportunity for a person who is inter-
ested in finding discrepancies in the Bible narrative.
She is said to have been Maacah the daughter


of Absalom (1 IX 15 2; 2 Ch 11 20.21.22). As
more than 50 years elapsed between the adoles-
cence of Absalom and the accession of Rehoboam,
the suggestion at once emerges that she may have
been Absalom’s daughter in the sense of being his
granddaughter. But Maaeah the daughter of
Absalom was the mother of Asa, Abijam’s son and
successor (1 K 15 10.13; 2 Ch 15 16). Further
we are explicitly told that Absalom had three sons
and one daughter (2 8S 14 27). It is inferred that
the three sons died young, inasmuch as Absalom
before his death built him a monument because
he had no son (28 18 18). The daughter was .
distinguished for her beauty, but her name was
Tamar, not Maacah. Finally, the narrative tells
us that the name of Abijah’s mother was ‘“Mieaiah
the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah” (2 Ch 18 2).

It is less difficult to combine all these statements
into a consistent account than it would be to com-
bine some pairs of them if taken by themselves.
When all put together they make a luminous nar--
rative, needing no help from conjectural theories
of discrepant sources or textual errors. It is natural
to understand that Tamar the daughter of Absalom
married Uriel of Gibeah; that their daughter was
Maacah, named for her great-grandmother (2 8
3 3; 1 Ch 3 2); that Micaiah is a variant of
Maacah, as Abijah is of Abijam. Maacah mar-
ried Rehoboam, the parties being second cousins
on the father’s side; if they had been first cousins
perhaps they would not have married. Very
likely Solomon, through the marriage, hoped to
conciliate an influential party in Israel which still
held the name of Absalom in esteem; perhaps also
he hoped to supplement the moderate abilities of
Rehoboam by the great abilities of his wife. She
was a brilliant woman, and Rehoboam’s favorite
(2 Ch 11 21). On Abijah’s accession she held at
court the influential position of king’s mother;
and she was so strong that she continued to hold
it, when, after a brief reign, Abijah was succeeded
by Asa; though it was a position from which Asa
had the authority to depose her (1 K 16 13;
2 Ch 15 16).

The account in Ch deals mainly with a decisive
victory which, it says, Abijah gained over northern
Israel (2 Ch 13), he having 400,000 men and
Jeroboam 800,000, of whom 500,000 were slain.
It is clear that these numbers are artificial, and were
so intended, whatever may be the key to their
meaning. Abijah’s speech before the battle pre-
sents the same view of the religious situation which
is presented in Kings and Amos and Hosea, though
with fuller priestly details. The orthodoxy of
Abijah on this one occasion is not in conflict with
the representation in Kings that he followed
mainly the evil ways of his father Rehoboam. In
Chronicles coarse luxury and the multiplying of
wives are attributed to both father and son.

(6) A priest of Nehemiah’s time, who sealed the
covenant (Neh 10 7). Conjeeturally the same with
the one mentioned in Neh 12 4.17.

(7) The wife of Judah’s grandson Hezron, to
whom was traced the origin of Tekoa (1 Ch 2 24).

(8) The mother of King Hezekiah (2 Ch 29 1),
called Abiin2 K. See Azr.

¥ Wiuus J. Barcurer

ABIJAM, a-bijam (D728, 'dbhiyam, “father of
sea,” or, “father of west’): The name given in
Kings (1 K 14 31; 15 1.7.8) to the son of Reho-
boam who succeeded him as king of Judah. See
ABIJAH.

The name has puzzled scholars. Some have
proposed, by adding one letter, to change it into
“father of his people.”’ Others have observed that
the Gr rendering in Kings is Abeiow. Either the
Heb copy used by the Gr translator read *dbhiyaha,


11 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Abihail
Abimelech


Abijah, or else the translator substituted the form
of the name which was to him more familiar. A few
existing copies of the Heb have the reading Abijah,
and Mt 1 7 presupposes that as the OT reading. So
they infer that Abijam in K is an erroneous reading
for Abijah. This seems at present to be the pre-
vailing view, and it is plausible. It would be more
convincing, however, if the name occurred but once
in the passage in Kings, instead of occurring five
times. It is improbable that a scribe would repeat
the same error five times within a few sentences,
while a translator, if he changed the name once,
would of course change it the other four times.

Exploration has revealed the fact that the whole
region near the eastern end of the Mediterranean
was known as “the west.” “Father of the west”
is not an inapt name for Rehoboam to give to the
boy who, he expects, will inherit the kingdom of
Solomon and David. The effect of the secession
of the ten tribes was to make that name a burlesque,
and one does not wonder that it was superseded by
Abijah, ‘“My father is Jehovah.”

Wiutus J. Bescuer
ABILA, ab’i-la. See Apitenn.


ABILENE, a-bi-le’ne (?ABeAnvh, Abeiléné, BA;
*ABAnvA, Abzléné, &*): Mentioned in Lk 3 1 as
the tetrarchy of Lysanias at the time when John
the Baptist began his ministry. The district
derived its name from Abila, its chief town, which
was situated, according to the Itineraritum An-
tonini, 18 Roman miles from Damascus on the
way to Heliopolis (Baalbec). This places it in the
neighborhood of the village of Suk Wady Barada
(see ABANA), near which there are considerable
ancient remains, with an inscription in Gr stating
that a “freedman of Lysanias the tetrareh’’ made a
wall and built a temple, and another in Lat record-
ing the repair of the road “at the expense of the

,Abilenians.” The memory of the ancient name
probably survives in the Moslem legend which
places the tomb of Abel in a neighboring height
where there are ruins of a temple. Jos calls this
Abila, hé Lusantou, lit. ‘the A. of Lysanius,” thus
distinguishing it from other towns of the same name,
and as late as the time of Ptolemy (cir 170 AD) the
name of Lysanias was associated with it.

The territory of Abilene was part of the Ituraean
Kingdom, which was broken up when its king,
Lysanias, was put to death by M. Antonius, e 35
BC. The circumstances in which A. became a
distinct tetrarchy are altogether obscure, and
nothing further is known of the tetrarch Lysanias
(Ani, XIX, v, 1; XX, ii, 1). In 87 AD the tet-
rarchy, along with other territories, was granted
to Agrippa IJ, after whose death in 44 AD it was
administered by procurators until 53 AD, when
Claudius conferred it again, along with neigh-
boring territories, upon Agrippa II. On Agrippa’s
death, toward the close of the 1st cent., his kingdom
was incorporated in the province of Syria. See
Lysanias. C. H. THomson


_ ABILITY, a-bil’i-ti (Sivapis, duinamis, or texts,
ischus): Variously used of resources, material,
mental and spiritual; e.g. of wealth, “gave after
their a.”’ (Ezr 2 69); of mental endowment, “a.
to stand in the king’s palace” (Dnl 1 4); of tal-
ents and character, “several a.” (Mt 26 15); of
spiritual strength, “minister, as of the a. which God
giveth” (AV 1 Pet 4 11). It thus may signify
either possessions, native capacity, or gifts of the
Holy Spirit.


ABIMAEL, a-bim’a-cl, ab-i-ma’el (82°28,
*ébhima@’ al, “my father is God,” or “God is father’’):
The ninth of the thirteen sons of Joktan, who was


descendant of Shem, and son of Eber, and brother
of Peleg in whose days the earth was divided
(Gen 10 25-29; 1 Ch 1 19-23). Like some of the
other names in this list, the name is linguistically
south Arabian, and the tribes indicated are south.
Arabians. On the Arab. elements in Heb propei
names see Halévy, Mélanges d’épigraphie et d’arché-
ologie sémitiques; ZDMG, esp. early in 1888; D. H.
Miller, Epigraphie Denkmdler aus Arabien; Glaser,
Skizze der Gesch. und Geog. Arabiens; and by index
Hommel, Ancient Hebrew Tradition; and Gray,
Hebrew Proper Names; and F. Giesebrecht, Die
alitestamentliche Schdtzung des Gottesnamens.
Wis J. Bercuer

ABIMELECH, a-bim’e-lek (T2"2"2N, ’abhtmelekh,
‘father of a king”): A name borne by five OT
persons.

(1) The name of two kings of Philistia; the first
was a contemporary of Abraham, the second,
probably son of the former, was king in the days
of Isaac. It is quite possible that Abimelech was
the royal title rather than the personal name, since
in the title of Ps 34 we find it applied to the king
of Gath, elsewhere known by his personal name,
Achish (1 8 27 2.3). Shortly after the destruc-
tion of Sodom Abraham journeyed with his herds
and flocks into the extreme 8.E. country of Pal
(Gen 20). While sojourning at Gerar, the city
of Abimelech, king of the Phili country, he made
helieve that Sarah was his sister (ver 2), and
Abimelech took her, intending to make her one of
his wives. But God rebuked him in a dream,
besides sending barrenness on the women of his
household (vs 3.17). After Abimelech had _ re-
proved Abraham most justly for the deception,
he dealt generously with him, loading him with
presents and granting him the liberty of the land
(vs 14.15). When contention had arisen between
the servants of the two men over the wells of water
the two men made a covenant at a well, which
took its name, Beersheba, from this fact of covenant-
making (Gen 21 31.32).

(2) Nearly a cent. later than the events con-
nected with the first Abimelech, as outlined above,
a second Abimelech, king of the Philistines, is men-
tioned in relations with Isaac (Gen 26), who in
time of grievous famine went down from his home,
probably at Hebron, to Gerar. Fearing for his
life because of his beautiful wife, Rebekah, he called
her his sister, just as Abraham had done -with
reference to Sarah. Neither Abimelech nor any
of his people took Rebekah to wife—quite a vari-
ation from the Abrahamic incident; but when the
falsehood was detected, be upbraided Isaac for
what might have happened, continuing nevertbe-
less to treat him most graciously. Isaac continued
to dwell in the vicinity of Gerar, until contention
between his herdsmen and those of Abimelech
became too violent; then he moved away by
stages, reopening the wells digged by his father
(vs 18-22). Finally, a covenant was made between
Abimelech and Isaac at Beersheba, just as had
been made between Abraham and the first Abime-
lech (Gen 26 26-33). The two kings of Philistia
were probably father and son.

(3) The title of Ps 34 mentions another Abime-
lech, who in all probability is the same as Achish
king of Gath (1 8 21 10—22 1); with whom
David sought refuge when fleeing from Saul, and
with whom he was dwelling at the time of the Phili
invasion of Israel, which cost Saul his kingdom and
his life (1 § 27). It appears from this that Abime-
lech was thé royal title, and not the personal name
of the Phili kings.

(4) A son of Gideon (Jgs 9) who aspired to be
king after the death of his father, and did rule three


Abinadab
Ablution


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 12


years (ver 22). He first won the support of the
members of his mother’s family and their recom-
mendation of himself to all Israel (vs 3.4). He
then murdered _all the sons of his father, seventy
in number, at Ophrah, the family home in the tribe
of Manasseh, Jotham the youngest son alone
escaping (ver 5). After this Abimelech was made
ruler by an assembly of the people at Shechem.
An insurrection led by Gaal the son of Ebed having
broken out in Shechem, Abimelech, although he
succeeded in capturing that city, was wounded
to death by a miull-stone, which a woman dropped
from the wall upon his head, while he was storming
the citadel of Thebez, into which the defeated rebels
had retreated, after that city also had been taken
(vs 50-53). Finding that he was mortally wounded
and in order to avoid the shame of death at a
woman’s hand, he required his armor-bearer to
kill him with his sword (ver 54). His cruel treat-
ment of the Shechemites (vs 46-49), when they
took refuge from him in their strong tower, was a
just judgment for their acquiescence in his crimes
(vs 20.57); while his own miserable death was
retribution for his bloody deeds (ver 56).

(5) A priest in the days of David; a descendant
of Ithamar and Eli, and son of Abiathar (1 Ch 18
16). In the LXX and in 1 Ch 24 he is called
Ahimelech; but is not to be confused with Ahime-
lech, the father of Abiathar, and therefore his
grandfather. He shared with Zadok, of the line
of Ithamar, the priestly office in the reign of David
(1 Ch 24 81). Epwarp Mack


ABINADAB, a-bin’a-dab (AVIAN, ‘dbhind-
dhabh, “father of willingness,’ or, ‘‘my father is
willing.” This is according to the ordinary usage
of the second word in the name—‘‘willing” rather
than ‘‘munificent” or ‘“‘noble’’):

(1) The man in whose house the men of Kiriath-
jearim placed the ark, after its return from the
land of the Philis, his house being either in Gibeah
of Benjamin or ‘‘in the hill” (1S 7 1; 2S 6 3.4).
To account for the ambiguity note that gibh‘ah
means hill, and that the place-name Gibeah or-
dinarily has the definite article. It is natural
to think that Abinadab was himself a man of
Kiriath-jearim, though the account does not
explicitly say so. The record is that the men of
Kiriath-jearim were summoned to take charge
of the ark at a time when no one else dared to have
it (1S 6 20.21); and the implication seems to be
that they had no option to refuse. Possibly this
was due to their being Gibeonites, and hereditary
“bondmen” of “the house of my God’ (Josh 9
17.23). However this may be, they “sanctified”
Abinadab’s son Eleazar to have charge of the ark.
According to the Heb and some of the Gr copies,
the ark was in Gibeah in the middle of the reign
of King Saul (1 8 14 18).

About a century later, according to the Bible
numbers, David went with great pomp to Kiriath-
jearim, otherwise known as Baalah or Baale-judah,
to bring the ark from Kiriath-jearim, out of the
house of Abinadab in the hill (or, in Gibeah), and
place it in Jerus (1 Ch 13; 2S 6). The new cart
was driven by two descendants of Abinadab. There
may or may not have been another Abinadab then
living, the head of the house.

(2) The second of the eight sons of Jesse, one of
the three who were in Saul’s army when Goliath
gave his challenge (18 16 8; 17 13; 1 Ch 2 13).

(3) One of the sons of King Saul (1 Ch 8 33;
9 39; 10 2; 1S 31 2). He died in the battle of
Gilboa, along with his father and brothers.

(4) Ini K 4 11 AV has “the son of Abinadab,”
where RV has Ben-apinapas, which see.

Wi.us J. Bercner


ABINOAM, a-bin’6-am, ab-i-nd’am (DVN,
‘adbhind‘am, “father of pleasantness,” or, ‘my
father is pleasantness”): A man of Kedesh-naph-
tali, the father of Barak who defeated the army of
Jabin and Sisera (Jgs 4 6.12; 6 1.12).


ABIRAM, a-bi‘ram (ON, ‘abhirdm, “exalted
father,” or, “my father is an exalted one”’):

(1) The son of Eliab the son of Pallu the son of
Reuben (Nu 26 5ff; Dt 116). In company
with his brother Dathan and Korah the Levite
and others, he disputed the authority of Moses
and Aaron in the wilderness (Nu 16-17, 26; Dt
116; Ps 10617). Two hundred and fifty followers
of Korah perished by fire at the doorway of the
tent of meeting. Dathan and Abiram refused to
come to the tent of meeting, at the summons of
Moses; and the earth opened where their tents
were, and swallowed them and their families and
their goods. See Koran.

(2) The firstborn son of Hiel the Bethelite, who
rebuilt Jericho in the time of Ahab (1 K 16 34;
ef Josh 6 26). This incident has recently acquired
a new interest owing to discoveries made at Gezer
and Megiddo concerning foundation sacrifices as
anciently offered in Palestine. One should not
be too positive in making statements concerning
this, but the following is a possible interpretation
of the record. The curse pronounced by Joshua
on the man who should rebuild Jericho was of a
piece with the other details, Jericho being treated
exceptionally, as a city placed under the ban. The
language of Joshua’s curse is capable of being
translated: ‘Cursed be the man before Jehovah
who shall. ... build... . Jericho; [who] shall
lay its foundation in his firstborn, and set up its
gates in his youngest.’ According to this inter-
pretation the death of the builder’s eldest and
youngest sons is not spoken of as the penalty in-
volved in the curse, but as an existing horrible
custom, mentioned in order to give solemnity to
the diction of the curse. The writer in Kings cites
the language of the curse by Joshua. The context
in which he mentions the affair suggests that he
regards Hiel’s conduct as exceptionally flagrant
in its wickedness. Hiel, in defiance of Jehovah, not
only built the city, but in building it revived the
horrible old Canaanite custom, making his first-
born son a foundation sacrifice, and his youngest
son a sacrifice at the completion of the work.

Wiis J. BEECHER

ABIRON, a-bi‘ron (’ABeipdv, Aberin):

(1) The LXX form (Ecclus 45 18 AV) of Abiram,
one of the sons of Eliab, who, with his brother
Dathan, aud with one of the same tribe, joined the
conspiracy against Moses and Aaron (Nu 16
1.12.24.25.27; 26 9; Dt 11 6; Ps 106 17).

_(2) The eldest son of Hiel, the Bethelite, who
died prematurely, thus fulfilling the doom pro-,
nounced on the posterity of him who should under-
take to rebuild Jericho (1 K 16 34). See Aprram.


ABISEI, ab-i-séi.. See Anrsset.


ABISHAG, ab‘i-shag, a-bi/shag (SWAN, ’dbhi-
shagh, apparently, ‘father of wandering,” that is,
“cause of wandering,” or “my father wanders”):
The Shunammite woman who became nurse to
King David (1 K 1 1-4.15;2 17.21.22). She was
chosen for the service with great care on account
of her youth and beanty and physical vigor. She
ministered to the king, that is, waited on him as
personal attendant and nurse. She also “cher-
ished” him in his feebleness—gave to him through
physical contact the advantage of her superabun-
dant vitality. This was a mode of medical treat-


ment recommended by the servants of the king,


13 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Abinadab
Ablution


and it appears to have been not wholly unsuccessful.
She had an intimate knowledge of the condition of
David, and was present at the interview of Bath-
sheba with David which resulted in the placing of
Solomon on the throne. If that act had been
questioned she would have been a most important
witness. By reason of this and of her personal
charms, she might become a strong helper to any
rival of Solomon who should intrigue to supplant
him, Adonijab sought Abishag in marriage. On
the basis of this and of such other evidence as may
supposably have been in his possession, Solomon
put Adonijah to death as an intriguer. :
Wits J. BEECHE

ABISHAI, ab‘i-shi, a-bi’shi (WAN, ‘dbhishai,
in Ch "WAN, ’abhshai; meaning is doubtful, prob-
ably “my father is Jesse,” BDB): Son of Zeruiah,
David's sister, and one of the three famous brothers,
of whom Joab and Asahel were the other two
(2 8 218). He was chief of the second group of
three among David’s “mighty men” (2 S 23 18).
He first appears with David, who was in the Wilder-
ness of Ziph, to escape Saul. When David called
for a volunteer to go down into Saul’s camp by
night, Abishai responded, and counseled the killing
of Saul when they came upon the sleeping king
(1 S 26 6-9). In the skirmish between the men
of Ishbosheth and the men of David at Gibeon,
in which Asahel was killed by Abner, Abishai was
present (2S 2 18.24). He was with and aided
Joab in the cruel and indefensible murder of Abner,
in revenge for their brother Asahel (2 S 3 30).
In David’s campaign against the allied Ammonites
and Syrians, Abishai led the attack upon the
Ammonites, while Joab met the Syrians; the
battle was a great victory for Israel (2S 10 10-14).
He was always faithful to David, and remained
with him, as he fled from Absalom. When Shimei,
of the house of Saul, cursed the fleeing king, Abishai
characteristically wished to kill him at once (2 8
16 8.9); and when the king returned victorious
Abishai advised the rejection of Shimei’s peni-
tence, and his immediate execution (2.8 19 21).
In the battle with Absalom’s army at Mahanaim
Abishai led one division of David’s army, Joab
and Ittai commanding the other two (2 8 18 2).
With Joab he put down the revolt against David
of Sheba, a man of Benjamin (2 S 20 6.10), at
which Joab treacherously slew Amasa his cousin
and rival, as he had likewise murdered Abner,
Abishai no doubt being party to the crime. In a
battle with the Philistines late in his life, David
was faint, being now an old man, and was in danger
of death at the hands of the Phili giant Ishbihenob
when Abishai came to his rescue and killed the
giant (2S 2117). In the list of David's heroes
(2 S 28) Abishai’s right to leadership of the
“second three” is based upon his overthrowing
three hundred men with his spear (ver 18).
He does not appear in the struggle of Adonijah
against Solomon, in which Joab was the leader,
and therefore is supposed to have died before that
time.

He was an impetuous, courageous man, but less
cunning than his more famous brother Joab,
although just. as cruel and relentless toward rival
or foe. David understood and feared their hard-
ness and cruelty. Abishai’s best trait was his
unswerving loyalty to his kinsman, David.

Epwarp Mack

ABISHALOM, a-bish’a-lom: Variant of AB-

sALOM, which see.


ABISHUA, a-bish’t-a, abi-shoo’a (27038,
abhishue', uncertain, perhaps ‘father of wealth,”
or “my father is wealth’):


(1) Ason of Bela the son of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 4).
(2) The son of Phinehas, who was grandson to
Aaron (1 Ch 6 4.5.50; Ezr 7 5).


ABISHUR, a-bi’shur (WW AN, 'ddhtshar, “my
father is a wall’): Great-grandson of Jerahmeel
and Atarah, Jerahmeel being great-grandson of
Judah. Abishur was son of Shammai, and was
the husband of Abihail, and the father of sons
(1 Ch 2 28.29).


ABISSEI, a-bis’é-i (AV Abisei): An ancestor
of Ezra (2 Esd 1 2)=Abisue (1 Esd 8 2) and
Abishua (1 Ch 6 4ff; Ez 7 5).


ABISUE, a-bis’t-é (B, ’ABural, Abisai; A, Abi-
souat; AV Abisum=Abishua |1 Ch 6 4ff; Esr
7 5] and Abissei [2 Esd 1 2]): An ancestor of Ezra
(1 Esd 8 2).


ABISUM, ab’i-sum. See AnrsvE (Apoc).


ABITAL, ab‘i-tal, a-bi’tal OU"AN, 'abhital, “my
father is dew’’): One of the wives of King David.
In the duplicated list (28 3 4; 1 Ch 3 3) in
which the sons born to David in Hebron are men-
tioned and numbered, the fifth is said to be
Shephatiah the son of Abital.


ABITUB, ab’i-tub, a-bi’‘tub (ATO°AN, *AbAttadh,
“father of goodness,” or, “my father is goodness’’) :
In AV Ahitub. A descendant of Benjamin and son
of Shaharaim and Hushim, born in the field of Moab
(1 Ch 8 11).


ABIUD, a-bi’ud (’APt0v5, Abioud, perhaps “my
father is majesty”; see AstHuD): Mentioned in the
genealogy of Jesus (Mt 1 13 and not elsewhere) as
the son of Zerubbabel. See GENEALOGY.


ABJECT, ab’jekt: Only as a noun, and but once
(Ps 35 15) for M32, nékheh, lit. “‘smitten ones,”
i.e. ‘men of the lowest grade’? (Hengstenberg,
Delitzsch), ‘‘the rabble,’’ defined by the succeeding
clause as those of such infcrior station that they
were unknown.


ABLE, 4’b’l: The Gr Suvapox, dinamai, “to have
power,” may refer either to inherent strength, or
to the absence of external obstacles, or to what
may, be allowable or permitted. The Gr loxvw,
ischio, as in Lk 13 24; Jn 21 6, refers always to
the first of the above meanings. The use of the
word as an adj. in AV of 2 Cor 3 6, is misleading,
and has been properly changed in RV into “‘sufh-
cient as: ministers,” i.e. “hath fitted us to be
ministers.”


ABLUTION, ab-li’shun: The rite of ablution for
religious purification seems to have been practised
in some form in all lands and at all times. The
priests of Egypt punctiliously practised it (Herod-
otus ii.37). The Greeks were warned ‘never with
unwashed hands to pour out the black wine at
morn to Zeus” (Hesiod, Opera et Dies v.722; cf
Homer, Iliad vi.266; Od. iv.759). The Romans
also observed it (Virgil, Aeneid ii.217); as did and
do Orientals in general (cf Koran, Sura 6 8, etc).

Ablutions for actual or ritual purification form
quite a feature of the Jewish life and ceremonial.
No one was allowed ta enter a holy place or to
approach God by prayer or sacrifice without having
first performed the rite of ablution, or “sanctifi-
cation,’ as it was sometimes called (Ex 19 10;
1S 16 5; 2 Ch 29 5; cf Jos, Ant, XIV, xi, 5).

Three kinds of washing are recognized in Biblical
and rabbinical law: (1) washing of the hands,


Abner
Abomination


(2) washing of the hands and feet, and (8) immer-
sion of the whole body in water. (1 and 2=Gr
vinta, nipto; 3=Gr dovw, lod). '
Something more than an echo of a universal
practice is found in the Scriptures. The rabbis
claimed _to find support for ceremonial hand-wash-
ing in Lev 16 11. David’s words, “I will wash
my hands in innocency: so will I compass thine
altar, O Jeh’ (Ps 26 6; cf Ps 73 13), are re-
garded by them as warranting the inference that
ablution of the hands was prerequisite to auy holy
act. This is the form of ablution, accordingly,
which is most universally and scrupulously prac-
tised by Jews. Before any meal of which bread
forms a part, as before prayer, or any act of wor-
ship, the hands must be solemnly washed in pure
water; as also after any unclean bodily function,
or contact with any unclean thing. Such hand-
washings probably arose naturally from the fact
that the ancients ate with their fingers, and so
were first for physical cleansing only; but they
came to be ceremonial and singularly binding.
The Talm abundantly shows that eating with
unwashed hands came to be reckoned a matter of
highest importance—“tantamount to committing
an act of unchastity, or other gross crime.” Akiba,
when in prison, went without water given him to
quench his thirst, rather than neglect the rite of
ablution (‘Er. 216). Only in extreme cases,
according to the Mish, as on a battlefield, might
peor dispense with it. Simeon, the Essene, ‘the
aint’? (Toseph. Kélim i.6), on entering the holy
place without having washed his hands, claiming
that he was holier than the high priest because of
his ascetic life, was excommunicated, as under-
mining the authority of the Elders (cf ‘Hdiy. 5 6).
Washing of the hands and feet is prescribed by
the Law only for those about to perform priestly
functions (cf Koran, Sura 6 8, in contrast: “When
ye prepare yourselves for prayer, wash your faces
and hands up to the elbows, and wipe your heads
and your feet to the ankles’; Hughes, Dici. of
Islam). For example, whenever Moses or Aaron
or any subordinate priest desired to enter the
sanctuary (Tabernacle) or approach the altar, he
was required to wash his hands and feet from the
laver which stood between the Tabernacle and the
altar (Ex 30 19; 40 31). The same rule held in
the Temple at Jerusalem. The washing of the
whole body, however, is the form of ablution most
specifically and exactingly required by the Law.
The cases in which the immersion of the whole
body is commanded, either for purification or
consecration, are very numerous. For example,
the Law prescribed that no leper or other unclean
person of the seed of Aaron should eat of holy
flesh until] he had washed his whole body in water
(Lev 22 4-6); that anyone coming in contact
with a person having an unclean issue, or with
any article used by such a one, should wash his
whole body (15 5-10); that a sufferer from an
unclean issue (15 16.18); a menstruous woman
(2 8 11 2.4), and anyone who touched a men-
struous woman, or anything used by her, should
likewise immerse the whole person in water (Lev
15 19-27): that the high priest who ministered
on the Day of Atonement (16 24-28), the priest
who tended the red heifer (Nu 19 7.8.19), and
every priest at his installation (Ex 29 4; 40 12)
should wash his whole body in water. Cf ‘divers
baptisms’ (immersions) in He 9 10, and see Broadus
on Mt 15 2-20 with footnote. (For another view
on bathing see Kennedy in HDB, I, 257 v.)
Bathing in the modern and non-religious sense
igs rarely mentioned in the Scriptures (Ex 2 5
Pharaoh’s daughter; 28 11 2 RV _ Bathsheba,
and the interesting case 1 K 22 38). Public


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 14


baths are first met with in the Gr period—included
in the “place of exercise’ (1 Macc 1 14), and
remains of such buildings from the Rom period
are numerous. Recently a remarkable series of
bath-chambers have been discovered at Gezer, in
Pal, in connection with a building which is sup-
posed to be the palace built by Simon Maccabaeus
(Kennedy fillust. in PEFS, 1905, 294 fl).

The rite of ablution was observed among early
Christians also. Eusebius (HE, X, 4.40) tells of
Christian churches being supplied with fountains
or basins of water, after the Jewish custom of pro-
viding the laver for the use of the priests. The
Apos Const (VIII.32) have the rule: ‘Let all the
faithful . when they rise from sleep, before
they go to work, pray, after having washed them-
selves” (nipsdmenot).

The attitude of Jesus toward the rabbinical law
of ablution is significant. Mk (7 3) prepares the
way for his record of it by explaining, ‘The Phar-
isees and all the Jews eat not except they wash
their hands to the wrist’ (pugmé). (See LTJM,
II, 11). According to Mt 15 1-20 and Mk 7 1-28
Pharisees and Scribes that had come from Jerusa-
lem (i.e. the strictest) had seen some of Jesus’
disciples eat bread with unwashed hands, and they
asked Him: ‘Why do thy disciples transgress the
tradition of the elders? for they wash not their
hands when they eat bread.’ Jesus’ answer was to
the Jews, even to His own disciples, in the highest
degree surprising, paradoxical, revolutionary (cf
Mt 12 8). They could not but see that it applied
not merely to hand-washing, but to the whole
matter of clean and unclean food; and this to
them was one of the most vital parts of the Law
(cf Acts 10 14). Jesus saw that the masses of
the Jews, no less than the Pharisees, while scrupu-
lous about ceremonial purity, were careless of
inward purity. So here, as in the Sermon on the
Mount, and with reference to the Sabbath (Mt
12 1 ff), He would lead them into the deeper and
truer significance of the Law, and thus prepare
the way for setting aside not only the traditions
of the elders that made void the commandments
of God, but even the prescribed ceremonies of the
Law themselves, if need be, that the Law in its
higher principles and meanings might be “fulfilled.”
Here He proclaims a principle that goes to the heart
of the whole matter of true religion in saying:
“Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites”
(Mk 7 6-13)—you who make great pretense of
devotion to God, and insist strenuously on the
externals of His service, while at heart you do not
love Him, making the word of God of none effect
for the sake of your tradition!


Litzeraturs.—For list of older authorities see McClin-
tock and Strong, Cyclopedia; Nowack, Biblische Archae-
ologie, II, 275-99; and Spitzer, Ueber Baden und Bdder
bei den alten Hebrdern, 1884.

Gro. B. Eager


ABNER, ab’nér (“248, ‘abhnér; in 1S 14 50
the Heb has the fuller form, WPAN, ’dbhinér,
Abiner; cf Abiram by the side of Abram; meaning,
“my father is a lamp”): Captain of the host under
Saul and Ishbosheth (Eshbaal). He was Saul’s
cousin; Ner the father of Abner and Kish the
father of Saul being brothers, the sons of Abiel
(18 14 50f). In 1 Ch 8 33; 939 the text
appears to be faulty; read: ‘And Ner begat Abner,
and Kish begat Saul.” According to 1 Ch 27 21
Abner had a son by the name of Jaasiel.

Abner was to Saul what Joab was to David.
Despite the many wars waged by Saul, we hear
little of Abner during Saul’s lifetime. Not even
in the account of the battle of Gilboa is mention
made of him. Yet both his high office and his
kinship to the king must have brought the two


15 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Abner
Abomination


men in close contact. On festive occasions it was
the custom of Abner to sit at table by the king’s
side (1 S 20 25). It was Abner who introduced
the young David fresh from his triumph over
Goliath to the king’s court (so according to the
account in 18 17 57). We find Abner accom-
panying the king in his pursuit of David (1 S 26
5 ff). Abner is rebuked by David for his negli-
gence in keeping watch over his master (ib, 15).

Upon the death of Saul, Abner took up the cause
of the young heir to the throne, Ishbosheth, whom
he forthwith removed from the neighborhood of
David to Mahanaim in the East-Jordanic country.
There he proclaimed him king over all Israel. By
the pool of Gibeon he and his men met Joab and
the servants of David. Twelve men on each side
engaged in combat which ended disastrously for
Abner who fled. He was pursued by Aszahel,
Joab’s brother, whom Abner slew. Though Joab
and his brother Abishai sought to avenge their
brother’s death on the spot, a truce was effected;
Abner was permitted to go his way after three
hundred and threescore of his men had fallen.
Joab naturally watched his opportunity. Abner
and his master soon had a quarrel over Saul’s
concubine, Rizpah, with whom Abner was intimate.
It was certainly an act of treason which Ishbosheth
was bound to resent. The disgruntled general
made overtures to David; he won over the tribe
of Benjamin. With twenty men of them he came
to Hebron and arranged with the king of Judah
that he would bring over to his side all Israel.
He was scarcely gone when Joab learned of the
affair; without the knowledge of David he recalled
him to Hebron where he slew him, “for the blood
of Asahel his brother.” David mourned sincerely
the death of Abner. ‘Know ye not,” he addressed
his servants, “that there is a prince and a great,
man fallen this day in Israel?’ He followed the
bier in person. Of the royal lament over Abner
a fragment is quoted:

“Should Abner dio as a fool dieth ?

Thy pends were not bound, nor thy feet put into

As a man falleth before the children of iniquity, so

didst thou fall."
(See 2 S 3 6-38.) The death of Abner, while it
thus cannot in any wise be laid at the door of David,
nevertheless served his purposes well. The back-
bone of the opposition to David was broken, and he
was soon proclaimed as king by all Israel.
Max L. Mareouis
ABODE, a-bid’. See ABipE.


ABOLISH, a-bol’ish (NN, hathath, “to be broken
down,” “made void,’’ ‘‘My righteousness shall not
be abolished” [Isa 61 6], i.e. as shown in God’s faith-
fulness to His promises; “A = mdhdh, ‘‘to erase,”
“blot out,” “that your works may be abolished”
[Ezk 6 6]; Karapyéo, katargés, ‘“‘to render in-
operative,” “bring to nought,” “make of no effect,”
“when he shall have abolished all rule” [1 Cor 16 24],
every power opposed to God’s kingdom; “having
abolished in his flesh the enmity” [Eph 2 15]): By
His death, Christ did away with the race separa-
tion due to historic ordinances and ceremonial laws
(as of circumcision and uncircumcision); through
the cross He wrought the reconciliation, and secured
that common access to the Father by which the
union is maintained.

“Our Saviour Christ Jesus ... . abolished
death” (2 Tim 110). Men still die, ‘At is ap-
pointed unto men” (He 9 27), but the fear of
death as having power to terminate or affect our
personal existence and our union with God, as a
dreadful stepping out into the unknown and un-
knowable (into Sheol of the impenetrable gloom),


and as introducing us to a final and irreversible
judgment, has been removed. Christ has taken
out of it its sting (1) Cor 16 55f) and all its hurt-
ful power (He 2 14); has shown it to be under His
control (Rev 1 18), brought to light the inccrrupt-
ible life beyond, and declarcd the ultimate de-
struction of death (1 Cor 15 26; cf Rev 20 14).
The Gr (katargeitai) indicates that the process of
destruction was then going on. M. O. Evans


ABOMINATION, a-bom-i-na’shun (2738, piggal,
TAIN, to'ebhah, PPW, shekeg [PV PW, shikkac]):
Three distinct Heb words are rendered in the Eng-
lish Bible by ‘abomination,’ or ‘abominable
thing,” referring (except in Gen 43 32; 46 34)
to things or practices abhorrent to Jehovah, and
opposed to the ritual or moral requirements of
His religion. It would be well if these words could
be distinguished in tr, as they denote different
degrees of abhorrence or loathsomeness.

The word most used for this idea by the Hebrews
and indicating the highest degree of abomination
is MA7IM, to°sbh@h, meaning primarily that which
offends the religious sense of a people. When it
is said, for example, ““The Egyptians might not
eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an abomi-
nation unto the Egyptians,” this is the word used;
the significance being that the Hebrews were
repugnant to the Egyptians as foreigners, as of an
iB a) caste, and especially as shepherds (Gen

The feeling of the Egyptians for the Greeks was
likewise one of repugnance. Herodotus (1.41)
says the Egyptians would not kiss a Greek on the
mouth, or use his dish, or taste meat cut with the
knife of a Greek.

Among the objects described in the OT as
“abominations” in this sense are heathen gods,
such as Ashtoreth (Astarte), Chemosh, Milcom,
the “abominations” of the Zidonians (Phoenicians),
Moabites, and Ammonites, respectively (2 K 23
13), and everything connected with the worship
of such gods. When Pharaoh, remonstrating
against the departure of the children .of Israel,
exhorted them to offer sacrifices to their God in
Egypt, Moses said: ‘Shall we sacrifice the abom-
ination of the Egyptians [i.e. the animals worshipped
by them which were taboo, to‘ébhah, to the Israel-
ites] before their eyes, and will they not stone us?”
(Ex 8 26).

It is to be noted that, not only the heathen idol
itself, but anything offered to or associated with
the idol, all the paraphernalia of the forbidden
cult, was called an “abomination,” for it “is an
abomination to Jeh thy God’’ (Dt 7 25.26). The
Deuteronomic writer here adds, in terms quite
significant of the point of view and the spirit of
the whole law: ‘Neither shalt thou bring an
abomination into thy house and thus become a
thing set apart [hérem=tabooed] like unto it; thou
shalt utterly detest it and utterly abhor it, for it is
a thing set apart’ (tabooed). To‘ébhah is even used
as synonymous with “idol’’ or heathen deity, as
in Isa 44 19; Dt 32 16; 2 K 23 13; and esp. Ex
8 22 ff. Ret ete, ete

Everything akin to magic or divination is like-
wise an abomination (to‘ébhdh); as are sexual
transgressions (Dt 22 5; 28 18; 24 4), esp. incest
and other unnatural offences: ‘For all these
abominations have the men of the land done,
that were before you” (Lev 18 27; cf Ezk 8 15).
It is to be noted, however, that the word takes on
in the later usage a higher ethical and spiritual
meaning: as where “divers measures, a great _and
asmall,” are forbidden (Dt 25 14-16); and in Prov
where “lying lips’? (12 22), “the proud in heart”


Abomination
Abound


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA . 16


(16 5), “the way of the wicked” (15 9), ‘‘evil de-
vices’ (15 26), and “he that justifieth the wicked,
and he that condemneth the righteous” (17 15),
are said to be an abomination in God’s sight. At
last prophet and sage are found to unite in declaring
that any sacrifice, however free from physical
blemish, if offered without purity of motive, is an
abomination: ‘Bring no more an oblation of false-
hood—an incense of abomination it is to me’
(Isa 1 13; cf Jer 7 10). “The sacrifice of the
wicked” and the prayer of him “‘that turneth away
his ear from hearing the law,” are equally an abomi-
nation (see Prov 15 8; 21 27; 28 9).

Another word rendered “abomination” in the AV
is TRU, shekeg or VIPW, shikkug. It expresses
generally a somewhat less degree of horror or religious
aversion than t0‘ébhah, but sometimes seems to stand
about on a level with it in meaning. In Dt 14 3,
for example, we have the command, ‘Thou shalt
not eat any abominable thing,” as introductory
to the laws prohibiting the use of the unclean ani-
mals (see CLEAN anp UNcLEAN ANIMALS), and the
word there used is t0‘ébha@h. Butin Lev 11 10-13.
20.23.41.42; Isa 66 17; and in Ezk 8 10 sheke¢
is the word used and likewise applied: to the pro-
hibited animals; as also in Lev 11 43 shekeg is
used when it is commanded, ‘Ye shall not make
yourselves abominable.” Then shekec is often
used parallel to or together with td‘ébhadh of that
which should be held as detestable, as for instance,
of idols and idolatrous practices (see esp. Dt 29 17;
Hos 9 10; Jer 41; 18 27; 1618; Ezk 11 18-
21; 20 7.8). It is used exactly as t6'@bhdh is used
as applied to Milcom, the god of the Ammonites,
which is spoken of as the detestable thing (shekeg)
of the Ammonites (1 K 11 5). Still even in such
cases to‘ébhah seems to be the stronger word and
to express that which is in the highest degree
abhorrent.

The other word used to express a somewhat
kindred idea of abhorrence and tr “abomination”
in AV is D\9D, piggal; but it is used in the Heb
Bible only of sacrificial flesh that has become stale,
putrid, tainted (see Lev 7 18; 19 7; Ezk 4 14;
Isa 65 4). Driver maintains that it occurs only
as a “technical term for such state sacrificial
flesh as has not been eaten within the prescribed
time,” and, accordingly, he would everywhere
render it specifically “refuse meat.’ Compare
lehem m‘gh@’al, “‘the loathsome bread” (from g@’al,
“to loathe’) Mal 17. A chief interest in the
subject for Christians grows out of the use of the
term in the expression “‘abomination of desolation”
(Mt 24 15 and Mk 13 14), which see. See also
ABHOR.

Lireratvrs.—Commentators ad loc. Rabbinical lit. in
point. Driver; Weiss; Gritz, Gesch. der Juden, IV, n. 15.

Gro. B. Eaczr


ABOMINATION, BIRDS OF, Lev 11 13-19:
“And these ye shall have in abomination among the
birds; they shall not be eaten, they are an abom-
ination: the eagle, and the gier-eagle, and the
ospray, and the kite, and the falcon after its kind,
every raven after its kind, and the ostrich, and the
night-hawk, and the sea-mew, and the hawk after
its kind, and the little owl, and the cormorant,
and the great owl, and the horned owl, and the
pelican, and the vulture, and the stork, the heron
after its kind, and the hoopoe, and the bat.” Dt
14 12-18 gives the glede in addition.

Each of these birds is treated in order in this
work. There are two reasons why Moses_pro-
nounced them an abomination for food. Either
they had rank, offensive, tough flesh, or they were
connected with religious superstition. The eagle,
gier-eagle, ospray, kite, glede, falcon, raven, night-


hawk, sea-mew, hawk, little ow!, cormorant, great
owl, horned owl, pelican and vulture were offen-
sive because they were birds of prey or ate carrion
or fish until their flesh partook of the odor of their
food. Young ostriches have sweet, tender flesh
and the eggs are edible also. In putting these
birds among the abominations Moses must have
been thinking of grown specimens. (Ostriches
live to a remarkable age and on account of the dis-
tances they cover, and their speed in locomotion,
their muscles become almost as hard as bone.)
There is a trace of his early Egyp training when he
placed the stork and the heron on this list. These
birds, and the crane as well, abounded in all coun-
tries known at that time and were used for food
according to the superstitions of different nations.
These three were closely related to the ibis which
was sacred in Egypt and it is probable that they
were protected by Moses for this reason, since they
were eaten by other nations at that time and cranes
are used for food today by natives of our south-
eastern coast states and are to be found in the
markets of our western coast. The veneration
for the stork that exists throughout the civilized
world today had its origin in Pal. Noting the
devotion of mated pairs and their tender care for
the young the Hebrews named the bird hdsidhah,
which means kindness. Carried down the history
of ages with additions by other nations, this un-
doubtedly accounts for the story now universal,
that the stork delivers newly-born children to their
homes; so the bird is loved and protected. One
ancient Rom writer, Cornelius Nepos, recorded
that in his time both crane and storks were eaten;
storks were liked the better. Later, Pliny wrote
that no one would touch a stork, but everyone was
fond of crane. In Thessaly it was a capital crime
to kill a stork. This change from regarding the
stork as a delicacy to its protection by a death
penalty merely indicates the hold the character-
istics of the bird had taken on people as it became
better known, and also the spread of the regard in
which it was held throughout Pal. The hoopoe
(q.v.). was offensive to Moses on account of ex-
tremely filthy nesting habits, but was considered
a great delicacy when captured in migration by
residents of southern Europe. See also ABOMINA-
TION; Brrps, UNCLEAN.
Gene Stratton-PorTER

ABOMINATION OF DESOLATION, des-o-
la’shun: The Heb root for abomination is 7PD,
shakag, “to be filthy,” “to loathe,” “to abhor,” from
which is derived 7 PW or TAPW, shikkue, or shikbic,
‘filthy,’’ esp. “‘idolatrous.” This word is used to de-
scribe specific forms of idolatrous worship that were
specially abhorrent, as of the Ammonites (1 K 11
5.7); of the Moabites (1 K 11 7; 2 K 23 13).
When Daniel undertook to specify an abomination
so surpassingly disgusting to the sense of morality
and decency, and so aggressive against everything
that was godly as to drive all from its presence
and leave its abode desolate, he chose this as the
strongest among the several synonyms, adding~
the qualification “that maketh desolate’ (Dnl 11
31; 12 11), LXX BoAvypa epqudcews, bdél-ug-ma
er-é-m6-se-0s. The same noun, though in the plural,
occurs in Dt 29 17; 2 K 23 24; Isa 66 3; Jer 4
1; 7.30; 13 27; 32 34; Ezk 20 7.8.30;  Dnl 9
27; Hos 910; Zec 97. The NT equivalent of
the noun is fdérvyya, bdél-ug-ma = “detestable,”
i.e. (specially) “idolatrous.” Alluding to Daniel,
Christ spoke of the “abomination of desolation”
(Mt 24 15; Mk 13 14).

Since the invasion of the Assyrians and Chal-
daeans, the Jewish people, both of the Northern and
of the Southern kingdom, had been without political


17 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Abomination
independence. From the Chaldaeans the rulership | A gymnasium was erected outside the castle; the


of Judaea had been transferred to the Persians, and

from the Persians, after an interval
1. The of 200 years, to Alexander the Great.
Historical From the beginning of the Pers sover-
Background eignty, the Jews had been permitted

to organize anew their religious and
political commonwealth, thus establishing a state
under the rulership of priests, for the high priest
was not only the highest functionary of the cult,
but also the chief magistrate in so far as these
prerogatives were not exercised by the king of
the conquering nation. Ezra had given a new
significance to the térah by having it read to the
whole congregation of Israel and by his vigorous
enforcement of the law of separation from the
Gentiles. His emphasis of the law introduced
the period of legalism and finical interpretation
of the letter which called forth some of the bitterest
invectives of our Saviour. Specialists of the law
known as “scribes” devoted themselves to its
study and subtle interpretation, and the pious
beheld the highest moral accomplishment in the
extremely conscientious observance of every pre-
cept. But in opposition to this class, there were


those who, influenced by the Hellenistic culture, '
introduced by the conquests of Alexander the |


Great, were inclined to a more “‘liberal’’ policy.
Thus two opposing parties were developed: the
Hellenistic, and the party of the Pious, or the
Chasidim, hdsidhim (Hasidaeans, 1 Macc 2 42;
713), who held fast to the strict ideal of the
scribes. The former gradually came into ascend-
ency. Judaea was rapidly becoming Hellenistic in
all phases of its political, social and religious life,
and the ‘‘Pious” were dwindling to a small minor-
ity sect. This was the situation when Antiochus
Epiphanes set out to suppress the last vestige of

the Jewish cult by the application of brute force.
Antiochus IV, son of Antiochus the Great,
became the successor of his brother, Seleucus IV,
who had been murdered by his min-


2. Antio- ister, Heliodorus, as king of Syria
chus (175-164 BC). He was by nature
Epiphanes a despot; eccentric and unreliable;


sometimes a spendthrift in his liber-
ality, fraternizing in an affected manner with those
of lower station; sometimes cruel and tyrannical,
ag witness his aggressious against Judaea. Polyb-
ius (26 10) tells us that his eccentric ideas caused
some to speak of him as a man of pure motive and
humble character, while others hinted at insanity.
The epithet Epiphanes is an abbreviation of theds
epiphanés, which is the designation given himself
by Antiochus on his coins, and means “the god
who appears or reveals himself.” Egyp writers
translate the inscription, “God which comes forth,”’
namely, like the burning sun, Horos, on the hori-
zon, thus identifying the king with the triumphal,
appearing god. When Antiochus Epiphanes arose
to the throne, Onias III, as high priest, was the
leader of the old orthodox party in Judaea; the head
of the Hellenists was his own brother Jesus, or,
as he preferred to designate himself, Jason, this
being the Gr form of his name and indicating the
trend of his mind. Jason promised the king large
gums of money for the transfer of the office of high
priest from his brother to himself and the privilege
of erecting a gymnasium and a temple to Phallus,
and for the granting of the privilege ‘‘to enroll the
inhabitants of Jerusalem as citizens of Antioch.”
Antiochus gladly agreed to everything. Onias
was removed, Jason became high priest, and hence-
forth the process of Hellenizing Judaea was pushed
energetically. The Jewish cult was not attacked,
but the “legal institutions were set aside, and
illegal practices were introduced” (2 Mace 4 11).


youth of Jerusalem exercised themselves in the
gymnastic art of the Greeks, and even priests left
their services at the altar to take part in the con-
test of the palaestra. The disregard of Jewish
custom went so far that many artificially removed
the traces of circumcision from their bodies, and
with characteristic liberality, Jason even sent a
contribution to the sacrifices in honor of Heracles
on the occasion of the quadrennial festivities in
Tyre.
Under these conditions it is not surprising that
Antiochus should have had both the inclination
and the courage to undertake the
3. The total eradication of the Jewish reli-
Suppression gion and the establishment of Gr
of the polytheism in its stead. The observ-
Jewish Cult ance of all Jewish laws, especially
those relating to the Sabbath and to
circumcision, were forbidden under pain of death.
The Jewish cult was set aside, and in all cities of
Judaea, sacrifices must be hrought to the pagan
deities. Representatives of the crown everywhere
enforced the edict. Once a month a search was
instituted, and whoever had secreted a copy of the
Law or had observed the rite of circumcision was
condemned to death. In Jerusalem on the 15th
of Chislev of the year 145 aet Sel, ie. in December
168 BC, a pagan altar was built on the Great Altar
of Burnt Sacrifices, and on the 25th of Chislev,
sacrifice was brought on this altar for the first
time (1 Mace 1 54.59). This evidently was the
“abomination of desolation.” The sacrifice, ac-
cording to 2 Macc was brought to the Olympian
Zeus, to whom the temple of Jerusalem had been
dedicated. At the feast of Dionysus, the Jews
were obliged to march in the Bacchanalian pro-
cession, crowned with laurel leaves. Christ applies
the phrase to what was to take place at the advance
of the Romans against Jerusalem. They who
would behold the ‘abomination of desolation”
standing in the holy place, He bids flee to the
mountains, which probably refers to the advance
of the Rom army into the city and temple, carrying
standards which bore images of the Rom gods and
were the objects of pagan worship.
Frank E. Hrrsce
ABOUND, a-bound’, ABUNDANCE, a-bun’-
dans, ABUNDANT, a-bun’dant, -LY, a-bun‘dant-li:
These words represent in the EV a considerable
variety of different words in the Heb and Gr
original. In the OT they most frequently stand
for some form of the stem rdbh, signifying ‘‘to cast
together,” “to increase.” In Prov 8 24 the
primary idea is “to be heavy” (root kdbhadh);
in Dt 33 19 and Job 22 11 it is “to overflow”
(shdpha‘); in Job 36 31 it is ‘to plait together,”
“to augment,” ‘to multiply” (makhbir from ka-
bhar); in Isa 47 9 it is “strength” (‘ogmah); in
1 K 18 41 it is “tumult,” “crowd” (hdmén); in
Eccl 5 12 it is “to fill to satiety’ (RV “fulness”);
in Isa 15 7 it is “excellence” (yithrah) and in 66 11
“9 full breast” (ziz); in Jer 33 6 it is “copious-
ness” (‘dthereth from ‘dthar). In several passages
(e.g. Ezk 16 49; Ps 105 30; Isa 66 12) RV gives
other and better renderings than AV. In the NT
perissés, perisseud, perisscia, etc, are the usual
words for “abundant,” “abound,” “abundance,”
ete (the adj. signifies ‘exceeding some number or
measure’). A slight formal difference of concep-
tion may be noted in pleondzd, which suggests
that the abundance has resulted from augmenta-
tion. In Rom 5 20 the two words stand in the
closest connection: ‘Where sin abounded [by its
increase] grace abounded more exceedingly [was
rich beyond measure]. In Mk 12 44; Lk 21 4;
2 Cor 8 20; 12 7; Rev 18 3 RV gives improved


About
Abraham


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 18


renderings instead of “abundance,” and in Titus 3 6
and 2 Pet 1 11 instead of “abundantly.”
J. R. Van Petr

ABOUT, a-bout’: The use of this word as prep.,
in the sense of “around,” is confined to the OT.
In the NT, generally an adverb, for Gr 4s, hés or
“hosei.” RV adopts it in several idiomatic tr® of
méllé, referring to what is about to be, i.e. on the
point of occurring, or immediately impending,
amending AV, in Acts 5 35; 272; Rev 12 4,
etc.


ABRAHAM, &’bra-ham:
I. Name
1. Various Forms
2. Etymology
3. Association
II. Kinprep
. CAREER
1. Period of Wandering
2. Period of Residence at Hebron
3. Period of Residence in the Negeb
IV. Conpitrons or Lire
1. Economic Conditions
2. Social Conditions
3. Political Conditions
4. Cultural Conditions
V, CHARACTER
1. Religious Beliefs
2. Morality
3. Persona! Traits
VI. Sieniricance 1n THE History or RELIGION
1. In the OT
2. In the NT
3. ln Jewish Tradition
4. In the Koran
INTERPRETATIONS OF THE Story OtTHsR THAN
HistoRIcab
1. The Allegorical Interpretation
2. The Personification Theory
3. The Mythical Theory
4, The ‘'Saga’’ Theory


I. Name.—In the OT, when applied to the pa-
triarch, the name appears as DAN, ’abhram, up


VII.


to Gen 17 5; thereafter always as
1. Various UMRN, ’abhrahdm. Two other per-
Forms sons arenamed DWN, 'dbhiram. The


identity of this name with ’abhram
cannot be doubted in view of the variation between
dbhinér and ’abhnér, ’dbhishalam and ‘abhshdlom,
etc. A. also appears in the list at Karnak of
places conquered by Sheshonk I:-’3brm (no. 72)
represents OA, with which Spiegelberg (Aegypt.
Randglossen zum AT, 14) proposes to connect the
preceding name (no. 71) p3 hkr’3 , so that the whole
would read ‘the field of Abram.” Outside of
Palestine this name (Abirému) has come to light
just where from the Biblical tradition we should
expect to find it, viz., in Babylonia (e.g. in a con-
tract of the reign of Apil-Sin, second predecessor
of Hammurabi; also for the aunt (!) of Esarhaddon
680-669 BC). Ungnad has recently found it,
among documents from Dilbat dating from the
Hammurabi dynasty, in the forms A-ba-am-ra-ma,
A-ba-am-ra-am, as well as A-ba-ra-ma.

Until this latest discovery of the apparently full,
historical form of the Bab equivalent, the best
that could be done with the etymology
was to make the first constituent
“father of”? (construct -i rather than
; suffix -2), and the second constituent
“Ram,” a proper name or an abbreviation of a
name. (Yet observe above its use in Assyria for
a woman; cf AsisHac; ApBicaiL). Some were
inclined rather to concede that the second element
was a mystery, like the second element in the ma-
jority of names beginning with ’a@bh and ’ah,
father’ and “brother.” But the full cuneiform
writing of the name, with the case-ending am,
indicates that the noun “father’’ is in the accusative,
governed by the verb which furnishes the second
component, and that this verb therefore is prob-
ably rému (=Heb DM, raéham) “‘to love,” ete;
so that the name would mean something like “he


2. Ety-
mology


loves the [his] father.’ (So Ungnad, also Ranke
in Gressmann’s art. “Sage und Geschichte in den
Patriarchenerzdblungen,” ZATW [1910], 3.) Anal-
ogy proves that this is in the Bab fashion of the
period, and that judging from the various writings
of this and similar names, its pronunciation was
not far from ’abh-ram.

While the name is thus not “Hebrew” in origin,
it made itself thoroughly at home among the

Hebrews, and to their ears conveyed
3. Associa- associations quite different from its
tion etymological signification. ‘Popular

etymology” here as so often doubtless
led the Hebrew to hear in ’abh-rdém, ‘‘exalted father,”
a designation consonant with the patriarch’s na-
tional and religious significance. In the form
’abh-raham his ear caught the echo of some root
(perhaps r-h-m; cf Arab. ruham, ‘“multitude’’)
still more suggestive of the patriarch’s extensive
progeny, the reason (“for”) that accompanies
the change of name Gen 17 5 being intended only
as a verbal echo of the sense in the sound. This
longer and commoner form is possibly a dialectical
vaniation of the shorter form, a variation for which
there are analogies in comparative Sem grammar.
It is, however, possible also that the two forms are
different names, and that ’abh-raham is etymologi-
cally, and not merely by association of sound,
‘father of a multitude’ (as above). (Another
theory, based on South-Arabic orthography, in
Hommel, Altisraelitische Ueberlieferung, 177.)

Hl. Kindred.—Gen 11 27, which introduces A.,
contains the heading, ‘“‘These are the generations of
Terah.” All the story of A. is contained within
the section of Gen so entitled. Through Terah
A’s ancestry is traced back to Shem, and he is
thus related to Mesopotamian and Arabian fami-
lies that belonged to the “Semitic” race. He is
further connected with this race geographically by
his birthplace, which is given as ’uér-kasdim (see
Ur), and by the place of his pre-Canaanitish resi-
dence, Haran in the Aramaean region. The
purely Sem ancestry of his descendants through
Isaac is indicated by his marriage with his own
half-sister (Gen 20 12), and still further empha-
sized by the choice for his daughter-in-law of
Rebekah, descended from both of his brothers,
Nahor and Haran (Gen 11 29; 22 22f). Both
the beginning and the end of the residence in Haran
are left chronologically undetermined, for the
new beginning of the narrative at Gen 12 1 is not
intended by the writer to indicate chronological
sequence, though it has been so understood, e.g.
by Stephen (Acts 7 4). All that is definite in
point of time is that an Aramaean period of resi-
dence intervened between the Bab origin and the
Palestinian career of A. It is left. to a comparison
of the Bib. data with one another and with the data
of archaeology, to fix the opening of A.’s career in
Pal not far from the middle of the 20th cent. BC.

iI. Career.—Briefly summed up, that career
was as follows. A., endowed with Jeh’s promise of

; limitless blessing, leaves Haran with

1. Period of Lot his nephew and all their establish-
Wandering ment, and enters Canaan. Successive
ae stages of the slow journey southward
are indicated by the mention of Shechem, Bethel
and the Negeb (South-country). Driven by
famine into Egypt, A. finds hospitable reception,
though at the price of his wife’s honor, whom the
Pharaoh treats in a manner characteristic of an
Egyp monarch. (Gressmann, op. cit., quotes from
Meyer, Geschichte des Alterthums, I, 142, the passage
from a magic formula in the pyramid of Unas, a
Pharaoh of the Fifth Dynasty: “Then he [viz. the
Pharaoh] takes away the wives from their husbands
whither he will, if desire seize hig heart.’ *) Retracing


SA EERE


WELL OF ABRAHAM AT BEERSHEBA


ies |S Sige}


Sy


19 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


About
Abraham


the path to Canaan with an augmented train, at
Bethel A. and Lot find it necessary to part company.
Lot and his dependents choose for residence the
great Jordan Depression; A. follows the backbone of
the land southward to Hebron, where he settles, not
in the city, but before its gates “‘by the great trees”
(LXX sing., ‘‘oak”’) of Mamre.
Affiliation between A. and the local Amoritish
chieftains is strengthened by a brief campaign, in
which all unite their available forces
2. Period of for the rescue of Lot from an Elamite
Residence king and his confederates from Baby-
at Hebron lonia. The pursuit leads them as far
as the Lebanon region. On the return
they are met by Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest
of *él ‘elydn, and blessed by him in his priestly
capacity, which A. recognizes by presenting him
with a tithe of the spoils. A.’s anxiety for a son
to be the bearer of the divine promises conferred
upon a “seed”? yet unborn should have been
relieved by the solemn renewal thereof in a formal
covenant, with precise specifications of God’s
gracious purpose. But human desire cannot wait
upon divine wisdom, and the Egyp woman Hagar
bears to A. a son, Ishmael, whose existence from its
inception proves a source of moral evil within the
’ patmarchal household. The sign of circumcision
and the change of names are given in confirmation
of the covenant still unrealized, together with
specification of the time and the person that should
begin its realization. The theophany that sym-
bolized outwardly this climax of the isms favor
serves also for an intercessory colloquy, in which A.
is granted the deliverance of Lot in the impending
overthrow of Sodom. Lot and his family, saved
thus by human fidelity and Divine clemency, exhibit
in the moral traits shown in their escape and sub-
sequent life the degeneration naturally to be
expected from their corrupt environment. Moab-
ites and Ammonites are traced in their origin to
these cousins of Jacob and Esau.
Removal to the South-country did not mean
permanent residence in a single spot, but rather a
succession of more or less temporary
3. Period of resting-places. The first. of these
Residence was in the district of Gerar, with
in the whose king, Abimelech, A. and his
Negeb wife had an experience similar to the
earlier one with the Pharaoh. The
birth of Isaac was followed by the expulsion of
Ishmael and his mother, and the sealing of peaceful
relations with the neighbors by covenant at Beer-
sheba. Even the birth of Isaac, however, did not
end the discipline of A.’s faith in the promise, for
a Divine command to sacrifice the life of this son
was accepted bona fide, and only the sudden inter-
position of a Divine prohibition prevented its
obedient execution. The death of Sarah became the
occasion for A.’s acquisition of the first permanent
holding of Pal soil, the nucleus of his promised
inheritance, and at the same time suggested the
probable approach of his own death. This thought
led to immediate provision for a future seed to
inherit through Isaac, a provision realized in
Isaac’s marriage with Rebekah, granddaughter
of A.’s brother Nahor and of Milcah the sister of
Lot. But a numerous progeny unassociated with
the promise grew up in A.’s household, children of
Keturah, a woman who appears to have had the
rank of wife after Sarah’s death, and of other
women unnamed, who were his concubines. Though
this last period was passed in the Negeb, A. was
interred at Hebron, in his purchased possession, the
spot with which Sem tradition has continued to
associate him to this day.
IV. Conditions of Life.—The life of A. in its
outward features may be considered under the


following topics: economic, social, political and
cultural conditions.
A.’s manner of life may best be described by the
adjective “semi-nomadic,” and illustrated by the
somewhat similar conditions prevail-
1. Economic ing today in those border-communi-
Conditions ties of the East that fringe the Syrian
: and Arahian deserts. Residence is
in tents, wealth consists of flocks, herds and slaves,
and there is no ownership of ground, only at most
a proprietorship in well or tomb. All this in
common with the nomad. But there is a relative,
or rather, intermittent fixity of habitation, unlike
the pure Bedawi, a limited amount of agriculture,
and finally a sense of divergence from the Ishmael
type—all of which tend to assimilate the semi-
nomadic A. to the fixed Canaanitish population
about him. As might naturally be expected, such
a condition is an unstable equilibrium, which tends,
in the family of A. as in the history of all border-
tribes of the desert, to settle back one way or the
other, now into the city-life of Lot, now into the
desert-life of Ishmael.
The head of a family, under these conditions,
becomes at the same time the chief of a tribe, that
live together under patriarchal rule
2. Social though they by no means share with-
Conditions out exception the tie of kinship. The
family relations depicted im Gen
conform to and are illuminated by the social
features of CH. (See K. D. Macmillan, art. ‘‘Mar-
riage among the Early Babylonians and Hebrews,”
Princeton Theol. Review, April, 1908.) There is one
legal wife, Sarah, who, because persistently child-
less, obtains the coveted offspring by giving her own
maid to A. for that purpose (cf CH, §§ 144, 146).
The son thus borne, Ishmael, is A.’s legal son and
heir. When Isaac is later borne by Sarah, the
elder son is disinherited by divine command (Gen
21 10-12) against A.’s wish which represented
the prevailing law and custom (CH, §§ 168 f).
The “‘maid-servants” mentioned in the inventories of
A’3 wealth (Gen 12 16; 24 35) doubtless furnished
the “concubines” mentioned in Gen 25 6 as having
borne sons tohim. Both mothers and children were
slaves, but had the right to freedom, though not
to inheritance, on the death of the father (CH,
§ 171). After Sarah’s death another woman
seems to have succeeded to the position of legal
wife, though if so the sons she hore were disin-
herited like Ishmael (Gen 26 5). In addition to
the children so begotten by A. the “men of his
house” (Gen 17 27) consisted of two classes, the
‘home-born” slaves (Gen 14 14; 17 12.23.27)
and the “purchased” slaves (ib). The extent of
the patriarchal tribe may be surmised from the
number (318) of men among them capable of
bearing arms, near the beginning of A.’s career,
yet after his separation from Lot, and recruited
seemingly from the “home-born” class exclusively
(Gen 14 14). Over this entire establishment A.
ruled with a power more, rather than less, absolute
than that exhibited in detail in the CH: more
absolute, because A. was independent of any perma-
nent superior authority, and so combined in his own
person the powers of the Bah paterfamilias and of
the Can city-king. Social relations outside of the
family-tribe may best be considered under the next
heading. ety :
It is natural that the chieftain of so considerable
an organism should appear an attractive ally and
a formidable foe to any of the smaller
3. Political political units of his environment.
Conditions That Canaan was at the time com-
posed of just such inconsiderable
units, viz. city-states with petty kings, and
scattered fragments of older populations, is abun-


Abraham


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 20


dantly clear from the Biblical tradition and veri-
fied from other sources. Egypt was the only great
power with which A. came into political contact
after leaving the East. In the section of Gen
which describes this contact with the Pharaoh A.
is suitably represented as playing no political rdle,
but as profiting by his stay in Egypt only through
an incidental social relation: when this terminates
he is promptly ejected. The réle of conqueror of
Chedorlaomer, the Elamite invader, would be
quite out of keeping with A.’s political status else-
where, if we were compelled by the narrative in
Gen 14 to suppose a pitched battle between the
forces of A. and those of the united Bab armies.
What that chapter requires is in fact no more than
a midnight surprise, by A.’s band (including the
forces of confederate chieftains), of a rear-guard
or baggage-train of the Babylonians inadequately
manned and picketed. (‘Slaughter”’ is quite too
strong a rendering of the original hakkoth, ‘‘smiting,”
ver 17.) Respect shown A. by the kings of Salem
(ver 18), of Sodom (ver 21) and of Gerar (Gen 20
14—16) was no more than might be expected from
their relative degrees of political importance,
although a moral precedence, assumed in the
tradition, may well have contributed to this
respect.

Recent archaeological research has revolutionized
our conception of the degree of culture which A.

could have possessed and _ therefore
4, Cultural presumably did possess. The high
Conditions plane which literature had attained

in both Babylonia and Egypt by 2000
BC is sufficient witness to the opportunities open
to the man of birth and wealth in that day for the
interchange of lofty thought. And, without having
recourse to A.’s youth in Babylonia, we may assert
even for the scenes of A.’s maturer life the presence
of the same culture, on the basis of a variety of
facts, the testimony of which converges in this
point, that Canaan in the second millennium BC
was at the center of the intellectual life of the East
and cannot have failed to afford, to such of its in-
habitants as chose to avail themselves of it, every
opportunity for enjoying the fruits of others’ cul-
ture and for recording the substance of their own
thoughts, emotions and activities.

V. Character.—A.’s inward life may be consid-
ered under the rubrics of religion, ethics and per-
sonal traits.

The religion of A. centered in his faith in one
God, who, because believed by him to be possess-~

or of heaven and earth (Gen 14 22;
1. Religious 24 3), sovereign judge of the nations
Beliefs (15 14) of all the earth (18 25), dis-

poser of the forces of Nature (18 14;
19 24; 2017 f), exalted (14 22) and eternal (21 33),
was for A. at least the only God. So far as the
Biblical tradition goes, A.’s monotheism was not
aggressive (otherwise in later Jewish tradition),
and it is theoretically possible to attribute to him
a merely ‘“monarchical” or “henotheistic” type of
monotheism, which would admit the coexistence
with his deity, say, of the “gods which [his]
fathers served” (Josh 24 14), or the identity with
his deity of the supreme god of some Canaanite
neighbor (Gen 14 18). Yet this distinction of
types of monotheism does not really belong to the
sphere of religion as such, but rather to that of
speculative philosophical thought. As religion,
monotheism is just monotheism, and it asserts itself
in corollaries drawn by the intellect only so far
as the scope of the monotheist’s intellectual life
applies it. For A. Jeh not only was alone God,
He was also his personal God in a closeness of
fellowship (Gen 24 40; 48 15) that has made him
for three religions the type of the pious man


(2 Ch 20 7; Isa 41 8; Jas 2 23; note the Arab.
name of Hebron is #l-Khalil, ie. the friend
[viz. of God]). To Jeh A. attributed the moral
attributes of justice (Gen 18 25), righteousness
(18 19), faithfulness (24 27), wisdom (20 6),
goodness (19 19), mercy (20 6). These qualities
were expected of men, and their contraries in men
were punished by Jeh (Gen 18 19; 20 11). He
manifested Himself in dreams (Gen 20 3), visions
(15 1) and theophanies (18 1), including the voice
or apparition of the Divine mal’akh or messenger
(“angel’”’) (Gen 16 7; 22 11). On man’s part,
in addition to obedience to Jeh’s moral require-
ments and special commands, the expression of his
religious nature was expected in sacrifice. This
bringing of offerings to the deity was diligently
practiced by A., as indicated by the mention of his
erection of an altar at each successive residence.
Alongside of this act of sacrifice there is sometimes
mention of a “calling upon the name” of Jeh
(cof 1 K 18 24; Ps 116 13f). This publication
of his faith, doubtless in the presence of Canaanites,
had its counterpart also in the public regard in
which he was held as a ‘“‘prophet’’ or spokesman for
God (Gen 20 7). His mediation showed _ itself
also in intercessory prayer (Gen 17 20 for Ishmael;
18 23-32; cf 19 29 for Lot; 20 17 for Abime-
lech), which was but a phase of his general prac-
tice of prayer. The usual accompaniment of sac-
rifice, a professional priesthood, does not occur in
A.’s family, yet. he recognizes priestly prerogative
in the person of Melchizedek, priest-king of Salem
(Gen 14 20). Religious sanction of course sur-
rounds the taking of oaths (Gen 14 22; 24 3)
aud the sealing of covenants (21 23). Other cus-
toms associated with religion are circumcision
(Gen 17 10-14), given to A. as the sign of the per-
petual covenant; tithing (14 20), recognized as the
priest’s due; and child-sacrifice (22 2.12), enjoined
upon A. only to be expressly forbidden, approved
for its spirit but interdicted in its practice.
As already indicated, the ethical attributes of
God were regarded by A. as the ethical require-
ment of man. This in theory. In
2. Morality the sphere of applied ethics and
casuistry A.’s practice, at least, fell
short of this ideal, even in the few incidents of his
life preserved to us. It is clear that these lapses
from virtue were offensive to the moral sense of
A.’s biographer, but we are left in the dark as to
A’s sense of moral obliquity. (The ‘dust and
ashes’? of Gen 18 27 has no moral implication.)
The demands of candor and honor are not sat-
isfactorily met, certainly not in the matter of
Sarah’s relationship to him (Gen 12 11-13; 20
2; cf 11-13), perhaps not in the matter of Isaac’s
intended sacrifice (22 5.8). To impose our own
monogamous standard of marriage upon the
patriarch would be unfair, in view of the different
standard of his age and land. It is to his credit
that no such scandals are recorded in his life and
family as blacken the record of Lot (Gen 19 30-
38), Reuben (35 22) and Judah (88 15-18).
Similarly, A.’s story shows only regard for life and
property, both in respecting the rights of others
and in expecting the same from them—the antipo-
des of Ishmael’s character (Gen 16 12).
Outside the bounds of strictly ethical require-
ment, A.’s personality displayed certain charac-
teristics that not only mark him out
3. Personal distinctly among the figures of history,
Traits but do him great credit as a singularly
é symmetrical and attractive character.
Of his trust and reverence enough has been said
under the head of religion. But this love that is
“the fulfilling of the law,” manifested in such piety
toward God, showed itself toward men in exceptional


21 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Abraham


generosity (Gen 13 9; 14 28; 23 9.13; 24 10;
25 6), fidelity (14 14.24; 17 18; 18 23-32; 19
27; 21 11; 23 2), hospitality (18 2-8; 21 8) and
compassion (16 6 and 21 14 when rightly under-
stood; 18 23-32). A solid self-respect (Gen 14
23; 166; 21 25; 23 9.13.16; 244) and real
courage (14 14-16) were, however, marred by the
cowardice that sacrificed Sarah to purchase per-
sonal safety where he had reason to regard life as
insecure (20 11).

VI. Significance in the History of Religion.—
A. is a significant figure throughout the Bible, and
plays an important réle in extra-Biblical Jewish
tradition and in the Mohammedan religion.

It is naturally as progenitor of the people of
Israel, “the seed of A.,” as they are often termed,

that A. stands out most prominently
1. Inthe in the OT books. Sometimes the
OT contrast between him as an individual
and his numerous progeny serves to
point a lesson (Isa 51 2; Ezk 33 24; perhaps Mal
2 10; cf 15). ‘The God of A.” serves as a designa-
tion of Jeh from the time of Isaac to the latest period;
it is by this title that Moses identifies the God who
has sent him with the ancestral deity of the children
of Israel (Ex 3 15). Men remembered in those
later times that this God appeared to A. in the-
ophany (Ex 6 3), and, when he was still among his
people who worshipped other gods (Josh 24 3)
chose him (Neh 9 7), led him, redeemed him
(Isa 29 22) and made him the recipient of those
special blessings (Mie 7 20) which were pledged
by covenant and oath (so every larger historical
book, also the historical Ps 105 [ver 9]), notably
the inheritance of the land of Canaan (Dt 6 10).
Nor was A.’s religious personality forgotten by his
posterity: he was remembered by them as God’s
friend (2 Ch 207; Isa 41 8), His servant, the
very recollection of whom by God would offset
the horror with which the sins of his descendants
inspired Jeh (Dt 9 27). .

When we pass to the NT we are astonished at
the wealth and variety of allusion to A. As in the


OT, his position of ancestor lends him
2. Inthe much of his significance, not only as
NT ancestor of Israel (Acts 13 26), but


specifically as ancestor, now of the
Levitical priesthood (He 7 5), now of the Mes-
siah (Mt 1 1), now, by the peculiarly Christian
doctrine of the unity of believers in Christ, of
Christian believers (Gal 3 16.29). All that A.
the ancestor received through Divine election, by
the covenant made with him, is inherited by his
seed and passes under the collective names of the
promise (Rom 4 13), the blessing (Gal 3 14),
mercy (Lk 1 54), the oath (Lk 1 73), the cove-
nant (Acts 3 25). The way in which A. responded
to this peculiar goodness of God_makes him the
type of the Christian believer. Though so far in
the past that he was used as a measure of antiquity
(Jn 8 58), he is declared to have “‘seen” Messiah’s
“day” (Jn 8 56). It is his faith in the Divine
promise, which, just because it was for him pecul-
jarly unsupported by any evidence of the senses,
becomes the type of the ‘faith that leads to justi-
fication (Rom 4 3), and therefore in this sense
again he is the “father” of Christians, as believers
(Rom 4 11). For that promise to A. was, after
all, a “preaching beforehand” of the Christian
gospel, in that it embraced “‘all the families of the
earth” (Gal 3 8). Of this exalted honor, James
reminds us, A. proved himself worthy, not by an
inoperative faith, but by “works” that evidenced
his righteousness (Jas 2 21; cf Jn 8 39). The
obedience that faith wrought in him is what _is
especially praised by the author of Hebrews (He
11 8.17). In accordance with this high estimate


of the patriarch’s piety, we read of his eternal
felicity, not only in the current conceptions of the
Jews (parable, Lk 16), but also in the express asser-
tion of Our Lord (Mt 8 11; Lk 13 28). Inci-
dental historical allusions to the events of A.’s life
are frequent in the NT, but do not add anything to
this estimate of his religious significance.
Outside the Scriptures we have abundant evi-
dence of the way that A. was regarded by his
posterity in the Jewish nation. The
3. In Jew- oldest of these witnesses, Ecclesias-
ish Tradi-  ticus, contains none of the accretions
tion of the later A.-legends. Its praise
of A. is confined to the same three
great facts that appealed to the canonical writers,
viz. his glory as Israel’s ancestor, his election to
berecipient of the covenant, and his piety (including
perhaps a tinge of “nomism’’) even under severe
testing (Ecclus 44 19-21). The improbable and
often unworthy and even grotesque features of
A.’s career and character in the later rabbinical
midrashim are of no religious significance, beyond
the evidence they afford of the way A.’s unique pasi-
tion and piety were cherished by the Jews.
To Mohammed A. is of importance in several


ways. He is mentioned in no less than 188 verses

of the Koran, more than any other
4.In the character except Moses. He is one
Koran of the series of prophets sent by God.


He is the common ancestor of the
Arab and the Jew. He plays the same réle of
religious reformer over against his idolatrous kins-
men as Mohammed himself played. He builds
the first pure temple for God’s worship (at Mecca!).
As in the Bible so in the Koran A. is the recipient
of the Divine covenant for himself and for his
posterity, and exhibits in his character the appro-
priate virtues of one so highly favored: faith,
righteousness, purity of heart, gratitude, fidelity,
compassion. He receives marked tokens of the
Divine favor in the shape of deliverance, guidance,
visions, angelic messengers (no theophanies for
Mohammed!), miracles, assurance of resurrection
and entrance into paradise. He is called “Imam
of the peoples” (2 118).

VII. Interpretations of the Story of A. Other
than the Historical.—There are writers in both
ancient and modern times who have, from various
standpoints, interpreted the person and career of
A. otherwise than as what it purports to be, viz.
the real experiences of a human person named
A. These various views may be classified accord-
ing to the motive or impulse which they believe to
have led to the creation of this story in the mind of
its author or authors.

Philo’s tract on A. bears as alternative titles,
“On the Life of the Wise Man Made Perfect by

Instruction, or, On the Unwritten
1. The Alle- Law.” A.’s life is not for him a history
gorical In- that serves to illustrate these things,
terpretation but an allegory by which these things

are embodied. Paul’s use of the
Sarah-Hagar episode in Gal 4 21-31 belongs to
this type of exposition (cf allégorouimena, ver 24),
of which there are also a few other instances in his
epistles; yet to infer from this that Paul shared
Philo’s general attitude toward the patriarchal
narrative would be unwarranted, since his use of
this method is incidental, exceptional, and merely
confirmatory of points already established by sound
reason. ‘‘Luther compares it to a painting which
decorates a house already built” (Schaff, “Gala-
tians,” Excursus). :

As to Philo A. is the personification of a certain
type of humanity, so to some modern writers he
is the personification of the Heb nation or of a
tribe belonging to the Heb group. This view,


Abraham
Absalom


which is indeed very-widely held with respect to
the patriarchal figures in general, furnishes so many
more difficulties in its specific appli-
2. The Per- cation to A. than to the others, that
sonification it has been rejected in A.’s case even
Theory by some who have adopted it for figures
like Isaac, Ishmael and Jacob. Thus
Meyer (Die Israeliten und ihre Nachbarstémme,
250; cf also note on p. 251), speaking of his earlier
opinion, acknowledges that, at the time when he
“regarded the assertion of Stade as proved that
Jacob and Isaae were tribes,” even then he “still
recognized A. as a mythical figure and originally a
god.” A similar differentiation of A. from the
rest is true of most of the other adherents of the
views about to be mentioned. Hence also Well-
hausen says ( Prolegamena®, 317): “Only A. is cer-
tainly no name of a people, like Isaac and Lot;
he is rather ambiguous anyway. We dare not of
course on that account hold him in this connection
as an historical personage; rather than that he
might be a free creation of unconscious fiction.
He is probably the youngest figure in this company
and appears to have been only at a relatively late
date put before his son Isaac.”
Urged popularly by Néldeke Um neuen Reich
(1871], I, 508ff) and taken up by other scholars,
especially in the case of A., the view


3. The gained general currency among those
Mythical who denied the historicity of Gen,
Theory that the patriarchs were old deities.


From this relatively high estate, it
was held, they had fallen to the plane of mere
mortals (though with remnants of the hero or even
demigod here and there visible) on which they
appear in Gen. A new phase of this mythical
theory has been developed in the elaboration by
Winckler and others of their astral-theology of
the Bab world, in which the worship of A. as the
moon-god by the Semites of Pal plays a part. A.’s
traditional origiu connects him with Ur and Haran,
leading centers of the moon-cult. Apart from this
fact the arguments relied upon to establish this
identification of A. with Sin may be judged by the
following samples: ‘‘When further the consort of
A. bears the name Sarah, and one of the women
among his closest relations the name Milcah,
this gives food for thought, since these names
correspond precisely with the titles of the female
deities worshipped at Haran alongside the moon-
god Sin. Above all, however, the number 318,
that appears in Gen 14 14 in connection with the
figure of A., is convincing; because this number,
which surely has no historical value, can only: be
satisfactorily explained from the circle of ideas
of the moon-religion, since in the lunar year of
354 days there are just 318 days on which the
moon is visible—deducting 36 days, or three for
each of the twelve: months, on which the moon is
invisible’ (Baentsch, Monotheismus, 60f). In
spite of this assurance, however, nothing could
exceed the scorn with which these combinations
and conjectures of Winckler, A. Jeremias and others
of this school are received by those who in fact
differ from them with respect to A. in little save
the answer to the question, what deity was A.
(see e.g. Meyer, op. cit., 252 f, 256 f).

Gunkel (Genesis, Introduction), in insisting
upon the resemblance of the patriarchal narrative
to the “sagas” of other primitive


4, The peoples, draws attention both to the
“Saga” human traits of figures like A., and
Theory to the very early origin of the material


embodied in our present book of Gen.
First as stories orally circulated, then as stories
committed to writing, and finally as a number of
collections or groups of such stories formed into a


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 22


cycle, the A.-narratives, like the Jacob- and the
Joseph-narratives, grew through a long and com-
plex literary history. Gressmann (op. cit., 9-34)
amends Gunkel’s results, in applying to them the
principles of primitive literary development laid
down by Professor Wundt in his Vélkerpsychalogie.
He holds that the kernel of the A.-narratives is a
series of fairy-stories, of international diffusion
and unknown origin, which have been given “a
local habitation and a name” by attaching to them
the (ex hypothest) then common name of A. (simi-
larly Lot, etc) and associating them with the
country nearest to the wilderness of Judaea, the
home of their authors, viz. about Hebron and the
Dead Sea. A high antiquity (1300-1100 BC) is
asserted for these stories, their astonishing accuracy
in details wherever they can be tested by extra-
Biblical tradition is conceded, as also the proba-
bility that, “though many riddles still remain un-
solved, yet many other traditions will be cleared
up by new discoveries” of archaeology.


J. Oscar Boyp
ABRAHAM, BOOK OF. See Apoca.yrptic
LiTERATURE.


ABRAHAM’S BOSOM, booz’um(kéAmros’’ABpadp,
kélpos Abradm; «édwo. A): Figurative. The ex-
pression occurs in Lk 16 22.23, in the parable of
the Rich Man and Lazarus, to denote the place of
repose to which Lazarus was carried after his
death. The fig. is suggested by the practice of the
guest at a feast reclining on the breast of his neigh-
bor. Thus John leaned on the breast of Jesus at
supper (Jn 21 20). The rabbis divided the state
after death (Sheol) into a place for the righteous
and a place for the wicked (see EscHatToLtoGcy oF
OT; Suxzot); but it is doubtful whether the fig.
of Jesus quite corresponds with this idea. ‘‘Abra-
ham’s bosom” is not spoken of as in ‘‘Hades,” but
rather as distinguished from it (Lk 16 23)—a place
of blessedness by itself. There Abraham receives,
as at a feast, the truly faithful, and admits them to
closest intimacy. It may be regarded as equiva-
lent to the ‘‘Paradise” of Lk 28 48. See Hanus;
PaRADISE. JAMES ORR


ABRAM, a’bram. See ABRAHAM.


ABRECH, 4a’brek: Transliteration of the Heb
TIAN , 'abhrékh, in Gen 41 43 RVm, of which both
the origin and meaning are uncertain. Jt was the
salutation which the Egyptians addressed to Joseph,
when he was made second to Pharaoh, and appeared
in his official chariot.

(1) The explanations based upon Heb derivation
are unsatisfactory, whether as AV ‘‘bow the knee,”
from 312, barakh (hiph. imp.) or marginal ‘‘tender
father,” or ‘father of a king” of the Tg. The
form as hiph. imp. instead of JI20, habhrékh, is
indefensible, while the other two derivations are
fanciful.

(2) The surmises of Egyptologists are almost
without number, and none are conclusive. Skinner
in Comm. on Gen. selects “attention!” after Spie-
gelberg, asbest. Speaker's Comm. suggests ‘‘rejoice
thou” from ab-nek. BDB gives preference to the
Coptie a-bor-k, “prostrate thyself.”

(3) The most satisfying || is the Assyr abarakku,
meaning “grand vizier” or ‘friend of a king,” as
suggested by Fried. Delitzsch; for Bab laws and
customs were dominant in western Asia, and the
Hyksos, through whom such titles would have been
carried into Egypt, were ruling there at that time.

Epvwarp Mack

ABROAD, a-bréd: An idiomatic rendering of
dpixero, aphiketo (lit. ‘‘arrived’), ‘come abroad”
_is used in Rom 16 19 to indicate a report that has


23


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Abrabam
Absalom


been most widely diffused (lit. ‘did reach unto all’).
Similar idiomatic tr® of AV have been replaced in
RV by those more literal, as in Mk 4 22; Lk 8
17; Mk 6 14; 1 Thess 1 8. Used also in other
idiomatic renderings, as “spread abroad” (diaphé-
mtz6), Mk 1 45; ‘noised abroad” (dialalés), Lk 1
65; “scattered abroad,” Jn 11 52; Acts 8 1, etc;
in all these cases for the pervasive meaning of the
Gr preposition in composition. In Gen 15 5, hug
means “outside.” H. E. Jacoss


ABROAD, SCATTERED. See Disrrrsion.


ABRONAH, a-brd’na, AV Ebronah (727537,
‘abhréndh): One of the stations of Israel in the
wilderness on the march from Sinai to Kadesh—
the station next before that at Ezion-geber on the
eastern arm of the Red Sea (Nu 33 34.35).


ABSALOM, ab’sa-lom (D}>W2N, ‘abhshalom,
‘father is peace,’ written also Abishalom, 1 K
15 2.10): David’s third son by
1. AGen- Maacah, daughter of Talmai, king
eral Favor- of Geshur, a small] territory between
ite Hermon and Bashan. Absalom was
born at Hebron (2 8 3 3), and moved
at an early age, with the transfer of the capital,
to Jerus, where he spent most of his life. He
was a great favorite of his father and of the people
as well. His charming manners, his personal
beauty, his insinuating ways, together with his love
of pomp and royal pretensions, captivated the
hearts of the people from the beginning. He lived
in great style, drove in a magnificent chariot and
had fifty men run before him. Such magnificence
produced the desired effect upon the hearts of the
young aristocrats of the royal city (2S 15 1 ff).
When Amnon, his half-brother, ravished his sister
Tamar, and David shut his eyes to the grave
crime and neglected to administer
2. In Exile proper punishment, Absalom became
justly enraged, and quietly nourished
his anger, but after the lapse of two years carried
out a successful plan to avenge his sister’s wrongs.
He made a great feast for the king’s sons at Baal-
hazor, to which, among others, Amnon came,
only to meet his death at the hands of Absalom’s
servants (13 1ff). To avoid punishment he now
fled to the court of his maternal grandfather in
Geshur, where he remained three years, or until
David, his father, had relented and condoned the
murderous act of bis impetuous, plotting son. At
the end of three years (18 38) we find Absalom once
more inJerus. It was, however, two years later be-
fore he was admitted to the royal presence (14 28).
Absalom, again reinstated, lost no opportunity
to regain lost prestige, and having his mind made
up to succeed his father upon the


3. Rebels throne, he forgot the son in the poli-
against His tician. Full of insinuations and rich
Father in promises, especially to. the dis-


gruntled and to those having griev-
ances, imaginary or real, it was but natural that he
should have a following. His purpose was clear,
namely, to alienate as many as possible from the
king, and thus neutralize his influence in the selec-
tion of a successor, for he fully realized that the
court party, under the influence of Bathsheba, was
intent upon having Solomon as the next ruler.
By much flattery Absalom stole the hearts of many
men in Israel (15 6). How long a period elapsed
between his return from Geshur and his open
rebellion against his father David is a question
which cannot be answered with any degree of
certainty. Most authorities regard the forty
years of 16 7 as an error and following the Syr and
some editions of the LXX, suggest four as the


correct text. Whether forty or four, he obtained
permission from the king to visit Hebron, the
ancient capital, on pretence of paying a vow made
by him while at Geshur in case of his safe return
to Jerus. With two hundred men he repairs to
Hebron. Previous to the feast spies had been
sent throughout all the tribes of Israel to stir up
the discontented and to assemble them under
Absalom’s flag at Hebron. Very large numbers
obeyed the call, among them Ahithophel, one of
David’s shrewdest counselors (15 7 ff).
Reports of the conspiracy at Hebron soon reached
the ears of David, who now became thoroughly
frightened and lost no time in leaving
4. David’s Jerus. Under the protection of his
Flight most loyal bodyguard he fled to Gilead
beyond Jordan. David was kindly
received at Mahanaim, where he remained till
after the death of his disloyal son. Zadok and
Abiathar, two leading priests, were intent upon
sharing the fortunes of David; they went so far
as to carry the Ark of the Covenant with them
out of Jerus (16 24). David, however, forced the
priests and Levites to take it back to its place in
the city and there remain as its guardians. This
was a prudent stroke, for these two great priests
in Jerus acted as intermediaries, and through
their sons and some influential women kept up
constant communications with David’s army in
Gilead (15 24 ff). Hushai, too, was sent back to
Jerus, where he falsely professed allegiance to Ab-
salom, who by this time had entered the royal
city and had assumed control of the government
(15 32 ff). Hushai, the priests and a few people
less conspicuous performed their part well, for the
counsel of Ahithophel, who advised immediate
action and advance upon the king’s forces, while
everything was in a panic, was thwarted (17 1 ff);
nay more, spies were constantly kept in contact
with David’s headquarters to inform the king of
Absalom’s plans (17 15 ff). This delay was fatal
to the rebel son. Had he acted upon the shrewd
counsel of Ahithophel, David's army might have
been conquered at the outset.
When at length Absalom’s forces under the
generalship of Amasa (17 25) reached Gilead,
ample time had been given to David
5. Absa- _ to organize his army, which he divided
lom’s Death into three divisions under the efficient
and Burial command of three veteran generals:
Joab, Abishai and Ittai (18 1 ff).
A great battle was fought in the forests of Ephraim.
Here the rebel army was utterly routed. No
fewer than 20,000 were killed outright, and a still
greater number becoming entangled in the thick
forest, perished that day (18 7f). Among the
latter was Absalom himself, for while riding upon
his mule, his head was caught in the boughs of a
great oak or terebinth, probably in a forked
branch. ‘He was taken up between heaven and
earth; and the mule that was under him went
on” (18 9). In this position he was found by a
soldier who at once ran to inform Joab. The
latter without a moment’s hesitation, notwith-
standing David’s positive orders, thrust three
darts into the heart of Absalom. To make his
death certain and encouraged by the action of their
general, ten of Joab’s young men “compassed about
and smote Absalom, and slew him” (18 15). He
was buried in a great pit, close to the spot where
he was killed. A great pile of stones was heaped
over his body (18 17), in accordance with the
custom of dishonoring rebels and great criminals
by burying them under great piles of stone (Josh
7°26; 8 29). Thornson informs us that Syrian
people to this day cast stones upon the graves of
murderers and outlaws (LB, II, 61).


Absalom
Abstinence


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 24


The death of Absalom was a source of great

grief to the fond and aged father, who forgot the

tuler and the king in the tender-

6. David’s hearted parent. His lament at the

Lament: gate of Mahanaim, though very brief,

is a classic, and expresses in tender

language the feelings of parents for wayward
children in all ages of the world (2 S 18 33).

Little is known of Absalom’s family life, but we
read in 14 27 that be had three sons and one
daughter. From the language of 18 18, it is
inferred ‘that the sons died at an early age.

Absalom’s Tomb: As Absalom had no son to
perpetuate his memory “he reared up for him-
self a pillar’ or a monument in the King’s dale,
which according to Josephus was two furlongs
from Jerusalem (Ant, VII, x, 3). Nothing is known


suctelolu — 7 Y
eal ae


Absalom's Tomb.


with certainty about this monument. One of the
several tombs on the east side of the Kidron passes
under the name of Absalom’s tomb. This fine
piece of masonry with its graceful cupola and
Sonic pillars must be of comparatively recent origin,
probably not earlier than the Rom period.’
W. W. Davies

ABSALOM (Apoc) (B, ’ABeooddwpos, Abes-
sdlémos and Abessalém; A, Absdlémos; ‘AV Ab-
salon): :

(1) Father of Mattathias, a captain of the Jewish
army (1 Mace 11 70; Ant, XIU, v, 7).

(2) Father of Jonathan who was sent by Simon
Maccabee to take possession of Joppa; perhaps
identical with A (1) (1 Macc 13 11; Ant, XIII,


vi, 4).

’B) One of two envoys of the Jews, mentioned in
a letter sent by Lysias to the Jewish nation (2 Mace
11 17).


ABSALON, ab’sa-lon. See Assatom (Apoc).
ABSOLUTION, ab-so-li’shun (tr of vbs. Av,
lid, “loose,” etc, and d¢lnu, aphiémi, “release,”
“sive up,” etc): Not a Bib., but an ecclesiastical
term, used to designate the official act described in
Mt 16 19: ‘Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth,
shall be loosed in heaven,” and Mt 18 18: “What
things soever ye shall loose,” etc, and interpreted by
Jn 20 23: ‘“‘Whose soever sins ye forgive, they are
forgiven unto them” (see Keys, Power or). The
Roman church regards this as the act of a properly
ordained priest, by which, in the sacrament of Pen-


ance, he frees from sin one who has confessed and
made promise of satisfaction. Protestants regard
the promise. as given not to any order within the
church, but to the congregation of believers, exercis-
ing its prerogative through the Christian ministry,
as its ordinary executive. They differ 4s to whether
the act be only declarative or collative. Luther
regarded it as both declarative and collative, since
the Word always brings that which it offers. The
absolution differs from the general promise of the
gospel by individualizing the promise. What the
gospel, as read and preached, declares in general,
the absolution applies personally. See also For-
GIVENESS. H. E. Jacoss


ABSTINENCE, abs’ti-nens: Abstinence as a form
of asceticism reaches back into remote antiquity,
and is found among most ancient peoples. It may
be defined as a self-discipline which consists in the
habitual renunciation, in whole or in part, of the
enjoyments of the flesh, with a view to the cultiva-
tion of the life of the spirit. In its extremest forms,
it bids men to stifle and suppress their physical
wants, rather than to subordinate them in the
interest of a higher end or purpose, the underlying
idea being that the body 1s the foe of the spirit,
and that the progressive extirpation of the natural
desires and inclinations by means of fasting,
celibacy, voluntary poverty, etc, is “the way of
perfection.”

This article will be concerned chiefly with ab-
stinence from food, as dealt with in the Bible.
(For other aspects of the subject, see TEMPERANCE;
Se.F-pEnraL; Cuban; UNcLEANNESS; MEAT, etc).
Thus limited, abstinence may be either public or
private, partial or entire.

Only one such fast is spoken of as having been
instituted and commanded by the Law of Moses,


that of the Day of Atonement. This
1. Public is called “the Fast” in Acts 27 9
Fasts (cf Ant, XIV, iv, 3; Philo, Vzé Mos,


II, 4; Schiirer, HJ P, I, i, 322).

Four annual fasts were later observed by the
Jews in-commemoration of the dark days of Jerus—
the day of the beginning of Nebuchadrezzar’s
siege in the tenth month, the day of the capture of
the city in the fourth month, the day of its destruc-
tion in the fifth month and the day of Gedaliah’s
murder in the seventh month. These are all re-
ferred to in Zec 8 19. See Fasts.

It might reasonably be thought that such solemn
anniversaries, once instituted, would have been kept
up with sincerity by the Jews, at least for many
years. But Isaiah illustrates how soon even the
most outraged feelings of piety or patriotism may
grow cold and formal. ‘Wherefore have we fasted
and thou seest not?’ the exiled Jews cry in their
captivity. ‘We have humbled our souls, and thou
takest no notice.” Jeh’s swift answer follows:
‘Because your fasting is a mere form! Behold,
in the day of your fast ye find your own pleasure
and oppress all your laborers’ (cf Isa 68 3; Ex-
positor’s Bible, ad loc.). That is to say, so formal
has your fasting grown that your ordinary selfish,
cruel life goes on just the same. Then Jeh makes
inquest: “Is such the fast that I have chosen? the
day for a man to afflict his soul? Is not this the
fast that I have chosen: to loose the bonds of
wickedness, to undo the bands of the yoke, and to
let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every
yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry,
and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to
thy house? Then shalt thou call, and Jeh will
answer; thou shalt cry, and he will say, Here I
am’ (vs 5-9). The passage, as George Adam Smith
says, fills the earliest, if not the highest place in the
glorious succession of Scriptures exalting practical


25 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Absalom
Abstinence


love, to which belong Isa 61; Mt 26; 1 Cor 13.
The high import is that in God’s view character
grows rich and life joyful, not by fasts or formal
observances, but by acts of unselfish service inspired
by a heart of love.

These fasts later fell into utter disuse, but they
were revived after the destruction of Jerus by the
Romans.

Occasional public fasts were proclaimed in Israel,
as among other peoples, in seasons of drought or
public calamity. It appears according to Jewish
accounts, that. it was customary to hold them on
the second and fifth days of the week, for the reason
that Moses was believed to have gone up to Mt.
Sinai on the fifth day of the week (Thursday) and
to have come down on the second (Monday)
(ef Did, 8; Apos Const, VIII, 23).

In addition to these public solemnities, indi-
viduals were in the habit of imposing extra fasts

upon themselves (e.g. Jth 8 6; Lk 2
2. Private 37); and there were some among the
Fasts Pharisees who fasted on the second
and fifth days of the week all the
year round (Lk 18 12; see Lightfoot, ad loc.).

Tacitus alludes to the “frequent fasts” of the
Jews (History, V, 4), and Jos tells of the spread of
fasting among the Gentiles (CAp, II, 40; cf Ter-
tullian, ad Nat, i.13). There is abundant evidence
that many religious teachers laid down rules con-
cerning fasting for their disciples (cf Mk 2 18; Mt
9 14; Lk 6 33).

Individuals and sects differ greatly in the degrees
of strictness with which they observe fasts. In
some fasts among the Jews abstinence
from food and drink was observed
simply from sunrise to sunset, and
washing and anointing were permitted.
In others of a stricter sort, the fast
lasted from one sunset till the stars
appeared after the next, and, not only food and
drink, but washing, anointing, and every kind of
agreeable activity and even salutations, were pro-
hibited (Schiirer, II, ii, 119; Edersheim, Life and
Times, 1, 663). Such fasting was generally prac-
tised in the most austere and ostentatious manner,
and, among the Pharisees, formed a part of their
most pretentious externalism. On this point the
testimony of Mt 6 16 is confirmed by the Mish.

There arose among the Jews various kinds of
ascetics and they may be roughly divided into

three classes.


3. Degrees
of Sirict-
ness in
Abstinence


4. Absti- (1) The Essenes—These lived to-
nence gether in colonies, shared all things
among in common and practised voluntary
Different poverty. The stricter among them
Kinds of also eschewed marriage. They were
Ascetics indifferent, Philo says, alike to money,


pleasure, and worldly position. They
ate no animal flesh, drank no wine, and used no oil
for anointing. The objects of sense were to them
‘unholy,’”? and to gratify the natural craving was
“sin.’’ They do not seem to come distinctly into
view in the NT. See EssEenes.

(2) The hermit ascetics.—These fled away from
human society with its temptations and allure-
ments into the wilderness, and lived there a life of
rigid self-discipline. Jos (Vita, 2) gives us a notable
example of this class in Banus, who “lived in the
desert, clothed himself with the leaves of trees,
ate nothing save the natural produce of the soil,
and bathed day and night in cold water for purity’s
sake.” John the Baptist was a hermit of an en-
tirely different type. He also dwelt in the desert,
wore a rough garment of camel’s hair and subsisted
on “Jocusts and wild honey.” But his agceticism
was rather an incident of his environment and
yocation than an end in itself (see ‘“‘Asceticism,”


DCG). In the fragments of his sermons which
are preserved in the Gospels there is no trace of any
exhortation to ascetic exercises, though Jobn’s
disciples practised fasting (Mk 2 18).

(3) The moderate ascetics—There were many
pious Jews, men and women, who practised asceti-
cism of a less formal kind. The asceticism of the
Pharisees was of a kind which naturally resulted
from their legal and ceremonial conception of
religion. It expressed itself chiefly, as we have
seen, in ostentatious fasting and externalism. But
there were not a few humble, devout souls in Israel
who, like Anna, the prophetess, served God ‘‘with
fastings and supplications night and day” (Lk 2
37), seeking by a true self-discipline to draw near
unto God (cf Acts 13 2.3; 14 23; 1 Tim 6 5).

Some of the rabbis roundly condemned abstinence,
or asceticism in any form, as a principle of life.

“Why must the Nazirite bring a sin


6. Absti- offering at the end of bis term?”
nence as (Nu 6 13.14) asks Eliezer ha-Kappar
Viewed in (Siphra’, ad loc.); and gives answer,


the Talmud ‘Because he sinned against his own

person by his vow of abstaining from
wine’; and he concludes, ‘‘Whoever undergoes fast-
ing or other penances for no special reason commits
a wrong.’ ‘Man in the life to come will have to
account for every enjoyment offered him that was
refused without sufficient cause’? (Rabh, in Yer.
Kid., 4). In Maimonides (Ha-Yadh ha-Hdzakah,
Dé‘sth 3 1) the monastic principle of abstinence in
regard to marriage, eating meat, or drinking wine,
or in regard to any other personal enjoyment or
comfort, is condemned as “contrary to the spirit of
Judaism,” and ‘‘the golden middle-way of modera-
tion’ is advocated.

But, on the other hand, abstinence is often con-
sidered by the rabbis meritorious and praiseworthy
as a voluntary means of self-discipline. ‘I par-
took of a Nazirite meal only once,” says Simon the
Just, “when I met with a handsome youth from the
south who had taken a vow. When I asked the
reason he said: ‘I saw the Evil Spirit pursue me as
I beheld my face reflected in water, and I swore
that these long curls shall be cut off and offered
as a sacrifice to Jeh’; whereupon I kissed him upon
his forehead and blessed him, saying, May there
be many Nazirites like thee in Israel!’ (Nazir, 4b).
“Be holy” was accordingly interpreted, “Exercise
abstinence in order to arrive at purity and holi-
ness” (‘Ab. Zarah, 20; Siphra’, Kedhishitm). ‘‘Ab-
stain from everything evil and from whatever is like
unto it” is a rule found in the Talm (Hullin, 440),
as also in the Did (3 1)—a saying evidently based
on Job 81 1, ‘Abstain from the lusts of the flesh
and the world.”’” The Mosaic laws concerning diet
are all said by Rabh to be ‘for the purification of
Israel” (Lev R. 13)—‘‘to train the Jew in self-
discipline.”

The question of crowning interest and significance
to us is, What attitude did Jesus take toward fast-

ing, or asceticism? The answer is to


6. The At- be sought in the light, first of His prac-
titude of tice, and, secondly, of His teaching.

Jesus to (1) His practice—Jesus has even
Fasting been accounted “the Founder and


Example of the ascetic life’ (Clem.
Alex., Strom, III, 6). By questionable emphasis
upon His “forty days’”’ fast, His abstinence from
marriage and His voluntary poverty, some have
reached the conclusion that complete renunciation
of the things of the present was ‘the way of per-
fection according to the Saviour.”

A fuller and more appreciative study of Jesus’
life and spirit must bring us to a different conclu-
sion. Certainly His mode of life is sharply differ-
entiated in the Gospels, not only from that of the


Abubus
Access


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 26


Pharisees, but also from that of John the Baptist.
Indeed, He exhibited nothing of the asceticism of
those illustrious Christian saints, St. Bernard and
St. John of the Cross, or even of St. Francis, who
“of all ascetics approached most nearly to the
spirit of the Master.’’ Jesus did not flee from the
world, or eschew the amenities of social life. He
contributed to the joyousness of-a marriage feast,
accepted the hospitality of rich and poor, permitted
a vase of very precious ointment to be broken and
poured upon His feet, welcomed the society of
women, showed tender love to children, and clearly
enjoyed the domestic life of the home in Bethany.
There is no evidence that He imposed upon Him-
self any unnecessary austerities. The “forty days’”
fast (not mentioned in Mk, the oldest authority)
ig not _an exception to this rule, as it was rather a
necessity imposed by His situation in the wilder-
ness than a self-imposed observance of a law of
fasting (cf Christ’s words concerning John the
Baptist: “John came neither eating nor drinking’;
see the article on ‘‘Asceticism,” DCG). At any
rate, He is not hcre an example of the traditional
asceticism. He stands forth throughout the Gospels
“as the living type and embodiment of self-denial,”’
yet the marks of the ascetic are not found in Him.
His mode of life was, indeed, so unascetic as to
bring upon Him the reproach of being “a gluttonous
man and a winebibber” (Mt 11 19; Lk 7 34).

(2) His teaching—Beyond question, it was, from
first to last, “instinct with the spirit of self-
denial.” “If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself,” is an ever-recurring refrain of His
teaching. ‘‘Seek ye first the kingdom of God,” is
ever His categorical imperative (Mt 6 33 AV; Lk
12 31). This is to Him the summum bonum—all
desires and strivings which have not this as their
goal must be suppressed or sacrificed (cf Mt 18
44-46; 19 21; Mk 10 21; Lk 9 59.60; 14 26
with Mt 6 29.30; Mk 9 43-47; Mt 16 24f;
Mk 8 34f; Lk 9 23f; and 14 33). In short, if
any man find that the gratification of any desire
of the higher or lower self will impede or distract
him in the performance of his duties as a subject
of the Kingdom, he must forego such gratification,
if he would be a disciple of Christ. “If it cause
thee to stumble,” is always the condition, implied
or expressed, which justifies abstinence from any
particular good.

According to the record, Jesus alluded to fasting
only twice in His teaching. In Mt 6 16-18,
where voluntary fasting is presupposed as a reli-
gious exercise of His disciples, He warns them
against making it the occasion of a parade of piety:
“Thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and
wash thy face; that thou be not seen of men to
fast, but of thy Father who is in secret.” In
short, He sanctions fasting only as a genuine ex-
pression of a devout and contrite frame of mind.

In Mt 9 14-17 (Mk 2 18-22; Lk 5 33-39)
in reply to the question of the disciples of John
and of the Pharisees, Jesus refuses to enjoin fast-
ing. He says fasting, as a recognized sign of
mourning, would be inconsistent with the joy
which “the sons of the bridechamber” naturally
feel while “the bridegroom is with them.” But,
he adds, suggesting the true reason for fasting, that
the days of bereavement will come, and then the
outward expression of sorrow will be appropriate.
Here, as in the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus sanc-
tions fasting, without enjoining it, as a form through
which emotion may spontaneously seek expression.
His teaching on the subject may be summarized
in the one word, subordination (DCG).

To the form of fasting He attaches little impor-
tance, as is seen in the succeeding parables of the
Old Garment and the Old Wine-skins. It will not


do, He says, to graft the new liberty of the gospel on
the body of old observances, and, yet more, to try
to force the new system of life into the ancient
molds. The new piety must manifest itself in new
forms of its own making (Mt 9 16.17; Mk 2 21.
22; Lk 6 36.38). Yet Jesus shows sympathy with
the prejudices of the conservatives who cling to
the customs of their fathers: ‘“‘No man having
drunk old wine desireth new; for he saith, The
old is good.” But to the question, Was Jesus an
ascetic? we are bound to reply, No.

“Asceticism,” as Harnack says, “has no place
in the gospel at all; what it asks is that we should
struggle against Mammon, against care, against
selfishness; what it demands and disengages is
love—the love that serves and is self-sacrificing;
and whoever encumbers Jesus’ message with any
other kind of asceticism fails to understand it”
(What ts Christianity? 88). :

On the whole, unquestionably, the practice and
teachings of the apostles and early Christians were

in harmony with the example and


7. The teaching of the Master. But a tend-
Practice ency, partly innate, partly trans-
and Teach- mitted from Jewish legalism, and
ing of the partly pagan, showed itself among
Apostles their successors and gave rise to the


Vita Religiosa and Dualism which
found their fullest. expression in Monasticism.

It is worthy of note that the alleged words of
Jesus: ‘But this kind goeth not out save by prayer
and fasting’ (Mk 9 29; Mt 17 21 AV), are cor-
ruptions of the text. (Cf Tob 12 8; Sir 34 26;
Lk 2 37). The Oxyrhynchus fragment (disc. 1897)
contains a logion with the words léget [ésotis, edn
mé néestetiete tin késmon, ou mé heiréte tén basilet-
an tow theo: “Jesus saith, Except ye fast to the
world, ye shall in no wise find the Kingdom of
God,” but the ‘fasting’ here is clearly meta-
phorical.


Literature.—Bingham, Antiquities; W. Bright, Some
Aspects of Primitive Church Life (1898); J. O. Hannay,
The Spirit and Origin of Christian Monasticism (1902),
and The Wisdom of the Desert (1904); Thomas & Kempis,
Imitation of Christ; Migne. Dictionnaire d’ Ascétisme, and
Enc Theol., XLV, XLVI, 45, 46; Jew Enc, and Bible


Dictionaries ad loc.
Geo. B. Eacer
ABUBUS, a-ba’bus ("ABovBos, Aboubos): The
father of Ptolemy, who deceitfully slew Simon
ie aaa) and his sons at Dok near Jericho (1 Mace
11.15).


ABUNDANCE, a-bun’dans, ABUNDANT,
a-bun’dant. See ABOUND.


ABUSE, a-biz’: “To dishonor,” “to make mock
of,” “to insult,” ete. (1) Trdin the OT from Soy,
‘alal, “to do harm,” “‘to defile’ (Jgs 19 25), ‘‘to
make mock of” (1 8 31.4). (2) Tr in the NT
from dpoevoxoirys, arsenokottés, lit. ‘one who lies
with a male,” “a sodomite’ (1 Cor 6 9; 1 Tim
110; AV “for them that defile themselves with
mankind’). (8) In AV 1 CorT7 31 “as not
abusing it,” from xaraxypdouat, katachrdomat, “to
abuse,” i.e. misuse; RV “using it to the full,” also
1 Cor 9 18. See Usz.


ABYSS, a-bis’, THE (4 4Pvoros, hé dbussos):
In classical Gr the word is always an adj., and is
used (1) lit. “very deep,” “bottomless”; (2) fig. “un-
fathomable,” “boundless.”’ ‘‘Abyss’’ does not occur
in the AV but the RV so transliterates 48vecos in
each case. The AV renders the Gr by “‘the deep” in
two passages (Lk 8 31; Rom 10 7). In Rev the
AV renders by “‘the bottomless pit”’ (9 1.2.11; 11 7;
17 8; 20 13). In the LXX abussos is the render-
ing of the Heb word DUNN (éhém). According to


27 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


primitive Sem cosmogony the earth was supposed
to rest on a vast body of water which was the
source of all springs of water and rivers (Gen 1 2;
Dt 8&7; Ps 242; 1366). This subterranean
ocean is sometimes described as ‘‘the water under
the earth’ (Ex 20 4; Dt 5 8). According to
Job 41 32 thom is the home of the leviathan in
which he ploughs his hoary path of foam. The
LXX never uses abussos as a rendering of DaNw,
shal (=Sheol= Hades) and probably t¢hém never
meant the ‘‘abode of the dead” which was the or-
dinary meaning of Sheol. In Ps 71 20 thdm is
used fig., and denotes “many and sore troubles”
through which the psalmist has passed (cf Jon 2
5). But in the NT the word abussos means the
“abode of demons.” In Lk 8 31 the AV renders
“into the deep” (Weymouth and The Twentieth
Century NT =“into the bottomless pit’). The
demons do not wish to be sent to their place of
punishment before their destined time. Mk
simply says ‘out of the country” (5 10). In
Rom 10 7 the word is equivalent to Hades, the
abode of the dead. In Rev (where the AV renders
invariably ‘the bottomless pit’’) abussos denotes
the abode of evil spirits, but not the place of final
punishment; it is therefore to be distinguished from
the “lake of fire and brimstone’ where the beast
and the false prophet are, and into which the Devil
is to be finally cast (19 20; 20 10). See also
Asrronomy, ITI, 7. THomas Lewis


ABYSSINIA, ab-i-sin’i-a. See Erntopta.


ACACIA, a-ka’sha (MMW, shittah, the shittah
tree of AV, Isa 41 19, and MOW ZI , ‘dce-shittah,
acacia wood; shittah wood AV, Ex 25 5.10.13;
26 15.26; 271.6; Dt 10 3.): Shittah (=shintah)
is equivalent to
the Arab. sant
which is now the
name of the Aca-
cia Nilotica (NO,
Leguminosae),
but no doubt the
name once in-
cluded other
species of desert
acacias. If one
particular spe-
cies is indicated
in the OT it is
probably the
Acacia Seyal—
the Arab. Seyyal
—which yields
the well-known
gum-arabic.This
tree, which has ff
finely bipinnate
leaves and glob-
ular flowers,
grows toa height
of twenty feet or
more, and its
stem may some-
times reach two
feet in thickness. co ;
The tree often assumes a characteristic umbrella-like
form. ‘The wood is close-grained and is not, readily
attacked by insects. It would be well suited for
such purposes as described, the construction of the
ark of the covenant, the altar and boarding of the
tabernacle. Even today these trees survive 1n con-
siderable numbers around ‘Ain Jidy and in the val-
leys to the south. E. W. G. MasterMan


ACATAN, ak’a-tan.


Shittim Wood—Acacia Seyal.


See AxaTan (Apoc),


Abubus
Access


ACCABA, ak’a-ba, ak-a’ba (B, ’AxkaBé, Akkabd;
A, Tafa, Gabé; AV Agaba)=Hagab (Ezr 2 46);
see also Hacaspa (Neh 7 48): The descendants of
A. (temple-servants) returned with Zerubbabel to
Jerus (1 Esd 5 30).


ACCAD, ak’ad, ACCADIANS, ak-a/di-ans.
BaBYLonia.


See


ACCARON, ak’a-ron (’Atkapov, Akkarén):
Mentioned in 1 Macc 10 89 AV; a town of the
Philistines, known as Ekron (Jp, ‘ekron) in OT,
which King Alexander gave to Jonathan Macca-
baeus as a reward for successful military service
in western Pal. It is also mentioned in the days
of the Crusades. See Exron.


ACCEPT, ak-sept’, ACCEPTABLE, ak-sep’ta-b'l,
ACCEPTATION, ak-sep-ta’-shun: ‘‘To receive with
favor,” “to take pleasure in”; ‘‘well-pleasing”’;
“the act of receiving.”

Accept, used (1) of sacrifice, “a. thy burnt-
sacrifice” (Jil, dashén, “‘accept as fat,” i.e. receive
favorably; Ps 20 8); (2) of persons, ‘“Jeh a. Job”
(Job 42 9, NW}, nasa’, “‘to lift up,” “take,” “re-
ceive”); (3) of works, “a. the work of his hands’’
(Dt 33 11 OT, ragah, ‘to delight in’). In NT
(1) of favors, “We a.... with all thankful-
ness”? (droddéyouat, apodéchomat, Acts 24 3); (2) of
personal appeal, “He a. our exhortation” (2 Cor
8 17); (3) of God’s impartiality (AapSdvw, lambdnd,
“to take,” receive’); “‘accepteth not man’s per-
son” (Gal 2 6).

Acceptable, used (1) of justice (WI2, bahar,
“choose, select’), ‘more a... ... than sacrifice”
(Prov 21 3); (2) of words (VR, hépheg, “delight
in,” “sought .... a. words” (Eccl 12 10); (8) of
times (JX, rdgdn, “delight,” “approbation”;
dexrés, dektés, “‘receivable’’) ‘‘a. year of the Lord”
(Isa 61 2(AV]; Lk 4 19); (4) of spiritual sacrifice
(ebrpbadextos, euprosdektos, ‘well received’’), ‘‘a. to
God” (1 Pet 2 5); (5) of patient endurance (xdprs,
chdris, “grace,” “favor’) This is a. with God” (1
Pet 2 20).

Acceptation, used twice to indicate the trust-
worthiness of the gospel of Christ’s saving grace:
“worthy of alla.” (1 Tim 1 15; 4 9).

These words are full of the abundant grace of
God and are rich in comfort to believers. That
which makes man, in word, work and character,
acceptable to God; and renders it possible for God
to accept him, his service and sacrifice, is the ful-
ness of the Divine mercy and grace and forgive-
ness. He “chose us” and made us, as adopted
sons, the heirs of His grace “which he freely be-
stowed on us in the Beloved” (Eph 1 6; cf AV).

Dwicut M. Pratr

ACCEPTANCE, ak-sep’-tans: A rendering of
the Heb TiX4, rcdn, “delight,” found only in Isa
60 7. It pictures God’s delight in His redeemed
people in the Messianic era, when their gifts, in -
joyful and profuse abundance, “shall come up with
acceptance on mine altar.” With “accepted” and
other kindred words it implies redeeming grace as
the basis of Divine favor. It is the “living, holy
sacrifice” that is “acceptable to God” (Rom 12 1;
ef Titus 3 4-6).


ACCESS, ak’ses (wporaywyt, prosagogé, “a lead-
ing to or toward,” “approach”): Thrice used in
the NT to indicate the acceptable way of ap-
proach to God and of admission to His favor.
Jesus said, “I am the way” (Jn 14 6). His blood
is the “new and living way” (He 10 20). Only
through Him have we “‘a. by faith into this grace


Accommodation


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 28


wherein we stand” (Rom 6 2); “Through him we
both have a. by one Spirit unto the Father”
(Eph 2 18 AV); “in whom we have. ... a. in
confidence, through our faith in him’’ (Eph 3 12).
The goal of redemption is life in God, “unto the
Father.” The means of redemption is the cross of
Christ, “in whom we have our redemption through
his blood” (Eph 1 7). The agent in redemption is
the Holy Spirit, “by one Spirit,” “sealed with the
Holy Spirit of promise” (Eph 1 13). The human
instrumentality, faith. The whole process of
approach to, and abiding fellowship with, God is
summed up in this brief sentence: Access to the
Father, through Christ, by the Spirit, by faith.
Dwicut M. Pratt
ACCO, ak’d (132, ‘akkd; *Anxd, Akchd; "Axy
TIrodepais, Aké Piolemais; Modern Arab. ‘Akka,,
Eng. Acre; AV Accho): A town on the Syrian
coast a few miles north of Carmel, on a small
promontory on the north side of a broad bay that
lies between it and the modern town of Haifa.
This bay furnishes the best anchorage for ships of
any on this coast except that of St. George, at
Beirfit, and Alexandretta at the extreme north.
As the situation commanded the approach from the
sea to the rich plain of Esdraelon and also the
coast route from the north, the city was regarded
in ancient times of great importance and at various
periods of history was the scene of severe struggles
for its possession. It fell within the bounds
assigned ‘to the Israelites, particularly to the tribe
of Asher, but they were never able to take it (Josh
19 24-31; Jgs 1 31). It was, like Tyre and Sidon,
too strong for them to attack and it became indeed
a, fortress of unusual strength, so that it withstood
many a siege, often baffling its assailants. In the
period of the Crusades it was the most famous
stronghold on the coast, and in very early times it
was a place of importance and appears in the Am
Tab as a possession of the Egyp kings. Its gov-
ernor wrote to his suzerain professing loyalty when
the northern towns were falling away (Am Tab
17 BM, 95 B). The Egyp suzerainty over the
coast, which was established by Thothmes III
about 1480 BC, was apparently lost in the 14th
cent., as is indicated in Am Tab, but was regained
under Seti I and his more famous son Rameses
II in the 18th, to be again lost in the 12th when
the Phoen towns seem to have established their
independence. Sidon however surpassed her sisters
in power and exercised a sort. of hegemony over
the Phoen towns, at least in the south, and
A. was inclnded in it (Rawl. Phoenicia, 407-8).
But when Assyria came upon the scene it had to
submit to this power, although it revolted when-
ever Assyria became weak, as appears from the
mention of its subjugation by Sennacherib (ib 449),
and by Asshur-bani-pal (ib 458). The latter
“quieted” it by a wholesale massacre and then
carried into captivity the remaining inhabitants.
Upon the downfall of Assyria it passed, together
with other Phoen towns, under the dominion of
Babylon and then of Persia, but we have no records
of its annals during that period; but it followed the
fortunes of the more important cities, Tyre and
Sidon. In the Seleucid period (BC 312-65) the
town became of importance in the contests between
the Seleucids and the Ptolemies. The latter
occupied it during the struggles that succeeded
the death of Alexander and made it their stronghold
on the coast and changed the name to Pro.emais,
by which it was known in the Gr and Rom period
as we sec in the accounts of the Gr and Rom writers
and in Jos, as well as in NT (1 Mace 6 22; 10
39; 12 48; Acts 21 7). The old name still con-
tinued locally and reasserted itself in later times.


The Ptolemies held undisputed possession of the
place for about 70 years but it was wrested from
them by Antiochus ILI, of Syria, in 219 BC and
went into the permanent possession of the Seleucids
after the decisive victory of Antiochus over Scopas
in that year, the result of which was the expulsion
of the Ptolemies from Syria, Pal and Phoenicia
(Ant, XII, iii, 3). In the dynastic struggles of the
Seleucids it fell into the hands of Alexander Bala,
who there received the hand of Cleopatra, the
daughter of Ptolemy Philometor, as a pledge of
alliance between them (ib XIII, iv, 1). Tigranes,
king of Armenia, besieged it on his invasion of
Syria, but was obliged to relinquish it on the ap-
proach of the Romans toward his own dominions
(BJ, 1,v, 3). Under the Romans Ptolemais became
a colony and a metropolis, as is known from its
coins, and was of importance, as is attested by
Strabo. But the events that followed the con-
quests of the Saracens, leading to the Crusades,
brought it into great prominence. It was cap-
tured by the Crusaders in 1110 AD, and remained
in their hands until 1187, when it was taken from
them by Saladin and its fortifications so_strength-
ened as to render it almost impregnable. The
importance of this fortress as a key to the Holy
Land was considered so great by the Crusaders
that they put forth every effort during two years to
recapture it, but all in vain until the arrival of
Richard Coeur de Lion and Philip Augustus with
reinforcements, and it was only after the most
strenuous efforts on their part that the place fell
into their hands; but it cost them 100,000 men.
The fortifications were repaired and it was after-
ward committed to the charge of the knights of
St. John, by whom it was held for 100 years and
received the name of St. Jean d’Acre. It was finally
taken by the Saracens in 1291, being the last place
held by the Crusaders in Pal.

It declined after this and fell into the hands of
the Ottomans under Selim I in 1516, and re-
mained mostly in ruins until the 18th cent., when
it came into the possession of Jezzar Pasha, who
usurped the authority over it and the neighboring
district and became practically independent of
the Sultan and defied his authority. In 1799 it
was attacked by Napoleon but was bravely and
successfully defended by the Turks with the help
of the English fleet, and Napoleon had to abandon
the siege after he had spent two months before it
and gained a victory over the Turkish army at
Tabor. It enjoyed a considerable degree of pros-
pen after this until 1831 when it was besieged

y Ibrahim Pasha, of Egypt, and taken, but only
after a siege of more than five months in which it
suffered the destruction of its walls and many of
its buildings. It continued in the hands of the
Egyptians until 1840 when it was restored to the
Ottomans by the English whose fleet nearly reduced
it to ruins in the bombardment. It has recovered
somewhat since then and is now a town of some
10,000 inhabitants and the seat of a Mutasarrifiyet,
or subdivision of the Vilayet of Beirdit. It con-
tains one of the state prisons of the Vilayet, where
long-term prisoners are incarcerated. Its former
commerce has been almost wholly lost to the town
of Haifa, on the south side of the bay, since the
latter has a fairly good roadstead, while Acre has
none, and the former being the terminus of the
railway which connects with the interior and the
Damascus-Mecca line, it has naturally supplanted
Acre as a center of trade. H. Porter


ACCOMMODATION, a-kom-mo-da’shun:
I. Intropuctory
1. Three Uses of the Term
2. The Importance of the Subject


29 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


II. Accommopatrep AppLicaTION OF ScripTuRE Pas-
SAGES
1. Interpretation a Science
2. Scientific Accommodation
III. Dovsis Rererence 1n ScRIPTURE
1. EE in Scripture
2. Hidden Truths of Scripture
3. Prophecy and Its Fulfilment
4, Conclusion .
IV. AccommopaTion IN REVELATION
1. General Principies
Ae eo d aon a Feature of Progressive Reve-
ation
3. The Limits of Revelation
4. The Outcome of Revelation __
5. The Question as to Christ’s Method
LireRaTURE


I. Introductory.—The term “accommodation” is
used in three senses which demand careful discrim-
ination and are worthy of scparate


1. Three treatment: (1) the use or application
Uses of the of a Scripture reference in a sense
Term other than the obvious and literal one


which lay in the mind and intent of
the writer; (2) the theory that a passage, according
to its original intent, may have more than one
meaning or application; (3) the general principle
of adaptation on the part of God im His self-reve-
lation to man’s mental and spiritual capacity.
Important issues are involved in the discussion
of this subject in each of the three divisions thus
naturally presented to us in the vari-
2. The Im- ous uses of the term. These issues
portance of culminate in the supremely impor-
the Subject tant principles which underlie the
question of God’s adaptation of His
revelation to men.
Il, Accommodated Application of Scripture
Passages.—It is obvious that the nature of thought
and of language is such as to consti-
1. Interpre- tute for all human writings, among
tation a  ~ which the Bible, as a document to be
Science understood, must be placed, a science
of interpretation with a definite body
of laws which cannot be violated or set aside with-
out confusion and error. This excludes the inde-
terminate and arbitrary exegesis of any passage.
It must be interpreted with precision and in
accordance with recognized laws of interpretation.
The first and most fundamental of these laws is
that a passage is to be interpreted in accordance
with the intent of the writer in so far as that can
be ascertained. The obvious, literal and original
meaning always has the right of way. All arbi-
trary twisting of a passage in order to obtain from
it new and remote meanings not justified by the
context is unscientific and misleading. te
There is, however, a scicntific and legitimate
use of the principle of accommodation. For ex-
ample, it is impossible to determine
2. Scientific beforehand that a writer’s specific
Accommo- application of a general principle is
dation the only one of which it is capable.
A bald and literal statement of fact
may involve a general principle which is capable
of broad and effective application in other spheres
than that originally contemplated. It is perfectly
legitimate to detach a writer’s statement from its
context of secondary and incidental detail and give
it a harmonious setting of wider application. It
will be seen from this that legitimate accommoda-
tion involves two things: (1) the acceptance of
the author’s primary and literal meaning; (2) the
extension of that meaning through the establish-
ment of a broader context identical in principle
with the original one. In the article on QuoTa-
TIoNs IN NT (q.v.) this use of the term accommoda~-
tion, here treated in the most general terms, 1s
dealt with in detail. See also INTERPRETATION.
UL Double Reference in Scripture.—The second
use of the term accommodation now emerges for


Acco
Accommoadatien


discussion. Are we to infer the presence of double
reference, or secondary meanings in Scripture?
Here again we must distinguish between the legiti-
mate and illegitimate application of a principle.
While we wisely deprecate the tendency to look
upon Scripture passages as cryptic utterances, we
must also recognize that many Scripture references
may have more than a single application.

We must recognize in the Scriptures the use of
allegory, the peculiar quality of which, as a form of

literature, is the double reference
1. Allegory which it contains. To interpret the
in Scripture story of the Bramble-King (Jgs 9

7-15) or the Parables of Our Lord
without reference to the double meanings which
they involve would be as false and arbitrary as
any extreme of allegorizing. The double meaning
is of the essence of the literary expression. This
does not mean, of course, that the poetry of the
Bible, even that of the Prophets and Apocalyptic
writers, is to be looked upon as allegorical. On the
contrary, only that writing, whether prose or
poetry, is to be interpreted in any other than its
natural and obvious sense, in connection with which
we have definite indications of its allegorical char-
acter. Figures of specch and poetical expressions
in general, though not intended to be taken literally
because they belong to the poetical form, are not
to be taken as having occult references and alle-
gorical meanings. Dr. A. B. Davidson thus char-
acterizes the prophetic style (OT Prophecy, 171;
see whole chapter): ‘Prophecy is poetical, but it
is not allegorical. The language of prophecy is
real as opposed to allegorical, and poetical as
opposed to real. When the prophets speak of
natural objects or of lower creatures, they do not
mean human things by them, or human beings,
but these natural objects or creatures themselves.
When Joel speaks of locusts, he means those
creatures. When he speaks of the sun and moon
and stars, he means those bodies.” Allegory,
therefore, which contains the double reference, in
the sense of speaking of one thing while meaning
another, is adefinite and recognizable literary form
with its own proper laws of interpretation. See
ALLEGORY.

There is progress in the understanding of Scrip-

ture. New reaches of truth are continually being
brought to light. By legitimate and
2. Hidden natural methods hidden meanings are
Truths of being continually discovered.
Scripture (1) It is a well-attested fact that
apart from any supernatural factor
a writer sometimes speaks more wisely than he
knows. He is the partially unconscious agent for
the expression of a great truth, not only for his own
age, but for all time. It is not often given to such
a really great writer or to his age to recognize all
the implications of his thought. Depths of meaning
hidden both from the origina! writer and from earlier
interpreters may be disclosed by moving historical
sidelights. The element of permanent value. in
great literature is due to the fact that the writer
utters a greater truth than can exhaustively be
known in any one era. It belongs to all time.

(2) The supernatural factor which has gone to
the making of Scripture insures that no one man
or group of men, that not all men together, can
know it exhaustively. It partakes of the inex-
haustibleness of God. It is certain, therefore, that
it will keep pace with the general progress of man,
exhibiting new phases of meaning as it moves along
the stream of history. Improved exegetical appa-
ratus and methods, enlarged apprehensions into
widening vistas of thought and knowledge, increased
insight under the tutelage of the Spirit in the
growing Kingdom of God, will conspire to draw


Accommodation THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 30


up new meanings from the depths of Scripture.
The thought of God in any given expression of
truth can only be progressively and approximately
known by human beings who begin in ignorance
and must be taught what they know. ;
_ (8) The supernatural factor in revelation also
implies a twofold thought in every important or
fundamental statement of Scripture: the thought
of God uttered through His Spirit to a man or his
generation, and that same thought with reference
to the coming ages and to the whole truth which
is to be disclosed. Every separate item belonging
to an organism of truth would naturally have a
twofold reference: first, its significance alone and
of itself; second, its significance with reference to
the whole of which it is a part. As all great
Scriptural truths are thus organically related, it
follows that no one of them can be fully known
apart from all the others. From which it follows
also that in a process of gradual revelation where
truths are given successively as men are able to
receive them and where each successive truth
prepares the way for others which are to follow,
every earlier statement will have two ranges of
meaning and application—that which is intrinsic
and that which flows from its connection with
the entire organism of unfolding truth which finally
appears.

(1) The principles thus far expressed carry us
a certain way toward an answer to the most impor-

tant question which arises under this
8. Prophecy division of the general topic: the
and Its Ful- relation between the OT and the NT
filment through prophecy and its fulfilment.
Four specific points of connection in-
volving the principles of prophetic anticipation
and historical realization in the career of Jesus are
alleged by NT writers. They are of vital impor-
tance, inasmuch as these four groups of interpreta-
tions involve the most important elements of the
OT and practically the entire NT interpretation of
Jesus. ;

(2) (a) The promise made to Abraham (Gen 12
1-3; cf 13 14-18; 15 1-6, etc) and repeated in
substance at intervals during the history of Israel
(see Ex 6 7; Lev 26 12; Dt 26 17-19; 29 12.13;
287; 1 Ch 17, ete) is interpreted as having
reference to the distant future and as fulfilled in
Christ (see Gal 3 for example of this interpreta-
tion, esp. ver 14; also Quotations In NT).

(b) The OT system of sacrifices is looked upon
as typical and symbolic, hence, predictive and
realized in the death of Christ interpreted as atone-
ment for sin (He 10, etc).

(c) References in the OT to kings or a king of
David’s line whose advent and reign are spoken of
are interpreted as definite predictions fulfilled in
the advent and career of Jesus the Messiah (Ps 2,
16, 22, 110; cf Lk 1 69, etc).

(d) The prophetic conception of the servant of
Jeh (Isa 42 1f; 44 1f; 62 13—-63 12; cf Acts
8 32-35) is interpreted as being an anticipatory
description of the character and work of Jesus
centering in His vicarious sin-bearing death.

(8) With the details of interpretation as involved
in the specific use of OT statements we are not
concerned here (see “Quotations,” etc) but only
with the general principles which underlie all such
uses of the OT. The problem is: Can we thus
interpret any passage or group of passages in the
OT without being guilty of what has been called
“pedantic supernaturalism”; that is, of distorting
Scripture by interpreting it without regard to its
natural historical connections? Is the interpre-
tation of the OT Messianically legitimate or ille-
gitimate accommodation?

(a) It is a widely accepted canon of modern


interpretation that the institutions of OT worship
and the various messages of the prophets had an
intrinsic contemporary significance. :

(b) But this is not to say that its meaning and
value are exhausted in that immediate contem-
porary application. Beyond question the prophet
was a man with a message to his own age, but
there is nothing incompatible, in that fact, with
his having a message, the full significance of which
reaches beyond his own age, even into the far dis-
tant future. It would serve to clear the air in this
whole region if it were only understood that it is
precisely upon its grasp of the future that the lever-
age of a great message for immediate moral uplift
rests. The predictive element is a vital part of the
contemporary value. .

(c) The material given under the preceding
analysis may be dealt with as a whole on the basis
of a principle fundamental to the entire OT economy,
namely: that each successive age in the history of
Israel is dealt with on the basis of truth common
to the entire movement of which the history of
Israel is but a single phase. It is further to be
remembered that relationship between the earher
and later parts of the Bible is one of organic and
essential unity, both doctrinal and historical. By
virtue of this fact the predictive element is an
essential factor in the doctrines and institutions of
the earlier dispensation as originally constituted
and delivered, hence forming a part of its contem-
porary significance and value, both pointing to the
future and preparing the way for it. In like
manner, the element of fulfilment is an essential
element of the later dispensation as the completed
outcome of the movement begun long ages before.
Prediction and fulfilment are essential factors in
any unified movement begun, advanced and com-
pleted according to a single plan in successive
periods of time. We have now but to apply this
principle in general to the OT material already in
hand to reach definite and satisfactory conclusions.

(4) (a) The promise made to Abraham was a
living message addressed directly to him in the
immediate circumstances of his life upon which the
delivery and acceptance of the promise made a
permanent impress; but it was of vaster proportions
than could be realized within the compass of a
single human life; for it included himself, his pos-
terity, and all mankind in a single circle of promised
blessing. So far as the patriarch was concerned
the immediate, contemporary value of the promise
lay in the fact that it concerned him not alone but
in relationship to the future and to mankind. A
prediction was thus imbedded in the very heart
of the word.of God which was the object of his
faith—a prediction which served to ensphere his
life in the plan of God for all mankind and to
fasten his ambition to the service of that plan.
The promise was predictive in its essence and in its
contemporary meaning (see Beecher, Prophets and
Promise, 213).

(6) So also it is with the Messianic King. The
Kingdom as an institution in Israel is described
from the beginning as the perpetual mediatorial
reign of God upon earth (see Ex 19 3-6; 287
8-16, etc), and the King in whom the Kingdom
centers is God’s Son (2 8 7 13.15) and earthly
representative. In all this there is much that is
immediately contemporaneous. The Kingdom and
the Kingship are described in terms of the ideal
and that ideal is used in every age as the ground of
immediate appeal to loyalty and devotion on the
part of the King. None the less the predictive
element lies at the center of the representation.
The very first recorded expression of the Messianic
promise to David involves the prediction of uncon-
ditioned perpetuity to his house, and thus grasps


31 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Accommodation


the entire future. More than this, the character-
istics, the functions, the dignities of the king are so
described (Ps 102; Isa 9 6.7) as to make it clear
that the conditions of the Kingship could be met
only by an uniquely endowed person coming forth
from God and exercising divine functions in a world-
wide spiritual empire. Such a King being described
and such a Kingdom being promised, the recipients
of it, of necessity, were set to judge the present
and scrutinize the future for its realization. The
conception is, in its original meaning and expression,
essentially predictive.

(c) Very closely allied with this conception of the
Messianic King is the prophetic ideal of the Serv-
ant of Jeh. Looked at in its original context we
at once discover that it is the ideal delineation
of a mediatorial service to men in behalf of Jeh
—which has a certain meaning of fulfilment in
any person who exhibits the Divine character by
teaching the truth and ministering to human need
(for application of the term see Isa 49 5.6.7;
50 10; esp. 45 1). But the service is described
in such exalted terms, the devotion exacted by it
is so high, that, in the application of the ideal as
a test to the present and to the nation at large, the
mind is inevitably thrown into the future and
centered upon a supremely endowed individual to
come, who is by preéminence the Servant of Jeh.

(d) The same principle may be applied with
equal effectiveness to the matter of Israel’s sacri-
ficial system. In the last two instances this fact
emerged: No truth and no institution can ex-
haustively be known until it has'run a course in
history. For example, the ideas embodied in the
Messianic Kingship and the conception of the
Servant of Jeh could be known only in the light
of history. Only in view of the actual struggles
and failures of successive kings and successive
generations of the people to realize such ideals
could their full significance be disclosed. More-
over, only by historic process of preparation could
such ideals ultimately be realized. This is pre-
eminently true of the OT sacrifices. It is clear
that the NT conception of the significance of OT
sacrifice in connection with the death of Christ
is based upon the belief that the idea embodied
in the original institution could be fulfilled only in
the voluntary sacrifice of Christ (see He 10 1-14).
This view is justified by the facts. Dr. Davidson
(op. cit., 239) holds that the predictive element in
the OT sacrifices lay in their imperfection. This
imperfection, while inherent, could be revealed
only in experience. As they gradually deepened
a sense of need which they could not satisfy, more
and more clearly they pointed away from them-
selves to that transaction which alone could realize
in fact what they express in symbol. A harmony
such as obtained between OT sacrifice and the
death of Christ could only be the result of design.
It is all one movement, one fundamental operation;
historically prefigured and prepared for by antici-
. pation, and historically realized. OT sacrifice
was instituted both to prefigure and to prepare the
way for the sacrifice of Christ in the very process
of fulfillmg its natural historic function in the
economy of Israel. : re dick ?

The total outcome of the discussion is this:
the interpretation of these representative OT
ideas and institutions as referring to
Christ and anticipating His advent
is no illegitimate use of the principle
‘of accommodation. The future ref-
erence which takes in the entire historical process
which culminates in Christ lies within the immediate
and original application and constitutes an essen-
tial element of its contemporary value. The
original statement is in its very nature predictive


4, Con-
clusion


and is one in doctrinal principle and historic con-
tinuity with that which forms its fulfilment.
Accommodation in Revelation.—(1) It is
evident that God’s revelation to men must be con-
veyed in comprehensible terms and
1. General adjusted to the nature of the human
Principles understanding. That is clearly not
: a revelation which does not reveal.
A disclosure of God’s character and ways to men
involves the use and control of the human spirit
in accordance with its constitution and laws. The
doctrine of inspiration inseparable from that of
revelation implies such a divine control of human
faculties as to enable them, still freely working
within their own normal sphere, to apprehend and
interpret truth otherwise beyond their reach.

(2) The Bible teaches that in the height and
depth of His being God is unsearchable. His
mind and the human mind are quantitatively
incommensurable. Man cannot by searching find
out God. His ways are not our ways and His
thoughts are not our thoughts.

(3) But, on the other hand, the Bible affirms
with equal emphasis the essential qualitative
kinship of the divine and the human constitutions.
God is spirit—man is spirit also. Man is made in
the image of God and made to know God. These
two principles together affirm the necessity and
the possibility of revelation. Revelation, con-
sidered as an exceptional order of experience due
to acts of God performed with the purpose of
making Himself known in personal relationship
with man, is necessary because man’s finite nature
needs guidance. Revelation is possible because
man is capable of such guidance. The Bible
affirms that God’s thoughts are not our thoughts,
but that they may become ours because God can
utter them so that we can receive them.

(4) These two principles lead to a most impor-
tant conclusion. In all discussions of the principle
of accommodation it is to be remembered that the
capacity of the human mind to construct does not
measure its capacity to receive and appropriate.
The human mind can be taught what it cannot
independently discover. No teacher is limited
by the capacity of his pupils to deal unaided with
a subject of study. He is limited only by their
capacity to follow him in his processes of thought
and exposition. The determining factor in reve-
lation, which is a true educative process, is the
mind of God which stamps itself upon the kindred
and plastic mind of man.

(1) The beginnings of revelation. Since man’s
experience is organically conditioned he is under

the law of growth. His entire mental


2. Accom- and spiritual life is related to his
modation a part and lot in the kingdom of organ-
Feature of isms. The very laws of his mind


Progressive reveal themselves only upon occasion
Revelation in experience. While it is true that
his tendencies are innate, so that he is
compelled to think and to feel in certain definite
ways, yet it is true that he can neither think nor
feel at all except as experience presents material
for thought and applies stimulus to feeling. Man
must live in order to learn. He must, therefore, -
learn gradually. This fact conditions all revela-
tion. Since it must deal with men it must be
progressive, and since it must be progressive it
must necessarily involve, in its earlier stages, the
principle of accommodation. In order to gain
access to man’s mind it must take him where he is
and link itself with his natural aptitudes and
native modes of thought. Since revelation in-
volves the endeavor to form in the mind of man
the idea of God in order that a right relationship
with Him may be established, it enters both the


Accommodation
Accountability


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


32


intellectual and moral life of the human race and
must accommodate itself to the humble beginnings
of early human experience. The chief problem of
revelation seems to have been to bring these
crude beginnings within the scope of a movement
the aim and end of which is perfection. The appli-
cation of the principle of accommodation to early
human experience with a view to progress is
accomplished by doing what at first thought seems
to negate the very principle upon which the mental
and moral life of man must permanently rest.
(a) It involves the authoritative revelations of
incomplete and merely tentative truths. (b) It
involves also the positive enactment of rudimen-
tary and imperfect morality.

In both these particulars Scripture has accom-
modated itself to crude early notions and placed
the seal of authority upon principles which are
outgrown and discarded within the limits of Scrip-
ture itself. But in so doing Scripture has saved
the very interests it has seemed to imperil by virtue
of two features of the human constitution which
in themselves lay hold upon perfection and serve to
bind together the crude beginnings and the mature
achievements of the human race. These two
principles are (c) the idea of truth; (d) the idea of
obligation.

(2) It is mainly due to these two factors of human
nature that any progress in truth and conduct is
possible tomen. What is true or right in matter of
specific fact varies in the judgment of different
individuals and of different ages. But the august
and compelling twin convictions of truth and
right, as absolute, eternal, authoritative, are
present from the beginning of human history to
the end of it. Scripture seizes upon the fact that
these great ideas may be enforced through crude
human conceptions and at very rudimentary
stages of culture, and enforcing them by means of
revelation and imperative law brings man to the
test of truth and right and fosters his advance to
larger conceptions and broader applications of
both fundamental principles. Canon Mozley in
discussing this principle of accommodation on its
moral side, its necessity and its fruitfulness, says:
“How can the law properly fulfil its object of cor-
recting and improving the moral standard of men,
unless it first maintains in obligation the standard
which already exists? Those crudely delineated
conceptions, which it tends ultimately to purify
and raise, it must first impose’ (Ruling Ideas in
Early Ages, 183; cf Mt 5 17 with 21.27.33).

Since the chief end of revelation is to form the
mind of man with reference to the purpose and will

of God to the end that man may enter


3. The into fellowship with God, the question
Limits of arises as to how far revelation will be
Revelation accommodated by the limitation of


its sphere. How far does it seek to
form the mind and how far does it leave the mind
to its own laws and to historical educative forces?
Four foundation principles seem to he sufficiently
clear: (a) Revelation accepts and uses at every
stage of its history such materials from the common
stock of human ideas as are true and of permanent
worth. The superstructure of revelation rests
upcn a foundation of universal and fundamental
human convictions. It appeals continually to the
rooted instincts and regulative ideas of the human
soul deeply implanted as.a preparation for reve-
lation. (b) Regard is paid in Scripture to man’s
nature as free and responsible. He is a rational
being who must be taught through persuasion;
he is a moral being who must be controlled through
his conscience and will. There must be, there-
fore, throughout the process of revelation an ele-
ment of free, spontaneous, unforced life in and


through which the supernatural factors work.
(c) Revelation must have reference, even in its
earliest phases of development, to the organism of
truth as a whole. What is actually given at any
time must contribute its quota to the ultimate
summing up and completion of the entire process.
(d) Revelation must guard against injurious errors
which trench upon essential and vital matters.
In short, the consistency and integrity of the move-


- ment through which truth is brought to disclosure


must sacredly be guarded; while, at the same
time, since it is God and man who are coming to
know each other, revelation must be set in a
broad environment of human life and entrusted
to the processes of history. See REVELATION.

It is now our task briefly to notice how in Scrip-
ture these interests are safeguarded. We must

notice (a) the principle of accommo-
4, The dation in general. It has often been
Outcome of pointed out that in every book of the
Revelation Bible the inimitable physiognomy of

the writer and the age is preserved;
that the Biblical language with reference to Nature
is the language of phenomena; that its doctrines
are stated vividly, tropically, concretely and in the
forms of speech natural to the age in which they
were uttered; that, its historical documents are, for
the most: part, artless annals of the ancient oriental
type; that it contains comparatively little infor-
mation concerning Nature or man which antici-
pates scientific discovery or emancipates the
religious man who accepts it as a guide from going
to school to Nature and human experience for such
information. All this, of course, without touching
upon disputed points or debated questions of fact,
involves, from the point of view of the Divine mind
to which all things are known, and of the human
mind to which certain facts of Nature hidden in
antiquity have been disclosed, the principles of
accommodation. Over against this we must set
certain contrasting facts:

(b) The Scripture shows a constant tendency to
transcend itseli and to bring the teaching of the
truth to a higher level. The simple, primitive
ideas and rites of the patriarchal age are succeeded
by the era of organized national life with its ideal of
unity and the mtensified sense of national calling
and destiny under the leadership of God. The
national idea of church and kingdom broadens
out into the universal conception and world-wide
mission of Christianity. The sacrificial symbolism
of the OT gives way to the burning ethical realities
of the Incarnate Life. The self-lmitation of the
Incarnation broadens out into the world-wide
potencies of the era of the Spirit who uses the letter
of Scripture as the instrument of His universal
ministry. It is thus seen that by the progressive
method through a cumulative process God has
gradually transcended the limitation of His instru-
ments while at the same time He has continuously
broadened and decpened the Spirit of man to
receive His self-disclosure.

(c) More than this, Scripture throughout is
marked by. a certain distinct and unmistakable
quality of timelessness. It continually urges and
suggests the infinite, the eternal, the unchangeable.
It is part of the task of revelation to anticipate so
as to guide progress. At every stage it keeps the
minds of men on the stretch with a truth that they
are not able at that stage easily to apprehend.
The inexhaustible vastness and the hidden fulness
of truth are everywhere implied. Prophets and
Apostles are continually in travail with truths
brought to their own ages from afar. The great
fundamental verities of Scripture are stated with
uncompromising fulness and finality. There is
no accommodation to human weakness or error.


33 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Accommodation
Accountability


Its ideals, its standards, its conditions are absolute
and inviolate.

Not only has Israel certain fundamental ideas
which are peculiar to herself, but there has been
an organizing spirit, an “unique spirit of inspi-
ration” which has modified and transformed the
materials held by her in common with her Sem
kindred. Even her inherited ideas and institu-
tions are transformed and infused with new mean-
ings. We note the modification of Sem customs, as
for example in blood revenge, by which savagery
has been mitigated and evil associations eliminated.
We note the paucity of mythological material.
If the stories of Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Samson were originally mythological they have
ceased to be such in the Bible. They have been
humanized and stripped of superhuman features.
(See ‘‘Fable,”” HGHL, 220 ff:)

If we yield to the current hypothesis as to the
Babylonian background of the narratives in Gen,
we are still more profoundly impressed with that
unique assimilative power, working in Israel, which
has enabled the Biblical writers to eradicate the
deep-seated polytheism of the Bab documents and
to stamp upon them the inimitable features of their
own high monotheism (see BaByLonia). We note
the reserve of Scripture, the constant restraint
exercised upon the imagination, the chastened
doctrinal sobriety in the Bible references to angels
and demons, in its Apocalyptic imagery, in its
Messianic promises, in its doctrines of rewards
and punishments. In all these particulars the
Bible stands unique by contrast, not merely with
popular thought, but with the extra-canonical lit.
of the Jewish people (see Drmons, etc).

We come at this point upon a most central and
difficult problem. It is, of course, alleged that

Christ adopted the attitude of con-
5. The currence, which was also one of ac-
Question as commodation, in popular views con-
to Christ’s cerning angels and demons, etc. It
Method is disputed whether this goes back

to the essential accommodation in-
volved in the self-limiting of the Incarnation so
that as man He should share the views of His
contemporaries, or whether, with wider knowledge,
He accommodated Himself for pedagogical pur-
poses to erroneous views of the untaught people
about Him (see DCG, art. ‘“Accommodation”).
The question is complicated by our ignorance of
the facts. We cannot say that Jesus accommo-
dated Himself to the ignorance of the populace
unless we are ready to pronounce authoritatively
upon the truth or falseness of the popular theory.
It is not our province in this article to enter upon
that discussion (see IncaRNATION and KeEwosis).
We can only point out that the reserve of the NT
and the absence of all imaginative extravagance
shows that if accommodation has been applied it
is most. strictly limited in its scope. In this it is
in harmony with the entire method of Scripture,
where the ignorance of men is regarded in the pre-
sentation of God’s truth, while at the same time
their growing minds are protected against the errors
which would lead them astray from the direct
path of progress into the whole truth reserved in
the Divine counsel.

Lirzrarurs.—(a) For the first division of the subject
consult standard works on Science of Interpretation and
Homiletics sub loc.

(6) For second division, among others, Dr. A. B.
Davidson, OT Prophecy; Dr. Willis J. Beecher, Prophets
and Promise. me

(c) For the third division, the most helpful single
work is the one quoted: Mozley, Ruling Ideas in Early
Ages, published by Longmans as ‘OT Lectures.”


Lovis MatrHews SwEet
ACCOMPLISH, a-kom’plish: Richly repre-
sented in the OT by seven Heb synonyms and in


the NT by five Gr (AV); signifying in Heb (1)
‘to complete’ (Lam 4 11); (2) “to fulfil” (Dnl 9
2); (8) “to execute’ (1 K 59); (4) “to set
apart” i.e. ‘consecrate’ (Lev 22 21); (5) “to
establish” (Jer 44 25 AV); (6) “to have pleasure
in” (Job 14 6); (7) ‘to perfect” (Ps 64 6); in Gr
(1) ‘to finish” (Acts 21 5); (2) ‘‘to bring to an


end” (He 9 6); (3) “to be fulfilled” (Lk 2 6);
(4) “to fill out” (Lk 9 31); (5) “to complete”
(Lk 12 50). ‘


ACCORD, a-kird’, ACCORDING, ACCORD-
INGLY, a-k6rd’ing-li: In OT MB, peh, “mouth,”
‘to fight with one accord” (Josh 9 2). "D>, lephi,
“according to the mouth of,” ‘according to their
families” (Gen 47 12, ‘acc. to [the number of]
their little ones” RVm). In Isa 59 18 the same
Heb word, 992, kal, is rendered ‘‘according to’’
and “accordingly.” In NT épo6vpadév, homothu-
madén, indicative of harmony of mind or action,
(Acts 114; 2 46; 757; 18 12) and «ard, kaid,
‘of the same mind . acc. to Christ Jesus”
(Rom 15 5); atréyaros, autématos, “of itself,”
“without constraint,” “opened to them of its own
accord” (Acts 12 10), i.e. without human agency
(cf Lev 25 5 AV; Mk 4 28); addaiperos, authat-
retos, “‘of his own free choice’ (2 Cor 8 17).
God ‘will render to every man according to his
works” (Rom 2 6), that is, agreeably to the nature
of his works (1 Cor 3 8), but salvation is not
according to works (2 Tim 1 9; Titus 3 5). See
DEED. M. O. Evans


ACCOS, ak’os (‘Axxés, Hakchés): The grand-
father of Eupolemus, whom Judas Maccabaeus
sent with others to Rome in 161 BC, to negotiate
a “league of amity and confederacy’? (1 Macc 8
17). The name occurs in the OT as Hakkoz
(Po, hakké¢), who was a priest in the reign of
David (1 Ch 24 10).


ACCOUNT, a-kount’. See AccounTaBILITY.


ACCOUNTABILITY,  a-koun-ta-bil’i-ti: The
general teaching of Scripture on this subject is
summarized in Rom 14 12: “So then

1. Scriptur- each one of us shall give account of
alPrinciples himself to God.’’ But this implies,
on the one hand, the existence of a

Moral Ruler of the universe, whose will is revealed,
and, on the other, the possession by the creature
of knowledge and free will. In Rom 4 15 it is
expressly laid down that, ‘where no law is, neither
is there transgression’; but, lest this might seem
to exclude from accountability those to whom the
law of Moses was not given, it is shown that even
heathen had the law to some extent revealed in
conscience; so that they are ‘‘without excuse”
(Rom 1 20). “For as many as have sinned without
the law shall also perish without the law: and as
many as have sinned under the law shall be judged
by the law’ (Rom 2 12). So says Paul in a passage
which is one of the profoundest discussions on the
subject of accountability, and with his sentiment
agrees exactly the word of Our Lord on the same
subject, in. Lk 12 47.48: ‘‘And that servant, who
knew his lord’s will, and made not ready, nor did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes; but he that knew not, and did things
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes.
And to whomsoever much is given, of him shall
much be required: and to whom they commit
much, of him will they ask the more.” There is a
gradual development of accountability accom-
panying the growth of a human being from infancy
to maturity; and there is a similar development in


Accoz
Achan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 34


the race, as knowledge grows from less to more.
In the full light of the gospel human beings are
far more responsible than they were in earlier
stages of intellectual and spiritnal development,
and the doom to which they will be exposed on
the day of account will be heavy in proportion to
their privileges. This may seem to put too great
a premium on ignorance; and a real difficulty
arises when we say that, the more of moral sensitive-
ness there is, the greater is the guilt; because, as
is well known, moral sensitiveness can be lost
through persistent disregard of conscience; from
which it might seem to follow that the way to
diminish guilt was to silence the voice of conscience.
There must, however, be a difference between the
responsibility of a conscience that has never been
enlightened and that of one which, having once
been enlightened, has lost, through neglect or
recklessness, the goodness once possessed. In the
practice of the law, for example, it is often claimed
that a crime committed under the influence of
intoxication should be condoned; yet everyone
must feel how different this is from innocence,
and that, before a higher tribunal, the culprit will
be held to be twice guilty—first, of the sin of
drunkenness and then of the crime.
Wherever civilization is so advanced that there
exists a code of public law, with punishments
attached to transgression, there goes
2. Connec- on a constant education in the sense
tion with of accountability; and even the
Immortality heathen mind, in classical times, had
advanced so far as to believe in a
judgment beyond the veil, when the shades had to
appear before the tribunal of Rhadamanthus,
Minos and Aacus, to have their station and degree
in the underworld decided according to the deeds
done in the body. How early the Hebrews had
made as much progress has to be discussed in con-
nection with the doctrine of immortality; but it is
certain that, before the OT canon closed, they
believed not only in a judgment after death but
in resurrection, by which the sense of accounta-
bility was fastened far more firmly on the popular
mind. Long before, however, there was awakened
by the sacred literature the sense of a judgment of
God going on during the present life and expressing
itself in everyone’s condition. The history of the
world was the judgment of the world; prosperity
attended the steps of the good man, but retribu-
tion sooner or later struck down the wicked. It
was from the difficulty of reconciling with this
belief the facts of life that the skepticism of Heb
thought arose; but by the same constraint the
pious mind was pushed forward in the direction
of the full doctrine of immortality. This came with
the advent of Him who brought life and immor-
tality to light by His gospel (2 Tim 110). In
the mind of Jesns not only were resurrection,
judgment and immortality unquestionable postn-
lates; but He was brought into a special connection
with accountability through His consciousness of
being the Judge of mankind, and, in His numerous
references to the Last Judgment, He developed
the principles upon which the conscience will then
be tried, and by which accordingly it ought now
to try itself. In this connection the Parable of the
Talents is of special significance; but it is by the
grandiose picture of the scene itself, which follows
in the same chapter of the First Gospel, that the
mind of Christendom has been most powerfully
influenced. Reference has already been made to
the discussions at the commencement of the Epistle
to the Romans in which our subject finds a place.
By some the apostle John has been supposed to
revert to the OT notion of a judgment proceeding
now in place of coming at the Last Day; but


Weiss (Der johanneische Lehrbegriff, Il, 9) has
proved that this is a mistake. tie

Up to this point we have spoken of individual

accountability; but the subject becomes more

complicated when we think of the

3. Joint and joint responsibility of several or many


Corporate persons. From the first the human
Responsi- mind has been haunted by what is
bility called the guilt of Adam’s first sin.


There is a solidarity in the human
race, and the inheritance of evil is too obvious to be
denied even by the most optimistic. There is
far, however, from being agreement of opinion as
to the relation of the individual to this evil legacy;
some contending fiercely against the idea that the
individual can have any personal responsibility
for a sin hidden in a past so distant and shadowy,
while others maintain that the misery which has
certainly been inherited by all can only be justi-
fied in a world governed by a God of justice if the
guilt of all precedes the misery. The question
enters deeply into the Pauline scheme, although
at the most critical point it is much disputed what
the Apostle’s real position is. While joint respon-
sibility burdens the individual conscience, it may,
at the same time, be said to lighten it. Thus, in
Ezk 18 one of the most weighty ethical discussions
to be found in Holy Writ is introduced with the
popular proverb, ‘‘The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, arid the children’s teeth are set on edge,”
which proves to be a way of saying that the respon-
sibility of children is lightened, if not abolished,
through their connection with their parents. In
the same way, at the present time, the sense of
responsibility is enfeebled in many minds through
the control over character and destiny ascribed
to heredity and environment. Even criminality
is excused on the ground that many have never
had a chance of virtue, and it is contended that
to know everything is to forgive everything.
There can be no doubt that, as the agents of trusts
and partnerships, men will allow themselves to
do what they would never have thought of in pri-
vate business; and in a crowd the individual sus-
tains psychological modifications by which he is
made to act very differently from his ordinary
self. In the actions of nations, such as war, there
is a vast and solemn responsibility somewhere;
but it is often extremely difficult to locate it—
whether in the ruler, the ministry or the people.
So interesting and perplexing are such problems
often that a morality for bodies of people, as dis-
tinguished from individuals, is felt by many to be
the great desideratum of ethics at the present time.

On this subject something will be found in most
of the works on either philosophical or Christian
ethics; see esp. Lemme’s Christliche Ethik, 242 ff.

JamMEs STALKER

ACCOZ, ak’oz (’AxBds, Akbés; RV AKKOS,
q.v.): 1 Esd 5 38, head of one of the priestly
families, which returned from the Exile, but was
unable to prove its descent, when the register was
searched. See also Ezr 2 61.


ACCURSED, a-ktrs’ed, a-kdrst’: In the Book
of Josh (6 17.18; 7 1.11.12.13.15) and 1 Ch (2 7)
“accursed” (or “accursed thing’? or ‘‘thing ae-
cursed”’) is the AV rendering of the Heb word,
OW, hérem. The RV consistently uses “de-
voted” or “devoted thing,” which the AV also
adopts in Lev 27 21.28.29 and in Nu 18 14.
“Cursed thing” is the rendering in two passages
(Dt 7 26; 13 17); and in one passage (Ezk 44 29
AV) “dedicated thing” is used. In four places
the AV renders the word by “curse” (Josh 6 18;
Isa 34 5; 43 28; Mal 3 24; [4 6]) whilst in


‘another passage (Zec 14 11) “utter destruction”


35 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


is adopted in tr. These various renderings are
due to the fact that the word hérem sometimes
means the act of devoting or banning (or the
condition or state resulting therefrom) and some-
times the object devoted or banned. We occa-
sionally find periphrastic renderings, e.g. 18
15 21: “the chief of the things which should
have been utterly destroyed,” AV (lit. ‘‘the chief
part of the ban’); 1 K 20 42: “a man whom I
appointed to utter destruction,” AV (lit. “a man of
my ban” (or “banning”). The root-word meant
“to separate,” “shut off.’ The Arab. harim de-
noted the precincts of the temple at Mecca, and
also the women’s apartment (whence the word
harem). In Heb the word always suggested ‘“‘sep-
arating” or “devoting to God.” Just as Wip,
kadhdsh, meant “holy” or “consecrated to the serv-
ice” of Jeh, and so not Hable to be used for ordinary
or secular purposes, so the stem of hérem meant
“devoting” to Jeh anything which would, if spared,
corrupt or contaminate the religious life of Israel,
with the further idea of destroying (things) or
exterminating (persons) as the surest way of avoid-
ing such contamination. Everything that might
paganize or affect the unique character of the reli-
gion of Israel was banned, e.g. idols (Dt:7 26);
idolatrous persons (Ex 22 20); idolatrous cities
(Dt 13 13-18). All Can. towns—where the cult of
Baal flourished—were to be banned (Dt 20 16-18).
The ban did not always apply to the gold and silver
of looted cities (Josh 6 24). Such valuable arts.
were to be placed in the “treasury of the house of
Yahweh.” This probably indicates a slackening
of the rigid custom which involved the total destruc-
tion of the spoil. According to Nu 18 14, ‘“every-
thing devoted in Israel’’ belonged to Aaron, and
Ezk 44 29 AV ordained that ‘every dedicated
thing” should belong to the priests (cf Ezr 10 8).
In the NT “accursed” is the AV rendering of
ANATHEMA (q.V.). TuHomas Lewis


ACCUSER, a-ktz’ér: This word, not found in
the OT, is the rendering of two Gr words: (1) Kar#-
yopes, katégoros, that is, a prosecutor, or plaintiff
in a lawsuit, or one who speaks in a derogatory
way of another (Acts 23 30.35; 25 16.18; Rev
12 10); (2) ArdéBoros, didbolos, meaning adver-
sary or enemy. This word is rendered ‘“accuser”’
in the AV and “slanderer”’ in the RV and the
ARV (2 Tim 33; Titus 2 3). According to
the rabbinic teaching Satan, or the devil, was
regarded as hostile to God and man, and that it
was a part of his work to accuse the latter of dis-
loyalty and sin before the tribunal of the former
(see Job 1 6 ff; Zec 3 1f; Rev 12 10).


W. W. Daviss
ACELDAMA, a-sel’da-ma.


See AKELDAMA.

ACHAIA, a-ki’ya (’Axavd, Achaid): The small-
est country in the Peloponnesus lying along the
southern shore of the Corinthian Gulf, north of
Arcadia and east of Elis. The original inhabitants
were Ionians; but these were crowded out later by
the Achaeans, who came from the East. According
to Herodotus, the former founded twelve cities,
many of which retain their original names to this
day. These cities were on the coast and formed a
confederation of smaller communities, which in the
last century of the independent history of Greece
attained to great importance (Achaean League).
Jn Rom times the term Achaia was used to include
the whole of Greece, exclusive of Thessaly. Today
Achaia forms with Elis one district, and -contains
a population of nearly a quarter of a million. The
old Achaean League was renewed in 280 BC, but
became more important in 251, when Aratus
of Sicyon was chosen commander-in-chief. This


Accoz
Achan


great man increased the power of the League and
gave it an excellent constitution, which our own
great practical politicians, Hamilton and Madison,
consulted, adopting many of its prominent devices,
when they set about framing the Constitution of
the United States. In 146 BC Corinth was de-
stroyed and the League broken up (see 1 Macc
16 23); and the whole of Greece, under the name of
Achaia, was transformed into a Rom province,
which was divided into two separate provinces,
Macedonia and Achaia, in 27 BC.

In Acts 18 12 we are told that the Jews in
Corinth made insurrection against Paul when
Gallio was deputy of Achaia, and in 18 27 that
Apollos was making preparations to set out for
Achaia. In Rom 16 5, ‘‘Achaia’”’ should read
“Asia” as in RV. In Acts 20 2 “Greece” means
Achaia, but the oft-mentioned ‘‘Macedonia and
Achaia’ generally means the whole of Greece
(Acts 19 21; Rom 15 26; 1 Thess 1 8). Paul
commends the churches of Achaia for their liber-
ality (2 Cor 9 13).


LiteratTurs.—See Gerhard, Ueber den Volkastamm der
A. (Berlin, 1854); Klatt, Forschungen zur Geschichte des
achaischen Bundes (Berlin, 1877); M. Dubois, Les ligues
étolienne et achéenne (Paris, 1855); Capes, History of the
Achaean League (London, 1888); ahaffy, Probleme,
177-86: Busolt, Gr. Staatsalter, 2d ed (1892), 347 ff;
Toeppfer, in Pauly's Realencyclopaedie.

For Aratus see Hermann, Staatsalter, 1885; Krakauer,
Abhandlung ueber Aratus (Breslau, 1874); Neumeyer,
Aratus aus Sikyon (Leipzlg, 1886); Holm, History of


Greece.
J. E. Harry

ACHAICUS, a-ka’/i-kus (’Axatxés, Achaikés,
“belonging to Achaia”): A name honorably con-
ferred upon L. Mummius, conqueror of Corinth
and Achaia (cf CorintH). A. was one of the
leaders of the Corinthian church (to be inferred
from 1 Cor 16 15 ff) who, visiting Paul at Ephesus
with Stephanas and Fortunatus, greatly relieved
the Apostle’s anxiety for the Corinthian church
(cf 1 Cor 5 1ff). Paul admonishes the members
of the Cor church to submit to their authority (cf 1
Thess 5 12) and to acknowledge their work (1 Cor
16 15 ff).


ACHAN, 4a’kan (j>¥, ‘akhan [in 1Ch27
Achar, 29, ‘akhar), “troubler”): The descendant
of Zerah the son of Judah who was put to death,
in Joshua’s time, for stealing some of the ‘‘devoted”’
spoil of the city of Jericho (Josh 7). The stem
‘akhan is not used in Heb except in this name.
The stem ‘akhar has sufficient use to define it. It
denotes trouble of the most serious kind—Jacob’s
trouble when his sons had brought him into blood
feud with his Can. neighbors, or Jephthah’s trouble


| when his vow required him to sacrifice his daughter


(Gen 34 30; Jgs 11 35). In Prov (11 17.29;
15 6.27) the word is used with intensity to describe
the results of cruelty, disloyalty, greed, wickedness.
The record especially speaks of Achan’s conduct
as the troubling of Israel (1 Ch 2 7; Josh 6 18;
7 24). In an outburst of temper Jonathan speaks
of Saul as having troubled the land (1 8 14 29).
Elijah and Ahab accuse each the other of being the
troubler of Israel (1 K 18 17.18). The stem also
appears in the two proper names AcHoR and
OcHRAN (q.V.). ‘ d
The crime of Achan was a serious one. Quite
apart from all questions of supposable superstition,
or even religion, the hérem concerning Jericho had
been proclaimed, and to disobey the proclamation
was disobedience to military orders in an army
that was facing the enemy. It is commonly held
that Achan’s family were put to death with him,
though they were innocent; but the record is not
explicit on these points. One whose habits of


thought lead’ him to expect features of primitive


Achar
Acquaint


savagery in such a case as this will be sure to find
what he expects; a person of different habits will
not be sure that the record says that any greater
cruelty was practised on the family of Achan than
that of compelling them to be present at the exe-
cution. Those who hold that the Deuteronomic
legislation comes in any sense from Moses should
not be in haste to think that its precepts were
ee by Joshua in the case of Achan (see Dt
The record says that the execution took place
in the arable valley of Achor, up from the Jordan
valley. See Acuor. Witus J. Bsscuer


ACHAR, a’kar: Variant of AcHan, which see.


ACHAZ, 4a’kaz ("Axat, Achaz), AV (Mt 19):
Gr form of Ahaz (thus RV). The name of a King
of Israel.


ACHBOR, ak’bor (T1AD2, ‘akhbor, “mouse”):

(1) The father of Baal-hanan, who was the
seventh of the eight kings who reigned in Edom
before there were kings in Israel (Gen 36 38.39;
1 Ch 1 49).

(2) The son of Micaiah (called in Ch Abdon the
son of Micah) who went with Hilkiah the priest
and other high officials, at the command of King
Josiah, to consult Huldah the prophetess concern-
ing the book that had been found (2 K 22 12.14;
2 Ch 34 20).

It may be presumed that this Achbor is also the
man mentioned in Jer (26 22; 36 12) as the father
of Elnathan, who went to Egypt for King Jehoiakim
in order to procure the extradition of Uriah the
prophet, and who protested against the burning of
Baruch’s roll. Wits J. BeEEcHER


ACHTACHARUS, a-ki-ak’a-rus (B ’Aytdxapos,
Achidcharos; 'Axelxapos, Achefeharos): Governor
of Assyria. A. is the son of Anael, a brother of
Tobit. (Tob 1 21). Sarehedonus (Esarhaddon),
the king of Assyria, appointed him over all “ac-
counts of his kingdom” and over all “his affairs’’
(Tob 1 21f; cf Dnl 2 48). At his request Tobit
comes to Nineveh (Tob 1 22). A. nourishes Tobit,
while the latter is afflicted with disease (Tob 2
10). He attends the wedding-feast of Tobias (Tob
11 18). Is persecuted by Aman, but saved (Tob
14 10).


ACHIAS, a-ki’as: An ancestor of Ezra (2 Esd
1 2). Omitted in other genealogies.


ACHIM, a’kim (Axel, Acheim): A descendant
of Zerubbabel and ancestor of Jesus, mentioned only
in Mt 1 14. :


ACHIOR, 4’ki-or (Axtdp, Achidr): General of
the Ammonites, who spoke in behalf of Israel
before Holofernes, the Assyr general (Jth 6 5 ff).
Holofernes ordered him bound and delivered at
Bethulia to the Israelites (Jth 6), who received
him gladly and with honor. Afterward he became
a proselyte, was circumcised, and joined to Israel
(Jth 14). In Nu 34 27 it is the LXX reading
for Ahihud, and in the Heb would be TIN"HSY,
*ahi’or, “brother of light.”


ACHIPHA, ak’i-fa; AV Acipha, as‘i-fa ’VAyudd,
Achiphd), in the Apoc (1 Esd 5 31) head of one
of the families of the temple-servants, who returned
with Zerubbabel; same as the OT Haxurna (Ezr
2 51; Neh 7 53), which see.


ACHISH, 4’kish (DDN, Gkhish): King of- the
city of Gath in the days of David. His father’s name
is given as Maoch (1 § 27 2), and Maacah (1 K 2


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 36


39). David sought the protection of Achish when
he first fled from Saul, and just after his visit to
Nob (1 8 21 10-15). Fearing rough treatment
or betrayal by Achish, he feigned madness. But
this made him unwelcome, whereupon he fled to
the Cave of Adullam (1S 22 1). Later in his
fugitive period David returned to Gath to be hos-
pitably received by Achish (1 8 27 1 ff), who gave
him the town of Ziklag for his home. A year
later, when the Philistines invaded the land of
Israel, in the campaign which ended so disas-
trously for Saul (1 S 31), Achish wished David
to participate (1 S 28 1-2), but the lords of the
Philistines objected so strenuously, when they
found him and his men with the forces of Achish,
that Achish was compelled to send them back.
Achish must have been a young man at this time,
for he was still ruling forty years later at the
beginning of Solomon’s reign (1 KK 2 39). He is
mentioned as Abimelech in the title of Ps 34.
See ABIMELECH 3. - Epwarp Mack


ACHITOB, ak’i-tob: Same as Ahitob. Used
in 1 Esd 8 2; ef 2 Esd 11 AV. See Aurrus 3.


ACHMETHA, ak’me-tha (Ezr 6 2; NDOT,
oo

’ahmetha’; LXX ?Apaéd, Amathd; Pesh Daou},

ahmathan; in Tiglath Pileser’s inser. cir 1100 BC

Amadana: in Darius’ Behistun Inser., I, 76-78,

Hafigmatana=“Place of Assembly”; ‘AySdrava,

Agbdétana, in Herodotus; ’Exfdrava, Hkbdiana,


Xenophon, etc; so 1 Esd 6 23; Tob 3 7; 6 5;
71; 14 12.14; Jth 1 1.2.14; 2 Mace 9 3; Talm
T2200, hamdan; now glue, hamadan): This,
the ancient capital of Media, stood (lat. 34° 50’ N.—
long. 48° 32’ E.) near the modern
1. Location Hamadin, 160 miles W.S.W. of Tthran,
almost 6,000 feet above the sea, cir 13

miles from the foot of Mt. Orontes (Alvand).
It was founded or rebuilt by Déiokés (Dayaukku)
about 700 BC on the site of Ellippi an ancient city
of the Manda, and captured by Cyrus
2. History 549 BC who brought Croesus there
as captive (Herodotus 1.153). It was
the capital of the 10th Nome under Darius I.
Cyrus and other Pers kings used to spend the two
summer months there yearly, owing to the compara-
tive coolness of the climate. Herodotus describes
it as a magnificent, city fortified with seven concen-
tric walls (1.98). Its citadel (lretha’, Ezr 6 2,
wrongly rendered “palace” in RV) is mentioned by
Arrian, who says that, when Alexander took the
city in 324 BC, he there stored his enormous booty.
In it the royal archives were kept. It stood on a
hill, where later was built a temple of. Mithra.
Polybius (x.27) speaks of the great strength of the
citadel. Though the city was unwalled in his time,
he can hardly find words to express his admi-
ration for it, especially for the magnificent royal
palace, nearly 7 stadia in circumference, built of
precious kinds of wood sheathed in plates of gold
and silver. In the city was the shrine of Ainé
(Nanza, Andhita?). Alexander is said to have
destroyed a temple of Aisculapius (Mithra?)
there. Diodorus tells us the city was 250 stadia
in circumference. On Mt. Alvand (10,728 feet)
there have been found inscriptions of Xerxes.
Doubtless Ecbatana was one of the “cities of the
Medes” to which Israel was carried captive (2 K
17 6). It should be noted that Gr writers mention
several other Ecbatanas. One of these, afterward
called Gazaca (Takhti Sulaiman, a little S. of
Lake Urmi, lat. 36° 28’ N., long. 47° 9’ E.) was
capital of Atropatene. It was almost destroyed
by the Mughuls in the 12th cent. Sir H. Rawlin-


37 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Achar
Acquaint


son identifies the Ecbatana of Tobit and Herodotus
with this northern city. The southern and far
‘more important Ecbatana which we have described
is certainly that of 2 Macc 9 3. It was Cyrus’
Median capital, and is doubtless that of Ezr 6 2.
Classical writers spoke erroneously of Ecbatiina (for
Ecbatana) as moderns too often do of Hamadén
for Hamadan. .

Hamadan has perhaps never fully recovered from
the fearful massacre made there in 1220 AD by
the Mongols, but its population is
about 50,000, including a considerable
number of descendants of the Israel-
ites of the Dispersion (tracing descent
from Asher, Naphtali, etc). They point to the
tombs of Esther and Mordecai in the neighborhood.
lt is a center for the caravan trade between Bagh-
dad and Téhran. There is an American Presby-
terian mission at work.

Authorities (besides those quoted above): Ctesias,
Curtius, Amm. Marcellinus, Pausanias, Strabo,
Diod. Siculus; Ibnu’! Athir, Yaqit, Jahangusha,
JAami‘u’t Tawarikh, and modern travelers.

W. St. Cratr Tisparh

ACHO, ak’s.


See Acco.

ACHOR, a’kor (139, ‘akhdr, “trouble,” the
idea of the word being that of trouble which is
serious and extreme. See Acuan): The_ place
where Achan was executed in the time of Joshua
(Josh 7 24.26). In all the five places where it is
mentioned it is described as the ‘émek, the arable
valley of Achor. There is no ground in the record
for the current idea that it must have been a
locality with horrid and dismal physical features.
It was on a higher level than the camp of Israel
in the Jordan valley, and on a lower level than
Debir—a different Debir from that of Josh 16 15.
In a general way, as indicated by the points men-
tioned in the border of Judah, it was north of Beth-
arabah, and south of Debir_ (Josh 7 24; 16 7).
Many identify it with the Wady Kelt which de-
scends through a deep ravine from the Judaean
hills and runs between steep banks south of the
modern Jericho to Jordan, the stream after rains
becoming a foaming torrent. Possibly the name
may have been applied to a region of considerable
extent. In Isa 65 10 it isa region on the east side
of the mountain ridge which is in some sense bal-
anced with Sharon on the west side. By implication
the thing depicted seems to be these rich agricul-
tural localities so far recovered from desolation as
to be good grounds for cattle and sheep. Hosea
recognizes the comforting aspect of the dreadful
affair in the valley of Achor; it was a doorway of
hope to pardoned Israel (Hos 2 15 [17]), and he
hopes for like acceptance for the Israel of his own
day. Witus J. Beecuer


ACHSA, ak’sa: Used in AV in 1 Ch 2 49 for
Acusan, which see.


ACHSAH, ak’sa (M022, ‘akhsah; in some copies
NOD’, ‘akhsa’ in 1 Ch 2 49), “anklet’’): The
daughter of Caleb whom he gave in marriage to
his younger kinsman Othniel the son of Kenaz,
as a reward for smiting Kiriath-sepher (Josh 16
16; Jgs 1 12ff). Caleb, the narrative says,
established Achsah in the South-country, and in
addition, at her asking, gave her certain important
springs of water—the ‘upper basins” and the
“nether basins.” Professor G. F. Moore identifies
these with the groups c ea 4 Seit ed-Dilbeh

n Jgs in Polychrome Bible).
Goren : Wius J. BEecHER

ACHSHAPH, ak’shaf (AWN, ’akhshéph, “sor-

cery,” or “fascination”): A city in the northern


3. Present
Condition


pat of the territory conquered by Joshua. The
ng of Achshaph was a member of the coalition
against Israel under Jabin and Sisera. It is men-
tioned with Hazor, Megiddo, Taanach, ete, in the
list of conquered kings. It is one of the cities
marking the boundaries of the tribe of Asher
(Josh 11 1; 12 20; 19 25). Several attempts have
been made to identify the site of it, but explorers
are not agreed as to the identification.


ACHZIB, ak’zib (A°TDR, ‘akhzibh, “lying’’ or
“disappointing’): The name of two towns in
Palestine: (1) A town in western Judah in the
lowlands, mentioned in connection with Mareshah
and Keilah as one of the cities allotted to Judah
(Josh 16 44), and in Mic (i 14), where it suggests
play upon its meaning, “deceptive” or “failing,”
possibly the place having received its name from
a winter spring or brook, which failed in summer.
It is also called Chezib (A°TD, kezibh [Gen 38 5)),
where Judah was at the time of the birth of his son
Shelah. In 1 Ch 4 22 it is called Cozeba, AV
“Chozeba” (N3T2, kozébha’), clearly seen to be the
same as Achzib, from the places with which it is
grouped. (2) It has been identified with the
modern ‘Ayin-Kezbeh in the valley of Elah, and
north of Adullam. Epwarp Mack

(3) Mod. Zib LXX variously: Josh 19 29, B,
"Hy ofé6B, Echozdb, A, ’Axtelb, Achzetph; Jgs 1 31,
B, ’Aoxatel, Aschazet, A, ’Aoxevbel, Aschendet;
Gr Ecdippa: A small town some miles north of Acre
on the coast. It is mentioned in Josh 19 29 as
falling within the possessions of the tribe of Asher,
but they never occupied it, as they did not the neigh-
boring Acre (Acco). The Phoen inhabitants of the
coast were too strongly entrenched to be driven out
by a people who had no fleet. The cities on the
coast doubtless aided one another, and Sidon had
become rich and powerful before this and could
succor such a small town in case of attack. Achzib
was a coast town, nine miles north of Acco, now
known as Ez-Zib. It appears in the Assyr inscrip-
tions as Aksibi and Sennacherib enumerates it
among the Phoen towns that he took at the same
time as Acco (702 BC). It was never important
and is now an insignificant village among the sand
dunes of the coast. It was the bordertown of Galilee
on the west, what lay beyond being unholy ground.

: H. Porter

ACIPHA, as‘i-fa. See AcnipHaH.

ACITHO, ACITHOH, as’‘i-thd (variant of AHI-
TUB): The name in AV of an ancestor of Judith
(Jth 8 1).


ACKNOWLEDGE, ak-nol’ej] (yeyvéono, gignd-
sko): To declare that one recognizes the claims of
a person or thing fully established. Both in OT
and NT expressed by various forms of the word
“know” (Prov 3 6; Isa 61 9; Col 2 2 AV). The
Psalmist (Ps 32 5) ‘‘acknowledged” his sin, when
he told God that he knew the guilt of what he had
done. The Corinthians (2 Cor 1 14) “acknowl-
edged” Paul and his companions when they formally
recognized their claims and authority. ;


ACQUAINT, a-kwant’, ACQUAINTANCE, a-
kwin'tans (yverrol, gnéstot): Terms referring to
various degrees of knowledge, but implying more
or less detailed information; applied to God’s
omniscience (Ps 139 3), to the grief of the Suffer-
ing Servant of Jehovah (Isa 53 3), and to the
knowledge which man should have of God. The
noun in the concrete, unless limited by a quali-
fying term, means more than one who has been
known simply in passing, and implies a degree of


Acra
Acts


| THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 38


intimacy, as may be seen in Lk 2 44; 23 49;
2K 12 5. H. E. Jacozs


ACRA, ak’ra, a’kra (1 Mace 1 33 RV, “cita-
del’). See JERUSALEM.


ACRABATTENE, ak-ra-ba-té'né.
TINE (Apoc).


ACRABBIM, ak-rab’im: Incorrect translitera-
ation of B'S1p2 ‘akrabbim, of Josh 16 3 in AV.
See AKRABBIM.


ACRE, a’kér, ’kér.


ACRE, a’kér (WOE, gemedh): A term of land-
measurement used twice in the English VSS of the
Bible (Isa 5 10; 1 14 14), and said to be the
only term in square measure foundin the OT. The
Eng. word “acre” originally signified field. Then it
came to denote the measure of land that an ox team
could plow in a day, and upon the basis of amaximum
acre of this kind the standard acre of 160 square rods
(with variations in different regions) was fixed. The
Heb word tr4 acre denotes a yoke of animals, in the
sense of a team, a span, a pair; it is never used to
denote the yoke by which the team are coupled to-
gether. The phrase ‘ten yokes of vineyard’ (Isa 5
10) may naturally mean vineyard covering as much
land as a team would plow in ten days, though other
plausible meanings can also be suggested. In 158
14 14 the same word is used in describing the limits
of space within which Jonathan and his armor-bearer
slew twenty Philistines. The tr of RV, ‘‘within asit
were half a furrow’s length in an acre of land,”
means, strictly, that they were slain along a line from
two to twenty rods in length. The word rendered
“furrow,” used only here and in Ps 129 3, is in
Brown’s Hebrew Lexicon defined as “plowing-
ground.” This gives the rendering ‘as it were in
half a plowing-stint, a yoke of ground,” the last
two phrases defining each the other, so that the
meaning is substantially that of the paraphrase
in AV. There is here an alleged obscurity and
uncertainty in the text, but it is not such as to
affect either the tr or the nature of the event.

Wiuuis J. BEECHER

ACROSTIC, a-kros’tik: The acrostic, understood
as a short poem in which the first letters of the
lines form a word, or name, or sentence, has not
yet been proved to occur in ancient Heb literature.
The supposed examples found by some scholars in
Ps 2 1-4 and 110 1b-4 are not generally recog-
nized. Still less can be said in favor of the suggestion
that in Est 1 20 four words read from left to right
form by their initials an acrostic on the name
YHWH (cf Kénig, EHinl 293). In Byzantine
hymn-poetry the term acrostichis with which our
word “‘acrostic” is connected was also used of alpha-
betical poems, that is poems the lines or groups of
lines in which have their initials arranged in the
order of the alphabet. Acrostics of this kind are
found in pre-Christian Heb literature as well as
elsewhere in ancient oriental literature. There are
twelve clear instances in the OT: Pss 26, 34, 37,
111 f, 119, 146; Prov 31 10-31, and Lam 1-4,
There is probably an example in Pss 9 and 10, and
possibly another in Nah 1 2-10. Outside the
Canon, Sir 51 13-30 exhibits clear traces of
alphabetic arrangement. Each of these fifteen
poems must briefly be discussed.

Pss 9 and 10, which are treated as one psalm in
LXX and Vulg, give fairly clear indications of
original alphabetic structure even in the MT.
The initials of 9 1.3.5 are respectively ’Gleph,
béth, gimel; of vs 9.11.13.15.17 vav, zayin, héth,
tah and yédh. The first ver of 10 begins with
lamedh and vs. 12.14.15.17 with képh, résh, shin and


See AKRABAT-


See Acco.


iadv. Four lines seem to have been allotted to each
letter in the original form of the poem. In Ps 25
all the letters are represented except vav and kaph.
In ver 18 we find résh instead of the latter as well
as in its place in ver 19. In ver 2 the alphabetical
letter is the initial of the second word. The last
verse is a supernumerary. There are mostly two
lines to a letter. In Ps 34 all the letters are repre-
sented except vdv, ver 6 beginning not with it, as
was to be expected, but with zayin. The last
verse is again a supernumerary. Since here and in
26 22 the first word is a form of pddhah it has been
suggested that there may have been here a sort of
acrostic on the writer’s name Pedahel (p*dhah’él)
but there is no evidence that a psalmist so named
ever existed. There are two lines to a letter. In
Ps 37 all the letters are represented except ‘ayin
which seems however from LXX to have been
present in the earliest text. As a rule four lines are
assigned to each letter. In Pss 111f are found two
quite regular examples with a line to each letter.
Ps 119 offers another regular example, but with 16
lines to a letter, each alternate line beginning with
its letter. Vs 1-8, for instance, each begin with
’aleph. In Ps 146 are found all the letters but nan.
As we find in LXX between vs 13 and 14, that is
where the n@n couplet ought to be:
‘‘Paithful is the Lord in his words
And holy in his works,"’

which may represent a Heb couplet beginning
with nin, 1t would seem that a ver has dropped out
of the MT. Prov 31 10-31 constitutes a regular
alphabetical poem with (except in ver 15) two lines
to a letter. Lam 1 is regular, with three lines to
a letter. Lam 2,3,4, are also regular with a
curious exception. In each case pé precedes ‘ayin, a
phenomenon which has not yet been explained. In2
there are three or four lines to a letter except inver 17,
where there seem to be five. In 8 also there are
three lines to a letter and each line begins with that
letter. In 4 there are two lines to a letter except in
ver 22 where there are probably four lines. Lam 6
has twice as many lines as the letters of the alphabet
but no alphabetical arrangement. In Nah 1 1-10ff
Delitzsch (following Frohnmeyer) in 1876, Bickell
in 1880 and 1894, Gunkel in 1893 and 1895, G. B.
Gray in 1898 (Expos, September) and others
have pointed out possible traces of original alpha-
betical structure. In the Massoretic text, however,
as generally arranged, it is not distinctly discernible.
Sir 61 13-30: As early as 1882 Bickell reconstructed
this hymn on the basis of the Gr and Syr VSS as a
Heb alphabetical poem. In 1897 Schechier (in
the judgment of most scholars) discovered the
original text in a collection of fragments from the
Genizah of Cairo, and this proved the correctness
of Bickell’s idea and even the accuracy of some
details of his reconstruction. The poem begins
with ’aleph and has tav as the initial letter of the
last line but one. In vs 21.22.24.25.26.27 the
letters mé@m, niin, ‘ayn, pe, gadhé, kaph and résh
ean be traced at the beginnings of lines in that
order. Samekh is absent (cf Schechter-Taylor,
The Wisdom of Ben Sira, Ixxvi-Ixxxvii).

As this rapid survey will have shown, this form
of acrostic as employed by Heb writers consisted
in the use of letters of the alphabet as initials in
their order, at regular intervals, the distance
between two different letters ranging from one to
sixteen lines. Once each letter is thus used three
times, in another case eight times. The corruption
of the text has in some cases led to considerable
interference with the alphabetical arrangement,
and textual criticism has endeavored to restore it
with varying success.

These alphabetical poems have been unduly
depreciated on account of their artificial structure


89 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


and have also been regarded for the same reason as
of comparatively late origin. This latter conclusion
is premature with present evidence. The poems
in Lam undoubtedly go back as far as the 6th cent.
BC, and Assyr testimony takes us back farther still
for acrostic poems of some kind. Strictly alphabeti-
cal poems are of course out of the question in Assyr
because of the absence of an alphabet, but there are
texts from the library of Ashur-bani-pal each
verse-line in which begins with the same syllable,
and others in which the initial syllables read together
compose a word or sentence. Now these texts
were written down in the 7th cent. BC, but may
have been copied from far earlier Bab originals.
There can be little doubt that oriental poets wrote
acrostic at an early period, and therefore the use
of some form of the acrostic is no clear indication
of lateness of date. (For these Assyr acrostics
ot pene Die Literatur der Babylonier und Assyrer,

LitrERATURE.—In addition to authorities already cited:
Kinig, Hinl, 58, 66, 74, 76, 399, 404, 419, and Stilistik,
etc, 357 1; Budde, Geschichte der alt-hebrdischen Littera-
tur, 30, 90, 241, 291; art. '' Acrostic’ in HDB (larger and
smaller) and Hastings, Enc of Religion and Ethics, and
Jew Enc; commentaries_on Ps, Nah, Prov and Lam;
Driver, Parallel Psalter; King, Early Religious Poetry of
the Hebrews, ch iv.

Wiuuram Tartor Smita

ACTS, APOCRYPHAL, a-pok’ri-fal. See Apoc-

RYPHAL AcTs.


ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, a-pos'ls:


I. Tite

II. Text
III. Uwniry or tHe Boox
IV. Tue AvrHor

V. Canonicity
VI. Date
Sources Usrep py LUKE
Tue SPEECHES IN THE AcTS
IX. Reuation or tHe Acts To Tap EpistTLes
X. CuHronotoey or Acts
XI. Historica, WortsH or Acts


XJI. Purrose oF THE Boox
XIII. Anavysis
LirERATURE


1. Title.—It is possible, indeed probable, that the
book originally had no title. The manuscripts
give the title in several forms. Aleph (in the
inscription) has merely “Acts” (Prdzeis). So
Tischendorf, while Origen, Didymus, Eusebius
quote from “The Acts.” But BD Aleph (in sub-
scription) have “Acts of Apostles” or “The Acts of
the Apostles” (Prdzeis Apostélon). So Westcott
and Hort, Nestle (cf Athanasius and Huthalius).
Only slightly different is the title in 31.61, and many
other cursives (Prazeis tén Apostolon, ‘‘Acts
of the Apostles”). So Griesbach, Scholz. Several
fathers (Clement of Alex, Origen, Dionysius of
Alex, Cyril of Jerus, Chrysostom) quote it as
“The Acts of the Apostles” (Hai Prazeis ton
Apostolén). Finally A? EGH give it in the form
“Acts of the Holy Apostles” (Prazeis tin Hagion
Apostolon). The Memphitic VS has “The Acts of
the Holy Apostles.” Clearly, then, there was no
single title that commanded general acceptance.

IL. Text.—(1) The chief documents. These are
the Primary Uncials (8 ABCD), E which is a
bilingual Uncial confined to Acts, later Uncials like
HLP, the Cursives, the Vulgate, the Pesh and the
Harclean Syriac and quotations from the Fathers.
We miss the Curetonian and Syr Sin, and have
only fragmentary testimony from the Old Latin.

(2) The modern editions of Acts present the
types of text (TR; RV; the critical text like that
of WH or Nestle or Weiss or von Soden). These
three types do not correspond with the four classes
of text (Syrian, Western, Alexandrian, Neutral)
outlined by Hort in his Introduction to the New Tes-
tament in Greek (1882). These four classes are
broadly represented in the documents which give


Acra
Acts


us Acts. But no modern editor of the Gr NT has
given us the Western or the Alex type of text,
though Bornemann, as will presently be shown,
argues for the originality of the Western type in
Acts. But the 7’R (Stephanus’ 3d ed in 1550)
was the basis of the AV of 1611. This ed of the
Gr NT made use of a very few MSS, and all of them
late, except D, which was considered too eccentric
to follow. Practically, then, the AV _ represents
the Syr type of text which may have been edited
in Antioch in the 4th cent. Various minor errors
may have crept in since that date, but substantially
the Syr recension is the text of the AV today.
Where this text stands alone, it is held by nearly
all modern scholars to be in error, though Dean
Burgon fought hard for the originality of the Syr
text (The Revision Revised, 1882). Thetext of WH
is practically that of B, which is held to be the Neu-
tral type of text. Nestle, von Soden, Weiss do not
differ greatly from the text of WH, though von
Soden and Weiss attack the problem on independent
lines. The text of the RV isin a sense a compromise
between that of the AV and the critical text,
though coming pretty close to the critical text.
Cf Whitney, The Reviser’s Greek Text, 1892. Fora
present-day appreciation of this battle of the texts
see J. Rendel Harris, Side Lights on the New Tes-
tament, 1908. For a detailed comparison between
the AV and the RV Acts see Rackham, The Acts of
the Apostles, xxii.

(3) In Acts the Western type of text. has its chief
significance. It is the merit of the late Friedrich
Blass, the famous classicist of Germany, to have
shown that in Luke’s writings (Gospel and Acts)
the Western class (especially D) has its most marked
characteristics. This fact is entirely independent
of the theory advanced by Blass which will be dis-
cussed directly. The chief modern revolt against
the theories of WH is the new interest felt in the
value of the Western type of text. In particular
D has come to the front in the Book of Acts. The
feeble support that D has in its peculiar readings
in Acts (due to absence of Cur. Syr and of Old Lat)
makes it difficult always to estimate the value
of this document. But certainly these readings
deserve careful consideration, and some of them may
be correct, whatever view one holds of the D text.
The chief variations are, as is usual with the Western
text, additions and paraphrases. Some of the
prejudice against D has disappeared as a result of
modern discussion.

(4) Bornemann in 1848 argued that D in Acts
represented the original text. But he has had very
few followers.

(5) J. Rendel Harris (1891) sought to show that
D (itself a bilingual MS) had been Latinized. He
argued that already in 150 AD a bilingual MS
existed. But this theory has not won a strong
following.

(6) Chase (1893) sought to show that the pecul-
iarities were due to tr from the Syr. | ?

(7) Blass in 1895 created a sensation by arguing
in his Commentary on Acts (Acta Apostolorum,
24 ff) that Luke had issued two editions of the
Acts, as he later urged about the Gospel of Luke
(Philology of the Gospels, 1898). In 1896 Blass
published this Roman form of the text of Acts
(Acta Apostolorum, secundum Formam quae videtur
Romanam). Blass calls this first, rough, unabridged
copy of Acts 8 and considers that it was issued at
Rome. The later edition, abridged and revised, he
calls a. Curiously enough, in Acts 11 28, D has
“shen we had gathered together,” making Luke .
present at Antioch. he idea of two edd is not
wholly original with Blass. Leclerc, a Dutch
philologist, had suggested the notion as early as
the beginning of the 18th cent. Bishop Light-


Acts


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 40


foot had also mentioned it (On a Fresh Revision
of the NT, 29). But Blass worked the matter
out and challenged the world of scholarship with
his array of arguments. He has not carried his
point with all, though he has won a respectable
following. Zahn (Hinl, IT, 338, 1899) had
already been working toward the same view (348).
He accepts in the main Blass’s theory, as do Belser,
Nestle, Salmon, Zéckler. Blass acknowledges his
debt to Corssen (Der cyprianische Text der Acta
Apostolorum, 1892), but Corssen considers the @
text as the earlier and the @ text as a later revision.

(8) Hilgenfeld (Acta Apostolorum, ete, 1899) ac-
cepts the notion of two edd, but denies identity of
authorship.

(9) Schmiedel (# B) vigorously and at much length
attacks Blass’s position, else “the conclusions reached
in the foregoing sections would have to be with-
drawn.” He draws his conclusions and then
demolishes Blass! He does find weak spots in
Blass’s armor as others have done (B. Weiss, Der
Codex D in der Apostelgeschichte, 1897; Page, Class.
Rev., 1897; Harnack, The Acts of the Apostles, 1909,
45). See also Knowling, The Acts of the Apostles,
1900, 47, for a sharp indictment of Blass’s theory
as being too simple and lacking verification.

(10) Harnack (The Acts of the Apostles, 48) doubts
if Luke himself formally published the book. He
thinks that he probably did not give the book a final
revision, and that friends issued two or moreedd. He
considers that the so-called 6 recension has a “‘series
of interpolations” and so is later than the « text.

(11) Ramsay (The Church in the Roman Empire,
150; St. Paul the Traveller, 27; Expos, 1895)
eonsiders the 8 text to be a 2d-cent. revision by a
copyist who has preserved some very valuable 2d-
cent. testimony to the text.

(12) Headlam (HDB) does not believe that the
problem has as yet been scientifically attacked,
but that the solution lies in the textual license
of scribes of the Western type (cf Hort, Introduction,
122 ff). But Headlam is still. shy of “Western”
readings. The fact is that the Western readings are
sometimes correct as against the Neutral (ci* Mt
27 49). It is not necessary in Acts 11 20 to say
that Hellenas is in Western authorities (AD, etc)
but is not a Western reading. It is at any rate too
soon to say the final word about the text of Acts,
though on the whole the « text still holds the field
as against the 8 text. The Syr text is, of course,
later, and out of court.

Ill, Unity of the Book.—It is not easy to discuss
this question, apart from that of authorship. But
they are not exactly the same. One may be con-
vinced of the unity of the book and yet not credit it
to Luke, or, indeed, to anyone in the Ist cent. Of
course, if Luke is admitted to be the author of the
book, the whole matter is simplified. His hand is
in it all whatever sources he used. If Luke is not
the author, there may still have been a competent
historian at work, or the book may be a mere com-
pilation. The first step, therefore, is to attack the
problem of unity. Holtzmann (inl, 383) holds
Luke to be the author of the ‘we’ sections only.
Schmiedel denies that the Acts is written by a com-
panion of Paul, though it is by the same author as
the Gospel bearing Luke’s name. In 1845 Schleier-
macher credited the ‘‘we’’ sections to Timothy,
not to Luke. For a good sketch of the theories
of “sources,” see Knowling on Acts, 25 ff. Van
Manen (1890) resolved the book into two parts,
Acta Petriand Acta Pauli, combined by a redactor.
Sorof (1890) ascribes one source to Luke, one to
Timothy. Spitta also has two sources (a Pauline—
Lukan and a Jewish-Christian) worked over by a
redactor. Clemen (1905) has four sources (History
of the Hellenists, History of Peter, History of Paul,


and a Journey of Paul), all worked over by a series
of editors. Hilgenfeld (1895) has three sources
(Acts of Peter, Acts of the Seven, Acts of Paul).
Jungst (1895) has a Pauline source and a Petrine
source. J. Weiss (1893) admits sources, but claims
that the book has unity and a definite aim. B.
Weiss (1902) conceives an early source for the first
partof thebook. Harnack (The Acts of the Apostles,
1909, 41f) has small patience with all this blind
criticism: ‘‘With them the book passes as a compara~
tively late patchwork compilation, in which the
part taken by the editor is insignificant yet in all
eases detrimental; the ‘we’ sections are not the
property of the author, but an extract from a source,
or even a literary fiction.’’ He charges the critics
with “airy conceit and lofty contempt.” Harnack
has done a very great service in carefully sifting
the matter in his Luke the Physician (1907). He
gives detailed proof that the ‘“‘we” sections are in
the same style and by the same author as the rest
of the book (26-120). Harnack does not claim
originality. in this line of argument: “It has been
often stated and often proved that the ‘we’ sections
in vocabulary, in syntax, and in style are most
intimately bound up with the whole work, and that.
this work itself (including the Gospel), in spite
of all diversity in its parts, is distinguished by a
grand unity of literary form’ (Luke the Physician,
26). He refers to the “splendid demonstration of
this unity” by Klostermann (Vindiciae Lucanae,
1866), to B. Weiss, who, in his commentary (1893,
2 Aufl, 1902) “has done the best work in demon-
strating the literary unity of the whole work,” to
“the admirable contributions’ of Vogel (Zur
Charakteristik des Lukas, ete, 2 Aufl, 1899) to the
“vet more careful and minute investigations” of
Hawkins (Horae Synopticae, 1899, 2d ed, 1909), to
the work of Hobart (The Medical Language of
St. Luke, 1882), who “has proved only too much”
(Luke the Physician, 175), but “the evidence is
of overwhelming force’ (198). Harnack only
claims for himself that he has done the work in
more detail and with more minute accuracy with-
out elaiming too much (27). But the conversion
of Harnack to this view of Acts is extremely sig-
nificant. It ought not to be necessary any more
to refute the partition theories of the book, or to
set forth in detail the proofs for the unity of the
book. Perhaps the compilation theory of Acts
is nowhere set forth more cogently than in Mc-
Giffert’s The Apostolic Age (1897). See a powerful
refutation of his argument by Ramsay in Pauline
and Other Studies (1906, 302-21). “TI think his
clever argumentation is sophistical” (305). Harnack
is fully aware that he has gone over to the side of
“Ramsay, Weiss and Zahn”: ‘The results at which
I have arrived not only approach very nearly to,
but are often coincident with, the results of their re-
search” (The Acts of the Aposiles, 302). He is afraid
that if these scholars failed to get the ear of critics
“there is little prospect of claiming the attention
of critics and compelling them to reconsider their
position.” But he has the advantage of coming to
this conclusion from the other side. Moreover,
if Harnack was won by the force of the facts, others
may be. This brief sketch of Harnack’s experience
may take the place of detailed presentation of the
arguments for the unity of the book. Harnack sets
forth in great wealth of detail the characteristic
idioms of the “we” sections side by side with paral-
lels in other parts of Acts and the Gospel of Luke.
The same man wrote the rest of Acts who wrote the
“we” sections. This fact should now be acknowl-
edged as proven. This does not mean that the
writer, a personal witness in the “we” sections, had
no sources for the other parts of Acts. This aspect
of the matter will be considered a little later.


41 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Acts


IV. The Author.—Assuming the unity of the
book, the argument runs as follows: The author
was a companion of Paul. The “we” sections prove
that (Acts 16 10-17; 20 6-16; 21; 27; 28). These
sections have the fulness of detail and vivid descrip-
tion natural to an eye-witness. This companion
was with Paul in the second missionary journey at
Troas and at Philippi, joined Paul’s party again
at Philippi on the return to Jerusalem during the
third tour, and probably remained with Paul till
he went to Rome. Some of Paul’s companions
came to him at Rome: others are so described in
the book as to preclude authorship. Aristarchus,
Aquila and Priscilla, Erastus, Gaius, Mark, Silas,
Timothy, Trophimus, Tychicus and others more or
less insignificant from the point of view of connection
with Paul (like Crescens, Demas, Justus, Linus,
Pudens, Sopater, etc) are easily eliminated. Curi-
ously enough Luke and Titus are not mentioned
in Acts by name at all. They are distinct persons
as is stated in 2 Tim 4 10f. Titus was with Paul
in Jerusalem at the conference (Gal 2 1) and was
his special envoy to Corinth during the time of
trouble there. (2 Cor 2 12f; 12 18.) He was
later with Paul in Crete (Titus 1 5). But the absence


of mention of Titus in Acts may be due to the fact -


that he was a brother of Luke (cf 2 Cor 8 18; 12
18). So A. Souter in DCG, art. “Luke.” If Luke
is the author, it is easy to understand why his name
does not appear. If Titus is his brother, the same
explanation occurs. As between Luke and Titus
the medical language of Acts argues for Luke.
The writer wasa physician. This fact Hobart (The
Medical Language of St. Luke, 1882) has demon-
strated. Cf Zahn, FHinl, 2, 435 ff; Harnack’s
Luke the Physician, 177 ff. The arguments from
the use of medical terms are not all of equal
weight. But the style is colored at points by the
langnage of a physician. The writer uses medical
terms in a technical sense. This argument involves
a minute comparison with the writings of physicians
of the time. Thus in Acts 28 3f kathdptd, ac-
cording to Hobart (288), is used in the sense of
poisonous matter invading the body, as in Diosco-
rides, Animal. Ven. Proem. So Galen, De Typis
4 (VII, 467), uses it “of fever fixing on parts of the
body.” Cf Harnack, Luke the Physician, 177 f.
Harnack agrees also that the terms of the diagnosis
in Acts 28 8 “are medically exact and can be
vouched for from medical literature” (ib, 176 f).
Hobart has overdone his argument and adduced
many examples that are not pertinent, but a_real
residuum remains, according to Harnack. Then
pimprasthai is a technical term for swelling. Let
these serve as examples. The interest of the writer
in matters of disease is also another indication; cf
Lk 8 43. Now Luke was a companion of Paul
during his later ministry and was a physician.


(Col 4 14). Hence he fulfils all the requirements
of the case. Theargument thus far is only ion
it is true; but there is to be added the undoubte


fact that the same writer wrote both Gospel and
Acts (Acts 1 1). The direct allusion to the Gospel
is reinforced by identity of style and method in the
two books. The external evidence is clear on
the matter. Both Gospel and Acts are eredited
to Luke the physician. The Muratorian canon
ascribes Acts to Luke. By the end of the 2d cent.
the authority of the Acts is as well established
as that of the Gospel (Salmon, Introduction to the
NT, 1885, 366). Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clement
of Alexandria, all call Luke the author of the book.
The argument is complete. It is_ still further
strengthened by the fact that the’ point of view of
the book is Pauline and by the absence of references
to Paul’s epistles. If one not Paul’s companion
had written Acts, he would certainly have made


some use of them. Incidentally, also, this is an
argument for the early date of the Acts. The
proof that has won Harnack, the leader of the left
in Germany, to the acknowledgment of the Lukan
authorship of Acts ought to wiu all to this position.

V. Canonicity.—The use of the Acts does not
appear so early or so frequently as is true of the
gospels and the Pauline epistles. The reason is
obvious. The epistles had a special field and the
gospels appealed to all. Only gradually would
Acts circulate. At first we find literary allusions
without the name of book or author. But Holtz-
mann (inl, 1892, 406) admits the use of Acts by
Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Polycarp. The use of
the Gospel according to Luke by Tatian and Mar-
cion really involves knowledge of the Acts. But
in Irenaeus frequently (Adv. Haer., i. 23, 1, etc)
the Acts is credited to Luke and regarded as Scrip-
ture. The Canon of Muratori lists it as Scripture.
Tertullian and Clement of Alexandria attribute
the book to Luke and treat it as Scripture. By
the time of Eusebius the book is generally acknowl-
edged as part of the canon. Certain of the hereti-
cal parties reject it (like the Ebionites, Marcionites,
Manichaeans). But by this time the Christians
had come to lay stress on history (Gregory,
Canon and Text of the NT, 1907, 184), and the
place of Acts is now secure in the canon.

VI. Date.—(1) Luke’s relations to Josephus.
The acceptance of the Lukan authorship settles the
question of some of the dates presented by critics.
Schmiedel places the date of Acts between 105 and
130 AD (#B). He assumes as proven that Luke
made use of the writings of Jos. It has never been
possible to take with much seriousness the claim
that the Acts shows acquaintance with Jos. See
Keim, Geschichte Jesu, III, 1872, 134, and Krenkel,
Josephus und Lucas, 1894, for the arguments in
favor of that position. The words quoted to prove
it are in the main untechnical words of common use.
The only serious matter is the mention of Theudas
and Judas the Galilean in Acts 5 36f and Josephus
(Ant, XX, v, 1f). In Jos the names occur some
twenty lines apart and the resemblance is only
slight indeed. ‘The use of petthé in connection with
Theudas and apéstésai concerning Judas is all
that requires notice. Surely, then, two common
words for “persuade” and “revolt” are not enough
to carry conviction of the writer’s use of Josephus.
The matter is more than offset by the differences in
the two reports of the death of Herod Agrippa I
(Acts 12 19-23; Jos, Ant, XVIII, vi, 7; XIX, viii,
2). The argument about Jos may be definitely dis-
missed from the field. With that goes all the ground
for a 2d-cent. date. Other arguments have been
adduced (see Holtzmann, Hini, 1892, 405) such as
the use of Panl’s epistles, acquaintance with Plu-
tarch, Arrian and Pausanias, because of imitation
in method of work (i.e. || lives of Peter and Paul,
periods of history, etc), correction of Gal in Acts
(for instance, Gal 1 17-24 and Acts 9 26-30; Gal
2 1-10 and Acts 15 1-33). The parallel with Plu-
tarch is fanciful, while the use of Paul’s epistles
is by no means clear, the absence of such use, indeed,
being one of the characteristics of the book. The
variation from Gal is far better explained on the
assumption that Luke had not seen the epistles.

(2) 80 AD is the limit if the book is to be credited
to Luke. The majority of modern critics who
accept the Lukan authorship place it between 70
and 80 AD. So Harnack, Lechler, Meyer, Ramsay,
Sanday, Zahn. This opinion rests mainly on the
idea that the Gospel according to Luke was written
after the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD. It
is claimed that Lk 21 20 shows that this tragedy
had already occurred, as compared with Mk 13 14
and Mt 24 15. But the mention of armies is very


Acts


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 42


general, to be sure. Attention is called also to the
absence of the warning in Lk. Harnack (The Acts
of the Apostles, 291 f) admits that the arguments in
favor of the date 70-80 are by no means conclusive.
He writes “to warn critics against a too hasty
closing of the chronological question.’’ In his new
book (Neue Untersuchungen zur A postelgeschichte,
etc, 1911, S. 81) Harnack definitely accepts the date
before the destruction of Jerus. Lightfoot would
give no date to Acts because of the uncertainty
about the date of the Gospel.

(3) Before 70 AD. This date is supported by
Blass, Headlam, Maclean, Rackham, Salmon. Har-
nack, indeed, considers that “very weighty con-
siderations’ argue for the early date. He,as already
stated, now takes his stand for the early date. It is
obviously the simplest way to understand Luke’s
close of the Acts to be due to the fact that Paul was
still in prison. Harnack contends that the efforts
to explain away this situation are not “quite
satisfactory or very illuminating.’ He does not
mention Paul’s death because he was still alive.
The dramatic purpose to bring Paul to Rome is
artificial The supposition of a third book from
the use of préton in Acts 1 1 is quite gratuitous,
since in the Koiné, not to say the earlier Greek,
“first”! was often used when only two were mentioned
(ef “our first story” and “second story,” ‘first
wife” and “second wife’). The whole tone of the
book is that which one would naturally have before
64AD. After the burning of Rome and the destruc-
tion of Jerusalem the attitude maintained in the
book toward Romans and Jews would have been
very difficult unless the date was a Jong time after-
ward. Harnack wishes “‘to help a doubt to its just
dues.” That “doubt” of Harnack is destined to
become the certainty of the future. (Since this
sentence was written Harnack has settled his own
doubt.) The book will, I think, be finally credited
to the time 63 AD in Rome. The Gospel of Luke
will then naturally belong to the period of Paul’s
imprisonment in Caesarea. The judgment of Mof-
fatt (Historical NT, 1901, 416) that “it cannot be
earlier’ than 80 AD is completely upset by the
powerful attack of Harnack on his own previous
position. See also Moffatt’s Introduction to the Lit.
of the NT (1911) and Koch’s Die Abfassungszeit des
lukanischen Geschichtswerkes (1911).

VII. Sources Used by Luke.—If we now assume
that Luke is the author of the Acts, the question
remains as to the character of the sources used by
him. One is at liberty to appeal to Lk 1 1-4 for
the general method of the author. He used both
oral and written sources. In the Acts the matter
is somewhat simplified by the fact that Luke was
the companion of Paul for a considerable part of
the narrative (the “we” sections, 16 11-17; 20 5;
21 18; 27 and 28). It is more than probable that
Luke was with Paul also during his last stay in
Jerusalem and during the imprisonment at Caesarea.
There is no reason to think that Luke suddenly left
Paul in Jerusalem and returned to Caesarea only
when he started to Rome (27 1). The absence of
‘Cwe” is natural here, since it is not a narrative of
travel, but a sketch of Paul’s arrest and series of
defences. The very abundance of material here, as
in chs 20 and 21, argues for the presence of Luke.
But at any rate Luke has access to Paul himself
for information concerning this period, as was true of
the second, from ch 13 to the end of the book. Luke
was either present or he could have Jearned from
Paul the facts used. He may have kept a travel
diary, which was drawn upon when necessary.
Luke could have taken notes of Paul’s addresses
in Jerus (ch 22) and Caesarea (chs 24-26). From
these, with Paul’s help, he probably composed the
account of Paul’s conversion (9 i-30). If, as I


think is true, the book was written during Paul’s
first Roman imprisonment, Luke had the benefit
of appeal to Paul at all points. But, if so, he was
thoroughly independent in style and assimilated
his materials like a true historian. Paul (and also
Philip for part of it) was a witness to the events
about Stephen in 6 8—8 i and a participant of
the work in Antioch (11 19-30). Philip, the host
of Paul’s company (21 8) on the Jast journey to
Jerusalem, was probably in Caesarea still during
Paul’s confiuement there. He could have told
Luke the events in 6 1-7 and 8 4-40. In Caesarea
also the story of Peter’s work may have been
derived, possibly even from Cornelius himself (9
32—11 18). Whether Luke ever went to Antioch
or not we do not know (Codex Bezae has ‘‘we”
in 11 28), though he may have had access to
the Antiochian traditions. But he did go to Jerus.
However, the narrative in ch 12 probably rests
on the authority of John Mark (12 12.25), in whose
mother’s house the disciples were assembled. Luke
was apparently thrown with Mark in Rome (Col
410), if not before. For Acts 1-5 the matter
does not at first seem so clear, but these chapters are
not necessarily discredited on that account. It is
remarkable, as ancient historians made so little
mention of their sources, that we can connect
Luke in the Acts with so many probable fountains
of evidence. Barnabas (4 36) was able to tell
much about the origin of the work in Jerus. So
could Mnason. Philip also was one of the seven
(6 5; 21 8). We do not know that Luke met
Peter in Rome, though that is possible. But
during the stay in Jerusalem and Caesarea (two
years) Luke had abundant opportunity to learn
the narrative of the great events told in Acts 1-65.
He perhaps used both oral and written sources for
this section. One cannot, of course, prove by
linguistic or historical arguments the precise nature
of Luke’s sources in Acts. Only in broad outlines
the probable materials may be sketched.

VI. The Speeches in Acis.—This matter is
important enough to receive separate treatment.
Are the numerous speeches reported in Acts free
compositions of Luke made to order 4 la Thucydi-
des? Are they verbatim reports from notes taken
at the time and literally copied into the narrative?
Are they substantial reports incorporated with
more or less freedom with marks of Luke’s own
style? In the abstract either of these methods was
possible. The example of Thucydides, Xenophon,
Livy and Jos shows that ancient historians did not
scruple to invent speeches of which no report was
available. There are not wanting those who accuse
Luke of this very thing in Acts. The matter can
only be settled by an appeal to the facts so far as
they can be determined. It cannot be denied that
to a certain extent the hand of Luke is apparent
in the addresses reported by him in Acts. But
this fact must not be pressed too far. It is not
true that the addresses are all alike in style. It is
possible to distinguish very clearly the speeches of
Peter from those of Paul. Not merely is this true,
but we are able to compare the addresses of both
Paul and Peter with their epistles. It is not prob-
able that Luke had seen these epistles, as will
presently be shown. It is crediting remarkable
literary skill to Luke to suppose that he made up
“Petrine’ speeches and ‘Pauline’ speeches with
such success that they harmonize beautifully with
the teachings and general style of each of these
apostles. The address of Stephen differs also
sharply from those of Peter and Paul, though we
are not able to compare this report with any original
work by Stephen himself. Another thing is true
also, particularly of Paul’s sermons. They are
wonderfully suited to time, place and audience.


43 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


They all have a distinct Pauline flavor, and yet a
difference in local color that corresponds, to some
extent, with the variations in the style of Paul’s
epistles. Professor Percy Gardner (The Speeches
of St. Paul in Acts, in Cambridge Biblical Essays,
1909) recognizes these differences, but seeks to
explain them on the ground of varying accuracy in
the sources used by Luke, counting the speech at
Miletus as the most historic of all. But he admits
the use of sources by Luke for these addresses.
The theory of pure invention by Luke is quite
discredited by appeal to the facts. On the other
hand, in view of the apparent presence of Luke’s
style to some extent in the speeches, it can hardly
be claimed that he has made verbatim reports.
Besides, the report of the addresses of Jesus in
Luke’s Gospel (as in the other gospels) shows the
same freedom in giving the substance without
exact reproduction of the words that is found in
Acts. Again, it seems clear that some, if not all,
the reports in Acts are condensed, mere outlines in
the case of some of Peter’s addresses. The ancients
knew how to make shorthand reports of such
addresses. The oral tradition was probably active
in preserving the early speeches of Peter and even
of Stephen, though Paul himself heard Stephen.
The speeches of Paul all show the marks of an eye-
witness (Bethge, Die paulinischen Reden, etc, 174).
For the speeches of Peter, Luke may have had
documents, or he may have taken down the cur-
rent oral tradition while he was in Jerusalem and
Caesarea. Peter probably spoke in Greek on the
day of Pentecost. His other addresses may have
been in Aram. orin Gr. But the oral tradition would
certainly carry them in Gr, if also in Aram. Luke
heard Paul speak at Miletus (Acts 20) and may have
taken notes at the time. So also he almost cer-
tainly heard Paul’s address on the steps of the
Tower of Antonia (ch 22) and that before Agrippa
(ch 26). There is no reason to think that he was
absent when Paul made his defences before Felix
and Festus (chs 24-25). He was present on the ship
when Paul spoke (ch 27), and in Rome when he
addressed the Jews (ch 28). Luke was not on hand
when Paul delivered his sermon at Antioch in Pisid-
ia (ch 13), or at Lystra (ch 14), or at Athens
(ch 17). But these discourses differ so greatly in
theme and treatment, and are so essentially Pauline
that it is natural to think that Paul himself gave
Luke the notes which he used. The sermon at
Antioch in Pisidia is probably given as a sample
of Paul’s missionary discourses. It contains the
heart of Paul’s gospel as it appears in his epistles.
He accentuates the death and resurrection of Jesus,
remission of sins through Christ, justification by
faith. It is sometimes objected that at Athens the
address shows a breadth of view and sympathy
unknown to Paul, and that there is a curious Attic
tone to the Gr style. The sermon does go as far
as Paul can (cf 1 Cor 9 22) toward the standpoint
of the Greeks (but compare Col and Eph). How-
ever, Paul does not sacrifice his principle of grace
in Christ. He called the Athenians to repentance,
preached the judgment for sin and announced the
resurrection of Jesus from the dead. The father-
hood of God and the brotherhood of man here
taught did not mean that God winked at sin and
could save all men without repentance and forgive-
ness of sin. Chase (The Credibility of Acts) gives a
collection of Paul’s missionary addresses. The his-
torical reality and value of the speeches in Acts may
be said to be vindicated by modern scholarship.
For a sympathetic and scholarly discussion of all of
Paul’s addresses see Jones, St. Paul the Orator
(1910). The short speech of Tertullus (Acts 24)
was made in public, as was the public statement
of Festus in ch 26. The letter of Claudius Lysias


Acts


to Felix in ch 23 was a public document. How
Luke got hold of the conversation about Paul
between Festus and Agrippa in ch 26 is more
difficult to conjecture.

IX. Relation of Acts to the Epistles.—There is
no real evidence that Luke made use of any of Paul’s
epistles. He was with Paul in Rome when Col
was written (4 14), and may, indeed, have been
Paul’s amanuensis for this epistle (and for Eph and
Philem). Some similarities to Luke’s style have
been pointed out. But Acts closes without any
narrative of the events in Rome during the years
there, so that these epistles exerted no influence
on the composition of the book. As to the two
preceding groups of Paul’s epistles (1 and 2 Thess;
1 and 2 Cor, Gal, Rom) there is no proof that Luke
saw any of them. The Epistle to the Romans was
probably accessible to him while in Rome, but he
does not seem to have used it. Luke evidently
preferred to appeal to Paul directly for information
rather than to his epistles. This is all simple
enough if he wrote the book or made his data while
Paul was alive. But if Acts was written very late,
it would be strange for the author not to have made
use of some of Paul’s epistles. The book has,
therefore, the great advantage of covering some of
the same ground as that discussed in the earlier
epistles, but from a thoroughly independent stand-
point. The gaps in our knowledge from the one
source are often supplied incidentally, but most
satisfactorily, from the other. The coincidences
between Acts and Paul’s epistles have been well
traced by Paley in his Horae Paulinae, still a book
of much value. Knowling, in his Wééness of the
Epistles (1892), has made a more recent study of
the sarne problem. But for the apparent conflict
between Gal 2 1-10 and Acts 16 the matter might '
be dropped at this point. Itis argued by some that
Acts, written long after Gal, brushes to one side
the account of the Jerusalem conference given by
Paul. It is held that Paul is correct in his personal
record, and that Acts is therefore unhistorical.
Others save the credit of Acts by arguing that Paul
is referring to an earlier private conference some
years before the public discussion recorded in Acts
15. This is, of course, possible in itself, but it is
by no means required by the variations between the
tworeports. The contention of Lightfoot has never
been really overturned, that in Gal 2 1-10 Paul
gives the personal side of the conference, not a
full report of the general meeting. What Paul
is doing is to show the Galatians how he is on a
par with the Jerusalem apostles, and how his author-
ity and independence were acknowledged by them.
This aspect of the matter came out in the private
conference. Paul is not in Gal 2 1-10 setting forth
his victory over the Judaizers in behalf of Gentile
freedom. But in Acts 16 it is precisely this struggle
for Gentile freedom that is under discussion. Paul’s
relations with the Jerusalem apostles is not the
point at all, though it is plain in Acts that
they agree. In Gal also Paul’s victory for Gen-
tile freedom comes out. Indeed, in Acts 15 it is
twice mentioned that the apostles and elders were
gathered together (vs 4. 6), and twice we are told
that Paul and Barnabas addressed them (vs 4. 12).
It is therefore natural to suppose that this private
conference narrated by Paul in Gal came in between
vs 5 and 6. Luke may not, indeed, have seen the
Epistle to the Galatians, and may not have heard
from Paul the story of the private conference,
though he knew of the two public meetings. If
he did know of the private meeting, he thought it
not pertinent to his narration. There is, of course,
no contradiction between Paul’s going up by reve-
lation and by appointment of the church in Antioch.
In Gal 2 1 we have the second (Gal 1 18) visit to


Acts


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 44


Jerusalem after his conversion mentioned by Paul,
while that in Acts 15 is the third in Acts (9 28;
11 29f; 15 2). But there was no particular reason
for Paul to mention the visit in Acts 11 30, which
did not concern his relation to the apostles in
Jerusalem. Indeed, only the “elders” are mentioned
on this occasion. The same independence between
Acts and Gal occurs in Gal 1 17-24, and Acts 9
26-30. In Acts there is no allusion to the visit to
Arabia, just as there is no mention of the private
conference in Acts 15. So also in Acts 15 35-39
there is no mention of the sharp disagreement be-
tween Paul and Peter at Antioch recorded in Gal
211ff. Paul mentions it merely to prove his own
authority and independence as an apostle. Luke
had no occasion to record the incident, if he was
acquainted with the matter. These instances il-
lustrate well how, when the Acts and the epistles
vary, they really supplement each other.

X. Chronology of Acts.—Here we confront one
of the most perplexing questions in New Testament
criticism. In general, ancient writers were not so
careful as modern writers are to give precise dates
for historical events. Indeed, it was not easy to
do so in view of the absence of a uniform method
of reckoning time. Luke does, however, relate
his narrative to outward events at various points.
In his Gospel he had linked the birth of Jesus with
the names of Augustus as emperor and of Quirinius
as governor of Syria (Lk 2 1f), and the entrance
of John the Baptist upon his ministry with the
names of the chief Roman and Jewish rulers of the
time (Lk 3 1f). So also in the Acts he does not
leave us without various notes of time. He does not,
indeed, give the date of the Ascension or of the
Crucifixion, though he places the Ascension forty
days after the Resurrection (Acts 1 3), and the
great Day of Pentecost would then come ten days
later, “not many days hence” (1 5). But the
other events in the opening chapters of Acts have
no clear chronological arrangement. The career
of Stephen is merely located ‘‘mn these days” (6 1).
The beginning of the general persecution under
Saul is located on the very day of Stephen’s death
(8 1), but the year is not even hinted at. The
conversion of Saul comes probably in its chronologi-
cal order in 9, but the year again is not given. We
have no hint.as to the age of Saul at his conversion.
So again the relation of Peter’s work in Caesarea,
(10) to the preaching to the Greeks in Antioch
(11) is not made clear, though probably in this
order. Itis only when we come to 12 that we reach
an event whose date is reasonably certain. This
is the death of Herod Agrippa J in 44 AD. But
even so, Luke does not correlate the life of Paul
with that incident. Ramsay (St. Paul the Traveller,
49) places the persecution and death of James in
44, and the visit of Barnabas and Saul to Jerusalem
in 46. About 44, then, we may consider that Saul
came to Antioch ‘from Tarsus. The “fourteen
years” in Gal 2 1, as already shown, probably
point to the visit in Acts 15 some years later. But
Saul had been in Tarsus some years and had spent
some three years in Arabia and Damascus after
his conversion (Gal 1 18). Beyond this it is
not possible to go. We do not know the age of
Saul in 44 AD or the year of his conversion. He
was probably born not far from 1 AD. But if
we locate Paul at Antioch with Barnabas in 44 AD,
we can make some headway. Here Paul spent a
year (Acts 11 26). The visit to Jerusalem in 11,
the first missionary tour in 13 and 14, the conference
at Jerusalem in 15, the second missionary tour in
16-18, the third missionary tour and return to
Jerusalem in 18-21, the arrest in Jerusalem and
two years in Caesarea in 21-26, all come between
44 AD and the recall of Felix and the coming of


Festus. It used to be taken for granted that Iestus
came in 60 AD. Wieseler figured it out so from
Josephus and was followed by Lightfoot. But
Eusebius, in his “Chronicle,” placed that event in
the second year of Nero. That would be 56, unless
Eusebius has a special way of counting those years.
Mr. C. H. Turner (art. “Chronology” ii HDB)
finds that Eusebius counts an emperor’s regual
year from the September following. If so, the date
could be moved forward to 57 (cf Rackham on
Acts, xvi). But Ramsay (ch xiv, ‘‘Pauline Chronol-
ogy,” in Pauline and Other Studies) cuts the Gordian
knot by showing an error in Eusebius due to his
disregarding an interregnum with the reign of
kings. Ramsay here follows Erbes (Todestage
Pauli und Petri) in this discovery and is able to fx
upon 59 as the date of the coming of Festus. Prob-
ably 59 will have to answer as a compromise date.
Between 44 AD and 59 AD, therefore, we place the
bulk of Paul’s active missionary work. Luke has
divided this period into minor divisions with rela-
tive dates. Thus a year and six months are men-
tioned at Corinth (Acts 18 11), besides “yet many
days” (18 18). In Ephesus we find mention of
“three months” (149 8) and “two years” (19 10),
the whole story summed up as ‘‘three years” (20
31). Then we have the “two years” of delay in
Caesarea (24 27). We thus have about seven of
these fifteen years itemized. Much of the remain-
ing eight was spent in the journeys described by
Luke. We are told also the time of year when
the voyage to Rome was under way (27 9), the
length of the voyage (27 27), the duration of the
stay in Melita (28 11), and the time spent in Rome
at the close of the book, ‘two whole years” (28 30).
Thus it is possible to fx upon a relative schedule
of dates, though not an absolute one. Harnack
(The Acts of the Apostles, ch i, “Chronological
Data”) has worked out a very careful scheme for
the whole of Acts. Knowling has a good critical
résumé of the present state of our knowledge of the
chronology of Acts in his Commentary, 38 ff; cf
also Clemen, Die Chronologie der paulinischen Briefe
(1893). It is clear, then, that a rational scheme for
events of Paul’s career so far as recorded in the Acts
can be found. If 57 AD, for instance, should be
taken as the year of Festus’ coming rather than 59
or 60 AD, the other dates back to 44 AD would, of
course, be affected on a sliding scale. Back of 44
AD the dates are largely conjectural.

XI. Historical Worth of Acts.—It was once
fashionable to discredit Acts as a book of no
real value as history. The Tiibingen school re-
garded Acts as “a late controversial romance, the
only historical value of which was to throw light
on the thought of the period which produced it”
(Chase, The Credibility of Acts, 9). There are
not wanting a few writers who still regard Acts as
a late eirénicon between the Peter and Paul parties,
or as & party pamphlet in the interest of Paul.
Somewhat fanciful parallels are found between
Luke’s treatment of both Peter and Paul. ‘“‘Accord-
ing to Holtzmann, the strongest argument for the
critical position is the correspondence between the
acts of St. Peter and the other apostles on the one
side and those of St. Paul on the other” (Headlam
in HDB). But this matter seems rather far
fetched. Peter is the leading figure in the early
chapters, as Paul is in the latter half of the book, but
the correspondences are not remarkably striking.
There exists in some minds a prejudice against the
book on the ground of the miracles recorded as
genuine events by Luke. But Paul himself claimed
to have wrought miracles (2 Cor 12 12). It is
not scientific to rule a book out beforehand because
it narrates miracles (Blass, Acta Apostolorum, 8).
Ramsay (St. Paul the Traveller, 8) tells his experi-


45


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Acts


ence in regard to the trustworthiness of Acts: “I
began with a mind unfavorable to it, for the in-
genuity and apparent completeness of the Tiibingen
theory had at one time quite convinced me.” It
was by actual verification of Acts in points where it
could be tested by inscriptions, Paul’s epistles, or
current non-Christian writers, that “it was gradually
borne in upon me that in various details the narra-
tive showed marvelous truth.” He concludes by
“placing this great writer on the high pedestal
that belongs to him” (10). MeGiffert (The Apos-
tolic Age) had been compelled by the geographical
and historical evidence to abandon in part the older
criticism. He also admitted that the Acts “is
more trustworthy than previous critics allowed”
(Ramsay, Luke the Physician, 5). Schmiedel (EB)
still argues that the writer of Acts is inaccurate
because he was not in possession of full information.
But on the whole Acts has had a triumphant
vindication in modern criticism. Jiilicher (Hinl,
355) admits “a genuine core overgrown with
legendary accretions’ (Chase, Credibility, 9). The
moral honesty of Luke, his fidelity to truth, (Rack-
ham on Acts, 46), is clearly shown in both his Gospel
and the Acts. This, after all, is the chief trait in
the true historian (Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller,
4). Luke writes as a man of serious purpose and
is the one New Testament writer who mentions his
careful use of his materials (Lk 1 1-4). His atti-
tude and spirit are those of the historian. He
reveals artistic skill, it is true, but not to the dis-
credit, of bis record. He does not give a bare
chronicle, but he writes a real history, an interpre-
tation of the events recorded. He had adequate
resources in the way of materials and endowment
and has made conscientious and skilful use of his
opportunity. It.is not necessary here to give in
detail all the points in which Luke has been vin-
dicated (see Knowling on Acis, Ramsay’s books and
Harnack’s Luke and Acts). The most obvious are
the following: The use of “proconsul” instead of
“propraetor”’ in Acts 13 7 is a striking instance.
Curiously enough Cyprus was not a_ senatorial
province very long. An inscription has been found
in Cyprus “in the proconsulship of Paulus.” ‘The
‘first men’ of Antioch in Pisidia is like the (13 50)
“First Ten,” a title which ‘was only given (as here)
+o a board of magistrates in Gr cities of the East”
(MacLean in one-vol. HDB). The “priest of
Jupiter” at Lystra (14 13) is in accord with the
known facts of the worship there. So we have
Perga in Pamphylia (13 13), Antioch in Pisidia
13 14), Lystra and Derbe in Lycaonia (14 6),
but not Iconium (14 1). In Philippi Luke notes
that the magistrates are called strategot or praetors
(16 20), and are accompanied by lictors or rhab-
dotichot (16 35). In Thessalonica the rulers are
politarchs (17 6), a title found nowhere else, but
now discovered on an inscription of Thessalonica.
He rightly speaks of the Court of the Areopagus at
Athens (17 19) and the proconsul in Achaia (18
12). Though Athens was a free city, the Court of
the Areopagus at the time were the real rulers.
Achaia was sometimes associated with Macedonia,
though at this time it was a separate senatorial
province. In Ephesus Luke knows of the Asiarchs
(19 31), “the presidents of the ‘Common Council’
of the province in cities where there was a temple of
Rome and the Emperor; they superintended the
worship of the Emperor’ (Maclean). Note also
the fact that Ephesus is ‘“‘temple-keeper of the great
Diana” (19 35). Then observe the town clerk
(19 35), and the assembly (19 39). Note also
the title of Felix, “governor” or procurator (24 1),
Agrippa the king (25 13), Julius the centurion and
the Augustan band (27 1). Ch 27 is a marvel of
interest and accuracy for all who wish to know


details of ancient seafaring. The matter has been
worked over in a masterful way by James Smith,
Voyage and Shipwreck of St. Paul. The title
“First Man of the Island” (28 7) is now found ona
coin of Melita. These are by no means all the
matters of interest, but they will suffice. In most
of the items given above Luke’s veracity was once
challenged, but now he has been triumphantly
vindicated. The force of this vindication is best
appreciated when one recalls the incidental nature
of the items mentioned. They come from widely
scattered districts and are just the points where in
strange regions it is so easy to make slips. If
space allowed, the matter could be set forth in more
detail and with more justice to Luke’s worth as a his-
torian. It is true that in the earlier portions of the
Acts we are not able to find so many geographical
and historical corroborations. But the nature of
the material did not call for the mention of so many
places and persons. In the latter part Luke does
not hesitate to record miraculous events also.
His character as a historian is firmly established
by the passages where outside contact has been
found. We cannot refuse him a good name in the
rest of the book, though the value of the sources used
certainly cuts afigure. It has been urged that Luke
breaks down as a historian in the double mention
of Quirinius in Lk 2 2 and Acts 6 37. But Ramsay
(Was Christ Born at Bethlehem?) has shown how
the new knowledge of the census system of Augustus
derived from the Egyp papyri is about to clear
up this difficulty. Luke’s general accuracy at
least calls for suspense of judgment, and in the
matter of Theudas and Judas the Galilean (Acts 5)
Luke as compared with Josephus outclasses his rival.
Harnack (The Acts of the Apostles, 203-29) gives in
his usual painstaking way a number of examples
of “inaccuracy and discrepancy.’ But the great
bulk of them are merely examples of independence
in narration (cf Acts 9 with 22 and 26, where we
have three reports of Paul’s conversion). Harnack
did not, indeed, once place as high a value on Luke
as a historian as he now does. It is all the more
significant, therefore, to read the following in
Harnack’s The Acts of the Aposiles (298f): ‘The
book has now been restored to the position of credit
which is its rightful due. It is not only, taken as a
whole, a genuinely historical work, but even in the
majority of its details it is trustworthy. ... .
Judged from almost every possible standpoint
of historical criticism it is a solid, respectable, and
in many respects an extraordinary work.” That
is, in my opinion, an understatement of the facts
(see Ramsay), but it is a remarkable conclusion
concerning the trustworthiness of Luke when one
considers the distance that Harnack has come. At
any rate the prejudice against Luke is rapidly
disappearing. The judgment of the future is
forecast by Ramsay, who ranks Luke as a historian
of the first order.

XII. Purpose of the Book.—A great deal of dis-
cussion has been given to Luke’s aim in the Acts.
Baur’s theory was that this book was written to
give a conciliatory view of the conflict between Peter
and Paul, and that a minute parallelism exists in
the Acts between these two heroes. This tendency
theory once held the critical field, but it does not
take into view all the facts, and fails to explain the
book as a whole. Peter and Paul are the heroes of
the book as they undoubtedly were the two chief
personalities in apostolic history (cf Wendt, A postel-
geschichte, 17). There is some parallelism between
the careers of the two men (cf the worship offered
Peter at Caesarea in Acts 10 25, and that to Paul
in 14 11; see also the punishment of Ananias and
Sapphira and that of Elymas). But Knowling (Acts,
16) well replies that curiously no use is made of the


Acts


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 46


death of both Peter and Paul in Rome, possibly
at thesame time. If the Acts was written late, this
matter would be open to the knowledge of the writer.
There is in truth no real effort on Luke’s part to
paint Paul like Peter or Peter like Paul. The
few similarities in incident are merely natural his-
torical parallels. Others have seen in the Acts
a strong purpose to conciliate gentile (pagan)
opinion in the fact that the Rom governors and
military officers are so uniformly presented as
favorable to Paul, while the Jews are represented
as the real aggressors against Christianity (cf
Josephus’ attitude toward Rome). Here again the
fact is beyond dispute. But the other explanation
is the more natural, viz. that Luke brings out this
aspect of the matter because it was the truth. Cf
B. Weiss, Hinl, 569. Luke does have an eye on the
world relations of Christianity and rightly reflects
Paul’s ambition to win the Roman Empire to Christ
(see Rom 16), but that is not to say that he has given
the book a political bias or colored it so as to de-
prive it of its historical worth. It is probably true
(cf Knowling, Acts, 15; J. Weiss, Ueber die Absicht
und den literarischen Charakter der Apostelgeschichte)
that Luke felt, as did Paul, that Judaism realized
its world destiny in Christianity, that Christianity
was the true Judaism, the spiritual and real Israel.
If Luke wrote Acts in Rome, while Paul’s case was
still before Nero, it is easy to understand the some-
what long and minute account of the arrest and
trials of Paul in Jerusalem, Caesarea and Rome.
The point would be that the legal aspect of Chris-
tianity before Rom laws was involved. Hitherto
Christianity had found shelter as a sect of Judaism,
and so was passed by Gallio in Corinth as a, religio
licitta. If Paul was condemned as a Christian, the
whole aspect of the matter would be altered. Chris-
tianity would at once become religio illicita. The
last word in the Acts comments on the fact that
Paul, though still a prisoner, was permitted to
preach unhindered. The importance of this point
is clearly seen as one pushes on to the Neronian
persecution in 64. After that date Christianity
stood apart from Judaism in the eye of Rome.

have already stated my belief that Luke closed the
Acts when he did and as he did because the events
with Paul had only gone thus far. Numerous
scholars hold that Luke had in mind a third book
(Acts 1 1), a possible though by no means necessary
inference from “first treatise.” It was a climax
to carry the narrative on to Rome with Paul, but it
is rather straining the point to find all this in Acts
18. Rome was not “the nethermost part of the
earth,’ Spain more nearly being that. Nor did
Paul take the gospel to Rome. Besides, to make
the arrival of Paul in Rome the goal in the mind of
Christ is too narrowing a purpose. The purpose
to go to Rome did dominate Paul’s mind for several
years (19 21), but Paul cuts no figure in the early
part of the book. And Paul wished to push on from
Rome to Spain (Rom 15 24). It is probably true
that Luke means to announce his purpose in Acts
1 1-8. One needs to keep in mind also Lk 1 1-4.
There are various ways of writing history. Luke
chooses the biographical method in Acts. Thus
he conceives that he can best set forth the tre-
mendous task of interpreting the first thirty years
of the apostolic history. It is around persons (cf
Harnack, The Acts of the Apostles, 117), two great
figures (Peter and Paul), that the narrative is focused.
Peter is most prominent in 1-12, Paul in 18-28.
Still Paul’s conversion is told in Acts 9 and Peter
reappears in 16. But these great personages do
not stand alone. John the Apostle is certainly
with Peter in the opening chapters. The other
apostles are mentioned also by name (1 13) and a
number of times in the first twelve chapters (and


in 15). But after 15 they drop out of the narra-
tive, for Luke follows the fortunes of Paul. The
other chief secondary figures in Acts are Stephen,
Philip, Barnabas, James, Apollos, all Hellenists save
James (Harnack, 120). The minor characters are
numerous (John, Mark, Silas, Timothy, Aquila and
Priscilla, Aristarchus, etc). In most cases Luke
gives a distinct picture of these incidental person-
ages. In particular he brings out sharply such
men as Gallio, Claudius, Lysias, Felix, Festus,
Herod, Agrippa I and II, Julius. Luke’s concep-
tion of the apostolic history is that it is the work of
Jesus still carried on by the Holy Spirit (1 1f).
Christ chose the apostles, commanded them to
wait for power from on high, filled them with the
Holy Spirit and then sent them on the mission
of world conquest. In the Acts Luke records the
waiting, the coming of the Holy Spirit, the planting
of a powerful church in Jerus and the expansion
of the gospel to Samaria and all over the Roman
Empire. He addresses the book to Theophilus
as his patron, a Gentile Christian plainly, as he had
done with his gospel. The book is designed for the
enlightenment of Christians generally concerning
the historic origins of Christianity. It is in truth
the first church history. It is in reality the Acts
of the Holy Spirit as wrought throngh these men.
It is an inspiring narration. Luke had no doubt
whatever of the future of a gospel with such a
history and with such heroes of faith as Peter and


aul,
XIII. Analysis.— 4
1. The connection between the work of the apostles
and that of Jesus (1 1-11). ;
2. The equipment of the early disciples for their
task (1 12—2 47).
(a) The disciples obeying Christ’s parting com-
mand (1 12-14).
(b) The place of Judas filled (1 15-26).
(c) Miraculous manifestations of the presence of
the Holy Spirit (2 1-18). :
(d) Peter’s interpretation of the situation (2


14-36).

(e) The immediate effect of the sermon (2
37-41).
The new spirit in the Christian community
(2 42-47).


3. The development of the work in Jerusalem
(3 1—8 1a).
(a) An incident in the work of Peter and John
with Peter’s apologetic (3).
(b) Opposition of the Sadducees aroused by the
preaching of the resurrection of Jesus (4


(c) An internal difficulty, the problem of pov-
erty (4 32—65 11).

(d) Great progress of the cause in the city (6
12-16


(e) Renewed hostility of the Sadducees and
_ Gamaliel’s retort to the Pharisees (5 17-


42).

(f) A crisis in church life and the choice of the
seven Hellenists (6 1-7).

(g) Stephen’s spiritual interpretation of Chris-
tianity stirs the antagonism of the Pharisees
and leads to his violent death (6 8—8 la).

4, The compulsory extension of the gospel to Judaea,

Samaria and the neighboring regions (8 1b-40).

(a) The great persecution, with Saul as leader
(8 1b—4).

(b) Philip’s work as a notable example of the
work of the scattered disciples (8 5-40).

5. The conversion of Saul changes the whole situe-

tion for Christianity (9 1-31).

(a) Saul’s mission to Damascus (9 1-3).

(b) Saul stopped in his hostile course and turns
Christian himself (9 4-18).


47 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Acts


(c) Saul becomes a powerful exponent of the
gospel in Damascus and Jerusalem (9 19-30).
(d) The church has peace (9 31).
6. The door opened to the Gentiles, both Roman
and Greek (9 32—11 30).
(a) veers activity in this time of peace (9 32-


(b) The appeal from Cornelius in Caesarea and
Peter’s response (10).

(c) Peter’s arraignment before the Pharisaic
penis in the church in Jerusalem (11

(d) Greeks in Antioch are converted and Barna-
bas brings Saul to this work (11 19-26).

(e) The Greek Christians send relief to the
Jewish Christians in Jerusalem (11 27-30).

7. Persecution from the civil government (12).

(a) Herod Agrippa I kills James and imprisons
Peter (12 1-19).

(b) Herod pays the penalty for his crimes (12
20-23).


(c) Christianity prospers (12 24 f).
8. The gentile propaganda from Antioch under the

leadership of Barnabas and Saul (13, 14).

(a) The specific call of the Holy Spirit to this
work (13 1-3).

(6) The province of Cyprus and the leadership
of Paul (13 4-12).

(c) The province of Pamphylia and the desertion
of John Mark (13 13).

(d) The province of Galatia (Pisidia and Lyca-
onia) and the stronghold of the gospel upon
the native population (13 14~—14 24).

(e) The return and report to Antioch (14 25-
28


9. The gentile campaign challenged by the Juda-
izers (15 1-35).
(a) They meet Paul and Barnabas at Antioch
who decide to appeal to Jerusalem (15 1-3).
(b) The first public meeting in Jerusalem (16 4 f).
(c) The second and more extended discussion
with the decision of the conference (15 6-29).
(d) The joyful reception (in Antioch) of the
victory of Paul and Barnabas (15 30-35).
10. The second great campaign extending to

Europe (15 36—18 22).

(a) The breach between Paul and Barnabas
over John Mark (15 36-39).

(b) From Antioch to Troas with the Mace-
donian Cry (16 40—16 10). :

(c) In Philippi in Macedonia the gospel gains
a foothold in Europe, but meets opposition
(16 11-40). ,

(d) Paul is driven also from Thessalonica and
Berea (cf Philippi), cities of Macedonia
also (17 1-15). :

(e) Paul’s experience in Athens (17 16-34).

(f) In Corinth Paul spends nearly two years
and the cause of Christ wins legal recog-
nition from the Roman governor (18 1-17).

(g) The return to Antioch by way of Ephesus,
Caesarea and probably Jerusalem (18
18-22).

11. The third great tour, with Ephesus as head-
quarters (18 23—20 3). A :

(a) Paul in Galatia and Phrygia again (18


(b) Apollos in Ephesus before Paul comes
(18 24-28).
(c) Paul’s three years in Ephesus (19 1—20


la).
(d) The brief visit to Corinth because of the
troubles there (20 16-3). ’
12. Paul turns to Jerusalem again with plans for
Rome (20 4—21 16).
(a) His companions (20 4).
(b) Rejoined by Luke at Philippi (20 5 f).


(c) The story of Troas (20 7-12).

(d) Coasting along Asia (20 13-16).

(e) ee Ephesian elders at Miletus (20

(f) From Miletus to Tyre (21 1-6).

(g) From Tyre to Caesarea (21 7-14).

(h) From Caesarea to Jerusalem (21 15 f).

13. The outcome in Jerusalem (21 15—28 30).

(a) Paul’s reception by the brethren (21 15-17).

(b) Their proposal of a plan by which Paul
could undo the work of the Judaizers con-
cerning him in Jerusalem (21 18-26).

(c) The uproar in the temple courts raised by
the Jews from Asia.as Paul was carrying
out the plan to disarm the Judaizers (21
27-30).

(d) Paul’s rescue by the Roman captain and
Paul's defence to the Jewish mob (21 31—
22 23).

(e) Eee euos of the chief captain (22 24-


(f) Brought before the Sanhedrin (22 30—


(g) Cheered by the Lord Jesus (23 11).
(h) Panl’s escape from the plot of Jewish con-
spirators (23 12-30).
14. Paul a prisoner in Caesarea (23 31—26).
(a) The flight to Caesarea and presentation to
Felix (23 31-35).
(b) Paul's appearance before Felix (24).
(c) Paul before Festus (25 1-12).
(d) Paul, as a matter of curiosity and courtesy,
brought before Herod Agrippa II (25 13—
26 32).
15. Paul gomg to Rome (27 1—28 15).
(a) From Caesarea to Myra (27 1-5).
(b) From Myra to Fair Havens (27 6-8).
(c) From Fair Havens to Malta (27 9—28 10).
(d) From Malta to Rome (28 11-15).
16. Paul in Rome at last (28 16-31).
(a) His quarters (28 16).
(b) His first interview with the Jews (28 17-22).
(c) His second interview with the Jews (28
23-28),
(d) Two years afterward still a prisoner, but
with freedom to preach the gospel (28 30 f).

LitEraTuRE.— Besides the works referred to above
see Wendt’s edition of Meyer's Kommentar (1899);
Headlam in HDB; Knowling on_ Acts in Expositor’s
Greek Testament (1900); nowling, Witness of the
Ep arias (1892), Testimony of St. Paul to Christ (1905);

offatt, Historical NT (1901).

Here is a selected list of important works:

1. Introduction: Bacon, Intro to the NT (1900);
Bennett and Adeney, Biblical Intro (1899); Bleek, Einl
in das NT (4 Aufl, 1900); S. Davidson, (3d ed, 1894);
C. R. Gregory, Canon and Text of the NT (1907); H. J.
Holtzmann, Bini in das NT (3 Aufl, 1892); Jacquies,
Histoire des livres du NT (1905-8); Jtilicher, Intro to the
NT (tr, 1904); Peake, Critical Intro to the NT (1909);
Reuss, Canon of the Holy Scriptures (tr, 1886); Salmon,
Hist Intro to the Study of the Books of the NT (7th ed,
1896); von Soden, The History of Early Christian Lit. (tr,
1906); B. Weiss, A Manual of Intro to the NT (tr, 1889);
Westcott, History of the Canon of the NT (1869); Zahn,
Intro to the NT (tr, 1909); Moffatt, Intro to the Lit. of
the NT (1911).


2. Text: See general works on textual criticism of the
NT (Gregory, Kenyon, Nestle, Tischendorf, Scrivener,
von Soden. Weiss, Westcott, etc). Of special trea-


tises note Blass, Philology of the Gospels (1898). Acta
Apostolorum (1895); Bornemann, Acte Apostolorum
(1848); Chase, Old Syriac Element in the Text of Codex
Bezae (1893); Corssen, Der cyprianische Text der Acta
Apostolorum (1892); Klostermann, Probleme im A postel
Texte (1883); Klostermann, Vindictae Lucanae (1866);
Nestle, Philologia (1896); J. Rendel Harris, Study of
Codex Bezae (1891). i 2

3. Apostolic History: For literature on_the life of
Paul see Rohertson, Epochs in the Life of Paul (1909),
321-27, and art. Pau. in this encyclopaedia. Important
general works are the following: Bartlet, The Apostolic
Age (1899); Baumgarten, The Apostolic History (tr,
1854): Blunt, Studies in the Apostolic Age (1909);
Burton, Records and Letters of the Apostolic Age (1895);
Doellinger, The First Age of the Church (tr, 1867);
Dobschiitz, Christian Life in the Primitive Church (tr,


Acts
Adam in OT


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 48


1904); Ewald, History of the Apostolic Times (tr, Vol VI
in History of Israel); Farrar, Barly Days of Christianity
(1887); Fisher, The Beginnings of Christianity (1877);
Gilhert, Christianity in the Apostolic Age (1908); Har-
nack, The Expansion of Christianity in the First Three
Centuries (tr, 1904-5); Hausrath, Neut. Zeitgeschichte
(Bd. 2, 1872); Heinrici, Das Urchristentum (1902);
Holtzmann, Neut. Zeitgeschichte (1895); Hort, Judaistic
Christianity (1898): Organization of the Early Christian
Churches (1895); WLechler, The Apostolic and  Post-
Apostolic Times (tr, 1886); Lightfoot, Dissertations on
the Apostolic Age (1892); Lindsay, The Church and the
Ministry tn the Early Centuries (1902), MeGiffert, A
History of Christianity in the Apostolic Age (1897);
Neander, History of the Planting and Training of the
Christian Church (1889); Pfleiderer, Christian Origins
(1906); Pressensé, The Farly Years of Christianity (1870);
Purves, Christianity in the Apostolic Age (1901); Ramsay,
The Church in the Roman Empire (1893); Ritschl, Die
Entstehung der altkath. Kirche (1857); Ropes, The Apos-
tolic Age tn the Light of Modern Criticism (1906); Weiz-
sacker, The Apostolic Age of the Christian Church (tr, 1894—
95); Pictures of the Apostolic Church (1910).

4. Special Treatises on The Acts: Belser, Beitrdge zur
Erklérung der Apostelgeschichte (1897); Benson, Ad-
dresses on the Acts of the Apostles (1901); Bethge, Die
paulinischen Reden der Apostelgeschichte (1887); Blass,
Acta Apostolorum secundum Formam quae videtur Roma-
nam (1896); Chase, The Credibility of the Book of the
Acts of the Apostles (1902); Clemen, Die A postelge-
schichte, im Lichte der neueren Forschungen (1905); Fiene,
Hine vorkanonische Nebenlieferung des Lukas in Eovan-
gelium und Apostelgeschichte (1891); Harnack, Luke,
the Phystcian (tr, 1907); The Acts of the Apostles (1909);
Hilgenfeld, Acta Apostolorum Graece et Latine (1899);
Jiingst, Die Quellen der A postelgeschichte (1895); Krenkel,
Josephus und Lucas (1894); Luckok, Footprints of the
Apostles as Traced by St. Luke in the Acts (1897); J.
Lightfoot, Hebrew and Talmudical Ezercitations on the
Acts of the Apostles (1768); Paley, Horae Paulinae (Birks
ed, 1850); Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller (1896); Pau-
line and Other Studies (1906); Cities of St. Paul (1908),
Luke the Physician, and Other Studies (1908); J. Smith,
Voyage and Shipwreck of St. Paul (4th ed, 1880); Sorof,
Die Entstehung der Apostelgeschichte (1890); Spitta, Die
Apostelgeschichte, thre Quellen und deren geschichtlicher
Werth (1891); Stifler, An Intro to the Book of Acts (1892);
Vogel, Zur Characteristik des Lukas nach Sprache und
Stii (1897); J. Weiss, Ueber die Absicht und die litera-
rischen Charakter der Apostelgeschichte (1897); Zeller,
The Contents and Origin of the Acts of the Apostles (tr,
1875); Maurice Jones, St. Paul the Orator (1910).

5. Commentaries:* There are the great standard works.
like Bede, Bengel, Calvin, Chrysostom, Grotius. The
chief modern commentaries are the following: Alex-
ander (1857), Alford (6th ed, 1868), Bartlet (1901),
Blass (Acta Apostolorum, 1895), Ewald (A postelgeschichte,
1871), Felten (Apostelgeschichte, 1892), Hackett (1882),
Holtzmann (Hand-Commentar, 3 Aufl, 1901), Kna-
benhaner (Actus Apostol, 1899), Knowling (#zposi-
tor's Gr Text, 1900), Luthardt und Zoeckler (A postel-
geschichte, 2d ed, 1894), McGarvey (1892), Meyer (tr by
Gloag and Dickson, 1885), Meyer-Wendt (A postel-
geschichte, 1888).
hauseu (1832), Page (1897), Rackham (1901), Rendall,
eae Stokes (1892), B. Weiss (Apostelgeschichte, 1892,
2d ed).

A. T. Ropertson

ACTS OF PILATE, pi‘lat, pi'lat.


PHAL GOSPELS.


ACTS OF SOLOMON: “The book of the acts
of Solomon” (1 K 11 41), probably a history
based on the state documents kept by the official
recorder. See 14 19.29; 15 23.31; 16 5.14.20.27;
22 39.45, ete.


ACUA, ak’u-a.


ACUB, &’kub (B, ’Akoth, Akowph; A, ’Akodp,
Akowim) = Bakbnk (Ear 2 51; Neh 7 53): The
descendants of A. Se ed returned with
Zerubbabel to Jerus (1 Esd 6 31).


ACUD, a’kud (Akot8, Akovd; AV Acua)=
Axkus (Ezr 2 45) which see; omitted in Neh 7:
The descendants of A. (temple-servants) returned
with Zerubbabel to Jerus (1 Esd 6 30).


ADADAH, a-da’da (WIPY, ‘adh‘adhah): A
city in the southern part of Judah (Josh 16 22).
The older copies of the Gr text have Arouél, but
that is not a sufficient reason for identifying the
name with the Aroer of 18 80 28. Some scholars


See Apocry-


See Acup.


Noesgen (A postelgeschichte, 1882), Ols- ;


adopt the change of text, and identify the site with
Ararah, about seven miles S.E. of Beer-sheba.
Others identify it with Adadah, eight or nine miles
S.E. of Arad.


ADADRIMMON, 4-dad-rim’on: Shorter and
less accurate name of a place in the Valley of
Megiddo, which tradition connected with the death
of King Josiah (Zec 12 11; 2 Ch 36 22). See
HapapriMMon.


ADAH, a’da (VIP, ‘ddhah, ‘‘adornment’’):

(1) One of the two wives of Lamech the descendant
of Cain (Gen 4 19.20.23). The narrative in Gen
assigns to her two sons, Jabal the “father’’ of tent-
dwelling people, and Jubal the “father of all such
as handle the harp and pipe.” Jos says that
Lamech had 77 sons by Ada and Zillah (Ant, I,


ii, 2).

; (2) According to Gen 86 2.4.10.12.16, the Hittite
wife of Esau, daughter of Elon, ‘and mother of
Eliphaz. In this chapter Esau’s other wives are
Oholibamah, a Hivite, and Basemath the daughter
of Ishmael. The names are differently given else-
where (Gen 26 34; 289). Basemath is said to
be the daughter of Elon. The daughter of Ishmael
is called Mahalath. In place of Oholibamah the
Hivite we find Judith the daughter of Beeri the
Hittite. Data are lacking for the solution of the
problem. Wiuuis J. BEECHER


ADAIAH, a-da’ya, a-di’a (IY, ‘ddhayah, ‘“‘Jeho-
vah hath adorned’’):

(1) Apparently the seventh of the nine sons of
Shimei, who is apparently the same with Shema,
who is the fifth of the sons of Elpaal, who is the
second of the two sons of Shaharaim and Hushim
(1 Ch 8 21). Shaharaim and his descendants are
listed with the descendants of Benjamin, though
his relations to Benjamin are not stated.

(2) A Levite; ancestor to David’s singer Asaph,
and a descendant of the fifth generation from
Gershom (1 Ch 6 41).

(3) The father of Maaseiah, who was one of the
captains of hundreds associated with Jehoiada the
priest in making Joash king (2 Ch 28 1).

(4) A resident of Bozkath, and father of Jedidah
the mother of King Josiah (2 K 22 1).

(5) A descendant of Judah through Perez. His
great-great-grandson Maaseiah resided in Jerus after
Nehemiah had rehabilitated the city (Neh 11 5).

(6) One of the men of Israel, not a priest or Levite,
but “of the sons of Bani,” who promised Ezra
ao, he would part with his foreign wife (Ezr 10

(7) The same man or another, in a different group
of the sons of Bani (Ezr 10 39).

(8) One of the priests of the latest Bible times,
mentioned with a partial genealogy (Neh 11 12;
1 Ch 9 12). Wiis J. BEECHER


ADALIA, a-da-li’a (S978, ‘ddhalya’, probably
a Pers name, meaning unknown): One of the ten


sons of Haman who were put to death by the Jews
(Est 9 8).


ADAM, ad’am, IN OT AND APOC (OI,
‘adham; LXX 'A&dp, Addm): The Heb word
occurs some 560 times in the OT with


1. Usage the meaning ‘‘man,” “mankind.” Out-
and Ety- side Gen 1-6 the only case where it is
mology unquestionably a proper name is 1 Ch


11. Ambiguous are Dt 32 8, AV
“sons of Adam,” RV “children of men”; Job 31
33 AV “as” RV “like Adam,” but margin “after
the manner of men’; Hos 6 7 AV “like men,”
RV “ike Adam,”’ and vice versa in the margin. In


49 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Acts
Adam in OT


Gen 1 the word occurs only twice, vs 26.27. In Gen
2-4 it is found 26 times, and in 6 1.3.4.5. In the
last four cases and in 4 25 it is obviously in-
tended as a proper name; but the VSS show con-
siderable uncertainty as to the rendering in the
other cases. Most modern interpreters would
restore a vowel point to the Heb text in 2 20; 3
17.21, thus introducing the definite article, and
read uniformly ‘‘the man” up to 4 25, where the
absence of the art. may be taken as an indication
that ‘‘the man” of the previous narrative is to be
identified with ‘‘Adam,” the head of the genealogy
found in 6 1ff. Several conjectures have been put
forth as to the root-meaning of the Heb word: (1)
creature; (2) ruddy one; (3) earthborn. Less prob-
able are (4) pleasant—to sight—and (5) social,

gregarious.
Many argue from the context that the language of
Gen 1 26.27 is general, that it is the creation of the
human species, not of any particular


2. Adam individual or individuals, that is
in the described. But (1) the context does
Narrative not even descend to a species, but
of Genesis arranges created things according to


the most general possible classification:
light and darkness; firmament and waters; land
and seas; plants; sun, moon, stars; swimming
and flying creatures; land animals. No possible
parallel to this classification remains in the case of
mankind. (2) In the narrative of Gen 1 the recur-
rence of identical expressions is almost rigidly uni-
form, but in the case of man the unique statement
occurs (ver 27), “Male and female created he them.”
Although Dillmann is here in the minority among
interpreters, it would be difficult to show that he
is wrong in interpreting this as referring to one
male and one female, the first pair. In this case
we have a point of contact and of agreement with
the narrative of ch2. Man, created in God’s image,
is given dominion over every animal, is allowed
every herb and fruit tree for his sustenance, and is
bidden multiply and fill the earth. In Gen 2 4—
6 5 the first man is made of the dust, becomes a
living creature by the breath of God, is placed in
the garden of Eden to till it, gives names to the
animals, receives as his counterpart and helper a
woman formed from part of his own body, and at
the woman’s behest eats of the forbidden fruit of
“the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.” With
her he is then driven from the garden, under the
curse of brief life and heavy labor, since should he
eat—or continue to eat?—of the fruit of the “tree
of life,” not previously forbidden, he might go on
living forever. He becomes the father of Cain
and of Abel, and of Seth at a time after the murder
of Abel. According to 6 3.5 Adam is aged 130
years at the birth of Seth and lives to the age of
930 years. :
That man was meant by the Creator to be in a
peculiar sense His own “image”; that he is the
divinely appointed ruler over all his
3. Teach- fellow-creatures on earth; and_ that
ings of the he enjoys, together with them, God’s
Narrative blessing upon a creature fit to serve the
ends for which it was created—these
things lie upon the surface of 1 26-31. In like
manner 2-4 tell us that the gift of a blessed immor-
tality was within man’s reach; that his Creator
ordained that his moral development should come
through an inward trial, not as a mere gift; and
that the presence of suffering in the world is due
to ain, the presence of sin to the machinations of a
subtle tempter. The development of the doctrine
of the fall belongs to the NT (see Apam 1n NT;
Fauu, THE). ,
Allusions to the narrative of the creation and the
fall of man, covering most points of the narrative


of Gen 1-4, are found in 2 Esd 8 4-7.10.21.26;
4 30; 6 54-56; 7 11.46-48; Tob 8 6; Wisd 2 23f;
9 2f; 1011; Ecclus 15 14; 17 1-4;
4. Adam in 26 24; 401; 49 16. In both 2 Esd
Apocrypha and Wisd we read that death came upon
all men through Adam’s sin, while 2 Esd
4 30 declares that “a grain of evil seed was sown
in the heart of Adam from the beginning.” Aside
from this doctrinal development the Apoc offers no
additions to the OT narrative. F. K. Farr


ADAM IN OT (Evolutionary! Interpretation):
DIN, ’adham, “man,” Gen 1 26, or “a man,” Gen
2 5; DIN, ha-’adham, “the man”; mostly with the
article as a generic term, and not used as the proper
name of a patriarch until 6 3, after which the name
first given to both man and woman [5 2] is used of
the man alone): The being in whom is embodied the
Scripture idea of the first created man and ancestor
of mankind. The account, which belongs mostly
to the oldest stratum of the Genesis story (J)
merits careful attention, because evolutionary
science, history, and new theology have all quarreled
with or rejected it on various grounds, without
providing the smallest approach to a satisfactory
substitute.

I. What the Writer Meant to Describe.—It is
important first of all, if we can, to get at what the

author meant to describe, and how it


1. Deriva- is related, if at all, to literal and
tion and factual statement. :

Use of the (1) Scholars have exercised them-
Name selves much, but with little arrival at


certainty, over the derivation of the

name; a matter which, as it is concerned with one
of the commonest words of the language, is of no
great moment as compared with the writer’s own
understanding of it. The most plausible conjec-
ture, perhaps, is that which connects it with the
Assyr adamu, “to make,” or “produce,” hence,
“the produced one,” “the creature.’ The author
of Gen 2 7 seems to associate it, rather by word-
play than derivation, with haé-ddhamah, “‘the
ground” or “soil,”’ as the source from which man’s
body was taken (cf 3 19.23). The name ’ddhamah
itself seems to be closely connected with the name
Edom (O778, ’édhdm, Gen 26 30), meaning “red’’;
but whether from the redness of the soil, or the
ruddiness of the man, or merely the incident
recorded in Gen 26 30, is uncertain. Without
doubt the writer of Gen 2, 3 had in mind man’s
earthly origin, and understood the name accordingly.
(2) The account of the creation is twice given,
and from two very different points of view. In the
first account, Gen 1 26-31, man is


2. Outline represented as created on the sixth
of the day along with the animals; a species
Genesis in the animal world; but differing
Narrative from them in bearing the image and


likeness of God, in having dominion
over all created things, and in having grains and
fruits for food, while they have herbs. The writer’s
object in all this seems to be as much to identify
man with the animal creation as to differentiate
him from it. In the second account, 2 4—3 24,
man’s identity with the animal is ignored or at
least. minimized (cf 2 20), while the object is to
determine his status in a spiritual individualized
realm wherein he has the companionship of God.
Jeh God “forms” or “shapes” him out of the dust
of the ground, breathes into his nostrils the breath
1It ought to be superfluous to say that the unfolding or
development of the human personality here identificd
with evolution is Sore far higher, deeper, and other
than anything that can be fathered, upon Darwin or
Herhert Spencer. Evolution (unfolding) is the great
process or movement; natural selection and survival of
the fittest name only guesses at some of its methods.


Adam in OT


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 50


of life, and with such special distinction he becomes,
like other created things, a “living soul’ (nephesh
hayyah; cf 27 with 1 30). He is placed in a
garden situated somewhere among the rivers of
Babylonia, his primitive occupation being to dress
and keep it. In the midst of the garden are two
mysterious trees, the tree of life, whose fruit seems
to have the potency of conferring immortality
(cf 3 22), and the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, whose fruit is not to be eaten under penalty
of death. Meanwhile, as in naming the animals
the man finds no real companion, Jeh God “builds”
one of the man’s ribs into a woman, and the man
recognizes her spiritual unity with him, naming her
accordingly. The story goes on to relate, without
note of time, how the serpent, the subtlest of beasts,
urged on the woman the desirable qualities of the
fruit of the forbidden tree, intimating that God had
made the prohibition from envy, and roundly
denying that death would be the consequence of
eating. Accordingly the woman took and ate, and
gave to her husband, who also ate; and the immedi-
ate consequence was a sense of shame, which caused
them to cover their nakedness with girdles of fig
leaves, and a sense of guilt (not differentiated by
Adam from shame, 3 10), which made the pair
reluctant to meet Jeh God. He obtains the con-
fession of their disobedience, however; and passes
prophetic sentence: on the serpent, of perpetual
antipathy between its species and the human;
on the woman, of sorrows and pains and subservi-
ence to the man; and on the man, of hardship and
severe labors, until he returns to the dust from which
he was taken. As the pair have chosen to eat of
the tree of knowledge, lest now they should eat
of the tree of life they are expelled from the garden,
and the gate is guarded by flaming sword and

Cherubim.
(8) It is impossible to read this story with the
entire detachment that we accord to an ancient,
myth, or even to a time- and space-


3. History conditioned historical tale. It con-
or Exposi- tinually suggests intimate relations
tion? with the permanent truths of human


-nature, as if there were a fiber in it
truer than fact. And this provokes the inquiry
whether the author himself intended the account
of the Edenic state and the Fall to be taken as
literal history or as exposition. He uniformly
makes the name generic by the article (the adam or
man), the only exceptions, which are not real
exceptions in meaning, being 1 26 and 2 5, already
noted. It is not until 5 3, where the proper name
Adam is as it were officially given, that such his-
tory as is conditioned by chronology and genealogy
begins. What comes before this, except the some-
what vague location of the Eden region, 2 10-14,
reads rather like a description of the primordial
manhood nature, not in philosophical but in nar-
rative language. Itis not fable; it is not a worked-
over myth; it is not a didactic parable; it is (to
speak technically) exposition by narration. By a
descriptive story it traces the elemental movement of
manhood in its first spiritual impact on this earthly
life. In other words, instead of being concerned
to relate a factual series of events from the remote
past, the writer’s penetrative intuition goes down-
ward and inward to those spiritual movements of
being which are germinal in all manhood. It is
a spiritual analysis of man’s intrinsic nature, and as
such must be spiritually discerned. An analogous
manner of exposition may be seen in the account of
Our Lord’s temptation in the wilderness, Mt 4 1-11,
which account, if authentic, must have come ulti-
mately from Our Lord Himself.

Hl, How the Story Looks Today.—Scarcely any
other Scripture story has so suffered from the


changes wrought by modern thinking as has this
story of Adam. On the one hand it is felt that to
refer the fall and inherited guilt of mankind to this
experience of Adam as a cause is to impose too great
a burden, dogmatic and historic, on this primitive
story. Yet on the other hand the story, including
this implication of the primal fall, refuses to be
dismissed as an outworn or fantastic myth. -It
lays hold so vitally on the roots of human nature
that our only course is not to reject it but to re-read
it with the best light our age affords. And whether
best or not, the evolutionary light in which all

modern thought is colored cannot be ignored.
(1) The divergent assumptions of the traditional
and the evolutionary view may be roughly stated
thus: of the traditional, that in con-


1. Inthe sequence of this Eden lapse man is
Light of a ruined nature, needing redemption
Evolution and reinstatement, and that therefore


the subsequent spiritual dealing with
him must be essentially pathological and remedial;
of the evolutionary, that, by the very terms of his
creation, which the lapse from obedience did not
annul, man is spiritually a child needing growth and
education, and that therefore the subsequent deal-
ing with him must foster the development within
him of a nature essentially normal and true. It
is evident that these two views, thus stated, merely
regard two lines of potency in one nature. With-
out rejecting the traditional, or stopping to inquire
how it and the evolutionary may coexist, we may
here consider how the story before us responds to
the evolutionary view. Only—it must be premised
—the evolution whose beginning it describes is
not the evolution of the human species; we can
leave natural science and history to take care of
that; but, beginning where this leaves off, the
evolution of the individual, from the first forth-
putting of individual initiative and choice toward
the far-off adult and complete personality. This,
which in view of its culmination we may call the
evolution of personality, is evolution distinctively
spiritual, that stage and grade of upward moving
being which succeeds to the material and psychical
(ef 1 Cor 15 45.46). On the material stage of
evolution, which the human species shares with
the beast and the plant, Scripture is silent. Nor
is it greatly concerned with the psychical, or cul-
tural development of the human species, except
to reveal in a divinely ordered history and ltera-
ture its essential inadequacy to the highest manhood
potencies. Rather its field is the evolution of the
spirit, in which alone the highest personal values
are realized. In the delimitation of this field it has
a consistent origin, course and culmination of its
own, as it traces the line of spiritual uprise and
growth from the first Adam, who as a “living
soul” was subject to the determinism of the species,
to the last Adam, who as a “life-giving spirit”
is identified with the supreme Personality in whom
Divine and human met and blended. Of this
tremendous evolution the story of Adam, with a
clearness which the quaint narrative style of exposi-
tion does not impair, reveals the primal and direct-
ive factors.
(2) Just as the habitat and the nature of created
things answer to each other, so the environment in
which man is placed when he comes
2. The Gar- from his Creator’s hand connotes the
den Habitat kind of life he is fitted to live. He
is placed not in wild and refractory
Nature but in a garden watered and planted with a
view to his receiving care and nurture from above.
Nature is kindly and responsive, furnishing fruits
ready to his hand, and requiring only that he “‘dress
and keep’’ the garden. Of all the trees he may
freely eat, including the tree of life; save only the


61 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


most centrally located of all, the tree of “knowl-


edge of good and evil.’’ The being fitted to this
habitat is a man adult in stature and intelligence,
but still like a child; not yet individualized to deter-
minate character, not yet exerting a will of his own
apart from the will of his Creator; in other words,
as spiritually considered, not yet detached from the
spirit of his personal Source. All this reads like
the description of a life essentially negative, or
rather neutral, with free communication both


downward and upward, but neither that of a domes-:


ticated animal nor of a captive god; a being bal-
anced, as it were, between the earthly and the
Divine, but not yet aware of the possession of that
individual will and choice which alone can give
spiritual significance to a committal to either.
(3) In the first story of man’s creation, 1 26-31,
describing his creation as a species, the distinction
of male and female is explicitly included
8. The Or- (1 27). In the second story (2, 3),
ganic Factor wherein man is contemplated rather
as an individual, the description of his
nature begins before any distinction of sex exists.
If the writer meant this latter to portray a condition
of man in time or in natural fact, there is thus a
discrepancy in accounts. If we regard it, however,
as giving a factor in spiritual evolution, it not
only becomes full of meaning but lays hold pro-
foundly on the ultimate teleology of creation. The
naive story relates that the woman was “builded”
out of the already shaped material of the man’s
body, in order to supply a fellowship which the
animals could not; a help “answering to” him
(keneghdé; cf 2 18 margin). Then it makestheman
recognize this conjugal relation, not at all with
reference to sexual passion or the propagation of
species but as furnishing man occasion, so to say,
for loving and being loved, and making this capacity
essential to the integrity of his nature. The
value of this for the ultimate creative purpose
and revelation is ag marvelous as it is profound;
it is the organic factor in realizing the far-reaching
design of Him who is evolving a being bearing His
image and deriving from Him the breath of life.
That God is Spirit (In 4 24), that God is love
(1 Jn 4 8.16) and love “creation’s final law,” may as
an idea-be later revelation; but meanwhile from the
beginning, in the commonest relation of life, a
pulsation of mutual love is implanted, by making
man a dual nature, wherein love, which is the an-
tithesis of self-seeking, has the equal and compan-
fonable object necessary to its existence. Thus in
the conjugal relation the potency of the highest
and broadest spiritual value is made intrinsic. In
all the dubious course of his subsequent, evolution,
this capacity of love, though itself subject to the
corruptio optimi pessima, is like a. redeeming
element at the heart alike of the individual and of
society. : Rx
(4) Even in this neutral parden existence it 18
noteworthy that the man’s nature evinces its
superiority to the animal in the
absence of determinism. He is not
enslaved to an instinct of blind con-
formity to an external will. In other
words, he can codperate intelligently
in his own spiritual evolution. He has the power of
choice, ministered by the stimulus of an unmotived
prohibition. He can abstain and live, or eat and
die (2 16.17). No reasons are given, no train of
spiritual consequences, to one whose spirit is not
Ma awake; in this pre-spiritual stage rather the


4, The In-
vasion of


Subtlety


eginnings of law and prescription must be arbi-
trary. Yet even in so rudimentary a relation we
are aware of the essential contrast between animal
and spiritual evolution, in that the latter is not a
blind and instinctive imposition from without, but


Adam in OT


a free course submitted to man’s intelligence and
coéperation. And it is a supremely significant fea-
ture of the narrative to make the first self-interested
impulse come by the way of subtlety. “The
serpent,’ the writer premises, “was more subtle
than any beast of the field which Jeh God had
made.” It points to a trait which he puts on the
border-line between the species and the individual,
the disposition, not indeed to rebel against a law
of being, but to submit it to refinement and accom-
modation or perhaps from sheer curiosity to try
conclusions with it. The suggestion came first
from the lower creation, but not from what is
animal in it; and it was eagerly responded to by
the woman, the finer and more spiritually awake of
the pair. Not to press this too far, it is significant
that the first impulse toward individual initiative
rises through the free play of intellect and reason.
It seems to promise a subtler way of being “like
God.” To differentiate more minutely the re-
spective parts of man and wife in the affair, which
are portrayed in the light of sex distinction, would

be beyond our present scope. See Eve.
(5) Two trees ‘‘in the midst of the garden” (2 9)
are mentioned at the outset; but the tree of life,
the permitted one, seems no more to


6. The have been thought of until it was no
Fateful longer accessible (3 22); indeed, when
Venture the woman speaks to the serpent of


“the tree which is in the midst of the
garden” (8 3) she has only one tree in mind, and
that the prohibited one. The other, as it was
counted in with their daily fare and opportunity,
seems to have been put by them with those privileges
of life which are ignored or postponed; besides, the
life it symbolized was the perpetuation of the gar-
den-life they were living, such life as man would
live before his spirit was awake to the alternatives
of living—a life innocent and blissful, but without
the stimulus of spiritual reaction. And it was just
this latter that the alternative of the two trees
afforded; a reaction fateful for good or evil, needing
only the impulse that should set the human spirit,
in motion. Consider the case. If manhood were
ever to rise from a state of childhood, wherein every-
thing was done and prescribed for him, into a life
of free choice and self-moved wisdom, it is hard
to see how this could have been brought about
except by something involving inhibition and pro-
hibition; something that he could not do without
incurring a risk. This is what the “tree of the
knowledge of good and evil’ (2 17) means. The
tree by its very name was alike a test and a lure.
In a sense we may say the temptation began with
God; but it was not a temptation to evil. Sym-
bolized in the two trees, but actual in the oppor-
tunity of spiritual committal, two ways of life
stood open before him. On the one band, it was
open to him to fortify his spirit in obedience and
against the lure of perilous knowledge, thus deepen-
ing and seasoning his negative innocence into posi-
tive holiness. That such a course was feasible
was shown centuries later in the Divine Son of Man,
who in perfect loyalty of the child yet in perfect
wisdom of adultness fulfilled the primal sinless ideal
of the first Adam. On the other hand there was
the lure of the forbidden knowledge, to which the
serpent gave the false glamor of godlikeness, and
which could be had by detaching his individual
will from that of God, and incurring the experience
of self-seeking, and taking the risk. It was the
latter that was chosen; this however not in the spirit
of rebellion or temptation, but in the desire for a
good beyond what the childlike limitations of Eden
afforded (3 6). This then was the first motived
uprise of the spirit of manhood, taking the initiative
and acting for itself. So far forth, as the self-


Adam in OT
Adam in NT


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 52


assertion of the individual, it was as truly a stage
of spiritual evolution as if the man had maintained
obedience; but there was in it the rupture of his
spirit’s union with its personal Source; and the
hapless committal to self, which is rightly called
a Fall. So strangely mingled were the spiritual
elements in this primal manhood initiative. See

Faux, THE. .
(6) The Scripture does not say, or even imply,
that by this forth-putting of initiative the man
was committed to a life of sin and


6. The depravity. This was the idea of a
Fitted later time. By the nature of the
Sequel case, however, he was committed to


the fallibility and unwisdom of his
own untried nature; in other words, to the perils
of self-reliance. Naturally, too, the gulf of detach-
ment from his spiritual Support would tend to
widen as he trusted himself more exclusively. It
lay with him and his species to perfect the indi-
vidual personality in the freedom which he had
chosen. And in this the possibilities both upward
toward godlikeness and downward toward the
abysms of self were immensely enlarged. Life
must henceforth be lived on a broader and pro-
founder scale. But to this end Eden with its tender
garden nurture can no longer be its habitat, nor
can man’s existence be fitly symbolized by a tree
from which he has only to take and subsist indefi-
nitely (3 22). It must encounter hardship and
sweat and toil; it must labor to subdue a reluctant
soil to its service (8 17-19); it must return at last
to the dust from which man’s body was formed
(3 19). Yet there is vouchsafed a dim and dis-
tant presage of ultimate victory over the serpent-
power, which henceforth is to be man’s deadly
enemy (3 15). At this point of the exposition it
is that the inchoate manhood is transplanted from
the garden to the unsubdued world, to work out
its evolution under the conditions of the human
species. The pair becomes the family, with its
family interests and cares; the family becomes the
unit of social and organized life; the members
receive individual names (3 20; 5 2); and chrono-
logically measured history begins.

il. How Adam Is Recognized in the OT.—
After the story of Adam is given as far as the birth
of Cain and Abel (4 1.2) and Seth (4 25), the
“book of the generations of Adam’ begins at 6 1,
and five verses are taken up with a statistical
outline of his life, his offspring, and his 980 years of
earthly existence.

(1) Here at Gen 5 5, in the canonical books
of the OT almost all allusion to him ceases, and

nothing whatever is made of his


1. Inthe fateful relation to the sin and guilt
OT Ca- of the race. (See Apam In THE NT.)
nonical This latter idea seems to have come
Books to consciousness only when men’s sense


of sin and a broken law was more
ingrained than it seems to have been in canonical
times. In the case of the few allusions that occur,
moreover, the fact that the name “Adam’’ is
identical with the word for “man” makes the
reference more or less uncertain; one does not
know whether the patriarch or the race is meant.
In the Song of Moses (Dt 32), in the clause ver 8,
‘‘when he separated the children of men” (or
‘‘Adam’’), the reference, which is to the distribution
of races as given in Gen 10, may or may not have
Adam in mind. In like manner Zophar’s words
(Job 20 4), “Knowest thou not this of old time,
since man [or Adam] was placed upon earth?”
may or may not be recognition by name of the
first created man. Job’s words (81 33), “‘f like
Adam I have covered my _transgressions,’’ sound
rather more definite as an allusion to Adam’s hiding


himself after having taken the fruit. When
Isaiah says (Isa 43 27), ‘Thy first father sinned,”
it is uncertain whom he means; for in 61 2 he says,
“Look unto Abraham your father,’ and Ezekiel
has told his people (Ezk 16 3), ‘“The Amorite was
thy father, and thy mother was a Hittite.” The
historical consciousness of the prophets seems to
have been confined to the history of the Israelitish
race.
(2) The references in the Apocryphal books
(Sir, Tob, 2 Esd) deal with Adam’s origin, his
lordship over creation, and in the
2. Inthe latest written book with the legacy
Apocrypha of sin and misery that the race inherits
from him. The passages in Sir (182
BC) where he is mentioned are 33 10; 40 1, and
49 16. Of these the most striking, 40 1, “Great
travail is created for every man, and a heavy yoke
is upon the sons of Adam,” is hardly to be con-
strued as a reference to our heritage of his sin. In
Tob (BC 2d cent.) he is mentioned once (8 6),
“Thou madest Adam, and gavest him Eve.”
2 Esd, written supposedly some time after 70 AD,
is of a somber and desponding tone throughout; and
its references to Adam (2 Esd 3 5.10.21.26; 4 30;
6 54; 7 11.46.48) are almost all in lament over
the evil he has implanted in the race of men by his
transgression. The first reference (3 5) is rather
remarkable for its theory of Adam’s nature: ‘‘And
[thou] commandedst the dust, and it gave thee
Adam, a body without a sonl, yet it was the work-
manship of thine hands,” etc. His indictment of
Adam culminates (7 48) in the apostrophe: “O
thou Adam, what hast thou done? for though it was
thou that sinned, the evil is not fallen on thee alone,
but upon all of us that come of thee.”
JoHN FRANKLIN GENUNG


[Evirorta, Nors.—The promoters of the Encyclo-
paedia are not to be understood as endorsing all the views
set forth in Dr. Genung’s article. It was thought right,
however, that a full and adequate presentation of so
suggestive an interpretation should be given.]


ADAM IN THE NT (A8Sdép, Addm): The name
of Adam occurs nine times (in five different passages)
in the NT, though several of these are purely
incidental.

IL. Gospels.—In Lk 3 38 the ancestry of Jesus
Christ is traced up to Adam, “Adam, the son of
God,” thereby testifying to the acceptance of the
OT genealogies of Gen. This is the only place in
the Gospels in which Adam is actually named,
thongh there is an allusion to him in Mt 19 46
(=Mk 10 6-8), referring to Gen 1 27 and 2 24.

Hf. Epistles.—Adam is used by Paul as the
founder of the race and the cause of the intro-

duction of sin in order to point the
1. Rom comparison and contrast with Christ
6:12-21 as the Head of the new race and the
, cause of righteousness. The passage
is the logical center of the ep., the central point to
which everything that precedes has converged,
and out of which everything which follows will
flow. The great ideas of Sin, Death, and Judgment
are here shown to be involved in the connection of
the human race with Adam. But over against this
there is the blessed fact of union with Christ, and
in this union righteousness and life. The double
headship of mankind in Adam and Christ shows the
significance of the work of redemption for the
entire race. Mankind is ranged under two heads,
Adam and Christ. There are two men, two acts
and two results. In this teaching we have the
spiritual and theological illustration of the great
modern principle of solidarity. There is a solidarity
of evil and a solidarity of good, but the latter far
surpasses the former in the quality of the obedience
of Christ as compared with Adam, and the facts of


53 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


the work of Christ for justification and life. The
section is thus no mere episode, or illustration, but
that which gives organic life to the entire ep.
Although sin and death are ours in Adam righteous-
ness and life are ours in Christ, and these latter two
are infinitely the greater (ver 11); whatever we have
lost in Adam we have more than gained in Christ.
As all the evils of the race sprang from one man, so
all the blessings of redemption come from One Per-
son, and there is such a connection between the
Person and the race that all men can possess what
the One has done. In vs 12-19 Paul institutes a
series of comparisons and contrasts between Adam
and Christ; the two persons, the two works and the
two consequences. The fulness of the apostle’s
meaning must be carefully observed. Not only does
he teach that what we have derived from the first
Adam is met by what is derived from Christ, but
the transcendence of the work of the latter is
regarded as_almost infinite in extent. ‘The full
meaning of Paul, however, is not grasped until we
erceive that the benefits received from Christ, the
econd Adam, are in inverse ratio to the disaster
entailed by the first Adam. It is the surplusage of
this grace that in Paul’s presentation is commonly
ores (Mabie, The Divine Reason of the Cross,
The contrast instituted here between Adam and
Christ refers to death and life, but great difficulty
turns on the interpretation of the two

2. 1 Cor “alls.”’ “As in Adam all die, so also in
16:22 Christ shall all be made alive.” Dods
(Ezpositor's Bible, 366) interprets it of
Adam as the source of physical life that ends in
death, and of Christ as the source of spiritual life
that never dies. ‘‘All who are by physical deriva-
tion truly united to Adam incur the death, which
by sinning he introduced into human_ experience;
and similarly, all who by spiritual affinity are in
Christ enjoy the new life which triumphs over
death, and which he won.” So also Edwards, who
does not consider that there is any real unfairness
in interpreting the former ‘‘all’’ as more extensive
than the latter, “if we bear in mind that the con-
ditions of entrance into the one class and the other
are totally different. They, are not stated here.
But we have them in Rom 5 5-11, where the
apostle seems as if he anticipated this objection to
the analogy which he instituted between Adam and
Christ. Both alike are heads of humanity, but
they are unlike in this (as also in other things, Rom
6 15), that men are in Adam by nature, in Christ
by faith” (Corinthians, 412). Godet considers that
‘Herhaps this interpretation is really that which
corresponds best to the apostle’s view,’’ and he
shows that zdopoieisthai, “to be made alive,”’ is a
more limited idea than egeiresthai, “to be raised,”
the limitation of the subject thus naturally pro-
ceeding from the special meaning of the verb itself.
“The two pdntes (all) embrace those only to whom
each of the two powers extends.” But Godet favors
the view of Meyer and Ellicott that “all” is to be
given the same interpretation in each clause, and
that the reference is to all who are to rise, whether
for life or condemnation, and that this is to be “in
Christ”: “Christ will quicken all; all will hear His
voice and will come forth from the grave, but not all
to the true ‘resurrection of life’: see Jn 5 29” (Hili-
cott, Corinthians, 301). Godet argues that “there
is nothing to prevent the word ‘quicken,’ taken
alone, from being used to denote restoration to the
fulness of spiritual and bodily existence, with a
view either to perdition or salvation” (Corinthians,
355). There are two serious difficulties to the latter
interpretation: (1) The invariable meaning of
“in Christ” is that of spiritual union; (2) the ques-
tion whether the resurrection of the wicked really


Adam in OT
Adam in NT


finds any place in the apostle’s argument in the
entire chapter.

“The first man Adam became a living soul. The
last Adam became a life-giving spirit.” The ref-
erence to Adam is from Gen 2 7; the
reference to Christ is due to the fact of
what He had done and was doing in
His manifestation as Divine Redeemer.
Behind results the apostle proceeds to nature. Adam
was simply a living being; Christ a life-giving Being.
Thus Christ is called Adam as expressive of His
Headship of a race. In this ver He is called the
“last”? Adam, while in ver 47 the “second.” In
the former ver the apostle deals not so much with
Christ’s relation to the first Adam as to the part He
takes iu relation to humanity, and His work on its
behalf. When precisely Christ became life-giving
is a matter of difference of opinion. Rom 1 4 as-
sociates power with the resurrection as the time
when Christ was constituted Son of God for the
purpose of bestowing the force of Divine grace.
This gift of power was only made available for His
church through the Ascension and the gift of the
Holy Spirit at Pentecost. It is possible that the
word “life-giving” may also include a reference to
the resurrection of the body hereafter.

Paul uses the creation of man and woman in his
argument for the subordination of woman (Gen 2


3. 1 Cor
16:45


7-25). This is no mere Jewish reason-
4.1 Tim ing, but an inspired statement of the
2:13.14 typical meaning of the passage in Gen.


The argument is a very similar one to
that in 1 Cor 11 8.9. When the apostle states
that “Adam was not beguiled,’’ we must apparently
understand it as simply based on the text in Gen
to which he refers (Gen 8 13), in which Eve,
not Adam, says, “The serpent beguiled me.” In


‘Gal 3 16 he reasons similarly from ‘‘seed” in the


singular number, just as He 7 reasons from the
silence of Gen 14 in regard to the parentage of
Melchizedek. Pan] does not deny that Adam was
deceived, but only that he was not directly de-
ceived. His point is that Eve’s facility in yielding
warrants the rule as to women keeping silence.

“And Enoch, the seventh from Adam” (Gen 5).
Bigg says that the quotation which follows is a
combination of passages from Enoch,
though the allusion to Enoch himself
is evidently based on the story in
Gen.

HL Conclusions.—As we review the use of
“Adam” in the NT, we cannot fail to observe that
Paul assumes that Adam was a historical person-
ality, and that the record in Gen was a record of
facts, that sin and death were introduced into the
world and affected the entire race as the penalty
of the disobedience of one ancestor. Paul evidently
takes it for granted that Adam knew and was
responsible for what he was doing. Again, sin and
death are regarded as connected, that death ob-
tains its moral quality from sin. Paul clearly
believed that physical dissolution was due to sin,
and that there is some causal connection between
Adam and the human race in regard to physical
death. While the reference to death in Rom 65 as
coming through sin, is primarily to physical death,
yet physical death is the expression and sign of the
deeper idea of spiritual death; and even though
physical death was in the world before Adam it was
only in connection with sin that its moral meaning
and estimate became clear. Whether we are to
interpret, “for that all sinned,” as sinning when
Adam sinned, or sinning as the result of an inher-
ited tendency from Adam, the entire passage implies
some causal connection between him and them.
The need of redemption is thus made by the apostle
to rest on facts. We are bound to Adam by birth,


5. Jude
ver 14


Adam, Books of Hm INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 54


a


and it is open to us to become bound to Christ by
faith. If we refuse to exchange our position in
Adam for that which is offered to us in Christ we
become answerable to God; this is the ground of
moral freedom. The NT assumption of our com-
mon ancestry in Adam is true to the facts of evo-
lutionary science, and the universality of sin
predicated is equally true to the facts of human
experience. Thus redemption is grounded on the
teaching of Scripture, and confirmed by the uncon-
tradicted facts of history and experience. Whether,
-therefore, the references to Adam in the NT are
purely incidental, or elaborated in theological
discussion, everything is evidently based on the
record in Gen. W. H. Grirrira THomas


ADAM, BOOKS OF: Books pretending to give
the life and deeds of Adam and other OT worthies
existed in abundance among the Jews and the early
Christians. The Talm speaks of a Book of Adam,
which is now lost, but which probably furnished
some of the material which appears in early Chris-
tian writings. The Vita Adami was tr’ from the
Ethiopic by Dillmann (1853), and into English by
Malan (The Book of Adam and Eve, London, 1882).
The Testament of Adam is a portion of the Vita
Adami (published by Renan in 1853) and so prob-
ably is the Diathéké tén Prétopldstén (Fabricius, II,
83). See ApocaLypric LITERATURE; APOCRYPHA.

M. O. Evans

ADAM, CITY OF (O°%, 'ddhim, “red” or
BDB “made’’): A city in the middle of the Jordan
valley near ZARETHAN (Josh 3 16), which see. The
name probably survives at the Damich Ford, near
the mouth of the Jabbok twenty miles above
Jericho. An Arabian historian asserts that about
1265 AD the Jordan was here blocked by a land
slide. The inner gorge of the Jordan is here narrow
with high banks which would facilitate such an
obstruction as permitted the waters to “pile up”
above to Adam and run out below, permitting
‘Joshua’s host to cross on dry land (SWP, II, 15;
Wright, SCOTH, 130-34).

Grorce FREDERICK WricutT

ADAMABH, ad’a-maé (NAIN, 'ddhamah; 'ABapl,
Adami): A fortified city in the territory of Naph-
tali, named between Chinnereth and Ramah (Josh
19 36). It is probably identical with the modern
?Admah, a ruin on the plateau about 10 miles N. of
Betsain.

ADAMANT, ad’a-mant ("2W, shamir [Ezk 3
9; Zee T 12]): In the passages cited and in Jer
17 1, where it is rendered “diamond,” the word
shamir evidently refers to a hard stone. The word
adamant (“unconquerable”’) is used in the early
Gr writers for a hard metal, perhaps steel, later for
a metal like gold and later for the diamond. The
Heb shamir, the Gr adamas (from which word
diamond as well as adamant is derived) and the
Eng. adamant occur regularly in fig. expressions.
All three are equally indefinite. Adamant may
therefore be considered a good tr for shdmir,
though the LXX does not use adamas in the pas-
sages cited. There is a possible etymological
identification of shamir with the Gr smyris (sméris
or smiris), emery, a granular form of corundum
well known to the ancients and used by them for
polishing and engraving precious stones. Corun-
dum in all its forms, including the sapphire and
ruby, is in the scale of hardness next to the diamond.
In EV Isa 6 6; 7 23-25; 918; 1017: 27 4;
32 13, shdmir is tr‘ brier. See also Stones, Prectovs.

ALFRED Evy Day

ADAMI, ad’a-mi; a-da’mi: Mentioned in AV as a

separate name, where RV has ApAMI-NEKEB, which


see (Josh 19 33).


- Demetrius (1 Macc 7 40 ff).


ADAMI-NEKEB, ad’a-mi né’keb (QP30 "OTN,
*ddhami ha-nekebh, ‘the ground of the piercing,”
that is of the pass, or defile): A place mentioned in
indicating the border of Naphtali (Josh 19 33).
In AV Adami and Nekeb are given as separate
names, and it is an open question which view of the
matter is correct. Most of the Gr texts give the
names as two. The Vulg has “Adami quae est
Neceb.” The Jerusalem Talm gives two names,
though instead of Hannekeb or Nekeb it has
Styadathah (Meg 1 1, or Neubauer’s Geog du Talm,
225). In the list’ of places conquered by Thothmes
III of Egypt occurs the name NKBU (Tomkins,
Rec of Past, new series, V, 47), which seems to be
the same with Nekeb.

The list of names for the border of Naphtali
(Josh 19 33.34) has no name in common with the
list of cities (vs 35-38) unless Adami and Adamah
are the same. The PE Survey maps locate Ada-
mah at Damieh, about seven miles northwest of the
exit of the Jordan from the Lake of Galilee, and
Adami at Khurbet Adamah, five or six miles south
of the exit. Conder, Tomkins and others place
Adami at Damieh, and identify Nekeb by its
Talmudic name in the neighboring ruin Setyddeh.
Conder says (art. ““Nekeb,’”’ HDB) that the “pass”
implied in the name Nekeb “‘is probably one leading
from the eastern precipices near Tiberias.”’

Wiis J. BEECHER

ADAN, a’dan.


See ADDAN.

ADAR, a’dar (138, *ddhdr, meaning uncertain):
The Bab name of the twelfth month of the year.
Used in the Bible only in Ezr 6 15 and eight times
in Est. At first the author in Est defines Adar as
the twelfth month, but afterward omits the nu-
meral. In order to maintain the relation of the year
to the seasons it was customary to add a second
aoe as often as was needed, as an intercalary
month,


ADAR, 4a’dar: In AV (Josh 15 3) for Appar,
which see.


ADARSA, a-dir’sa. See Apasa.


ADASA, ad’a-sa ('A8aca, Adasd; AV Adarsa):
A town less than four miles from Beth-horon (30
furlongs Ant, XII, x, 5; 1 Macc 7 40) and a day’s
journey from Gazara (1 Macc 7 45), where Judas
Maccabee defeated and killed Nicanor, a general of
The ruin of Adaseh
near Gibeon (SWP, IIL, XVID.


ADBEEL, ad’bé-el (RDI, ’adhb’'él, “God's
discipline,” possibly): The third of the twelve sons
of Ishmael (Gen 25 13; 1 Ch 1 29). The name
appears in the Assyr records as that of a north


Arabian tribe residing somewhere 8.W. of the
Dead Sea.


ADD:

(1) émbSiardcoropat, epidiatdssomai, “to add to,”
“to arrange in addition”: Found only in Gal 3 15,
which may thus be paraphrased: “To take a familiar
illustration: even a man’s will, when ratified, no
third remy may annul or supplement” (Dummelow,
in loc.).

(2) émurlOnp., epitithémi, “to put upon,” “If
any man shall add unto them, God shall add
unto him the pibeuce (Rev 22 18). The book is
not to be falsified by addition or excision (see
Book) by the interpolation of unauthorized doc-
trines or the neglect of essential ones (cf Dt 4 2;
12 32). See also Imparr; Suppry.

M. 0. Evans

ADDAN, ad’an (]J8, ‘addin; in Neh JUIN,
‘addon; connected in some way with the name of


55 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Adam, Books of
Adina


the god Addu): A name mentioned in the list of the
returning exiles (Ezr 2 59, duplicated in Neh 7 61).
It is one of several names of Bab localities from
which came men who were unable to declare their
genealogy as Israelites.


ADDAR, ad’aér (WJ, ’adddr, “glorious.”
Arp):

(1) A grandson of Benjamin, sometimes counted
as one of his sons (1 Ch 8 3).

(2) Atown on the southern border of Judah (Josh
a 3 AV “Adar”). The same as Hazar-addar (Nu


ADDER, ad’ér (A°W32, ‘akhshibh [Ps 140 3];
Vf, pethen [Ps 68 4]; "WDE, ¢giph‘ont [Prov
23 32]; {D°DW, shephiphon [Gen 49 17]; DY,
cephas [AVm; Isa 14 29]): This word is used for
several Heb originals. In each case a poisonous
serpent is clearly indicated by the context. It is


See


ee


impossible to tell in any case just what species is
meant, but it must be remembered that_the Eng.
word adder is used very ambiguously. It is from
the Anglo-Saxon nedre, a snake or serpent, and
is the common Eng. name for Vipera berus, L, the
common viper, which is found throughout Europe
and northern Asia, though not in Bible lands; but
the word adder is also used for various snakes,
both poisonous and non-poisonous, found in differ-
ent parts of the world. In America, for instance,
both the poisonous moccasin (Ancistredon) and the
harmless hog-nosed snakes (Heterodon) are called
adders. See SERPENT. Aurrep Ezy Day


ADDI, ad’i (A88t, Addi; »ASSet, Addet): An
ancestor of Joseph, the husband of Mary, mother of
Jesus; fourth from Zerubbabel in the ascending
genealogical series (Lk 3 28).


ADDICT, a-dikt’: Found only in AV of 1 Cor 16
15, for Gr réccw, téssd. The house of Stephanus is
said to be “‘addicted to the ministry of the saints,”
i.e. they have so “arranged” their affairs as to make
of this service a prime object; RV “set themselves
to minister.’”’


ADDO, ad’s (A, ’A88é, Addé; B, HESSelv,
Eddein)=Iddo (Ezr 6 1; 6 14): The father (Zec
1 1.7 grandfather) of Zechariah the prophet (1 Esd
6 1).

ADDON, ad’on.

ADDUS, ad’us (A85o%s, Addotis): The descend-
ants of A. (sons of Solomon’s servants) returned


with Zerubbabel to Jerusalem (1 Esd 5 34). Omit-
ted in Ezr 2 and Neh 7.


See ADDAN.


ADER, a’dér: Used in 1 Ch 8 15 AV for Enz,
which see.


ADIABENE, 4-di-a-bé’né (?AS&aBynvi, Adiabéné):
A state lying on the east of the Tigris, on the
greater and lesser rivers Zab, in the territory of
ancient Assyria. For the half-century terminating
with the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, Adia-
bene is especially interesting by reason of the
careers of its king, Izates, and his mother Helena,
who became Jews. They had their part in the
Jewish-Roman wars, and in various ways were
typical of the existing situation. (See Ant, XX,
2-5; BJ, I, xvi, 4; xix.2; V,iv, 2; viol; 14.5; VI,
vi, 4.) Somewhat later Adiabene was absorbed
into the Roman Empire and became one of the six
provinces which formed the larger province of
Assyria, though Pliny and Ammianus sometimes
call the large province by the name Adiabene.

Wits J. BEECHER

ADIDA, ad’i-da (??A& 84, Adidé): A town of the
Benjamin tribe near Lod and Ono located upon a
hill facing the ‘plain country” of Judaea, rebuilt
and fortified by Simon Maccabee (1 Macc 12 38),
who later encamped here to meet the army of Try-
phon (1 Mace 13 18; Anfé, XIII, vi, 5). It was
also here that Aretas, king of Arabia, met Alexan-
der Janneus in battle and defeated him (Ant, XIII,
xv, 2). Perhaps the El-Haditheh of today located
open three miles east of Lydda or Lod. See

ADID.


ADIEL, ad’i-el (ON"OY, ‘ddhi’el, “ornament of
God”):

(1) One of the “princes” of the tribe of Simeon,
who, in the days of Hezekiah, smote the aborigines
of Gedor and captured the valley (1 Ch 4 36 ff).

(2) Father of Maasai, one of the priests who
dwelt in Jerusalem after the return from the Exile
(1 Ch 9 12).

(3) Father of Azmaveth who was over David’s
treasures (1 Ch 27 25).


ADIN, 2’din (J772, ‘adhin, “adorned”): The
name of a family, ‘‘thesons of Adin” (Ezr 2 15; 8 6;
Neh 7 20; 10 16; 1 Esd 5 14; 8 32), mentioned
among the returning exiles. The list in Ezr 2
is placed in the midst of the narrative concerning
Zerubbabel, but its title and its contents show that
it also includes the later Jewish immigrants into
Pal. The list in Neh 7 is a duplicate of that in
Ezr, but with variations; most of the variations
are naturally accounted for by supposing that one
copy was made later than the other and was
brought up to date. In Ezr and 1 Esd the number
of the sons of Adin is said to be 454; in Neh it is
655. The 50 males, led by Ebed the son of Jona-
than, who came with Ezr, may or may not have
been included in the numbers just mentioned.
Among the names of those who sealed the cove-
nant along with Neh are 44 that are placed_under
the caption “the chiefs of the people” (Neh 10
14-26), and nearly half of these are the family
names of the list in Ezr 2 and Neh 7. It is nat-
ural to infer that in these cases a family sealed the
covenant collectively through some representative.
In that case the Adin here mentioned is the same
that is mentioned in the other places. See also


AnINU. Wiuuuis J. Beecuer
ADINA, ad’i-na, a-di’na (NI, ‘ddhind’,
“adorned”): “Adina the son of Shiza the Reu-


benite, a chief of the Reubenites, and thirty with
him” (1 Ch 11 42). This is in that part of the
list of David’s mighty men in which the Chronicler
supplements the list given in 2 8.


Adino
Adonijah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 56


ADINO, ad’i-no, a-di’no (2, ‘ddhind, “his
adorned one’’): The senior of David’s “mighty
men.” ‘‘Josheb-basshebeth a Tahchemonite, chief
of the captains; the same was Adino the Eznite,
against eight hundred slain at one time’ (28
23 8). This very exact rendering makes it evident
even to an English reader that the text is imper-
fect. Ginsburg offers a corrected form taken
substantially from the parallel passage in 1 Ch 11
11: “Jashobeam a son of a Hachmonite, chief of
the captains; he lifted up his spear.’ This is
plausible, and is very generally accepted, and elimi-
nates the names Adino and Eznite, which do not
occur elsewhere in the Bible. Some of the facts
are against this. The Sept has the names Adino
and Eznite. The Lat finds no proper names in the
passage, hut so translates the words as to presup-
pose the Heb text as we have it. It may be a case
for suspended judgment.

The texts concerning David’s mighty men are
fragmentary both in § and in Ch. If they were
more complete they would perhaps make it clear
that the three seniors were comrades of David at
Pas-dammim, Ephes-dammim (1 Ch 11 13; 18
17 1); and that we have in them additional details
concerning that battle. The record says that on
the death of Goliath the Philistines fled and the
Israelites pursued (1 8 17 52 ff), but it is not
improbable that during the retreat portions of the
Phili force rallied, so that there was strenuous
fighting. Wiis J. BrecHer


ADINQU, ad’i-ni, ADIN (A8wvot, Adinoti, 1 Esd
5 14; ’A8ly, Adin, 1 Esd 8 32): Cf Adin (Ezr 2
15; 8 6; Neh 7 20; 10 16). The descendants of
A. (leaders of the nation) returned with their
families to Jerus: one party being with Zerubbabel
(454 members 1 Esd 5 14), a second party with
Ezra (250 members 1 Esd 8 32).


ADINUS, ad’i-nus.


ADITHAIM, ad-i-tha‘im (DIDI, ‘adhithayim
“double ornament, passage, or prey’): A city in
“the lowland” (Shephelah, not as AV “valley”) of
Judah (Josh 15 36). Site unknown, but possibly
same as Apipa (q.v.).


ADJURATION, ad-ji-ra’shun: The act of re-
quiring or taking a solemn oath. In a time of
military peril Saul adjured the people (DN, alah,
“to take oath’) and they took oath by saying
“Amen” (1 S 14 24). When Joshua pronounced
a ban on Jericho (Josh 6 26) he completed it with
an oath (V2 , shabha‘, “to cause to swear’). Often
used in the sense of a solemn charge without the
administration of anoath (1 K 22 16; 2 Ch 18 15;
Cant 2 7; 5 8.9; 1 Thess 5 27). With reference
to the withholding of testimony, see Lev 5 1 and
Prov 29 24. The high priest sought to put Jesus
under oath (éfopxl{w, exorkiz6, “to force to an
oath,” Mt 26 63). Adjure also means to solemnly
implore (épxifw, horktzd) as when the man with an
unclean spirit appealed to Jesus: “I adjure thee by
God, torment me not” (Mk 6 7); or seven sons of
Sceva, exorcists, sought in the name of Jesus to expel
demons (Acts 19 18).

(1) The exacting of an oath has, from time imme-
morial, been a customary procedure in conferring
civil and ecclesiastical office and in taking legal
testimony. Though often allowed to become
painfully trivial and a travesty on its inherent
solemnity, the taking of an official oath or the
swearing of Witnesses is still considered essential
to the moral integrity of government, secular or
spiritual. False swearing, under solemn oath, con-


See Japinvus (Apoc).


stitutes the guilt and heinousness of perjury. The
universality of oath-taking is humanity’s tribute,
whether pagan or Christian, to the sacredness of
truth.

(2) Civilized nations administer oaths under three
heads: political, ecclesiastical, legal. The sov-
ereign of England receives the crown only as he or
she responds affirmatively to the solemn adjuration
of the archbishop or bishop: ‘Will you solemnly
promise and swear to govern,”’ etc, closing with the
affirmation, “So help me God.” A fundamental
conviction of civilized nations was expressed by
Lycurgus: ‘‘An oath is the bond that keeps the state
together.”” It is the most solemn appeal to the in-
violability of the human conscience, and the sacred-
ness of a vow as witnessed both by God and men.
See also OaTu. Dwieut M. Pratr


ADLAIL, ad'li-i, ad’ii (279, ‘adhlay; LXX
"ASM, Adli and ’ASat, Adai, “lax, weary”): The
father of Shaphat, an overseer of David’s herds in
the lowlands (1 Ch 27 29).


ADMAH, ad’mé (OS , ’adhmah): From a root
signifying red; one of the Cities of the Plain (Cic-
car) (Gen 10 19; 14 2.8; Dt 29 23; Hos 11 8)
upon which Abraham and Lot looked from the
heights of Bethel; destroyed with Sodom and
Gomorrah. Conder tentatively identifies it with
the City of Adam referred to in Josh 3 16, and
thinks that perhaps the name may be preserved
in that of Damieh Ford, near the mouth of the
river Jabbok; but that point could not have been
in view from Bethel. See VaLz of Sippim.


ADMATHA, ‘ad’ma-tha, ad-ma’tha (NO,
’adhmatha’): One of ‘the seven princes of Persia
and Media, who saw the king’s face, and sat first
in the kingdom” (Est 1 14); cf 2 K 25 19; Ear
714. The LXX gives only three names.


ADMIN, ad’min. See ARN.


ADMINISTER, ad-min’is-tér (Staxovéw, dia-
koné6), ADMINISTRATION, ad-min-is-tra’shun
(Stakovla, diakonia): Terms used in AV in
1 Cor 12 5; 2 Cor 8 19.20; 2 Cor 9 12 respec-
tively, and replaced in RV by “minister” and
“ministration.” The root idea of both words is
“service,” hence to supply, or conduct or attend
to anything; the performance of official duty, the
conduct of affairs, the various forms of spiritual
or social service. ‘Minister,’ used either of an
act or of an office, is the term that best represents
the apostolic thought and ideal.

Dwicut M. Prarr

ADMIRATION, ad-mi-ra’shun (@atpa, thaima,
“a marvel” or “wonder”; Savpdto, thaumdzd, “to
wonder”): A term thrice used in AV in the NT,
to express a wonder that includes approval, high
esteem; replaced in RV by three renderings better
suited to convey the various kinds of surprise,
wonder, admiration, expressed by this fertile
word: viz. in 2 Thess 1 10, “to be admired,”
reads in RV ‘‘to be marvelled at”; in Jude ver 16
“having men’s persons in admiration” is rendered
“showing respect of persons”; in Rev 17 6 “won-
dered with great admiration” is replaced by “with a
great wonder.” The Gr original is used frequently
in the NT, esp. in the Gospels, to express marvel
and wonder at the supernatural works of Jesus.

Dwicut M. Prarr

ADNA, ad’na (NI9Y, ‘adhna’, “pleasure”; Al-
Souvé, Aidainé):

(1) An Israelite in Ezra’s time who, having mar-
ried a foreign wife, divorced her. He belonged to
Pahath-moab (Ezr 10 30).


57 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Adino
Adonijah


(2) A priest of the family of Harum, during the
ros ie ana of Joiakim son of Jethua (Neh 12
2-15).


ADNAH, ad’ni (N22, ‘adhnah, “pleasure”;
'ESvé, Ednd):

(1) A warrior of the tribe of Manasseh, who
deserted Saul and joined David’s forces at Ziklag
(1 Ch 12 20.21).

(2) An officer of high rank, perhaps the command-
er-in-chief of Jehoshaphat’s army (2 Ch 17 14).
Here the spelling in Heb is MY , ‘adhnah.


ADO, a-doo’: Found only in Mk 6 39 AV:
“Why make ye this ado and weep?” Here ‘make
ado” is used to translate the Gr verb opuBéoua:,
thorubéomai (cf Mt 9 23 AV, where it is like-
wise rendered “making a noise”). ‘‘Ado” as a
subst. is OE for “trouble” or ‘‘fuss,” used only
in the sing.; and in the early Eng. VSS it com-
bined well with the verb ‘“‘make,”’ as here, to trans-
late the Gr word rendered elsewhere “causing an
uproar,” or “tumult,” “making a noise,” etc
(see Acts 17 5; 20 10). Cf Shakespeare, Romeo
and Juliet, III, 4, “We'll keep no great ado;—a
friend or two.” Gro. B. Hacer


ADONAI, a-do’ni, ad-o-na/i OJIN, ’ddhindy):
A Divine name, tr’ ‘‘Lord,” and -signifying, from
its derivation, “sovereignty.” Its vowels are
found in the MT with the unpronounceable tetra-
grammaton 177; and when the Heb reader came
to these letters, he always substituted in pronun-
ciation the word ‘’ddhindy.”’ Its vowels combined
with the tetragrammaton form the word “Jehovah.”
See Gop, Names or.


ADONIBEZEK, a-d6-ni-bé’zek = (PTIDIAN,
'ddhonibhezek, “lord of Bezek”): Lord of a town,
Bezek, in southern Palestine, whom the tribes of
Judah and Simeon overthrew. Adonibezek fled
when his men were defeated, but was captured,
and was punished for his cruelty in cutting off the
thumbs and great toes of seventy kings by a similar
mutilation. Being brought to Jerusalem, he died
there (Jgs 1 5-7). This not to be confused with
Adonizedek, as inthe LXX. This is quite another
name.


ADONIJAH, ad-o-ni/ja GMTIIN or TABI,
ddhoniyaha or ddhoniyah, ‘my lord is Jehovah”):

(1) The son of David and Haggith, the fourth of
David’s sons, born in Hebron after David became
king of Judah, principally known for his attempt
to become king instead of Solomon (2.8 3 4;
1 Ch 32; 1K 1 and 2). The record gives no
details concerning Chileab, the son of David and
Abigail. Leaving him out, Adonijah was the oldest
living son of David, after the death of Amnon and
Absalom.

In treating the record it has been needlessly
obscured by neglecting or distorting the time data.
It says that the rebellion of Absalom broke out
‘at an end of forty years’ (2 S 16 7). The
natural meaning is not forty years after the last-
mentioned preceding date, but at the close of the
fortieth calendar year of the reign of David. As
David reigned 404 years (2S 5 4.5), the close of
his fortieth calendar year was the beginning of his
last year. That the date intended was at the be-
ginning of a vernal year is confirmed by the ref-
erences to the season (2 S 17 19.28). Instead of
giving this number Jos says that 4 years had
elapsed since the last preceding date, which is very
likely correct.

Many considerations show that the outbreak
cannot have occurred much earlier than the fortieth


year of David; for Amnon and Absalom were born
after David’s reign began, and were men with
establishments of their own before Amnon’s offence
against Tamar, and after that the record, if we
accept the numeral of Jos, accounts for 2 plus
3 plus 2 plus 4, that is, for 11 years (2 8 13 23.38;
14 28; Ant, VII, ix,1). In the year following
David’s fortieth year there was ample room for the
rebellions of Absalom and of Sheba, the iliness of
David, the attempt of Adonijah, and the beginning
of the reign of Solomon. Ali things confirm the
number forty as giving the date of the outbreak.
The common assumption that the forty is to be
reduced to four, on the basis of the number in
Jos, is contrary to the evidence.

On this view of the chronology all the events
fall into line. David’s idea of making Solomon
king was connected with his temple-building idea.
This is implied in K, and presented somewhat in
full in Ch. The preparations described in Ch
(1 Ch 22-29) seem to have culminated in David’s
fortieth year (1 Ch 26 31). David’s policy was
not altogether popular with the nation. His
assembly (1 Ch 28 1) is mostly made up of
sarim and other appointed officials, the hereditary
Israelitish “princes” and ‘elders’ being con-
spicuous by their absence. The outbreak under
Absalom was mainly a matter of skilful manipu-
lation; the hearts of the people were really with
David. And yet the party of Absalom was dis-
tinctly a legitimist party. It believed in the
succession of the eldest son, and it objected to
many things in the temple-building policy. Joab
and Abiathar and others sympathized with this
party, but they remained with David out of per-
sonal loyalty to him.

The Absalom campaign began early in the calen-
dar year. There is no reason to think that it lasted
more than a few weeks. Later in the year a few
weeks are enough time to allow for the campaign
against Sheba. Joab must have been more or less
alienated from David by David’s appointment of
Amasa to supersede him. Then came David’s
serious illness. Abishag was brought in, not to
“attend upon David during his declining years,”
but to put her vitality at his disposal during a few
weeks. Joab and Abiathar did not believe that
David would ever do business again. Their per-
sonal loyalty to him no longer restrained them from
following their own ideas, even though these were
contrary to his wishes.

The narrative does not represent that Nathan
and Bathsheba influenced David to interfere in
behalf of Solomon; it represents that they suc-
ceeded in arousing him from his torpor, so that he
carried out his own wishes and intentions. Fer-
haps resting in bed had done something for him.
The treatment by Abishag had not been unsuccess-
ful. And now a supreme appeal to his mind proved
sufficient to arouse him. He became himself again,
and acted with his usual vigor and wisdom.

Adonijah is described as a handsome and showy
man, but his conduct does not give us a high opinion
of his capabilities. He had no real command of
the respect of the guests who shouted ‘Live King
Adonijah.” When they heard that Solomon had
been crowned, they ‘were afraid, and rose up, and
went every man his way.” Adonijah made his
submission, but afterward attempted to engage in
intrigues, and was put to death.

(2) One of the Levites sent out by Jehoshaphat,
in his third year, with the Book of the Law, to give
instruction in Judah (2 Ch 17 8). :

(3) One of the names given, under the heading
“the chiefs of the people,” of those who sealed the
covenant along with Nehemiah (Neh 10 16).

Wiis J. BEECHER


Adonikam
Adoption


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD


BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


ADONIKAM, ad-é-ni’kam (OPN , ddhonikam,
“my lord has risen up’): The name of a family
of the returning exiles (Hzr 2 13; Neh 7 18).
“The sons of Adonikam,’? men and women and
children, numbered 666 according to the list as given
in Ezr, but 667 according to the copy in Neh.
Hither included among these or in addition to them
was the contingent that came with Ear, ‘‘Eliphalet,
Jeuel, and Shemaiah, and with them 60 males”
(Ezr 8 18).


ADONIRAM, ad-6-ni'ram (BY ISN, ’adhdniram,
“my lord is exalted”): An official of Solomon
(1 K 46; 6 14). Near the close of the reign of
David, and.at the opening of the reign of Reho-
boam, the same office was held by Adoram (2 §
20 24; 11K 1218). The name Adoram seems
to be a contraction of Adoniram, and doubiless
the same person held the office in all the three
reigns. The name also appears as Hadoram
(2 Ch 10 18). In AV and RV the office is vari-
antly described as ‘‘over the tribute,” which is
misleading, and “over the levy,” which is correct,
though obscure. In ARV it is uniformly ‘over the
men subject to taskwork.” Adoniram was at the
head of the department of forced labor for the
government. The record is to the effect that
peoples conquered by Israel, excepting the Canaan-
ites, were to be spared, subject to the obligation to
forced labor on the public works (Dt 20 11);
that this law was actually extended to the Canaan-
ites (Josh 16 10; 17 13; Jgs 1 28 ff); that David,
in his preparations for the temple, organized and
handed over to Solomon a service of forced labor
(1 Ch 22 2.15, etc); that under Solomon this
service was elaborately maintained (1 K 6 13 ff;
9 15 ff; 2 Ch 87 ff). It was not for the temple
only, but for all Solomon’s numerous building
enterprises. In theory men of Israelitish blood
were free from this burden, but practically they
found it a burden and a grievance. At the acces-
sion of Rehoboam they protested against it (1 K
12; 2 Ch 10). Nothing in the account is more
indicative of Rehoboam’s utter lack of good judg-
ment than his sending his veteran superintendent
of the forced labor department to confer with the
people. The murder of Adoniram, and the ig-
nominious flight of Rehoboam, were natural conse-
quences. Witus J. BrecHER


ADONIS, a-dd’nis: A name for the Bab god
Tammuz, which see. The word occurs only in
ERVm of Isa 17 10, where for ‘pleasant plants”
is read ‘‘plantings of Adonis.” The ARV rightly
omits this marginal suggestion.


ADONI-ZEDEK, a-dé-ni-zé’dek (PIZ"JTN, *ddho-
nicgedhek, “lord of righteousness”): King of Jerus
at the time of the conquest of Canaan (Josh 10 1).
When he heard of the fall of Ai and the submission
of the Gibeonites, he entered into a league with
four other kings to resist Joshua and Israel, and
to punish Gibeon (Josh 10 3.4), but was over-
thrown by Joshua in a memorable battle (vs 12-14).
Adoni-zedek and his four allies were shut up in a
cave, while the battle lasted, and afterward were
taken out by Joshua’s order, put to death and
hanged on trees (Josh 10 22-27). It is noticeable
that the name is almost the equivalent of Mel-
chizedek, pip. , malktcedhek, “king of righteous-
ness,” who was ruler of Jerus in the time of Abra-
ham. Epwarp Mack


ADOPTION, a-dop’shun (vio@erla, huiothesia,
“placing as a son”):
I. Tus Generar Lacan Ipza
1. In the OT


2. Greek
3. Roman


II. Pavu’s Docrrine


1. In Gal as Liberty

2. In Rom as Deliverance from Debt
Tre Caristian ExppRiIENCE

1. In Relation to Justification

2. In Relation to Sanctification

3. In Relation to Regeneration

As Gon's Act

1. Divine Fatherhood

2. Its Cosmic Range

This term appears first in NT, and only in
the epp. of Paul (Gal 4 5; Rom 8 15.23; 9 4;
Eph 1 5) who may have coined it out of a familiar
Gr phrase of identical meaning. It indicated
generally the legal process by which a man might
bring into his family, and endow with the status
and privileges of a son, one who was not by nature
his son or of his kindred.

Ll. The General Legal Idea.—The custom pre-
vailed among Greeks, Romans and other ancient
peoples, but it does not appear in Jewish law.

Three cases of adoption are mentioned: of Moses
(Ex 2 10), Genubath (1 K 11 20) and Esther

(Est 2 7.15), but it is remarkable
1. Inthe OT that they all occur outside of Pal—

in Egypt and Persia, where the prac-
tice of adoption prevailed. Likewise the idea
appears in the NT only in the epistles of Paul,
which were addressed to churches outside Pal.
The motive and initiative of adoption always lay
with the adoptive father, who thus supplied his
lack of natural offspring and satisfied the claims of
affection and religion, and the desire to exercise
paternal authority or to perpetuate his family.
The process and conditions of adoption varied with
different peoples. Among oriental nations it was
extended to slaves (as Moses) who thereby gained
their freedom, but in Greece and Rome it was,
with rare exceptions, limited to citizens.

In Greece a man might during his lifetime, or by
will, to take effect after his death, adopt any male

citizen into the privileges of his son,
2. Greek but with the invariable condition that
the adopted son accepted the legal
obligations and religious duties of a real son.

In Rome the unique nature of paternal authority
(patria potestas), by which a son was held in his
father’s power, almost as a slave was
owned by his master, gave a peculiar
character to the process of adoption.
For the adoption of a person free from paternal
authority (sui juris), the process and effect were
practically the same in Rome as in Greece (adro-
gatio). In a more specific sense, adoption proper
(adoptio) was the process by which a person’ was
transferred from his natural father’s power into
that of his adoptive father, and it consisted in a
fictitious sale of the son, and his surrender by the
natural to the adoptive father.

Hf, Paul’s Doctrine.—As a Rom citizen the
apostle would naturally know of the Rom custom,
but in the cosmopolitan city of Tarsus, and again
on his travels, he would become equally familiar
with the corresponding customs of other nations.
He employed the idea metaphorically much in the
manner of Christ’s parables, and, as in their case,
there is danger of pressing the analogy too far in
its details. It is not clear that he had any specific
form of adoption in mind when illustrating his
teaching by the general idea. Under this figure
he teaches that God, by the manifestation of His
grace in Christ, brings men into the relation of sons
to Himself, and communicates to them the experi-
ence of sonship.

In Gal Paul emphasizes especially the liberty
enjoyed by those who live by faith, in contrast
to the bondage under which men are held, who
guide their lives by legal ceremonies and ordi-
nances, as the Galatians were prone to do (6 1).


Tie


Iv.


3. Roman


59 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Adonikam
Adoption


The coutrast between law and faith is first set
forth on the field of history, as a contrast between
both the pre-Christian and the Chris-
1. In Gal tian economies (3 23.24), although in
as Liberty another passage he carries the idea of
adoption back into the covenant rela-
tion of God with Israel (Rom 9 4). But here
the historical antithesis is reproduced in the con-
trast between men who now choose to live under
law and those who live by faith. Three figures
seem to commingle in the description of man’s
condition under legal bondage—that of a slave,
that of a minor under guardians appointed by his
father’s will, and that of a Rom son under the
patria potestas (Gal 4 1-3). The process of lib-
eration is first of all one of redemption or buying
out (Gr exagordséi) (4 5). This term in itself
applies equally well to the slave who is redeemed
from bondage, and the Rom son whose adoptive
father buys him out of the authority of his natural
father. But in the latter case the condition of the
son is not materially altered by the process: he
only exchanges one paternal authority for another.
If Paul for a moment thought of the process in
terms of ordinary Rom adoption, the resulting
condition of the son he conceives in terms of the
more free and gracious Greek or Jewish family life.
Or he may have thonght of the rarer case of adop-
tion from conditions of slavery into the status of
sonship. The redemption is only a precondition
of adoption, which follows upon faith, and_ is
accompanied by the sending of “‘the Spirit of his
Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father,” and
then all bondage is done away (4 5-7).
In Rom (8 12-17) the idea of obligation or debt
is conpled with that of liberty. Man is thought
of as at one time under the authority
2.In Rom and power of the flesh (8 5), but when
as Deliver- the Spirit of Christ comes to dwell
ance from in him, he is no longer a debtor to the
Debt flesh bunt to the Spirit (8 12.13), and
debt or obligation to the Spirit is
itself liberty. As in Gal, man thus passes from a
state of bondage into a state of sonship which is
also a state of liberty. ‘For as many as are led
by the Spirit of God, these [and these only] are
sons of God” (8 14). The spirit of adoption or
sonship stands in diametrical opposition to the
spirit of bondage (8 15). And the Spirit to which
we are debtors and by which we are led, at once
awakens and confirms the experience of sonship
within us (8 16). In both places, Paul conveys
under this figure, the idea of man as pase from a
state of alienation from God and of bondage under
law and sin, into that relation with God of mutual
confidence and Jove, of unity of thought and will,
which should characterize the ideal family, and in
which all restraint, compulsion and fear have passed


away.

TL The Christian Experience.—As a fact_of
Christian experience, the adoption is the recognition
and affirmation by man of his sonship toward God.
Tt follows upon faith in Christ, by which man be-
comes so united with Christ that his filial spirit
enters into him, and takes possession of his con-
sciousness, so that he knows and greets God as
Christ does (cf Mk 14 36). :

It is an aspect of the same experience that Paul
describes elsewhere, under another legal metaphor,

as justification by faith. According
1. In Rela- to the latter, God declares the sinner
tion to Jus- righteous and treats him as such,
tification admits him to the experience of for-

iveness, reconciliation and _ peace
(Rom 5 1). In all this the relation of father and
son is undoubtedly involved, but in adoption it is
emphatically expressed. It is not only that the


prodigal son is welcomed home, glad to confess
that he is not worthy to be called a son, and willing
to be made as one of the hired servants, but he is
embraced and restored to be a son as before. The
point of each metaphor is, that justification is the
act of a merciful judge setting the prisoner free,
but adoption is the act of a generous father, taking
a son to his bosom and endowing him with liberty,
favor and a heritage.
Besides, justification is the beginning of a proc-
ess which needs for its completion a progressive
course of sanctification by the aid of
2. In Rela- the Holy Spirit, but adoption is
tion to Sanc- coextensive with sanctification. The
tification sons of God are those Jed by the
Spirit of God (Rom 8 14); and the
same spirit of God gives the experience of sonship.
Sanctification describes the process of general cleans-
ing and growth as an abstract process, but adoption
includes it as a concrete relation to God, as loyalty,
obedience, and fellowship with an ever-loving
Father.
Some have identified adoption with regeneration,
and therefore many Fathers and Roman Catholic
j theologians have identified it with


3. In Rela- baptismal regeneration, thereby ex-
tion to cluding the essential fact of con-
Regenera- scious sonship. The new birth and
tion adoption are certainly aspects of the


same totality of experience, but they
belong to different systems of thought, and to
identify them is to invite confusion. The new
birth defines especially the origin and moral quality
of the Christian experience as an abstract fact,
but adoption expresses a concrete relation of man
to God. Nor does Paul here raise the question of
man’s natural and original condition. It is pressing
the analogy too far to infer from this doctrine of
adoption that man is by nature not God’s son.
It would contradict Panl’s teaching elsewhere
(e.g. Acts 17 28), and he should not be convicted
of inconsistency on the application of a metaphor.
He conceives man outside Christ as morally an
alien and a stranger from God, and the change
wrought by faith in Christ makes him morally a
son and conscious of his sonship; but naturally he
is always a potential son because God is always a
real father.

IV. As God’s Act.—Adoption as God’s act is an
eternal process of His gracious love, for He “‘fore-
ordained us unto adoption as sons through Jesus
Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure
of his will” (ph 1 5).

The motive and impulse of Fatherhood which
result in adoption were eternally real and active

in God. In some sense He had be-
1. Divine stowed the adoption nvpon Israel
Fatherhood (Rom 9 4). “Israel is my son, my

first-born” (Ex 4 22; cf Dt 14 1; 32
6; Jer 31 9; Hos 11 1). God could not reveal
Himself at all without revealing something of His
Fatherhood, but the whole revelation was as yet
partial and prophetic. When ‘‘God sent forth his
Son” to “redeem them that were under the law,”
it became possible for men to receive the adoption;
for to those who are willing to receive it, He sent
the Spirit of the eternal Son to testify in their hearts
that they are sons of God, and to give them, con-
fidence and utterance to enable them to call God
their Father (Gal 4 5.6; Rom 8 15).

But this experience also is incomplete, and looks

forward to a fuller adoption in the response, not
only of man’s spirit, but of the whole
2. Its Cos- creation, including man’s body, to
mic Range the Fatherhood of God (Rom 8 23).
Every filial spirit now groans, because
it finds itself imprisoned in a body subjected to


muvi
Adrammelech


vanity, but it awaits a redemption of the body,
perhaps in the resurrection, or in some final con-
summation, when the whole material creation
shall be transformed into a fitting environment
for the sons of God, the creation itself delivered
from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of
the glory of the children of God (Rom 8 21).
Then will adoption be complete, when man’s whole
personality shall be in harmony with the spirit of
sonship, and the whole universe favorable to its
perseverance in a state of blessedness. See Cuit-
DREN oF Gop.


Litzraturs.—Lightfoot, Galatians; Sanday, Romans;
Lidgett, Fatherhood of God; Ritschl, Justification and


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Reconciliation.
T. Ress


ADOR, a’dor, ADORA, a-di’ra (?A8wpa, Adora):
In Idumaea, mentioned in Ani, XITI, ix, 1 as one
of the cities captured by Hyrcanus, and referred
to in 1 Mace 13 20. See Aporaim.


ADORAIM, ad-o-ra’im (DMM, ’ddhorayim,
“a, pair of knolls,’’ perhaps): One of several cities
in Judah that were fortified by Rehoboam (2 Ch
11 9). The name appears in Jos and in 1 Macc as
Adora or Dora or Dor. Its location is indicated in
general by that of the other cities which the record
in Ch groups with it. Common consent identifies
it with Dara, about five miles W. by S. of Hebron.


ADORAM, a-dd’ram. See ADONIRAM.


ADORATION, ad-o-ra’shun: Though this word
never occurs in EV, it represents aspects of worship
which are very prominent in the Bible.

Etymology.—The word is derived from Lat
adorare=(1) “to speak to,” (2) “to beseech,” ‘‘en-
treat,’ (8) ‘to do homage,” “to worship”; from os
(oris), mouth. Some have supposed that the root os
points to the Rom practice of applying the hand to
the mouth, i.e. kissing the hand to (a person or
thing), as a token of homage.

I Meaning.—Adoration is intense admiration
culminating in reverence and worship, together
with the outward acts and attitudes which accom-
pany such reverence. It thus includes both the
subjective sentiments, or feelings of the soul, in
the presence of some superior object or person,
and the appropriate physical expressions of such
sentiments in outward acts of homage or of wor-
ship. In its widest sense it includes reverence
to beings other than God, esp. to monarchs, who
in oriental countries were regarded with feelings
of awe. But it finds its highest expression in
religion. Adoration is perhaps the highest type
of worship, involving the reverent and rapt con-
templation of the Divine perfections and preroga-
tives, the acknowledgment of them in words ‘of
praise, together with the visible symbols and
postures that express the adoring attitude of the
creature in the presence of his Creator. It is the ex-
pression of the soul’s mystical realization of God’s
presence in His transcendent greatness, holiness
and lovingkindness. Asa form of prayer, adoration
is to be distinguished from other forms, such as
petition, thanksgiving, confession and intercession.

IH. Outward Postures.—In the OT and NT,
these are similar to those which prevailed in all
oriental countries, as amply illustrated by the
monuments of Egypt and Assyria, and by the
customs still in use among the nations of the East.
The chief attitudes referred to in the Bible are the
following:

Among the Orientals, esp. Persians, prostration
(i.e. falling upon the knees, then gradually inclining
the body, until the forehead touched the ground)
was common as an expression of profound rev-


erence and humility before a superior or a bene-


60


factor. It was practised in the worship of Yah-
weh (Gen 17 3; Nu 16 45; Mt 26 39, Jesus in

Gethsemane; Rev 1 17), and of idols
1. Prostra- (2 K 5 18; Dnl 3 5.6), but was by
tion no means confined to religious exer-

cises. It was the formal method of
supplicating or doing obeisance to a superior (e.g.
18 26 23f; 2K 4 37; Est 83; Mk 6 22; Jn
11 32).

A substitute for prostration was kneeling, a

common attitude in worship, frequently mentioned

in OT and NT (eg. 1 K 8 54; Ear
2. Kneeling 9 5; Ps 96 6; Isa 46 23; Lk 22 41,

Christ in Gethsemane; Acts 7 60;
Eph 3 14). The same attitude was sometimes
adopted in paying homage to a fellow-creature, as
in2K1 18. “Sitting” as an attitude of prayer
(only 2 8 7 18 || 1 Ch 17 16) was probably a form
of kneeling, as in Mahometan worship.

This was the most usual posture in prayer, like
that of modern Jews in public worship. Abraham

“stood before Jeh” when he interceded
3. Standing for Sodom (Gen 18 22). Cf1S 1 26.

The Pharisee in the parable “stood and
prayed” (Lk 18 11), and the hypocrites are said to
‘oray standing in the synagogues, and in the corners
of the streets’ (Mt 6 5 AV).

The above postures were accompanied by various
attitudes of the hands, which were either lifted
up toward heaven (Ps 63 4; 1 Tim
2 8), or outspread (Ex 9 29; Ear 9 5;
Isa 1 15), or both (1 K 8 54).

The heathen practice of kissing hands
to the heavenly bodies as a sign of adoration is re-
ferred to in Job 31 27, and of kissing the idol in

1 K 19 18; Hos 18 2. The kiss of
5. Kiss of homage is mentioned in Ps 2 12, if the
Adoration text there be correct. Kissing hands

to the object of adoration was custom-
ary among the Romans (Pliny xxviii.5). The NT
word for ‘“‘worship” (proskuné6) lit. means to kiss the
hand to (one). See also ATTITUDES.

IV. Objects of Adoration.—The only adequate
object of adoration is the Supreme Being. He
only who is the sum of all perfections can fully
satisfy man’s instincts of reverence, and elicit the
complete homage of his soul.

Yet, as already suggested, the crude beginnings
of religious adoration are to be found in the respect

_ paid to created beings regarded as
1. Fellow- possessing superior claims and powers,
Creatures esp. to kings and rulers. As instances
we may mention the woman of Tekoa
falling on her face to do obeisance to King David
(2 8 14 4), and the king’s servants bowing down
to do reverence to Haman (Est 3 2). Cf Ruth
210; 1S 20 41; 28 1 2; 14 22.

On a higher plane, as involving some recognition

of divinity, is the homage paid to august and mys-

terious objects in Nature, or to
2. Material phenomena in the physical world
Objects which were supposed to have some

divine significance. To give rever-
ence to material objects themselves is condemned
as idolatry throughout the OT. Such e.g. is the
case with the worship of “the host of heaven’ (the
heavenly bodies) sometimes practised by the
Hebrews (2 K 17 16; 21 3.5). So Job protests
that he never proved false to God by kissing hands
to the sun and moon in token of adoration (Job 31
26-28). We have reference in the OT to acts of
homage paid to an idol or an image, such as falling
down before it (Isa 44 15.17.19; Dnl 8 7), or
kissing it (1 K 19 18; Hos 13 2). All such prac-
tices are condemned in uncompromising terms.
But when material things produce a reverential
attitude, not to themselves, but to the Deity whose


4, The
Hands


61 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ador
Adrammelech


presence they symbolize, then they are regarded
as legitimate aids to devotion; eg. fire as a
manifestation of the Divine presence is’ described
as causing the spectator to perform acts of
reverence (e.g. Ex 32.5; Lev 9 24; 1 K 18 38f).
. In these instances, it was Yahweh Himself that
was worshipped, not the fire which revealed Him.
The sacred writers are moved to religious adora-
tion by the contemplation of the glories of Nature.
To them, “the heavens declare the glory of God;
and the firmament sheweth his handiwork.” (Cf
esp. the “nature-Pss” 8, 19, 29, 104.)

_ On a still higher plane is the adoration prac-
tised in the presence of supernatural agents of the


Divine will. When an angel of God
3. Angels appeared, men fell instinctively before
him in reverence and awe (e.g. Gen 18
2; 191; Nu 22 31; Jgs 13 20; Lk 24 4.5).


This was not to worship the creature instead of the
Creator, for the angel was regarded, not as a dis-
tinct individual having an existence and character
of his own, but as a theophany, a self-manifestation
of God.
_The highest form of adoration is that which is
directed immediately to God Himself, His kingly
attributes and spiritual excellencies
4. The being so apprehended by the soul
Deity that it is filled with rapture and praise,
and is moved to do Him reverence.
A classical instance is the vision that initiated
Isaiah into the prophetic office, when he was so
possessed with the sovereignty and sublimity of
God that he was filled with wonder and self-abase-
ment (Isa 6 1-5). In the OT, the literature of
adoration reaches its high-water mark in the Pss
(cf esp. the group Pss 95-100), where the ineffable
majesty, power and holiness of God are set forth
in lofty strains. In the NT, adoration of the Deity
finds its most rapturous expression in Rev, where
the vision of God ealls forth a chorus of praise
addressed to the thrice-holy God (4 8-11; 7 11.12),
with whom is associated the Redeemer-Lamb.
How far is Jesus regarded in the NT as an object
of adoration, seeing that adoration is befitting only
to God? During Our Lord’s lifetime


6. Jesus He was often the object of worship
Christ (Mt 211; 82; 918; 1433; 15

25; 20 20; 28 9.17; Mk 66; Jn
9 38). Some ambiguity, however, belongs to the


Gr word proskunein, for while it is the usual word
for “worshipping” God (eg. Jn 4 24), in some
contexts it means no more than paying homage to
a person of superior rank by kneeling or prostra-
tion, just as the unmerciful servant is said to have
‘fallen down and worshipped’ his master the king
(Mt 18 26), and as Jos speaks of the Jewish high
priests as proskunoimenot (BJ, IV, v, 2). On the
other hand, it certainly implies a consciousness, on
the part of those who paid this respect to Jesus, and
of Jesus Himself, of a very exceptional superiority
in His person, for the same homage was refused
by Peter, when offered to him by Cornelius, on the
ground that he himself also was a man (Acts 10 25
f), and even by the angel before whom John pros-
trated himself, on the ground that God alone was
to be “worshipped” (Rev 22 8.9). Yet Jesus never
repudiated such tokens of respect. But whatever
about the ‘days of His flesh,” there is no doubt
that after the ascension Christ became to the church
the object _of adoration as Divine, and the homage
paid to Him was indistinguishable in character
from that paid to God. This is proved not only
by isolated passages, but still more by the whole
tone of the Acts and epp. in relation to Him. This
adoration reaches its highest expression in Rev 6
9-14, where the Redeemer-Lamb who shares the
throne of God is the subject of an outburst of


adoring praise on the part of the angelic hosts.
In 4 8-11 the bymn of adoration is addressed to
the Lord God Almighty, the Creator; here it is
addressed to the Lamb on the ground of His re-
deeming work. In Rev the adoration of Him “who
sitteth on the throne” and that of “the Lamb”
flow together into one stream of ecstatic praise
(ef 7 9-11). D. Miatt Epwarps


ADORN, a-dorn’ (korpéo, kosmés): Has as its
primary meaning ‘‘to arrange,” “to put in order,”
‘to decorate.’ It is used with reference to the
manner in which Christian women were urged to
dress. This was_a vital question in the early
church, and both Paul and Peter give advice on the
subject (1 Tim 2 9; 1 Pet 3 3). See Dress.

Figurative: In Mt 12 44 AV the word is tr@
“garnish” and is used in a fig. sense. It describes
accurately the condition of the Jewish nation. Even
though they have swept out idolatry and have
adorned the life with much ceremony and endless
religious prescriptions yet the evil spirit can say, “I
will return to my house.” This same thing has re-
peatedly been done by individuals and nations when
reforms have been instituted, but Christ was not en-
throned and the heart or nation was still dominated
by evil. It is used also in a fig. sense with reference
to the graces of the Christian life. When we re-
member how very highly Orientals esteem the adorn-
ment of the body, its use here becomes very forceful.
It is this that makes Ps 45 13 of special significance
as to the beauty and glory of the church as she is
presented to God. See also Prov 19; 49; Isa
61 10; 1 Pet_3 4.5. Consecration to God, the in-
dwelling of His Spirit, righteousness, a meek and
quiet spirit—these are the true adornments of the
life. All these passages carry with them the idea of
joy, the satisfaction that should be ours in these
possessions. Jacop W. Kapp


ADRA, a’dra. See Aran (city).


ADRAMMELECH, a-dram’el-ek, and ANAM-
MELECH, a-nam’el-ek (722778 and 7027,
’adhrammelekh and ‘dnammelekh, apparently, ac-
cording to Assyrian usage, ‘Adar is prince,” “Anu
is prince.” By Palestinian usage it would be
“Adar is king,” “Anu is king’):

(1) The names given by the Israelitish narrator
to the god or gods imported into the Samaritan
land by the men of Sepharvaim whom the king
of Assyria had settled there (2 K 17 31). In the
Bab pantheon Anu, the god of heaven, is one of the
three chief gods, and Adar, otherwise known as
Ninib, is a solar god. Concerning the statements
in this ver in K, archaeologists differ in some im-
portant points, and it is a case in which a sus-
pended judgment may be becoming in one who is
not an expert. But at least a portion of the alleged
difficulties have arisen from failures to get the point
of view of the Israelitish narrator. He is writing
from a time considerably later than the estah-
lishment of the institutions of which he speaks—
late enough to render the phrase ‘‘unto this day”
suitable (2 K 17 34), late enough so that words
and usages may have undergone modification.
He is describing a mixture of religions which he
evidently regards as deserving of contempt and
ridicule, even apart from the falsity of the religions
included in it. This mixture he describes as con-
taining ingredients of three kinds—first, the im-
ported religions of the imported peoples; second,
the local high-place religions (vs 32, etc), and third,
the Jeh religion of Northern Israel (not that of
Jerus). It is not likely that he thought that they
practised any cult in its purity. They contami-
nated the religion of Jeh by introducing Canaanitish


Adramyttium
Adultery


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 62


usages into it, and they are likely to have done the
same with the ancestral religions which they brought
with them. The proper names may be correct as
representing Pal usage, even if they differ some-
what from the proper Bab usage. The writer says
that they “burnt their children in the fire to Adram-
melech,” but this does not necessarily prove that
he thought that they brought this practice from
Babylonia; his idea may be that they corrupted
even their own false cult by introducing into it
this horrible Canaanitish rite. In considering the
bearings of the evidence of the monuments on the
case, considerations of this kind should not be
neglected.

(2) The name of a son of Sennacherib king of
Assyria—one of the two who slew him and escaped,
indirectly leading to the accession of Esar-haddon
(2 K 19 37; Isa 37 38). Mention of the inci-
dent is found on the monuments, and traces of the
name appear in the writings of Abydenus and Poly-
histor. Wiis J. BrEcHEer


ADRAMYTTIUM, ad-ra-mit’i-um (ASpapérriov,
Adramittion; for other forms see Thayer’s lexicon):
An ancient city of Mysia in the Rom Province of
Asia. The only reference in the NT to it is in Acts
27 2 which says that Paul, while being taken a pris-
oner from Caesarea to Rome, embarked upon a ship
belonging to A.

- The city, with a good harbor, stood at the head of

the Gulf of Adramyttium facing the island of Les-
bos, and at the base of Mt. Ida. Its early history
is obscure. While some authors fancy that it was
the Pedasus of Homer, others suppose that it was
founded by Adramys, the brother of the wealthy
Croesus; probably a small Athenian colony existed
there long before the time of Adramys. When
Pergamus became the capital of Asia, A. grew to be
a city of considerable importance, and the metropolis
of the N.W. part of the province. There the assizes
were held. The coins which the peasants pick up
in the surrounding fields, and which are frequently
aids in determining the location and history of the
cities of Asia Minor, were struck at A. as late as the
3d cent. AD, and sometimes in connection with
Ephesus. Upon them the effigies of Castor and
Pollux appear, showing that A. was the seat of
worship of these deities.

The ancient city with its harbor has entirely
disappeared, but on a hill, somewhat farther inland,
is a village of about one thousand houses bearing
the name Edremid, a corruption of the ancient
name Adramys. The miserable wooden huts
occupied by Gr fishermen and by Turks are sur-
rounded by vineyards and olive trees, hence the
chief trade is in olive oil, raisins and timber. In
ancient times A. was noted for a special ointment
which was prepared there (Pliny, NH, xiii.2.5).

E. J. Banks

ADRIA, 4’dri-a (6 ‘ASplas, [WH] ho Hadrias or
ho Adrias): In Gr Adrias (Polybios 1.2.4), Adriatike
Thalassa (Strabo iv.204), and Adriatikon Pelagos
(Ptolemy 111.15.2), and in Lat Adriaticum mare
(Livy xl.57.7), Adrianum mare (Cicero in Pisonem
38), Adriaticus sinus (Livy x.2.4), and Mare
superum (Cicero ad Att. 9.5.1). The Adriatic
Sea is a name derived from the old Etruscan city
Atria, situated near the mouth of the Po (Livy v.
33.7; Strabo v.214). At first the name Adria
was only applied to the most northern part of the
sea. But after the development of the Syracusan
colonies on the Italian and IIlyrian coasts the
application of the term was gradually extended
southward, so as to reach Mons Garganus (the
Abruzzi), and later the Strait of Hydruntum
(Ptolemy iii.1.1; Polybios vii.19.2). But finally the
name embraced the Jonian Sea as well, and we


find it employed to denote the Gulf of Tarentum
(Servius Aen xi.540), the Sicilian Sea (Pausanias v.
95), and even the waters between Crete and Malta
(Orosius i.2.90). Procopius considers Malta as
lying at the western extremity of the Adriatic Sea
(.14). After leaving Crete the vessel in which
the apostle Paul was sailing under military escort
was “driven to and fro in the sea of Adria” four-
teen days (Acts 27 27) before it approached the
shore of Malta. We may compare this with the
shipwreck of Jos in ‘‘the middle of the Adria’”’ where
he was picked up by a ship sailing from Cyrene to
Puteoli (Jos, Vita, 3). Georce H. ALLEN


ADRIEL, 4’dri-el Gx , ‘adhriv’él, “my
help is God”): The son of Barzillai the Meholath-
ite, to whom Merab the daughter of King Saul was
married when she should have been given to David
(18 18 19; 2S 21 8). “Michal” in 21 8 is a
textual error easily accounted for. Adriel and Merab
had five sons, whom David handed over to the blood
vengeance of the men of Gibeon. The name Adriel
seems to be Aram., the equivalent of the Heb name
Azriel. :


ADUEL, a-di’el (ASouqA, Adouél): An ancestor
of Tobit (Tob 1 1).


ADULLAM, a-dul’am (039%, ‘idhullam):

(1) A city, with dependencies, and anciently
having a king, mentioned five times in the OT,
each time in a list with other cities (Josh 12 15; 16
35; 2 Ch 117; Mic 1 15; Neh 11 30). In the
list of 31 kings whom Joshua smote, Adullam
follows Hormah, Arad, Libnah, and precedes Mak-
kedah. Among the 14 Judahite cities of the first
group in “the lowland” Adullam is mentioned be-
tween Jarmuth and Socoh. In the list of 15 cities
fortified by Rehoboam it appears between Socoh and
Gath. Micah gives what may be a list of cities
concerned in some Assyr approach to Jerus; it
begins with Gath, includes Lachish, and ends with
Mareshah and Adullam. And Adullam is still
in the same company in the list in Neh of the cities
“and their villages” where the men of Judah then
dwelt. In the time of the patriarchs it was a place
to which men “‘went down” from the central moun-
tain ridge (Gen 38 1). Judas Maccabaeus found
it still existing as a city (2 Mace 12 38). Common
opinion identifies Adullam with the ruin ‘Aid-el-Ma,
13 miles W.S.W. from Bethlehem (see HGHL,
229 ff). This is in spite of the testimony of the
Onom, which, it is alleged, confuses Adullam with
Eglon. Presumably the city gave its name to the
cave of Adullam, the cave being near the city.

(2) The cave of Adullam, David’s headquarters
during a part of the time when he was a fugitive
from Saul (1 S 22 1; 2S 23 18; 1 Ch 11 15).
Sufficient care has not been exercised in reading the
Bible statements on this subject. To begin with,
Heb syntax permits of the use of the word “cave’’
collectively; it may denote a group or a region of
caves; it is not shut up to the meaning that there
was one immense cave in which David and his 400
men all found accommodations at once. All reason-
ings based on this notion are futile.

Further, by the most.natural syntax of 2 S 23
13-17 (duplicated with unimportant variations in
1 Ch 11 15-19), that passage describes two dif-
ferent events, and does not connect the cave of
Adullam with the second of these. ‘‘And three of
the thirty chief men went down, and came to David
in the harvest time unto the cave of Adullam; and
the troop of the Philistines was encamped in the
valley of Rephaim. And David was then in the
stronghold; and the garrison of the Philistines was
then in Beth-lehem. And David longed, and said,


63 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Adramyttium
Adultery


Oh that one would give me water,” ete. Concerning
these three seniors among David’s “mighty men” it
is narrated, first, that they were David’s comrades
in a certain battle, a battle which the Chronicler
identifies with Pas-dammim, where David slew
Goliath; second, that they joincd David at the
cave of Adullam, presumably during the time when
he was in hiding from Saul; third, that at a later
time, when the Philistines were in the valley of
Rephaim (cf 2 8 6 18), and David was “in the
stronghold” (Jos says “at Jerusalem,” Ani, VII,
xii, 4), these men broke through the Phili lines and
brought him water from the home well of Bethlehem.

The cave of Adullam, like the city, was “down”
from the central ridge (1S 22 1; 258 23 18).
The city was in Judah; and David and his men were
in Judah (1 8 23 3) at a time when, apparently,
the cave was their headquarters. Gad’s advice to
David to return to Judah (1 8 22 3.5) was given
at a time when he had left the cave of Adullam.
If the current identification of ‘Aid-el-Ma. as Adul-
lam is correct, the cave of Adullam is probably the
cave region which has been found in that vicinity.

It has been objected that this location is too far
from Bethlehem for David’s men to have brought
the water from there. To this it is replied that
thirteen or fourteen miles is not an excessive dis-
tance for three exceptionally vigorous men to go and
return; and a yet stronger reply is found in the
consideration just mentioned, that the place from
which the men went for the water was not the cave
of Adullam. The one argument for the tradition
to the effect that St. Chariton’s cave, a few miles
S.E. of Bethlehem, is Adullam, is the larger size of
this cave, as compared with those near ‘Aid-el-Ma
We have already seen that this has no force.

In our current speech ‘cave of Adullam’ sug-
gests an aggregation of ill-assorted and disreputable
men. This is not justified by the Bible record.
David’s men included his numerous and respectable
kinsmen, and the representative of the priesthood,
and some of David’s military companions, and some
men who afterward held high office in Israel. Even
those who are described as being in distress and
debt and bitter of soul were doubtless, many of
them, persons who had suffered at the hands of
Saul on account of their friendship for David.
Doubtless they included mere adventurers in their
number; but the Scriptural details and the circum-
stances alike indicate that they were mainly homo-
geneous, and that most of them were worthy citizens.

Wiuus J. Bercarr

ADULLAMITE, a-dul’am-it: The gentilic adj.
of ADULLAM, which see. It is used only of Judah's
friend Hirah (Gen 38 1.12.20).


ADULTERY, a-dul’tér-i: In Scripture desig-
nates sexual intercourse of a man, whether married
or unmarried, with a married woman.
It is categorically prohibited in the
(seventh commandment,

Ex 20 14; Dt 6 18): “Thou shalt
not commit adultery.” In more specific language
we read: ‘And thou shalt not lie carnally with
thy neighbor’s wife, to defile thyself with her”
(Lev 18 20). The penalty is death for both guilty
parties: ‘And the man that committeth adultery
with another man’s wife, even he that committeth
adultery with his neighbor’s wife, the adulterer
and the adulteress shall surely be put to death”
(Lev 20 10). The manner of death is not _par-
ticularized; according to the rabbis (Siphra’ ad
loc.; Sanhedhrin 62b) it is strangulation. It would
seem that in the days of Jesus the manner of death
was interpreted to mean stoning (“Now in the
law Moses commanded us to stone such,” Jn 8 5,
said of the woman taken in adultery). Neverthe-


1. Its
Punishment Decalogue


less, it may be said that in the case in question
the woman may have been a virgin betrothed unto
a husband, the law (in Dt 22 23 f) providing that
such a person together with her paramour be stoned
to death (contrast ver 22, where a woman married
to a husband is spoken of and the manner of death
is again left general), Ezk 16 40 (cf 23 47) equally
mentions stoning as the penalty of the adulteress;
but it couples to her sin also that of shedding blood;
hence the rabbinic interpretation is not necessarily
controverted by the prophet. Of course it may
also be assumed that a difference of custom may
have obtained at different times and that the
pes was in the line of leniency, strangulation
eing regarded as a more humane form of execu-
tion than stoning.
The guilty persons become amenable to the
death penalty only when taken ‘in the very act”
(Jn 8 4). The difficulty of obtaining
2. Trial by direct legal evidence is adverted to by
Ordeal the rabbis (see Makkoth 7a). In the
case of a mere suspicion on the part
of the husband, not substantiated by legal evidence,
the woman is compelled by the law (Nu 6 11-30)
to submit to an ordeal, or God’s judgment, which
consists in her drinking the water of bitterness,
that is, water from the holy basin mingled with
dust from the floor of the sanctuary and with the
washed-off ink of a writing containing the oath
which the woman has been made to repeat. The
water is named bitter with reference to its effects
in the case of the woman’s guilt; on the other hand,
when no ill effects follow, the woman is proved
innocent and the husband’s jealousy unsubstan-
tiated. According to the Mish (Séiah 9) this ordeal
of the woman suspected of adultery was abolished
by Johanan ben Zaccai (after 70 AD), on the ground
that the men of his generation were not above the
suspicion of impurity. See article Birrer, Brr-
TERNESS.
Adultery was regarded as a heinous crime (Job


31 11). The prophets and teachers in Israel re-
peatedly upbraid the men and women
8. AHei- of their generations for their loose-


nous Crime ness in morals which did not shrink
from adulterous connections. Nat-
urally where luxurious habits of life were indulged
in, particularly in the large cities, a tone of levity
set in: in the dark of the evening, men, with their
features masked, waited at their neighbors’ doors
(Job 24 15; 31.9; ef Prov 7), and women for-
getful of their God’s covenant broke faith with the
husbands of their youth (Prov 2 17). The prophet
Nathan confronted David after his sin with Bath-
sheba, the wife of Uriah, with his stern rebuke
(“Thou art the man,” 2 8 12 7); the penitential
psalm (61) —‘“‘Miserere’’—was sung by the royal
bard as a prayer for divine Dae Promiscuous
intercourse with their neighbors’ wives is laid by
Jeremiah at the door of the false prophets of his
day (Jer 23 10.14; 29 23).
While penal law takes only cognizance of adul-
terous relations, it is needless to say that the moral
law discountenances all manner of
4, Penal illicit intercourse and all manner of
and Moral unchastity in man and woman. While
Distinctions the phrases “harlotry,”’ “commit har-
lotry,” in Scripture denote the breach
of wedlock (on the part of a woman), in the rabbinic
writings a clear distinction is made on the legal
side between adultery and fornication. The latter
is condemned morally in no uncertain terms; the
seventh commandment is made to include all
manner of fornication. The eye and the heart are
the two intermediaries of sin (Palestinian Talm,
Berakhoth 6b). A sinful thought is as wicked as a
sinful act (Niddah 13b and elsewhere). Job makes


Adummim
Affect


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 64


a covenant with his eyes lest he look upon a virgin
(31 1). And so Jesus who came “not to destroy,
but to fulfil” (Mt 6 17), in full agreement with the
ethical and religious teaching of Judaism, makes
the intent of the seventh commandment explicit
when he declares that “every one that looketh on a
woman to lust after her hath committed adultery
with her already in his heart” (Mt 5 28). And
in the spirit of Hosea (4 15) and Johanan ben
Zaccai (see above) Jesus has but scorn for those
that are ready judicially to condemn though they
be themselves not free from sin! ‘He that is
without sin among you, let him first cast a stone
at her’ (Jn 8 7). Whereas society is in need of
the death penalty to secure the inviolability of the
home life, Jesus bids the erring woman go her way
and sin no more. How readily His word might be
taken by the unspiritual to imply the condoning of
woman’s peccability is evidenced by the fact that
the wholesection (Jn 7 53—8 11) is omitted by ‘‘most
ancient authorities” (see St. Augustine’s remark).
Adultery as a ground of divorce—The meaning
of the expression “‘some unseemly thing” (Dt 24 1)
being unclear, there was great variety
5. A of opinion among the rabbis as to the
Ground of grounds vpon which a husband may
Divorce divorce his wife. While the school of
Hillel legally at least allowed any
trivial reason as a ground for divorce, the stricter
interpretation which limited it to adultery alone
obtained in the school of Shammai. Jesus coin-
cided with the stricter view (see Mt 5 32; 19 9,
and commentaries). From a moral point of view,
divorce was discountenanced by the rabbis like-
wise, save of course for that one ground which
indeed makes the continued relations between hus-
band and wife a moral impossibility. See also
Crimes; Divorce. Max L. Marcos


ADUMMIM, a-dum’im (O°STN, ‘ddhummim,
perhaps “red spots”): ‘The ascent of Adummim”
is one of the numerous landmarks mentioned in
defining the northern border of Judah westward
from the mouth of the Jordan to Jerusalem, and
in defining the southern border of Benjamin east-
ward from Jerusalem to the mouth of the Jordan
(Josh 15 7; 18 17). It is identified with the
gorge part of the road from Jericho up to Jerusalem.


The Inn of the Good Samaritan.


Its present name is Tala‘at-ed-Dumm, “ascent
of blood.” The stone is marked by “curious red
streaks,” a phenomenon which probably accounts
for both the ancient and the modern names, and for
other similar names which have been applied to the
locality. It is the scene of our Saviour’s story of
the Good Samaritan, and tradition of course locates
the inn to which the Sam brought the wounded man
(see HGHL, 265). Witus J. BEECHER


ADVANTAGE, ad-van' taj (J29 , sékhan): In Job
365 3 is interpreted in succeeding clause as “profit.”
In Rom 3 1 repiocds, perissds, is likewise inter-
preted by a paraphrase in the next sentence. RV
prefers to render pleonektéd by “take advantage,”
where AV has “defraud” (2 Cor 7 2) or ‘make
gain of” (2 Cor 12 17; ef 2 Cor 211). In Jude
(ver 16), “advantage” (dphéleia) means “‘profit.”’


ADVENT, ad’vent.
NIUM; PAROUSIA.


ADVENTURE, ad-ven’ttir: “To risk,’ “to
dare,” referring always to an undertaking attended
with some peril (Jgs 9 17: ‘My father adventured
his life’). Cf Dt 28 56. So also Eccl 6 14:
“Riches perish by evil adventure.” Only once in
NT for dtawp:, diddmi (Acts 19 31), where Paul’s
friends beg him “not to adventure himself [archaic
for “‘venture’’] into the theatre.”’


See Incarnation; MILLEen-


ADVERSARY, ad’vér-sa-ri, ad’vér-sé-ri: This
word (in the sing. or pl.) is used in the OT to render
different Heb words. In thirty-two cases the word
corresponds to the noun “¥, ¢dr, or the verb VX,
carer. This noun is the ordinary word for “‘foe”’ or
“adversary.” In twelve passages the Heb word, of
which “adversary” is the tr, is TOW, satan =noun or
TOW, saian=verb. This stem means “to oppose,”
or “thwart” anyone in his purpose or claims.

The angel of Jeh was satan to Balaam (Nu 22 22).
The word often denotes a political adversary
(1 K 11 14.23.25). In four cases (viz. Prologue to
Job; Zec 3 12; 1 Ch 211; Ps 109 6) the AV
retains Satan as the rendering. But it is ouly in
1 Ch that the word is used without the art., that
is, strictly as a proper name. The LXX gives
did Boros, didbolos, as the rendering, and both in Job
and Zec, Satan is portrayed as the “false accuser.”
In two cases “adversary” represents two Heb ex-
pressions which mean the “opponent in a suit” or
“controversy” (Job 31 35; Isa 50 8).

In the NT “adversary” represents: (1) dvrucet-
pevot, antikeimenoi, the participle of a verb which
means “to be set over against,” ‘‘to be opposed”
(Lk 18 17; Phil 1 28). (2) dvrtdios, antidikos,
“opponent in a lawsuit,” “prosecutor” (Mt 5
25; Lk 12 58; 18 3; 1 Pet 5 8). According to
the last passage the devil is the “accuser” or
“prosecutor” of believers, but according to another
writer they have an “advocate” or ‘counselor
for the defense’ with the Father (1 Jn 2 1). In
one passage (He 10 27) “adversary” represents a
Gr word, hupenantios, which means ‘set over
against,” “contrary to”—a word used in classical
Gr and in the LXX. Tuomas LEewis


ADVERSITY, ad-var'si-ti: In RV exclusively
an OT term, expressing the various forms of distress
and evil conveyed by four Heb words: yoy, cela‘,
“a halting” or “fall”; WE, ¢érah, “straits,” “dis-
tress,” “affliction”; ZY, car, ‘“‘straitness,” ‘afflic-
tion”; U1, ra‘, “bad,” “evil,” “harmful.” These
words cover the whole range of misfortunes caused
by enemies, poverty, sorrow and trouble. ‘‘Ad-
versity,” which occurs once in AV in NT (He 13 3:
kaxouvxovuevos, kakouchotimenos, ‘‘ill-treated’’) is dis-
placed in RV by the lit. rendering which illustrates
or interprets a common phase of adversity.

Dwicut M. Pratr

ADVERTISE, ad’vér-tiz: This word is found
twice in the OT: In Nu 24 14 (from Heb 773,
ya‘ag, “to advise’) Balaam advises Balak of the
future of Israel and its influence upon his kingdom
(“I will advertise thee”). In AV Ruth 4 4 (from


Adummim


65 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ws m3, galah ’dzen, “to uncover the ear,’ “to
reveal’) Boaz in speaking to the nearer kinsman


of Ruth: “I thought to advertise thee’ (RVm
“uncover thine ear’).
ADVICE, ADVISE, ADVISEMENT, ad-vis’,


ad-viz’, ad-viz’ment: Aside from their regular
meaning these words are peculiarly employed as
follows: (1) Advice: In 28 19 43 Grom "3%,
dabhar, ‘‘word’’) the meaning is equal to “request”
(RVm “were we not the first to speak of bringing
back”). In 15 25 83 AV (from BYY, ta‘am,
‘taste,’ “reason”’) “advice” is equal to “sagacity”’
(RV “blessed be thy discretion”). In 2 Ch 25 17
(from 73), yd‘ag, “to give or take counsel’’) the
meaning seems to be “to consult with oneself’’;
ef also Jgs 19 30 AV (RV “take counsel’’). (2)
Advise: In 25 2413 AV (from 3°, yadha‘,
“to know’’) “to advise” means “to advise oneself,”’
ie. ‘to consider’ (RV ‘advise thee’). Cf also
1 Ch 2112 AV (RV “consider” from MS),
r@ah, “to see’) and Prov 13 10 where ‘‘well-
advised” is the same as “considerate” (from JQ),
ya‘ag; see 2 Ch 2617). (8) Advisement (anti-
quated): Found once in the OT in 1 Ch 12 19
(from MEY, ‘écah, “‘counsel”), where “upon ad-
visement”’ means “upon deliberation.” Cf 2 Macc
14 20 AV (RV “when these proposals had been
long considered’’). A. L. Bresiicw


ADVOCATE, ad’vo-kat (rapékdyros, pardklétos):
Found in 1 Jn 2 1, “If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the right-
eous.”’ The Gr word has several shades of mean-
ing: (1) a legal advocate; (2) an intercessor; (8)
a helper generally. In the passage before us the
first and second meanings are included. Christ
in heaven intercedes for Christians who sin upon
earth. The next ver declares that He is the ‘‘pro-
pitiation for our sins” and it is His propitiatory
work which lies at the basis of His intercession.
The margins of RV and ARV give as alternative
readings Comforter, Helper, Gr Paraclete. Beyond
doubt however, ‘‘advocate” is the correct tr in the
passage in the ep. The same Gr word also occurs
in the Gospel of John (14 16.26; .15 26; 16 7)
referring not to Christ but to the Holy Spirit, to
whom Christ refers as ‘another comforter’ whom
He will send from the Father. In the Gospel
various functions are ascribed to the Spirit in rela-
tion to believers and unbelievers. The word in
the Gospel is inadequately tr¢ “Comforter.” The
Spirit according to these passages, is more than
Comforter and more than Advocate. See Para-
CLETE; ComrortTeR; Hoty Spirit.

E. Y. MvLiins

ADYTUM, ad‘i-tum (Lat from Gr 4dfvrov,
dduton, adj. ddutos, ‘not to be entered”): Apphed
to the innermost sanctuary or chambers in ancient
temples, and to secret places which were open only
to priests: hence also to the Holy of Holies in the
Jewish temple. See TEMPLE.


AEDIAS, 4-é-di’as (AnSelas, Aédeias): Men-
tioned in 1 Esd 9 27, being one of those who agreed
to divorce their. alien wives. This name is sup-
posed to be a corruption of the Gr ‘HNa, Hélta,
there being no Heb equivalent for it, and in Ezr 10
26, the name occurs in the correct form as Elijah


(mP5N, *eliyah=“God is Jehovah”).
AELIA, @'li-a.


AENEAS, @-né’as (Atvéas, Ainéas): A para-
lytic at Lydda, who, after he “had kept his bed eight
years,” was miraculously healed by Peter (Acts 9
33.34).


See JERUSALEM.


Affect


AENON, @’non (Alvdév, Ainédn): The place
where John was baptizing ‘‘because there was much
water there” (Jn 3 23). It was on the west side
of the Jordan, the place where John baptized at
the first being on the east (Jn 1 28; 3 26; 10 40).
We may be sure it was not in Sam territory. Onom
locates it 8 Rom miles S. of Scythopolis (Beisan),
this stretch of land on the west of the Jordan being
then, not under Samaria, but under Scythopolis.
Its position is defined by nearness to Salim. Various
identifications have been suggested, the most prob-
able being the springs near Umm el-‘Amdan,
which exactly suit the position indicated by Onom.
See discussion under Saum. Ewine


AEON, é’on: This word originally meant “dura-
tion,” “dispensation.” In the philosophy of Plato
and Aristotle the word is aléy, aién, from which this
word is transliterated. In the gnostic philosophy
it has a special meaning and is there used to solve
the problem of the world order. In the infinite
separation between God and the .world, it was
taught, there must of necessity be mediating powers.
These powers are the acons and are the successive
emanations from God from eternity. They are
spiritual, existing as distinct entities. They con-
stituted the Divine fulness or the Divine Pleroma.
The name was applied to these beings for two reasons:
because they were thought to partake of the eternal
existence of God and because they were supposed
to govern the various ages. The idea of the aeons
in various forms may be found in nearly all oriental
philosophy that attempted to deal with the prob-
lem of the world order. It appears in the writings
of Philo, in Shintoism, in the old Zoroastrian religion.
See GNosTIcIsM. Jacos W. Karp


AESORA, @’so-ra, AV Esora, é-s6’ra (Alowpd,
Aiséré): A town in the borders of Samaria, men-
tioned in connection with Beth-horon and Jericho
(Jth 4 4), and from this association we judge that
it was in the eastern part of Samaria.


AFFECT, AFFECTION, a-fekt’, a-fek’shun:
The lit. meaning of ‘‘affect”’ is to act upon (Lat
ad, ‘‘to,”” “upon,” facio, “to do”). It has various
shades of meaning, and occurs in the following
senses in the Eng. Bible: (1) In its lit. sense: Lam
3 51, “Mine eye affecteth my soul.’”’ (2) Inthesense
of “to endeavor after” “desire,” “court”: Gal
4 17, “They zealously affect [RV “seek”] you... .
that ye may affect [RV ‘‘seek”] them,” i.e. they
earnestly court your favor, that you may court
theirs. Paul means that the proselytizing zeal
of the Judaizers was rooted in personal ambition.
The past part. “affected” (RV “sought’’) has the
same meaning in ver 18. The same Gr_word
(26163) is tr’ “desire earnestly” in RV (1 Cor 12
31; 14 1.39). ‘Affect’ has a similar meaning in
Ecclus 13 11. (3) In the passive, it occurs in the
sense of “‘to be disposed,” in a neutral sense, with
an advb. to characterize the nature of the disposi-
tion: Acts 14 2, “evil affected against the brethren.”
So also 2 Macc 4 21; 13 26. :

“Affection” occurs in the following senses: (1)
In the lit. sense: the state of having one’s feelings
acted upon or affected in some way; bent or dis-
position of mind, in a neutral sense (the nature of
the affection, whether good or bad, needing further
description in the context), So Col 32, ‘Set
your affection [RV “mind”] on things above”,
Col 3 5, “inordinate affection” (here “affection’
by itself is neutral; the addition of the adj. makes
it equivalent to “passion” in an evil sense, as in
RV). (2) In a good sense: tender feeling, warm
attachment, good will; the word in itself carrying
a good meaning apart from the context. 1 Ch 29


Affinity
Affliction


3, “because I have set my affection on the house of
my God’; Rom 14 31; 2 Tim 3 3, “without natu-
ral affection’; 2 Cor 6 12 “Ye are straitened in
your own affections”’ (lit. “bowels,” regarded as the
seat of kindly feelings; cf Eng. “heart”). So2Cor
7 15. (3) In an evil sense in the plur.= passions:
Gal 6 24, “the flesh, with the affections [RV
“passions’’] and lusts’; Rom 1 26, “God gave them
unto vile affections” (RV “‘passions’’).
“Affectioned” occurs once, in a neutral sense:
Rom 12 10, “affectioned [i.e. “disposed”] one to
another.” In 1 Thess 2 8, we have ‘“affection-
ately,” in a good sense. D. Mratt Enwarns


AFFINITY, a-fin’i-ti (JJ , hdthan, “to join one-
self’): This term is used three times in the OT:
(1) in 1 K 3 1, where we read that “Solomon made
affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt’; (2) in 2
Ch 181, where it is stated that Jehoshaphat
‘Soined affinity with Ahab,” and (3) in Ezr 9 14,
where it is asked: “Shall we . . . . join in affinity
with the peoples that do these abominations?”
The Heb word thus rendered in the above three
passages refers in each case to marriage alliances
rather than to family or political relationships. See
Marriace; Fairy. W. W. Davizs


AFFIRM, AFFIRMATIVES, a-fir’ma-tivs (8ticx-
vplttopar, diischurizomai): The verb “affirm’’ occurs
in several passages of the NT in the sense of
“assert” (Lk 22 59; Acts 12 15; 26 19 [¢dcxw,
phé-sko]; Rom 3 8 [¢nul, phémi]; 1 Tim 1 7;
Titus 3 8 [d:aBeBasdouor, diabebaidomai]. The Heb
does not employ affirmative particles, but gives
a positive reply by either repeating the word in
question or by substituting the first person in the
reply for the second person in the question, or
by employing the formula: “Thou hast said” or
“Thou hast rightly said.” The Saviour used this
idiom (cd efwas, st eipas) when answering Judas
and Caiaphas (Mt 26 25.64). A peculiar ele-
gance occasionally attaches to the interpretation
of the Scriptures because of their use of an affirma-
tive and a negative together, rendering the sense
more emphatic; sometimes the negative occurs
first, as in Ps 118 17: “1 shall not die, but live’;
sometimes the affirmative precedes, as in Isa 38 1:
“Thou shalt die, and not live.” Jn 1 20 is made
peculiarly emphatic because of the negative placed
between two affirmatives: ‘‘And he confessed, and
denied not; and he confessed, I am not the Christ.”

Frank E. Hrrscu

AFFLICTION, a-flik’shun: Represents no fewer
than 11 Heb words in the OT, and 3 Gr words in the
NT, of which the most common are "32 (‘éni),
O\iyis (thlipsis). It is used (1) actively = that
which causes or tends to cause bodily pain or mental
distress, as “the bread of affliction” (Dt 16 3;
2 Ch 18 26); often in pl, as ‘Many are the
afflictions of the righteous’ (Ps 34 19); (2)
passively=the state of being in pain or trouble, as
“to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction”
(Jas 1 27). The following are the chief forms of
affliction referred to: (1) Individual affliction, esp.
sickness, poverty, the oppression of the weak by
the strong and rich, perverted justice. (2) National.
A great place is given in the OT to affliction as a
national experience, due to calamities, such as war,
invasion, conquest by foreign peoples, exile. ‘These
form the background of much of the prophetic
writings, and largely determine their tone and char-
acter. (3) In the NT the chief form of affliction is
that due to the fierce antagonism manifested to the
religion of Jesus, resulting in persecution.

IL. The Source of Affliction.—The Heb mind did
not dwell on secondary causes, but attributed
everything, even afflictions, directly to the great


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 66


First Cause and Author of all things: “Shall evil
befall a city, and Jeh hath not done it?” (Am 3 6);

“| form the light, and create darkness;
1. God I make peace, and create evil [i.e. ca-

lamity]; Iam Jeh, that doeth all these
things” (Isa 45 7). Thus all things, including ca-
lamity, were referred to the Divine operation. The
Heb when afflicted did not doubt the universal sover-
eignty of God; yet, while assuming this sovereignty,
he was sometimes tempted to accuse Him of indif-
ference, neglect or forgetfulness. Cf Job passim;
Isa 40 27; 49 14; Ezk 8 12; 9 9. :

Yet there are traces of a dualism which assigns a
certain vague limit to God’s absolute sovereignty,
by referring affliction to an_ evil
agency acting in quasi-independence
of God. There could, however, never
be more than a tendency in this direc-
tion, for a strict dualism was incompatible with the
standpoint of Jewish monotheism. Thus Saul’s
mental affliction is attributed to an “evil spirit,”
which is yet said to be “from Jeh” (18 16 14;
18 10; 19 9); and the fall of Ahab is said by
Micaish to be due to the “lying spirit” which enticed
him to his doom, in obedience to God’s command
(1 K 22 20-22). In the prologue of Job, Job’s
calamities are ascribed to the Satan, but even
he receives his word of command from God, and is
responsible to Him, like the other “sons of God”
who surround the heavenly throne. He is thus
“included in the Divine will and in the circle of
Divine providence” (Schultz). After the prologue,
the Satan is left out of account, and Job’s misfor-
tunes are attributed directly to the Divine causality.
In later Judaism, the tendency to trace the origin
of evil, physical and moral, to wicked spirits became
more marked, probably because of the influence of
Pers dualism. In NT times, physical and mental
maladies were thought to be due to the agency of
evil spirits called demons, whose prince was Beelze-
bub or Satan (Mk 1 23 ff; 3 22f; 56 2ff; Mt 9
32, etc). Christ gave His assent to this belief
(cf the woman under infirmity, “whom Satan hath
bound,” Lk 13 16). Paul attributed his bodily
affliction to an evil angel sent by Satan (2 Cor
12 7), though he recognized that the evil agent
was subordinate to God’s purpose of grace, and was
the means of moral discipline (vs 7.9). Thus,
while the evil spirits were regarded as malicious
authors of physical maladies, they were not, in a
strictly dualistic fashion, thought to act in complete
independence; rather, they bad a certain place
assigned to them in the Divine Providence.

I. Meaning and Purpose of Affliction.—Why
did God afflict men? How is suffering to be ex-
plained consistently with the goodness and justice
of God? This was an acute problem which weighed
heavily upon the Heb mind, especially in the later,
more reflective, period. We can only briefly indi-
cate the chief factors which the Scriptures con-
tribute to the solution of the problem. We begin
with the OT.

The traditional view in early Heb theology was
that afflictions were the result of the Divine law of
retribution, by which sin was invari-
ably followed by adequate punish-
ment. Every misfortune was a proof
of sin on the part of the sufferer.
Thus Job’s ‘friends’ sought to con-
vince him that his great sufferings were due to his
sinfulness. This is generally the standpoint of the
historians of Israel, who regarded national calamities
as a mark of the Divine displeasure on account of
the people’s sins. But this naive belief, though it
contains an important element of truth, could not
pass uncontested. The logic of facts would suffice
to prove that it was inadequate to cover all cases;


2. Evil
Agents


1. Punitive
or Retrib-
utive


67 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Affinity
Affiiction


e.g. Jeremiah’s sufferings were due, not to sin, but
to his faithfulness to his prophetic vocation. So
the “suffering servant” in Isa. Job, too, in spite
of his many woes, was firm in the conviction of his
own integrity. To prove the inadequacy of the
penal view is a main purpose of the Book of Job.
A common modification of the traditional view was,
that the sorrows of the pious and the prosperity of
the wicked were only of brief duration; in the course
of time, things would adjust themselves aright (e.g.
Job 20 5ff; Ps 73 3-20). But even granting time
for the law of retribution to work itself out, experi-
ence contradicts the view that a man’s fortune or mis-
fortune is an infallible proof of his moral quality.
The thought is often expressed that afflictions are
meant to test the character or faith of the sufferer.
; This idea is especially prominent in
2. Proba- Job. God allowed the Satan to test
tional the reality of Job’s piety by over-
whelming him with disease and mis-
fortunes (2). Throughout the poem Job main-
tains that he has stood the test (e.g. 23 10-12).
Cf Dt 8 2.16; Ps 66 10f; 17 3; Isa 48 10; Jer
97; Prov 17 3.
For those who are able to stand the test, suffering
has a purificatory or disciplinary value. (1) The
thought of affliction as a discipline or
3. Disci- form of Divine teaching is found in
plinary and Job, especially in the speeches of Elihu,
Purificatory who insists that tribulation is intended
as a method of instruction to save man
from the pride and presumption that issue in destruc-
tion (Job 33 14-30; 36 8-10.15 RV). The same
conception is found in Ps 94 12; 119 67.71. (2)
The purificatory function of trials is taught in such
passages as Isa 125; Zec 13 9; Mal 3 2.3, where
the process of refining metals in fire and smelting out
the dross is the metaphor used.
The above are not fully adequate to explain the
mystery of the afflictions of the godly. ‘The pro-
foundest contribution in the OT to a
4. Vicarious solution of the problem is the idea of
and Re- the vicarious and redemptive sig-
demptive nificance of pain and sorrow. | The
author of Job did not touch this rich
vein of thought in dealing with the afflictions of his
hero. ‘his was done by the author of the Second-
Isa. The classical passage is Isa 62 13—63, which
deals with the woes of the oppressed and afflicted
Servant of God with profound spiritual insight.
It makes no difference to the meaning of the afflic-
tions whether we understand by the Servant the
whole Heb nation, or the pious section of it, or an
individual member of it, and whether the speakers
in 63 are the Jewish nation or the heathen. The
significant point here is the value and meaning
ascribed to the Servant’s sufferings. The speakers
had once believed (in accordance with the tradi-
tional view) that the Servant suffered because God
was angry with him and had stricken him. Now
they confess that his sorrows were due, not to his
own sin but to theirs (vs 4-6.8). His sufferings
were not only vicarious (the punishment of their
sin falling upon him), but redemptive in their
effect (peace and health coming to them as a result
of his chastisement). Moreover, it was not only
redemptive, but expiatory (“his soul guilt-offering,
ver 10)—a remarkable adumbration of the Chris-
tian doctrine of atonement. ; :
So far we have dealt only with OT teaching on
the meaning and purpose of affliction, The NT
makes no new contribution to the


6. The solution of the problem, but repeats
New Tes- and greatly deepens the points of
tament view already found in the OT. (1)


There is a recognition throughout
the NT of the law of retribution (Gal 6 7). Yet


Jesus repudiates the popular view of the invariable
connection between misfortune and moral evil
(Jn 9 2f). It is clear that He had risen above
the conception of God’s relation to man as merely
retributive (Mt 5 45, sunshine and rain for evil
men as well as for the good). His followers would
suffer tribulation even more than unbelievers,
owing to the hostile reaction of the evil world,
similar to that which afflicted Christ Himself
(Mt 6 10f; 10 16-25; Jn 16 18-20; 16 33).
Similarly the Acts and the epp. frequently refer to -
the sufferings of Christians (e.g. Acts 14 22; 2 Cor
48-11; Col 1 24; He 10 32; 1 Pet 4 13; Rev
7 14). Hence afflictions must have some other
than a purely punitive purpose. (2) They are
probational, affording a test by which the spurious
may be separated from the genuine members of the
Christian church (Jas 1 3.12; 1 Pet 17; 4 17),
and (3) a means of discipline, calculated to purify
and train the character (Rom 6 3; 2 Cor 12 7.9;
Jas 13). (4) The idea of vicarious and redemp-
tive suffering gets a far deeper significance in the
NT than in the OT, and finds concrete realization in
a historical person, Jesus Christ. That which is
foreshadowed in Second-lsa becomes in the NT a
central, pervasive and creative thought. A unique
place in the Divine purpose is given to the passion
of Christ. Yet in a sense, His followers partake of
His vicarious sufferings, and “fill up.... that
which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ” (Col
1 24; cf Phil 3 10; 1 Pet 413). Here, surely,
is a profound thought which may throw a flood of
light on the deep mystery of human affliction. The
cross of Christ furnishes the key to the meaning of
sorrow as the greatest redemptive force in the uni-
verse.

Hl. Endurance of Affliction.—The Scriptures
abound in words of consolation and exhortation
adapted to encourage the afflicted. Two main
considerations may be mentioned. (1) The thought
of the beneficent sovereignty of God. “Jeh reigneth;
let the earth rejoice,” even though “clouds and
darkness are round about him” (Ps 97 1.2); ‘‘All
things work together for good to them that love
God” (Rom 8 28 AV). Since love is on the throne
of the universe, we may rest assured that all
things are meant for our good. (2) The thought
that tribulation is of brief duration, in comparison
with the joy that shall follow (Ps 30 5; Isa 54
7f; Jn 16 22); a thought which culminates in
the hope of immortality. This hope is in the OT
only beginning to dawn, and gives but a faint and
flickering light, except in moments of rare exalta-
tion and insight, when the thought of a perfect
future blessedness seemed to offer a solution of
the enigmas of life (Job 19 25-27; Pss 37, 49, 73).
But in the NT it is a postulate of faith, and by it the
Christian is able to fortify himself in affliction, re-
membering that his affliction is light and momen-
tary compared with the “far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory” which is to issue out of it
(2 Cor 4 17 AV; cf Mt 5 12; Rom 8 18). Akin
to this is the comfort derived from the thought of
the near approach of Christ’s second coming (Jas
6 7.8). In view of such truths as these, the Bible
encourages the pious in trouble to show the spirit
of patience (Ps 37 7; Lk 21 19; Rom 12 12; Jas
1 3.4; 5 7-11; 1 Pet 2 20), and even the spirit of
positive joy in tribulation (Mt 5 11f; Rom 5 3;
2 Cor 12 10; Jas 12.12; 1 Pet 4 13). In the
NT emphasis is laid on the example of Jesus in
patient endurance in suffering (Jn 16 33; Jas 6
7-11; 1 Pet 219-23; 3 17f). Above all, the
Scriptures recommend the afflicted to take refuge in
the supreme blessedness of fellowship with God,
and of trust in His love, by which they may enter
into a deep peace that is undisturbed by the trials


Affright
Agape


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 68


and problems of life (Ps 73, esp. 23-28; Isa 26
3.4; Jn 14 1.27; Phil 4 7; et passim).
D. Miatt Enwarps

AFFRIGHT, a-frit’: Designates a state of terror
occasioned by some unexpected and _ startling
occurrence; not as strong as “amazed,” which
refers more to the stupor resulting from fright.
In the NT most frequently for éadoBos, émphobos
(Lk 24 37; Acts 10 4; Rev 11 13). RV uses it
also for pturémenot of Phil 1 28, a word ‘properly
used of scared horses’’ (Ellicott).


AFOOT, a-f60t’ (mwefetw, pezevid, “to go on foot”):
By walking from Troas to Assos Paul avoided the
tedious voyage round Cape Lectum (Acts 20 13
AV; cf Mk 6 38).


AFORE, a-for’: Archaic for “before’’ of time, or
“formerly”; frequently occurs as compound, as in
“aforetime,” “aforehand,” etc; in the NT most
commonly for the Gr prefix 76, pré, in compound
words (Rom 1 2; 15 4); at other times, for Gr
advb. moré, poté, ‘‘at some time,” “once” (Jn 9 13;
1 Pet 3 5; Col 8 7).


AFRESH, a-fresh’: Only in He 6 6, “seeing they
crucify’ to themselves the Son of God afresh,”
where it stands for the prefix of the Gr anastau-~
rounias. It has been disputed whether in this word
ana has the reiterative force (‘“again,” ‘“anew’’)..
In classical Gr anastauréd has always the simple
sense of “to crucify,” (i.e. “to raise wp on a cross,”
ana being merely ‘‘up”). So some would render it
here (e.g. Cremer, Lex. of NT Gr). Against this
it is argued (1) that the classical writers had no
oceasion for the idea of crucifying anew (cf Winer,
De verb. Comp., ete, Pt III, 9 ff, Leipzig, 1843);
(2) that in many compounds ana signifies both “up”
and “again,” as in anablépo. which means ‘“‘to re-
cover sight” as well as ‘“‘to look up”; (3) that the
rendering “crucify afresh” suits the context; (4)
that the Gr expositors (e.g. Chrys) take it so with-
out questioning. (So also Bleek, Liinemann, Al-
ford, Westcott; cf Vulg rursum crucifigentes.)

. Mratt Enwarps

AFRICA, af’ri-ka: The name of this tract, as a
continent, does not occur in the Bible, and it was only

in later days known as one of the
1. Africa as quarters of the world, under the name


Known of Libya—that portion opposite the
to the coast of Greece and W. of Egypt.
Ancients Naturally the most considerable part


of Africa known to the Hebrews
was Egypt*itself, but Libya is regarded as being
referred to under the names of Lehabim and Lubim
(Ludim) (Gen 10 138; 2 Ch 12 3)—words indicat-
ing, as often with the Semites, not the country
itself, but its inhabitants. Other portions of
Africa known to the Hebrews were Cush or Ethiopia,
and Put, whose inhabitants they regarded as he-
longing to the Hamitic stock. Canaan, also Cushite
.and therefore Hamitic, naturally did not belong to
the African continent, showing that the divisions
of the then known world into “quarters” (Europe,
Asia, Africa) had not taken place when the Table
of the Nations (Gen 10 1 ff) was drawn up—indeed,
these divisions were not apparently thought of
until many centuries later. The Casluhim and the
Naphtuhim (Gen 10 138.14) were in all probability
African peoples, though their position is in general
regarded as uncertain. For the Hebrews, to all
appearance, the southernmost point of Africa was
Cush or Ethiopia, called by the Assyrians and
Babylonians Kusu and Melubha (Meroé), which
included the district now known as the Soudan, or
Black region. The sons of Cush, and also those
of his firstborn, Sheba, were all Arabian tribes,


nominally under the domain of Mizraim or Egypt,
and on this account classed with the descendants

of Ham. pa
It will thus be seen that the Negro districts were
practically unknown to the ancient Hebrews,
though men and women of Negro race


2. The must have come within their ken. It
Cushites seems doubtful, therefore, whether
and the there be, in the Bible, any reference
Negroes to that race, either collectively or


individually, the word Cushite stand-

ing, not for Negro, but for Ethiopian. This term
is applied to Moses’ (first) wife (Nu 12 1); and it
will probably be generally admitted, that the great.
Hebrew lawgiver is not likely to have espoused a
Negro woman. The Ethiopian eunuch converted
by Philip the Evangelist (Acts 8 26 ff) was an of-
ficial of Meroé, and an educated man, for he could
read the OT in the Gr (Sept) version. Commerce
must have revealed to the Hebrews the where-
abouts of the various peoples of Africa with whom
they came into contact, and they acquired a personal
knowledge of Egypt when the 12 tribes were in
bondage there. During this period, it may be
supposed, they saw from time to time visitors from
the South—people who are not mentioned in the
sacred books of the OT because the Hebrews, as a
nation, never came into contact with them. Apart
from Egypt, the history of the portion of Africa
known to the Hebrews was a chequered one, as it
came successively under Egyp, Phoen, Gr and Rom
civilization. That it was not overrun, or even
influenced, by the barbarous tribes of the South,
is due to the fact that the Mediterranean tract is
isolated from the central (and southern) portion of
that continent by the Sahara. In the Talm it is
related that Alexander penetrated

3. Hebrew Africa on Libyan asses to find a race
Tradition of women, with whom he had conver-
sation, and from whom, as he after-

ward confessed, being a fool, he learned wisdom—a
legend suggesting some possible tradition of the
Amazons of Dahomey. But even in the Talm
itis mainly the nearer (N.E.) portion of Africa which
is referred to, the Africans, who had the reputation
of being flat-footed, being associated with the
Canaanites. See also CusH; Etuiopia; Mizram.

T. G. Pincwses

AFTER, aft’ér, AFTERWARD, aft’ér-wérd: The
fundamental thought, in which all shades of mean-
ing unite, is that of succession either in time or
place. This succession may be immediate or remote.
A very common adaptation of this conception is
the use of “after” to denote “according to,” “after
the manner of,” or “in the order of,” as in Gen
1 26; Eph 4 24; Lk 1 59; Rom & 14; He 4 11
(RVm “unto”), and in many passages where the Gr
uses the preposition card, katd, as Mt 23 3; Rom
8 4; 1 Cor 1 26, ete. “In proportion to”: Ps
28 4; cf 90 15. It sometimes correctly translates
a peculiar Gr idiom of the prep. di, did, with the


gen, indicating time elapsed, as Mk 2 1, lit.
“through some days,” “after some days had
passed”; ef Acts 24 17. While the Gr is expressed


by a variety of words, the Heb uses ’ahar for both
prep. and advb. H. E. Jacogps


AFTERNOON, af-tér-ndon’ (O° MID), netoth
ha-yom, “‘the declining of the day”; Jgs 19 8 AV):
The expression D154 OMD, kehém ha-yom, ‘in the
heat of the day’ (Gen 18 1) refers to the early
afternoon when the sun is a little past its zenith, its
rays still being very strong. The phrase m9
BII, l-rith ha-yom, “in the cool of the day”
(Gen 3 8) isin contrast to the last phrase and points
to the late afternoon; in the Orient a cooling breeze


69 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Affright
Agape


arises at this period of the day, and it is then that
much of the day’s business is transacted. See Day.


AGABA, ag’a-ba: A fortressin Judaea. Thefirst
of 22 “strong places’? which by its commander
Galestus was given over to Aristobulus, the son of
Alexander Janneus and Alexandra, when he (his
mother, the queen, being dangerously ill) attempted
to get eae of the Judaean government (Ant, XIII,
xvi, 5).


_ AGABUS, ag’a-bus ("Ayafos, Agabos): A Chris-

tian prophet of Jerus, twice mentioned in Acts.
(1) In Acts 11 27, we find him at Antioch foretell-
img ‘“‘a great famine over all the world,” “which,”
adds the historian, ‘“‘came to pass in the days of
Claudius.” This visit of Agabus to Antioch took
place in the winter of 43-44 AD, and was the
means of urging the Antiochian Christians to send
relief to the brethren in Judaea by the hands of
Barnabas and Saul. Two points should be noted.
(a) The gift of prophecy here takes the form of
prediction. The prophet’s chief function was to
reveal moral and spiritual truth, to “forth-tell’”’
rather than to ‘‘foretell’; but the interpretation of
God’s message sometimes took the form of pre-
dicting events. (6) The phrase ‘‘over all the
world” (practically synonymous with the Rom
Empire) must be regarded as a rhetorical exagger-
ation if strictly interpreted as pointing to a general
and simultaneous famine. But there is ample
evidence of severe periodical famines in various
localities in the reign of Claudius (e.g. Suet. Claud.
18; Tac. Ann. xii.48), and of a great dearth in
Judaea under the procurators Cuspius Fadus and
Tiberius Alexander, 44-48 AD (Ant, , i, 6; v, 2),
which probably reached its climax cir 46 AD.
(2) In Acts 21 10f we find Agabus at Caesarea
warning Paul, by a vivid symbolic action (after
the manner of OT prophets; cf Jer 13 1 ff; Ezk
3, 4) of the imprisonment and suffering he would
undergo if he proceeded to Jerus. (3) In late
tradition Agabus is included in lists of the seventy
disciples of Christ. D. Miatt Epwarps


AGADE, ag’a-dé: Ancient name for Akkad (or
Accap, q.v.), one of the chief cities of Babylonia
(Gen 10 10), and the capital city of Sargon, who
lived and ruled in Babylonia cir 3500 BC. ‘Together
with Shunir it formed part of one of the royal titles:
“kings of Shunir [Sumer] and Accad.”


AGAG, a’gag GAN, ‘dghagh, or AIX, "dghagh,
meaning unknown, possibly ‘‘violent,” BDB): A
name, or title, applied to the king of the Amalekites,
like Abimelech in Philistia and Pharaoh in Egypt.
It is used of two of these kings: (1) A king of Ama-


lek, mentioned by Balaam (Nu 24 7) in his blessing |


of Israel; (2) A later king, in the days of King Saul
(1 8 15). Saul was sent with his army to destroy
the Amalekites, who had so violently opposed
Israel in the Wilderness. He disregarded the
Divine command, sparing the best of the spoil, and
saving Agag the king alive (1S 15 8.9). After
rebuking Saul, Samuel had Agag put to death for
all the atrocities committed by himself and his
nation (1 S 15 32.33). Epwarp Mack


AGAGITE, a’gag-it, (238, ’dghaght, from Aa8,
‘éghagh, “a member of the house of Agag”’): A title
of opprobrium given to Haman (Hst 3 1.10;
8 3.5; 9 24). Jewish tradition always assigned
the arch-enemies of Israel membership in the house
of Amalek, the hereditary foe of the nation. Cf
Ant, XI, vi, 5. The word Agag has properly been
taken by Delitzsch as related to the Assyr agagu,
“40 be powerful,” “vehement,” “angry.” In the


Gr parts of Est, Haman is termed a Macedonian
(12 6; 16 10). The name Haman is probably of
Elamitic origin. Oppert’s attempt to connect the
term “Agagite” with “Agaz,” a Median tribe men-
tioned by Sargon, has found no supporters. See
AGaG. H. WoLr


AGAIN, a-gen’: Advb. denoting repetition; in
NT, generally for wédvv, pdlin, “back,” ‘once
more.” Occasionally, it has the force of, a con-
nective, synonymous with “moreover,” as in Rom
15 10 ff; 1 Cor 3 20, etc. The expression “born
again” of AV, Jn 3 3.7; 1 Pet 1 23, translating
the Gr ‘“dnéthen” and “and” in comp, becomes in
RV “anew,” i.e. “over again.” As these particles
mean “from above” and “up,” their use as indi-
cating repetition is sometimes disputed, but without
further foundation than that ‘again’ does not
exhaust the meaning.


AGAIN, BORN. See Recenerarion.


AGAINST, a-genst’ (kard, katd; évavrlov, enanti-
on; mpés, prés): Prep. expressing contrast. When
used of direction, equivalent to “toward” (Mt
10 35; 12 14, etc); when of position, meaning
“opposite,” “facing,” “in front of” (1 K 7 5;
Gen 15 10; Rom 8 31); when of action, “opposed
to” (Mt 6 11; 26 59; 1 Cor 4 6); ‘in resistance
to” (He 12 4); “provision for” (Gr eis, lit. “unto,
toward” (1 Tim 6 19). Sometimes also applied
to what breaks an established order as ‘‘customs’’
(Acts 28 17), “nature” (Rom 1 26). Peculiar shades
of meaning may be traced by careful examination
of the variety of preps. in Heb and Gr employed
in the Scriptures, that are translated into English
by this one word. H. E. Jacoss


AGAPE, ag’a-pé (yarn, agépé): The name
Agape or “‘love-feast,” as an expression denoting
the brotherly common meals of the


1. The early church, though of constant use
Name and in the post-canonical literature from
the Thing the time of Ignatius onward, is found


in the NT only in Jude ver 12 and
in 2 Pet 2 13 according to a very doubtful reading.
For the existence of the Christian common meal,
however, we have abundant NT evidence. The
“breaking of bread” practised by the primitive
community in Jerusalem according to Acts 2 42.46
must certainly be interpreted in the light of Pau-
line usage (1 Cor 10 16; 11 24) as referring to
the ceremonial act of the Lord’s Supper. But the
added clause in ver 46, “they took their food
with gladness and singleness of heart,” implies
that a social meal was connected in some way with
this ceremonial act. Paul’s references to the abuses
that had sprung up in the Corinthian church at the
meetings for the observance of the Lord’s Supper
(1 Cor 11 20-22.33.34) make it evident that in
Corinth as in Jerusalem the celebration of the rite
was associated with participation in a meal of a more
general character. And in one of the “we” sections
of Acts (20 11) where Luke is giving personal testi-
mony as to the manner in which the Lord’s Supper
was observed by Paul in a church of his own found-
ing, we find the breaking of bread associated with
and yet distinguished from an eating of food, in a
manner which makes it natural to conclude that in
Troas, as in Jerusalem and Corinth, Christians
when they met together on the first day of the week
were accustomed to partake of a common meal.
The fact that the name Agape or love-feast used
in Jude ver 12 (RV) is found early in the 2d cent.
and often afterward as a technical expression for
the religious common meals of the church puts the
meaning of Jude’s reference beyond doubt.


Agar
Agony


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 70


So far as the Jerusalem community was con-
cerned, the common meal appears to have sprung
mis out of the koinénia or communion that
2. Origin of characterized the first days of the
the Agape Christian church (cf Acts 114; 21
etc). The religious meals familiar to
Jews—the Passover being the great type—would
make it natural in Jerusalem to give expression by
means of table fellowship to the sense of brother-
hood; and the community of goods practised by
the infant church (2 44; 4 32) would readily take
the particular form of a common table at which the
wants of the poor were supplied out of the abundance
of the rich (6 1 ff). The presence of the Agape
in the Gr church of Corinth was no doubt due to the
initiative of Paul, who would hand on the observ-
ances associated with the Lord’s Supper just as
he had received them from the earlier disciples;
but participation in a social meal would commend
itself very easily to men familiar with the common
meals that formed a regular part of the procedure
at meetings of those religious clubs and associa-
tions which were so numerous at that time through-
out the Gr-Rom world.
In the opinion of the great majority of scholars
the Agape was a meal at which not only bread and
wine but all kinds of viands were used,
3. Relation a meal which had the double purpose
to the of satisfying hunger and thirst and
Eucharist giving expression to the sense of Chris-
tian brotherhood. At the end of this
feast, bread and wine were taken according to the
Lord’s command, and after thanksgiving to God
were eaten and drunk in remembrance of Christ
and as a special means of communion with the
Lord Himself and through Him with one another.
The Agape was thus related to the Eucharist as
Christ’s last Passover to the Christian rite which
He grafted upon it. It preceded and led up to the
Eucharist, and was quite distinct from it. In
opposition to this view it has been strongly urged
by some modern critical scholars that in the apos-
tolic age the Lord’s Supper was not distinguished
from the Agape, but that the Agape itself from
beginning to end was the Lord’s Supper which was
held in memory of Jesus. It seems fatal to such
an idea, however, that while Paul makes it quite
evident that bread and wine were the only elements
of the memorial rite instituted by Jesus (1 Cor 11
23-29), the abuses which had come to prevail at the
social gatherings of the Corinthian church would
have been impossible in the case of a meal consisting
only of bread and wine (cf vs 21.338f). More-
over, unless the Eucharist in the apostolic age had
been discriminated from the common meal, it
would be difficult to explain how at a later period
the two could be found diverging from each other
so completely.
In the Did (cir 100 AD) there is no sign as yet
of any separation. The direction that the second
Eucharistic prayer should be offered


4. Separa- “after being filled” (x.1) appears to
tion from imply that a regular meal had imme-
the diately preceded the observance of the
Eucharist sacrament. In the Ignatian Epistles


(cir 110 AD) the Lord’s Supper and
the Agape are still found in combination (Ad
Smyrn vii.2). It has sometimes been assumed that
Pliny’s letter to Trajan (cir 112 AD) proves that
the separation had already taken place, for he
speaks of two meetings of the Christians in Bithyn-
ia, one before the dawn at which they bound them-
selves by a “‘sacramentum” or oath to do no kind
of crime, and another at a later hour when they
partook of food of an ordinary and harmless char-
acter (Ep x.96). But as the word “sacramentum”
cannot be taken here as necessarily or even prob-


ably referring to the Lord’s Supper, the evidence of
this passage is of little weight. When we come to
Justin Martyr (cir 150 AD) we find that in his
account of church worship he does not mention the
Agape at all, but speaks of the Eucharist as follow-
ing a service which consisted of the reading of
Scripture, prayers and exhortation (Apol, lxvii);
so that by his time the separation must have taken
place. Tertullian (cir 200 AD) testifies to the
continued existence of the Agape (Apol, 39), but
shows clearly that in the church of the West the
Eucharist was no longer associated with it (De
Corona, 3). In the East the connection appears
to have been longer maintained (see Bigg, Christian
Platonists of Alexandria, 102 ff), but by and by
the severance became universal; and though the
Agape continued for long to maintain itself as a
social function of the church, it gradually passed
out of existence or was preserved only as a feast
of charity for the poor.
Various influences appear to have codperated
in this direction. Trajan’s enforcement of the old
law against clubs may have had some-
5. Reasons thing to do with it (cf Pliny as above),
for the but a stronger influence probably
Separation came from the rise of a popular sus-
picion that the evening meals of the
church were scenes of licentious revelry and even
of crime. The actual abuses which already meet
us in the apostolic age (1 Cor 11 20ff; Jude ver
12), and which would tend to multiply as the church
grew in numbers and came into closer contact with
the heathen world, might suggest the advisability
of separating the two observances. But the
strongest influence of all would come from the
growth of the ceremonial and sacerdotal spirit
by which Christ’s simple institution was slowly
turned into a mysterious priestly sacrifice. To
Christ Himself it had seemed natural and fitting
to institute the Supper at the close of a social meal.
But when this memorial Supper had been trans-
formed into a repetition of the sacrifice of Calvary
by the action of the ministering priest, the ascetic
idea became natural that the Eucharist ought to
be received fasting, and that it would be sacri-
legious to link it on to the observances of an
ordinary social meal.


LitERaTURE.—Zahn, art. ‘‘Agapen’’ in Hauck-Herzog,
Realencyklopddie; Keating, Agape and Eucharist; Schaff,
The Oldest Church Manual, ch xviii; Lambert, Sacra-
ments in the New Testament, Lect viii; Weizsicker, The
Apostolic Age, etc, I, 52 ff.


f J. C. LamMBErt

AGAR, a/gar ("Ayap, Agar): Found once in the
Apoc in the Gr (Bar 3 23) probably for the OT
Hagar, mother of Ishmael, whose children are men-
tioned with the merchants of Meran (Midian) and
Teman. In 1 Ch 5 10 the “Hagarites” AV, are
located E. of Gilead, and in the days of Saul were
at war with the tribe of Reuben. See also vs 19.20
and1 Ch 27 31. In Ps 83 6 the name of the same
people is Hagarenes.


AGARENES, ag-a-rénz’: Bar 3 23 AV.
OT the word is Hacarenss (q.v.).
above.


AGATE, ag’at.


In the
See also Acar


See Stongs, Precious.


AGE, aj: A period of time or a dispensation.
In the above sense the word, occurs only once in
AV, in the sing., as the tr of "1I, ddr, which means,
properly, a “revolution” or “round of time,” “a
period,” “an age” or “generation of man’s life’;
almost invariably tr “generation,” “generations”
(Job 8 8, “Inquire, I pray thee, of the former age’);
we have the plur. as the tr of ain, prop. ‘duration,’
“the course or flow of time,” “an age or period of


ral THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Agar
Agony


the world,” “the world’ (Eph 2 7, “in the ages
to come”; Col 1 26, ‘the mystery which hath been
hid from ages and from generations,’ ERV, “from
all ages,” etc, ARVm, of geneat, “generations”
(Eph 3 5 “generations,” ver 21, “unto all genera-
tions for ever and ever,” Gr m, “all the generations
of the age of the ages’). ‘Ages’ is given in m of
AV (Ps 145 13; Isa 26 4, “the rock of ages”).

We have ‘age’ in the above sense (2 Esd 3 18;
Tob 14 5; aion) “ages,” atén (1 Esd 4 40 [of
Truth] “she is the strength,” etc, ‘‘of all ages”),
genea, RV, “generation”? (Wisd 7 27; 1 Mace 2
61); Ecclus 24 33, ets geneds atonén, “generations
of ages’; Wisd 14 6, ‘‘generations” (genéseas).

RV has “age” for ‘‘world” (He 6 5); “ages” for
“worlds’ (RVm He 1 2; ARVm; cf 1 Tim 1 17)
(m, “unto the ages of the ages’); “ages” for
“world” (1 Cor 10 11; He 9 26). ERV has “all
ages” for “the beginning of the world’”’ (Eph 3 9,
ARV “for ages’); “king of the ages” for “king of
saints’ (Rev 15 3, corrected text; m, many ancient
authorities read “nations”; Jer 10 7). See Evrer-
LASTING. W. L. WaLKER


AGE, OLD AGE, in individual lives (721, heledh;
HAtkla, hélikia): We have scarcely any word in
the OT or NT which denotes “‘age” in the familiar
modern sense; the nearest in the OT is perhaps
heledh, ‘‘life,”’ “lifetime,” and in the NT hélikia,
“full age,’ “manhood,” but which is rendered
“stature” in Mt 6 27, etc, AV; heledh occurs (Job 11
17, ‘Thine age shall be clearer than the noonday,’”’
RV “[thy] life’; Ps 89 5, “‘Mine age is as nothing
before thee,’ ARV, ‘‘my life-time’); we have
helikia (Jn 9 21.23, “He is of age”; He 11 11.
“past age,’ Lk 2 52, “Jesus increased in wisdom
and age,” so RVm, AVm, Eph 4 18); yom, day,
(days), is used in the OT to express “age” (Gen 47
28), “the whole age of Jacob,” AV, ‘the days of the
years of his life’; but it occurs mostly in connec-
tion with old age); bén, “son” (Nu 8 25; 1 Ch 23
3.24); kelah, “to be complete,” is tr+ “full age”
(Job 5 26); téleios, “complete” (He 5 14, RV,
“fullerown men,” m, “perfect”), ddr, “a revolu-
tion,” “a period” is tr? “age” (Isa 38 12, “Mine
age is departed and removed from meas a shepherd’s
tent,’ ARV, “My dwelling is removed, and is
carried away from me as a shepherd’s tent,” ERV,
“mine age,” m, “or habitation’; Delitzsch, “my
home”; cf Ps 49 19 [20]; 2 Cor 6 8). In NT
we have étos, “year” (Mk 5 42, RV, “old”; Lk 2
37; 3 23, “Jesus... . about 30 years of age’’).
“Qld age,’ “aged,” are the tr of various words, zaken
(eakan, “the chin,” ‘‘the beard’’), perhaps to have
the chin sharp or hanging down, often tri “elders,”
“old man,” ete (2 8 19 32; Job 12 20; 32 9; Jer
6 11).

In NT we have presbuités, ‘‘aged,” “advanced in
days” (Titus 2 2; Philem 9); presbutis, “aged
woman” (Titus 2 3); probebékés en hémérais, “‘ad-
vanced in days’? (Lk 2 36); géras, “old age” (Lk
1 36).

RV has “old” for “the age of” (1 Ch 23 3),
“own age’ for “sort’? (Dnl 1 10); “aged” for
“ancients” (Ps 119 100); for ‘‘ancient’’ (Isa 47 6);
for “old” (He 8 13); “aged men” for “the ancients”
(Job 12 12); for “aged” (Job 12 20), “elders.”

(1) Among the Hebrews (and Orientals generally)
old age was held in honor, and respect was require

for the aged (Lev 19 32), ‘Thou shalt
Regard for rise up before the hoary head, and
Old Age honor the face of the old man”; a

mark of the low estate of the nation
was that “The faces of elders were not honored’;
“The elders have ceased from the gate” (Lam 5
12.14). Cf Job 29 8 (as showing the exceptionally


nee regard for Job). See also Wisd 2 10; Ecclus


6.

(2) Old age was greatly desired and its attain-
ment regarded as a Divine blessing (Gen 16 15;
Ex 20 12, ‘that thy days may be long in the land”;
Job 5 26; Ps 91 16, “With long life will I satisfy
him’; 92 14; cf Isa 65 20; Zec 8 4; 1 S 2 82).

(3) A Divine assurance is given, ‘Even to old
age I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carry you”
(Iisa 46 4); hence it was looked forward to in faith
and hope (Ps 71 9.18).

(4) Superior wisdom was believed to belong to
the aged (Job 12 20; 16 10; 32 7.9; cf 1 K 12
8); hence positions of guidance and authority were
given to them, as the terms ‘elders,’ ‘“‘pres-
byters” and (Arab.) ‘‘sheik” indicate.

W. L. WALKER

AGEE, 4’gé (NAN , ’dghé’, fugitive’): A Hararite,
father of Shammah, one of David’s “three mighty
men” (2S 23 11). In 1 Ch 11 34 we read of
one “Jonathan the son of Shagee the Hararite.”
The parallel in 2 S 23 32.33 reads “Jonathan,
Shammah the Hararite.” If we read “Jonathan
{son of] Shammah,” then Agee is the grandfather of
Jonathan. Some, however, think 1 Ch 11 34
to be correct, and read “Shagee”’ for ‘‘Agee’’ in
28 23 11, and for “Shammah’’ in 2 § 23 33.
This makes Jonathan and Shammah brothers.


AGES, ROCK OF: Applied to Jehovah as an
encouragement for trust (Isa 264 RVm; AV
“everlasting strength”).


AGGABA, a-ga’ba ’AyyoBé, Aggabd, and ’Aypa-
Ba, Agrabé; AV Graba)= Hagabah (Ezr 2 45)
and Hagaba (Neh 7 48): The descendants of A.
(temple-servants) returned with Zerubbabel to
Jerus (1 Esd 5 29). See also AccaBa. °


AGGAEUS, a-gé’us (’Ayyatos, Aggaios; AV
Aggeus): Haggai, one of the Minor Prophets. A.
prophesied in the second year of the reign of Darius
(ef Ezr 4 24; 6 1) with Zacharias in Jerus (1 Esd
61; 73). In 2 Esd 1 40 he is mentioned as one
who with others shall be given as “leader to the
nation from the east.” ;


AGIA, a’gi-a (Aya, Agid; AV Hagia)=Hattil
(Ezr 2 57; Neh 7 59): The descendants of A. (sons
of the servants of Solomon) returned with Zerubbabel
to Jerus (1 Esd 5 34).


AGONE, a-gon’: In AV of 1 8 30 13. Old past
part. of ‘“‘to go.” RV has “ago,” viz. “three days
ago,” lit. ‘‘the third day.”


AGONY, ag’o-ni (@yevla, agdnia; Vulg agonia):
A word occurring only once in the NT (Lk 22 44),
and used to describe the climax of the mysterious
soul-conflict and unspeakable suffering of Our Lord
in the garden at Gethsemane. The term is derived
from the Gr agén “contest” and this in turn from
the Gr dgé “to drive or lead,” as in a chariot race.
Its root idea is the struggle and pain of the severest
athletic contest or conflict. The wrestling of the
athlete has its counterpart in the wrestling of the
suffering soul of the Saviour in the garden. At the
beginning of this struggle He speaks of His soul
being exceeding sorrowful even unto death, and
this tumult of emotion culminated in the agony.
All that can be suggested by the exhausting
struggles and sufferings of charioteers, runners,
wrestlers and gladiators, in Grecian and Roman
amphitheaters, 1s summed up in the pain and death-
struggle of this solitary word “agony.” The word
was rendered by Wyclif (1382) “maad in agonye”’;
Tindale (1534) and following translators use “an


Agrapha


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 72


agony.” The record of Jesus’ suffering in Gethsem-
ane, in the Synoptic Gospels (Mt 26 36-46; Mk 14
32-42; Lk 22 39-46, and alsoin He 5 7.8) indicates
that it was threefold:
The agony of His soul wrought its pain on His
body, until “his sweat became as it were great
drops of blood falling down upon the
1. Physical ground” (Lk 22 44, omitted by some
ancient authorities). He offered His
prayers and supplications ‘‘with strong crying and
tears” (He 5 7). The intensity of His struggle so
distressed and weakened Him that Luke says “there
appeared unto him an angel from heaven, strength-
ening him.” The threefold record of the evangelists
conveys the idea of the intensest physical pain. As
the wire carries the electric current, so every nerve
in Jesus’ physical being felt the anguish of His sen-
sitive soul as He took upon Himself the burden of
the world’s sin and moral evil.
The crisis of Jesus’ career as Messiah and Re-
deemer came in Gethsemane. The moral issue of
His atoning work was intelligently
2. Mental and voluntarily met here. The Gospels
exhaust language in attempting to
portray the stress and struggle of this conflict.
“My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death.”
“Being in an agony he prayed more earnestly,
saying, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
away from me.” The mental clearness of Christ’s
vision of humanity’s moral guilt and the energy
of will necessary to meet the issue and take ‘‘this
cup” of being the world’s sin-bearer, indicate the
awful sorrow and anguish of His supernatural con-


flict. It is divinely significant that the word
“agony” appears but once in all Scripture. This
solitary word records a solitary experience. Only


One ever compassed the whole range of the world’s
sorrow and pain, anguish and agony. The shame
of criminal arrest in the garden and of subsequent
condemnation and death as a malefactor had to
His innocent soul the horror of humanity’s entire
and ageless guilt. The mental and moral anguish
of Jesus in Gethsemane interprets the meaning of
Paul’s description of the atonement, ‘(Him who knew
no sin he made to be sin on our behalf”’ (2 Cor 5 21).
The agony of Jesus was supremely within the
realm of His spirit. The effect of sin in separating
the human soul from God was fath-

3. Spiritual omed by the suffering Saviour in the
fathomless mystery of His super-

natural sorrow. Undoubtedly the anguish of
Gethsemane surpassed the physical torture of
Calvary. The whole conflict was wrought out here.
Jesus’ filial spirit, under the burden of the world’s
guilt, felt isolated from the Father. This awful,
momentary seclusion from His Father’s face con-
stituted the “cup” which He prayed might pass from
Him, and the “agony” of soul, experienced again
on the cross, when He felt that God had forsaken


im.

No theory of the atonement can do justice to
the threefold anguish of Jesus in Gethsemane and
on Calvary, or to the entire trend of Scripture, that
does not include the substitutionary element in
His voluntary sacrifice, as stated by the prophet:
“Jeh hath laid on him the iniquity of us all,” Isa
63 6; and by His apostles: “who was delivered up
for our trespasses,” Rom 4 25; “who his own self
bare our sins,” 1 Pet 2 24.

The word “agony” also occurs in 2 Macc 3
14.16.21 AV ( RV “distress’’) in describing the dis-
tress of the people at the attempt of Heliodorus to
despoil the treasury of the temple in the days of
Onias. Dwicat M. Prarr


AGRAPHA, ag’ra-fa ("Aypada, dgrapha): The
word dgraphos of which agrapha is the neuter


plur. is met with in classical Gr and in Gr papyti
in its primary sense of ‘‘unwritten,” “unrecorded.
In early Christian lit., esp. in the


1. The writings of Clement of Alexandria, it
Term and was used of oral tradition; and in
Its History this sense it was revived by Koerner


in a Leipzig Program issued in 1776
under the title De sermonibus Christi agraphois.
For some time it was restricted to sayings of Christ
not recorded in the Gospels and believed to have
reached the sources in which they are found by means
of oral tradition. As however graphé, the noun
with which agrapha is connected, can have not only
the general meaning “writing,” but the special
meaning ‘‘Scripture,” the adj. could signify not
only “oral’’ but also ‘“uncanonical” or “non-
canonical’; and it was employed by Resch in the
latter sense in the Ist ed of his great work on the
subject which appeared in German in 1889 under the
title, Agrapha: Extra-canonical Gospel Fragments.
The term was now also extended so as to include
narratives as well as sayings. In the second ed
(also in German) it is further widened so as to em-
brace all extra-canonical sayings or passages con-
nected with the Bible. The new title runs: Agra-
pha: Extra-canonical Fragments of Scripture; and the
volume contains a first collection of OT agrapha.
The term is still however used most frequently of
non-canonical sayings ascribed to Jesus, and to the
consideration of these this art. will mainly be de-
voted.

Of the 361 agrapha and apocrypha given by Resch
about 160 are directly ascribed to Christ. About 30
others can be added from Christian and

2. Extent of Jewish sources and about 80 sayings


Material found in Mubammadan literature (Ex-
pos T, V, 59, 107, 177 f, 508 f, 561,
etc). The last-mentioned group, although not


entirely without interest, may largely be disre-
garded as it is highly improbable that it represents
early tradition. The others come from a variety
of sources: the NT outside of the Gospels, Gospel
MSS and VSS, Apocryphal Gospels and an early
collection of sayings of Jesus, liturgical texts,

patristic and mediaeval lit. and the Talm.
Many of these sayings have no claim to be regarded
as independent agrapha. At least five classes come
under this category. (1) Some are


3. Sayings mere parallels or variants, for in-
to Be stance: “Pray and be not weary,”
Excluded which is evidently connected with


Lk 18 1; and the saying in the Talm:
“T, the Gospel, did not come to take away from the
law of Moses but to add to the law of Moses have I
come” (Shab 116b) which is clearly a variant of
Mt 6 17. (2) Some sayings are made up of two or
more canonical texts. “I chose you before the
world was,” for example, is a combination of
Jn 15 19 and Eph 1 4; and “Abide in my love
and I will give you eternal life’ of Jn 8 31 and
10 28. (3) Misquotation or loose quotation ac-
counts for a number of alleged agrapha. ‘Sodom
is justified more than thou” seems to be really from
Ezk 16 53 and its context. “Let not the sun go
down upon your wrath” is of apostolic not evan-
gelic origin (Eph 4 26). “Anger destroys even
the prudent” comes from LXX of Prov 16 1.
(4) Some sayings must be rejected because they
cannot be traced to an early source, for instance,
the fine saying: “Be brave in war, and fight with
the old serpent, and ye shall receive eternal life,”
which is first met with in a text of the 12th cent.
(5) Several sayings are suspicious by reason of their
source or their character. The reference to “my
mother the Holy Spirit,” in one of them, has no
warrant in the acknowledged teaching of Christ
and comes from a source of uncertain value, the


73 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Agrapha


Gospel according to the He. Pantheistic sayings
such as “I am thou and thou art I, and wherever
thou art I am’; “You are I and I am you’; and
perhaps the famous saying: ‘‘Raise the stone and
thou wilt find me; cleave the wood and there am
I,”’ as well as the sayings reported by Epiphanius
from the Gospel of the Ebionites seem to breathe
an atmosphere different from that of the canonical
Gospels.
When all the sayings belonging to these five
classes, and a few others of liturgical origin, have
: been deducted there remain about
4. Sayings thirty-five which are worthy of men-
in NT tion and in some cases of careful con-
sideration. Some are dealt with in
the art. Loara (q.v.). The others, which are given
here, are numbered consecutively to facilitate
reference. The best authenticated are of course
those found in the NT outside of the Gospels.
‘These are (1) the great saying cited by Paul at
Miletus: “It 1s more blessed to give than to receive’
(Acts 20 35); (2) the words used in the institution
of the Eucharist preserved only in 1 Cor 11 24 f;
(3) the promise of the baptism of the Spirit (Acts
1 5and1i 16); and (4) the answer to the question:
“Dost thou at this time restore the kingdom to
Israel?” (Acts 1 7f). Less certain are (5) the
description of the Second Advent, said to be “by
the word of the Lord” (1 Thess 4 15ff); and
(6) the promise of the crown of life to them that
love God (Jas 1 12).
Of considerable interest are some additions, in MSS
of the Gospels and VSS. One of the most remark-
able (7) is the comment of Jesus on a


5. Sayings man’s working on the Sabbath day
in MSS inserted after Lk 6 4 in Codex D and
and VSS_—s the Freer MS recently discovered in


Egypt: “If thou knowest what thou
doest, O man, blessed art thou, but if thou knowest
not, thou art accursed and a transgressor of the
law.’’? Another (8) also found in D and in several
other authorities is appended to Mt 20 28: “But
ye seek ye from little to increase and from greater
to be less.” In the Curetonian Syriac the latter
clause runs: “and not from greater to be less.”’
The new saying is noteworthy but obscure. A
third passage (9) of less value but still of interest
is an insertion in the longer ending of Mk, between
ver 14 and ver 15, which was referred to by Jerome
as present in codices in his day but has now been
met with in Gr for the first time in the above-
mentioned Freer MS. (For facsimile see Am.
Journal of Archaeology, 1908.) In reply to a com-

laint of the disciples about the opposition of
Ratan and their request: ‘Therefore reveal thy
righteousness even now,” Jesus is reported to have
said: “The limit of the years of the authority of
Satan is fulfilled, but other dreadful things are
approaching, and in behalf of those who had sinned
was I delivered unto death in order that they might
return to the truth and might sin no longer, that
they might inherit the spiritual and incorruptible
glory of righteousness in heaven.” This alleged
utterance of the risen Lord is most probably_of
secondary character (cf Gregory, Das Freer Lo-
gion; Swete, Two New Gospel Fragments).

Apocryphal and patristic literature supplies some
notable sayings. The first place must be given

(10) to the great saying which in its


6. Sayings shortest form consists of only three
from the words: ‘Be [“become,” ‘show your-
Fathers, selves to be”’] approved money-
ete changers.” Resch (Agrapha?, no. 87)


gives 69 references, at least 19 of
which date from the 2d and 3d cents., although
they represent only a few authorities, all Egyptian.
The saying seems to have circulated widely in


. him who seeks cease... .


the early church and may be genuine. Other
early sayingsof interest or value, from these sources,
must be given without comment. (11) “The
heavenly Father willeth the repentance of the sin-
ner rather than his punishment” (Justin Martyr).
(12) “That which is weak shall be saved by that
which is strong” (cir 300 AD). (13) “Come out
from bonds ye who will” (Clement of Alexandria).
(14). “Be thou saved and thy soul” (Theodotus in
id). (15) “Blessed are they who mourn for the
perdition of unbelievers’ (Didaskalia). (16) “He
who is near me is near the fire; he who is far from
me is far from the kingdom” (Origen). (17) “He
who has not been tempted has not been approved”
(Didaskalia, etc). (18) He who makes sad a
brother’s spirit is one of the greatest of criminals’
(Ev Heb). (19) ‘‘Never be glad except when ye
have seen your brother in love” (ib). _ (20) “Let not
until he find, and when
he finds he shall be astonished; astonished he shall
reach the kingdom, and when he has reached the
kingdom he shall rest”? (Clement of Alexandria and
Logta of Oxyrhynchus). (21) In a fragment of a
Gospel found by Grenfell and Hunt at Oxyrhynchus
(O Papyri no. 655) is the following non-canonical
passage in a canonical context: ‘‘He Himself will
give you clothing. His disciples say unto Him:
When wilt thou be manifest to us and when shall we
see thee? He saith: When ye shall be stripped
and not be ashamed.”” The saying or apocryphon
exhibits considerable likeness to a saying cited by
Clement of Alexandria from the Gospel according
to the Egyptians, but the difference is great enough
to make original identity doubtful. Another frag-
ment found by the same explorers on the same site
(O Papyri no. 840) preserves two agrapha or apoc-
rypha which though clearly secondary are very
curious. The first (22) is the concluding portion of
a saying about the punishment of evil-doers: ‘‘Be-
fore aman does wrong he makes all manner of subtle
excuses. But give heed lest you also suffer thesame
things as they for the evil-doers among men receive
not their due among the living (Gr zéis) only
but also await punishment and much _ torment.”
Professor Swete (Two New Gospel Fragmenis),
accents 20ois as the plural of zdon and thus finds
a contrast between the fate of animals and that of
human beings. The second saying (23) is a rather
lengthy reply to the complaint of a Pharisaic
stickler for outward purity. The most interesting
part of it as edited by Swete runs as follows: ‘“Woe
to you blind who see not..... But I and my
disciples who thou sayest have not been dipped
have dipped in the waters of eternal life which
come down from God out of heaven.” All these
texts from Oxyrhynchus probably date from the
2d cent. Other Egypt sources, the so-called Coptic
Apocryphal Gospels (Texts and Studies Camb.
IV, 2, 1896), contain several sayings which are
of interest as coming from the same religious
environment. The following three are the most
remarkable. (24) “Repent, for it is better that a
man find a cup of water in the age that is coming
than all the riches of this world” (130). (25)
“Better is a single footstep in My Father's house
than all the wealth of this world” (130f). (26)
“Now therefore have faith in the love of My
Father; for faith is the end of all things’ (176).
As in the case of the Logia these sayings are found
jn association with canonical sayings and parallels.
Since the Logia may well have numbered scores,
if not hundreds, it is at least possible that these
Coptic sayings may have been taken from the
missing portions of this collection, or a recension
of it, and therefore they are not unworthy of
notice as conceivably early agrapha. To these
sayings of Christian derivation may be added


Agrarian Laws
Agriculture


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 74


(27) one Muhammadan saying, that inscribed in
Arabic on the chief gateway of the city Futtey-
pore Sikni built by Akbar: “The world is but a
bridge, over which you must pass, but must not
linger to build your dwelling” (In the Himalayas
by Miss Gordon Cumming, cited by Griffenhoofe,
The Unwritten Sayings of Christ, 128).

Although the number of agrapha purporting to
be sayings of Jesus which have been collected by

scholars seems at first sight imposing,
7. Result those which have anything like a
strong claim to acceptance on the
ground of early and reliable source and internal
character are disappointingly few. Of those given
above nos. 1-4, 7, 8, 10 which have mostly early
attestation clearly take precedence of the rest.
Nos. 11-20 are early enough and good enough to
merit respectful consideration. Still the propor-
tion of genuine, or possibly genuine, material is
very small. Ropes is probably not far from the
truth when he remarks that “the writers of the
Synoptic Gospels did their work so well that only
stray bits here and there, and these but of small
value, were left for the gleaners.”’ On the other
hand it is not necessary to follow Wellhausen in
rejecting the agrapha in tote. Recent discoveries
have shown that they are the remains of a con-
siderable body of extra-canonical sayings which
circulated more or less in Christian circles, esp. in
Egypt, in the early cents., and the possible presence
in what we possess of a sentence or two actually
spoken by Jesus fully justifies research.

The second edition of the work of Resch includes
17 agrapha from MSS of Acts and 1 Jn most of

which are from Codex D, 31 apostolic
8. Other apocrypha, and 66 agrapha_and apoc-
Agrapha rypha connected with the OT. 19 of
the latter are largely taken from pseu-
depigrapha, a pseudo-Ezekiel for instance. These
agrapha some of which are really textual variants
are of inferior interest and value.

LitERATURE.—The chief anthorities are the German
book of the American scholar J. H. Ropes, Die Spriche
Jesu, die in den kanonischen Hvangelien nicht iberliefert
sind, and his art. “Agrapha'' in HDB (extra vol); and
the often-mentioned work of Resch. The former has
great critical value, and the latter, especially in the
2d ed, is a veritable thesaurus of material. For a fnll
survey of the literature up to 1905 see that work, pp.
14-17. There is much criticism in Bauer's Das Leben
Jesu im Zeitalter der neutestamentlichen Apokryphen, ch
vii. Among smaller works special mention Inay be made
of Prebendary Blomfield's Twenty-Fine Agraphe (1900);
and the book of Griffenhoofe, the title of which is given
above. There are recent arts. on the subject in HDB
(1909), ‘‘ Unwritten Sayings,” and DCG, ‘‘Sayings (Un-
written)"; Am. Journal of Archaeology, XII (1908), 49—
55: H. A. Sanders, New MSS from Egypt; also ib, XIII
(1909), 180. See Locra.

Witii1am Taytor Smits
AGRARIAN LAWS, a-gra’ri-an léz:
The Sabbath Year °
The Jubilee
Its Object
The Legal Rules
Ideas and Circumstances of the Legislatlon
Form of the Legislation
. Its Operation and Extension
Other Laws Affecting the Land


The Mosaic provisions on this subject form one
of the most characteristic and interesting portions
of the legislation. The main institutions are two,
viz., the Sabbath year and the jubilee, and they are
closely linked together.

In every seventh year the land was to lie fal-
low “that the poor of thy people may eat: and

what they leave the beast of the field


PNM MP oho


1. The shall eat” (Ex 23 10f; cf Lev 25 2-7).
Sabbath ‘And the Sabbath of the land shall
Year be for food for you; for thee, and for


thy servant, and for thy maid, and
for thy hired servant and for thy stranger that
sojourn with thee; bué for thy cattle, and for the


beasts that are in thy land, shall all the increase
thereof be for food’ (Lev 25 6f). This has been
quoted at length because the rendering of EV is
misleading. ‘The Sabbath of the land” does not
mean that the natural increase thereof is to be
eaten by the Israelitish peasant. That interpre-
tation is excluded by vs 3-5.20-22. What is
intended is clearly shown by the latter of these two
passages, “I will command my blessing upon you
in the sixth year.” The principle on which the
manna had been provided for Sabbaths was to
apply to the harvest of the sixth year, and this is
the import of the phrase. 5
After “seven sabbaths of years, even forty and
nine years” a trumpet was to be blown throughout
the land on the tenth day of the
seventh month (i.e. the Day of Atone-
ment) and the fiftieth year was to be
hallowed and celebrated as a ‘‘jubilee.”
No agricultural work of any kind was to be
performed, but ‘‘ye may [so correct EVV] eat the
increase thereof out of the field” (Lev 25 12).
God would so bless the land in the sixth year that
it would bring forth enough for the Sabbath year,
the ensuing jubilee and the subsequent period to the
harvest of the ninth year (vs 20-22).
In addition to being a period in which the land
was left fallow, the jubilee was intended to meet
the economic evils that befell peasants
3. Its in ancient societies. Wars or unfa-
Object vorable seasons would soon reduce a
farmer to a condition in which he
would have to borrow. But money is rarely to
be had without interest and security, and in early
communities the rates of interest were very high
indeed, while the only security the farmer could
offer would consist of his land and the persons of
himself and his children. Hence we find insol-
vency giving rise to the alienation of land and to
slavery all over the world—sometimes with the
retention of civil rights (as in Rome and Israel),
at others in a more unalloyed form. The jubilee
aims at both these evils. It is provided that in
that year the peasants who had lost their full
freedom through insolvency should be free (see
SBL, 5 ff) and all lands that had been sold should
return to the original owner or his family. ‘And
the land shall not be sold in perpetuity; for the
land is mine: for ye are strangers and sojourners
with me’ (ver 23). To this theory there are
parallels elsewhere, e.g. in Togoland (Heinrici,
aes fir vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft, XI,
Lev 25 containing the land laws gives effect to
this view by enacting that when an Israelite was
compelled to part with his land there
4. The was to be a “redemption” of land, and
Legal Rules that in default of redemption the land
; should return to its original owner in
the jubilee year. This “redemption” covers two
ideas—a right of preémption by the next of kin
in the first instance, and if that were not exercised,
a right on the part of the original owner to buy
back the land before the jubilee (vs 24-28). The
theory did not apply to houses in walled cities.
Those might be redeemed within a year of sale:
in default the property passed for ever and was un-
affected by the jubilee (vs 29f). Villages were
reckoned as country (ver 31). The Levitical
cities were subject to the rules of land, not of
walled cities (vs 32f; read with the Vulg in ARVm,
‘Sf they have not been redeemed” in vs 32), and
their fields were not to be sold (ver 34). All sales
of lands to which the jubilee applied were to be
made on the basis of the number of crops (vs 14 ff);
in fact, what was sold was not the property itself
but the usufruct (i.e. the right of using, reaping,


2. The
Jubilee


75 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Agrarian Laws
Agriculture


etc) till the year of the jubilee. Similarly with the
laws of Lev 27 16-25, where the general principle
is that if a field be sanctified the value shall be esti-
mated according to the number of years to the
jubilee. Unfortunately the text is corrupt and it
is impossible to make out the exact circumstances
in which no further redemption was allowed
(ver 20).
“The land laws are the product of many inde-
pendent ideas and circumstances First. such
a system as that expounded in the 25th
6. Ideas chapter of Lev could only be put for-
and Cir- ward by one who had to work on what
cumstances is so very rare in history—a clean slate.
of the In other words, the system of land
Legislation tenure here laid down could only be
__, introduced in this way by men who had
no preéxisting system to reckon with. Secondly,
there is (mutatis mutandis) a marked resemblance
between the provisions of Lev and the system intro-
duced in Egypt by Joseph (Gen 47). The land
is the Lord’s as it is Pharaoh’s; but the towns
which are built on that land are not subject to the
same theory or the same rules. Perhaps the ex-
planation is that Joseph’s measures had affected
only those who gained their living by agriculture,
i.e. the dwellers in the country. Thirdly, the
system shows the enormous power that the con-
ception of family solidarity possessed in the Mo-
salc age... .. And fourthly, the enactment is
inspired and illuminated by the humanitarian and
religious convictions to which reference has already
been made” (Journal of Transactions of the Victoria
Institute, XLI, 160). Undoubtedly the most strik-
ing feature of the enactment is to be found in these
religious convictions with the absolute reliance on
constant Divine intervention to secure the working
of the Jaw (vs 20 ff).
Lev 26 shows clearly that this legislation was
conceived as the terms of a covenant made between
God and the children of Israel, and it


6. Form appears from vs 42-45 that this
of the covenant was regarded as being con-
Legislation nected with the covenants with the


patriarchs though it is also a covenant
made with the generation that came forth from
Egypt. Tbe land was originally promised to Abra-
ham in a covenant (Gen 17) and it would seem
that these laws are regarded as attaching to that
covenant which had been renewed with his de-
scendants. Indeed the laws appear to be presented
as terms of the sworn agreement (covenant) under
which God was about to give Israel the possession
of Canaan.
As respects the operation of these laws we have
no information ag to the observance of any fallow
years before the Exile: 2 Ch 36 21
7. Its Oper- is rather unfavorable, but so obviously
ation and echoes Lev 26 43 that it scarcely
Extension seems to be meant as a historical state-
ment. But traces are to be found
of the operation of other parts of the system.
Ruth 4 shows us the law of redemption working,
but with two notable extensions. Widows have
acquired a right of property in their husbands’
estates, and when the next of kin refuses to redeem,
the right passes to the kinsman who is nearest in
succession. Neither of these cases is contemplated
by the Pent: both appear to be fresh applications
of the Levitical law which, like wll other legislations,
had to be adapted to meet new sets of facts as they
arose. Similarly Jer 32 illustrates the law of pre-
emption, but here a small difficulty arises, for Lev
25 34 forbids the sale of the suburbs of the Levitical
cities. Probably however this refers only to sale
outside the family and not as here to the nearest
kinsman and heir presumptive. Similarly Ezk


twice refers to the jubilee (7 12f and 46 17) in
terms that seem to show that he knew it as an
existing institution (see SBL, 96; Churchman, May,
1906, 292). Historical traces of the Levitical cities
are mentioned in the art. LeviricaL Cities. It
should be added that under the monarchy a rule
seems to have been introduced that derelict lands
pee the king (see 2 8 9 9f; 1 K 21 16; 2 K 8


In later times there are several references to the
fallow of the Sabbatical year (1 Macc 6 49.53; Ant,
XIII, viii, 1; XIV, x, 6, etc).

In addition to these laws Moses enacted pro-
visions favoring gleaning, on which see Poor.

He also prohibited sowing a field or


8. Other vineyard with two kinds of seed (Lev
Laws 19 19; Dt 22 9) and prescribed that
Affecting for three years the fruit of trees should
the Land not be eaten, while in the fourth it


should be holy, and in the fifth it was
to be available for ordinary purposes (Lev 19 23 ff).
Harotp M. WIENER

AGREE, a-gré’ (cuppevéw, sumphanéd, “to be
of the same mind,” “to come to a mutual under-
standing”): This is the sense of the word in Mt 20
2; Jn 9 22, and other passages. In Mk 14 56
the word is isos and has the thought not only that
their words did not agree, but also that the testi-
mony was not in agreement with or equal to what
the law required in such a case. The thought of
being equal occurs also in1 Jn 5 8.

The fig. use of the word in Mt 18 19 makes it
of special interest. The word there is sumphé-
né6, from which comes our word symphony, mean-
ing a harmonious blending. This agreement there-
fore is complete. Three persons are introduced:
two human beings and the Father. They are in
perfect agreement on the subject or purpose under
consideration. It is therefore an inward unity
produced by the Holy Spirit, leading the two into
such an agreement with the Father. There will
follow then, as a matter of course, what is promised
in vs 19.20. In Acts 5 9 it sets forth the justice
of Peter in dealing in the same manner in both cases.
Ananias and Sapphira were in perfect agreement
and equally guilty (Lk 6 36; Acts 15 15).

Jacop W. Kapp

AGRICULTURE, ag’ri-kul-tiir, ag’ri-kul-chur:

I. DevevorpmMentT or AGRICULTURE
II. Curmatic Conpitions AND FErRTILity
III. AoricutturaL Pursuits

1. Growing of Grain
(1) Plowing and Sowing
(2) Reaping
(3) Threshing

2. Care of Vineyards

3. Raising of Flocks

L. Development of Agriculture.—One may witness
in Syria and Pal today the various stages of social
progress through which the people of Bible times
passed in which the development. of their agricul-
ture played an important part. To the E. the sons


c, Share.
Ox-goad (below).


a, Pole or Beam. 06, Yokes.


d, Handle.
e, Points. a


of Ishmael still wander in tribes from place to place,
depending upon their animals for food and raiment,
unless by a raid they can secure the fruits of the


Agriculture


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 76


soil from the peoples, mostly of their own blood,
who have given up wandering and are supporting
themselves by tilling the ground. It is only a short
step from this frontier life to the more protected
territory toward the Mediterranean, where in
comparatively peaceful surroundings, the wander-
ers become stationary. If the land which they
have come to possess is barren and waterless, they
become impoverished physically and spiritually,
but if they have chosen the rarer spots where under-
ground streams burst forth into valleys covered
with alluvial deposits (Ex 3 8), they prosper and
there springs up the more complicated community
life with its servants, hirelings, gardeners, etc. A
division of labor ensues. Some leave the soil for
the crafts and professions but still depend upon
their farmer neighbors for their sustenance. (1 K.
5 11.) Such was the variety of life of the people
among whom Jesus lived, and of their ancestors,
and of the inhabitants of the land long before the
children of Israel came to take possession of it.
Bible history deals with the Hebrews at a period
when a large proportion of that people were en-
gaged in agrarian pursuits, hence we find its pages
filled with references to agricultural occupations.

II, Climatic Conditions and Fertility.—With cli-
matic conditions and fertility so varied, the mode
of cultivation, seedtime and harvest differed even
in closely adjacent territory. On the coastal plains
and in the low Jordan valley the soil was usually
rich and the season was early, whereas in the moun-
tainous regions and high interior plains the planting
and reaping times were from two weeks to a month
later. To make use of the soil on the hillsides,
terracing was frequently necessary. Examples
of these old terraces still exist. On the unwatered
plains the crops could be grown only in the winter
and spring, i.e. during the rainy season. These
districts dried up in May or June and remained
fallow during the rainless summer. The same
was true of the hilly regions and valleys except
where water from a stream could be diverted from
its channel and spread over the fields. In such
districts crops could be grown irrespective of the
seasons. See IRRIGATION.

I, Agricultural Pursuits.—To appreciate the
many references in the Bible to agricultural pur-
suits and the frequent allusions of Our Lord to the
fields and their products, we must remember how


different were the surroundings of the farmers of
that day from those among which most of us live
or with which we are acquainted. What knowl-
edge we have of these pursuits is drawn from such
references as disclose methods bearing a close
similarity to those of the present day. The strong


tendency to resist change which is everywhere
manifest throughout the country and the survival
of ancient descriptive words in the language of
today further confirm our belief that we now wit-
ness in this country the identical operations which
were used two thousand or more years ago. It
would be strange if there were not a variety of
ways by which the same object was accomplished
when we remember that the Heb people benefited
by the experience of the Egyptians, of the Baby-
lonians, of the inhabitants of the land of their
adoption, as well as of its late European conquerors.
For this reason the drawings found on the Egyp
monuments, depicting agricultural scenes, help us to
explain the probable methods uscd in Pal.

Three branches of agriculture were more promi-
nent than the others; the growing of grain, the
care of vineyards (Nu 18 30), and the raising of
flocks. Most households owned fields and vine-
yards and the richer added to these a wealth of
flocks. The description of Job’s wealth (in Job 1)
shows that he was engaged in all these pursuits.


Threshing Instr


Hezekiah’s riches as enumerated in 2 Ch 32 27.28
suggest: activity in each of these branches.

In this and following descriptions, present-day
methods as far as they correspond to ancient
records will be dealt with.

(1) Plowing and sowing—On the
plains, little or no preparation for
plowing is needed, but in the hilly
regions, the larger stones, which the tilling of the
previous season has loosened and which the winter’s
rains have washed bare, are picked out and piled
into heaps on some ledge, or are thrown into the
paths, which thus become elevated above the fields
which they traverse. (See Fretp.) If grain is to
be planted, the sced is scattered broadcast by the
sower. Ifthe land has not been used for some time
the ground is first plowed, and when the seed has
been scattered is plowed again. The sower may
keep his supply of seed in a pocket made by pulling
up his outer garment through his girdle to a suffi-
cient extent for it to sag down outside his girdle
in the form of a loose pouch. He may, on the
other hand, carry it in a jar or basket as the sowers
are pictured as doing on the Egyp monuments.
As soon as the seed is scattered it is plowed in
before the ever-present crows and ravens can
gather it up. The path of the plow in the fields
of the hilly regions is a tortuous one because of the
boulders jutting out here and there (Mt 13 3 ff)
or because of the ledges which frequently lie hidden
just beneath the surface (the rocky places of
Christ’s parable). When the plowman respects
the footpaths which the sufferance of the owner
has allowed to be trodden across his fields or which
mark the boundaries between the lands of different
owners, and leaves them unplowed, then the seed
which has fallen on these portions becomes the
food of the birds. Corners of the field where the
plow cannot reach are hoed by hand. Harrowing-in
as we know it is not practised today, except on
some of the larger plains, and probably was not
used in Pal in earlier times. (See Harrow.)

(2) Reaping.—After the plowing is over, the


1. Growing
of Grain


77


fields are deserted until after the winter rains, unless
an unusually severe storm of rain and hail (Ex 9 25)
has destroyed the young shoots. Then a second
sowing is made. In April, if the hot east winds
have not blasted the grain (see Buastina) the bar-
ley begins to ripen. The wheat follows from a
week to six weeks later, depending upon the alti-
tude. Toward the end of May or the first week
in June, which marks the beginning of the dry
season, reaping begins. Whole families move out
from their village homes to spend the time in the
fields until the harvest is over. Men and women
join in the work of entting the grain. A handful
of grain is gathered together by means of a sickle
held in the right hand. The stalks thus gathered
in a bunch are then grasped by the left hand and
at the same time a pull is given which cuts off some
of the stalks a few inches above the ground (see


SruBBLE) and pulls the rest up by theroots. These
handfuls are laid behind the reapers and are gathered
up by the helpers (see GLEANING), usually the chil-
dren, and made into piles for transporting to the
threshing-floor.

(3) Threshing—The threshing-floors are con-
structed in the fields, preferably in an exposed posi-
tion in order to get the full benefit of the winds.
If there is danger of marauders they are clustered
together close to the village. The floor is a level,
cirenlar area 25 to 40 ft. in diameter, prepared by
first picking out the stones, and then wetting the
ground, tamping or rolling it, and finally sweeping
it. A border of stones usually surrounds the floor
to keep in the grain. The sheaves of grain which
have been brought on the backs of men, donkeys,
camels, or oxen, are heaped on this area, and the
process of tramping out begins. In some localities
several animals, commonly oxen or donkeys, are
tied abreast and driven round and round the floor.
In other places two oxen are yoked together to


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Agriculture


a drag, the bottom of which is studded with pieces
of basaltic stone. This drag, on which the driver,
and Pores his family, sits or stands, is driven in a
circular path over the grain. In still other dis-
tricts an instrument resembling a wheel harrow is
used, the antiquity of which is confirmed by the
Egyp records. The supply of unthreshed grain is
kept in the center of the floor. Some of this is
pulled down from time to time into the path of the
animals. All the while the partly threshed grain
is being turned over with a fork. The stalks
gradually become broken into short pieces and the
husks about the grain are torn off. This mixture
of chaff and grain must now be winnowed. This
is done by tossing it into the air so that the wind
may blow away the chaff (see WiInNowING). When
the chaff is gone then the grain is tossed in a wooden
tray to separate from it the stones and lumps of


THRESHING WITH OXEN.


soil which clung to the roots when the grain was
reaped. The difference in weight between the
stones and grain makes separation by this process
possible (see Sirtep). The grain is now piled in
heaps and in many localities is also sealed. This
process consists in pressing a large wooden seal
against the pile. When the instrament is removed
it leaves an impression which would be destroyed
should any of the grain be taken away. This
allows the government officials to keep account of
the tithes and enables the owner to detect any
theft of grain. Until the wheat is transferred to
bags some one sleeps by the piles on the threshing-
floor. If the wheat is to be stored for home con-
sumption it is often first washed with water and
spread out on goats’ hair mats to dry before it is
stored in the wall compartments found in every
house (see StorEHOUSE). Formerly the wheat was
ground only as needed. This was then a household
task which was accomplished with the hand-mill or
mortar (see Mizz).


Agrippa
Ahab


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 78


No clearer picture to correspond with present-
day practice in vine culture (see VINE) in Pal could
be given than that mentioned in Isa
2. Care of 6 1.6. Grapes probably served an
Vineyards important part in the diet of Bible
times as they do at present. In the
season which begins in July and extends for at least
three months, the humblest peasant as well as the
richest landlord considers grapes as a necessary
part of at least one meal each day. The grapes
were not only eaten fresh but were made into wine
(see WinepPREss). No parallel however can be
found in the Bible for the molasses which is made
by, boiling down the fresh grape juice. Some
writers believe that this substance was meant in
some passages tr? by wine or honey, but it is doubt-
ful. The care of the vineyards fitted well into the
farmer’s routine, as most of the attention required
coud be given when the other crops demanded no
ime.

The leaders of ancient Israel reckoned their
flocks as a necessary part of their wealth (see

Sueer Raisinc). When aman’sflocks
3. Raising were his sole possession he often lived
of Flocks with them and led them in and out in

search of pasturage (Ps 28; Mt 18
12), but_a man with other interests delegated this
task to his sons (1 § 16 11) or to hirelings. Hu-
man nature has not changed since the time when
Christ made the distinction between the true shep-
herd and the hireling (Jn 10 12). Within a short
time of the writing of these words the writer saw a
hireling cursing and abusing the stray members of
a flock which he was driving, not leading as do good
shepherds.

The flock furnished both food and raiment. The
milk of camels, sheep and goats was eaten fresh or
made into curdled milk, butter or cheese. More
rarely was the flesh of these animals eaten (sce
Foop). The peasant’s outer coat is still made of a
tawed sheepskin or woven of goats’ hair or wool
(see Weavine). The various agricultural opera-
tions are treated more fully under their respective
names, (q.v.). James A. Patcu


AGRIPPA, a-grip’s. See Heron.


AGUE, a’gt (KIMIP, kaddahath): In Lev 26 16
AV is one of the diseases threatened as a penalty
for disobedience to the law. The malady is said
to ‘consume the eyes, and make the soul to pine
away.” The word means burning (Vulg ‘‘ardor’’)
and was probably intended to denote the malarial
fever so common now both in the Shephelah and in
the Jordan valley. In LXX the word used (terepos,
tkteros) means jaundice, which often accompanies
this fever. RV translates it “fever.” See Frvrr.


AGUR, 4a’gur (138, ’dghir, seeming, from com-
parison with Arab. roots, to mean either “hireling,”’
or “collector,” “gatherer’’): One of the coniribu-
tors to Prov; his words being included in 30. He
takes an agnostic attitude toward God and tran-
scendent things, and in general the range of his
thought, as compared with that of other authors,
is pedestrian. He shows, however, a tender rever-
ence and awe. His most notable utterance, per-
haps, is the celebrated Prayer of Agur (Prov 30
7-9), which gives expression to a charming golden
mean of practicalideal. His sayings are constructed
on arather artificial plan; having the form of the
so-called numerical proverb. See under Proverss,
Book orf, II, 6. JOHN FRANKLIN GENUNG


AH, 4, AHA, a-ha’: Interjections of frequent
occurrence in the OT, representing different Heb
words and different states of feeling. (1) “8,


’ahah, expressing complaint and found in the phrase
“Ah, Lord Jeh” (Jer 16; 4 10 etc; Ezk 4 14
etc). Elsewhere the word is tr’ “alas!”’ (Joel 1
15). (2) MS, ’ak, occurs once (Ezk 21 15), express-
ing grief in contemplating Israel’s destruction.
(3) ON, he’ah, usually expresses malicious joy over
the reverses of an enemy, and is introduced by the
verb “to say” (BDB); so in Ps 36 21.25; Ezk
26 3; 26 2; 36 2; in the repeated psalm 40 15,
70 8. It expresses satiety in Isa 44 16; and repre-
sents the neighing of a horse in Job 39 25. (4)
“1, hoy, expresses grief or pain, (Isa 1 4; Jer 22
18). In 1 K 18 30 it is tr “alas!’’ More fre-
quently it is used to indicate that a threat of
judgment is to follow (Isa 10 5; 29 1; or to direct
attention to some important announcement (Isa
55 1), where the Heb word is tr? “Ho.” (5)
Gr odd, oud, in Mk 15 29, used by those who
mocked Jesus, as He hung upon the cross. All of
these words are evidently imitative of the natural
sounds, which spontaneously give expression to
these emotions of complaint, grief, pain, exultation,
etc. Epwarp Mack

AH in proper names. See Aur.

AHAB, 3’hab (ANTIN, ’ah’abh; Assyr a-ha-ab-bu;
LXX '’AyxaéfS, Achadb, but Jer 29 21f, "Axa,
Achidb, which, in analogy with 7O7°NN, SNT10N),
ete, indicates an original IN MN , ’éh7’abh, meaning
“the father is my brother’): The compound prob-
ably signifies that ‘‘the father,” referring to God,
has been chosen as a brother.

Ahab, son of Omri, the seventh king of Israel,
who reigned for twenty-two years, from 876 to 854

(1 K 16 28 ff), was one of the strongest
1. Ahab’s and at the same time one of the weakest
Reign kings of Israel. With his kingdom he
inherited also the traditional enemies
of the kingdom, who were no less ready to make |
trouble for him than for his predecessors. Occupy-
ing a critical position at the best, with foes ever
ready to take advantage of any momentary weak-
ness, the kingdom, during the reign of Ahab, was
compelled to undergo the blighting effects of mis-
fortune, drought and famine. But Ahab, equal to
the occasion, was clever enough to win the admi-
ration and respect of friend and foe, strengthening
the kingdom without and within. Many of the
evils of his reign, which a stronger nature might
have overcome, were incident to the measures that
he took for strengthening the kingdom.

In the days of David and Solomon a beneficial
commercial intercourse existed between the He~-

brews and the Phoenicians. Ahab,


2. His recognizing the advantages that would
Foreign accrue to his kingdom from an alliance
Policy with the foremost commercial nation


of his time, renewed the old relations
with the Phoenicians and cemented them by his
marriage with Jezebel, daughter of Ethbaal, king of
Tyre (the Ithobalos, priest of Astarte mentioned by
Meander).

He next turns his attention to the establishment
of peaceful and friendly relations with the kindred
and neighboring kingdom of Judah. For the first
time since the division of the kingdoms the heredi-
tary internecine quarrels are forgotten, ‘and
Jehoshaphat,” the good king of Judah, ‘made
peace with the king of Israel.” This alliance, too,
was sealed by a marriage relationship, Jehoram, the
crown-prince of Judah, being united in marriage
with the princess Athaliah, daughter of Ahab.

Perhaps some additional light is thrown upon
Ahab's foreign policy by his treatment of Benha-
dad, king of Damascus. An opportunity was given


79 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


to crush to dust the threatening power of Syria.
But when Benhadad in the garb of a suppliant was
compelled to sue for his life, Ahab received him
kindly as his brother, and although denounced by
the prophets for his leniency, spared his enemy and
allowed him to depart on the condition that he
would restore the cities captured from Omri, and
concede certain “streets” in Damascus as a quarter
for Israelitish residents. No doubt Ahab thought
that a king won as a friend by kindness might be of
greater service to Israel than a hostile nation, made
still more hostile by having its king put to death.
Whatever Ahab’s motives may have been, these
hereditary foes really fought side by side against
the common enemy, the king of Assyria, in the battle
at Karkar on the Orontes in the year 854, as is
proved by the inscription on the monolith of Shal-

maneser II, king of Assyria.
Ahab’s far-sighted foreign policy was the antithe-
sis of his short-sighted religious policy. Through
his alliance with Phoenicia he not


3. His only set in motion the currents of
Religious commerce with Tyre, but invited
Policy Phoen religion as well. The worship


of Jeb by means of the golden calves of
Jeroboam appeared antiquated to him. Baal, the
god of Tyre, the proud mistress of the seas and the
possessor of dazzling wealth, was to have an equal
place with Jeh, the God of Israel. Accordingly he
built in Samaria a temple to Baal and in it erected
an altar to that god, and at the side of the altar a
pole to Asherah (1 K 16 32.33). On the other
hand he tried to serve Jeh by naming his children
in his honor—Ahaziah (‘“Jeh holds’), Jehoram
(“Jeh is high’), and Athaliah (‘‘Jeh is strong’).
However, Ahab failed to realize that while a coali-
tion of nations might be advantageous, a syncre-
tism of their religions would be disastrous. He
failed to apprehend the full meaning of the prin-
ciple, “‘Jeh alone is the God of Israel.” In Jezebel,
his Phoen wife, Ahab found a champion of the
foreign culture, who was as imperious and able
as she was vindictive and unscrupulous. She was
the patron of the prophets of Baal and of the devo-
tees of Asherah (1 K 18 19.20; 19 1.2). At her
instigation the altars of Jeh were torn down. She
inaugurated the first great religious persecution
of the church, killing off the propbets of Jeh with
the sword. In all this she aimed at more than a
syncretism of the two religions; she planned to
destroy the religion of Jeb root and branch and put
that of Baal in its place. In this Ahab did not
oppose her, but is guilty of conniving at the policy
of his unprincipled wife, if not of heartily con-
curring in it. nee :
Wrong religious principles have their counterpart
in false ethical ideals and immoral civil acts. Ahab,
as a worshipper of Baal, not only in-


4, The troduced a false religion, but_ false
Murder of social ideals as well. The royal resi-
Naboth dence was in Jezreel, which had


probably risen in importance through
his alliance with Phoenicia. Close to the royal
palace was a vineyard (1 K 21 1) owned by
Naboth, a native of Jezreel. This piece of ground
was coveted by Ahab for a vegetable garden. He
demanded therefore that, Naboth should sell it to
him or exchange it for a better piece of land. Na-
both declined the offer. Ahab, a Heb, knowing
the laws of the land, was stung by the refusal and
went home greatly displeased. Jezebel, however,
had neither religious scruples nor any regard for
the civil laws of the Hebrews. Accordingly she
planned a high-handed crime to gratify the whim
of Ahab. In the name and by the authority of the
king she had Naboth falsely accused of blasphemy
against God and the king, and had him stoned to


Agrippa
Ahab


death by the local authorities. The horror created
by this judicial murder probably did as much to
finally overthrow the house of Omri as did the
favor shown to the Tyrian Baal.

Neither religious rights nor civil liberties can be
trampled under foot without Divine retribution.

The attempt to do so calls forth an
5. Ahab awakened and quickened conscience,
and Elijah imperatively demanding that the right
be done. Like an accusing conscience,
Elijah appeared before Ahab. His very name
(“my God is Jeh’’) inspired awe. ‘As Jeh, the
God of Israel, liveth, before whom I stand, there
shall not be dew nor rain these years,’”’ was the
conscience-troubling message left on the mind of
Ahab for more than three years. On Elijah’s
reappearance, Ahab greets him as the troubler of
Israel. Elijah calmly informs him that the king’s
religious policy has caused the trouble in Israel.
The proof for it is to be furnished on Mount Carmel.
Ahab does the bidding of Elijah. The people shall
know whom to serve. Baal is silent. Jeh answers
withfire. Atorrent of rain ends the drought. The
victory belongs to Jeh.

Once more Elijah’s indignation flashes against
the house of Ahab. The judicial murder of Naboth
calls it forth. The civil rights of the nation must
be protected. Ahab has sold himself to do evil
in the sight of Jeh. Therefore Ahab’s house shall
fall. Jezebel’s carcase shall be eaten by dogs;
the king’s posterity shall be cut off; the dogs of
the city or the fowls of the air shall eat their bodies
(1 K 21 20-26). Like thunderbolts the words
of Elijah strike home. Ahab “fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly.” But the die was cast.
Jeh is vindicated. Never again, in the history of
Israel can Baal, the inspirer of injustice, claim a
place at the side of Jeh, the God of righteousness.

In common with oriental monarchs, Ahab dis-
played a taste for architecture, stimulated, no


doubt, by Phoen influence. Large
6. Ahab’s building operations were undertaken
Building in Samaria (1 K 16 32; 2 K 10 21).


Operations Solomon had an ivory throne, but Ahab
built for himself, in Jezreel, a palace
adorned with woodwork and inlaid with ivory
(1 K 21 1; 22 39). Perbaps Amos, one hundred
years later, refers to the work of Ahab when he
says, “The houses of ivory shall perish” (Am 3 15).
In his day Hiel of Bethel undertook to rebuild
Jericho, notwithstanding the curse of Joshua (1 K
16 33.34). Many cities were built during his reign
(1 K 22 39).
Ahab was not only a splendor-loving monarch,
but a great military leader as well. He no doubt
began his military policy by fortifying


7, Ahab’s the cities of Israel (1 K 16 34; 22 39).
Military Benhadad (the Dadidri of the Assyr
Career annals; Hadadezer and Barhadad


are Heb, Aram. and Arab. forms of
the same name), the king of Syria, whose vassals
the kings of Israel had been (1 K 15 19), promptly
besieges Samaria, and sends Ahab an insulting mes-
sage. Ahab replies, “Let not him that girdeth
on his armor boast himself as he that putteth it
off.” At the advice of a prophet of Jeh, Ahab,
with 7,000 men under 232 leaders, inflicts a crush-
ing defeat upon Benhadad and his 32 feudal kings,
who had resigned themselves to a drunken carousal
(1 K 20-21). : : ;
In the following year, the Syrian army, in spite
of its overwhelming superiority, meets another
defeat at the hands of Ahab in the valley, near
Aphek. On condition that Benhadad restore all
Israclitish territory and grant the Hebrews certain
rights in Damascus, Ahab spares his life to the
great indignation of the prophet (1 K 20 22).


Ahab
Ahaz


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 80


In the year 854, Ahab with 2,000 chariots and
10,000 men, fights shoulder to shoulder with Ben-
hadad against Shalmaneser II, king of Assyria. At
Karkar, on the Orontes, Benhadad, with his allied
foes, suffered an overwhelming defeat (COT, II, i,

Perhaps Benhadad blamed Ahab for the defeat.
At any rate he fails to keep his promise to Ahab
(1 K 22 3; 20 34). Lured by false prophets, but
against the dramatic warning of Micaiah, Ahab
is led to take up the gauntlet against Syria once
more. His friend, Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, joins
him in the conflict. For the first time since the
days of David all Israel and Judah stand united
against the common foe.

Possibly the warning of Micaiah gave Ahab a
premonition that this would be his last fight.

He enters the battle in disguise, but in
8. Ahab’s vain. An arrow, shot at random, inflicts
Death a mortal wound. With the fortitude of
a hero, in order to avoid a panic, Ahab
remains in his chariot all day and dies at sunset.
His body is taken to Samaria for burial. A great
king had died, and the kingdom declined rapidly
after his death. He had failed to comprehend the
greatness of Jehovah; he failed to stand for the
highest justice, and his sins are visited upon his
posterity (1 K 22 29f).

(1) The Moabite Stone (see MoapiTeE SToNz)
bears testimony (lines 7, 8) that Omri and his son

: (Ahab) ruled over the land of Meh-

9. Ahab deba for forty years. When Ahab
and was occupied with the Syr_ wars,
Archaeology Moab rose in insurrection. Mesha
informs us in an exaggerated manner

that “Israel perished with an everlasting destruc-
tion.” Mesha recognizes Jeh as the God of Israel.

(2) The Monolith of Shalmaneser II (Brit Mus;
see AssyRia) informs us that in 854 Shalmaneser [1
came in conflict with the kingdom of Hamath, and
that Benhadad II with Ahab of Israel and others
formed a confederacy to resist the Assyrian advance.
The forces of the coalition were defeated at Karkar.

(3) Recent excavations.—Under the direction of
Harvard University, excavations have been carried
on in Samaria since 1908. In 1909 remains of a
Heb palace were found. In this palace two grades
of construction have been detected. The explorers
suggest that they have found the palace of Omri,
enlarged and improved by Ahab. This may be
the “ivory house” built by Ahab. In August,
1910, about 75 potsherds were found in a building
adjacent to Ahab’s palace containing writing.
The script is the same as that of the Moabite Stone,
the words being divided by ink spots. These
ostraca seem to be labels attached to jars kept in a
room adjoining Ahab’s palace. One of them reads,
“In the ninth year. From Shaphtan. For Ba‘al-
zamar. A jar of old wine.’ Another reads,
“Wine of the vineyard of the Tell.” These read-
ings remind one of Naboth’s vineyard. In another
room not far from where the ostraca were found,
‘“was found an alabaster vase inscribed with the
name of Ahab’s contemporary, Osorkon II of
Egypt.” Many proper names are found on the os-
traca, which have their equivalent in the OT.
It is claimed that the writing is far greater than all
other ancient Hebrew writing yet known. Perhaps
with the publication of all these writings we may
expect much light upon Ahab’s reign. (See
Osrraca; Harvard Theological Review, January,
1909, April, 1910, January, 1911; Sunday School
Times, January 7, 1911; The Jewish Chronicle,
January 27, 1911.) S. K. Mosiman


AHAB, i/hab, and ZEDEKIAH, zed-e-ki’a (ANT,
‘ah’abh, ‘uncle’; WPI, gidhkiyaha, “Jeh is my


righteousness”): Ahab, son of Kolaiah, and Zede-
kiah, son of Maaseiah, were two prophets against
whom Jeremiah uttered an oracle for prophesying
falsely in the name of Jeh, and for immoral con-
duct. They should be delivered over to Nebuchad-
rezzar and be slain, and the captives of Judah
that were in Babylon should take up the curse con-
cerning them. ‘Jeh make thee like Zedekiah and
like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon roasted in
the fire” (Jer 29 21 ff). S. F. Hunter


AHARAH, ii‘/har-a, a-hér’a (TIN, ’ahrah;
A, ’Aapé, Aard; B, labaA, Japhaél, brother of
Rah, or, a brother’s follower, though some regard
it as a textual corruption for Ahiram): A son of
Benjamin (1 Ch 8 1). See Amram.


AHARHEL, a-har‘hel Grn, *dharhél, “brother
of Rachel”; LXX dScAdbod PnxaB, adelphou
Réchdb, “brother of Rechab’’): A son of Harnm of
the tribe of Judah (1 Ch 4°8).


AHASAI, a’ha-si, a-ha’si.


AHASBAI, a-has’bi (ADDS, ’dhasbay, “bloom-
ing’): The father of Eliphelet, a Maacathite, a
soldier in David’s army (2 8 23 34). He was
either a native of Abel-beth-maacah (20 14) or,
more probably, of Maacah in Syria (10 6). The
list in 1 Ch 11 35.36 gives different names en-
tirely. Here we have Ur and Hepher, which simply
show that the text is corrupt in one or both places.


AHASUERUS, a-haz-i-é’rus, or ASSEURUS
(LXX 'Accotnpos, Assoviéros, but in Tob 14 15
Asteros; the Lat form of the Heb WIWWAN,
’Ghashwérdsh, a name better known in its ordinary
Gr form of Xerxes): It was the name of two, or
perhaps of three kings mentioned in the canonical,
or apocryphal, books of the OT.

There seems to be little reasonable doubt, that
we should identify the Ahasuerus of Est with the
well-known Xerxes, who reigned over
Persia from 485 to 465 BC, and who
made the great expedition against
Greece that culminated in the defeat
of the Pers forces at Salamis and Plataea. If
Est be taken as equivalent to Ishtar, it may well
be the same as the Amestris of Herodotus, which
in Bab would be Ammi-Ishtar, or Ummi-Ishtar.
Amestris is said to have been the daughter of Otanes,
a distinguished general of Xerxes, and the grand-
daughter of Sisamnes, a notorious judge, who was
put to death with great cruelty by the king because
of malfeasance in office. Sisamnes may be in
Bab Shamash-ammanu-[shallim]. If he were the
brother and Otanes the nephew of Mordecai, we
can easily account for the ease with which the latter
and his ward Est, were advanced and confirmed
in their positions at the court of Xerxes.

An Ahasuerus is mentioned in Ezr 4 6, as one
to whom some persons unnamed wrote an accusa-

tion against Judah and Jerusalem.
2.In Ezra Ewald and others have suggested

that this Ahasuerus was Cambyses,
the son and successor of Cyrus. It seems to be
more probable that Xerxes, the son and successor
of Darius Hystaspis, is meant: first, because in
the following ver Artaxerxes, the son and successor
of Xerxes, is mentioned; and secondly, because
we have no evidence whatever that Cambyses was
ever called Ahasuerus, whereas there is absolute
certainty that the Pers Khshayarsha, the Heb
‘dhashwérosh, the Gr Assoueros or Xerxes, and the
Lat Ahasuerus, are the exact equivalents of one
another.


See AHZAI.


1. In
Esther


81 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ahab
Ahaz


In the apocryphal book of Tob (14 15 AV) it is said
that before Tobias died he heard of the destruction
__ of Nineveh, which was taken by Na-
3. In Tobit buchodonosor and Assuerus. This
Assuervs can have been no other than
Cyaxares, who according to Herod. (1.196) took Nin-
eveh and reduced the Assyrians into subjection,
with the exception of the Bab district. As we shall
see below, he was probably the same as the Ahas-
uerus of Dn] (9 1). The phrase ‘“‘which was taken
by Nabuchodonosor and Assuerus’’ is not found in
the Syr version of Tob.
An Ahasuerus is said in Dnl 9 1 to have been the
father of Darius the Mede, and to have been of the
seed of the Medes. It is probable
4. In Daniel that this Ahasuerus is the same as
: the Uvakhshatara of the Pers recen-
sion of the Behistun inscription, which in the Bab
is Umaku'ishtar, in the Susian Makishtarra, and
in Herod Cyaxares. It will be noted that both the
Gr Cyaxares and the Heb Akhashwerosh omit the
preformative uva and the ¢ of the Pers form Uvakh-
shatara. That this Median king had sons living
in the time of Cyrus is shown by the fact that two
rebel aspirants to the throne in the time of Darius
Hystaspis claimed to be his sons, to wit: Fra-
vartish, a Median, who lied saying, “I am Khsha-
thrita of the family of Uvakhshatara” (Behistun
Inser, col. II, v); and Citrantakhma, who said,
“T am king in Sagartia of the family of Uvakh-
shatara” (id, II, xiv). If we accept the identifi-
cation of Gubaru with Darius the Mede, then the
latter may well have been another of his sons, at
first a sub-king to Astyages the Scythian, as he was
later to Cyrus the Persian. R. Dick Witson


AHAVA, a-ha’va (SION, ’ahdwa’): The river in
Babylonia on the banks of which Ezra gathered
together the Jews who accompanied him to Jeru-
salem. At this rendezvous the company encamped
for three days to make preparation for the difficult
and dangerous journey (Ezr 8 15 ff). On review-
ing the people and the priests Ezra found no Levites
among them; he therefore sent to Iddo, ‘‘the chief
at the place Casiphia,” a request for ministers for
the temple. A number of Levites with 220 Nethi-
nim returned to the rendezvous with the deputation.
Ezra had expressed to the king his faith in the pro-
tection of God; being, therefore, ashamed to ask
for a military escort he proclaimed a fast to seek of
God “a straight way.” To 12 priests Ezra assigned
the care of the offering for the temple in Jerusalem.
When all was ready the company “departed from
the river Ahava,” and journeyed in safety to Jerus.

This river, apparently called after a town or
district toward which it flowed (8 15), remains
unidentified, though many conjectures have been
made. Rawlinson thinks it is the “Is” of Herod.
(i.79), now called “Hit,” which flowed past a town
of the same name in the Euphrates basin, 8 days’
journey from Babylon. Some identify the dis-
trict with “Ivvah” (2 K 18 34, etc). Most prob-
ably, however, this was one of the numerous canals
which intersected Babylonia, flowing from the
Euphrates toward a town or district ‘‘Ahava.” If
80, identification is impossible. 8. F. Hunter


AHAZ, a’haz (TTS, ‘ahdz, “he has grasped,”


2K 16; 2 Ch 28; Isa 710 ff; "Axdt, Achdz): The


name is the same as Jehoahaz; hence
appears on Tiglath-pileser’s Assyr_in-
scription of 732 BC as [a-u-ha-zi. The
sacred historians may have dropped the first part
of the name in consequence of the character of the
king. :

‘Ahaz was the son of Jotham, king of Judah. He
succeeded to the throne at the age of 20 years


1. Name


(according to another reading 25). The chronol-
ogy of his reign is difficult, as his son Hezekiah
is stated to have been 25 years of age
2. The when he began to reign 16 years after
Accession (2 K 18 2). If the accession of Ahaz
be placed as early as 743 BC, his
grandfather Uzziah, long unable to perform the
functions of his office on account of his leprosy
(2 Ch 26 21), must still have been alive. (Others
date Ahaz later, when Uzziah, for whom Jotham
had acted as regent, was already dead.)
Although so young, Ahaz seems at once to have
struck out an independent course wholly opposed
to the religious traditions of his nation.
3. Early His first steps in this direction were the
Idolatries causing to be made and circulated of
molten images of the Baalim, and the
revival in the valley of Hinnom, south of the city,
of the abominations of the worship of Moloch
(2 Ch 28 2.3). He is declared to have made his
own son “pass through the fire’ (2 K 16 3); the
chronicler puts it even more strongly: he “burnt
his children in the fire’ (2 Ch 28 3). Other acts
of idolatry were to follow.
The kingdom of Judah was at this time in serious


peril. Rezin, king of Damascus, and Pekah, king
of Samaria, had already, in the days of
4. Peril Jotham, begun to harass Judah (2 K


from Syria 15 37); now a conspiracy was formed
and Israel to dethrone the young Ahaz, and set
upon the throne a certain “son of
Tabeel” (Isa 7 6). An advance of the two kings
was made against Jerus, although without success
(2 K 16 5; Isa 7 1); the Jews were expelled from
Elath (2 K 16 6), and the country was ravaged,
and large numbers taken captive (2 Ch 28 5 ff).
Consternation was universal. The heart of Ahaz
“trembled, and the heart of his people, as the trees
of the forest tremble with the wind” (lsa 7 2). In
his extremity Ahaz appealed to the king of Assyria
for help (2 K 16 7; 2 Ch 28 16).
Amid the general alarm and perturbation, the one
man untouched by it in Jerus was the prophet
Isaiah. Undismayed, Isaiah set him-
6. Isaiah’s self, apparently singlehanded, to turn
Messages the tide of public opinion from the
to the King channel in which it was running, the
seeking of aid from Assyria. His ap-
peal was to both king and people. By Divine
direction, meeting Ahaz ‘at the end of the conduit
of the upper pool, in the highway of the fuller’s
field,” he bade him have no fear of ‘these two tails
of smoking firebrands,’’ Rezin and Pekah, for, like
dying torches, they would speedily be extinguished
(isa 7 3 ff). If he would not believe this he would
not be established (ver 9). Failing to win the young
king’s confidence, Isaiah was sent a second time,
with the offer from Jeh of any sign Ahaz chose to
ask, “either in the depth, or in the height above,”
in attestation of the truth of the Divine word.
The frivolous monarch refused the arbitrament on
the hypocritical ground, “I will not ask, neither
will IT tempt Jeh” (vs 10-12). Possibly his am-
bassadors were already despatched to the Assyr
king. Whenever they went, they took with them a
large subsidy with which to buy that ruler’s favor
(2 K 16 8). It was on this occasion that Isaiah,
in reply to Ahaz, gave the reassuring prophecy of
Immanuel (Isa 7 18 ff). p
As respects the people, Isaiah was directed to
exhibit on “a great tablet” the words ‘For Maher-
shalal-hash-baz” (‘‘swift the spoil,
6. Isaiah’s speedy the prey”). This was attested
Tablet by two witnesses, one of whom was
Urijah, the high priest. It was a
solemn testimony that, without any action on the
part of Judah, ‘the riches of Damascus and the


Ahaz, Dial of
Ahijah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 82


spoil of Samaria shall be carried away before the

king of Assyria” (Isa 8 1-4).
Tt was as the prophet had foretold. Damascus
fell, Rezin was killed (2 K 16 9), and Israel was
raided (15 29). The action brought


7. Fall of temporary relief to Judah, but had
Damascus the effect of placing her under the
and Its heel of Assyria. Everyone then living
Results knew that there could be no equal


alliance between Judah and Assyria,
and that the request for help, accompanied by the
message, “I am thy servant” (2 K 16 7.8) and by
“presents” of gold and silver, meant the submission
of Judah and the annual payment of a heavy tribute.
Had Isaiah’s counsel been followed, Tiglath-pileser
would probably, in his own interests, have been com-
pelled to crush the coalition, and Judah would have
retained her freedom.
The political storm having blown over for the
present, with the final loss of the important port
of Elath on the Red Sea (2 K 16 6),
8. Sun-Dial Ahaz turned his attention to more
of Ahaz congenial pursuits. The king was
somewhat of a dilettante in matters
of art, and he set up a sun-dial, which seems to
have consisted of a series of steps arranged round
a short pillar, the time being indicated by the posi-
tion of the shadow on the steps (cf 2 K 20 9-11;
Isa 388 8). As it is regarded as possible for the
shadow to return 10 steps, it is clear that each step
did not mark an hour of the day, but some smaller
period.
Another act of the king was to remove from the
elaborate ornamental bases on which they had
stood (cf 1 K 7 27-39), the ten lavers
9. The of Solomon, and also to remove
Lavers and Solomon’s molten sea from the 12
Brazen Sea brazen bulls which supported it (cf 1 K
7 23-26), the sea being placed upon
a raised platform or pavement (2 K 16 17). From
Jer 52 20, where the prophet sees ‘“‘the 12 brazen
bulls that were under the bases,” it has been
conjectured that the object of the change may have
Pee to transfer the lavers to the backs of the
ulls.
To this was added a yet more daring act of im-
piety. In 732 Ahaz was, with other vassal princes,
summoned to Damascus to pay hom-


10. The age to Tiglath-pileser (2 K 16 10; his
Damascus name appears in the Assyr inscrip-
Altar tion). There he saw a heathen altar of


fanciful pattern, which greatly pleased
him. A model of this was sent to Urijah the high
priest, with instructions to have an enlarged copy
of it placed in the temple court. On the king’s
return to Jerus, he sacrificed at the new altar, but,
not satisfied with its position, gave orders for a
change. The altar had apparently been placed on
the east side of the old altar; directions were now
given for the brazen altar to be moved to the north,
and the Damascus altar to be placed in line with it,
in front of the temple, giving both equal honor.
Orders were further given to Urijah that the cus-
tomary sacrifices should be offered on the new altar,
now called “the great altar,” while the king re-
served the brazen altar for himself ‘‘to inquire by”
(2 K 16 15).
Even this did not exhaust the royal innovations.
We learn from a later notice that the doors of the
temple porch were shut, that the golden
11. Further candlestick was not lighted, that the


Impieties offering of incense was not made, and
other solemnities were suspended (2
Ch 29 7). It is not improbable that it was Ahaz


who set up ‘the horses of the sun’ mentioned in
2 K 23 11, and gave them accommodation in the
precincts of the temple. He certainly built the


“altars . .. . on the roof of the upper chamber of
Ahaz,’”’ perhaps above the porch of the temple, for
the adoration of the heavenly bodies (ver 12). Many
other idolatries and acts of national apostasy are
related regarding him (2 Ch 28 22 ff).
In the later years of his unhappy reign there was
a recurrence of hostilities with the inhabitants of
Philistia and Edom, this time with
12. Recur- disaster to Judah (see the list of places
rence of lost in 2 Ch 28 18.19). New appeal
Hostilities was made to Tiglath-pileser, whose
subject Ahaz now was, and costly
presents were sent from the temple, the royal
palace, and even the houses of the princes of Judah,
but without avail (vs 19-21). The Assyr ‘dis-
tressed’ Ahaz, but rendered no assistance. In his
trouble the wicked king only ‘‘trespassed yet more”
(ver 22).
Ahaz died in 728, after 16 years of misused power.
The exultation with which the event was regarded
is reflected in Isaiah’s little prophecy
13. Death written ‘“‘ in the year that King Ahaz
of Ahaz died” (Isa 14 28-32). The statement
in 2 K 16 20 that Ahaz ‘was buried
with his fathers in the city of David” is to be under-
stood in the light of 2 Ch 28 27, that he was buried
in Jerusalem, but that his body was not laid in the
sepulchers of the kings of Israel. His name appears
in the royal genealogies in 1 Ch 3 13 and Mt 1 9.
W. Suaw CaLpecorr
AHAZ, DIAL OF. Sce Dirat or Awaz.


AHAZIAH, i-ha-zi’a (WIN and WWI,
*dhazyah and ’thazyahi, “‘Jeh holds, or sustains’’):

I. Ahaziah.—Son of Ahab and Jezebel, eighth
king of Israel (1 K 22 51—2 K 1 18).

Ahaziah became king over Israel in the seven-
teenth year of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, and

he reigned two years, 854-853 BC.

1. His There is here an incongruity between
Reign the synchronism and the length of the
reigns of the kings. Jehoshaphat be-
gan to reign in the fourth year of Ahab (1 K 22
41), and he reigned 22 years (1 K 16 29). Accord-
ingly Ahaziah’s first year, in the twenty-second
year of Ahab, would fall in the nineteenth year of
Jehoshaphat. The chronological statement in 2 K
1 17 is probably taken from the Syr, and both are
in harmony with a method of computation followed
by certain Gr MSS.

A good name does not insure a good character.
Ahaziah, the ‘‘God-sustained,” served Baal and

worshipped him, and provoked to anger

2. His Jehovah, the God of Israel, just as
Character his father before him had done. He
appears to have been weak and un-
fortunate, and calamities in quick succession pur-
sued him.

Ahab had sought the good and became an enemy


to the best. His house and the nation suffered the

consequences. ‘Moab rebelled against
3. The Israel after the death of Ahab.’’
Revolt of | Ahaziah appears to have been too
Moab weak to offer resistance. The Moabite


Stone dates the revolt in the days of

Ahab. No doubt it began at the time of Ahab’s
last campaign against Syria.

According to 1 K 22 48f Ahaziah attempted

to form an alliance with Jehoshaphat of Judah to

revive the ancient maritime traffic, but


4. His failed. According to 2 Ch 20 35-37
Maritime _ the alliance was consummated, in con-
Alliance sequence of which the enterprise came


to nothing. See JEHosHAPHAT.
Ahaziah suffered a severe accident by falling
through the lattice in his upper apartment in


83 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ahaz, Dial of
Ahijah


Samaria, and lay sick. Asa worthy son of Jezebel
and Ahab, he sent messengers to consult Baal-

zebub, the god of Ekron, regarding
5. His his recovery. But Israel belonged
Sickness to Jehovah. Accordingly the mes-
and Death sengers were met by the prophet

Elijah who for the last time warns
against the corrupting moral influences of the Baal
religion. ‘“Thus saith Jehovah, Is it because there
is no God in Israel, that thou sendest to inquire
of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? therefore thou
shalt. not come down from the bed whither thou
art gone up, but shalt surely die” was the message
which he sent back to the embassy, and the death
of the king speedily followed.

If, Ahaziah.—Sixth king of Judah (2 K 8 25-
29; 9 16f=2 Ch 22 1-9); also written Jehoahaz
(2 Ch 21 17; 25 23), which is merely a trans-
position of the component parts of the compound.
The form “Azariah” (2 Ch 22 6) is an error,
fifteen Heb MSS and all the VSS reading Ahaziah.

Ahaziah, youngest son of Jehoram, began to
reign in the twelfth year (2 K 8 25) of Jehoram of


Israel. In2 K 9 29 it is stated as the
1. His eleventh. The former is probably the
Brief Heb, the latter the Gr method of com-
Reign putation, the LXX Luc also reading


eleventh in 8 25. He was 22 years old
when he began to reign and he reigned one year
(2 K 8 26). Thereading “forty two” (2 Ch 22 2)
is a scribal error, since according to 2 Ch 21 5.20
Jehoram the father was only 40 years old at the
time of his death. Syr, Arab. and Luc read 22,
LXX B20. See Curonotoey or OT.
(Cf 2 K 8 27; 2 Ch 22 3.4.) In view of the
disaster which befell the royal house (2 Ch 21 16.


17), the inhabitants of Jerusalem
2. His placed Ahaziah the youngest son upon
Character the throne. That “he walked in the


way of the house of Ahab” is exempli-
fied by Ch to the effect that his mother, the daugh-
ter of Jezebel, counseled him in the ways of wicked-
ness and that the house of Ahab led him to his
destruction. The influence of Jezebel was at work
in Judah. Ahaziah dedicated “hallowed things”
to Jeh (2 K 12 18), but he did evil in Jeh’s eyes.
(Cf 2 K 8 28.29; 2 Ch 22 5.6.) Ahaziah cul-
tivated the relations which had been established
between the two kingdoms by Ahab.
3. His Alli- Accordingly he joined his uncle Jeho-
ance with ram of Israel in an expedition against
Jehoram of Hazael, king of Syria. Ramoth-gilead
Israel was captured and held for Israel against
the king of Syria (2 K 9 14). How-
ever, Jehoram of Israel was wounded and returned
to Jezreel to be healed of his wounds. It appears
that the army was left in charge of Jehu at Ramoth-
gilead. Ahaziah apparently went to Jerus and later
went down to Jezreel to visit Jechoram. In the mean-
time Jehu formed a conspiracy against Jehoram.
The death of Abaziah, as told in 2 K 9 16f,
differs from the account in 2 Ch 22 7-9. Accord-
ing to the account in K, Ahaziah who
is visiting Jehoram, joins him in_a
separate chariot to meet Jehu. Je-
horam suspecting treachery turns to
flee, but an arrow from the bow of Jehu_ pierces
his heart and he dies in his chariot. Ahaziah tries
to escape, but is overtaken near Ibleam and mor-
tally wounded by one of Jehu’s men. He fled to the
fortress of Megiddo, where he died. His servants
conveyed his body in a chariot to Jerus, where
he was buried. “According to the Chronicler,
this account is very much abbreviated (2 Ch 22
71). Hig destruction is of God because of his
alliance with Jehoram. Jehu, who was executing
judgment on the house of Ahab, first slew the kins-


4. His
Death


men of Ahaziah. He then sought Ahaziah who was
hiding in Samaria. When he was found, he was
brought to Jehu and put to death. He was buried,
but where and by whom we are not told.

That there were other traditions respecting the
death of Ahaziah, is proved by Jos, who says that
when Ahaziah was wounded he left his chariot and
fled on horseback to Megiddo, where he was well
cared for by his servants until he died (Ant, IX, vi,
3). S. K. Mostmman


AHBAN, a’‘ban (JANN, ’ahban, “brother of an
intelligent one’’[?] ’AxaBdp, Achabdr): The son of
Abishur of the tribe of Judah (1 Ch 2 29).


AHER, a‘hér (ATIN, ‘ahér, “another”; ’Aép, Aér):
A man of Benjamin (1 Ch 7 12), apparently a
contracted form, perhaps the same as Ahiram (AV)
(Nu 26 38) or Aharah (1 Ch 8 1).


AHI or AH in proper names (TIN or ON, ahi or
’ah “brother’’): The usage is practically the same
with that of ’abh, ’dbhi. See Api; Namus, PROPER.


AHI, a’/hi (TN, 'éhi, “my brother,” or perhaps a
coutraction from AH1sAH, which see): (1) A mem-
ber of the tribe of Gad (1 Ch 6 15). (2) A
member of the tribe of Asher (1 Ch 7 34).


AHIAH, a-hi’a: A variant in AV (1 8 14 38.18;
1 K 4 3; 1 Ch 8 7) for Anuau, which see. Also
in the RV (Neh 10 26).


AHIAM, a-hi’am (BX°TN, *dhi’am, “mother’s
brother’): One of David’s thirty heroes. He was
the son of Sharar (2 S 23 33) or according to 1 Ch
11 35 of Sacar, the Hararite.


AHIAN, a-hi’an (77, ‘ahyan, “brotherly’”’): A
son of Shemida of the tribe of Manasseh (1 Ch
7 19).


_AHTEZER, 4-hi-é’zer ("II"M® , ’ahi‘ezer, “brother
is help’): (1) A son of Ammishaddai, a Danite
prince, who acted as representative of his tribe on
several occasions. (See Nu 1 12; 2 25; 7 66.71;
10 25.) (2) One of the mighty men or warriors,
who joined David at Ziklag when a fugitive before
Saul (1 Ch 12 3).


AHTHOUD, a-hi’hud (TVMN , ’éhihadh, “brother
is majesty”): (1) One of the chief men of the tribe
of Asher. He was selected by Moses to help divide
the land west of the Jordan (Nu 34 27). (2) A
gon of Ehud of the tribe of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 6.7).
The text here is obscure and probably corrupt.


AHTJAH, a-hi’'ja (MN or WIN, *éhiyah or
’ahiyaha, “brother of Jeh,” “my brother is Jeh,”
“Jeh is brother.” In AV the name sometimes
appears as Ahiah):

(1) One of the sons of Jerahmeel the great-grand-
son of Judah (1 Ch 2 25),

(2) A descendant of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 7).

(3) The son of Ahitub, priest in the time of King
Saul (1 § 14 3.18). Either he is the same with
Ahimelech, who is mentioned later, or he is the
father or brother of Ahimelech. He is introduced
to us when Saul has been so long on the throne that
his son Jonathan is a man grown and a warrior.
He is in attendance upon Saul, evidently as an
official priest, “wearing an ephod.” When Saul
wishes direction from God he asks the priest to
bring hither the ark; but then, without waiting for
the message, Saul counts the confusion in the Phili
camp a sufficient indication of the will of Providence,
and hurries off to the attack. Some copies of the Gr


Ahikam
Ahio


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 84


here read “ephod” instead of “ark,” but the docu-
mentary evidence in favor of that reading is far from
decisive. If the Heb reading is correct, then the
seclusion of the ark, from the time of its return from
Philistia to the time of David, was not so absolute
as many have supposed. See Anime.ecs I.

(4) One of David’s mighty men, according to the
listin 1 Ch 11 36. The corresponding name in the
list in2 8 23 34 is Eliam the son of Ahithophel the
Gilonite.

(5) A Levite of David's time who had charge of
certain treasures connected with the house of God
(1 Ch 26 20). The Gr copies presuppose the
slightly different text which would give in Eng.
“and their brethren,” instead of Ahijah. ‘This is
accepted by many scholars, and it is at least more
plausible than most of the proposed corrections of
the Heb text by the Gr.

(6) Son of Shisha and brother of Elihoreph (1 Ik
4 3). The two brothers were scribes of Solomon.
Can the scribes Ahijah and Shemaiah (1 Ch 24 6)
be identified with the men of the same names who,
later, were known as distinguished prophets?
Shisha is probably the same with Shavsha (1 Ch
18 16; cf 2S 8 17; 20 25), who was scribe under
David, the office in this case descending from father
to son.

(7) The distinguished prophet of Shiloh, who was
interested in Jeroboam I. In Solomon’s lifetime
Ahijah clothed himself with a new robe, met Jero-
boam outside Jerusalem, tore the robe into twelve
pieces, and gave him ten, in token that he should
become king of the ten tribes (1 K 11 29-39).
Later, when Jeroboam had proved unfaithful to
Jeh, he sent his wife to Ahijah to ask in regard to
their sick son. The prophet received her harshly,
foretold the death of the son, and threatened the
extermination of the house of Jeroboam (1 K 14).
The narrative makes the impression that Ahijah
was at this time a very old man (ver 4). These
incidents are differently narrated in the long addi-
tion at 1 K 12 24 found in some of the Gr copies.
In that addition thé account of the sick boy pre-
cedes that of the rent garment, and both are placed
between the account of Jeroboam’s return from
Egypt and that of the secession of the ten tribes,
an order in which it is impossible to think that the
events occurred. Further, this addition attributes
the incident of the rent garment to Shemaiah and
not to Ahijah, and says that Ahijah was 60 years old.

Other notices speak of the fulfilment of the threat-
ening prophecies spoken by Ahijah (2 Ch 10 15;
1K 12 15; 15 29). In 2 Ch “the prophecy of
Ahijah the Shilonite” is referred to as a source for
the history of Solomon (9 29).

(8) The father of Baasha king of Israel (1 K 15
27.33; 21 22; 2 K 9 9).

(9) A Levite of Nehemiah’s time, who sealed the
covenant (Neh 10 26 AV). Wi.us J. Beecuer


AHIKAM, a-hikkam (OP°T8, ‘dhikdm, “my
brother has risen up”): A prominent man of the
time of IKing Josiah and the following decades (2 K
22 12.14; 26 22; 2 Ch 34 20; Jer 26 24; 39 14;
40 5ff; 41 1ff; 43 6). He was the son of Sha-

han, who very likely is to be identified with
Suaptian the scribe, who was at that time so promi-
nent. Ahikam was the father of Gedaliah, whom,
on the capture of Jerusalem, Nebuchadnezzar made
governor of the land. Ahikam was a member of
the deputation sent by Josiah to the prophetess
Huldah to consult her concerning the contents of
the Book of the Law which had been found. Under
Jehoiakim he had sufficient influence to protect
Jeremiah from being put to death. On the capture
of Jerusalem Nebuchadnezzar committed Jeremiah
into the care of Gedaliah. It is clear that both


Shaphan and his son, like Jeremiah, belonged to the
party which held that the men of Judah were under
obligation to keep the oath which they had sworn
to the king of Babylon. Wiuuis J. BercuEer


AHILUD, a-hi'lud cabny, ’dhiladh, ‘‘child’s
brother,” perhaps): The father of Jehoshaphat,
who is mentioned as “recorder” in both the earlier
and the later lists under David, and in the list under
Solomon (2 § 8 16 and 1 Ch 18 15; 2 8 20 24;
1 K 4 3). Inthe absence of proof we may assume
that the father of Baana, one of Solomon’s district
superintendents, was the same Ahilud (1 K 4 12).


AHIMAAZ, a-hi-ma/az, a-him’i-az (72S TR,
*dhima‘ag, perhaps ‘my brother is rage,” or “broth-
er of rage”):

(1) Father of Ahinoam the wife of King Saul (18
14 50


‘

(2) The son of Zadok the high priest (1 Ch 6
8.9.53). With his father he remained loyal to
David in the rebellions both of Absalom and of
Adonijah. With Jonathan the son of Abiathar he
carried information to David when he fled from
Absalom (2 8 15 27.36; 17 17.20). At his own
urgent request he carried tidings to David after
the death of Absalom (2S 18 19 ff). He told
the king of the victory, and also, through his re-
luctance to speak, informed him of Absalom’s
death. By his reluctance and his sympathy he
softened a little the message, which the Cushite
presently repeated more harshly.

That Ahimaaz did not succeed his father as high
priest has been inferred from the fact that in the
Solomon list of heads of departments (1 K 4 2)
Azariah the son of Zadok is mentioned as priest.
It is assumed that this Azariah is the one who ap-
pears in the genealogy as the son of Ahimaaz, and
that for some reason Ahimaaz was left out of the
succession. These inferences ‘are not justified
by the record, though possibly the record does not
absolutely disprove them. As the list stands it
makes Zadok and Abiathar the high priests. Azari-
ah and Zabud, the son of Nathan (vs 2.5), are
spoken of as holding priestly offices of a different
kind. Ahimaaz may have died early, or may have
followed some other career, but the simple fact is
that we do not know. : :

(3) Ahimaaz, in Naphtali, was one of Solo-
mon’s twelve commissary officers (1 K 4 15), who
married Basemath the daughter of Solomon. It is
not impossible that he was Ahimaaz the son of Zadok,
though there is no proof to that effect.

Witus J. Bescuer

AHIMAN, a-hi‘man (JON, ‘dhiman, per-
haps, ‘‘brother of fortune,” or, ‘‘my brother is
fortune’):

(1) One of the names given as those of the three
“children of the Anak” (Nu 18 22; Josh 16 14;
ef Nu 13 28; 2S 21 16.18), or the three ‘sons
of the Anak” (Josh 15 14; Jgs 1 20). The three
names (Ahiman, Sheshai, Talmai) also occur to-
gether in Jgs 1 10. The word Anak in the Heb
Bible has the definite article except in Nu 13 33
and Dt 9 2. Its use is that of a common noun
denoting a certain type of man, rather than as the
proper name of a person or a clan, though this need
not prevent our thinking of the Anakim as a clan
or group of clans, who regarded Arba as their
founder. The question is raised whether Ahiman
and Sheshai and Talmai are to be thought of as
persons or as clans. The most natural understand-
ing of the Bible statements is certainly to the effect
that they were personal leaders among the Anakim
of Kiriath-arba (Hebron). They were smitten and
dispossessed by the tribe of Judah, with Caleb
for leader.


85 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


(2) A_Levite, one of the gatekeepers of the latest
Bible times (1 Ch 9 17). He is associated with
Akkub and Talmon and their brethren: cf Neh
11 19. : Wiuus J. BEecHER


AHIMELECH, a-him’e-lek (MN , dhimelekh,
“brother of a king,” or, “my brother is king,” or,
“king is brother’):

(1) The father of David’s high priest Abiathar:
son of Ahitub, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli
(1S 211.28; 229-20; 236; ‘30 7). Ahijah
the son of Ahitub (1 S 14 3.18) was either the
same person under another name, or was Ahim-
elech’s father or brother. See Autau, 3. Ahim-
elech is an interesting person, especially because
he stands for whatever information we have con-
cerning the priestly office in Israel during the period
between Eli and David. Whether the Deutero-
nomic law for a central sanctuary originated with
Moses or not, its provisions were very imperfectly
carried cut during the times of the Judges. This
was particularly the case after the capture of the
ark by the Philistines, and the deaths of Eli and
his sons. From that time to the middle of the reign
of David the ark was in the custody of the men of
Kiriath-jearim ‘in the hill,” or ‘in Gibeah” (1 8
71; 28 6 2.3). As a general proposition Israel
“sought not unto it” (1 Ch 13 3), though there
is nothing to forbid the idea that it may, on occasion,
have been brought out from its seclusion (1 § 14
18). Before and after the accession of Saul some
of the functions of the national sanctuary were trans-
acted, of course very incompletely, at Gilgal (1 8
10 8; 11 14.15; 13 7 ff; 15 12.21.33). Whether
there was a priesthood, with Ahitub the grandson of
Eli as high priest, is a matter on which we have no
information; but we may remind ourselves that the
common assumption that such men as Samuel and
Saul performed priestly offices is nothing but an
assumption.

After Saul has been king for a good many years
we find Ahijah in his retinue, acting as priest and
wearing priestly vestments. A few years later
Ahimelech is at the head of the very considerable
priestly establishment at Nob. The scale on which
it existed is indicated by the fact that 85 robed
priests perished in the massacre (1 S 22 18).
They had families residing at Nob (ver 19). They
were thought of as priests of Jehovah, and were
held in reverence (ver 17). It was a hereditary
priesthood (vs 11.15). Men deposited votive
offerings there, the sword of Goliath, for example
(21 9). There seems to have been some kind of
police authority, whereby a person might be ‘de-
tained” (21 7). It was customary to inquire of
Jeh there (22 10.15). A distinction was made be-
tween the common and the holy (21 4-6). The
custom of the shewbread was maintained (21 6).
In fine, Jesus is critically correct in calling the place
“the house of God” (Mk 2 26). The account
does not say that the ark was there, or that the
burnt-offering of the morning and evening was
offered, or that the great festivals were held. The
priestly head of the establishment at Nob is repre-
sented to have been the man who had the right to
the office through his descent from Aaron. It is
gratuitous to assume that there were other similar
sanctuaries in Israel, though the proposition that
there were none might be, like other negative propo-
sitions, hard to establish by positive proof.

(2) A son of Abiathar (28 8 17; 1 Ch 18 16;
246); and grandson of the above. In_ a list of
the heads of departments under David, a list
belonging later than the middle of David's 40 years,
and in which David’s sons appear, this Ahimelech,
the son of David’s friend, is mentioned as sharing
with Zadok a high position in the priesthood. In


this capacity, later, he shared with David and Zadok
in the apportionment of the priests into 24 ancestral
classes, 16 of the house of Eleazar, and 8 of the house
of Ithamar (1 Ch 24). In this account Ahimelech
is mentioned three times, and with some detail. It
is alleged as a difficulty that Abiathar was then
living, and was high priest along with Zadok (1 Ch
16 11; 28 16 29; 19 11; 20 25; 1 K 2 27.35;
4 4, etc). But surely there is no improbability in
the affirmation that Abiathar had a son named
Ahimelech, or that this son performed prominent
priestly functions in his father’s lifetime.

Many regard ‘“‘Ahimelech the son of Abiathar’’
(Mt gives Ahimelech) as an inadvertent transposi-
tion for ‘‘Abiathar the son of Ahimelech.” This is
rather plausible in the passage in 2 8 8 and the
duplicate of it in 1 Ch 18 16, but it has no applica-
tion in the detailed account in 1 Ch 24. One
must accept Ahimelech the son of Abiathar as
historical unless, indeed, one regards the testimony
of Ch to a fact as evidence in disproof of that fact.
See ABIATHAR.

(3) A Hittite, a companion and friend of David,
when he was hiding from Saul in the wilderness
(18 26 6). Wiuuis J. BEECHER


AHIMOTH, a-hi’moth (MYON, ‘shimdth,
“brother of death,’’ or, ‘my brother is death”): A
descendant of Kohath the son of Levi (1 Ch 6
25); ancestor of Elkanah the father of Samuel.
The name Mahath holds a similar place in the list
that follows (6 35).


AHINADAB, a-hin’a-dab (279°7N, ’dhinadhabh,
“brother of willingness,” or, ‘‘my brother is will-
ing”): Decidedly the ordinary use of the stem
nadhabh is to denote willingness rather than liber-
ality or nobleness. One of Solomon’s twelve com-
missary officers (1 K 4 14). He was the son of
Iddo, and his district was Mahanaim.


AHINOAM, a-hi-ni’am, a-hin’o-am (D270
‘ahind‘am, “my brother is pleasantness’’):

(1) Daughter of Ahimaaz, and wife of King Saul
(1 8 14 50).

(2) The woman from Jezreel whom David mar-
ried after Saul gave Michal to another husband.
She and Abigail, the widow of Nabal, seem to have
been David’s only wives prior to the beginning of
his reign in Hebron. His marriage to Abigail is ~
mentioned first, with some details, followed by the
statement, easily to be understood in the pluper-
fect, that he had previously married Ahinoam (1 S
25 39-44). Three times they are mentioned to-
gether, Ahinoam always first (1 S 27 3; 305; 28
2 2), and Ahinoam is the mother of David’s first
son, and Abigail of his second (2.8 3 2; 1 Ch 3 1).
Ahinoam’s son was Amnon. The record really rep-
resents David’s polygamy as a series of bids for
political influence; the names of Amnon, Absalom,
Adonijah suggest that the method was not finally a
success. Wiuis J. BEECHER


AHIO, a-hi’s (IN, 'ahyd, variously explained
as “hig brother,” “brotherly,” “brother of Jeh,”
‘my brother is Jeh”): Proper names containing
a similar form of the name of Jeh are found on
the ostraca recently exhumed at Samaria. The
word is always treated as a common noun in the
ordinary Gr copies, being rendered either “brother”
or “brothers,” or “his brother” or “his brothers’;
but this is probably to be taken as an instance of
the relative inferiority of the Gr'text as compared
with the MT. See Ostraca.

(1) One of the sons of Beriah, the son of Elpaal, the
son of Shaharaim and Hushim, reckoned among
the families of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 14). Beriah


Ahira


Ai THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 86


and Shema are described as ‘ancestral heads’ “of the
inhabitants of Aijalon, who put to flight the in-
habitants of Gath.”

(2) A descendant of Jeiel (‘‘the father of Gibeon’’)
and his wife Maacah (1 Ch 8 31; 9 37). King
Saul apparently came from the same family (8 30.
83; 9 39).

(3) One of the men who drove the new cart
when David first attempted to bring the ark from
the house of Abinadab to Jerus (2 8 6 3.4; 1 Ch
13 7). In Samuel Uzza and Ahio are called sons
of Abinadab. By the most natural understanding
of the Biblical data about 100 years had elapsed
since the ark was brought to the house; they were
sons of that. Abinadab in the sense of being his
descendants. Whether he had a successor of the
same name living in David’s time is a matter of
conjecture. Wiuuts J. BEECHER


AHIRA, a-hi’ra (YT, “dhira‘, “brother of
evil,” or, “my brother is evil’): A man of Naph-
tali, contemporary with Moses. He is five times
mentioned as the son of Enan. He was the repre-
sentative of his tribe who assisted Moses in the
census (Nu 1 15). He was the hereditary “prince”
of the tribe; he made the tribal offering (Nu 2 29;
7 78; cf ver 83), and was commander of the
tribal host when on the march (Nu 10 27).


AHIRAM, a-hi'ram (ODS, ’dhiram, “exalted
brother,” or ‘‘my brother is exalted”): A son of
Benjamin. Mentioned third of the five in Nu 26
88.39. In 1 Ch 8 1 five sons are likewise men-
tioned, being explicitly numbered; the third name,
Aharah (akrah), is conjectured to be either a
corruption of Ahiram or a different name for the
same person. In 1 Ch 7 6ff is a fuller list of
Benjamite names, but it is fragmentary and not
clear. In it occurs Aher (’akér), which may be
either Ahiram or Aharah with the end of the word
lost. In Gen 46 21 ten sons of Benjamin are men-
tioned, some being there counted as sons who, in the
other lists, are spoken of as more remote descend-
ants. In this list Ehi (’@%) is perhaps Ahiram
apocopated. See AnaRAH; AnrrR; Eni.

Wiuus J. BEECHER

AHIRAMITE, a-hi’ram-it (SM , 'dhirami, “of
the family of Ahiram”; Nu 26 38). See Amram.


AHISAMACH, a-his’a-mak (JAOUIN, ’dhisa-
makh, “my brother supports’): A man of the tribe
of Dan, father of Oholiab, who was the assistant
of Bezalel in the building of the tent of meeting and
preparing its furniture (Ex 31 6; 36 34; 38 23).


AHISHAHAR, a-hish’a-hir (IMDM, 'ahishahar,
“brother of dawn”): One of the sons of Bilhan,
the son of Jediael, the son of Benjamin (1 Ch 7 10).


AHISHAR, a-hish’ér (VW°N, ’dhishar, “my
brother has sung’): Mentioned in Solomon’s list
of heads of departments as ‘“‘over the household”
-(1 K 4 6).


AHITHOPHEL, a-hith’ofel ODIMN, ‘ahitha-
phel, “brother of foolishness,” perhaps): The real
leader of the Absalom rebellion against David.
He is described as “the king’s counsellor,” in a
context connected with events some of which are
dated in the fortieth year of David (1 Ch 27 33.
34; cf 26 31). Concerning him and his part in the
rebellion we have rather full information (25
15 12 ff).

Some hold that he was the grandfather of Bath-
sheba, and make much of this in forming their
estimates of him. Does the evidence sustain this
view? In the latter half of the list of David’s mighty


men, not among the older veterans with whom the
list begins, appears ‘‘Eliam the son of Ahithophel
the Gilonite’ (2 S 28 34), the corresponding name
in the other copy of the list being ‘‘Ahijah the Pelo-
nite’ (1 Ch 11 36). It is assumed that this is the
same Eliam who was father to Bath-sheba (2 S 11 3).
Apparently the Chronicler testifies (1 Ch 3 5) that
the mother of Solomon was ‘‘Bath-shua the daughter
of Ammiel.’”’ Bathshua may easily be a variant
of Bathsheba, and the names Eham and Ammiel
are made up of the same parts, only in reversed
order. It is not strange that men have inferred
that the son of Ahithophel was the father of Bath-
sheba. But the inference is really not a probable
one. The record does not make the impression
that Ahithophel was an older man than David.
The recorded events of David’s life after his mis-
conduct with Bathsheba cannot have occupied
less than about twenty years; that is, he cannot have
been at the time older than about fifty years. That
Ahithophel had then a married granddaughter is
less probable than that there were in Israel two
Eliams. Further, Ahithophel was not the sort of
man to conspire against the interests of bis grand-
daughter and her son, however he may, earlier,
have resented the conduct of David toward her.
Ahithophel’s motive in the rebellion was doubtless
ambition for personal power, though he very likely
shared with many of his countrymen in the convic-
tion that it was unjust to push aside an older son
by elevating a younger son to the throne.
Ahithophel has a reputation for marvelous
practical sagacity (2 5 16 23). He did not show
this in joining the conspiracy but it is in evidence
in his management of the affair. According to the
record the hearts of the people, in spite of the much
fault they had to find, were all the time with David.
Absalom’s only chance of success was by the method
of surprise and stampede. There must be a crisis
in which everybody would join Absalom because
everybody thought that everybody else had done
so. Such a state of public sentiment could last only
a very few days; but if, in those few days, David
could be put out of the way, Absalom might hold
the throne in virtue of his personal popularity and
in default of a rival. The first part of the program
was carried out with wonderful success; when it
came to the second part, Ahithophel’s practical
wisdom was blocked by Hushai’s adroit appeal
to Absalom’s personal vanity. Ahithophel saw with
absolute clearness that Absalom had sacrificed his
one opportunity, and he committed suicide to avoid
participation in the shameful defeat which he saw
could not be averted. Wiuus J. BescHer


AHITOB, a-hi'tob (’AxttdB, Achitdb; AV Achitob):
One of the ancestors of Ezra (1 Esd 8 2; 2 Esd
11). Cf Aurrus, 3 (Ezr 7 2 etal.).


AHITUB, a-hi’tub (JIO"NN, ’dhitabh, “brother
of goodness,” i.e. ‘good brother,” or, ‘“‘my brother
is goodness’’):

(1) The brother of Ichabod and son of Phinehas
the son of Eli (1 § 14 3; 22 9.11.12.20), Accord-
ing to 1 Ch 24 he and his line were descended from
Aaron through Ithamar. The record implies that
he was born while his father and grandfather were
priests at Shiloh, and it says that he was the father
and grandfather of priests; but it is silent as to his
own exercise of the priestly office. We have no
information concerning the office from the time
when the Philis captured the ark till Saul became
king. See Aniszan; ABIMELECH; ABIATHAR.

(2) A descendant of Aaron through Eleazar:
by this fact distinguished from Ahitub, the descend-
ant of Ithamar, though nearly contemporaneous
with him. Esp. known as the father of Zadok


87 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ahira
Ai


who, at Solomon’s accession, became sole high
riest (285 8 17; 1 Ch 6 8; 18 16). His genca-
ogical line, from Levi to the Exile, is given in 1 Ch
6 1-15 (6 27-41). The three successive names,
Ahitub and Zadok and Ahimaaz, appear in 2 8
(8 17; 15 27, ete). The line is paralleled by select-
ed names in Eur 7 1-5, and relatively late parts of
it are paralleled in 1 Ch 9 11 and Neh 11 11.
The best explanation of certain phenomena in Ch
is that the record was copied from originals that
were more or less fragmentary. In some cases,
also, a writer gives only such parts of a genealogy
as are needed for his purpose. It is due to these
causes that there are many omissions in the genea-
logical lists, and that they supplement one another.
Allowing for these facts there is no reason why we
should not regard the genealogies of Ahitub as having
distinct historical value.

(3) In the genealogies, in the seventh generation
from Ahitub, the descendant of Eleazar, appears
another Ahitub, the son of another Amariah and the
father (or grandfather) of another Zadok (1 Ch 6
11 (6 37]; 9 11; Neh 1111). The list in Ear 7
omits a block of names, and the Ahitub there named
may be either 2 or 3. He is mentioned in 1 Esd
8 2 and 2 Esd 1 1, and the name occurs in Jth
8 1. In these places it appears in the Eng. ver-
sions in the various forms Ahitub, Ahitob, Achitob,
Acitho. Wiuuis J. BEECHER


AHLAB, &4’lab (22m, ’ahlabh, “fat or fruitful’):
A town of Asher. It is clear, however, that the
Israelites failed to drive away the original inhabi-
tants (Jgs 1 31). Some have identified Ahlab with
Gush Halab or Geschila, N.W. of the Sea of Galilee.


AHLAI, ai ("2ON, ’ahlay “O would that!”):
(1) A Son of Sheshan (1 Ch 2 31) or according to
ver 34 a daughter of Sheshan, for here we read:
“Now Sheshan had no sons, but danghters.” (2)
The father of Zabad, a soldier in David’s army
(1 Ch 11 41).


AHOAKG, a-ho’a (DIM, ’éhoh, “brotherly”[?]):
A son of Bela of the tribe of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 4).


AHOHITE, a-ho/hit (TIN, ’dhoh7): A patro-
nymic employed in connection with the descendants
of Amoag (q.v.) such as Dodai (2 S 23 9) or Dodo
1 Ch 11 12), Ilai (29) or Zalmon (2 8 23 28),
and also Eleazar, son of Dodo (1 Ch 11 12). The
family must have been fond of military affairs, for
all the above were officers in David and Solomon’s
armies.


AHOLAH, a-hd’la.
AHOLIAB, a-ho-li’ab. See Onouras.
AHOLIAH, a-ho-li’a.
AHOLIBAH, a-hd'li-ba.


See OHOLAH.


See OHOLIAE.
See OHOLIBAH.
AHOLIBAMABH, a-ho-li-ba’ma. See OHOLIBAMAH.


AHUMAI, a-ht’mi-i, a-hi’mi (“2108 , ’dhumay,
“brother of water’’[?]): A descendant of Shobal of
the tribe of Judah (1 Ch 4 2).


AHUZZAM, a-huz’am, AHUZAM, a-hi’zam
(DIDS , dhuzzdm, “possessor”): A son of Ashahur
of the tribe of Judah; his mother’s name was Naarah
(1 Ch 4 6); written Ahuzam in AV.


AHUZZATH, a-huz’ath (NINN, ’dhuzzath, ‘“pos-
session”): A “friend” perhaps a minister, of Abim-
elech, king of Gerar. He together with Phicol,


commander of the army, accompanied their sov-
ereign to Beersheba to make a covenant with Isaac
(Gen 26 26). The termination -ath reminds us of
Phili proper names, such as Gath, Goliath, ete. Cf
Genubath (1 K 11 20).


AHZAI, 4’2i ("ITR, ’ahzay, “my protector”): A
priest who resided in Jerus (Neh 11 13). The AV


has Ahasai which is probably the same as Jahzevah
of 1 Ch 9 12.


Al, #7 (9, ‘ay, written always with the def.
art., "27, hd-‘ay, probably meaning ‘“‘the ruin,”
kindred root, MY , ‘dwah) :

(1) A town of central Palestine, in the tribe of
Benjamin, near and just cast of Bethel (Gen 12
8). It is identified with the modern Haiydn, just
south of the village Dér Diwdn (Conder in HDB;
Delitzsch in Comm. on Gen 12 8) or with a mound,
El-Teil, to the north of the modern village (Davis,
Dict. Bib.). The name first appears in the earliest
journey of Abraham through Pal (Gen 12 8)
where its location is given as east of Bethel, and
near the altar which Abraham built between the


‘Ascent to Ai: Path to Elijah’s Translation.


two places. It is given similar mention as he re-
turns from his sojourn in Egypt (Gen 13 8).
In both of these occurrences the AV has the form
Hai, including the article in transliterating. The
most conspicuous mention of Ai is in the narrative
of the Conquest. As a consequence of the sin of
Achan in appropriating articles from the devoted
spoil of Jericho, the Israelites were routed in the
attack upon the town; but after confession and
expiation, a second assault was successful, the city
was taken and burned, and left a heap of ruins, the
inhabitants, in number twelve thousand, were put
to death, the king captured, hanged and buried under
a heap of stones at the gate of the ruined city, only
the cattle being kept as spoil by the people (Josh
7, 8). The town had not been rebuilt when Josh
was written (Josh 8 28). The fall of Ai gave the
Israelites entrance to the heart of Canaan, where
at once they became established, Bethel and other
towns in the vicinity seeming to have yielded with-
ont a struggle. Ai was rebuilt at some later period,
and ig mentioned by Isa (10 28) in his vivid descrip-
tion of the approach of the Assyr army, the feminine
form (M>2, ‘ayyath) being used. Its place in the
order of march, as just beyond Michmash from
Jerusalem, corresponds with the identification given
above. It is mentioned also in post-exilic times by
Ezr (2 28) and Neh (7 32, and in 11 31 as N3Y,
‘ayyd@’ ), identified in each case by the grouping with
Bethel.

(2) The Ai of Jer 49 3 is an Ammonite town, the
text probably being a corruption of WY, ‘ar; or
WI, hd-‘tr, “the city” (BDB). Epwarp Mack


Aiah
Alema


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


88


ATAH, a’ya (TS, ’ayyah, “falcon”; once in AV
Ajah, Gen 36 24): (1) A Horite, son of Zibeon,
and brother of Anah, who was father of one of
Esau’s wives (Gen 36 24; 1 Ch 1 40). (2) Father
of Rizpah, a concubine of Saul, about whom Ish-
bosheth falsely accused Abner (2 8 3 7), and whose
sons were hanged to appease the Gibeonites, whom
Saul had wronged (2 8 21 8-11).


AIATH, a’yath (M79, ‘ayydth): Found in Isa 10
28; feminine form of the city At (q.v.).


AID, ad (PIM, hazak, ‘‘to strengthen,” “to aid”):
A military term used only once in OT in AV (Jgs
9 24) and displaced in RV by the lit. rendering,
“who strengthened his hands.” The men of She-
chem supported Abimelech in his fratricidal crime,
with money, enabling him to hire men to murder
his brethren. The fundamental idea in the word,
as used in the OT, is abounding strength.


AIJA, 4-1’ja (879, ‘ayya’): A form of name for
city Ai, found in Neh 11 31. See Ar; Atatu.


AIJALON, &’ja-lon bay, ’ayyalon, ‘“‘deerplace”’;
AV Ajalon [Josh 10 12]):

(1) The name of a town allotted to the tribe of Dan
(Josh 19 42), which was also designated a Levitical
city (Josh 21 24), which fell to the Sons of Kohath
(1 Ch 6 69). The first mention of Aijalon is in
the narrative of Joshua’s defeat of the five Amorite
kings: “thou, Moon, in the valley of Aijalon” (Josh
10 12). The Danites failed to take 1t from the


Valley of Aijalon.
Amorites (Jgs 1 35), although the men of Ephra-
im held it in vassalage. Here Saul and Jonathan
won a great victory over the Philistines (1 8 14 31).
At one time it was held by the tribe of Benjamin
(1 Ch 8 13). Rehoboam fortified it against the
kingdom of Israel (2 Ch 11 10). In the days of
King Ahaz it was captured by the Philis (2 Ch
28 18). It has been identified with the modern
Yalo; its antiquity goes back to Am Tab, in which
it has mention. It is situated N.W. of Jerusin a
valley of the same name, which leads down from the
mountains to the sea.

(2) A town in the tribe of Zebulun, site unknown,
where Elon the judge was buried (Jgs 12 12).


Epwarp Mack
AIJELETH HASH-SHAHAR, 4’je-leth hash-
sha/har. See Psaums; Sone.


AIL, 41 (AS eglan, “‘to pain”): Asa verb trans, is
“to trouble,” “afflict” (obs); intrans, ‘‘to feel pain,
trouble, uneasiness,” etc; it represents Heb mah
Iekha “what to thee’ (Gen 21 17, “What aileth
thee, Hagar?”; Jgs 18 23; 18 115; 28 14 5;
2K 6 28: Isa 22 1); in Ps 114 5, it is figura-
tively or poetically applied to the sea, the river
Jordan, etc: ‘What ailed thee, O thon sea, that
thou fleddest?” ete; RV, “What aileth thee, O thou
sea that thou ficest?” etc; in 2 Esd 9 42; 10 31,
“What aileth thee?”


r


AIM, aim: In Wisd 18 9. Lit. tr by AV of
Gr croxdcacba, siochdsasthai, which commonly
means ‘“‘to shoot at.” This is interpreted and
explained by RV as “explore,” with a hint as to
the nature of the process, and may be paraphrased:
“Tf they be able to conjecture the mysteries of the
universe.”


AIN. See AyIn.


AIN, a’in (777, ‘ayin, “eye or spring [of water]’’):

(1) A town in the extreme N.W. corner of Canaan,
so named, most probably, from a noted spring
in the vicinity (Nu 84 11). Thomson and after
him Robinson make Ain the same as ‘Ain el-‘Asy,
the chief source of the Orontes, some fifteen miles
S.W. of Riblah, which, in turn, is about twenty
miles S.W. of Emesa (Hums). As Ain is named in
connection with Lake Gennesarct, some claim that
Riblah of Nu 34 11 must be another place farther
8. and closer to that lake.

(2) A Levitical city (Josh 21 16) in the Negeb
or southern part of Judah. It was first allotted to
the tribe of Judah (15 32) but later to Simeon (19
7). The fact that it is several times named in
immediate connection with Rimmon has lent
plausibility to the view that we have here a com-
pound word, and that we should read En-Rimmon,
ie. Ain-Rimmon (see Josh 15 32; 19 7; 1 Ch
4 32). Seealso Ayn. W. W. Davies


AIR, Ar (fp, aér): In the OT “air’’ is used (with
one exception) in the phrase “fowl” or “fowls
(birds) of the air.’’ The Heb word is usually rendered
“heaven” or “heavens.” According to ancient
Heb cosmogony the sky wasa solid dome (firmament)
stretching over the earth as a covering. In the
above phrase the air means the space between the
earth and the firmament. In Job (41 16) “air”
renders D4, rah, “breath,” “wind,” “spirit.”
The scales of the leviathan are so closely joined
together that no air can penetrate. In the NT the
phrase “birds [or fowls] of the air,” occurs ten times.
This simply reproduces the Hebraism noticed above.
Apart from this expression “air” in the AV repre-
sents aér, which denotes the atmosphere which sur-
roundsus. The expression “beating the air” (1 Cor
9 26) means to ‘deal blows that do not get home’’—
that miss the mark. In his conflict with the lower
life represented by the body, Paul compares him-
self to a boxer who aims with unerring accuracy
at his opponent. No stroke is lost. Paul also
uses the phrase “speaking into the air” (1 Cor 14 9)
in reference to the unintelligible utterances of those
who ‘“‘spake with tongues.” In the expression,
“Srince of the powers of the air” (Eph 2 2 AV) we
find an echo of the current belief that the air was the
dwelling place of spirits, especially of evil spirits.

Tuomas Lewis

AIRUS, 4-i’rus, 4r’us (?’Ialpos, Jairos): AV, one of
the heads of a family of temple servants (1 Esd 5
31 RV JAIRUS), which returned from Babylon with
Zerubbabel; in the OT called Reaiah (Ezr 2 47;
Neh 7 50), and classed among the Nethinim.


AJAH, a’ja. An Edomite tribe (Gen 36 24 AV).
See AraH.


AJALON, aj’a-lon. See ArsaLon.


AKAN, akan ((p2, ‘dkan, ‘“‘twisted’): A son
of Ezer, a descendant of Esau of Seir (Gen 86 27).
He is called Jaakan in 1 Ch 1 42. The AVm has
Jakan.


AKATAN, ak’a-tan (Axardv, Akaidn; AV Aca-
tan =Hakkatan; Ezr 8 12): The father of Joaunes
who returned with Ezra to Jerus (1 Esd 8 38).


89 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Aiah
Alema


AKELDAMA, a-kel’da-ma (‘Ane\Sapa, Akelda-
md, or, In many MSS, ’AxeASapax, Akeldamdch;
AV Aceldama): A field said in Acts 1 19 to have
been bought by Judas with the “‘thirty pieces of
silver.” In Mt 27 6.7 it is narrated that the
priests took the silver pieces which Judas had
“cast down .... into the sanctuary” and ‘“‘bought
with them the potter’s field, to bury strangers in.
Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood,
unto this day.” Doubtless it was a supposed con-
nection between this potter’s field and the potter’s
house (Jer 18 2) and the Valley of the Son of Hin-
nom (Jer 19 2) which influenced the selection of the
present site which, like the Aram. wambpn (Dal-
man), is today known as hakk-ed-dumm, ‘field of
blood.”

Tradition, which appears to go back to the 4th
cent., points to a level platform on, and some dis-
tance up, the southern slope of the Wady er Rababi
(Valley of Hinnom) just before it joins the Kidron
Valley. Upon this spot there is a very remarkable
ruin (78 ft.X57 ft.) which for many centuries
was used as a charnel house. The earth here was
reputed to have the property of quickly consuming
dead bodies. So great was its reputation that vast
quantities of it are said to have been transported
in 1215 AD to the Campo Santo at Pisa. When this
building was standing entire, the bodies were low-
ered into it through five openings in the roof and
then left to disintegrate, so that a few years ago
there were very many feet of bones all over the
floor. These have now been removed. A littleS.E.
of this ruin is a new Greek monastery erected in
recent years over the remains of a large number of
cave tombs; many of the bones from ‘‘Akeldama”

_ are now buried here. BE. W. G. MasterMan


AKKAD, ak’ad, AKKADIANS, a-ka’di-ans. See
Accap; AccaDIANs.


AKKOS, ak’os (‘AxPds, Akbés in 1 Esd 5 38;
AV Accos, which see): The OT equivalent (1 Ch
24 10; Ezr 2 61; Neh 8 4.21) is Haxxoz (("PS,
hakkocg), which also see.


AKKUB, ak’ub (A1p¥, ‘akkabh, “pursuer”):
1) A son of Elioenai, a descendant of Zerubbabel
(1 Ch 3 24). (2) A Levite porter on duty at the
east gate of the second Temple (1 Ch 9 17).


AKRABATTINE, ak-ra-ba-ti’né (’AxpaBarrivn,
Akrabattiné; AV Arabattine): A place in Idumaea
where Judas Maccabee defeated the children of
Esau (1 Macc 6 3).


AKRABBIM, ak-rab’im (once in AV Acrabbim
{Josh 16 3); DIAIPY, ‘akrabbim, ‘‘scorpions’’):
Three times found (Nu 344; Josh 15 3; Jgs
1 36), and always with mr, ma‘dleh, “ascent”
or “pass”; and so “Ascent of the Scorpions,” an
ascent at the 8.W. point of the Dead Sea and a part
of the boundary line between Judah and Edom.
At this pass Judas Maccabaeus won a victory
over the Edomites (1 Macc 5 3), called in the AV
Arabattine.


ALABASTER, al’a-bas-tér (@AaBartpov, aldbas-
tron [Mt 26 7; Mk 14 3; Lk 7 387]): In modern
mineralogy alabaster is crystalline gypsum or sul-
phate of lime. The Gr word alabasiron or alabas-
tos meant a stone casket or vase, and alabastites
was used for the stone of which the casket was
made. This stone was usually crystalline stalag-
mitie rock or carbonate of lime, now often called
oriental alabaster, to distinguish it from gypsum.
The word occurs in the Bible only in the three
passages of the Synoptic Gospels cited above. See
Box.


ALAMETH, al’a-meth qraby, ‘dldmeth, ‘“con-
cealment”; 1 Ch 7 8 AV): The name of a son of
Becher and grandson of Benjamin. His name was
preserved as the name of a town near Anathoth
(ALLEMETH, 1 Ch 6 60 RV). Except for the
strong pausal accent in the Heb the form of the word
would be the same as ALEMETH (q.v.).


ALAMMELECH, a-lam’e-lek: AV (Josh 19 26)
for ALLAMMELECH (q.Vv.).


ALAMOTH, al’a-mith. See Music.


ALARM, a-lirm’ (AZIM, teri‘dh): This expres-
sion is found six times in the OT. The Heb
word so rendered is derived from a verb meaning
“to shout” or “blow a horn,” as a signal for break-
ing up camp, starting on a journey or into battle, or
in triumphant shout over the defeat of enemies.
In a few instances it is employed of a ery of despair
or distress. The noun éra‘dh translated “alarm”
in Nu 10 5f refers to the signal given the people
of Isracl to start on their journcy in the Wilderness.
The passages in Jer (4 19; 49 2) both refer to the
summons for war. The same is true of Zeph 1 16.

The law concerning the sounding of the alarm
is fully stated in Nu 10 1-10. Here we read that
two silver trumpets of beaten work were sounded
by the sons of Aaron in case of war and also “in
the day of .... gladness” to gather the people
together for the various feasts, new moons, sacri-
fices and offerings. W. W. Davigs


ALBEIT, 61-b@it (tva ph, hina mé; lit. “lest”):
Occurs in a paraphrase rather than as a tr of a
clause in Philem19 AV. The thoughtis: “although”
or-“‘albeit” (synonym of ‘‘although”’) “I might say,”
etc. This RV translates with intense literalness:
“that I say not.”


ALCIMUS, al’si-mus (DIP?28, ’elyakium, “God
will rise’; "AAnipos, Alkimos, ‘“‘valiant’’): A high
priest for three years, 163-161 BC, the record
of whose career may be found in 1 Macc 7 4-50;
9 1-57; 2 Macc 14; see also Ant, XII, 9-11;
XX, 10. He was a descendant of Aaron, but not
in the high-priestly line (1 Mace 7 14; also Ant,
XX, 10); and being ambitious for the office of
high priest, he hastened to Antioch to secure the
favor and help of the new king, Demetrius, who had
just overthrown Antiochus Eupator and made him-
self king. Alcimus was of the Grecianizing party,
and therefore bitterly opposed by the Maccabees.
Demetrius sent a strong army under Bacchides to
establish him in the high-priesthood at Jerus.
The favor with which Alcimus was received by the
Jews at Jerus on account of his Aaronic descent
was soon turned to bate by his cruelties. When
Bacchides and his army returned to Antioch, Simon
Maccabaeus attacked and overcame Alcimus, and
drove him also to Syria. There he secured from
Demetrius another army, led by. Nicanor, who,
failing to secure Simon by treachery, joined battle
with him, but was defeated and killed. A third
and greater army, under Bacchides again, was dis-
patched to save the falling fortunes of Alcimus.
Now Simon was overwhelmed and slain, Alcimus
established as high priest and a strong force left
in Jerus to uphold him. But he did not long enjoy
his triumph, as he died soon after from a paralytic
stroke. Epwarp Mack


ALCOVE, al’kév (T2p, kubbah; AV tent; ARV
pavilion; ARVm alcove): Perhaps a large tent
occupied by a prince (Nu 26 8).


ALEMA, al/é-ma (’Adépots, Alémois): A town
in Gilead, mentioned once only (1 Mace 6 26),


Alemeth
Alexander


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 90


besieged by the nations under Timotheus, together
with Bosor and other cities; and probably relieved
along with these cities by Judas Maccabaeus,
although no mention is made of Alema’s relief. The
name occurs the one time as dative pl.


ALEMETH, al’é-meth (M999, ‘alemeth, “con-
cealment”’): (1) RV for Alameth of the AVin1 Ch
7 8. (2) Descendant of Saul and Jonathan, and son
of Jehoaddah, 1 Ch 8 36, or of Jarah, 1 Ch 9 42.
The genealogies in the two chapters are identical,
and he is the fifth generation after Jonathan. (3)
In some Heb texts, Ginsburg and Baer, for AL-
LEMETH (q.v.); so in AV.


ALEPH, 4’lef (8, ’): The first letter of the Heb
alphabet. It is nearly soundless itself and best
represented, as in this Enc, by the smooth breath-
ing (’), but it is the direct ancestor of the Gr, Lat
and Eng. a as in ‘father.’’ In either case this
beginning of the alphabet happens to be near the
very basis of all speech—in one case the simple
expiration of breath, in the other the simplest
possible vocal action—the actual basis from which
all other vowels are evolved. It became also the
symbol for the number one (1) and, with the diere-
sis, 1,000. It is the symbol also for one of the most
famous of Gr Biblical MSS, the Codex Sinaiticus.
For name, written form, etc, see ALPHABET.


E. C. RicHarpson
ALEPPO, a-lep’s.


See Berga.

ALEXANDER, al-eg-zan’dér (’AdéEavSpos, Alér-
andros, lit. meaning ‘‘defender of men.’”” This word
occurs five times in the NT, Mk 15 21; Acts 4 6;
19 33; 1 Tim 1 19.20; 2 Tim 4 14): It is not
certain whether the third, fourth and fifth of these
passages refer to the same man.

(1) The first of these Alexanders is referred to in
the passage in Mk, where he is said to have been

one of the sons of Simon of Cyrene,


1. ASon the man who carried the cross of
of Simon Christ. Alexander therefore may have
of Cyrene been a North African by birth. Mt,


Mk and Lk all record the fact, with
varying detail, that Simon happened to be passing
at the time when Christ was being led out of the
city, to be crucified on Calvary. Mk alone tells
that Simon was the father of Alexander and Rufus.
From this statement of the evangelist, it is appar-
ent that at the time the Second Gospel was written,
Alexander and Rufus were Christians, and that
they were well known in the Christian community.
Mk takes it for granted that the first readers of his
Gospel will at once understand whom he means.

There is no other mention of Alexander in the
NT, but it is usually thought that his brother
Rufus is the person mentioned by Paul in Rom
16 13, “Salute Rufus the chosen in the Lord, and
his mother and mine.” If this identification is
correct, then it follows, not only that the sons of
Simon were Christians, but that his wife also was
a Christian, and that they had all continued faith-
ful to Christ for many years. It would also follow
that the households were among the intimate friends
of Paul, so much so that the mother of the family is
affectionately addressed by him as “Rufus’ mother
and mine.” The meaning of this is, that in time
past this lady had treated Paul with the tender care
which a mother feels and shows to her own son.

This mention of Rufus and his mother is in the
list of names of Christians resident in Rome.
Lightfoot (Comm. on Phil, 176) writes: ‘There
seems no reason to doubt the tradition that Mk
wrote especially for the Romans; and if so, it is
worth remarking that he alone of the evangelists
describes Simon of Cyrene, as ‘the father of Alex-


ander and Rufus.’ A person of this name there-
fore (Rufus) seems to have held a prominent place
among the Rom Christians; and thus there is at
least fair ground for identifying the Rufus of St.
Paul with the Rufus of St. Mark. The inscriptions
exhibit several members of the household (of the
emperor) bearing the names Rufus and Alexander,
but this fact is of no value where both names are
so common.”

To sum up, Alexander was probably by birth a
North African Jew; he became a Christian, and
was a well-known member of the church, probably
the church in Rome. His chief claim to recollec-
tion is that he was a son of the man who carried
the cross of the Saviour of the world.

(2) The second Alexander, referred to in Acts 4 6,
was a relative of Annas the Jewish high priest.

He is mentioned by Lk, as having
2. A Rela- been present as a member of the San-
tive of hedrin, before which Peter and Jn were
Annas brought to be examined, for what they

had done in the cure of the lame man
at the gate of the temple.. Nothing more is known
of this Alexander than is here given by Lk. It has
been conjectured that he may have been the Alex-
ander who was a brother of Philo, and who was also
the alabarch or magistrate of the city of Alexan-
dria. But this conjecture is unsupported by any
evidence at all.

(3) The third Alexander is mentioned in Acts


19 38: “And some of the multitude instructed
Alexander, the Jews putting him
8. Alexan- forward. And Alexander beckoned


der and the with the hand, and would have made a
Riot at defence unto the people. But when
Ephesus they perceived that he was a Jew, all
with one voice,” etc, RVm. In the
matter of the riot in Ephesus the whole responsi-
bility rested with Demetrius the silversmith. In
his anger against the Christians generally, but
specially against Paul, because of his successful
preaching of the gospel, he called together a meet-
ing of the craftsmen; the trade of the manufacture
of idols was in Jeopardy. From this meeting there
arose the riot, in which the whole city was in com-
motion. The Jews were wholly innocent in the
matter: they had done nothing to cause any dis-
turbance. But the riot had taken place, and no
one could tell what would happen. Modern anti-
Semitism, in Russia and other European countries,
gives an idea of an excited mob stirred on by hatred
of the Jews. Instantly recognizing that the fury
of the Ephesian people might expend itself in
violence and bloodshed, and that in that fury they
would be the sufferers, the Jews “put forward”
Alexander, so that by his skill as a speaker he might
clear them, either of having instigated the riot, or
of being in complicity with Paul. “A certain
Alexander was put forward by the Jews to address
the mob; but this merely increased the clamor
and confusion. There was no clear idea among
the rioters what they wanted: an anti-Jewish and an
anti-Christian demonstration were mixed up, and
probably Alexander’s intention was to turn the
general feeling away from the Jews. It is possible
that he was the worker in bronze, who afterward did
Paul much harm” (Ramsay, Si. Paul the Traveller,
etc, 279).
4) The fourth of the NT Alexanders is one of
two heretical teachers at Epbesus—the other being


Hymenaeus: see art. s.v.—against
4, Alexan- whom Paul warns Timothy in 1 Tim 1
der an 19.20. The teaching of Hymenaeus


and Alexander was to the effect that
Christian morality was not required
—antinomianism. They put away—
“thrust from them,’? RV—faith and a good con-


Ephesian
Heretic


91 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Alemeth
Alexander


science; they wilfully abandoned the great central
facts regarding Christ, and so they made ship-

wreck concerning the faith.
In2 Tim 2 17.18, Hymenaeus is associated with
Philetus, and further details are there given _re-
garding their false teaching. What


5. His they taught is described by Paul as
Heresy “profane babblings,” as leading to more
Incipient ungodliness, and as eating ‘‘as doth
Gnosticism a gangrene.” Their heresy consisted


in saying that the resurrection was
past already, and it had been so far successful,
that it had overthrown the faith of some. The
doctrine of these three heretical teachers, Hy-
menaeus, Alexander and Philetus, was accordingly
one of the early forms of Gnosticism. It held that
matter was originally and essentially evil; that for
this reason the body was not an essential part of
human nature; that the only resurrection was that
of each man as he awoke from the death of sin to
a righteous life; that thus in the case of everyone
who has repented of sin, “the resurrection was past
already,” and that the body did not participate
in the blessedness of the future life, but that salva-
tion consisted in the soul’s complete deliverance
from all contact with a material world and a ma-
terial body.

So pernicious were these teachings of incipient
Gnosticism in the Christian church, that they
quickly spread, eating like a gangrene. The denial
of the future resurrection of the body involved also
the denial of the bodily resurrection of Christ,
and even the fact of the incarnation. The way in
which therefore the apostle dealt with those who
taught such deadly error, was that he resorted to the
same extreme measures as he had employed in the
case of the immoral person at Corinth; he delivered
Hymenaeus and Alexander to Satan, that they
might learn not to blaspheme. Cf 1 Cor 5 5.

(5) The fifth and last occurrence of the name
Alexander is in 2 Tim 4 14.15, ‘‘Alexander the

coppersmith did me much evil: the


6. Alexan- Lord will render to him according to
der the his works: of whom do thou also beware
Copper- [AV “of whom be thou ware also” j
smith for he greatly withstood our words.’


This Alexander was a worker in copper
or iron, a smith. It is quite uncertain whether
Alexander no. 5 should be identified with A. no. 4,
and even with A. no. 3. In regard to this, it should
be remembered that all three of these Alexanders
were resident in Ephesus; and it is specially to be
noticed that the fourth and the fifth of that name
resided in that city at much the same time; the
interval between Paul’s references to these two being
not more than a year or two, as not more than that
time elapsed between his writing 1 Tim and 2
Tim. It is therefore quite possible these two
Alexanders may be one and the same person.

Tn any case, what is said of this last A. is that he
had shown the evil which was in him by doing many
evil deeds to the apostle, evidently on the occasion
of a recent visit paid by Paul to Ephesus. These
evil deeds had taken the form of personally oppos-
ing the apostle’s preaching. The personal antago-
nism of Alexander manifested itself by his greatly
withstanding the proclamation of the gospel by
Paul. As Timothy was now in Ephesus, in charge
of the church there, he is strongly cautioned by the
apostle to be on his guard against this opponent.

JoHn RUTHERFURD

ALEXANDER BALAS, A. ba’las (’AdéfavSpos
& Bddas Acyspevos, Alézandros ho Bdlas legéme-
nos): He contended against Demetrius I of Syria
for the throne and succeeded in obtaining it. He
was a youth of mean origin, but he was put forth
by the enemies of Demetrius as being Alexander,


the son and heir of Antiochus Epiphanes. He
received the support of the Rom Senate and of
Ptolemy VI of Egypt, and on account of the
tyranny of Demetrius, was favored by many of the
Syrians. The country was thrown into civil war
and Demetrius was defeated by Alexander in 150
BC and was killed in battle. Demetrius II took
up the cause of his father and in 147 BC, Alexander
fled from his kingdom and was soon after assas-
sinated.

Our chief interest in Alexander is his connection
with the Maccabees. Jonathan was the leader of
the Maccabean forces and both Alexander and


Tetradrachm (Ptolemaic talent) of Alexander Balas.


Demetrius sought his aid. Demetrius granted
Jonathan the right to raise and maintain an army.
Alexander, not to be outdone, appointed Jonathan
high priest, and as a token of his new office sent
him a purple robe and a diadem (Ant, XIII, ii, 2).
This was an important step in the rise of the Mac-
cabean house, for it insured them the support of
the Chasidim. In 153 BC, Jonathan officiated as
high priest at the altar (1 Macc 10 1-14; Ant,
XIII, ii, 1). This made him the legal head of
Judaea and thus the movement of the Maccabees
became closely identified with Judaism. In 1 Macc
10 1, he is called Alexander Epiphanes.
A. W. Fortune
ALEXANDER, THE GREAT (’Adéavipos,
Alézandros): Alexander, of Macedon, commonly
called “the Great” (b. 356 BC), was


1. Parent- the son of Philip, king of Macedon,
age and and of Olympias, daughter of Neop-
Early Life tolemos, an Epeirote king. Although


Alexander is not mentioned by name
in the canonical Scriptures, in Dul he is designated
by a transparent symbol (8 5.21). In1 Macc 11
he is expressly named as the overthrower of the
Pers empire, and the founder of that of the Greeks.
As with Frederick the Great, the career of Alex-
ander would have been impossible had his father
been other than he was. Philip had been for some
years a hostage in Thebes: while there he had
learned to appreciate the changes introduced into
military discipline and tactics by Epaminondas.
Partly no doubt from the family claim to Herac-
leid descent, deepened by contact in earlier days with
Athenians like Iphicrates, and the personal influ-
ence of Epaminondas, Philip seems to have united
to his admiration for Gr tactics a tincture of Hel
culture, and something like a reverence for Athens,
the great center of this culture. In military matters
his admiration led him to introduce the Theban
discipline to the rough peasant levies of Macedon,
and the Macedonian phalanx proved the most
formidable military weapon that had yet been de-
vised. The veneer of Gr culture which he had
taken on led him, on the one hand, laying stress
on his Hel descent, to claim admission to the comity
of Hellas, and on the other, to appoint Aristotle to
be a tutor to his son. By a combination of force
and fraud, favored by circumstances, Philip got
himself appointed generalissimo of the Hel states;


Alexander
Alexandria


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 92


and further induced them to proclaim war against
the “Great King.” In all this he was preparing
the way for his son, so soon to be his successor.
He was also preparing bis son for his career.
Alexander was, partly no doubt from being the
pupil of Aristotle, yet more imbued
2. His with Gr feelings and ideas than was
Preparation his father. He was early introduced
for His into the cares of government and the
Career practice of war. While Philip was
engaged in the siege of Byzantium he
sent his son to replace Antipater in the regency;
during his occupancy of this post, Alexander, then
only a youth of sixteen, had to undertake a cam-
paign against the Illyrians, probably a punitive
expedition. Two years later, at the decisive battle
of Chaeroneia, which fixed the doom of the Gr
autonomous city, Alexander commanded the feudal
cavalry of Macedon, the “Companions.” He not
only saved his father’s life, but by his timely and
vehement charge materially contributed to the
victory.
When all his plans for the invasion of Persia
were complete, and a portion of his troops was
already across the Hellespont, Philip


3. His was assassinated. Having secured his
Accession succession, Alexander proceeded to
to the Corinth, where he was confirmed in
Hegemony his father’s position of leader of Hellas
of Greece against Darius. Before he could cross


into Asia he had to secure his northern
frontier against possible raids of barbarian tribes.
He invaded Thrace with his army and overthrew
the Triballi, then crossed the Danube and inflicted
a defeat on the Getae. During his absence in these
but slightly known regions, the rumor spread that
he had been killed, and Thebes began a movement
to throw off the Macedonian yoke. On his return
to Greece he wreaked terrible vengeance on Thebes,
not only as promoter of this revolt, but also as the
most powerful of the Gr states.

Having thus secured his rear, Alexander collected
his army at Pella to cross the Hellespont, that he

might exact the vengeance of Greece
4. Cam- on Persia for indignities suffered at
paign in the hands of Xerxes, who “by his
Asia Minor strength through his riches” had stirred

up ‘‘all against the realm of Grecia’’
(Dnl 11 2 AV). Steeped as he was in the romance of
the Iliad, Alexander, when he came to the site of
Troy, honored Achilles, whom he claimed as his
ancestor, with games and sacrifices. This may
have been the outflow of his own romantic nature,
but there was also wise policy in it; the Greeks were
more readily reconciled to the loss of their freedom
when it was yielded up to one who revived in his
own person the heroes of the Iliad. It may be
noted how exactly the point of Alexander’s in-
vasion is indicated in Daniel’s prophecy (8 5).
From Troy he advanced southward, and encoun-
tered the Pers forces at the Granicus. While
in the conflict Alexander exhibited all the reckless
bravery of a Homeric hero. He at the same time
showed the skill of a consummate general. The
Pers army was dispersed with great slaughter.
Before proceeding farther into Persia, by rapid
marches and vigorously pressed sieges, he com-
pleted the conquest of Asia Minor. Here, too, he
showed his knowledge of the sensitiveness of
Asiatic peoples to omens, by visiting Gordium, and
cutting the knot on which, according to legend,
depended the empire of Asia.

What he had done in symbol he had to make a
reality; he had to settle the question of supremacy
in Asia by the sword. He learned that Darius
had collected an immense army and was coming
to meet him. Although the Pers host was esti-


mated at a half-million men, Alexander hastened
to encounter it. Rapidity of motion, as symbolized

in Dnl by the “he-goat” that “came
6. Battle of from the west . and touched


Issus and not the ground” (Dnl 8 5), was Alex-
March ander’s great characteristic. The two
through armies met in the relatively narrow
Syria to plain of Issus, where the Persians lost,
Egypt to a great extent, the advantage of


their numbers; they were defeated with
tremendous slaughter, Darius himself setting the
example of flight. Alexander only pursued the de-
feated army far enough to break it up utterly. He
began his march southward along the seacoast of
Syria toward Egypt, a country that had always im-
pressed the Gr imagination. Though most of the
cities, on his march, opened their gates to the con-
queror, Tyre and Gaza only yielded after a prolonged
siege. In the case of the latter of these, enraged
at the delay occasioned by the resistance, and emu-
lous of his ancestor, Alexander dragged its gallant
defender Batis alive behind his chariot as Achilles
had dragged the dead Hector. It ought to be noted
that this episode does not appear in Arrian, usually
regarded as the most authentic historian of Alex-
ander. Josephus relates that after he had taken
Gaza, Alexander went up to Jerus, and saw Jad-
dua the high priest, who showed him the prophecy
of Daniel concerning him. The fact that none of
the classic historians take any notice of such a
détour renders the narrative doubtful: still it con-
tains no element of improbability that the pupil
of Aristotle, in the pursuit of knowledge, might,
during the prosecution of the siege of Gaza, with
a small company press into the hill country of
Judaea, at once to secure the submission of Jeru-
salem which occupied a threatening position in
regard to his communications, and to see something
of that mysterious nation who worshipped one God
and had no idols.
When he entered Egypt, the whole country sub-
mitted without a struggle. Moved at once by the
fact that Pharos is mentioned in the
6. Found- Odyssey, and that he could best rule
ing of Alex- Egypt from the seacoast, he founded
andria and Alexandria on the strip of land oppo-
Visit to the site Pharos, which separated Lake


Shrine of Mareotis from the Mediterranean.
Jupiter The island Pharos formed a natural
Ammon breakwater which made possible a


spacious double harbor; the lake,
communicating with the Nile, opened the way for
inland navigation. As usual with Alexander,
romance and policy went hand in hand. The city
thus founded became the capital of the Ptolemies,
and the largest city of the Hel world. He spent
his time visiting shrines, in the intervals of arrang-
ing for the government of the country. The most
memorable event of his stay in Egypt was his
expedition to the oracle of Jupiter Ammon (Amen-
Ra) where he was declared the son of the god. To
the Egyptians this meant no more than that he was
regarded a lawful monarch, but he pretended to
take this declaration as assigning to him a Divine
origin like so many Homeric heroes. Hencefor-
ward there appeared on coins Alexander’s head
adorned with the ram’s horn of Amen-Ra. This
impressed the eastern imagination so deeply that
Mohammed, a thousand years after, calls him in
the Quran Iskander dhu al-garnain, “Alexander
the lord of the two horns.’”’ It is impossible to
believe that the writer of Dn! could, in the face
of the universal attribution of the two ram’s
horns to Alexander, represent Persia, the power
he overthrew, as a two-horned ram (Dnl 8 3.20),
unless he had written before the expedition into
Egypt.


93 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Having arranged the affairs of Egypt, Alexander
set out for his last encounter with Darius. In vain
: had Darius sent to Alexander offering
7. The Last to share the empire with him; the
Battle with ‘king of Javan” (RVm) ‘was moved


Darius with anger against him” (Dnl 8 7) and
: would have nothing but absolute
submission. There was nothing left for Darius but


to prepare for the final conflict. He collected a yet
huger host than that he had had under him at
Issus, and assembled it on the plain east of the
Tigris. Alexander hastened to meet him. Al-
though the plain around Gaugamela was much more
suitable for the movements of the Pers troops, which
consisted largely of cavalry, and gave them better
opportunity of making use of their great numerical
superiority to outflank the small Gr army, the result
was the same as at Issus—overwhelming defeat
and immense slaughter. The consequence of this
victory was the submission of the greater portion
of the Pers empire.

After making some arrangements for the govern-
ment of the new provinces, Alexander set out in the
pursuit of Darius, who had fied in the care or cus-
tody of Bessus, satrap of Bactria. Bessus, at last,
to gain the favor of Alexander, or, failing that, to
maintain a more successful resistance, murdered
Darius. Alexander hurried on to the conquest
of Bactria and Sogdiana, in the course of his expe-
dition capturing Bessus and putting him to death.
In imitation of Bacchus, he proceeded now to invade
India. He conquered all before him till he reached
the Sutlej; at this point his Macedonian veterans
refused to follow him farther.

Thus compelled to give up hopes of conquests
in the farther East, he returned to Babylon, which

he purposed to make the supreme
8. Close of capital of bis empire, and set himself,
His Life with all his superabundant energy, to

organize his dominions, and fit Baby-
lon for its new destiny. While engaged in this
work he was seized with malaria, which, aggravated
by his recklessness in eating and drinking, carried
him off in his 33d year.

Alexander is not to be estimated merely as a
military conqueror. If he had been only this, he
would have left: no deeper impress on
the world than Tamerlane or Attila.
While he conquered Asia, he endeav-
ored also to Hellenize her. He every-
where founded Gr cities that enjoyed at all events
a municipal autonomy. With these, Hel thought
and the Hel language were spread all over south-
western Asia, so that philosophers from the banks
of the Euphrates taught in the schools of Athens.
Tt. was through the conquests of Alexander that Gr
became the language of literature and commerce
from the shores of the Mediterranean to the banks
of the Tigris. It is impossible to estimate the
effect of this spread of Gr on the promulgation of
the gospel. J. E. H. Toomson


9. His
Influence


ALEXANDRIA, al-eg-zan’dri-a (h ’AAcEdv8pea,
hé Alexdndreia): In 331 BC, Alexander the Great,
on his way to visit the Oracle of

1. History Amon seeking divine honors, stopped
at the W. extremity of the Delta at the

isle of Pharos the landing-place of Odysseus (Od.
iv.35) His keen eye noted the strategic possi-
bilities of the site occupied by the little Egyptian
village of Rhacotis, and his decision was immediate
to erect here, where it would command the gateway
to the richest domain of his empire, a glorious city
to be called by his own name. Deinocrates, great-
est living architect, already famous as builder of
the Temple of Diana, was given free hand and
like a dream the most beautiful city of the ancient


Alexander
Alexandria


or modern world (with the single exception of Rome)
arose with straight, parallel streets—one at least
200 feet wide—with fortresses, monuments, palaces,
government, buildings, and parks all erected accord-
ing to a perfect artistic plan. The city was about
fifteen miles in circumference (Pliny), and when
looked at from above represented a Macedonian
cloak, such as was worn by Alexander's heroic
ancestors. A colossal mole joined the island to
the main land and made a double harbor, the best
in all Egypt. Before Alexander died (323 BC)
the future of the city as the commercial metropolis
of the world was assured and here the golden casket
of the conqueror was placed in a fitting mausoleum.
Under the protection of the first two Ptolemies and
Euergetes A. reached its highest prosperity, receiving
through Lake Mareotis the products of Upper
Egypt, reaching by the Great Sea all the wealth
of the West, while through the Red Sea its merchant
vessels brought all the treasures of India and
Arabia into the A. docks without once being un-
laden. The manufactories of A. were extensive, the
greatest industry however being shipbuilding, the
largest merchant ships of the world and _ battle-
ships capable of carrying 1,000 men, which could
hurl fire with fearful effect, being constructed here.
This position of supremacy was maintained during
the Rom domination up to the 5th cent. during
which A. began to decline. Yet even when A.
was captured by the Arabs (641) under the caliph
Omar, the general could report: ‘‘I have taken a
city containing 4,000 palaces and 4,000 baths and
400 theaters.” They called it a “city of marble”
and believed the colossal obelisks, standing on
crabs of crystal, and the Pharos, that white stone
tower 400 ft. high, ‘“‘wonder of the world,”’ to be the
creation of jinn, not of men. With oriental exag-
geration they declared that one amphitheater
could easily hold a million spectators and that
it was positively painful to go upon the streets at
night because of the glare of light reflected from the
white palaces. But with the coming of the Arabs
A. began to decline. It sank lower when Cairo
became the capital (cir 1000 AD), and received
its death blow when a_ sea route to India was
discovered by way of the Cape of Good Hope
(cir 1500). Today the ancient A. lies entirely
under the sea or beneath some later construction.
Only one important relic remains visible, the
so-called Pompey’s Fillar which dates from the
reign of Diocletian. Excavations by the English
(1895) and Germans (1898-99) have yielded few
results, though Dr. G. Botti discovered the Sera-
peum and some immense catacombs, and only
recently (1907) some fine sphinxes. In its most
flourishing period the population numbered from
600,000 to 800,000, half of whom were perhaps
slaves. At the close of the 18th cent. it num-
bered no more than 7,000. Under the khedives
it has recently gained something of its old im-
portance and numbers now 320,000, of whom 46,000
are Europeans, chiefly Greeks (Baedeker, Handbook,
1902; Murray, Handbook, 1907).
Among the private papers of Alexander it is
said a sketch was found outlining his vast plan of
making a Greek empire which should
2. The include all races as harmonious units.
Jews in In accordance with this, Europeans,
Alexandria Asiatics and Africans found in A. a
common citizenship. Indeed in sever-
al cities, under the Ptolemies, who accepted this
policy, foreigners were even given superiority
to natives. Egyptians and Greeks were con-
ciliated by the introduction of a syncretic religion
in which the greatest Gr god was worshipped as
Osiris, Egyp god of the underworld, whose soul
appeared visibly in the form of the Apis bull. This


Alexandria


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


94


was the most popular and human form of the Egyp
worship. This new religion obtained phenomenal
success. It was in furtherance of this general
policy that the Jews in A. were given special
privileges, and though probably not possessing full
civic rights, yet they “occupied in A. a more in-
fluential position than anywhere else in the ancient
world” (Jew Enc). To avoid unnecessary friction
a separate district was given to the Jews, another to
the Greeks and another to the native Egyptians.
In the Gr section were situated the palaces of the
Ptolemies, the Library and Museum. In the
Egyp district was the temple dedicated to Serapis
(Osiris-Apis) which was only excelled in grandeur
by the capitol at Rome. The Jews possessed many
synagogues in their own district and in Philo’s
day these were not confined to any one section of
the city. Some synagogues seem to have exercised
the right of asylum, the same as heathen temples.


nate the first week in Lent as the ‘Fast of Herac-
lius.”” Wisd and many other influential writings
of the Jews originated in A. Doubtless numbers
of the recently discovered documents from the
Cairo g¢nizGh came originally from A. But the
epochal importance of A. is found in the teaching
which prepared the Heb people for the reception of
a gospel for the whole world, which was soon to be
preached by Hebrews from Hellenized Galilee.
(1) In Dnl 11 the Ptolemies of A. and their
wives are made a theme of prophecy. Apollos,
the “orator,” was born in A. (Acts 18
3. Alexan- 24). Luke twice speaks of himself and
dria’s Influ- Paul sailing in “a ship of A.” (Acts
ence on the 27 6; 28 11). Stephen ‘disputed’ in
Bible Jerusalem in the synagogue of the
Alexandrians (Acts 6 9). These direct
references are few, but the influence of A. on the


Bible was inestimable.


a [Paces

auithes, ‘|

Arsmoeum 2m, Soma. Library
cae eee Stadium

useum


ANCIENT


ALEXANDRIA


Stadia.
a
° 2 4 6 6
English Feet


1000 2000 4000 6000 8000


ye |
SSS
JEWS “7 |


Z


oyalN
Dockyards


Exchange fo) oO QUARTER


Hippo-
ayo


=


Gate of
the Sun


Pani


el


Hall of Justice &


iN é
yu, “Gymnasium
%y ( Dicasterium) ik


Lake Mareo SS


One of these was so large that the hazan signaled by
a flag when the congregation should give the Amen!
Each district had a practically independent, politi-
cal government. The Jews were at first ruled by a
Heb ethnarch. By the days of Augustus a Council
of Elders (gerusia) had control, presided over by
71 archons. Because of their wealth, education
and social position they reached high public office.
Under Ptol. VI and Cleopatra the two generals-
in-chief of the royal army were Jews. Ptol. I
had 30,000 Jewish soldiers in his army, whose
barracks have only recently been discovered. It
may have been a good thing that the persecu-
tion of Antiochus Epiphanes (2d cent. BC) checked
Jewish Hellenization. During the Rom supremacy
the rights of the Jews were maintained, except
during their persecution for a brief period by the
insane Caligula, and the control of the most im-
portant industries, including the corn trade, came
into their hands. When Christianity became the
state religion of Egypt the Jews at once began to
be persecuted. The victory of Heraclius over the
Persians (629 AD) was followed by such a massacre
of the Jews that the Copts of Egypt still denomi-


(2) The Sept, tr? in A. (8d to 2d cent. BC),
preserves a Heb text 1,000 years older than any
now known. This tr if not used by Jesus was
certainly used by Paul and other NT writers, as
shown by their quotations. It is Egyp even in
trifles. This Gr Bible not only opened for the
first time the “Divine Oracles” to the Gentiles and
thus gave to the OT an international influence, but
it affected most vitally the Heb and Christian de-
velopment.

(3) The Alex Codex (4th to 5th cent.) was
the first of all the great uncials to come into the
hands of modern scholars. It was obtained in
A. and sent as a present to the king of England
(1628) by Cyrellus Lucaris, the Patriarch of Con-
stantinople. The Sin and Vatican uncials with
many other most important Bible MSS—Heb, Gr,
Coptic and Syr—came from A.

(4) Jn and several other NT writings have justly
been regarded as showing the influence of this
philosophic city. Neither the phraseology nor
conceptions of the Fourth Gospel could have been
grasped in a world which A. had not taught. Pflei-


derer’s statement that He ‘‘may be termed the most


95 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Alexandria


finished treatise of the A. philosophy’? may be

doubted, but no one can doubt the fact of Alex in-
fluence on the NT.

With the founding of the University of A. began

the “third great epoch in the history of civiliza-

tion” (Max Miiller). It was modeled

4. Influence after the great school of Athens, but


of Alexan- excelled, being preéminently the “‘uni-
dria on versity of progress” (Mahaffy). Here
Culture for the first time is seen a school of


science and literature, adequately
endowed and offering large facilities for definite
original research. The famous library which at
different eras was reported as possessing from
400,000 to 900,000 books and rolls-—the rolls being
as precious as the books—was a magnificent edifice
connected by marble colonnades with the Museum,
the ‘“Temple of the Muses.”” An observatory, an
anatomical laboratory and large botanical and
zodlogical gardens were available. Celebrated
scholars, members of the various faculties, were
domiciled within the halls of the Museum and
received stipends or salaries from the government.
The study of mathematics, astronomy, poetry
and medicine was especially favored (even vivi-
section upon criminals being common); Alex archi-
tects were sought the world over; Alex inventors
were almost equally famous; the imfluence of Alex
art can still be marked in Pompeii and an Alex
painter was a hated rival of Apelles. Here Euclid
wrote his Elements of Geometry; here Archimedes,
‘that greatest mathematical and inventive genius
of antiquity,” made his spectacular discoveries
in hydrostatics and hydraulics; here Eratosthenes
calculated the size of the earth and made his other
memorable discoveries; while Ptolemy studied here
for 40 years and published an explanation of the
stellar universe which was accepted by scientists
for 14 cents., and established mathematical theories
which are yet the basis of trigonometry. ‘iver
since this epoch the conceptions of the sphericity
of the earth, its poles, axis, the equator, the arctic
and antarctic circles, the equinoctial points, the sol-
stices, the inequality of climate on the earth’s
surface, have been current notions among scientists.
The mechanism of the lunar phases was perfectly
understood, and careful though not wholly suc-
cessful calculations were made of inter-sidereal
distances. On the other hand literature and art
flourished under the careful protection of the court.
Literature and its history, philology and criticism
became sciences” (A. Weber). It may be claimed
that in literature no special originality was dis-
played though the earliest “love stories” and pas-
toral poetry date from this period (Mahaffy);
yet the literature of the Augustan Age cannot be
understood “without due appreciation of the char-
acter of the Alex school” (#B, 11th ed), while in
editing texts and in copying and translating MSS
inconceivable patience and erudition _ were dis-
played. Our authorized texts of Homer and
other classic writers come from A. not from Athens.
All famous books brought into Egypt were sent
to the library to be eopied. The statement of Jos
that Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-247) requested
the Jews to translate the OT into Gr is not in-
credible. It was in accordance with the custom of
that era. Ptol. Euergetes is said to have sent to
Athens for the works of Aeschylus, Sophocles,
Euripides, etc, and when these were transcribed,
sent back beautiful copies to Greece and kept the
originals! No library in the world excepting the
prophetic library in Jerusalem was ever as valuable
as the two Alex libraries. The story that the
‘Arabs burned it in the 7th cent. is discredited
and seemingly disproved (Butler). At any rate
after this period we hear of great private libraries


in A., but the greatest literary wonder of the world
has disappeared. :
_ Though no department of philosophy was estab-
lished in the Museum, nevertheless from the 3d
cent. BC to the 6th cent. AD it was
5. Influence the center of gravity in the philo-
on Philos- sophic world. Here Neo-Pythagorean-
ophy ism arose. Here Neo-Platonism, that
contemplative and mystical reaction
against the materialism of the Stoics, reached its
full flower. It is difficult to overestimate the in-
fluence of the latter upon religions thought. In it
the profoundest Aryan speculations were blended
with the sublimest Sem concepts. Plato was
numbered among the prophets. Greece here ac-
knowledged the Divine Unity to which the OT was
pledged. Here the Jew acknowledged that Athens
as truly as Jerusalem had taught a vision of God.
This was the first attempt to form a universal
religion. The Alex philosophy was the Elijah to
prepare the way for a Saviour of the world. The
thought of both Sadducee and Pharisee was affected
by it and much late pre-Christian Jewish lit. is
saturated with it. Neo-Platonism drew attention
to the true relation between matter and spirit,
good and evil, finite and infinite; it showed the
depth of antagonism between the natural and
spiritual, the real and ideal; it proclaimed the
necessity of some mystic union between the human
and the Divine. It stated but could not solve the
problem. Its last word was escape, not recon-
ciliation (Ed. Caird). Neo-Platonism was the
“germ out of which Christian theology sprang’
(Caird) thongh later it became an adverse force.
Notwithstanding its dangerous teaching concern-
ing evil, it was on the whole favorable to piety,
being the forerunner of mysticism and sympathetic
with the deepest, purest elements of a spiritual
religion.
According to all tradition St. Mark, the evangel-
ist, carried the gospel to A., and his body rested
here until removed to Venice, 828 AD.
6. Christian From this city Christianity reached
Church in all Egypt and entered Nubia, Ethiopia
Alexandria and Abyssinia. During the 4th cent.
ten councils were held in A., it
being the theological and ecclesiastical center of
Christendom. The first serious persecution of


. Christians by heathen occurred here under Decius


(251) and was followed by many others, the one
under Diocletian (303-11) being so savage that
the native Coptic church still dates its era from it.
When the Christians reached political power they
used the same methods of controversy, wrecking
the Caesarion in 366 and the Serapeum twenty-
five years later. Serapis (Osiris-Apis) was the best
beloved of all the native deities. His temple was
built of most precious marbles and filled with price-
less sculptures, while in its cloisters was a library
second only to the Great Library of the Museum.
When Christianity became the state religion of
Egypt the native philosophers, moved by patriotism,
rallied to the support of Serapis. But Theodosius
(391) prohibited idolatry, and led by the bishop, the
Serapeum was seized, and smitten by a soldier’s
battle-axe, the image—which probably represented
the old heathen religion at its best—was broken
to pieces, and dragged through the streets. That
day, as Steindorff well puts it, “Egyp paganism
received its death blow; the Egyp religion fell to
pieces” (History of Egypt). Thereafter heathen
worship hid itself in the dens and caves of the
earth. Even secret allegiance to Serapis brought
persecution and sometimes death. The most
appalling tragedy of this kind occurred in 415 when
Hypatia, the virgin philosopher, celebrated equally
for beauty, virtue and learning, was dragged by


Alexandrians
Allegory


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


96


a mob to the cathedral, stripped, and torn to pieces
before the altar. Some of the greatest Christian
leaders used all their influence against such atroci-
ties, but the Egyp Christians were always noted for
their excitability. They killed heretics easily,
but they would themselves be killed rather than
renounce the very slightest and most intangible
theological tenet. It only needed the change of
a word e.g. in the customary version to raise a riot
(Expos, V1I, 75). Some curious relics of the early
Egyp church have very recently come to light.
The oldest autographic Christian letter known
(3d cent.) proves that at that time the church
was used as a bank, and its ecclesiastics (who,
whether priests or bishops, were called “‘popes’’)
were expected to help the country merchants in
their dealings with the Rom markets. Some sixty
letters of the 4th cent. written to a Christian cavalry
officer in the Egyp army are also preserved, while
papyri and ostraca from cir 600 AD show that
at this time no deacon could be ordained with-
out having first learned by heart as much as an
entire Gospel or 25 Pss and two epistles of Paul,
while a letter from a bishop of this period is filled
with Scripture, as he anathematizes the “oppressor
of the poor,” who is likened unto him who spat
in the face of Our Lord on the cross and smote
Him on the head (Adolph Deissmann, Light from
the Ancient East, etc, 1910). Oppression of Jews
and heretics was not, however, forbidden and during
the 5th and 6th cents. Egypt was a battle-field in
which each sect persecuted every other. Even
when the Arabs under the caliph Omar captured
the city on Good Friday (641), Easter Day was
spent by the orthodox in torturing supposed here-
tics! The next morning the city was evacuated
and Jews and Copts received better treatment from
the Arabs than they had from the Rom or Gr
ecclesiastics. After the Arab conquest the Coptic
church, being released from persecution, pros-
pered and gained many converts even from the
Mohammedans. But the Saracenic civilization
and religion steadily displaced the old, and the
native learning and native religion soon disappeared
into the desert. By the 8th cent. Arab. had taken
the place of Gr and Coptic, not only in public
documents but in common speech. Then for
1,000 years the Egyp church remained without
perceptible influence on culture or theology. But
its early influence was immeasurable and can still
be marked in Christian art, architecture and ritual
as well as in philosophy and theology. Perhaps
its most visible influence was in the encourage-
ment of image-reverence and asceticism. It is
suggestive that the first hermit (Anthony) was.a
native Egyp, and the first founder of a convent
(Pachomius) was a converted Egyp (heathen) monk.
Today A. has again become a Christian metropolis
containing Copts, Romans, Greeks, Armenians,
Maronites, Syrians, Chaldaeans and Protestants.
The Protestants are represented by the Anglican
church, the Scotch Free church, the evangelical
church of Germany and the United Presbyterian
church of the U.S. (For minute divisions see
Catholic Enc.)
The first theological school of Christendom was
founded in A. It was probably modeled after
earlier Gnostic schools established for
7. Catechet- the study of religious philosophy.
ical School It offered a three years’ course. There
in Alexan- were no fees, the lecturers being sup-
dria ported by gifts from rich students.
Pantaenus, a converted Stoic philoso-
pher, was its first head (180). He was followed by
Clement (202) and by Origen (232) under whom the
school reached its zenith. It always stood for the
philosophical vindication of Christianity. Among


its greatest writers were Julius Africanus (215),
Dionysius (265), Gregory (270), Eusebius (315),
Athanasius (373) and Didymus (347), but Origen
(185-254) was its chief glory; to him belongs the
honor of defeating paganism and Gnosticism with
their own weapons; he gave to the church a “‘scien-
tific consciousness,” his threefold interpretation
of Scripture affected Biblical exegesis clear down
to the last century. Arius was a catechist in this
institution, and Athanasius, the “father of ortho-
doxy” and “theological center of the Nicene age”
(Schaff), though not officially connected with the
catechetical school was greatly affected by it, having
been bred and trained in A. The school was closed
toward the end of the 4th cent. because of theological
disturbances in Egypt, but its work was continued
from Caesarea, and other centers, affecting profoundly
Western teachers like Jerome and Ambrose, and com-
pletely dominating Eastern thought. From the first
there was a mystical and Docetic tendency visible,
while its views of inspiration and methods of inter-
pretation, including its constant assumption of a
secret doctrine for the qualified initiate, came legiti-
mately from Neo-Platonism. For several centuries
after the school disbanded its tenets were combated
by the “school of Antioch,” but by the 8th cent. the
Alex theology was accepted by the whole Christian
world, east and west.

Lirerature.—Besides works mentioned in the text
see especially: Petrie, History of Egypt (1899), V, VI;
Mahaffy, Empire of the Ptolemies (1895); Progress of
Hellenism (1905); Butler, Arab Conquest of Egypt (1902);
Ernst Sieglin, Ausgrabungenin Alexandrien (1908); Har-
nack, Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte (1895-1900), and in
New Sch-Herz (1910); Inge, Alexandrian Theology in
Ene of Religion and Ethics (1908); Ed. Caird, Evolution
of Theology in the Greek Philosophers (1904); Pfleiderer,
Philosophy and Development of Religion (1894); Schaff,
History of Christian Church (1884-1910); Zogheb, Ftudes
sur l’ancienne Alexandrie (1909).


Campren M. Cosern
ALEXANDRIANS, al-eg-zan'dri-ans_ (’AAefav-
Speis, Alexandreis): Jews of Alexandria, who had,
with the Libertines and Cyrenians, a synagogue in
Jerusalem. They were among those who disputed


with Stephen (Acts 6 9).


ALGUM, al'gum (D"2"328, ’algiimmim [2 Ch 2
8; 910f]; or ALMUG [Dra , ’almuggim,
1 K 10 11f]): Itis generally supposed that these


Algum Tree—Sanialum album.


two names refer to one kind of tree, the consonants
being transposed as is not uncommon in Sem words.
Solomon sent to Hiram, king of Tyre, saying,
“Send me also cedar-trees, fir-trees, and algum-trees,


97 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


out of Lebanon” (2 Ch 2 8). In 1 K 10 11 it
is said that the navy of Hiram “that brought gold
from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of
almug-trees and precious stones.’’ In the parallel
passage in 2 Ch 9 10 itis said that ‘‘algum-trees and
precious stones” were brought. From this wood
“the king made... . pillars for the house of Jeh,
and for the king’s house, harps also and psalteries
for the singers: there came no such almug-trees,
nor were seen, unto this day” (1 K 10 12). The
wood was evidently very precious and apparently
came from E. Asia—unless we suppose from 2 Ch
28 that it actually grew on Lebanon, which is
highly improbable; it was evidently a fine, close-
grained wood, suitable for carving. Tradition
says that this was the famous sandal wood, which
was in ancient times put to similar uses in India
and was all through the ages highly prized for its
color, fragrance, durability and texture. It is
the wood of a tree, Pierocar pussantalinus (N.D.
Santalaceae), which grows to a height of 25 to 30
feet; it is a native of the mountains of Malabar.
. W. G. Masrerman

ALIA, a-li’a (71729, ‘alyah): One of the dukes,
or heads of thousands of Edom (1 Ch 1 51).
In Gen 36 40 the name is Alvah (1199, ‘alwah),
the only difference being the change of the weaker
4, v, of Gen to the somewhat stronger, 7, y, of
the later Ch, a change which is not infrequent in
Heb. He is not to be confused, as in HDB, with
the Alian of the same chapter.


ALIAN, a-li’an G22: ‘alyan): A descendant of
Esau, and son of Shobal (1 Ch 1 40). In the cor-
responding earlier genealogy (Gen 36 23) the same
person is given as Alvan (W27 , ‘alwan), the change
of the third consonant being a simple one, common
to Heb, occurring similarly in Aliah (q.v.). Alian
is not to be identified with Aliah, since the groups
of names in which these occur are quite different,
and the context in each case is not the same.


ALIEN, 4l’yen: Found in the AV for “2, gér,
(Ex 18 3)=‘‘guest,” hence: “foreigner,” ‘‘so-
journer” RV; also for 133, nékhar (Isa 61 5)=
“foreign,” “a foreigner’ RV (concrete), “‘heathen-
dom” (abstract), ‘alien,’ “strange’’ (-er); and for
"D2, nokhri (Dt 14 21 RV “foreigner”; cf Job
19 15; Ps 69 8; Lam 6 2)—“strange,” ina variety
of degrees and meanings: “foreign,” “non-relative,”
“adulterous,” ‘different,’ ‘wonderful,’ “alien,”
“outlandish,” “strange.” Inthe NT we find arni-
horpiwpévos, apéllotrioménos (Eph 4 18; Col 1 21)
= “being alienated,” and alldtrios (He 11 34) =
“another’s,” “not one’s own,” hence: “foreign,”
‘not akin,’ “hostile.” In the OT the expression
was taken in its lit. sense, peleriny to those who were
not Israelites—the heathen; in the NT it is given a
fig. meaning, as indicating those who have not be-
come naturalized in the kingdom of God, hence are
outside of Christ and the blessing of the gospel.

Frank E. Hirsca

ALIENATE, l’yen-at (39, ‘abhar; draddorpida,
apallotriéd, “to estrange from’’): In OT, for the
break between husband and wife caused by unfaith-
fulness to the marriage vow (Jer 6 8; Ezk 23 17);
also applied to the diversion of property (Ezk 48
14). In NT, spiritually, for the turning of the soul
from God (Eph 2 12; Col 1 21). The Gr alldtrios,
which is the root of the verb, is the opposite of éd-
i-os, “one’s own.”’ The word implies a former state,
whence the person or thing has departed, and that,
generally, by deterioration.


ALIVE, a-liv’ (1%, hai, “living”; td, 2dd, “to
live,” dvatde, anazdd, “to live again”): These


Alexandrians
Allegory


Heb and Gr originals are the chief terms for life in
both Testaments. They cover all life, including
soul and spirit, although primarily referring to
physical vitality. Striking examples may be cited:
“Ts your father yet a.?” (Gen 43 7); “To whom
he also showed himself a.’’ (Acts 1 3). Often used
of God: “the living God” (Josh 3 10); also of the
resurrection life: ‘In Christ shall all be made a.”
(1 Cor 15 22); of the soul’s regenerate life:
“Reckon ... . yourselves .... . a. unto God,” ‘as
those that are a. from the dead” (Rom 6 11.13 AV).
The term is vital with the creative energy of God;
the healing, redemptive, resurrection life of Christ;
the renewing and recreative power of the Holy
Spirit. Dwicut M. Prarr


ALL, 61: Used in various combinations, and with
different meanings.

(1) All along, “Weeping all along as he went”
(Jer 41 6), ie. throughout the whole way he went,
feigning equal concern with the men from Shiloh,
etc, for the destruction ofthe Temple, so as to put
them off their guard.

(2) All in all, ‘‘That God may be all in all”
(1 Cor 15 28, Gr pdnia en pédsin, “all things in all
[persons and] things”). ‘The universe, with all it
comprises, will wholly answer to God’s will and re-
flect His mind” (Dummelow).

(8) All one, “It is all one” (Job 9 22), “it makes
no difference whether I live or die.”

(4) At all, “If thy father miss me at all” (18
20 6), ‘in any way,” “in the least.”

(5) Allto, “All to brake his skull” (Jgs 9 53 AV)
an obsolete form signifying “altogether”; “broke
his skull in pieces.”

(6) Often used indefinitely of a large number or a
great part, “All the cattle of Egypt died” (Ex 9
6; cf vs 19.25); ‘all Judaea, ate all the region
round about” (Mt 3 5); ‘that all the world should
be enrolled’? (Lk 2 1); “all Asia and the world’
(Acts 19 27); ‘All [people] verily held John to be a
prophet” (Mk 11 32). M. O. Evans


ALLAMMELECH, a-lam’é-lek (F228, ’al-
lammelekh, “oak of a king’): A town in the tribe


of Asher, the location of which is not known
(Josh 19 26; AV Alammelech).


ALLAR, al’ar (AV Aalar; ’Aaddp, Aaldr): Oc-
curring once (1 Esd 6 36) and used apparently to
indicate a place from which certain Jews came on
the return from captivity, who could not prove their
lineage, and were excluded for this reason from the
privileges of the priesthood. HDB identifies with
Immer of Ezr 2 59 and Neh 7 61 (q.v.), but this
is not at all certain.


ALLAY, 2-14’ (I°27, hénith, “to cause to rest,”’
“soothe”: “Gentleness allayeth [lit., ‘“pacifieth”’]
great offences’ [Eccl 10 4]): The word is applied
to what “excites, disturbs and makes uneasy”
(Smith, Synonyms Discriminated, 106).


ALLEGE, a-lej’ (raparlOnpt, “paratithemt,” “to
set forth,” Acts 17 3): It is not used in the Eng.
Bible in its more modern and usual sense, ‘‘to assert,”
but is about equivalent to “to prove.”

ALLEGIANCE, a-lé’jans (M}QU2, mishmereth,
“a charge,” from shamar, “to keep,” 1 Ch 12 29):
RVm gives as lit. meaning, “‘kept the charge of the
house of Saul,” which revisers consider fig. for
“maintaining their loyalty and fidelity,” ie.
“allegiance.”


ALLEGORY, al’é-go-ri: The term allegory, being
derived from Ado dyopederv, dllo agoreiein, sig-
nifying to say something different.from what the


Allegory
Allure


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 98


words themselves imply, can etymologically be
applied to any fig. form of expression of thought.
In actual usage in theology, the term is employed
in a restricted sense, being used however in three
ways, viz. rhetorically, hermeneutically and homi-
letically. In the first-mentioned sense it is the
ordinary allegory of rhetoric, which is usually defined
as an extended or continued metaphor, this exten-
sion expanding from two or more statements to a
whole volume, like Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress.
Allegories of this character abound in the Scrip-
tures, both in OT and in NT. Instructive exam-
ples of this kind are found in Ps 80 8-19; Eccl 12
3-7; Jn 10 1-16; Eph 6 11-17. According to
traditional interpretation of both the Jewish exe-
gesis and of the Catholic and Protestant churches
the entire book of Cant is such an allegory. The
subject is discussed in full in Terry’s Biblical
Hermeneutics, etc, ch vii, 214-38.

In the history of Biblical exegesis allegory rep-
resents a distinct type of interpretation, dating
back to pre-Christian times, practised particularly
by the Alex Jews, and adopted by the early Church
Fathers and still practised and defended by the
Roman Catholic church. This method insists that
the literal sense, particularly of historical passages,
does not exhaust the divinely purposed meaning
of such passages, but that these latter also include
a deeper and higher spiritual and mystical sense.
The fourfold sense ascribed to the Scriptures finds
its expression in the well-known saying: Littera
gesta docet; quid credas, allegorica; moralis, quid
agas; quid speres, anagogica (‘‘The letter shows things
done; what you are to believe, the allegoric; what
you are to do, the moral; what you are to hope,
the anagogic”), according to which the allegorical
is the hidden dogmatical meaning to be found in
every passage. Cremer, in his Biblico-Theological
New Testament Lexicon, shows that this method
of finding a hidden thought behind the simple
statement of a passage, although practised so ex-
tensively on the Jewish side by Aristobulus and
especially Philo, is not of Jewish origin, but was,
particularly by the latter, taken from the Alex
Greeks (who before this had interpreted Gr my-
thology as the expression of higher religious con-
ceptions) and applied to a deeper explanation of OT
historical data, together with its theophanies,
anthropomorphisms, anthropopathies, and the like,
which in their plain meaning were regarded as
unworthy of a place in the Divine revelation of the
Scriptures. Such allegorizing became the common
custom of the early Christian church, although not
practised to the same extent in all sections, the
Syrian church exhibiting the greatest degree of
sobricty in this respect. In this only Jewish prec-
edent. was followed; the paraphrases commonly
known as the Tg, the Midr, and later in its ex-
tremest form in the Kabbalah, all showed this mark
of eisegesis instead of exegesis. This whole false
hermeneutical principle and its application orig-
inated doubtless in an unhistorical conception of
what the Scriptures are and how they originated.
It is characteristic of the NT, and one of the evi-
dences of its inspiration, that in the entire Biblical
literature of that age, both Jewish and Christian,
it is the only book that does not practise allego-
rizing but abides by the principle of the lit. interpre-
tation. Nor is Paul’s exegesis.in Gal 4 21-31
an application of false allegorical methods. Here
in ver 24 the term allégorouimena need not be
taken in the technical sense as expressive of a
method of interpretation, but merely as a para-
phrase of the preceding thought; or, if taken tech-
nically, the whole can be regarded as an argumentum
ad hominem, a way of demonstration found also else-
where in Paul’s writings. The Protestant church,


beginning with Luther, has at all times rejected
this allegorizing and adhered to the safe and sane
principle, practised by Christ and the entire NT,
viz. Sensum ne inferas, sed efferas (“Do not carry a
meaning into [the Scriptures] but draw it out of [the
Scriptures]’’). It is true that the older Protestant
theology still adheres to a sensus mysticus in the
Scriptures, but by this it means those passages in
which the sense is conveyed not per verba (through
words), but per res verbis descriptas (‘through things
described by means of words’’), as e.g. in the parable
and the type.

In homiletics allegorizing is applied to the method
which draws spiritual, truths from common his-
torical statements, as e.g. when the healing of a
leper by Christ is made the basis of an exposition
of the healing of the soul by the Saviour. Naturally
this is not interpretation in the exegetical sense.

G. H. ScuoppE

ALLELUIA, al-é-lo6’ya. See HaLLeLusau.

ALLEMETH, al’é-meth (027, ‘allemeth, ‘‘con-
cealment”; AV Alemeth, 1 Ch 6 60): Name of
a town in tribe of Benjamin, near Anathoth, one
of the cities given to the sons of Aaron, the same as
Almon of Josh 2118. The AV ALEmetTH (q.v.)
is based upon the Heb reading M'A27, ‘alemeth.


Its site is the modern Almit, a village a short dis-
tance N.E. of Anathoth.


ALLIANCE, a-li’ans: Frequent references are
made to alliances between the patriarchs and for-
eigners. Abraham is reported to have
1. Inthe had ‘confederates’ among the chiefs
Patriarchal of the Canaanites (Gen 14 13). He
Stories also allied with Abimelech, king of
Gerar (21 22-34). Isaac’s alliance with
Abimelech (26 26-34), which is offered as an ex-
planation of the name Beer-sheba (ver 33), appears
to be a variant of the record of alliance between
Abraham and Abimelech. Jacob formed an al-
liance with Laban, the Syrian (31 44-54), by which
Gilead was established as a boundary line between
Israel and Aram. These treaties refer, in all
probability, to the early period of Israel’s history,
and throw a good deal of light upon the relation
between Israel and the Philis and the Syrians imme-
diately after the conquest of Canaan.
The only reference to an alliance between Israel
and foreign people prior to the conquest of Canaan,
that might be regarded as historical,


2. In Pre- is that made between Israel and the
Canaanitic Kenite tribes at the foot of Sinai, the
History precise nature of which, however, is


not very clearly indicated. Such al-
liances led to intermarriages between the members
of the allied tribes. Thus Moses married a Kenite
woman (Jgs 1 16; 411). The patriarchal mar-
riages refer to the existing conditions after the con-
quest. Possibly one more alliance belonging to
that period is that between Israel and Moab (Nu
25 1-3). According to the narrative, Israel be-
came attached to the daughters of Moab, at Shittim,
and was led astray after Baal-peor. Its historicity
is proven from the prophetic allusions to this event
(cf Hos 9 10; Mic 6 5).
The invading hordes of Israel met with strong
opposition on the part of the natives of Pal (Jgs 1


21.27~36). In time, alliances were
3. During formed with some of them, which
the Con- generally led, as might be expected,
quest to considerable trouble. One concrete


illustration is preserved in the story of
the Gibeonites (Josh 9). Intermarriages were fre-
quent. The tribe of Judah thus became consolidated
through the alliance and the amalgamation with
the Kenites and Calebites (Jgs 1 10-16). These


99 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


relations between Israel and the Canaanites threat-
ened the preservation of Yahwism.

Prohibitory measures were adopted in the legal
codes with a view to Jewish separateness and purity

(Ex 23 32; 34 12.15; Dt 7 2; cf Jgs

4. The 2 2.3; Lev 18 3.4; 20 22f).
Monarchy But at a very early date in the his-
tory of the Jewish kingdom the official
heads of the people formed such alliances and inter-
married. David became an ally to Achish of Gath
(1 8 27 2-12) and later on with Abner, which led to
the consolidation of Judah and Israel into one king-
dom (28 3 17-21; 6 1-3). It appears likewise
that Toi, king of Hamath, formed an alliance with
David (2 8 9 10) and that Hiram of Tyre was his
ally (1 K 6 12a). Alliances with foreign nations
became essential to the progress of trade and com-
merce during the reign of Solomon. Two of his
treaties are recorded: one with Hiram of Tyre (1 K
5 12-18; 9 11-14) and one with Pharaoh, king of
Egypt (1 K 9 16).

After the disruption, Shishak of Egypt invaded
Judaea, and probably also Israel. This meant an

abrogation of the treaty existing be-


5. The tween Israel and Egypt during the
Divided reign of Solomon. In consequence of
Kingdom the war between the two kingdoms,


Asa formed an alliance with Ben-
hadad of Syria (1 K 16 18-20). Later on Ahab
sought an alliance with Ben-hadad (1 K 20 31-
34). Friendly relations ensued between Israel and
Judah, during the reign of Jehoshaphat, which
continued to the close of the dynasty of Omri
(1 K 22 24.50; 2 K 37). With the accession
of Jehu, hostilities were resumed. In the Syro-
Ephraimitic war, Israel was allied with Syria, and
Judah with Assyria (2 K 16 6-9; Isa 7). This
opened the way to the Assyr power into both king-
doms. Relief against Assyria was sought in Egypt;
Hoshea rebelled against Shalmaneser, and alhed
with So (Sevechus, the Shabaka of the 25th Dynasty)
and thus brought about the fall of Samaria.

Hezekiah likewise sought an alliance with So,
but derived no assistance from him. He is re-
corded to have formed friendly rela-


6. The tions with Berodach-baladan of Baby-
Kingdom lon (2 K 20 12-18). These alliances
of Judah resulted in the introduction of foreign


cults into Jerus (2 K 16 10.11). Dur-
ing the reign of Manassch, Yahwism was seriously
threatened by foreign religious practices (2 K 21
2-9). The protesting spirit against the prevailing
conditions found expression in the Dt code, which
emphasizes the national policy. Josiah fought
against Pharaoh-necoh as an ally of Assyria (2 K
23 29). Jehoahaz continued the Assyr alliance and
was dethroned in consequence by Pharaoh-necoh (ver
38). Jehoiakin was disposed to be friendly with
Egypt, and even after his subjection to Nebuchad-
nezzar, he remained loyal to the Pharaoh (ver 35).
Zedekiah came to the throne as an ally of Babylon.
When he broke this alliance, the destruction of Jerus
resulted (26). : ;
Judas Maccabaeus sought an alliance with the
Romans (1 Mace 8; Jos, Ant, XII, x, 6) which was
renewed by Jonathan (1 Macc 12 1;


7. In Ant, XIII, v, 8) and_by Simon (1
Post-exilic Macc 15 17; Ant, XIII, vii, 3).
Times Treaties were concluded with the


Spartans (1 Macc 12 2; 14 20; Ant,
XII, iv, 10; XIII, v, 8). The Rom alliance was
again renewed by Hyrcanus about 128 BC (Ant,
XIII, ix, 2). This alliance proved to be of fatal
consequence to the independence of the Jews
(Ant, XIV, iv, 4; and xiv, 5). For the rites con-
nected with the formation of the earlier alliances,
see COVENANT. SaMuEL Conon


Allegory
Allure


ALLIED, a-lid’ (B4P , kardbh, “near,” as in Gen
46 10; Ex 13 17, etc): Neh 18 4 refers either to
family ties, as in Ruth 2 20, or to intimate asso-
ciation.


ALLOM, al’om (’AdAdv, Allén): RV ALLON
(q.v.): One of the families of the “servants of
Solomon,” whose descendants returned with Zerub-
babel from Babylon in the First Return, 537 BC
(1 Esd 5 34). Thename isnot found in the parallel
lists of Ezra and Nehemiah, although some have
tried to identify with the last name of each list,
Ami of Ezr 2 57, and Amon of Neh 7 59. This is
not probable.


ALLON, al’on (7'5X, ’allon, “oak’’):

(1) A town in the tribe of Naphtali in northern
Palestine (Josh 19 33), according to AV, which
follows some Heb texts. It is better however to
read with the RV, “oak” (Fibs , él6n), rather than
as proper noun.

2) A prominent descendant of the tribe of
Simeon (1 Ch 4 37).

(3) RV for Allom of the AV inl Esd 6 34 (q.v.).


ALLON-BACUTH, al’on-ba’kuth (MADD 75bN,
’allon bakhith; AV transliterates Allon-bachuth,
al-on-bak’uth, ‘‘oak of weeping’): The burial place
of Deborah, the nurse of Rebekah (Gen 36 8);
it appears from the narrative that she made her
home with Jacob, who had returned from Paddan-
aram, and was sojourning at the time at Bethel,
in the vicinity of which was the ‘oak of weeping,”
under which she was buried.


ALLOW, a-lou’, ALLOWANCE, a-lou’ans: The
vb. “to allow’ is used in AV to tr four different
Gr words: (1) suneudokéd, “to approve together”
(with others) (RV “consent unto”), Lk 11 48.
(2) prosdéchomai, ‘‘to receive to oneself,” ‘“admit”’
(RV “look for,” m ‘“‘accept”’); Acts 24 15. (3) gin-
ésko, “to know,” “recognize”: “That which I do, I
allow not” (RV “I know not’’), i.e. “I do not under-
stand what I am doing, my conduct is inexplicable
to me” (Grimm-Thayer); Rom 7 15. (4) dokimdz6,
“to prove,” “approve.” ‘Happy is he that con-
demneth not himself in the thing which he alloweth”
(RV “approveth,” i.e. in practice), i.e. who is not
troubled with scruples; Rom 14 22. Thus RV has
removed the vb. “allow” in each case in which it
occurs in AV, it being somewhat ambiguous in
meaning (its original sense, as derived from Lat
allocare, “to place,” “assign,” “grant,” being influ-
enced by another word, Lat allaudare, “to praise’”’).
The noun “allowance’’ occurs in the sense of quan-
tity of food allowed, in 2 K 26 30 (AV, RV) and
the || passage Jer 52 34 (RV; “diet” in AV).

D. Miatu Epwarps

ALLOY, a-loi’ oun, bedhil): In Isa 1 25 RVm;
tr? “tin” in the text. Elsewhere in both VSS
bedhil is tr4 Tin (q.v.).


ALLURE, a-lir’ (0B, pathah, “to persuade,”
“woo,” “entice”; Sedcd{w, deledzé, “to entrap,” “lay
a bait’’): : ;

(1) “I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness” (Hos 2 14), with evident reference to
the Assyr invasion and the devastation of the land,
followed up by the Exile. Thus would Jeh entice
Israel to repent by gentle punishment; then would
follow her restoration and the outpouring of His
love (vs 14 ff).

(2) “They allure through the lusts of the flesh”
(2 Pet 2 18, RV “entice’”’). Wicked men allure
to destruction; God (as above) allures to_punish-
ment, repentance and restoration. M. O. Evans


Almighty
Alms


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


100


ALMIGHTY, 6l-mit’i: (1) (IW, shaddai [Gen
17 1)): Found in the OT forty-eight times, most
of these in the Book of Job; it occurs either alone
or in combination with Sy, *al, “God”’). The root
meaning is uncertain. (2) (ravroxpdrwp, pantokrd-
tor), the exclusive tr of this Gr word in the NT, found
principally in Rev (nine times); once besides (2 Cor
6 18). Itsoccurrence in the Apoc is frequent. See
Gop, NaMEs oF.


ALMODAD, al-md’dad (TADS, *almadhadh,
“the beloved,” or, ‘God is beloved’): The first
mentioned of the thirteen sons of Joktan (Gen 10
25-29; 1 Ch 1 19-23). A south Arabian name,
and pointing to a south Arabian tribe. See ABIMAEL.


ALMON, al’mon (757299, ‘almon, “hidden”):
A Levitical city in the tribe of Benjamin (Josh 21
18), the same as ‘‘Allemeth” RV, “Alemeth” AV,
of 1 Ch 6 60 (q.v.).


ALMON-DIBLATHAIM, = al’mon-dib-la-tha’im
(manda aor, ‘almon dibhlathayim, ‘‘Almon of
the double cake of figs’): A station in the wilder-
ness journeyings of the Israelites, located in Moab
between Diban-gad and the mountains of Abarim
(Nu 38 46.47). It was near the end of the forty
years’ wanderings. The name was probably given
because the location was like two lumps of pressed
figs. In both occurrences the word has the accusa-
tive ending of direction, and should properly be read:
“Almon toward Diblathaim.” It was probably the
same place as Beth-diblathaim of Jer 48 22, men-
tioned in the prophet’s oracle against Moab.


ALMOND, 4’mund:

(1) TpW, shakedh, Gen 48 11; Nu 17 8, etc.
The word shaked comes from a Heb root meaning
to “watch” or “wait.” In Jer 1 11.12 there is a
play on the word, “And I said, I see a rod of an


Almond—Amygdalus communis.


almond-tree [shakédh]. Then said Jehovah unto me,
Thou hast well seen: for | will watch (shdkédh] over
my word to perform it.” ;

(2) 17>, laz; AV hazel, Gen 30 37; lauz is the
mod Arab. name for ‘“almond”’—Luz was the old
name of BETHEL (q.v.).


The almond tree is mentioned in Eccl 12 5,
where in the description of old age it says ‘‘the
almond-tree shall blossom.” The
1. Almond reference is probably to the white hair
Tree of age. An almond tree in full bloom
upon a distant hillside has a certain
likeness to a head of white hair.
A rod of almond is referred to Gen 30 37, where
“Jacob took him rods of fresh poplar, ‘and of the
almond [liz] and of the plane-tree; and
2. ARod peeled white streaks in them” as a
of Almond means of securing ‘“‘ring-streaked, speck-
led, and spotted” lambs and goats—a
proceeding founded doubtless upon some ancient
folklore. Aaron’s rod that budded (Nu 17 2.3)
was an almond rod. Also see Jer 1 11 referred to
above.
The blossoms of the almond are mentioned Ex 25


33f; 87 19f, etc. “Cups made like almond-

blossoms in one branch, a knop (i.e.
3. The knob) and a flower,” is the description
Blossoms given of parts of the sacred candle-


sticks. It is doubtful exactly what was
intended—the most probable is, as Dillmann has
suggested, that the cup was modeled after the calyx
of the almond flower. See CaNDLESTICK.

Israel directed his sons (Gen 43 11) to carry
almonds as part of their present to Joseph in Egypt.

Palestine is a land where the almond
4. The flourishes, whereas in Egypt it would
Fruit appear to have been uncommon.
Almonds are today esteemed a deli-
cacy; they are eaten salted or beaten into a pulp
with sugar like the familiar German Marzipan.

The almond is Amygdalus communis (N.O.
Rosaceae), a tree very similar .to the peach. The
common variety grows to the height of 25 feet
and produces an abundant blossom which appears
before the leaves; in Pal this is fully out at the
end of January or beginning of February; it is the
harbinger of spring. This early blossoming is
supposed to be the origin of the name shakédh which
contains the idea of “‘early.”? The masses of almond
trees in full bloom in some parts of Pal make a
very beautiful and striking sight. The bloom of
some varieties is almost pure white, from a little
distance, in other parts the delicate pink, always
present at the inner part of the petals, is diffused
enough to give a pink blush to the whole blossom.
The fruit is a drupe with a dry fibrous or woody
husk which splits into two halves as the fruit
ripens. The common wild variety grows a kernel
which is bitter from the presence of a substance
called amygdalon, which yields in its turn prussic
(hydrocyanic) acid. Young trees are grafted with
cuttings from the sweet variety or are budded with
apricot, peach or plum. W. G. MasTerman


ALMOST, 61l’most (év Aly): In Acts 26 28 the
Gr en oligd does not mean “almost,” although
scholars have for centuries tr’ the clause ‘Almost
thou persuadest me to become a Christian.” The
revisers saw clearly the errors of their predeces-
sors, so far as the signification of the first two words
is concerned; but their explanation of the sentence
is also erroneous; for the Gr cannot mean ‘With
but httle persuasion thou wouldst fain make me a
Christian.” Paul’s reply proves that en oligd must
be taken with the last word poiésat, not with pef-
theis, since he takes up Agrippa’s en oligd, couples
it with en megdld and continues with genésthai
which is the regular passive of poiésai (cf Lysias
xii.71 with 72). And the idea of “Christian” is
also taken up and repeated in hopotos kat egé
eimt.

An investigation of the usage of en oligd shows
that it was never used in the sense of “almost.”


101


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Almighty
Alms


The phrase occurs first in the Hymn to Hermes,
240, and here it is evidently an abbreviated expres-
sion for the Homeric é\lyp él xdpy, oligd ent
chéro (M 423). Cf K 161, P 394. But it was
used for both time and place, with the substantive
expressed or understood (Thue. 1.93.1; iii.66.3; iv.
26.3; iv.55.3; 11.84.38; i1.86.5; iv.96.3; v.112; vii.
67.3; vii.87.1; Pind. Pyth. vili.131; Eur. Suppl.
1126; Hel. 771; Isoe. iv.83; Dem. lviii.60; iii.18).
These uses persist from Homer far down into the
post-classical literature (Plut. Per. 159 F; Coriol.
217 F; Mar. 427A; Crass. 547C; Polyb. x.18;
Appian, Mithrad. 330; Themistius xi.143.C; Eus-
tath. IL.B, p.339.18). In the NT the phrase occurs
also in Eph 3 3. Here too the common versions
are incorrect. The clause in which the phrase
occurs means simply, ‘‘as I said a little while ago”—
the addition of en oltgd merely indicates that the
interval indicated by pro is short, an idea which
would have been expressed in classical Gr by the
simple dative, olig and the adverb préteron (Ar.
Thesm. 578; Aeschin. i. 2, 26, 72, 165; ii. 77, 147).
Only a short while before Paul had expressed
practically the same thought (Eph 3 3) and in
almost identical language.

Consequently, en oligd, in the NT, means “a
little,” and is equivalent to oligos which occurs
in 2 Pet 2 18. In classical writers the idea would
have been expressed by olfgon, or kat’ oligon.
So en oligé, which originally signified ‘in a little
space’ (or time), comes to mean simply “‘a little”
(bit), ein bischen, but is never equivalent to oligou
(‘within a little’) in any period of the language.
The King James translators disregarded the real
significance of poiésai, or adopted the reading of
the inferior MSS (genesthat), so as to make the
rest of the sentence harmonize with their tr of
the first two words; and the revisers force the
last two words into an impossible service, since
the object of poiésat of which christianén is the
factitive predicate, must be a third person, but
certainly not Agrippa. Some scholars are of the
opinion that the thought is: “You are trying to
persuade me so as to make me a Christian.” This
is, indeed, the Spanish version; but examples show
that the infinitive after mwel@ev was used in a
different sense. The best MS reads TTIOEIC.
This might, of course, stand for wees. But
pemifes may point to an original pemirobes. Cf
Jas 4 5 and 2 Cor 5 2, Plato Leg. 855 E. If
these contentions be correct, the verb means simply
“earnestly desire,” and not “persuade.” Cf
Herod. v.93; Plato Protag. 329 D; Aesch. Pers. 542;
Soph. Phil. 534; Eur. H.F. 1408; I.T. 542; Cyel.
68; Ion 1432; Ar. Lys. 605, to dei; t potheis;
Agrippa is asking, ‘‘What do you want, Paul?
What are you trying todo? Make mea Christian?”
The implication in Paul’s reply is that he is very
desirous indeed of making him a Christian. And
this interpretation harmonizes with the scene.
The apostle’s business at this juncture is not to
convert heathen to Christianity; for he is in chains
before Agrippa, Berenice, Festus and prominent
men of Caesarea, metd pollés phantastas (ver 23),
to answer the charges brought against him by
the Jews. But he holds forth at length and with
such ardor that the Roman king says (though not
necessarily in irony): ‘You seem to be anxious to
make me a Christian in small measure.” And
Paul responds: “both small and great.” All the
MSS, except Sinaiticus, have etOes (Alexandr.
TITE!QOH-). Several read genesthat (instead of pot-
ésai). Wetstenius (Amsterdam 1752) and Knapp
(Halle 1829) follow these MSS. So most of the
old tr®: Coverdale (1535), “Thou persuadest me
in a parte to become a Christen”; Biblia Sacra


(Paris 1745) “In modico suades me C. fieri’’; a
Latin MS, 14th cent. now in Lane Sem., Cin-
cinnati; Rosenmueller’s Scholia (1829), ‘“Parum
abest quin mihi persuadeas ut fiam’’; Stier und
Theile’s Polyglotten Bibel (1849); Tregelles (1857—
79, with Jerome’s version); Edouard Reuss, His-
toire apostolique (Paris 1876), ‘“Tu vas me persuader
bientét de devenir Chrétien.” The tr of Queen
Elizabeth’s Bible is ‘‘Somewhat thou bryngeste
me in minde for to become Chryste.’”’ Wycliffe
renders “In litil thing thou councelist me for to be
maad a Christen man.” Erasmus takes en oligd
in the sense of “a little.’ Calvin’s rendering,
“Thou wilt make me a Christian in a moment,”
has been adopted in various countries (Wetstenius,
Kuinoel, Neander, de Wette, Lange, Robinson,
Hackett, Conybeare). The older scholars generally
hold to “almost” (Valla, Luther, Beza, Grotius,
Castalio, Du Veil, Bengel, Stier). Some interpret
the phrase “with little labor’ (Oecumenius, Ols-
hausen, Baumgarten, Meyer, Lechler). Neander
maintains that if we adopt the readings en megald
in Paul’s answer, Agrippa’s words must be explained
“with a few reasons” (‘which will not cost you
much trouble”). Meyer-Wendt (Kritisch-exegetisches
Handbuch uber die A postelgeschichte) translates ‘mit
Wenigem ueberredest du mich Christ zu werden.”
Meyer himself conceives the words to have been
spoken sarcastically. See Classical Review, XX11,
238-41. J. E. Harry


ALMS, dims, ALMSGIVING, 4ms-giv’ing: The
Eng. word “alms” is an abridged form of the Gr
word, éAenuocdvy, eleémostiné (cf ‘“eleemosynary”’),
appearing in gradually reduced forms in German
Almosen, Wyclif’s Almesse, Scotch Aw’mons, and
our alms.

The later Jews often used “righteousness”
c*dhaka@h as meaning alms, that being in their
view the foremost righteousness. (Cf our modern
use of ‘charity’ to denote almsgiving.) This use
is seen in the Talm and in the frequent translations
of the Hebrew word for ‘‘righteonsness” (¢¢dhakah)
by “alms” (eleémosuné) in the LXX, though
nothing warranting this is found in the Heb OT,
or in the true text of the NT. This notion of right-
eousness as alms being well-nigh universal among
Jews in Jesus’ day, and spreading even among
Christians, accounts for ‘‘alms” in Mt 6 1, where
the true text has “righteousness”: ‘Take heed that
ye do not your righteousness before men, to be
seen of them” (RV with BND, the Lat versions,
ete). The oriental versions which generally read
“alms” may be accounted for on the supposition that
“alms’’ was first written on the margin as explaining
the supposed meaning of “righteousness,’’ and then,
as according with this accepted oriental idea, was
substituted for it in the text by the copyists.

Dikaiostiné and eleémosuné are both used in
the LXX to tr hesedh, ‘‘kindness,” and are also
both used to tr ¢°dhakah, “Justice.” Almsgiving
was regarded not merely as a plain evidence of
righteousness in general but also as an act of justice,
a just debt owing to the needy. ‘No one refuses
directly,’ Mackie says, hence, possibly, Christ’s
teaching in Lk 11 41, “Let your righteousness
[charity] be from within,” ‘Give your hearts to
almsgiving.”’

In the course of time the impulse and command to
give alms in a true human way, out of pity, such
as is found expressed in Dt 15 11 AV, “Thou shalt
open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy
poor, and to thy needy, in thy land,” gave place to
a formal, “meritorious” practice, possessing, like
sacrifice, as men came to think, the power of atoning
for man’s sins, and redeeming him from calamity
and death. For instance, Prov 11 4 (cf 16 6;


Almug
Alphabet


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


102


21 3) was expounded: ‘‘Water will quench blazing
fire; so doth almsgiving make atonement for sins”
(Ecclus 3 30). ‘Lay up alms in thy storehouse;
it shall deliver thee from affliction’”’ (Ecclus 29 12).
The story of Tob is especially in point: it is simply
a lesson on almsgiving and its redeeming powers:
“Alms delivers from death and will purge away all
sin” (Tob 1 3.16; 2 14; 4 7-11; 12 8.9. Cf Sir
29 11 ff). Kindred teaching abounds in the Talm:
“Alms-giving is more excellent than all offerings,’ is
“equal to the whole law,’ will ‘deliver from the
condemnation of hell,’ will “make one perfectly
righteous,” etc. According to Rabbi Assi, ‘‘Alms-
giving is a powerful paraclete between the Israelites
and their Father in heaven; it brings the time of re-
demption nigh” (Babha’ Bathra’ Talm 10a).

The Roman Catholics, holding the books of Tob
and Sir to be canonical, find in them proof-texts
for their doctrine of almsgiving, and likewise attach
great value to the gifts to the poor as atoning for
sins. Protestants, by a natural reaction, have failed
to hold always at its true value what was and is an
important Christian duty (see Lk 12 33 AV, and
cf Mt 6 19-24: “Sell that ye have and give alms,”
etc). It seems to have been so regarded and kept
up in the Christian communities until the beginning
of the 4th cent. (Apos Const II 36; Cyprian, De
Opera and Eleemos. xiv).

The teaching of Jesus on the subject is important,
first, as bearing upon Jewish ideas and practices,
and second, as bearing upon present-day Christian
ideas and practices.

This teaching appears most conspicuously in the
Sermon on the Mount. While showing what is
required of the subjects of the Messianic reign, He
avowedly sets forth a higher and more spiritual
morality than that which was taught and practised
by the scribes and Pharisees: “Except your right-
eousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the
kingdom of heaven” (Mt 5 20). There, too, He
lays down the general principle embodied in the
words of Mt 6 1: ‘Take heed that ye do not your
righteousness before men, to be seen of them,”
and illustrates it by applying it to the three exercises
most valued among the Jews (commended together
in Tob 12 8), viz. almsgiving (Mt 6 2.4), prayer
(vs 5-15), and fasting (vs 16-18). Jewish writers
claim that these are “the three cardinal disciplines
which the synagogue transmitted to the Christian
church and the Mohammedan mosque” (cf Koran,
Sura 2 40, 104; 9 54).

Clearly what Jesus here forbids in general is not
publicity in performing good deeds, which is often
necessary and proper, but ostentatious publicity,
for the purpose of attracting attention. (The Gr
conveys distinctly this idea of purpose, and the
verb for “‘to be seen” is the one from which comes
our word ‘‘theater.’’) :

Jewish writers, as also Gr and Rom philosophers
have many notable maxims upon the beauty and
importance of being unostentatious in virtue,
especially in deeds of benevolence. The Essenes
had their treasury in a chamber of their own in the
temple that both the giving and the taking should
be unobserved (Mish, Sh°k, v.6). Rabbi Eleazer
said, ‘‘Alms-giving should be done in secret and not
before men, for he who gives before men is a sinner,
and God shall bring also the good deed before his
judgment” (B.B. 9a; cf Eccl 12 14).

In applying this principle to almsgiving Jesus
teaches His disciple: “When . . . thou doest alms,
sound not a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites
do” (Mt 6 2). The conjecture of Calvin, followed
by Stier and others, and mentioned as early as Ruthy-
mius, that it was a practice among Jews for an
ostentatious almsgiver literally to sound a trumpet,


or cause a trumpet to be sounded before him, in
public places to summon the needy, is without
foundation (Lightfoot); asis also the notion, made
current by the rabbis and accepted by Edersheim
(The Temple, etc, 26), that by ‘‘sounding a trumpet”
Jesus was alluding to the trumpet-like receptacles
of brass in the temple treasury. There is no proof
that these were found “in the synagogues,” or “in
the streets.” ‘Sound a trumpet,” according to
the Gr commentators, and the best modern authori-
ties, is merely a fig. expression common to many
languages, for self-parade—efforts to attract notice
and win applause (cf our vulgar Eng. saying about
“blowing your own horn’). The contrast with
the common practice instituted by Jesus is the
significant thing: “But when thou doest alms”
—“thou” is emphatic by position in the Gr—“‘let
not thy left hand know what thy right hand
doeth,” etc, i-e. ‘So far from trumpeting your alms-
giving before the public, do not even let it be
known to yourself.” Jesus here, Calvin well says,
“silently glances at a kind of folly which prevails
everywhere among men, that they think they have
lost their pains if there have not been many spec-
tators of their virtues.” (The traditional saying
of Mohammed, “In almsgiving, the left hand
should not know what the right has given,” is
evidently borrowed from this saying of Jesus.) It
is worthy of note that, despite popular practice, to
give alms with right motives, and only to those who
were worthy to reccive, was a matter of special
solicitude and instruction with the best among
Jews as well as among Christians. The words
of the Psalmist, ‘Blessed is he that considereth
the poor,” are construed to be an admonition to
“take personal interest in him and not simply give -
him alms” (Le. R. xxxiv). “When thou wilt
do good, know to whom thou doest it. Give unto
the good and help not the sinner’ (Ecclus 12 1-6;
ef Did 1 5.6). “He that gives a free offering should
give with a well-meaning eye” (Yer. B.D. 4 11).
Jesus’ words concerning the ‘‘single”’ and the “evil”
eye (cf Lk 11 34-36), and Paul’s teaching, “God
loveth a cheerful giver’ (2 Cor 9 7-9) have their
counterparts in Jewish teaching. Rabbi Eleazer,
referring to Hos 10 12, taught this high doctrine:
“The kindness displayed in the giving of alms
decides the final reward” (Suk. 496). Other kin-
dred teaching in a way anticipated Jesus’ supreme
lesson, “that thine alms may be in secret: and thy
Father who seeth in secret shall recompense thee”
(Mt 6 4).

Lirzerature.—Commentaries ad loc.


erature in point. D.
alten Israel, 1887.


Rabbinical lit-
Cassel, Die Armenverwaliung des


Gro. B. Eacer
ALMUG, al’mug. See ALcum.


ALNATHAN, al’na-than (Adva0dv, Alnathdén,
“God has given,” RV ELNATHAN): Apocryphal
name of a person (1 Esd 8 44) corresponding to
Elnathan of Ezr 8 16. He was one of the learned
men summoned by Ezra, as he was beginning his
journey to Jerus, and sent to Iddo to ask for minis-
ters for the house of Jeh.


ALOES, al’6z, LIGNALOES, lin-al’oz, lig-nal’éz
("ms , dhalim, Nu 24 6, tr “lign-aloes” [=lignum
aloes, “wood of aloes’’], Prov 7 17; nibny, dhaléth,
Ps 45 8; Cant 4 14; dAén, aldé, Jn 19 39): Men-
tioned as a substance for perfuming garments (Ps
45 8) and beds (Prov 7 17). In Cant 4 14, it
occurs in a list of the most precious spices. The
most memorable use of aloes as a spice is in Jn 19
39: ‘‘There came also Nicodemus, he who at the
first came to him at night, bringing a mixture of
myrrh and aloes, about a hundred pounds.” This


103


was an imnmfense quantity and if the aloes bore any
large proportion to the myrrh the mixture must
have been purchased at a very high cost. The most
difficult mention of aloes is the earliest where (Nu
24 5.6) Balaam in his blessing on Israel exclaims—
“How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob,

Thy tabernacles, O Israel!

As valleys are they spread forth,

As gardens by the river-side,

As lign-aloes which Jehovah hath planted,

As cedar-trees beside the waters. '*
As the aloes in question grow in E. Asia it is difficult
to see,how Balaam could have come to speak of them
as living trees. Post (HDB, I, 69) suggests that
they may possibly have been growing at that time
in the Jordan valley; this is both improbable
and unnecessary. Balaam need have had no actual
tree in his mind’s eye but may have mentioned the


Aloes—A quilaria agallocha.


aloe as a tree famous over the Orient for its precious-
ness. That the reference is poetical rather than
literal may be supposed by the expression in the
next ver “cedar-trees beside the waters’’—a situation
very unnatural for the high-mountain-loving cedar.
Yet another explanation is that the Heb has been
altered and that D578 , elim, “terebinths’’ instead
of DOMN, ’shalim, “aloes” stood in the original
text.

The aloe wood of the Bible is eaglewood—so
misnamed by the Portuguese who confused the
Malay name for it (agila) with the Lat aquila,
“eagle’—a product of certain trees of the N.O.
Aquilariaceae, growing in 8.E. Asia. The two most
valued varieties are Aquilaria malaccensis and A.
agallocha—both fine spreading trees. The resin,
which gives the fragrant quality to the wood, is
formed almost entirely in the heart wood; logs are
buried, the outer part decays while the inner part,
saturated with the resin, forms the “eagle wood” or
“aloe wood” of commerce; “aloes” being the same
wood in a finely powdered condition. To the Arabs
this wood is known as ‘ud. It shows a beautiful
graining and takes a high polish.

These aloes must be clearly distinguished from
the well-known medicinal aloes, of ancient fame.
This is a resin from Aloes socatrina, and allied species,
of the N.O. Liliaceae, originally from the island of
Socotra, but now from Barbadoes, the Cape of
Good Hope and other places. The “American


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Almug
Alphabet


aloe” (Agave americana) which today is cultivated
in many parts of Palestine, is also quite distinct
from the Biblical plant. E. W. G. Mastsrman


ALOFT, a-loft’ (érdévo, epdns): Only in 1 Esd
8 92. Meaning obscure. The statement following
a confession of sin means probably that Israel in
penitence returning to the Lord, is exultant in the
assurance of His forgiveness, and encouraged in
efforts at reformation.


ALONG, a-long’: Corresponding to two different
Heb words, Jgs 9 25; 1S 6 12; Jer 41 6, joined
with “come” and “go,” vividly describes a course
that is taken—it emphasizes its directness and im-
mediateness. In Jgs 7 12, “lay along in the valley,”
probably means “all the length” or “at length.”


ALOTH, a’loth (M159, ‘alath): So found in AV
and RVm in 1 K 4 16, where the RV has BEA-
LOTH (nays, bealéth). A town, or district in
northern Pal, together with Asher under Baana,
one of Solomon’s twelve civil officers. Conder
identifies with the ruin ‘Alia, near Achzib. There
was another Bealoth in southern Pal (Josh 15 24).
The difference in the form of the word in AV and
RV is due to interpretation of the initial b as prepo-
sition ‘‘in” in the former, and as part of the word
itself in the latter.


ALPHA, al’'fa, AND OMEGA, o’me-ga, o-mé’ga,
o-meg’a (A and Q=A and OQ): The first and last
letters of the Gr alphabet, hence symbolically,
“beginning and end”; in Rev “The Eternal One”
in 1 8 of the Father, in 21 6 and 22 13 of the Son.
Cf Theodoret, HE, iv.8: ‘We used alpha down to
omega, i.e. all.’ A similar expression is found in
Lat (Martial, v.26). Cf Aretas (Cramer’s Catenae
Graecae in NT) on Rev 1 8 and Tertullian (Monog
5): “So also two Gr letters, the first and last, did
the Lord put on Himself, symbols of the beginning
and the end meeting in Him, in order that just as A
rolls on to 2 and © returns again to A, so He
might show that both the evolution of the beginning
to the end is in Him and again the return of the
end to the beginning.” Cyprian, Testim, ii.1; vi.
22; iti.100, Paulinus of Nola Carm. xix.645; xxx.
89; Prudentius, Cathem., ix.10-12. In Patristic
and later literature the phrase is regularly applied
to the Son. God blesses Israel from ’aléph to taw
(Lev 26 3-13), but curses from waw to mem (Lev
26 14-43). So Abraham observed the whole law
from ’aléph to taw. Consequently, “Alpha and
Omega” may be a Gr rendering of the Heb phrase,
which expressed among the later Jews the whole
extent of a thing. J. E. Harry


ALPHABET, al’fa-bet: An alphabet is a list of
the elementary sounds used in any language. More
strictly speaking it is that particular
1. Defini- series, commonly known as the Phoen
tion or Can alphabet, which was in use in
the region of Pal about 1000 BC,
and which is the ancestor of nearly all modern
written alphabets whether Sem or European. It is
the alphabet therefore of OT Heb and Aram. and
NT Gr, of the superscription of Caesar and the Lat
inscription on the cross, as well as of Eng. through
the Gr and Lat. It is an interesting fact, with
many practical bearings on text and exegesis, that
three sets of letters so very unlike in appearance
as Heb, Gr and modern Eng. should be the same in
origin and alike in nature. Although the earliest
surviving inscriptions must be a good deal later
than the separation between the Gr and Heb, the
records in each are more like one another than
either is like its own modern printed form.


Alphabet


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


104


The characteristics of an alphabet are (1) the
analysis of sounds into single letters rather than
syllables or images, (2) the fixed order of succession
in the letters, (8) the signs for the sounds, whether
names or written symbols.

Of these the analysis into single letters, instead
of whole words or syllables, is the characteristic
element. The order of the letters may vary, as
that of the Sanskrit does from the European, and
yet the list remain not only alphabetic but the
“same” alphabet, i.e. each sound represented by a
similar name or written character. On the face
of it, therefore, it might be imagined that the Egyp
and Bab, the Cypriote, the Minoan and other
forms earlier than the Can which are known or
suspected to have had phonetic systems, may have
had lists of these forms arranged in a fixed order,
but these lists were not alphabetic until the final
analysis into individual letters.

The name alphabet comes from the first two letters
of the Gr, alpha beta, just as the old Eng. name for
the alphabet, abc or abece, is simply
the first three letters of the Eng.
alphabet, and thus is merely an abbre-
viation for the whole alphabet. It appears that the
Greeks also used the first and last letters of the
alphabet (alpha and omega) as the Jews did the
first and last, or the first, middle and last letters
of their alphabet, as abbreviation for the whole and


2. Name


in the same sense that in Eng. one says “a to izzard.” |


Alpha and beta are themselves derived from the
Sem names for the same letters (aléph, béth) and
have no meaning in the Gr.

The question of the invention of this alphabet
differs from the question of the origin of the written
forms of the letters with which it is
often confused, and relates to the
recognition of the individual letters.
Alphabetical language whether written
or spoken, inward or outward, is distinguished from
the pictographic, hieroglyphic, and syllabic stages
by this analysis into individual sounds or letters.
It begins with the picture, passes to the ideogram
and syllable, and from the syllable to the letter.
This its best seen in writing, but it is equally true
in specch. At the letter stage the alphabet begins.
It is alleged by some that another stage, a con-
sonantal writing, between syllabic and alphabetic
writing, should be recognized. This would deny
to the Phoen the character of a true alphabet since,
as in all Sem languages, the vowels were anciently
not written at all. Some go so far as to speak
of it as syllabic in character, but on the other
hand it may be said with equal pertinence that
various syllabaries are nearly alphabetic. When a


3. Inven-
tion


Phoenician, Cretan Linear Cretan Hiero- Reindeer Mesha
c A+B glyphs Period Inser.


Be £
aN AAE GR) *) 5


ALEPH[AL PHA]
"Ox"


Primitive Signs like A. (Chiefly from Evans,
Scripta minoa.)


syllabic writing is reduced, as was thé case with the
Egyp, the Cypriote and others, to a point whcre a
character represents uniformly a certain consonant
and a certain vowel, the vocal analysis has been
made and the essential alphabet begun, although
it was only later that men discovered that the con-
sonant common to several syllables might be ex-
pressed to advantage in writing by one unvarying
sign, and later still that the vowels too might be
distinguished, to advantage.


Few modern questions are changing shape so
rapidly as that of the historical predecessor of the
Can or Phoen alphabet. For a long


4. Origin time it was thought that De Rougé
of the had solved the problem by tracing the
Letters letters to the Egyp hieratic. Thisis the


view of most of the popular literature
of the present time, but is wholly surrendered by
most workers in the field now, in spite of the fact
that the latest studies in hieratic show a still greater
resemblance in forms (Miller, Hierat. Paldo-
graphie, 1909). Winckler and others have claimed
derivation from the Cuneiform, Praetorius from the
Cypriote, Sayce gets at least three letters from the
Hittite, while Evans and others incline to believe
that the Minoan was the direct source of the alpha-
bet, introduced from Crete into Pal by the Philis
who were Cretans, or at least that the two are
from a common ancestor, which is also the ancestor
of many other of the Mediterranean alphabets.


The Paestos Disk, Face A.


Some, like Evans and Mosso, even suggest that,
perhaps through the Minoan, the letter forms may
be traced to the pictographs of the neolithic era
in the caves of Europe. There is, in fact, an extra-
ordinary resemblance between some of the letters
of the Phoen alphabet and some of the convén-
tionalized signs of the neolithic age, and it may
not be too fantastic to imagine that these early signs
are the historic ancestors of the written alphabetical
characters, but that they were in any sense alphabet-
ical themselves is impossible if the invention of the
alphabet was historical as here supposed, and is
unlikely from any point of view.

If in fact the Paestos disk dates from before
1600 BC, and if Dr. Hempl’s resolution of it into
Ionic Gr is sound, we have another possible source
or stock of characters from which the inventor of
the alphabet may have chosen (Harper’s Magazine,
January, 1911).

The ideal written alphabet contains a separate
character for each sound used in any or every lan-

guage. Practically in most languages
5. Number the alphabet falls a good deal short of
of Letters the number of recognized sounds to be

expressed in that language and in pro-
nouncing dictionaries they have to be analyzed into
say a broad, a short, a@ open, etc, by adding dia-
critical marks. “In educated English without re-
garding finer distinctions’ (Edmonds, Comparative
Philology, 45) about 50 sounds are commonly used,
but Murray distinguishes at least 96, and the number
sometimes used or which may be used is much greater,


az


itis}
a
28
BS
of


Shas ToKL sa h UAA
SEN DEFEVGN AS TOXIN


oi 3


Hieratic Moab- Cartha- Egyptian-- Palmy- Hi
itic ginian Aramaic rene


4X KR KEAN ORK
44 994 4558 4H 5
AT ANV AA AX 5
QQ 4044499 44 9
AA ANA PAM AA 3
YY 40% WW w8d 1
Vbb bb oy lie 4
LoAdbb Anny WH !
AAddH OG bb |
(OC ia Te ere
nn00 0 4797 YBY :
Miche FE ULL YG
(64 GL YARD 455;
hile Ghee ae
Veg Via 39%
ELLE kK vsyy yo
UE. Pg O58

10 © ite XI

‘Wada PPP ws

ete e Vay) 44a

ww eve yyy Wy


x freeRR Ph bh


PRIMITIVE


ew Greek


Latin Runic Goth Latin
minuscule


AAARAAA BF a a
9 8 be B BB B +
“Bae eG SO “Ge ng
A A0?~rPD DP a ad
wake Ee EM 6 &
TEE Eee Oke
Tet MTG he Cr se
A BHHMH N hy
RO) [D> fy fact)

2 | i loeeiey PR 3g
MoKK KEK K K k
ALLA bik hb §8 AL
“NM MMM 7 M  ™
Yr~vvwwN *¥ No”

5 BF
O GeO°ee OO Ril “~~

\ ampere Ym»
aN M See
ae la fs Ca na ie

A PP RR ORR Rs ORC K Yr

v 38 oR 5S S oo r
i OY ce 0 ae i a a
CY VO VN OV nN 2) came 2
(SB) Xt X XH Xb *

% 6f1 $,0 ie #5)
CAl YWe }YA
Cf) <2 %


*“HABETS


105


the possible number of vowel sounds alone being as
many as 72.

Moreover the individual letters differ in sound in
different individuals, and even in the same individual
in successive utterances of what would be called the
same letter or the same sound. It is alleged that
the average sound of the a for example, is never
the same in any two languages; the a in “father,”
even, is never the same in any two individuals,
and that the same individual, even, never pro-
nounces it twice so exactly in the same fashion
that the difference may not be detected by sound
photography.

The written alphabet is always thus less than the
number of sounds used. The Phoen and the Sem
alphabets generally had 22 letters, but they omitted
the vowels. English has 26, of which many have
two or more sounds.

The names of the Gr alphabet are derived from
the Sem names and are meaningless in the Gr,

while in the Sem it has been pretty


6. Names clearly shown that they signify for
of the the most part some object or idea of
Letters which the earliest form of the written


letter was a picture, as e.g. ’aléph, the
ox. The forms of the letters are apparently derived


from pictures of the ox, house, etc, made linear”


and finally reduced to a purely conventional sign
which was itself reduced to the simplest writing
motion. All this has been boldly denied by Mr.
Pilcher (PSBA, XXVI [1904], 168-73; XXVII
{1905], 65-68), and the original forms declared to
be geometric; but he does not seem to have made
many converts, although he has started up rival
claimants to his invention.

The names of the letters at least seem to indicate
the Sem origin of the alphabet, since the majority
of them are the Sem names for the objects which
gave name to the letter, and the picture of which
gives form to the written letter. ;

Following is Sayce’s list (PSBA, XXXII [1910],
215-22) with some variants: (1) ’a@léph=ox; (2) beth
=house (tent); (3) g?mel=camel; (4) daleth=door;
(5) hé=house; (6) waw=nail (Evans, tent peg); (7)
zayin=weapon; (8) héth=fence; (9) féth=cake of
bread (Lidzbarski, a package); (10) yédh=hand;
(11) kaph=palm of hand; (12) lamedh=ox-goad;
(13) mém=water flowing; (14) nén=fish; (15)
samekh=?; (16) ‘ayin=eye; (17) pé=mouth; (18)
cadhé=trap (others, hook or nose or steps); (19)
koph=cage (Evans says picture is an outline head
and Lidzbarski, a helmet); (20) résh=head; (21)
shin=tooth (not teeth); (22) taw=mark. Not all
of these meanings are, however, generally accepted
(ef also Néldeke, Betirdge Strassb. [1904], 124-36;
Lidzbarski, Ephemeris, II, 125-39). ‘

The order of the letters differs more or less in
different languages, but it is in the main the same in
all the Sem and Western alphabets
derived from the Phoen alphabet and
this is roughly the order of the Eng.
alphabet. This order is, however,
full of minor variations even among the Western
alphabets and’ in the Indian languages the letters
are entirely regrouped on a different principle.

The conventional order of the Semitic alphabet
may be traced with some certainty in the Biblical
books to as early as the 6th cent. BC, even accept-
ing the dates of a radical higher criticism, for there
are more than a dozen passages in the OT composed
on the principle of the alphabetical acrostic (Pss
111, 112, 119; Prov 31 10-31; Lam 1, 2, 3, 4, etc)
and the oldest of these are of this period (see
Acrostic). .The Formello abecedarium, if it is in
fact from the 7th cent. BC, carries the known order
back a century farther still and shows it prevailing in
Italy as well as Pal. Moreover there are those who


7. Order
of Letters


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Alphabet


still consider some of the alphabetical psalms older
even than this. :

It must be noted, however, that while the order is
in general fixed, there are local and temporary
differences. In several cases e.g. the order of the
sixteenth and seventeenth letters of the alphabet
is inverted in the alphabetical acrostics, and this
would seem to point to a time or place where 7,
‘ayin, was the accepted order. It happens that the
inversion occurs in both the passages which are
counted earliest by the modern critics (G. B. Gray
in HDB?, 8). Mr. Sayce too has recently altered
or restored the order by relegating the original
samekh to a place after shin, while Mr. Pilcher has
quite reconstructed the original order on a geo-
metrical basis, to his own taste at least, as rd;
hog; mn; set.


Hebrew Inscribed Tablet from Gezer.


A certain grouping together of signs according to
the relationship of the objects which they _repre-
sent has often been noticed, and Sayce (PSBA,
XXXII [1910], 215-22) thinks that he has (after
having put samekh in its right place) reduced the
whole matter to a sequence of pairs of things
which belong together: ox-house, camel-tent door,
house-nail, weapon-fence (city wall), bread-hand,
open hand-arm with goad, water-fish, eye-mouth,
trap-cage, head-tooth, samekh, taw. This arranging
he thinks was done by someone who knew that
’alaph was the West Sem for “leader” and taw was
the Cretan sign for ending—an Amorite therefore
in touch with the Phili. The final word on order
seems not yet to have been spoken.

The chief North Sem texts are (1) Moabite
stone (cir 850 BC); (2) inscriptions of Zkr, Zen-

jirli, ete (cir 800); (3) Baal-Lebanon


8. The inscription (cir 750); (4) Siloam in-
Earliest scription (cir 700 BC); (5) Harvard.
Texts Samaritan ostraca (time of Ahab?);


(6) Gezer tablet; (7) various weights
and seals before 600 BC. The striking fact
about the earliest inscriptions is that however re-
mote geographically, there is on the whole so
little difference in the forms of the letters. This


Alphaeus
Altar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


106


is particularly true of the North Sem inscriptions
and tends to the inference that the invention was
after all not so long before the surviving inscriptions.
While the total amount of the earliest Pal inscrip-
tions is not even yet very large, the recent dis-
covery of the Sam ostraca, the Gezer tablet, and
various minor inscriptions, is at least pointing to a
general use of Sem writing in Pal at least as early

as the 9th cent. BC.
The tendency of letters to change form in con-
sequence of changed environment is not peculiar
to alphabetical writing but is char-


9. Changes acteristic of the transmission of all
in Letter sorts of writing. The morphology
Forms of alphabetical writing has however its


own history. The best source for
studying this on the Sem side is Lidzbarski’s
Handbuch (see below), and on the Gr side the best
first source is E. 8. Roberts, Intro to Gr Epigraphy
(Cambr.). The best synoptical statement of the
Sem is found in the admirable tables in the Jew
Enc, V, i, 449-53.

For the later evolution of both Gr and Lat alpha-~
bets, E. M. Thompson’s Introduction to Greek and
Latin Palaeography, Oxford, 1912, is far the best
introduction. In this he takes account of the great
finds of papyri which have so revolutionized the study
of the forms of Greck letters around the beginning
of the Christian era, since his first Handbook was
published. (See arts. on the text of OT and NT.)

In the Heb, the old Phoen alphabet of the early
inscriptions had in the NT times given way to the
square Aram. characters of the modern Heb which
possibly came into use as early as the time of Ezra.

The most comprehensive modern brief conspectus
covering both Heb and Gr is that reproduced in this
art. from the little manual of Specht. See also
WRITING.

Lireratrurn.—Isaac Taylor’s Alphabet (2d ed, 1899)


is still useful for orientation, and his article in the HDB
likewise, but Edward Clodd’s little Story of the Alphabet
(New York, 1907), taken with Faulmann’s Geschichte
der Schrift and Buch der Schrift, is better for general
purposes. For scientific purposes see the bibliography
prefixed to Lidzbarski’s Handbuch der nordsemitischen
Epigraphik (1898, 2 vols) and his Ephemeris passim to
date, Evans’ Scripta minoa, Oxf., 1909, and the lit. of the
art. Writine in this Encyclopaedia. Sce also C. G.
Ball, ‘Origin of the Phoen Alphabet,'’ PSBA, XV,
392-408; E. J. Pilcher, ‘The Origin of the Alphabet,"’
PSBA, XXVI (1904), 168-73; Franz Praetorius, ‘Tho
Origin of the Canaanite Alphahet,’’ Smithsonian Rep.
(1907), 595-604; S. A. Cook, ‘‘The Old Hebrew Alphabet
and the Gezer Tablet,’ PEFS (1909), 284-309. For
Bible class work, H. N. Skinnor’s Story of the Letters and
Figures (Chicago, 1905) is very admirably adapted to
the purpose.
E. C. Ricuarpson


ALPHAEUS, al-f@’us (?AdAdatos, Alphatos; WH,
Addaios, Halphaios):

(1) The father of the second James in the list of
the apostles (Mt 10 3; Mk 3 18; Lk 6 15; Acts
1 13)


(2) The father of Levi, the publican (Mk 2 14).
Levi is designated as Matthew in the Gospel of
Mt (9 9). There is no other reference to this
Alphaeus.

Some writers, notably Weiss, identify the father
of Levi with the father of the second James. He
says that James and Levi were undoubtedly
brothers; but that seems improbable. If they were
brothers they would quite likely be associated as
are James and John, Andrew and Peter. Chry-
sostom says James and Levi had both been tax-
gatherers before they became followers of Jesus.
This tradition would not lend much weight as proof
that they were brothers, for it might arise through
identifying the two names, and the western MSS
do identify them and read James instead of Levi
in Mk 2 14. This, however, is undoubtedly a
corruption of the text. If it had been the original


it would be difficult to explain the substitution of
an unknown Levi for James who,is well known.

Many writers identify Alphaeus, the father of the
second James, with Clopas of Jn 19 25. This had
early become a tradition, and Chrysostom believed
they were the same person. This identity rests on
four suppositions, all of which are doubtful:

(a) That the Mary of Clopas was the same as the
Mary who was the mother of the second James.
There is a difference of opinion as to whether ‘‘Mary
of Clopas” should be understood to be the wife of
Clopas or the daughter of Clopas, but the former is
more probable. We know from Mt 27 56 and
Mk 15 40 that there was a James who was the son
of Mary, and that this Mary belonged to that little
group of women that was near Jesus at the time
of the crucifixion. It is quite likely that this Mary
is the one referred to in Jn 19 25. ‘That would
make James, the son of Mary of Mt 27 56, the
son of Mary of Clopas. But Mary was such a
common name in the NT that this supposition
cannot be proven.

(b) That the James, who was the son of Mary,
was the same person as the James, the son of
Alphaeus. Granting the supposition under (a),
this would not prove the identity of Clopas and
Alphaeus unless this supposition can also be proven,
but it seems impossible to either prove it or disprove


it.

(c) That Alphaeus and Clopas are different
variations of a common original, and that the
variation has arisen from different pronunciations
of the first letter T (h) of the Aram. original. There
are good scholars who both support and deny this
theory.

(d) That Clopas had two names as was common
at that time; but there is nothing to either sub-
stantiate or disprove this theory. See CLopas.

It seems impossible to determine absolutely
whether or not Alphaeus, the father of the second
James, and Clopas of Jn 19 25 are the same person,
but it is quite probable that they are.

A. W. Fortune

ALSO, 6l’so: In the Gr «al, kat, when it is equiva-
lent to “also” or “even,” is always placed before
the word or phrase which it is intended to emphasize
(e.g. Acts 12 3; 1 Jn 421). Mt 6 14 should
therefore read, ‘“Your heavenly Father will forgive
you also”; Lk 6 13, “Whom also he named apos-
tles’’; He 8 6, “The mediator of a better covenant
also’; and 1 Thess 4 14, ‘If we believe that Jesus
died and rose again, so also [we believe that] those
Whe are fallen asleep in Jesus, God will bring with

im.


ALTANEUS,
(Apoc).


ALTAR, 6l’tér (DATO, mizbéeh, lit. “place of
slaughter or sacrifice,” from MAT, zabhah, which is
found in both senses; Bwopds, bémds [only in Acts
17 23), Qvovacriprov, thusiastérion) :

I. Cuassirication or Hesrew ALTARS

Importance of the Distinction
Il. Lay Aurars
1. Pre-Mosaic
2. In the Mosaic Age
3. Dangers of the Custom
4, Tho Mosaic Provisions
Ill, Hornep Atrars or Burnt OFFERINO
1. The Tabernacle Altar
. The Altar of Josh 22
The Altar till Solomon
The Horned Altar in Usa
The Temple of Solomon
The Altar of Ahaz
Ezekiel *
The Post-exilic Altar
. Idolatrons and Unlawful Altars
. The Horns
IV. AvtTars or INCENSE


al-ta-né’us. See Ma.ranneus


2
SOONS ABW


107


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


V. Recent ARCHAEOLOGICAL MATERIALS
1. A Gezer Altar
2. The Taanach Altar of Incense
LItERATURE


A. Critmican
_L. Classification of Hebrew Altars.—Before con-
sidering the Biblical texts attention must be drawn
to the fact that these texts know of at least two


SU hee Oe


Fie. 1.—Cairn Altar.


kinds of altars which were so different in appearance
that no contemporary could possibly confuse them.
The first was an altar consisting of earth or unhewn
It had no fixed shape, but varied with the


stones.


Alphaeus
Altar


to note this distinction, and the reader can hope
to make sense of the Biblical laws and narratives
only if he be very careful to picture to himself in
every case the exact object to which his text refers.
For the sake of clearness different terms will be
adopted in this article to denote the two kinds of
altars. The first will be termed “lay altars”
since, as will be seen, the Law permitted any lay-
man to offer certain sacrifices at an altar of earth
or unhewn stone without the assistance of a priest,
while the second will be styled “horned altars,”
owing to their possession of horns which, as already
pointed out, could not exist in a lay altar that con-
formed with the provisions of the law.
il, Lay Altars.—In Gen we often read of the
erection of altars, e.g. 8 20; 12 7; 138 4. Though
no details are given we are able to
1. Pre- infer their general character with
Mosaic considerable precision. In reading the
accounts it is sometimes evident that
we are dealing with some rough improvised structure.
For example, when Abraham builds the altar for


materials. It might consist of a rock (Jgs 13 19)
or a single large stone (1 S 14 33-35) or again a
number of stones (1 K 18 31f). It could have
no horns, for it would be impossible to give the stone
horns without hewing it, nor would a heap of earth
lend itself to the formation of horns. It could have
no regular pattern for the same reason. On the
other hand we meet with a group of passages that
refer to altars of quite a different type. We read
of horns, of fixed measurements, of a particular
pattern, of bronze as the material. To bring home
the difference more rapidly illustrations of the two
types are given side by side. The first figure
represents a cairn altar such as was in use in some
other ancient religions. The second is a conjectural
restoration of Heb altars of burnt offering and
incense of the second kind.
Both these might be and were called altars, but
it is so evident that this common designation could
not have caused any eye-witness to con-
Importance fuse the two that in reading the Bible
of the we must carefully examine each text
Distinction in turn and see to which kind the
author is referring. Endless confusion
has been caused, even in our own time, by the failure


the sacrifice of Isaac in Gen 22 it cannot be supposed
that he used metal or wrought stone. When Jacob
makes a covenant with Laban a heap of stones is
thrown up “and they did eat there by the heap”
(31 46). This heap is not expressly termed an
altar, but if this covenant be compared with later
covenants it will be seen that in these its place is
taken by an altar of the lay type (SBL, ch 2),
and it is reasonable to suppose that this heap was
in fact used as an altar (cf ver 54). A further con-
sideration is provided by the fact that the Arabs
had a custom of using any stone as an altar for the
nonce, and certainly such altars are found in the
Mosaic and post-Mosaic history. We may there-
fore feel sure that the altars of Gen were of the
general type represented by Fig. 1 and were totally

unlike the altars of Fig. 2.
Thus Moses found a custom by which the Israelite
threw up rude altars of the materials most easily
obtained in the field and offered sacri-


2. Inthe ficial worship to God on sundry oc-
Mosaic casions. That the custom was not
Age peculiar to the Israelites is shown by
: such instances as that of Balaam (Nu
23 1, etc). Probably we may take the narrative


Altar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


108


of Jethro’s sacrifice as a fair example of the occasions
on which such altars were used, for it cannot be
supposed that Aaron and all the elders of Israel
were openly committing an unlawful act when they
ate bread with Moses’ father-in-law before God (Ex
18 12). Again, the narrative in which we sce Moses
building an altar for the purposes of a covenant
probably exemplifies a custom that was in use for
other covenants that did not fall to be narrated
(Ex 24 4 ff).
But a custom of erecting altars might easily
lend itself to abuses. Thus archaeology has shown
us one altar—though of a much later
3. Dangers date—which is adorned with faces
of the (Fig. 4), a practice that was quite con-
Custom trary to the Mosaic ideas of preserv-
ing a perfectly imageless worship.


Other possible abuses were suggested by the current
practices of the Canaanites or are explained by the
See Hico Prac.


terms of the laws.


Accordingly Moses regulated these lay altars.
Leaving the occasion of their erection and use to
be determined by custom he promul-


4. The gated the followmg laws: “An altar
Mosaic of earth mayest thou make unto me,
Provisions and mayest sacrifice thereon thy


burnt offerings and thy peace offerings,
thy sheep, and thine oxen; in all the place where I
record my name J will come unto thee and I will
bless thee. And if thou make me an altar of
stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stones; for
if thou lift thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it.
Neither mayest thou go up by steps unto mine
altar,” etc (Ex 20 24-26; so correct EV). Several
remarks must be made on this law. It is a law for
laymen, not priests. This is proved by the second
person singular and also by the reason given for
the prohibition of steps—since the priests were
differently garbed. It applies “in all the place
where I record my name,” not, as the ordinary
rendering has it, “in every place.” This latter is
quite unintelligible: it is usually explained as mean-
ing places hallowed by theophanies, but there are
plenty of instances in the history of lay sacrifices
where no theophany can be postulated; see e.g.
Gen 31 54; 1S 20 6.29 (HPC, 185 f). “All the
place” refers to the territory of Israel for the time
being. When Naaman desired to cease sacrificing
to any deity save the God of Israel he was con-
fronted by the problem of deciding how he could
sacrifice to Him outside this ‘‘place.”’ He solved


it by asking for two mules’ burden of the earth
of the “place” (2 K 5 17). Lastly, as already
noticed, this law excludes the possibility of giving
the altars horns or causing them to conform to any
given pattern, since the stone could not be wrought.
One other law must be noticed in this connection:
Dt 16 21f: ‘Thou shalt not plant thee an ’dshéerah
of any kind of tree beside the altar of the Lord thy
God, which thou shalt make thee. Neither shalt
thou set thee up a pillar, which the Lord thy God
hateth.” Here again the reference is probably to
the lay altars, not to the religious capital which
was under the control of the priests.
HI. Horned Altars of Burnt Offering.—In Ex
27 1-8 (cf 388 1-7) a command is given to construct
for the Tabernacle an altar of shittim
1. The wood covered with bronze. It was
Tabernacle to be five cubits long by five broad
Altar and three high. The four corners
were to have horns of one piece with
it. A network of bronze was to reach halfway up
the altar to a ledge. In some way that is defined
only by reference to what was shown to Moses in
the Mount the altar was to be hollow with planks,
and it was to be equipped with rings and staves for
facility of transport. The precise construction
cannot be determined, and it is useless to specu-
late where the instructions are so plainly governed
by what was seen by Moses in the Mount; but
certain features that are important for the elucida-
tion of the Bible texts emerge clearly. The altar
is rectangular, presenting at the top a square sur-
face with horns at the four corners. The more
important material used is bronze, and the whole
construction was as unlike that of the ordinary lay
altar as possible. The use of this altar in the ritual
of the Tabernacle falls under the heading Sacri- .
Fices. Here we must notice that it was served
by priests. Whenever we find references to the
horns of an altar or to its pattern we see that the
writer is speaking of an altar of this general type.
Thus a criminal seeking asylum fled to an altar of
this type, as appears from the horns which are
mentioned in the two historical instances and also
from such expressions as coming down or going up.
See ASYLUM.
We read in Josh 22 9ff that the children of
Reuben and the children of Gad built an altar.
In ver 28 we find them saying, ‘‘Be-


2. The hold the pattern of the altar,” etc.
Altar of This is decisive as to the meaning,
Josh 22 for the lay altar had no pattern. Ac-


cordingly in its general shape this
altar must have conformed to the type of the Taber-
nacle altar. It was probably not made of the same
materials, for the word “build” is continually used
in connection with it, and this word would scarcely
be appropriate for working metal: nor again was
it necessarily of the same size, but it was of the
same pattern: and it was designed to serve as a
witness that the descendants of the men who built
it had a portion in the Lord.. It seems to follow
that the pattern of the Tabernacle altar was dis-
tinctive and unlike the heathen altars in general
use in Palestine and this appears to be confirmed
by modern excavations which have revealed high
places with altars quite unlike those contemplated
by the Pent. See Hicu Puacs.
In the subsequent history till the erection of
Solomon’s Temple attention need only be directed
to the fact that a horned altar existed


3. The while the Ark was still housed in a
Altar till tent. This is important for two
Solomon reasons. It shows a historical period


ee in which a horned altar existed at the
religious capital side by side with a number of lay
altars all over the country, and it negatives the


109


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


suggestion of G. A. Smith (Jerusalem, II, 64) that
the bare rock es-Sakhra was used by Solomon as
: the altar, since the unhewn rock ob-
4- The viously could not provide a horned
Horned Al- altar such as we find as early as
tarin Use 1K 1 50-53. Note too that we read

here of bringing down from the altar,
and this expression implies elevation. Further in
9 25 we hear that Solomon was in the habit of


ald,


Fic. 4.—Rock Altar from Taanach.


offering on the altar which he had built, and this
again proves that he had built an altar and did not
merely use the temple rock. (See also Watson in

PEFS {January, 1910], 15 ff, in reply to Smith.)
For the reasons just given it is certain that Solo-
mon used an altar of the horned type, but we have
no account of the construction in K.


5. The According to a note preserved in the
Temple of LXX but not in the Heb, Solomon
Solomon enlarged the altar erected by David


on Araunah’s threshing-floor (2 8
24 25), but this notice is of very doubtful historical
value and may be merely a_glossator’s guess.
According to 2 Ch 41 the altar was made of
bronze and was twenty cubits by twenty by ten.
The Chronicler’s dimensions are doubted by many,
but the statement of the material is confirmed
by 1K 8 64; 2 K 16 10-15. From the latter
passage it appears that an altar of bronze had been
in use till the time of Ahaz. This king saw an
altar in Damascus of a different pat-
6. The Al- tern and had a great altar made for
tar of Ahaz the temple on its model. As the text
contrasts the great altar with the altar
of bronze, we may infer that the altar of Ahaz was
not made of bronze. Whether either or both of
these altars had steps (cf Ezk 43 17) or were
approached by a slope as in Fig. 2 cannot be deter-
mined with certainty. It may be noted that in
Isa 27 9 we read of the stones of the altar in a
passage the reference of which is uncertain.
Ezekiel also gives a description of an altar (43
18-17), but there is nothing to show whether it


Altar


is purely ideal or represents the altar of Solomon
or that of Ahaz, and modern writers take different


views. In the vision it stood before
7. Ezekiel the house (40 47). In addition he
describes an altar or table of wood
(41 22). This of course could only be a table, not


in any sense an altar. See TaBiz.
Ezr 3 2f tells of the setting up of the altar by
Zerubbabel and his contemporaries. No informa-
tion as to its shape, etc, can be ex-


8. The tracted from this notice. We read
Post-exilic of a defilement of the temple altar
Altar in 1 Macc 1 54. This was made of


stones (Ex 20 24-26 having at this
date been applied to the temple altar contrary to
its original intent) and a fresh altar of whole stones
was constructed (1 Macc 4 44-49). Presumably
this altar had no horns.
It is clear from the historical and prophetical
books that in both kingdoms a number of unlawful
altars were in use. The distinction


9. Idola- which has been drawn between lay
trous altars and horned altars helps to
Altars make these passages easy to under-


stand. Thus when Amos in speaking
of Bethel writes, “The horns of the altar shall be
cut off,” we see that he is not thinking of lay altars
which could have no horns (8 14). Again Hosea’s
“Because Ephraim hath multiplied altars ‘to sin,’
altars have been to him ‘for sin’”’ (8 11; ef 10 1-8;
12 11 [12]), is not in contradiction to Ex 20 24-26
because the prophet is not speaking of lay altars.
The high places of Jeroboam (1 K 12 28-33) were
clearly unlawful and their altars were unlawful
altars of the horned type. Such cases must be
clearly distinguished from the lay altars of Saul and
others. ;

The origin of the hornsis unknown, though there

are many theories. Fugitives caught:
10. The hold of them (1 K 1.50.51), and vic-
Horns a could be tied to them (Ps 118
27).

IV. Altars of Incense.—Ex 30 1-10 contains
the commands for the construction and use of an
altar of incense. The material was shittim wood,
the dimensions one cubit by one by two, and it
also had horns. Its top and sides were overlaid
with gold and it was surrounded by a crown or
rim of gold. For facility of transport it had golden
rings and staves. It stood before the veil in front
of the ark.

Solomon also constructed an altar of incense (1 K
6 20; 7 48; 1 Ch 28 18), cedar replacing shittim
wood. The altar of incense reappears in 1 Macc 1
21; 4 49.


Fie. 5.—Incense Altars of Sandstone Found in the
Rock Shrine at Sinai.


V. Recent Archaeological Materials.—Recently
several altars have been revealed by excavations.
They throw light on_the Bible chiefly by showing
what is forbidden. See esp. Hich Prace. Fig.3


Altar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


110


represents an altar found at Gezer built into the
foundation of a wall dating about 600 BC. Mr.
Macalister describes it in the following
1. A Gezer words: “It is a four-sided block of
Altar limestone, 1 ft.3 in. high. The top and
‘ bottom are approximately 104 and 9
in. square respectively; but these are only the aver-
age dimensions of the sides, which are not regularly
cut. The angles are prolonged upward for an addi-
tional 13 in. as rounded knobs—no doubt the ‘horns’
of the altar. The top is very slightly concave so
as to hold perhaps an eighth of a pint of liquid”
(PEFS (July, 1907], 196f). The size suggests an
altar of incense rather than an altar of burnt offering,
but in view of the general resemblance between the
Tabernacle altars of burnt offering and incense, this
is a fact of minor importance. On the other hand,
the shape, pattern and material are of great interest.
That the altar violates in principle the law of Ex
20 25 forbidding the dressing of the stones is obvious,
though that passage does not apply in terms to
altars of incense, but certainly the appearance of
the block does recall in a general way the altars of
the other type—the horned altars. Like them it
is four-sided with a square top, and like them it has
knobs or horns at each corner. Possibly it was
formed in general imitation of the Temple altars.
Other altars in Can high places exemplify by their
appearance the practices prohibited by the Pent.
See for illustrations H. Vincent, Canaan d’aprés
Vexploration récente; R. Kittel, Studien zur hebrd-
ischen Archdologie und Religions-Geschichte; S. R.
Driver, Modern Research as Illustrating the Bible.
Importance attaches to a terra cotta altar of
incense found by Sellin at Taanach, because its
height and dimensions at the base


2. The recall the altar of Ex. “It was just
Taanach 3 ft. high, and in shape roughly like a
Altar of truncated pyramid, the four sides at
Incense the bottom being each 18 in. long, and


the whole ending at the top in a bowl
afootindiameter..... The altarishollow.....
Professor Sellin places the date of the altar at about
700 BC..... An incense-altar of exactly the
same shape . .. . but of much smaller size... .
has been found quite recently at Gezer in débris of
about 1000-600 BC” (Driver, Modern Research, etc,
85). These discoveries supply a grim comment on
the theories of those critics who maintain that
incense was not used by the Hebrews before the
time of Jer. The form of the altar itself is as
contrary to the principles of the Pent law as any
thing could be.

On altar furniture see Pots; SHoveis; Basins;
FiesH-Hooks; Fireprans. On the site, TEMPLE,
and generally, Arimt; Sacririce; Sancruary;
TaBEeRNACLE; Hicu Pace.


LITERATURE.—R. Kittel,. Studien zur hebrdischen Ar-
chdologie und Religions-Geschichte, I and 11; Hastings,
Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics; Murray, Illustrated
Bible Dictionary; EB,s.v.‘‘Altar’’; EPC,ch6. Thedis-
cussions in the ordinary works of reference must be used
with caution for the reason given in J above.


Harotp M. WIENER


B. In Worsuip
I. In WorsuHip: TaBERNACLE AND TEMPLES
1. Patriarchal Altars :
2. Sacred Sites
3. Pre-Tabernacle Altars
Ii. Tue Avtar oF Burnt Orrerine (BRrazEN ALTAR)
Altar before the Tabernacle
Its History
. Altar of Solomon's Temple
. Altar of Ezekiel's Temple
. Altar of Second Temple
6. Altar of Herod's Temple
IVI. Tue Avtar or Incensgs (GoupeNn ALTAR)
. In the Tabernacle
Mode of Burning Incense
. In Solomon's Temple and Later
. In Herod's Temple
. Symbolism of Incense Burning


PONE


Cub Obes


I. In Worship: Tabernacle and Temples.—In
the literature of the Bible, sacrifices are prior
to altars, and altars prior to sacred


1. Patri- buildings. Their first mention is in
archal the case of the altar built by Noah
Altars after the Flood (Gen 8 20). The


next is the altar built at the place of
Shechem, by which Abraham formally took posses-
sion, on behalf of his descendants, of the whole
land of Canaan (Gen 12 7). A second altar was
built between Bethel and Ai (ver 8). To this the
patriarch returned on his way from Egypt (Gen
13 4). His next place of sacrifice was Hebron
(ver 18); and tradition still professes to show the
place where his altar stood. A subsequent altar
was built on the top of a mountain in the land of
Moriah for the sacrifice of Isaac (Gen 22 9).

Each of these four spots was the scene of some
special revelation of Jehovah; possibly to the third
of them (Hebron) we may attribute
the memorable vision and covenant
of Gen 15. These sites became, in
after years, the most venerated and
coveted perquisites of the nation, and fights for
their possession largely determined its history. To
them Isaac added an altar at Beersheba (Gen 26
25), probably a reérection, on the same site, of an
altar built by Abraham, whose home for many
years was at Beersheba. Jacob built no new altars,
but again and again repaired those at Shechem and
Bethel. On one occasion he offered a sacrifice
on one of the mountains of Gilead, but without
mention of an altar (Gen 31 54). There were
thus four or five spots in Canaan associated at
once with the worship of Jehovah, and the name of
their great ancestor, which to Hebrews did not lose
their sanctity by the passage of time, viz. Shechem,
Bethel, Hebron, Moriah and Beersheba.

The earliest provision for an altar as a portion of
a fixed establishment of religion is found in Ex 20


2. Sacred
Sites


24-26, immediately after the pro-
3. Pre- mulgation of the Decalogue. Altars are
Tabernacle commanded to be made of earth or
Altars of unhewn stone, yet so as to have,


not steps, but only slopes for ascent
to the same—the injunction implying that they
stood on some elevation (see Aurar, A, above).
Before the arrival at Sinai, during the war with
Amalek, Moses had built an emergency altar, to
which he gave the name Jehovah-Nissi (Ex 17 15).
This was probably only a memorial altar (cf the
altar Ed in Josh 22 21 ff). At Sinai took place the
great crisis in Israel’s national history. It was
required that the covenant about to be made with
Jehovah should be ratified with sacrificial blood; but
before Moses could sprinkle the Book of the Cove-
nant and the people who covenanted (Ex 24 6.7;
cf He 9 19), it was necessary that an altar should
be built for the sacrificial act. This was done
“under the mount,” where, beside the altar, were
reared twelve pillars, emblematic of the twelve
tribes of Israel (ver 4).

In connection with the tabernacle and the suc-
cessive temples there were two altars—the Altar of
Burnt Offering (the altar by preéminence, Ezk 43
13), and the Altar of Incense. Of these it is now
necessary to speak more particularly.

I, The Altar of Burnt Offering (nbayn mara,
mizbah ha-‘dlah), The Brazen Altar (mats

mona,  mizbah ha-nthdsheth).—
1, Altar be- (By “brass” throughout understand
fore the “bronze.”) The altar which stood
Tabernacle before the tabernacle was a portable

box constructed of acacia wood and
covered on the outside with plates of brass (Ex 27
1 ff). ‘Hollow with planks,” is its definition


111


(ver 8). It was five cubits long, five cubits broad,
and three cubits high; on the ordinary reckoning,
about 73 ft. on the horizontal square, and 43 ft.
in height (possibly less; see Cusir). On the ‘“grat-
ing of network of brass” described as around and
half-way up the altar (vs 4.5), see Gratine. Into
the corners of this grating, on two sides, rings were
riveted, into which the staves were inserted by
which the Ark was borne (see Stavss). For its
corner projections, see Horns or THz Atrar. The
prohibition of steps in Ex 20 26 and the analogy
of later altars suggest that this small altar before the
tabernacle was made to stand on a base or platform,
led up to by aslope of earth. The right of sanctuary
is mentioned in Ex 21 14. For the utensils con-
nected with the altar, see Pans; SHoveLs; Basins;
FiesH-Hooxs; Crensers. All these utensils were
made of brass.
The history of the altar before the tabernacle was
that of the tabernacle itself, as the two were not
parted during its continuance (see
2. Its TABERNACLE). Their abolition did
History not take place till Solomon’s temple
was ready for use, when the great
high place at Gibeon (1 K 3 4) was dismantled,
and the tabernacle and its holy vessels were brought
to the new temple (8 4). Another altar had mean-
while been raised by David before the tabernacle
he had made on Zion, into which the Ark of the
Covenant was moved (1 Ch 15 1; 161). This
would be a duplicate of that at Gibeon, and would
share its supersession at the erection of the first
temple.
In Solomon’s temple the altar was considerably
enlarged, as was to be expected from the greater
size of the building before which it
3. Altar of stood. We are indebted to the
Solomon’s Chronicler for its exact dimensions
Temple (2 Ch 41). It formed a square of
twenty cubits, with an elevation of
ten cubits (30X30X15 ft.; or somewhat less).
It is described ag “‘an altar of brass’ (2 Ch 4 1),
or “brazen altar”? (1 K 8 64; 2 Ch 77; ff 2K
16 14), either as being, like its predecessors, encased
in brass, or, as others think, made wholly of brass.
It was not meant to be portable, but that the altar
itself was movable is shown by the fact of Ahaz
having it removed (2 K 16 14). Further details
of its structure are not given. The altar stood in
“the middle of the court that was before the house,”
but proved too small to receive the gifts on the day
of the temple’s dedication (1 K 8 64; 2 Ch 7 7).
Tt remained, however, the center of Israelitish wor-
ship for 23 centuries, till Ahaz removed it from the
forefront of the house, and placed it on the northern
side of his Damascene altar (2 K 16 14). This
indignity was repaired by Hezekiah (cf 2 K 18
92), and the altar assumed its old place in the
temple service till its destruction by Nebuchadnez-
zar in 586 BC. :
The altar of Ezekiel’s ideal temple was, 48
planned, a most elaborate structure, the cubit used
for this purpose being that of “a


4. Altar of cubit and an handbreadth” (Ezk 43
Ezekiel’s 13), or the large cubit of history (see
Temple Cusit). The paragraph — describing


it (43 13-17) is very specific, though
uncertainty rests on the meaning of some of the
details. The altar consisted of four stages lying
one above another, gradually diminishing in size
till the hearth was reached upon which the fire was
lit. This was a square of twelve cubits (18 ft.),
from the corners of which 4 horns projected up-
ward (ver 15). The base or lowest stage was one
cubit in height, and had a border round about,
half a cubit high (ver 13); the remaining stages
were two, four, and four cubits high respectively


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Altar


(vs 14.15); the horns may have measured another
cubit (thus LX X). Each stage was marked by the
inlet of one cubit (vs 13.14). The basement was
thus, apparently, a square of eighteen cubits or 27 ft.
The word “bottom” (lit. “bosom”) in Ezekiel’s de-
scription is variously interpreted, some regarding it
as a “drain” for carrying off the sacrificial blood,
others identifying it with the “basement.” On its
eastern face the altar had steps looking toward the
east (ver 17)—a departure from the earlier practice
(for the reason of this, cf Perowne’s art. ‘Altar’

in DB). :
Of the altar of the second temple no measure-
ments are given. It is told only that it


5. Altar § was built prior to the temple, and was
of Second set upon its base (Ezr 3 3), presum-
Temple ably on the Sakhra stone—the ancient


site.
_In Herod’s temple a difficulty is found in barmo-
nizing the accounts of the Mish and Jos as to the
; size of the altar. The latter gives


6. Altar of it as a square of fifty cubits (BJ,
Herod’s V, v, 6). The key to the solution
Temple probably lies in distinguishing be-


tween the structure of the altar proper
(thirty-two cubits square), and a platform of larger
area (fifty cubits square=75 ft.) on which it stood.
When it is remembered that the Sakhra stone is
56 ft. in length and 42 ft. in width, it is easy to see
that it might form a portion of a platform built
up above and around it to a level of this size. The
altar, like that of Ezekiel’s plan, was built in di-
minishing stages; in the Mish, one of one cubit,
and three of five cubits in height, the topmost
stage measuring twenty-six cubits sqnare, or, with
deduction of a cubit for the officiating priests,
twenty-four cubits. Jos, on the other hand, gives
the height at fifteen cubits. The altar, as before,
had 4 horns. Both Jos and the Mish state that the
altar was built of unhewn stones. The ascent,
thirty-two cubits long and sixteen broad, likewise
of unhewn stone, was on thesouth side. See further,
Tempe, Herop’s. It is of this altar that the
words were spoken, ‘‘Leave there thy gift before
the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift” (Mt
5 24).
HL The Altar of Incense (NOP Nala , mizbah
ha-ketoreth), Golden Altar (AIO Mat, mizbah
ha-zahabh).—This was a diminutive
41. Inthe table of acacia overlaid with gold, the
Tabernacle upper surface of which was a square of
one cubit, and its height two cubits,
with an elevated cornice or crown around its top
(Ex 30 2ff). Like the great altar of burnt offering,
it was in the category of ‘‘most holy” things (Ex
30 10); a distinction which gave it a right to a
place in the inner room of the cella or holy of holies.
Hence, in 1 K 6 22, it is said to “belong to the
oracle,” and in He 9 4 that chamber is said to
have the “altar of incense.” It did not, however,
actually stand there, but in the outer chamber,
“before the veil’ (Ex 40 26). The reason for this
departure from the strict rule of temple ritual was
that sweet incense was to be burnt daily upon it
‘at the offering of every daily sacrifice, the lamps
being then lit and extinguished (cf Nu 28 3f;
Ex 30 7.8), so that a cloud of smoke might fill the
inner chamber at the moment when the sacrificial
blood was sprinkled (see Mercyr-sgeat). To have
burnt this incense within the veil would have
required repeated entries into the holy of holies,
which entries were forbidden (Lev 16 2). The
altar thus stood immediately without the veil,
and the smoke of the incense burnt upon it entered
the inner chamber by the openings above the veil.


Al-tashheth
Amasa


For the material construction which admitted of
this, see Hoty Puacs.

For other uses of the altar of incense see Horns
oF THE ALTAR, where it is shown that at the time of
the offerings of special sin offerings and on the day
of the annual fast its horns were sprinkled with
blood. This, with the offering of incense upon it,
were its only uses, as neither meal offerings might
be laid upon it, nor libations of drink offerings poured
thereon (Ex 30 9). The Tamid, or standing sacri-
fice for Israel, was a whole burnt offering of a lamb
offered twice daily with itsmeal offering, accompa-
nied with a service of incense.

It is probable that the censers in use at the time of
the construction of this altar and after were in shape

like a spoon or ladle (see Taste or
2. Mode of SHEwBREAD), which, when filled with
Burning live coals from the great, altar, were
- Incense carried within the sanctuary and laid

upon the altar of incense (Lev 16 12).
The incense-sticks, broken small, were then placed
upon the coals. The narrative of the deaths of
Aaron’s sons, Nadab and Abihu, is thus made in-
telligible, the fire in their censers not having been
taken from the great altar.

The original small altar made by Moses was super-
seded by one made by Solomon. This was made of

cedar wood, overlaid with gold (1 K
3. In 6 20.22; 748: 925: 2 Ch 4 19);
Solomon’s hence was called the “golden altar.”
Temple and This was among “all the vessels of


Later the house of God, great, and small,”
which Nebuchadnezzar took to Babylon
(2 Ch 36 18). As a consequence, when Ezekiel


drew plans for a new temple, he gave it an incense
altar made wholly of wood and of larger dimensions
than before (Ezk 41 22). It had a height of three
cubits and a top of two cubits square. There was
an incense altar likewise in the second temple. It
was this altar, probably plated with gold, which
Antiochus Epiphanes removed (1 Macc 1 21), and
which was restored by Judas Maccabaeus (1 Macc
4 49). (On critical doubts as to the existence of
the golden altar in the first and second temples, cf
POT, 323.) :

That the Herodian temple also had its altar of
incense we know from the incident of Zacharias

having a vision there of “an angel . . .


4, In standing on the right side of the altar of
Herad’s incense” when he went into the temple
Temple of the Lord to burn incense (Lk 1 11).


No representation of such an altar ap-
pears on the arch of Titus, though it is mentioned
by Jos (BJ, V, v, 5). It was probably melted down
by John during the course of the siege (V, xiii, 6).

In the apocalypse of John, no temple was in the
restored heaven and earth (Rev 21 22), but in the
earlier part of the vision was a temple


5. Symbol- (Rev 14 17; 15 6) with an altar and
ism of a censer (8 3). It is described as
Incense ‘the golden altar which was before the
Burning throne,” and, with the smoke of its


incense, there went up hefore God the

prayers of the saints. This imagery is in harmony

with the statement of Lk that as the priests burnt

incense, “the whole multitude of the people were

praying without at the hour of incense’’ (1 10).-

Both history and prophecy thus attest the abiding

truth that salvation is by sacrificial blood, and is

made available to men through the prayers of
saints and sinners offered by a great High Priest.
. SHaw CaLpEcoTr

AL-TASHHETH, al-tash’heth, AL-TASCHITH,

al-tas’ kith. See Psatms; Sona.


ALTOGETHER, 61-t606-geth’ér: Representing five
Heb and three Gr originals, which variously sig-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


112


nify (1) “together”; i.e. all, e.g. ‘all men, high
and low, weighed together in God’s balance are
lighter than vanity’ (Ps 62 9); so also 53 3;
Jer 10 8. (2) “all”: so RV, Isa 10 8: ‘Are not
my princes all of them kings?” (3) “with one
accord have broken the yoke”; so RV, Jer 6 5.
(4) “completely,” “entirely,” “fully”: “so as not to
destroy him altogether” (2 Ch 12 12; cf Gen 18
21; Ex 111; Ps 39 5; Jer 30 11 AV; cf RV).
(5) “wholly”: “altogether born in sins,” Jn 9 34.
(6) In 1 Cor 5 10 RV rendered “at, all’; 1 Cor 9
10 “assuredly.” (7) A passage of classic difficulty
to translators is Acts 26 29, where ‘‘altogether”
in RV is rendered “with much,” Gr en megdlod
(en polld). See Aumost. Many of the instances
where “altogether’’ occurs in AV perome “together”
in RV. Used as an adj. in Ps 39 5 (“altogether
vanity”’). Dwient M. Pratr


ALUSH, a’lush (78, ‘aliish): A desert camp of
the Israelites between Dophkah and Rephidim (Nu
33 13.14). The situation is not certainly known.
See WaNDERINGS OF ISRAEL.


ALVAH, al’va ey , ‘alwah): A chief (AV duke)
of Edom (Gen 36 40), called ‘‘Aliah” in 1 Ch 1
51. Probably the same as Alvan, or Alian, son of


Shobal son of Seir (Gen 36 23; 1 Ch 1 40).


ALVAN, al’van (ey, ‘alwadn, “tall’?): A son of
Shobal, the Horite (Gen 86 23). In 1 Ch 1 40 the
name ig written Alian, LXX ‘Adu. It is probably
the same as Alvah of Gen 36 23, which appears in
1 Ch 1 51 as Aliah.


ALWAY, 6l’w (archaic and poetic); ALWAYS,
6l'wiz: Properly applied to acts or states perpet-
ually occurring, but not necessarily continuous.
In Heb, most frequently, 79%, tamidh. In Gr
Sia mwavrés, did paniés, ordinarily expresses con-
tinuity. In Mt 28 20 “alway” AV, RV “always,”
tr Gr pdsas tés héméras, “all the days,” cor-
responding to the Heb idiom similarly rendered in
Dt 6 29; 6 24; 111; 28 33; 1 K 11 36, etc.
Gr aet in Acts 7 51; 2 Cor 6 10; 1 Pet 3 15,
means “at every and any time.”


AMAD, 4’mad (7222, ‘am‘adh): A town in
northern Pal, which fell to the tribe of Asher in the
division of the land (Josh 19 26). The modern
ruin ‘Amid near Accho may be the site.


AMADATHA, a-mad’a-tha, AMADATHUS, a-
mad’a-thus (Ad Est 12 6). SeeAman; HAMMEDATHA.


AMAIN, a-man’ (tr? from the Gr ets ovyhv
Sppnoav, eis phugén hérmésan, “they rushed to
flight”): The word is composed of the prefix “a”
and the word ‘main,’ meaning “force.” The
expression is used by Milton, Parker, et al., but in
Bib. lit. found only in 2 Macc 12 22 where it is
used to describe the flight of Timotheus and his
army after he suffered defeat at the hands of Judas
Maccabee (‘They fled amain,” i.e. violently and
suddenly).


AMAL, 4’mal (2'2Y, ‘amal, “toiler”): A son of
Helem of the tribe of Asher (1 Ch 7 35).


AMALEK, am/a-lek (pear, ‘dmalék): The son,
by his concubine Timna, of Eliphaz, the eldest son
of Esau. He was one of the chiefs (AV dukes) of
Edom (Gen 36 12.16). See AMALEKITE.


AMALEK, am’a-lek, AMALEKITE, a-mal’e-kit,
am’a-lek-it (P22, ‘dmalek, "GYR, ‘dmalekt):
A tribe dwelling originally in the region south of


113


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Al-tashheth
Amasa


Judah, the wilderness of et-Tih where the Israelites
came into conflict with them. They were nomads
as a people dwelling in that tract would naturally
be. When they joined the Midianites to invade
Israel they came “with their cattle and their tents”
(Jgs 6 3-5). They are not to be identified with
the descendants of Esau (Gen 36 12.16) because
they are mentioned earlier, in the account of the
invasion of Chedorlaomer (Gen 14 7) and in
Balaam’s prophecy (Nu 24 20) A. is called “the
first of the nations,” which seems to refer to an
early existence. We are uncertain of their origin
for they do not appear in the list of nations foun
in Gen 10. They do not seem to have had any
relationship with the tribes of Israel, save as, we
may surmise, some of the descendants of Esau were
incorporated into the tribe. Itis probable that they
were of Sem stock though we have no proof of it.
The first contact with Israel was at Rephidim,
in the wilderness of Sinai, where they made an un-
provoked attack and were defeated after a desper-
ate conflict (Ex 17 8-13; Dt 26 17.18). On ac-
count of this they were placed under the ban and
Israel was commanded to exterminate them (Dt
25 19; 1S 16 2.3). The next encounter of the
two peoples was when the Israelites attempted to
enter Canaan from the west of the Dead Sea. The
spies had reported that the Amalekites were to be
found in the south, in connection with the Hittites,
Jebusites and Amorites (Nu 18 29). The Israel-
ites at first refused to advance, but later deter-
mined to do so contrary to the will of God and the
command of Moses. They were met by A. and
the Canaanites and completely defeated (Nu 14
39-45). A. is next found among the allies of Moab
in their attack upon Israel in the days of Eglon
(Jgs 3 13). They were also associated with the
Midianites in their raids upon Israel (Jgs 6 3),
and they seemed to have gained a foothold in
Ephraim, or at least a branch of them, in the hill
country (Jgs 5 14; 12 15), but it is evident that
the great body of them still remained in their old
habitat, for when Saul made war upon them he drove
them toward Shur in the wilderness toward Egypt
(1 S 16 1-9). David also found them in the same
region (1S 27 8; 301). After this they seem
to have declined, and we find, in the days of Heze-
kiah, only a remnant of them who were smitten by
the Simeonites at Mount Seir (1 Ch 4 41-43).
They are once mentioned in Pss in connection with
other inveterate enemies of Israel (Ps 83 7). The
hatred inspired by the Amalekites is reflected in the
passages already mentioned which required their
utter destruction. Their attack upon them when
they were just escaped from Egypt and while they
were struggling through the wilderness made a
deep impression upon the Israelites which they
never forgot, and the wrath of David upon the
messenger who bronght him news of the death of
Saul and Jonathan, declaring himself to be the
slayer of Saul, was no doubt accentuated by his
being an Amalekite (2 S 1 1-16). H. Porter


AMAM, 4’mam (8°98, ’dmam): An unidentified
town in southern Pal, which fell to Judah in the
allotment of the land; occurs only in Josh 15 26.


AMAN, 4’man (Apdv, Amdn; B reads 7ASén,
Adém): Tob 14 10; Ad Est 12 6; 16 10.17, prob-
ably in each case for Haman, the arch-enemy of the
Jews in the canonical Book of Est (cf Est 3 1 with
Ad Est 12 6). In Ad Est (16 10) Aman is repre-
sented as a Macedonian, in all other points corre-
sponding to the Haman of Est.


AMANA, a-ma’na, a-ma’na (MQ'AN, ’dmanah):
A mountain mentioned in Cant 4 8 along with


Lebanon, Senir and Hermon. The name probably
means the “firm,” or “constant.” ‘From the top
of Amana’’.is mistr* by the LXX dé dpxfs rlorews,
apé archés pisteds. The Amana is most naturally
sought in the Anti-Lebanon. near the course of the
river Abana, or Amana (see ABANAH). Another
possible identification is with Mt. Amanus in the
extreme north of Syria.


AMARIAH, an-a-ri’a (T™VON, 'dmaryah, and
AATYVAN , ’dmaryaha, “the Lord has said”; cf HPN,
180, 285): (1) A Levite in the line of Aaron-
Eleazar; a son of Meraioth and grandfather of
Zadok (1 Ch 6 7.52) who lived in David’s time.
Cf Zadok (2 S 16 27, etc) also Ant, VIII, i, 3 and
X, viii, 6. (2) A Levite in the line of Kohath-
Hebron referred to in 1 Ch 23 19 and 24 23 at the
time when David divided the Levites into courses.
(3) A Levite in the line of Aaron-Eleazar; a son of
Azariah who “executed the priest’s office in the
house that Solomon built” (1 Ch 6 10f). Cf
Ezr 7 3 where in the abbreviated list this Am. is
mentioned as an ancestor of Ezra. See AMARIAS
(1 Esd 8 2; 2 Esd 1 2) and no. (4) of this art.
(4) Chief priest and judge “‘in all matters of Jehovah”
appointed by Jehoshaphat (2 Ch 19 11). Possi-
bly identical with Am. no. (3). (5) A descendant
of Judah in the line of Perez and an ancestor
of Ataiah who lived in Jerus after the Bab exile
(Neh 11 4). Cf Imri (1 Ch 9 4) and no. (7) of
this art., which Am. seems to be of the same family,
(6) A Levite and an assistant of Kore who was ap-
pointed by Hezekiah to distribute the “oblations of
Jehovah” to their brethren (2 Ch 31 15). (7) A
son of Bani who had married a foreign woman
(Ezr 10 42). See no. (5) of this art. (8) A priest
who with Nehemiah sealed the covenant (Neh 10
3); he had returned to Jerusalem with Zernbbabel
(Neh 12 2) and was the father of Jehohanan (cf
Hanani, Ezr 10 20), priest at the time of Joiakim
(Neh 12 13). Cf Immer (Ezr 2 37; 10 20; Neh
7 40) and also Emmeruth (AV “Meruth,” 1 Esd 5
24). (9) An ancestor of Zephaniah, the prophet
(Zeph 1 1). A. L. Bresiicu


AMARIAS, am-a-ri’as (A, ’Apapias, Amarias; B,
*Apaptelas, Amartheias)=Amariah no. 3: An an-
cestor of Ezra (1 Esd 8 2; 2 Esd 1 2).


AMARNA, TELL EL,, tel-el-i-mar’nd. See Tenn
EL-AMARNA TABLETS.


AMASA, a-mii’sa (NW'9Z, ‘masa’, or read "WAY,
‘ammishai, ie. "W2 DY, ‘am yishai, “people of
Jesse’): The form NW, is based upon a mis-
taken etymology (from=0'A9 [‘amas] “to burden”’).

(1) According to 2 S 17 25, Amasa is the son of
Abigail, the sister of Zeruiah and David, and
Ithra, an Israelite; but another source, 1 Ch 2 17,
calls his father Jether the Ishmaelite. He was a
nephew of David and a cousin of Absalom, who
made him commander of the army of rebellion.
When the uprising had been quelled, David, in
order to conciliate Amasa, promised him the position
held by Joab; the latter had fallen from favor (2
§ 19 13 ff). When a new revolt broke out under
Sheba, the son of Bichri (2 S 20), Amasa was
intrusted with the task of assembling the men of
Judah. But Joab was eager for revenge upon the
man who had obtained the office of command that
hecoveted. When Amasa met Joab at Gibeon, the
latter murdered him while pretending to salute
him (2 S 20 8-10; 1 K 2 5). ; ;

(2) Son of Hadlai, of the Bend ’Ephrayim (“Chil-
dren of Ephraim’), who, obeying the words of the
prophet Oded, refused to consider as captives the


Amasai
Amerce


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


114


Judaeans who had been taken from Ahaz, king of
Judah, by the victorious Israelites under the lead-
ership of Pekah (2 Ch 28 12). H. J. Wour


AMASAI, a-ma’si (WAY, ‘dmdsay, perhaps
rather to be read "WAY , ‘ammishay; so Wellhausen,
IJG, II, 24, n.2):

(1) A name in the genealogy of Kohath, son of
Elkanah, a Levite of the Kohathite family (cf 1 Ch
6 25; 2 Ch 29 12).

(2) Chief of the captains who met David at Zik-
lag and tendered him their allegiance. Some have
identified him with Amasa and others with Abishai,
who is called Abshai in 1 Ch 11 20m (cf 1 Ch 18
12). The difficulty is that neither Amasa nor
Abishai occupied the rank of the chief of thirty
according to the lists in 2 S 23 and 1 Ch 11, the
rank to which David is supposed to have appointed
him (cf 1 Ch 12 18).

(3) One of the trumpet-blowing priests who
greeted David when he brought back the Ark of
the Covenant (cf 1 Ch 16 24).


AMASBHSAI, a-mash’si (SWAY , ‘dimashsay, prob-
ably a textual error for "W'DY, ‘dmdshay; the © [s}
implies a reading "0°39, based on a mistaken deri-
vation from 0'0Y. The original reading may have
been "WAY, ‘immishay; cf AMasar): Amashsai is a
priestly name in the post-exilic list of inhabitants of
Jerus (Neh 11,13; Maasai, 1 Ch 9 12); the read-
ing in Ch is "W2"2, ma‘dsay, AV “Maasiai,”” RV
“Maasai.”


AMASIAH, am-a-si’a (“O22 , ‘dmasyah, ‘““Yahwe
bears’): One of the captains of Jehoshaphat (cf
2 Ch 17 16).


- AMATH, a’/math, AMATHIS, am’a-this (1 Mace
12 25). See Hamar.


AMATHEIS, am-a-thé‘is.


AMAZED, a-mizd’: A term which illustrates
the difficulty of expressing in one Eng. word the
wide range of startled emotion, wonder, astonish-
ment, awe, covered, in the OT, by four Heb words
and in the NT by as many Gr words. Its Scripture
originals range in meaning from amazement ac-
companied with terror and trembling to an astonish-
ment full of perplexity, wonder, awe and joyous
surprise. It is the word esp. used to show the effect
of Christ’s miracles, teaching, character and Divine
personality on those who saw and heard Him, and
were made conscious of His supernatural power (Mt
12 23: “All the multitudes were amazed”). The
miracles of Pentecost and the Holy Spirit’s bestowal
of the gift of tongues produced the same universal
wonder (Acts 2 7: “They were all amazed and mar-
velled’’). Dwicut M. Prarr


AMAZIAH, am-a-zi'a (MPO, WLAN, ’dmac-
yah, ‘démacyahi, “Jehovah is mighty”; 2 K 14
1-20; 2 Ch 25): Son of Jehoash, and tenth king
of Judah. Amaziah had a peaceable accession at
the age of 25. A depleted treasury, a despoiled
palace and temple, and a discouraged people were
among the consequences of his father’s war with
Hazael, king of Syria. When settled on the throne,
Amaziah brought to justice the men who had
assassinated his father. A verbal citation of Dt
24 16 in 2 K 14 6, forbidding the punishment of
children for a father’s offence, shows that the laws
of this book were then known, and were recog-
nized as authoritative, and, in theory, as govern-
ing the nation. His accession may be dated cir
812 (some put later).


See EMATHEIS.


The young king’s plan for the rehabilitation of
his people was the restoration of the kingdom’s
military prestige, so severely lowered


1. The in his father’s reign. A militia army,
Edomite composed of all the young men above
War 20 years of age, was first organized


and placed upon a war footing (2 Ch
25 5; the number given, 300,000, is not a reliable
one). Even this not being considered a large
enough force to effect the project, 100 talents of
silver were sent to engage mercenary troops for the
expedition from Israel. When these came, a man of
God strongly dissuaded the king from relying on
them (2 Ch 25 7 ff). When this was communicated
to the soldiers, and they were sent back unemployed, .
it roused them to “fierce anger” (ver 10).
Amaziah’s purpose in making these extensive
preparations for war, in a time of profound peace,


is clear. To the 8.E. of Judah lay
2. Its the Edomite state, with its capital
Occasion at Petra. For many years Edom had


‘ been subject to Jehoshaphat, and a
Heb “deputy” had governed it (1 K 22 47). In
the reign of his son and successor, Jehoram, a con-
federacy of Philistines, Arabians and Edomites took
Libnah and made a raid on Jerusalem. A band of
these penetrated the palace, which they plundered,
abducted some women, and murdered all the young
princes but the youngest (2 Ch 21 17; 221). The
public commotion and distress caused by such an
event may be seen reflected in the short oracle of
the prophet Obadiah, uttered against Edom, if, with
some, Obadiah’s date is put thus early.
From that time “Edom... . made a king over
themselves” (2 Ch 21 8), and for fifty years fol-
lowing were practically independent.
3. The Vic- It was this blot on Jerusalem and the
tory inthe good name of Judah that Amaziah
Valley of | determined to wipe out. The army
Salt of retaliation went forward, and after
a battle in the Valley of Salt, south of
the Dead Sea, in which they were the victors, moved
on to Petra. This city lies in a hollow, shut in by
mountains, and approached only by a narrow ravine,
through which a stream of water flows. Amaziah
took it “by storm” (such is Ewald’s rendering of
“by war,” in 2 K 14 7). Great execution was
done, many of the captives being thrown from the
rock, the face of which is now covered with rock-
cut tombs of the Gr-Rom age.
The campaign was thus entirely successful, but
had evil results. Flushed with victory, Amaziah
brought back the gods of Edom, and
4. Apostasy paid them worship. For this act of
and Its apostasy, he was warned of approach-
Punishment ing destruction (2 Ch 25 14-17).
Disquieting news soon came relating
to the conduct of the troops sent back to Samaria.
From Beth-horon in the south to the border of the
northern state they had looted the villages and
killed some of the country people who had attempted
to defend their property (2 Ch 25 13). To Ama-
ziah’s demand for reparation, Jehoash’s answer was
the contemptuous one of the well-known parable of
the Thistle and the Cedar.
War was now inevitable. The kings “looked
one another in the face,” in the valley of Beth-
shemesh, where there is a level space,


5. Battle — suitable to the movements of infantry.
of Beth- Judah was utterly routed, and the
shemesh king himself taken prisoner. There


being no treasures in the lately de-
spoiled capital, Jehoash contented himself with
taking hostages for future good behavior, and with
breaking down 400 cubits of the wall of Jerus at the
N.W. corner of the defence (2 K 14 13.14; 2 Ch
25 22-24),


115


Amaziah’s career as a soldier was now closed.
He outlived Jehoash of Israel “fifteen years”


(2 K 14 17). His later years were
6. Closing spent in seclusion and dread, and had
Years and a tragical ending. The reason for his
Tragical unpopularity is not far to seek. The
End responsibility for the war with Je-


hoash is by the inspired writer placed
upon the shoulders of Amaziah (2 K 14 9-11).
It was he who “would not hear.” The quarrel
between the kings was one which it was not beyond
the power of diplomacy to remedy, but no brotherly
attempt to heal the breach was made by either king.
When the results of the war appeared, it could not
be but that the author of the war should be called
upon to answer for them. So deep was his dis-
grace and so profound the sense of national humil-
lation, that a party in the state determined on
Amaziah’s removal, so soon as there was another
to take'‘his place. The age of majority among the
Heb kings was 16, and when Amaziah’s son was of
this age, the conspiracy against his life grew so
strong and open that he fled to Lachish. Here he
was followed and killed; his body being insultingly
carried to Jerusalem on horses, and not conveyed
in a litter or coffin (2 K 14 19.20; 2 Ch 25 27.28).
He was 54 years old and had reigned for 29 years.
The Chronicler (2 Ch 26 1) hardly conceals the
popular rejoicings at the exchange of sovereigns,
when Uzziah became king.

In the last ver of 2 Ch 26 is a copyist’s error
by which we read “in the city of Judah,” instead
of “in the city of David,” as in the corresponding
passage in Kings. The singular postscript to the
record of Amaziah in 2 K 14 22 is intended to
mark the fact that while the port of Elath on the
Red Sea fell before the arms, in turn, of Amaziah
and of his son Uzziah, it was the latter who restored
it to Judah, ag a part of its territory. Amaziah
is mentioned in the royal genealogy of 1 Ch 3 12,
but not in that of Mt 1. There is a leap here from
Jehoram to Uzziah, Ahaziah, Jehoash and Amaziah
being omitted. - W. SHaw CaunEecorr


AMBASSADOR, am-bas’a-dor (NOD, mal akh,
‘““messenger’’; 7», lag, “interpreter”; WX, gir, “to
go”; hence a messenger; wperPeia, presbeid, “to
act as an ambassador,” lit. to be older): An am-
bassador is an official representative of a king
or government, as of Pharach (Isa 30 4); of the
princes of Babylon (2 Ch 32 31); of Neco, king
of Egypt (2 Ch 35 21); of the messengers of
peace sent by Hezekiah, king of Judah, to Sen-
nacherib, king of Assyria (Isa 33 7). The same
Heb term is used of the messengers sent by Jacob to
Esau (Gen 32 3); by Moses to the king of Edom
(Nu 20 14). For abundant illustration consult
“Messenger” (3N2°2, mal’akh) in any concordance.
See Concornance. The inhabitants of Gibeon
made themselves pretended ambassadors to Joshua
in order to secure by deceit the protection of a treaty
(“covenant”) (Josh 9 4). f

In the NT the term is used in a fig. sense. As
the imprisoned representative of Christ at Rome
Paul calls himself “an ambassador in chains”
(Eph 6 20); and in 2 Cor 6 20 includes, with
himself, all ministers of the gospel, as “ambassadors

. on behalf of Christ,” commissioned by Him,
as their sovereign Lord, with the ministry of recon-
ciling the world to God. The Bible contains no
finer characterization of the exalted and spiritual
nature of the minister’s vocation as the represen-
tative of Jesus Christ, the King of kings, and
Saviour of the world. Dwieut M. Pratr


AMBASSAGE, am’ba-s4j (wpeo Pela, presbeta, “an
embassy,” a body of ambassadors on the message


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Amasai
Amerce


entrusted to them): Twice used by Christ (1) in
the parable of the Pounds, of the citizens who hated
the nobleman and sent an ambassage, refusing
to have him reign over them, thus illustrating those
who wilfully rejected His own spiritual sovereignty
and kingdom (Lk 19 14); (2) of a weak king who
sends to a stronger an ambassage to ask conditions
pi Beare (Lk 14 32). Not used elsewhere in the
ible.


AMBER, am’bér. See Stonus, Preciovs.


AMBITIOUS, am-bish’us (voTwéopar, philo-
timéomai, “to be strongly desirous,’”’ ‘strive ear-
nestly,” “make it one’s aim’’): Given as a marginal
reading in Rom 16 20 (“being ambitious to bring
good tidings’), 2 Cor 5 9 (“We are ambitious,
whether at home or absent, to be well-pleasing
unto him’), and 1 Thess 4 11 (‘that ye be am-
hitious to be quiet”’).


AMBUSH, am’boésh (A728, ‘arabh, “to set an
ambush”; JN, md’drabh, “an ambush’): A
military stratagem in which a body of men are placed
in concealment to surprise an enemy unawares, or to
attack a point when temporarily undefended. This
stratagem was employed successfully by Joshua at
Ai (Josh 8). Jeremiah calls upon the Medes to ‘“‘set
up a standard against the walls of Babylon, make
the watch strong, set the watchmen, prepare the
ambushes” (Jer 51 12).


AMBUSHMENT, am’‘boésh-ment (as above) has
now disappeared ‘in 2 Ch 20 22, where RV gives
for “ambushment”’ “‘liers-in-wait.’’ It still remains
in 2 Ch 13 13 where both AV and RV render the
Hebrew noun “ambushment.”’


AMEN, 4-men’ (in ritual speech and in singing
d-men’, 4’men) (JAN, ’amén; aphv, amén, = “truly,”
“verily’’): Is derived from the reflexive form of a
vb. meaning “to be firm,” or “to prop.” It occurs
twice as a noun in Isa 66 16, where we have
(AV, RV) “God of truth.” This rendering implies
the pointing ’6mén or 'émiin i.e. “truth,” or “faith-
fulness,” a reading actually suggested by Cheyne
and adopted by others. Amen is generally used as
an advb. of assent or confirmation—fiat, “‘so let it
be.’ In Jer 28 6 the prophet indorses with it
the words of Hananiah. Amen is employed when
an individual or the whole nation confirms a cove-
nant or oath recited in their presence (Nu 6 22;
Dt 27 15 ff; Neh 5 13, etc). It also occurs at the
close of a ps or book of pss, or of a prayer.

That Amen was appended to the doxology in the
early church is evident both from St. Paul and Rev,
and here again it took the form of a response by the
hearers. ‘The ritual of the installation of the Lamb
(Rev 5 6-14) concludes with the Amen of the four
beasts, and the four and twenty elders. It is also
spoken after “Yea: I come quickly” (22 20). And
that Rev reflects the practice of the church on earth,
and not merely of an ideal, ascended community
in heaven, may be concluded from 1 Cor 14 16,
whence we gather that the lay brethren_were ex-
pected to say Amen to the address. (See Weiz-
sicker’s The Apostolic Age of the Christian Church,
Eng. tr, II, 289.) James MILuaR


AMERCE, a-mirs’: Found in AV only in Dt
22 19, “And they shall amerce him in an hundred
shekels of silver.’ Amerce is a legal term derived
from the French (4=“at’’?; merci=‘mercy,” ive. lit.
“at the mercy” [of the court]). Here it is used of
the imposing of a fine, according to the Law of Moses,
upon the man who has been proven by the Elders
to have brought a false charge against the virginity
of the maid he has married by saying to the father,
“T found not thy daughter a maid.”


American RV


‘Anion THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


116


AMERICAN REVISED VERSION, a-mer‘i-kan
ré-vizd’ var’shun: On July 7, 1870, it was moved
in the Lower House of the Convoca-
1. History tion of Canterbury that in the work
ae of revision the coéperation of Ameri-
can divines be invited. This resolution was assented
to, and on December 7, 1871, the arrangements
were completed. Under the general presidency
of Dr. Philip Schaff, an OT Company of fifteen
scholars was formed, with Dr. W. H. Green as
chairman, and a NT Company of sixteen members
(including Dr. Schaff), with Dr. T. D. Woolsey as
chairman. Work was begun on October 4, 1872,
and took the form of offering criticisms on the suc-
cessive portions of the English revision as they were
received. These criticisms of the American Com-
panies were duly considered by the English Com-
panies during the second revision and the decisions
were again sent to America for criticism. The
replies received were once more given consideration
and, finally, the unadopted readings for which the
American Companies professed deliberate prefer-
ence were printed as appendices to the two Testa-
ments as published in 1881 and 1885. These lists,
however, were not regarded by the American
Companies as satisfactory. In the first place, it
became evident that the English Companies, on
account of their instructions and for other reasons,
were not willing to make changes of a certain class.
Consequently the American Companies insisted
on only such readings as seemed to have a real
chance of being accepted. And, in the second place,
the English presses hurried the last part of the work
and were unwilling to allow enough time for ade-
quate thoroughness in the preparation of the lists.
But it was hoped that the first published edition of
the ERV would not be considered definitive and
that in the future such American proposals as had
stood the test of public discussion might be incor-
porated into the text. This hope was disappointed
—the English Companies disbanded as soon as
their revision was finished and their work stood
as final. As a result the American Companies
resolved to continne their organization. They
were pledged not to issue or indorse any new revi-
sion within fourtccn years after the publication of
the ERV, and so it was not until 1900 that the
ARV NT was published. The whole Bible was
issued in the following year.
As the complete editions of the ARV give a full
list of the changes made, only the more prominent
need be mentioned here.
2. Differ- readings printed in the’ appendices to
ences from the ERV were abandoned, but many
ERV new ones were introduced, including
some that had been adopted while the
English work was in progress but which had not
been pressed. (See above.) Still, in general appear-
ance, the ARV differs but slightly from the English.
The most important addition is found in the page-
headings. Somechanges have been made in shorten-
ing the titles of the NT books. The printing of
poetical passages in poetical form has been carried
through more consistently. The paragraphs have
been altered in some cases and (especially in the OT)
shortencd. The punctuation has been simplified,
especially by the more frequent use of the semi-
colon. The removal of obsolete words (‘‘magnifical,”’
“neesings,’”’ etc) has been effected fairly thoroughly,
obsolete constructions (‘jealous over,’’ etc) have
been modernized, particularly by the use of ‘‘who”
or “that’’ (instcad of “which”’) for persons and ‘‘its”
(instead of “his’’) for things. In the OT “Jehovah”
has been introduced systematically for the proper
Heb word, as has ‘‘Sheol” (“Hades” in the NT).
Certain passages too literally rendered in the ERV
(“reins,” “by the hand of,” etc) are given in modern


A few of the.


terms. In the NT, the substitution of ‘Holy
Spirit’’ for ‘“Holy Ghost’? was completed through-
out (in the ERV it is made in some twenty places),
“demons” substituted for “devils,” ‘“Teacher” for
“Master,” and “try” for “tempt’’ when there is no
direct reference to wrongdoing. so on.

It may be questioned whether the differences
between the two Revisions are great enough to

counterbalance the annoyance and
3. Criticism confusion resulting from the existence

of two standard versions in the same
language. But, accepting the ARV as an accom-
plished fact, and acknowledging a few demerits
that it has or may be thought to have in compari-
son with the ERV (a bit of pedantry in Ps 148 12
or renderings of disputed passages such as Ps 24 6),
these demerits are altogether outweighed by the
superiorities—with one exception. In the Psalter,
when used liturgically, the repetition of the word
“Jehovah” becomes wearisome and the ERV which
retains “The Lord’ is much preferable. Most to
be regretted in the ARV is its extreme conservatism
in the readings of the original texts. In the OT
the number of marginal variants was actually
reduced. In the NT, only trivial changes are made
from the so-called Revisers’ Greek Text, although
this text did not represent the best scholarly opin-
ion even in 1881, while in 1900 it was almost uni-
versally abandoned. (Today—in 1914—it is obso-
lete.) It is very unfortunate that the American
Revisers did not improve on the example of their
English brethren and continue their sessions after
the publication of their version, for it is only by the
successive revisions of published work that a really
satisfactory result can be attained.

No ARV Apoc was attempted, a particularly
unfortunate fact, as the necessity for the study of
the Apoc has become imperative and
the ERV Apocis not a particularly good
piece of work. However, copies of the
ARV can now be obtained with the
ERV Apoc included. See ENciisH VERsIons.

Burton Scotr Easton

AMETHYST, am’e-thist. See Sronzs, Precious.


AMI, a’mi, 4’mé (AN, ’dmt): Ancestor of a
family among ‘‘Solomon’s servants” in the Return
(Ezr 2 57); the same as Amon in Neh 7 59.


AMIABLE, 4’mi-a-b’l (7°, ydhidh, “beloved”):
Applied to the tabernacle or tent of meeting.
“How a. [‘lovely” RVm] are thy tabernacles’’
(Ps 84 1), the pl. having reference to the subdi-
visions and appurtenances of the sanctuary (cf
68 35). The adj. is rendered ‘amiable’ in the
sense of the French aimable, lovely; but the usage
of the Heb word requires it to be understood as
meaning “dear,” “beloved.” Cf “so amiable a
prospect” (Sir T. Herbert), “They keep their
churches so cleanly and amiable” (Howell, 1644).
“What made the tabernacle of Moses lovely was not
the outside, which was very mean, but what was
within” (John Gill). See TaBERNACLE.

; M. O, Evans

AMINADAB, a-min’a-dab (ApwwaSdR, Amina-
ddb): AV: Gr form of Amminadab (q.v.). Thus
RV (Mt 1 4; Lk 8 33).


4. Apocry-
pha


_ AMISS, a-mis’: There are two words tr’ “amiss”
in the NT, drozos, dtopos, referring to that which
is Improper or harmful (Lk 23 41; Acts 28 6),
while xaxés, kakdés, refers to that which is evil
in the sense of a disaster, then to that which is
wicked, morally wrong. This latter is the use of
it in Jas 4 3. The purpose of the prayer is evil,
it is therefore amiss and cannot be granted (cf


2 Ch 6 37 ff).


117


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


American RV
Ammon


AMITTAI, a-mit’] (EVAN, ’dmitiay, faithful”):
The father of the prophet Jonah. He was from
Gath-hepher in Zebulun (2 K 14 25; Jon 1 1).


AMMAH, am’a (AN, ’ammah, “mother’’ or
beginning”): A hill in the territory of Benjamin
(2 5 2 24), where Joab and Abishai halted at
nightfall in their pursuit of Abner and his forces
after their victory over him in the battle of Gibeon.
It “lieth before Giah by the way of the wilderness
of Gibeon”; but the exact location has not been
identified. The.same Heb word appears as the
second part of Metheg-ammah in 2 5 8 1 AV, but
rendered “mother city” in RV, probably however
not the same place as in 2S 2 24.


AMMI, ami ("QY, ‘ammi, “my people’): A
symbolic name given to Israel by Hosea (2 1; 2
3 in Heb text), descriptive of Israel in the state of
restoration, and in contrast to sinful and rejected
Israel, represented by Hosea’s son, who was called
Lo-ammi, “not my people,’ when born to the
prophet (Hos 1 9.10). This restoration to the
Divine favor is more fully described in Hos 2 21.
23 in words quoted by Paul (Rom 9 25.26). The
use of such fig. and descriptive names is frequent
in the OT; ef Isa 62 4.12.


AMMIDIOI, a-mid’i-oi (AV Ammidoi, am‘i-doi;
*AuplSior, Ammidiot [also with aspirate]; oc-
curring only in 1 Esd 5 20): One of the families
returning from the Bab Captivity in the First
Return, under Zerubbabel, in 537 BC. This name
is not found in the corresponding lists of the canoni-
cal books, Ezr 2 and Neh 7. Their identity is
uncertain.


AMMIEL, am’i-el Onva7, ‘ammivél, “my kins-
man is God”; ’ApehdA, Ametél]): A name borne by
four men in the OT.

(1) One of the twelve spies sent into Canaan by
Moses; son of Gemalli, of the tribe of Dan (Nu 13
12).
to) A Benjamite, the father of Machir, a friend
of David, living at Lodebar in Gilead (2 S 9 4.5;
17 27).

(3) rather of Bathshua (or Bathsheba), one of
David’s wives, who was mother of Solomon (1 Ch 3
5). In the || passage, 2 8 11 3, by transposition
of the two parts of the name, he is called Eliam,
meaning “my God is a kinsman.” ;

(4) The sixth son of Obed-edom, a Levite, one
of the doorkeepers of the tabernacle of God in
David’s life-time (1 Ch 26 5). Epnwarpn Mack


AMMIHUD, a-mvhud (TOY, ‘ammihidh,
“my kinsman is glorious”; variously in LXX,
1Eyv0t, Hmiotd or Seprotd, Semioid or *Apioss,
Amiotid): The name of several OT persons.

(1) Father of Elishama, who in the Wilderness
was head of the tribe of Ephraim (Nu 1 10; 2 18;
7 48.53; 10 22; 1 Ch 7 26). :

(2) Father of Shemuel, who was appointed by
Moses from the tribe of Simeon to divide the land
among the tribes after they should have entered
Canaan (Nu 34 20). ;

(3) Father of Pedahel, who was appointed from
the tribe of Naphtali for the same purpose as the
Ammihud of (2) (Nu 34 28). :

(4) In the AV and RVm for the Ammihur
(MAY, ‘ammihdr, “my kinsman is noble’), who
was father of Talmai of Geshur, a little Aram. king-
dom E. of the Lebanon mountains, to whom Absa-
lom fled after the murder of his brother Amnon.
The weight of evidence seems to favor the reading
Ammihur (2 5 13 37).


(5) A descendant of Judah through the line of
Perez (1 Ch 9 4). Epwarp Mack


AMMIHOUR, a-mi’hur (AV and RVm; “AY,
‘ammihar, “my kinsman is noble’; 'Ep.ot8, Hmi-
oud). See Amminup (4).


AMMINADAB, a-min’a-dab (ATI, ‘am-
minddhabh=“my people [or my kinsman] is gen-
erous or noble”): Three persons bearing this name
are mentioned in the OT.

(1) In Ruth 4 19.20 and 1 Ch 2 10 Amminadab
is referred to as one of David’s ancestors. He was
the great-grandson of Perez, a son of Judah (Gen
38 29; 46 12) and the great-grandfather of Boaz,
who again was the great-grandfather of David.
Aaron’s wife, Elisheba, was a daughter of Am-
minadab (Ex 6 23), while one of the sons, viz.
Nahshon, occupied an important position in the
Judah-clan (Nu 1 7; 2 3; 7 12; 10 14).

(2) In the first Book of Ch (6 22) Amminadab is
mentioned as a son of Kohath (and therefore a
grandson of Levi) and the father of Korah. But in
other genealogical passages (Ex 6 18; Nu 3 19;
1 Ch 6 2) the sons of Kohath are Amram, Izhar,
Hebron and Uzziel, and in two places (Ex 6 21;
1 Ch 6 38) Izhar is mentioned as the father of
Korah. 2

(3) According to 1 Ch (15 10.11) Amminadab
was the name of a priest who took part in the
removal of the ark to Jerusalem. He was the son
of Uzziel, and therefore a nephew of Amminadab,
son of Kohath (=Izhar). Tuomas Lewis


AMMINADIB, a-min’a-dib (2° "OY, ‘ammi
nadhibh): The name occurs in AV and RVm only
in one passage (Cant 6 12, “the chariots of Am-
minadib”). In AVm and RV text, however, it is
not regarded as a proper name, and the clause is
rendered, “among the chariots of my princely
people.” Interpretations widely vary (see Com-
MENTARIES).


AMMISHADDAI, am-i-shad’i, am-i-shad-a’1
CIwWAy, ‘ammishadday, ‘“Shaddai is my kins-
man”): The father of Ahiezer, a Danite captain or
‘head of his fathers’ house,” during the Wilderness
journey (Nu 1 12; 2 25, etc).


AMMIZABAD, a-miz’a-bad (TAT"AY, ‘ammi-
zabhadh, ‘‘my kinsman has made a present”): The
son of Benaiah, one of David’s captains for the third
month (1 Ch 27 6). ;


AMMON, am’on; AMMONITES, am/on-its
(WAP, ‘ammin; BBY, ‘ammonim): The Heb
tradition makes this tribe descendants of Lot and
hence related to the Israelites (Gen 19 38). This
is reflected in the name usually employed in OT to
designate them, Ben ‘Ammi, Bene “Ammon, “son of
my people,” “children of my people,” i.e. relatives.
Hence we find that the Israelites are commanded
to avoid conflict with them on their march to the
Promised Land (Dt 2 19). Their dwelling-place
was on the east of the Dead Sea and the Jordan,
between the Arnon and the Jabbok, but, before
the advance of the Hebrews, they had been dis-
possessed of a portion of their land by the Amorites,
who founded, along the east side of the Jordan
and the Dead Sea, the kingdom of Sihon (Nu 21
21-31). We know from the records of Egypt, esp.
Am Tab, the approximate date of the Amorite
invasion (14th and 18th cents. BC). They were
pressed on the north by the Hittites who forced
them upon the tribes of the south, and some of
them settled east of the Jordan. Thus Israel
helped A. by destroying their old enemies, and this


Ammonitess
Amorites


makes their conduct at a later period the more
reprehensible. In the days of Jephthah they
oppressed the Israelites east of the Jordan, claim-
ing that the latter had deprived them of their terri-
tory when they came from Egypt, whereas it was
the possessions of the Amorites they took (Jgs 11
1-28). They were defeated, but their hostility
did not cease, and their conduct toward the Is-
raelites was particularly shameful, as in the days
of Saul (1 S 11) and of David (2S 10). This may
account for the cruel treatment meted out to them
in the war that followed (2 8 12 26-31). They
seem to have been completely subdued by David
and their capital was taken, and we find a better
spirit manifested afterward, for Nahash of Rabbah
showed kindness to him when a fugitive (2 8 17
27-29). Their country came into the possession of
Jeroboam, on the division of the kingdom, and
when the Syrians of Damascus deprived the king-
dom of Israel of their possessions east of the Jordan,
the A. became subjects of Benhadad, and we find
a contingent of 1,000 of them serving as allies of
that king in the great battle of the Syrians with
the Assyrians at Qarqar (854 BC) im the reign of
Shalmaneser II. They may have regained their
old territory when Tiglath-pileser carried off the
Israelites E. of the Jordan into captivity (2 K 16 29;
1 Ch 65 26). Their hostility to both kingdoms,
Judah and Israel, was often manifested. In the
days of Jehoshaphat they jomed with the Moabites
in an attack upon him, but met with disaster
(2 Ch 20). They paid tribute to Jotham (2 Ch
27 5). After submitting to Tiglath-pileser they
were generally tributary to Assyria, but we have
mention of their joining in the general uprising
that took place under Sennacherib; but they sub-
mitted and we find them tributary in the reign of
Esarhaddon. Their hostility to Judah is shown
in their joining the Chaldaeans to destroy it (2 K 24
2). Their cruelty is denounced by the prophet
Amos (1 13), and their destruction by Jer (49 1-6),
Ezk (21 28-32), Zeph (2 8.9). Their murder of
Gedaliah (2 K 25 22-26; Jer 40 14) was a das-
tardly act. Tobiah the A. united with Sanballat to
oppose Neh (Neh 4), and their opposition to the
Jews did not cease with the establishment of the
latter in Judaea.

They joined the Syrians in their wars with the
Maccabees and were defeated by Judas (1 Mac 5


Their religion was a degrading and cruel super-
stition. Their chief god was Molech, or Moloch,
to whom they offered human sacrifices (1 K 11 7)
against which Israel was especially warned (Lev 20
2-5). This worship was common to other tribes for
we find it mentioned among the Phoenicians.


H. Porter
AMMONITESS, am-on-i’tes, a-mon’‘i-tes
(MBI, ‘ammonith): A woman of the Ammon-
ites, Naamah, the mother of Rehoboam (1 K 14


21.31; 2 Ch 12 13; 24 26).


AMNON, am’non (FATA, 7amnon, “faithful”;
cf FINAN, ’dmindn, 2 § 13 20, which is probably a
diminutive. Wellhausen [IJG, II, 24, n.2] resolves
PIN into "AX, ’immi, and J, nin, “my
mother is the serpent”; cf Nun): ‘

(1) The eldest son of David and Ahinoam, the
Jezreelites (cf 2 S 3 2). As the crown prince and
heir presumptive to the throne, he was intensely
hated by Absalom, who was, therefore, doubly
eager to revenge the outrage committed by Amnon
upon his sister Tamar (28 3 2; 13 1 ff; 1 Ch
3 1).

(2) A name in the genealogy of Judah (1 Ch
4 20).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


118


AMOK, 4’mok (p12, ‘amok, “deep’’): A chief
priest who came to Jerus with Zerubbabel (Neh
12 7) and the forefather of Eber, who was priest
in the days of Joiakim (Neh 12 20).


AMON, a’mon (7128, 'amén): A name identical
with that of the Egyp local deity of Thebes (No);
ef Jer 46 25. The foreign name given to a Heb
prince is remarkable, as is also the fact that it is
one of the two or three royal names of Judah not
compounded with the name of Jehovah. See
ManasseH. It seems to reflect the sentiment
which his fanatical father sought to make prevail
that Jeh had no longer any more claim to identi-
fication with the realm than had other deities.

(1) A king of Judah, son and successor of Ma-
nasseh; reigned two years and was assassinated
in his own palace by the officials of his household.
The story of his reign is told briefly in 2 K 21
19-26, and still more briefly, though in identical
terms, so far as they go, in 2 Ch 33 21-25. His
short reign was merely incidental in the history of
Judah; just long enough to reveal the traits and
tendencies which directly or indirectly led to his
death. It was merely a weaker continuation of the
régime of his idolatrous father, though without the
fanaticism which gave the father positive character,
and without the touch of piety which, if the Chron-
icler’s account is correct, tempered the father’s
later years.

If the assassination was the initial act of a revo-
lution, the latter was immediately suppressed by
“the people of the land,” who put to death the
conspirators and placed Amon’s eight-year-old
son Josiah on the throne. In the view of the
present writer the motive of the affair was prob-
ably connected with the perpetuity of the Davidic
dynasty, which, having survived so long according
to prophetic prediction (cf 2 8 7 16; Ps 89 36.37),
was an essential guarantee of Jeh’s favor. Ma-
nasseh’s foreign sympathies, however, had loosened
the hold of Jeh on the officials of his court; so that,
instead of being the loyal center of devotion to
Israel’s religious and national idea, the royal house-
hold was but a hotbed of worldly ambitions, and
all the more for Manasseh’s prosperous reign, so
long immune from any stroke of Divine judgment.
It is natural that, seeing the insignificance of
Amon’s administration, some ambitious clique,
imitating the policy that had frequently succeeded
in the Northern Kingdom, should strike for the
throne. They had reckoned, however, without
estimating the inbred Davidie loyalty of the body
of the people. It was a blow at one of their most
cherished tenets, committing the nation both
politically and religiously to utter uncertainty.
That this impulsive act of the people was in the
line of the purer religious movement which was ripen-
ing in Israel does not prove that the spiritually-
minded ‘remnant’ was minded to violence and
conspiracy; it merely shows what a stern and
sterling fiber of loyalty still existed, seasoned and
confirmed by trial, below the corrupting cults and
fashions of the ruling classes. In the tragedy of
Amon’s reign, in short, we get a glimpse of the
basis of sound principle that lay at the common
heart of Israel.

(2) A governor of Samaria (1 K 22 26); the one
to whom the prophet Micaiah was committed as
a prisoner by King Ahab, after the prophet had
disputed the predictions of the court prophets and
foretold the king’s death in battle.

(3) The head of the “children of Solomon’s serv-
ants” (Neh 7 59) who returned from captivity;
reckoned along with the Nethinim, or temple slaves.
Called also Ami (Ezr 2 57).

JoHN FranKkiin GENUNG


119


AMORITES, am’o-rits; Amorites ("YON , ’&mari,
always in the singular like the Bab Amurra from
which it is taken; ’Apoppato, Amorratot):

7 : :

Pos anonerRnion en

3. Sihon'’s Conquest

4. Disappearance of the Amorite Kingdom
5 Physical Characteristics of the Amorites

The name Amorite is used in the OT to denote
(1) the inhabitants of Pal generally, (2) the popu-
lation of the hills as opposed to the plain, and
(3) a specific people under a king of their own.
Thus (1) we hear of them on the west shore of the
Dead Sea (Gen 14 7), at Hebron (Gen 14 13),
and Shechem (Gen 48 22), in Gilead and Bashan
(Dt 3 10) and under Hermon (Dt 3 8; 4 48).
They are named instead of the Canaanites as the
inhabitants of Pal whom the Israelites were required
to exterminate (Gen 15 16; Dt 20 17; Jgs 6 10;
18714; 1K 21 26; 2 K 2111); the older
population of Judah is called Amorite in Josh 10
5.6, in conformity with which Ezk (16 3) states that
Jerus had an Amorite father; and the Gibeonites are
said to have been “of the remnant of the Amorites’’
(2S 21 2). On the other hand (2), in Nu 13 29
the Amorites are described as dwelling in the moun-
tains like the Hittites and Jebusites of Jerus, while
the Amalekites or Bedouins lived in the south and
the Canaanites on the seacoast and in the valley
of the Jordan. Lastly (3) we hear of Sihon, “‘king
of the Amorites,”’ who had conquered the northern
half of Moab (Nu 21 21-31; Dt 2 26-35).

Assyriological discovery has explained the varying
use of the name. The Heb form of it is a translit-

eration of the Bab Amurré, which was
1. Varying both sing.andpl. In the age of Abra-


Use of the ham the Amurru were the dominant
Name Ex- people in western Asia; bence Syria
plained and Pal were called by the Baby-


Jonians “the land of the Amorites.”

In the Assyr period this was replaced by “land of
the Hittites,” the Hittites in the Mosaic age having
made themselves masters of Syria and Canaan.
The use of the name “Amorite” in its general
sense belongs to the Bab period of oriental history.
The Amorite kingdom was of great antiquity.
About 2500 BC it embraced the larger part of
Mesopotamia and Syria, with its capi-


2. The tal probably at Harran, and a few
Amorite centuries later northern Babylonia
Kingdom was occupied by an ‘“‘Amorite” dy-


nasty of kings who traced their descent
from Samu or Sumu (the Biblical Shem), and made
Babylon their capital. To this dynasty belonged
Khammu-rabi, the Amraphel of Gen 14 1. In the
astrological documents of the period frequent
reference is made to “the king of the Amorites.”
This king of the Amorites was subject to Baby-
lonia in the age of the dynasty of Ur, two or three
centuries before the birth of Abraham. He claimed
suzerainty over a number of ‘“Amorite’’ kinglets,
among whom those of Khana on the Euphrates,
near the mouth of the Khabur, may be named, since
in the Abrahamic age one of them was called
Khammop-rapikh and another Isarlim or Israel.
A payment of a cadastral survey made at this time
by a Bab governor with the Can name of Urime-
lech is now in the Louvre. Numerous Amorites
were settled in Ur and other Bab cities, chiefly for the
purpose of trade. They seem to have enjoyed the
same rights and privileges as the native Baby-
lonians. Some of them were commercial travelers,
but we hear also of the heads of the great firms
making journeys to the Mediterranean coast.
In an inscription found near Diarbekir and dedi-
cated to Khammu-rabi by Ibirum (=Eber), the
governor of the district, the only title given to the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ammonitess
Amorites


Bab monarch is “‘king of the Amorites,” where in-
stead of Amurra@ the Sumerian Martu (Heb méreh)
is used. The great-grandson of Khammu-rabi still
calls himself “king of the widespread land of the
Amorites,” but two generations later Babylonia was
invaded by the Hittites, the Amorite dynasty came
to an end, and there was once more a “king of the
Amorites’’ who was not also king of Babylonia.


Heads of Amorites, akin to North Africans.


The Amorite kingdom continued to exist down
to the time of the Israelitish invasion of Pal, and
mention is made of it in the Egyp records as well
as in the cuneiform Am Tab, and the Hittite ar-
chives recently discovered at Boghaz-keui, ‘the site
of the Hittite capital in Cappadocia. The Egyp
conquest of Canaan by the kings of the XVITIIth
Dynasty had put an end to the effective govern-
ment of that country by the Amorite princes,
but their rule still extended eastward to the borders
of Babylonia, while its southern limits coincided
approximately with what was afterward the north-
ern frontier of Naphtali. The Amorite kings,
however, became, at all events in name, the vassals
of the Egyp Pharaoh. When the Egyp empire
began to break up, under the “heretic king” Amen-
hotep IV, at the end of the XVIIIth Dynasty
(1400 BC), the Amorite princes naturally turned
to their more powerful ncighbors in the north. One
of the letters in the Tell el-Amarna correspondence
is from the Pharaoh to his Amorite vassal Aziru
the son of Ebed-Asherah, accusing him of rebellion
and threatening him with punishment. Eventually
Azirn found it advisable to go over openly to the
Hittites, and pay the Hittite government an annual
tribute of 300 shekels of gold. From that time
forward the Amorite kingdom was a dependency
of the Hittite empire, which, on the strength of
this, claimed dominion over Pal as far as the Egyp
frontier.

The second successor of Aziru was Abi-Amurru
(or Abi-Hadad), whose successor bore, in addition
to a Sem name, the Mitannian name of Bente-
sinas. Bente-sinas was dethroned by the Hittite
King Muttallis and imprisoned in Cappadocia,
where he seems to have met the Hittite prince
Khattu-sil, who on the death of his brother Muttal-
lis seized the crown and restored Bente-sinas to
his kingdom. Bente-sinas married the daughter
of Khattn-sil, while his own daughter was wedded
to the son of his Hittite suzerain, and an agreement
was made that the succession to the Amorite throne
should be confined to her descendants. Two or
three generations later the Hittite empire was
destroyed by an invasion of “northern barbarians,”
the Phrygians, probably, of Gr history, who marched
southward, through Pal, against Egypt, carrying
with them “the king of the Amorites.”’ The in-
vaders, however, were defeated and_ practically
exterminated by Ramses III of the XXth Egyp
Dynasty (1200 BC). The Amorite king, captured
on this occasion by the Egyptians, was probably
the immediate predecessor of the Sihon of the OT.


Amos


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


120


Egyp influence in Canaan had finally ceased with
the invasion of Egypt by the Libyans and peoples
of the Aegean in the fifth year of
3. Sihon’s Meneptah, the successor of Ramses
Conquest II, at the time of the Israelitish Exo-
dus. Though the invaders were re-
pulsed, the Egyp garrisons had to be withdrawn
from the cities of southern Pal, where their place
was taken by the Philis who thus blocked the way
from Egypt to the north. The Amorites, in the
name of their distant Hittite suzerains, were ac-
cordingly able to overrun the old Egyp provinces
on the east side of the Jordan; the Amorite chief-
tain Og possessed himself of Bashan (Dt 3 8), and
Sihon, ‘king of the Amorites,” conquered the north-
ern part of Moab.

The conquest must have been recent at the time
of the Israelitish invasion, as the Amorite song of
triumph is quoted in Nu 21 27-29, and adapted
to the overthrow of Sihon himself by the Israelites.
‘Woe unto thee,’ it- reads, ‘O Moab; thou art
undone, O people of Chemosh! [Chemosh] hath
given thy sons who escaped [the battle] and thy
danghters into captivity to Sihon king of the
Amorites.’ The flame that had thus consumed
Heshbon, it is further declared, shall spread south-
ward through Moab, while Heshbon itself is rebuilt
and made the capital of the conqueror: ‘Come to
Heshbon, that the city of Sihon flike the city of
David, 2 8S 5 9] may be rebuilt and restored. For
the fire has spread from Heshbon, the flame from the
capital of Sihon, devouring as far as Moab [reading
‘adh with the LXX instead of ‘ar], and swallowing
up [reading bale‘ah with the LXX] the high places
of Arnon.” The Israelitish invasion, however, pre-
vented the expected conquest of southern Moab from
taking place.

After the fall of Sihon the Amorite kingdom dis-


appears. The Syrians of Zobah, of Hamath and
of Damascus take its place, while
4. Disap- with the rise of Assyria the “Amor-


pearance of ites” cease to be the representatives
the Amorite in contemporary lit. of the inhabitants
Kingdom of western Asia. At one time their
power had extended to the Bab
frontier, and Bente-sinas was summoned to Cap-
padocia by his Hittite overlord to answer a charge
made by the Bab ambassadors of his having raided
northern Babylonia. The Amorite king urged,
however, that the raid was merely an attempt to
recover a debt of 30 talents of silver.
In Nu 13 29 the Amorites are described as moun-
taineers, and in harmony with this, according to
Professor Petrie’s notes, the Egyp
6. Physical artists represent them with fair com-
Characteris- plexions, plac eyes and light hair. It
tics of the would, therefore, seem that they
Amorites belonged to the Libyan race of north-
em Africa rather than to the Sem
stock. In western Asia, however, they were mixed
with other racial elements derived from the sub-
ject populations, and as they spoke a Sem language
one of the most important of these elements would
have been the Semites. In its general sense, more-
over, the name “Amorite’”’ included in the Bab
period all the settled and civilized peoples west of
the Euphrates to whatever race they might belong.


Lirerature.—Hugo Winckler, Mitteilungen der deut-
schen Orient-Gesellschaft (1907), No. 35, Berlin; Sayce,
The Races of the OT, Religious Tract Sec., 1890.


A. H. Sayce


AMOS, 4’mos (O70, ‘dmés, “burdensome” or


_ “burden-bearer’; ’Apés, Amés):
I. Tnx Proreet

1. Name

2. Native Place

3. Personal History

4. His Preparation


34 Knowledge of God
(2) Acquaintance with History of His People
‘3 Personal Travel
(4) Scenery of His Home
5. His Mission
6. Date
II. Tue Boox |
1. Its Divisions
2. Its Ontlook
3. Value of the Book ey
(1) As a Picture of the Social Condition
3 As Picture of the Religious Condition
(3) Testimony to History
(4) Testimony to the Law
(a) The Ritual |.
(0) Ethical Teaching
(5) The Prophetic Order
(6) The Prophetic Religion


LivERATURE


IL. The Prophet.—Amos is the prophet whose
book stands third among the “Twelve” in the
Hebrew canon. No other person
bearing the same name is mentioned
in the OT, the name of the father of
the prophet Isaiah being written differently (dmg).
There is an Amos mentioned in the genealogical
series Lk 3 25, but he is otherwise unknown, and
we do not know how his name would have been
written in Hebrew. Of the signification of the
prophet’s name all that can be said is that a verb
with the same stem letters, in the sense of to load or
to carry a load, is not uncommon in the language.

Tekoa, the native place of Amos, was situated
at a distance of 5 miles S. from Bethlehem, from
which it is visible, and 10 miles from
Jerusalem, on a hill 2,700 ft. high,
overlooking the wilderness of Judah.
It was made a “city for defence” by
Rehoboam (2 Ch 11 6), and may have in fact
received its name from its remote and exposed
position; for the stem of which the word is a deriva-
tive is of frequent occurrence in the sense of sound-
ing an alarm with the trumpet: e.g. ‘‘Blow the
trumpet in Tekoa, and set up a sign of fire in
Beth-haccerem” (Jer 6 1 AV). The same word is
also used to signify the setting up of a tent by
striking in the tent-pegs; and Jerome states that
there was no village beyond Tekoa in his time.
The name has survived, and the neighborhood is
at the present day the pasture-ground for large
flocks of sheep and goats. From the high ground
on which the modern village stands one looks down
on the bare undulating hills of one of the bleakest
districts of Palestine, ‘the waste howling wilder-
ness,” which must have suggested some of the
startling imagery of the prophet’s addresses. The
place may have had—as is not seldom the case with
towns or villages—a reputation for a special quality
of its inhabitants; for it was from Tekoa that
Joab fetched the ‘wise woman” who by a feigned
story effected the reconciliation of David with his
banished son Absalom (2 § 14). There are traces
in the Book of Am of a shrewdness and mother-wit
which are not so conspicuous in other prophetical
books. :

The particulars of a personal kind which are
noted in the book are few but suggestive. Amos

was not a prophet or the son of a
3. Personal prophet, he tells us (7 14), ie. he did
History not belong to the professional class

which frequented the so-called schools
of the prophets. He was ‘‘among the herdmen of
Tekoa” (1 1), the word here used being found
only once in another place (2 K 3 4) and applied
to Mesha, king of Moab. It seems to refer to a
special breed of sheep, somewhat ungainly in ap-
pearance but producing an abundant fleece. In
7 14 the word rendered “herdman” is different, and
denotes an owner of cattle, though some, from the
LXX rendering, think that the word should be
the same as in 11. He was also “a dresser of


A: Name


2. Native
Place


121


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Amos


sycomore-trees” (7 14). The word rendered ‘‘dress-
er’. (RV) or “gatherer” (AV) occurs only here,
and from the rendering of the LXX (kvigwr) it
is conjectured that there is reference to a squeez-
ing or nipping of the sycamore fig to make it more
palatable or to accelerate its ripening, though such
a usage is not known in Pal at the present day.

Nothing is said as to any special preparation of

the prophet for his work: ‘The Lord took me from

following the flock, and the Lord said
4, His unto me, Go, prophesy unto my people
Preparation Israel” (7 15 ERV). In these words

he puts himself in line with all the
prophets who, in various modes of expression,
claim a direct revelation from God. But the men-
tion of the prophetic call in association with the
mention of his worldly calling is significant. There
was no period interposed between the one and the
other, no cessation of husbandry to prepare for the
work of prophesying. The husbandman was pre-
pared for this task, and when God’s time came he
took it up. What was that preparation? Even if
we suppose that the call was a momentary event, the
man must have been ready to receive it, equipped
for its performance. And, looking at the way in
which he accomplished it, as exhibited in his book,
we can see that there was a preparation, both
internal and external, of a very thorough and effect-
ive character.

(1) Knowledge of God.—First of all, he has no
doubt or uncertainty as to the character of the God
in whose name he is called to speak. The God of
Amos is one whose sway is boundless (9 2 ff), whose
power is infinite (8 9f), not only controlling the
forces of Nature (4; 6 8f) but guiding the move-
ments and destinies of nations (6 1 ff.14; 9 7 ff).
Moreover, He is righteous in all His ways, dealing
with nations on moral principles (1 3 ff; 2 1 ff);
and, though particularly favorable to Israel, yet
making that very choice of them as a people a
ground for visiting them with sterner retribution for
their sins (3 2). In common with all the prophets,
Amos gives no explanation of how he came to know
God and to form this conception of His character.
It was not by searching that they found out God.
It is assumed that God is and that He is such a
Being; and this knowledge, as it could come only
from God, is regarded as undisputed and undis-
putable. The call to speak in God’s name may
have come suddenly, but the prophet’s conception
of the character of the God who called him is no
new or sudden revelation but a firm and well-
established conviction.

(2) Acquaintance with history of his people.—
Then his book shows not only that he was well
acquainted with the history and traditions of his
nation, which he takes for granted as well known
to his hearers, but that he had reflected upon these
things and realized their significance. We infer that
he had breathed an atmosphere of religion, as there
is nothing to indicate that, in his acquaintance
with the religious facts of his nation, he differed
from those among whom he dwelt, although the
call to go forth and enforce them came to him in a
special way.

(3) Personal travel—It has been conjectured
that Amos had acquired by ‘personal travel the
accurate acquaintance which he shows in his graphic
delineations of contemporary life and conditions;
and it may have been the case that, as a wool-
merchant or flock-master, he had visited the towns
mentioned and frequented the various markets to
which the people were attracted.

(4) Scenery of his home.—Nor must we overlook
another factor in his preparation: the scenery in
which he had his home and the occupations of his
daily life. The landscape was one to make a


6 8; 9 5f).


solemn impression on a reflective mind: the wide-
spreading desert, the shimmering waters of the
Dead Sea, the high wall of the distant hills of Moab
over all which were thrown the varying light and
shade. The silent life of the desert, as with such
scenes ever before him, he tended his flock or
defended them from the ravages of wild beasts,
would to one whose thoughts were full of God
nourish that exalted view of the Divine Majesty
which we find in his book, and furnish the imagery
in which his thoughts are set (1 2; 3 4f; 4 18;
As he is taken from following the
flock, he comes before us using the language and
figures of his daily life (8 12), but there runs through
all the note of one who has seen God’s working in
all Nature and His presence in every phenomenon.
Rustic he may be, but there is no rudeness or
rusticity in his style, which is one of natural and
impassioned eloquence, ordered and regular as
coming from a mind which was responsive to the
orderly working of God in Nature around him.
There is an aroma of the free air of the desert about
his words; but the prophet lives in an ampler ether
and breathes a purer air; all things in Nature and
on the field of history are seen in a Divine light and
measured by a Divine standard.

Thus prepared in the solitudes of the extreme
south of Judah, he was called to go and prophesy

unto the people of Israel, anal appears
6. His at Bethel the capital of the Northern
Mission Kingdom. It may be that, in the
prosecution of his worldly calling, he
had seen and been impressed by the conditions of
life and religion in those parts. No reason is given
for his mission to the northern capital, but the
reason is not far to seek. It is the manner of the
prophets to appear where they are most needed;
and the Northern Kingdom about that time had
come victorious out of war, and had reached its
culmination of wealth and power, with the attend-
ant results of luxury and excess, while the Southern
Kingdom had been enjoying a period of outward
tranquillity and domestic content. :

The date of the prophet Amos can approximately
be fixed from the statement in the first ver that his
.activity fell “in the days of Uazziah
king of Judah, and in the days of
Jeroboam the son of Joash king of
Israel, two years before the earthquake.” Both
these monarchs had long reigns, that of Uzziah
extending from 779 to 740 BC and that of Jero-
boam II from 783 to 743 BC. If we look at the
years when they were concurrently reigning, and
bear in mind that, toward the end of Uzziah’s reign,
Jotham acted as co-regent, we may safely place
the date of Amos at about the year 760 BC. Ina
country in which earthquakes are not uncommon
the one here mentioned must have been of unusual
severity, for the memory of it was long preserved
(Zec 14 5). How long he exercised his ministry
we are not told. In all probability the book is the
deposit of a series of addresses delivered from time
to time till his plain speaking drew upon him the
resentment of the authorities, and he was ordered
to leave the country (Am 7 10ff). We can only
conjecture that, some time afterward, he withdrew
to his native place and put down in writing a con-
densed record of the discourses he had delivered.

IL The Book.—We can distinguish with more
than ordinary certainty the outlines of the individual
addresses, and the arrangement of the book is
clear and simple. The text, also, has been on the
whole faithfully preserved; and though in a few
places critics profess to find the traces of later
editorial hands, these conclusions rest mainly on
gubjective grounds, and will be estimated differ-
ently by different minds.


6. Date


Amos


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


122


_The book falls naturally into three parts, recog-
nizable by certain recurring formulas and gencral
literary features.

1. Its (1) The first section, which is clearly
Divisions recognizable, embraces chs 1 and 2.
Here, after the title and designation
of the prophet in ver 1, there is a solemn procla-
mation of Divine authority for the prophet’s words:
“Jeb will roar from Zion, and utter his voice
from Jerusalem” (ver 2). This is notable in one
who throughout the book recognizes God’s power
as world-wide and His operation as extensive as
creation; and it should be a caution in view, on
the one hand, of the assertion that the temple at
Jerusalem was not more sacred than any of the
numerous “high places” throughout the land, and,
on the other hand, the superficial manner in which
some writers speak of the Heb notion of a Deity
whose dwelling-place was restricted to one locality
beyond which His influence was not felt. For this
God, who has His dwelling-place in Zion, now
through the mouth of the prophet denounces in
succession the surrounding nations, and this mainly
not for offences committed against the chosen people
but for moral offences against one another and for
breaches of a law binding on humanity. It will
be observed that the nations denounced are not
named in geographical order, and the prophet
exhibits remarkable rhetorical skill in the order of
selection. The interest and sympathy of the
hearers is secured by the fixing of the attention on
the enormities of guilt in their neighbors, and curios-
ity is kept awake by the uncertainty as to where
the next stroke of the prophetic whip will fall.
Beginning with the more distant and alien peoples
of Damascus, Gaza and Tyre, he wheels round to
the nearer and kindred peoples of Edom, Ammon
and Moab, till he rests for a moment on the brother
tribe of Judah, and thus, having relentlessly drawn
the net around Israel by the enumeration of seven
peoples, he swoops down upon the Northern King-
dom to which his message is to be particularly
addressed.

(2) The second section embraces chs 3 to 6,
and consists apparently of a series of discourses,
each introduced by the formula: “Hear this
word” (3 1; 41; 51), and another introduced
by a comprehensive: “Woe to them that are at
ease in Zion, and to them that are secure in the
mountain of Samaria” (6 1). The divisions here
are not so clearly marked. It will be observed
e.g. that there is another ‘“Woe” at 6 18; and in
ch 4, though the address at the outset is directed
to the luxurious women of Samaria, from ver 4
onward the words have a wider reference. Accord-
ingly some would divide this section into a larger
number of subsections; and some, indeed, have
described the whole book as a collection of il-
arranged fragments. But, while it is not necessary
to suppose that the written book is an exact repro-
duction of the spoken addresses, and while the
division into chs has no authority, yet we must
allow for some latitude in the details which an
impassioned speaker would introduce into his dis-
courses, and for transitions and connections of
thought which may not be apparent on the surface.

(3) The third section has some well-marked char-
acteristics, although it is even less uniform than the
preceding. The outstanding feature is the phrase,
“Thus the Lord Jeh showed me” (7 1.4.7; 8 1)
varied at 9 1 by the words, “I saw the Lord stand-
ing beside the altar.’’ We have thus a series of
“visions” bearing upon, and interpreted as apply-
ing to, the condition of Israel. It is in the course
of one of these, when the prophet comes to the
words, “I will rise against the house of Jeroboam
with the sword” (7 9) that the interposition of


Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, is recorded, with the
prophet’s noble reply as to his Divine call, and his
rebuke and denunciation of the priest, ending with
a prophetic announcement of the downfall and
captivity of Israel (7 14-17).

If the discourses are put down in chronological
order of their delivery, it would appear that Amos
did not immediately take his departure,
since more visions follow this episode;
and there is a special appropriateness
in the intervention of Amaziah just
at the point where it is recorded. As to the closing
passage of this section (9 11-15) which gives a
bright prospect of the future, there is a class. of
critics who are inclined to reject it just on this
account as inconsistent with the severe denunciatory
tone of the rest of the book. It is quite possible,
however, that the prophet himself (and no succeed-
ing later editor) may have added the passage when
he came to write down his addresses. There is no
reason to believe that any of the prophets—harsh
though their words were—believed that the God
of Israel would make a full end of His people in
captivity: on the contrary, their assurance of
God’s faithfulness to His promise, and the deep-
seated conviction that right would ultimately pre-
vail, lead us to expect even in the sternest or earliest
of the prophets the hope of a future glory—that
hope which grew brighter and brighter as the na-
tion’s outlook grew darker, and attained intensity
and clearness in the Messianic hope which sus-
tained them in the darkest days of exile. It is
difficult to believe that any of the prophets were
prophets of despair, or to conceive how they could
have prophesied at all unless they had a firm faith
in the ultimate triumph of the good.

The Book of Am is particularly valuable from
the fact that he is certainly one of the earliest

prophets whose writings have come
3. Value down to us. It is, like the Book of
of the Book Hosea which belongs to about the

same time, a contemporaneous docu-
ment of a period of great significance in the history
of Israel; and not only gives graphic sketches or
illuminating hints of the life and religious condition
of the people, but furnishes a trustworthy standard
for estimating the value of some other books whose
dates are not so precisely determined, a definite
starting-point for tracing the course of Israel’s
history.

(1) Asa picture of the social condition.—The book
is valuable as embodying a contemporary picture
of society and the condition of religion. From the
abuses which the prophet denounces and the life-
like sketches he draws of the scenes amid which he
moved, taken along with what we know otherwise
of the historical movements of the period, we are
able to form a fairly adequate estimate of the con-
dition of the age and the country. During the
reign of Jeroboam II the kingdom of Israel, after
having been greatly reduced during preceding
reigns, rose to a degree of extent and influence
unexampled since the days of Solomon (2 K 14 25);
and we are not astonished to read in the Book of Am
the haughty words which he puts into the mouth
of the people of his time when they spoke of Israel
as the “‘chief of the nations,” a first-class power in
modern language, and boasted of the “horns” by
which they had attained that eminence (6 1.13).
But success in war, if it encouraged this boastful
spirit, brought also inevitable evils in its train.
Victory, as we know from the Assyr monuments,
meant plunder; for king after king recounts how
much spoil he had taken, how many prisoners he had
carried away; and we must assume that wars
among smaller states would be conducted on the
same methods. In such wars, success meant an


2. Its
Outlook


123


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Amos


extension of territory and increase of wealth, while
defeat entailed the reverse. But it is to be remem-
bered that, in an agricultural country and in a
society constituted as that of Israel was, the result
of war to one class of the population was to a great
extent disastrous, whatever was the issue, and
success, when it was achieved, brought evils in its
train which even aggravated their condition. The
peasant, required to take up arms for offence or
defence, was taken away from the labors of the
field which, in the best event, were for a time neg-
lected, and, in the worst, were wasted and rendered
unproductive. And then, when victory was se-
cured, the spoils were liable to fall into the hands
of the nobles and leaders, those “called with a
name” (6 1), while the peasant returned to his
wasted or neglected fields without much substantial
resource with which to begin life again. The wealth
secured by the men of strong hand led to the in-
crease of luxury in its possessors, and became
actually the means of still further adding to the
embarrassment of the poor, who were dependent
on the rich for the means of earning their livelihood.
The situation would be aggravated under a feeble
or corrupt government, such as was certainly that
of Jeroboam’s successors. The condition prevails
in modern eastern countries, even under com-
paratively wise and just administration; and that
it was the state of matters prevailing in the time of
Amos is abundantly clear from his book. The
opening denunciation of Israel for oppression of the
poor and for earth-hunger (2 6.7) is reéchoed and
amplified in the succeeding chs (8 9.10; 41; 5
11.12; 8 4-6); and the luxury of the rich, who


battened on the misfortune of their poorer brethren,


is castigated in biting irony in such passages as
6 3-6. Specially noticeable in this connection
is the contemptuous reference to the luxurious
women, the “kine of Bashan’ (4 1), whose ex-
travagances are maintained by the oppression of
the poor. The situation, in short, was one that
has found striking parallels in modern despotic
countries in the East, where the people are divided
into two classes, the powerful rich, rich because
powerful and powerful because rich, and the poor
oppressed, men who have no helper, no “back’’ in
the common eastern phrase, dependent on the rich
and influential and tending to greater poverty under
greedy patrons. s

(2) As a picture of the religious condition —In
such a social atmosphere, which poisoned the cle-
mentary virtues, religion of a vital kind could
not flourish; and there are plain indications in the
words of Amos of the low condition to which it had
sunk. There was, indeed, as we gather from his
addresses, no lack of outward attention to the forms
of worship; but these forms were of so corrupted
a character and associated with so much practical
godlessness and even immorality, that instead of
raising the national character it tended to its greater
degradation. The people prided themselves in
what they regarded the worship of the national
God, thinking that so long as they honored Him
with costly offerings and a gorgeous ritual, they
were pleasing Him and secure in His protection.
Bethel, Dan, Gilgal, Beersheba, and we know not
how many other places were resorted_to in pil-
grimage by crowds of worshippers. With all the
accompaniments of ceremonious ritual which the
newly found wealth put in their power, with offer-
ings more than the legally prescribed or customary
(4 4.5) the service of these sanctuaries was main-
tained; but even these offerings were made at the
expense of the poor (6 11), the prevailing luxury
forced its way even to the precincts of the altars
(2 8), and justice and mercy were conspicuously
absent from the religious life. The people seemed


to have settled down to a complacent optimism,
nourished no doubt by national prosperity, and,
though there had not been wanting reminders of
the sovereignty of a righteous God, in convulsions
of Nature—drought, famine, pestilence and earth-
quake (4 6-11)—these had been of no avail to
awaken the sleeping conscience. They put the
evil day far from them (6 3), for Jeh was their
national God and ‘the day of the Lord,” the good
time coming (6 18), when God would come to their
help, was more in their mind than the imperative
duty of returning to Him (4 6.8, etc).

(8) Testimony to history~—The book is valuable
for the confirmation it gives of the historical state-
ments of other books, particularly for the refer-
ences it contains to the earlier history contained
in the Pentateuch. And bere we must distinguish
between references to, or quotations from, books,
and statements or hints or indications of historical
events which may or may not have been written
in books or accessible to the prophet and his hear-
ers. Opinions differ as to the date of composition
of the books which record the earlier history, and
the oldest Biblical writers are not in the habit of
saying from what sources they drew their informa-
tion or whether they are quoting from books. We
can hardly believe that in the time of Amos copies
of existing books or writings would be in the hands
of the mass of the people, even if the power to
read them was general. In such circumstances, if
we find a prophet like Amos in the compass of a
small book referrmg to outstanding events and
stages of the past history as matters known to all
his hearers and unquestionable, our confidence in
the veracity of the books in which these facts are
recorded is greatly increased, and it becomes a
matter of comparatively less importance at what
date these books were composed. Now it is re-
markable how many allusions, more or less precise,
to antecedent history are found in the compass of
this small book; and the significance of them lies
not in the actual number of references, but in the
kind of reference and the implications involved in
the individual references. That is to say, each
reference is not to be taken as an isolated testimony
to some single event in question, but involves a
great deal more than is expressed, and is intelligible
only when other facts or incidents are taken into
consideration. Thus e.g. the reference to the over-
throw of Sodom and Gomorrah (4 11) is only
intelligible on the supposition that the story of that
catastrophe was a matter of common knowledge;
and it would be a carping criticism to argue that
the destruction of other cities of the plain at the
same time and the whole story of Lot were unknown
in the days of Amos because they are not men-
tioned here in detail. So, when we have in one
passage a reference to the house of Isaac (7 16),
in another to the house of Jacob (8 18), in another
to the house of Joseph (6 6) and in another to the
enmity between Jacob and Esau (1 11), we cannot
take these as detached notices, but must supply
the links which the prophet’s words would suggest
to his hearers. In other words, such slight notices,
just because they are incidental and brief, imply a
familiarity with a ¢onnected patriarchal history
such as is found in the Book of Gen. Again, the
prophet’s references to the “whole family” of the
“children of Israel” whom the Lord “brought up
out of the land of Egypt” (8 1), to the Divine
leading of the people “forty years in the wilderness,
to possess the land of the Amorite” (2 10) are not
odds and ends of popular story but links in a chain
of national history. It seems to be on the strength
of these and similar references in the books of Am
and Hos, whose dates are known, that. critics have
agreed to fix the date of the earliest historical por-


Amos
Amram


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


124


tions of the Pent as. they understand them, viz.
the parts designated as J and E, in the 8th and 9th
cents. BC, i.e. at or shortly before the time of these
prophets. It may be left to the unbiased judgment
of the reader to say whether the references look
like references to a newly composed document, or
whether it is not more probable that, in an age
when written documents were necessarily few and
not accessible to the multitude, these references are
appeals to things well fixed in the national memory,
a memory extending back to the things themselves.
Or, if the prophet’s words are to be taken as suffi-
cient proof of the existence of written sources, the fact
that the matters are assumed as well known would
rather encourage the conclusion that the written
sources in question go hack to a much earlier period,
since the matters contained in them had by this
time become matters of universal knowledge.

(4) Testimony to the Law—And what about
those other elements of the Pent of a legal and ritual
character which bulk so prominently in those books?
The question whether the Book of Am indicates an
acquaintance with these or not is important
because it is to a great extent on the silence of
prophetical and historical writers that critics of a
certain school relegate these legalistic portions of
the Pent to a late date. Now at the outset it is
obvious to ask what we have a reasonable right to
expect. We have to bear in mind what was the
condition of the people whom Amos addressed,
and the purpose and aim of his mission to the
Northern Kingdom. It is to be remembered
that, as we are told in the Book of K (1 K 12
25 ff), Jeroboam I deliberately sought to make a
breach between the worship of Jerusalem and that,
of his own kingdom, while persuading his people
that the worship of Jeh was being maintained. The
schism occurred some 170 years before the time of
Amos and it is not probable that the worship and
ritual of the Northern Kingdom tended in that
interval to greater purity or greater conformity
to what had been the authoritative practice of the
undivided kingdom at the temple of Jerus. When,
therefore, Amos, in face of the corrupt worship
combined with elaborate ritual which prevailed
around him, declares that God hates and despises
their feasts and takes no delight in their solemn
assemblies (6 21), we are not justified in pressing
his words, as is sometimes done, into a sweeping
condemnation of all ritual. On the contrary,
seeing that, in the very same connection (6 22),
he specifies hurnt offerings and meal offerings and
peace offerings, and, in another passage (4 4.5),
daily sacrifices and tithes, sacrifices of thanksgiving
and free-will offerings, it is natural to infer that
by these terms which are familiar in the Pent he
is referring to those statutory observances which
were part of the national worship of united Israel,
but had been overlaid with corruption and become
destitute of spiritual value as practised in the
Northern Kingdom. So we may take his allu-
sions to the new moon and the Sabbath (8 5) as
seasons of special sacredness and universally sanc-
tioned. Having condemned in such scornful and
sweeping terms the worship that he saw going on
around him, what was Amos to gain by entering into
minute ritual prescriptions or defining the precise
duties and perquisites of priests and Levites; and
having condemned the pilgrimages to the shrines
of Bethel, Gilgal, Beersheba, Samaria and .Dan
(4 4; 5 5; 8 14), what was he to gain by quoting
the law of Dent as to a central sanctuary? And
had one of his hearers, like the woman of Samaria
of a later day, attempted to draw him into a dis-
cussion of the relative merits of the two temples,
we can conceive him answering in the spirit of
the great Teacher: ‘Ye worship ye know not what:


we know what we worship” (Jn 4 22 AV). A regu-
lation of the form was of no avail while the whole
spirit of the ohservance was corrupt; the soul of
religion was dead, and the prophet had a higher
duty than to dress out the carcase.

At the root of the corruption of the religion lay
a rottenness of moral sense; and from beginning to
end Amos insists on the necessity of a pure and
righteous life. In this connection his appeals are
in striking agreement with the specially ethical
demands of the law hooks, and in phraseology so
much resemble them as to warrant the conclusion
that the requirements of the law on these subjects
were known and acknowledged. Thus his denun-
ciations of those who oppress the poor (2 7; 41;
8 4) are quite in the spirit and style of Ex 22 21.22;
23 9; his references to the perversion of justice
and taking bribes (2 6; 5 7.10 ff; 6 12) are rhetor-
ical enforeements of the prohibitions of the law
in Ex 23 6-8; when he reproves those that “lay
themselves down beside every altar upon clothes
taken in pledge” (2 8) we hear an echo of the
command: “If thou at all take thy neighbor’s
garment to pledge, thou shalt restore it unto him
before the sun goeth down” (Ex 22 26); and
when he denounces those making “the ephah small,
and the shekel great, and dealing falsely with bal-
ances of deceit’? (8 5) his words are in close agree-
ment with the law, “Ye shall do no unrighteousness
in judgment, in mete-yard, in weights, or in measure.
Just balances,, just weight, a just ephah, and a just
hin, shall ye have” (Lev 19 35.36 AV).

Ethical teaching. As a preacher of righteous-
ness, Amos affirms and insists upon those ethical
parts of the law which are its vital elements, and
which lie at the foundation of all prophecy; and
it is remarkable how even in phraseology he agrees
with the most ethical book of the Pent, Dt. He
does not, indeed, like his contemporary Hosea, dwell
on the love of God as Dt does; but, of sterner
mould, in almost the very words of Dt, emphasizes
the keeping of God’s commandments, and denounces
those who despise the law (cf 2 4 with Dt 17 19).
Among verbal coincidences have been noticed the
combinations “oppress” and “‘crush” (4 1; Dt 28
33), “blasting” and ‘‘mildew” (4 9; Dt 28 22), and
“gall” and ‘wormwood” (6 12;° Dt 29 18). Cf
also 9 8 with Dt 6 15, and note the predilection
for the same word to “destroy” common to both
books (cf 2 9 with Dt 2 22). In view of allof which
it seems an extraordinary statement to make that
“the silence of Amos with reference to the cen-
tralization of worship, on which Dt is so explicit,
alone seems sufficient to outweigh any linguistic
similarity that can be discovered” (H. G. Mitchell,
Amos, an Essay in Exegesis, 185).

(5) The prophetic order—As Amos is without
doubt one of the earliest writing prophets, his
book is invaluable as an example of what prophecy
was in ancient Israel. And one thing cannot fail
to impress the reader at the very outset: viz. that
he makes no claim to be the first or among the first
of the line, or that he is exercising some new and
hitherto unheard-of function. He begins by boldly
speaking in God’s name, assuming that even the
people of the Northern Kingdom were familiar
with that kind of address. Nay, he goes farther
and states in unequivocal terms that “the Lord
God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto
his servants the prophets” (8 7 AV). We need not
search farther for a definition of the prophet as
understood by him and other OT writers: the
prophet is one to whom God reveals His will, and
who comes forward to declare that will and pur-
pose to man. A great deal has been made of the
words of Amaziah the priest of Bethel (7 12), as
if they proved that the prophet in those times was


125


regarded as a wandering rhetorician, earning his
bread by reciting his speeches; and it has been
inferred from the words of Amos himself that the
prophets of his day were so disreputable a class
that he disdained to be named along with them
(7 14). But all this is fanciful. Even if we admit
that there were men calling themselves prophets
who prophesied for hire (Mic 3 5.11), it cannot be
assumed that the expression here to “eat bread”
has that meaning; for in other passages it seems
simply to signify to lead a quiet or ordinary life,
to go about one’s daily business (see Ex 24 11;
Jer 22 15). In any case we are not to take the
estimate of a man hke Amaziah or a godless popu-
lace in preference to the conception of Amos himself
and his account of his call. It was not by man or
by any college of prophets but by Jeh Himself
that he was appointed, and by whatever name he
might be called, the summons was “Go, prophesy
unto my people Israel’ (7 15). There is no trace
here of the “prophets becoming conscious of a dis-
tinction between themselves and the professional
nbhi’im, who were apt simply to echo the patriotic
and nationalistic sentiments of the people, and in
reality differed but little from the soothsayers and
diviners of Sem heathenism” (Ottley, The Religion
of Israel, 90). Whoever the “professional n¢bhi’tm”
may have been in his day, or whatever he thought
of them if they existed, Amos tells us nothing; but
he ranges himself with men to whom Jeh has
spoken in truth (3 7.8), and indicates that there
had been a succession of such men (2 11), faithful
amid the prevailing corruption though tempted to
be unfaithful (2 12); in short he gives us to under-
stand that the “prophetic order” goes back to a
period long before his day and has its roots in the
true and original religion of Israel.

(6) The prophetic religion—Finally, from the
Book of Am we may learn what the prophetic
religion was. Here again there is no indication
of rudimentary crudeness of conception, or of pain-
ful struggling upward from the plane of naturalism
or belief in a merely tribal God. The God in whose
name Amos speaks has control over all the forces
of Nature (4 6ff; 5 8.9), rules the destinies of
nations (6 2.14; 9 2-6), searches the thoughts of
the heart (4 13), is inflexible in righteousness and
deals with nations and with men on equal justice
(1 and 2; 9 7), and is most severe to the people
who have received the highest privileges (3 2).
And this is the God by whose name his hearers call
themselves, whose claims they cannot deny, whose
dealings with them from old time are well known
and acknowledged (2 11), whose laws they have
broken (2 4; 3 10) and for whose just judgment
they are warned to prepare (4 12). All this the
prophet enforces faithfully and sternly; not a voice
is raised in the circle of his hearers to controvert
his words; all that, Amaziah the priest can do is to
urge the prophet to abstain from unwelcome words
in Bethel, because it is the king’s sanctuary and a
royal house; the only inference is that the people
felt the truth and justice of the prophet’s words.
The “prophetic religion” does not begin with Amos.

Lireraturr.—W._R. Harper, ‘‘Amos and Hosea,”
in the ICC; S. R. Driver, ‘Joel and Amos” in Cam-
bridge Bible for Schools and Colleges; H. G. Mitchell,
Amos, an Essay in Exegesis (Boston); A. B. Davidson,
two arts. in Expos, 3d ser, V, VI (1887); W. R. Smith,
The Prophets of Israel; G. A, Smith, “The Book of the
Twelve Prophets,” in Expositor's Bible; J. J. P. Vale-
ton, Amos und Hosea (1894); C. von Orelli, Die zwolf
kleinen Propheten, 3. Aufl. (1908) and ET; Nowack, ‘‘ Die
kleinen Propheten,” in Hand-Commentar zum AT; Marti,
“Das Dodekapropheton erklért,’’ in Kurzer Hand-Com-


menae sme Te Jas. RopERTSON


AMOS, 4’mos (Apés, Amés): An ancestor of
Jesus in Lk’s genealogy, the eighth before Joseph,
the husband of Mary (Lk 3 25).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Amos
Amram


AMOZ, 4'moz (P7108, mde, ‘‘strong”): The
father of Isa the prophet (2 K 19 2.20; 20 1;
2 Ch 26 22; 32 20.32; Isa 1 1; 2 1; 13 1; 20 2;
37 2.21; 38 1).


AMPHIPOLIS, am-fip’o-lis (Aptos, Am-
phipolis): A town in Macedonia, situated on the
eastern bank of the Strymon (mod. Struma or
Karasu) some three miles from its mouth, near the
point where it flows out of Lake Prasias or Cer-
cinitis. It lay on a terraced hill, protected on the
N., W. and 8. by the river, on the E. by a wall
(Thuc. iv.102), while its harbor-town of Eion
lay on the coast close to the river’s mouth. The
name is derived either from its being nearly sur-
rounded by the stream or from its being conspicuous
on every side, a fact to which Thucydides draws
attention (l.c.). It was at first called Hnnea Hodoi,
Nine Ways, a name which suggests its importance
both strategically and commercially. It guarded
the main route from Thrace into Macedonia and
later became an important station on the Via
Egnatia, the great Rom road from Dyrrbachium
on the Adriatic to the Hebrus (Maritza), and it
was the center of a fertile district producing wine,
oil, figs and timber in abundance and enriched by
gold and silver mines and considerable manu-
factures, especially of woolen stuffs. In 497 BC
Aristagoras, ex-despot of Miletus, tried to settle
there, and a second vain attempt was made in 465-
464 by the Athenians, who succeeded in founding
a colony there in 437 under the leadership of Hag-
non. The population, however, was too mixed
to allow of strong Athenian sympathies, and in
424 the town fell away to the Spartan leader Brasi-
das and defied all the subsequent attempts of the
Athenians to recover it. It passed under the pro-
tectorate of Perdiccas and Philip of Macedon, and
the latter finally made himself master of it in 358.
On the Rom partition of Macedonia after the battle
of Pydna (168 BC) Amphipolis was made a free
city and capital of Macedonia Prima. Paul and
Silas passed through it on their way from Philippi
to Thessalonica, but the narrative seems to preclude
a long stay (Acts 171). The place was called
Popolia in the Middle Ages, while in modern times
the village of Neochori (Turkish, Yenikeut) marks the
site (Leake, Northern Greece, III, 181 fi; Cousinéry,
Macédoine, I, 100 ff, 122 ff; Heuzey et Daumet,
Mission archéol. de Macédoine, 165 ff).

Magcus N. Top

AMPLIAS, am’pli-as (TR 'Aparkuds, Amplids).
AV form: a contraction of Amriiarus (thus RV;
q-v.).


AMPLIATUS, am-pli-a’tus (Aptrdtdros, N apr,
Amplidtos; ’Apwdtas, DELP, RV form; AV Am-
plias): The name of a member of the Christian
community at Rome, to whom Paul sent greetings
(Rom 16 8). He is designated “my beloved in the
Lord.” It is a common name and is found in
inscriptions connected with the imperial household.
The name is found twice in the cemetery of Domi-
tilla. The earlier inscription is over a cell which
belongs to the end of the Ist or the beginning of the
2d cent. The bearer of this name was probably
a member of her household and conspicuous in the
early Christian church in Rome.


AMRAM, am’‘ram (O79, ‘amram,
exalted’):

(1) Father of Aaron, Moses and Miriam (Ex 6
20; Nu 26 59; 1 Ch 6 3; 23 13); and a son of
Kohath, the son of Levi (Ex 6 18; Nu 3 19, etc).
It is not certain that he was literally the son of
Kohath, but rather his descendant, since_ there
were ten generations from Joseph to Joshua


“people


Amramites
Amulet


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


126


(1 Ch 7 20-27), while only four are actually men-
tioned from Levi to Moses for the corresponding
period. Moreover the Kohathites at the time of
the Exodus numbered 8,600 (Nu 3 28), which
would therefore have been an impossibility if only
two generations had lived. It seems best to regard
Amram as a descendant of Kohath, and his wife
Jochebed as a “daughter of Levi” in a general
sense.


(2) One of the Bani, who in the days of Ezra |


had taken a foreign wife (Ezr 10 34).

(8) In 1 Ch 1 41 (AV) for the properly read
HAMRAN of the RV ({}@0, hamran), a Horite,
who in Gen 36 26 is called Hempan (q.v.).

Epwarp Mack

AMRAMITES, am’ramits (“AV29, ‘amrami):
The descendants of Amram, one of the Levitical
families mentioned in Nu 8 27 and 1 Ch 26 23,
who had the charge of the tabernacle proper,
guarding the ark, table, candlestick, etc, called in
1 Ch 26 22 “the treasures of the house of Jeh.”


AMRAPHEL, am’ra-fel, am-ra’fel OPTes, ’am-
raphel, or, perhaps better, ’am*raéphel): This name,
which is identified with that of the re-
nowned Bab king Hammurabi (q.v.), is
only found in Gen 14 1.9, where he is
mentioned as the king of Shinar (Baby-
Sodom and _ lonia), who fought against the cities of

Gomorrah the plain, in alliance with Arioch king
of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam,
and Tidal king of Nations (RV GOIIM). The
narrative which follows is very circumstantial.
From it we learn, that Bera king of Sodom, Birsha
king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, She-
meber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela or
Zoar, had served Chedorlaomer for 12 years,
rebelled in the 18th, and in the 14th year Chedor-
laomer, with the kings enumerated, fought with and
defeated them in the vale of Siddim, which is
described as being the Salt Sea. Previous to this
engagement, however, the Elamites and _ their
allies had attacked the Rephaim (Onkelos: ‘“giants’’)
in Ashtaroth-karnaim, the Zuzim (O: “mighty
ones,” “heroes”) in Ham (O: Hamta’), the Emim
(O: “terrible ones’) in Shaveh-kiriathaim, and
-the Horites in their Mount Seir, by the Desert.
These having been rendered powerless to aid the
revolted vassals, they returned and came to En-
mishpat, or Kadesh, attacked the country of the
Amalekites, and the Amorites dwelling in Hazazon-
tamar (vs 2-7).
At this juncture the kings of the cities of the
plain came out against them, and opposed them
with their battle-array in the vale of
2. The Siddim. The result of the fight was,
Preparation that the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the with their allies, fled, and fell among
Attack the bitumen-pits of which the place
was full, whilst those who got away
took refuge in the mountain. All the goods and
food (the camp-equipment and supplies) of the
kings of the plain were captured by Chedorlaomer
and his allies, who then continued their march
(to their own lands) (vs 8-11).

Among the captives, however, was Lot, Abram’s

nephew, who dwelt in Sodom. A fugitive, having

escaped, went and announced the re-
3. Abra- sult of the engagement to Abram, who
ham’s Res- was at that time living by Mamre’s
cue of Lot oak plantation. The patriarch immedi-

ately marched forth with his trained
men, and pursued them to Dan, where he divided
his forces, attacked the Elamite-Bab army by night,
and having put them to flight, pursued them again
to Hobah, on the left (or N.) of Damascus. The
result of this sudden onslaught was that he rescued


1, The
Expedition
Against


Lot, with the women and people, and recaptured
Lot’s goods, which the allies of Amraphel had carried
off (vs 12-16).

There is no doubt that the identification of Amra-
phel with the Hammurabi of the Bab inscriptions is
the best that has yet been proposed,
and though there are certain difficulties
therein, these may turn out to be ap-
parent rather than real, when we know
more of Bab history. The / at the end
of Amraphel (which has also ph instead
of por b) as well as the fact that the
expedition itself has not yet been recognized among
the campaigns of Hammurabi, must be acknowledged
as two points hard to explain, though they may
ultimately be solved by further research.

It is noteworthy, however, that in the first ver of
Gen 14 Amraphel is mentioned first, which, if he be

really the Bab Hammurabi, is easily
6. Histori- comprehensible, for his renown to all
cal Agree- appearance exceeded that of Chedor-
ments laomer, his suzerain. In vs 4 and 5,

however, it is Chedorlaomer alone who
is referred to, and he heads the list of eastern kings
in ver 9, where Tidal comes next (a quite natural
order, if Goiim be the Bab Guté, ie. the Medes).
Next in order comes Amraphel, king of Babylonia
and suzerain of Arioch of Ellasar (Eri-Aku of Larsa),
whose name closes the list. It may also be sug-
gested, that Amraphel led a Bab force against Sodom,
as the ally of Chedorlaomer, before he became king,
and was simply crown prince. In that case, like
Belshazzar, he was called “king” by anticipation.
For further details see AntocH and CHEDORLAOMER,
and cf Ert-Axu and Hammurasj; for the history
of Babylonia during Hammurabi’s period, see that
article. T. G. PincHEs


4, Difficul-
ties of the |
Identifica-
tion of
Amraphel


AMULET, am’t-let (OP, kemia', DWND, leha-
shim, TTA, mezidzah, POOM, tephillin, MR, cigith;
dvdaxriptov, phulaktérion): Modern scholars are
of opinion that our Eng. word amulet comes from
the Lat amuletum, used by Pliny (Naturalis His-
toria, xxviii, 28; xxx, 2, etc), and other Lat writers;
but no etymology for the Lat word has been dis-
covered. The present writer thinks the root exists
in the Arab. himlat, ‘‘something carried”’ (see Dozy,
Supplément aux Dietionnaires Arabes, I, 327), though
there is no known example of the use of the Arab.
word in a magical sense. Originally ‘“‘amulet” de-
noted any object supposed to have the power of
removing or warding noxious influences believed to
be due to evil spirits, etc, such as the evil eye, etc.
But in the common usage it stands for an object
worn on the body, generally hung from the neck,
as a remedy or preservative against evil influences
of a mystic kind. The word “amulet” occurs once
in the RV (Isa 3 20) but not at allin the AV.

The substances out of which amulets have been
made and the forms which they have taken have

been various.
1. Classes (1) The commonest have consisted
of Amulets of pieces of stone or metal, strips of

parchment with or without inscriptions
from sacred writings (Bible, Koran, etc). The
earliest Egyp amulets: known are pieces of green
schist of various shapes—animal, etc. These were
placed on the breast of a deceased person in order
to secure a safe passage to the under-world. When
a piece of stone is selected as an amulet it is always
portable and generally of some striking fig. or shape
(the human face, etc). The use of such a stone for
this purpose is really a survival of animism.

(2) Gems, rings, etc. It has been largely held
that all ornaments worn on the person were origi-
nally amulets. (8) Certain herbs and animal prepa-


127


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Amramites
Amulet


rations; the roots of certain plants have been con-
sidered very potent as remedies and preservatives.

The practice of wearing amulets existed in the
ancient world among al! peoples, but esp. among
Orientals; and it can be traced among most modern
nations, esp. among peoples of backward civiliza-
tion. Nor is it wholly absent from peoples of the
most advanced civilization of today, the English,
Americans, etc. Though the word charm (see
CHARM) has a distinct meaning, it is often insep-
arably connected with amulets, for it is in many
cases the incantation or charm inscribed on the
amulet that gives the latter its significance. As dis-
tinguished from talisman (see TALISMAN) an amulet
is believed to have negative results, as a means of
protection: a talisman is thought to be the means of
securing for the wearer some positive boon.


Egyptian Amulets and Har-rings.


Though there is no word in the Heb or Gr Scrip-
tures denoting ‘“‘amulet,”’ the thing itself is mani-
festly implied in many parts of the

2. Amulets Bible. But it is remarkable that the
in the Bible general teaching of the Bible and esp.
that of the OT prophets and of the

NT writers is wholly and strongly opposed to such
things. ; 5
(1) The Old Testament.—The golden ear-rings,
worn by the wives and sons and daughters of the
Israelites, out of which the molten calf was made
(Ex 32 2f), were undoubtedly amulets. What
other function could they be made to serve in the
simple life of the desert? That the women’s orna-
ments condemned in Isa 3 16-26 were of the same
character is made exceedingly likely by an examina-
tion of some of the terms employed. We read of
moonlets and sunlets (ver 18), i.e. moon and sun-
shaped amulets. The former in the shape of cres-
cents are worn by Arab girls of our own time. The
“ear-drops,” ‘“nose-rings,” “arm chains” and ‘foot
chains” were all used as a protection to the part of
the body implied, and the strong words with which
their employment is condemned are only intelligible
if their function as counter charms is borne in mind.
In Isa 3 20 we read of I¢hashim rendered ‘‘ear-rings”’
(AV) and “amulets” (RV). The Heb word seems
to be cognate with the word for “serpent” (n*hashim;
1 and r often interchange), and meant probably
in the first instance an amulet against a serpent
bite (see Magic, Divination, and Demonology among


—~.


the Hebrews and Their Neighbours, by the present
writer, 50f, 81; cf Jer 8 7; Eccl 10 11; Ps 68 5).
Crescent-shaped amulets were worn by animals as
well as human beings, as Jgs 8 21.26 shows.

At Bethel, Jacob burned not only the idols
(“strange gods’) but also the ear-rings, the latter
being as much opposed to Yahwism as the former,
on account of their heathen origin and import.

In Prov 17 8 the Heb words rendered “‘a precious
stone’ (Heb “a stone conferring favor’) mean
without question a stone amulet treasured on ac-
count of its supposed magical efficacy. It is said in
Prov 1 9 that wisdom will be such a defence to the
one who has it as the head amulet is to the head and
that of the neck to the neck. The words rendered
in the RV “a chaplet of grace unto thy head” mean
lit. “something bound to the head conferring favor,”
the one word for the latter clause being identical
with that so rendered above (hén). The Talm
word for an amulet (k*mi#") denotes something tied
or bound (to the person).

We have reference to the custom of wearing
amulets in Prov 6 21 where the reader is urged
to “bind them [i.e. the admonitions of father and
mother] . . . . upon thy heart” and to ‘tie them
about thy neck’”’—words implying a condemnation
of the practice of trusting to the defence of mere
material objects.

Underneath the garments of warriors slain in
the Maccabean wars amulets were found in the
shape apparently of idols worshipped by their neigh-
bors (2 Macc 12 40). It is strange but true that
like other nations of antiquity the Jews attached
more importance to amulets obtained from other
nations tban to those of native growth. It is
probable that the signet ring referred to in Cant
8 6; Jer 22 24; Hag 2 23 wasanamulet. It was
worn on the heart or on the arm.

(2) The phylacteries and the m*ztizah.—There is
no distinct reference to these in the OT. The Heb
technical term for the former (éphillin) does not
occur in Bib. Heb, and although the Heb word


- m®zazah does occur over a dozen times its sense is


invariably ‘“‘door-[or ‘‘gate-’] post’? and not the
amulet put on the door-post which in later Heb
the word denotes. :

It is quite certain that the practice of wearing
phylacteries has no Bib. support, for a correct exege-
sis and a proper understanding of the context put it
beyond dispute that the words in Ex 13 9.16;
Dt 6 8f; 11 18-20 have reference to the exhorta-
tions in the foregoing verses: ‘‘Thou shalt bind
them [the commands previously mentioned] for a
sign upon thy hand, and they shall be for frontlets
between thyeyes. And thou shalt write them upon
the door-posts of thy house, and upon thy gates”
(Dt 6 8f). The only possible sense of these words
is that they were to hold the precepts referred to
before their minds constantly as if they were in-
scribed on their arms, held in front of their eyes,
and written on the door- or gate-posts which they
daily passed. That the language in Ex 13 9.16
does not command the use of phylacteries is obvious;
and that the same is true of Prov 3 3; 6 21; 7 3
where similar words are used is still more certain.
Yet, though none of the passages enjoin the use
of phylacteries or of the m‘ztizah,they may all con-
tain allusions to both practices as if the sense were,
“Thou shalt keep constantly before thee my words
and look to them for safety and not to the phylacter-
ies worn on head and arm by the heathen.” _ If,
however, phylacteries were in use among the Jews
thus early, it is strange that there is not in the OT
a single instance in which the practice of wearing
phylacteries is mentioned. Jos, however, seems
to refer to this practice (Ant, IV, viii, 13), and it is
frequently spoken of in the Mish (Berakhoth, i, ete).


Amzi
Ananias


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


128


It is a striking and significant fact that the Apoc
is wholly silent as to the three signs of Judaism,
phylacteries, the mziizdh and the ¢icith (or tassel
attached to the corner of the prayer garment called
tallith; cf Mt 9 20; 14 36 AV where “hem of the
garment’ is inaccurate and misleading).

It is quite evident that phylacteries have a
magical origin. This is suggested by the Gr name
phulaktérion (whence the Eng. name) which in the
1st cent. of our era denoted a counter charm or
defence (phulassé, ‘‘to protect’’) against evil influ-
ences. No scholar now explains the Gr word as de-
noting a means of leading people to keep (phulassd)
the law. The Heb name ¢*phiilin (=‘‘prayers’’)
meets us first in post-Bib. Heb, and carries with it
the later view that phylacteries are used during
prayer in harmony with the prayers or other formu-
lae over the amulet to make it effective (see Budge,
Egyptian Magic, 27). Seemore fully under Cuarm.

Litrratvure.—tn addition to the lit. given in the course
of the foregoing art., the following may be mentioned.
On the general subject see the great works of Tyler (Karly
History of Mankind, Primitive Culture) and Frazer, Golden
Bough; also the series of arts. under ‘‘Charmsand Amulets”’
in Hastings’ Enc of Religion and Ethics and the excellent
article ‘‘Amulet”’ in the corresponding German work, Die
Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart. See further the
art. ‘“Amulet”’ in Jew Enc, and on Egyp amulets, Budge,
Egyptian Magic, 25 ff

T. Witton Daviss

AMZI, am’ai OXY, ‘amez, “my strength’): (1)
A Levite of the family of Merari (1 Ch 6 46). (2)
A priest of the family of Adaiah in the second temple.
His father’s name was Zechariah (Neh 11 12).


ANAB, a’nab (279, ‘dndbh, ‘grapes’; B, ’Avav,
Anén or ’AvéB, Anédb): Mentioned in the list of
cities which fell to Judah (Josh 15 50). In the
list it follows Debir, from which it was a short dis-
tance to the S.W. It lay about twelve miles to
the S.W. of Hebron. It was a city of the Anakim,
from whom Joshua took it (Josh 11 21). Its site
is now known as the ruin ‘Anab.


ANAEL, an‘a-el ?Avafd, Anaél): A brother of
Tobit mentioned once only (Tob 1 21) as the father


of Achiacharus, who was an official in Nineveh‘


under Esar-haddon.


ANAH, 4’na (7122, ‘dndh, meaning uncertain;
a Horite clan-name [Gen 36]):

(1) Mother of Aholibamah, one of the wives of
Esau and daughter of Zibeon (cf Gen 36 2.14.18.
25). The LXX, the Sam Pent, and the Pesh read
“son,” identifying this Anah with no. 3 (see below);
Gen 36 2, read "00 (ha-hdri), for “WI (he-
hiwwi.

(2) Son of Seir, the Horite, and brother of Zibeon;
one of the chiefs of the land of Edom (cf Gen 36
20.21=1 Ch 1 38). Seir is elsewhere the name
of the land (cf Gen 14 6; Isa 21 11); but here
the country is personified and becomes the mythical
ancestor of the tribes inhabiting it.

(3) Son of Zibeon,‘“Thisis Anah who found the hot
springs in the wilderness” (cf Gen 36 24=1 Ch 1
40.41). The word B25, ha-yémtm, occurs only
in this passage and is probably corrupt. Ball
(SBOT, Gen, crit. note 93) suggests that it is a
corruption of DMT, w-h&mam (cf Gen 36 22)
in an earlier ver. Jerome, in his commentary on
Gen 36 24, assembles the following definitions of
the word gathered from Jewish sources: (1) “seas”
as though 0°%2, yammim; (2) “hot springs” as
though DAN, hammim; (3) a species of ass, J),
yemin; (4) ‘toules.” This last explanation was
the one most frequently met with in Jewish lit.;
the tradition ran that Anah was the first to breed
the mule, thus bringing into existence an unnatural


species. As a punishment, God created the deadly
water-snake, through the union of the common viper
with the Libyan lizard (cf Gen Rabbah 82 15;
Yer. Ber 1 126; Bab Pes 54a; Ginzberg, Monat-
schrift, XLII, 538-39).

The descent of Anah is thus represented in the
three ways pointed out above as the text stands.
If, however, we accept the reading jZ, ben, for
M3, bath, in the first case, Aholibamah will then be
an unnamed daughter of the Anah of ver 24, not
the Aholibamah, daughter of Anah of ver 25 (for
the Anah of this verse is evidently the one of ver,
20, not the Anah of ver 24). Another view is that
the words, ‘‘the daughter of Zibeon,’”’ are a gloss,
inserted by one who mistakenly identified the Anah
of ver 25 with the Anah of ver 24; in this event,
Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah, will be the one
mentioned in ver 25.

The difference between (2) and (3) is to be ex-
plained on the basis of a twofold tradition. Anah
was originally a sub-clan of the clan known as
Zibeon, and both were ‘‘sons of Seir’’—i.e. Horites.

H. J. Wor

ANAHARATH, a-na/ha-rath (MVIIN, 7dna-
hdrath, meaning unknown): A place which fell to
the tribe of Issachar in the division of the land
(Josh 19 19). Located in the valley of Jezreel
toward the E., the name and site being preserved
as the modern en-Na‘dra. BD B is wrong in assign-
ing it to the tribe of Naphtali.


ANAIAH, an-a-i’a, a-ni’a (MY, ‘dnayah, “Jab
has answered’’): (1) a Levite who assisted Ezr in
reading the law to the people (Neh 8 4), perhaps
the person called Ananias in Esd 9 48. (2) One of
those who sealed the covenant (Neh 10 22). He
may have been the same as Anaiah (1).


ANAK, a’nak. See ANAKIM.


ANAKIM, an’a-kim (D°po2, ‘dndkim; ’Evaxtp,
Enakim, or ’Evaxelp, Enakeim; also called “sons
of Anak” [Nu 13 33], and “sons of the Anakim”
[Dt 1 28]): The spies (Nu 13 33) compared them
to the Nephilim or “giants” of Gen 6 4, and
according to Dt 2 11 they were reckoned among
the RerHam (q.v.). In Nu 13 22 the chiefs of
Hebron are said to be descendants of Anak, while
“the father of Anak” is stated in Josh (15 13; 21
11) to be Arba after whom Hebron was called “the
city of Arba.” Josh “cut off the Anakim ... . from
Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, ... . and from all
the hill-country of Israel,” remnants of them being
left in the Phili cities of Gaza, Gath and Ashdod
(Josh 11 21.22). As compared with the Israelites,
they were tall like giants (Nu 13 33), and it would
therefore seem that the ‘‘giant” Goliath and his
family were of their race. At Hebron, at the time
of the Israelitish conquest, we may gather that they
formed the body-guard of the Amorite king (see
Josh 10 5) under their three leaders Sheshai, Ahi-
man and Talmai (Nu 13 22; Josh 15 14; Jgs 1
20). Am Tab show that the Can princes were
accustomed to surround themselves with body-
guards of foreign mercenaries. It appears probable
that the Anakim came from the Aigean like the
Philistines, to whom they may have been related.
The name Anak is a masculine corresponding with
a feminine which we meet with in the name of the
goede Onka, who according to the Gr writers,

tephanus of Byzantium and Hesychius, was the
“Phoen,’’i.e. Syrian equivalent of Athena. Anket or
Anukit was also the name of the goddess worshipped
by the Egyptians at the First Cataract. Inthe name
Ahi-man it is possible that -man denotes a non-Sem
deity. A. H. Sayce


129


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA -


Amzi
Ananias


ANAMIM, an’a-mim (0027, ‘dndmim): De-
scendants of Mizraim (Gen 10 13; 1 Ch 111). See
TaBLeE or NaTIONS.


ANAMMELECH, a-nam’e-lek (7929, ‘énam-
melekh=Assyr Anu-malik, “Anu is the prince’):
A Bab (?) deity worshipped by the Sepharvites in
Samaria, after being transported there by Sargon.
The worship of Adrammelech (who is mentioned
with Anammelech) and Anammelech is accom-
panied by the sacrifice of children by fire: ‘The
Sepharvites burnt their children in the fire to
Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of
Sepharvaim” (2 K 17 31). This passage presents
two grave difficulties. First, there is no evidence
in cuneiform lit. that would point to the presence
of human sacrifice, by fire or otherwise, as part of
the ritual; nor has it been shown that the sculp-
tures or bas-reliefs deny this thesis. Much depends
upon the identification of ‘“Sepharvaim’’; if, as
some scholars hold, Sepharvaim and Sippar are
one and the same cities, the two deities referred to
are Bab: But there are several strong objections
to this theory. It has been suggested that Sephar-
vaim (LXX, seppharin, sepphareimi) is rather
identical with “Shabara’in,” a city mentioned in
the Bab Chronicle as having been destroyed by
Shalmaneser IV. As Sepharvaim and Arpad and
Hamath are grouped together (2 K 17 24; 18 34)
in two passages, it is probable that Sepharvaim is
a Syr city. Sepharvaim may then be another form
of “Shabara’in,”’ which, in turn, is the Assyr form
of Sibraim (Ezk 47 16), a city in the neighborhood
of Damascus (cf Halévy, ZA, II, 401 ff). One
objection to this last is the necessity for representing
© (s) by sh; this is not necessarily insurmountable,
however. Then, the attempt to find an Assyr
etymology for the two god-names falls to the ground.
Besides, the custom of sacrifice by fire was preva-
lent in Syria. Secondly, the god that was wor-
shipped at Sippar was neither Adrammelech nor
Anammelech but Sama’. It is improbable, as some
would urge, that Adrammelech is a secondary title
of the tutelary god of Sippar; then it would have to
be shown that Anu enjoyed special reverence in this
city which was especially consecrated to the worship
of the Sun-god. (For “Anu” see Assyria.) It may
be that the text is corrupt. See also ADRAMMELECH.

H. J. Wour

ANAN, 4’nan (379, ‘dndn, “cloud’’): (1) One
of those who, with Neh, sealed the covenant (Neh
10 26). (2) Areturned exile (1 Esd 5 30). He is
called Hanan in Ezr 2 46 and Neh 7 49.


ANANI, a-na’ni ("222 , ‘éndni, perhaps a short-
ened form of Ananiah, “Jehovah has covered’’):
A son of Elicenai of the house of David, who lived
after the captivity (1 Ch 3 24).


ANANIAH, an-a-ni’a (7912, ‘dnanyah, “Je-
hovah has covered”): (1) Grandfather of Azariah.
He assisted in repairing the walls of Jerus after
his return from the exile (Neh 3 23). (2) A town
of Benjamin mentioned in connection with Nob
and Hazor (Neh 11 32). Itis commonly identified
with Beit Hanina, between three and four miles
N.N.W. from Jerus.


ANANIAS, an-a-ni’as (Avavias; WH, ‘Avavias,
Hananias; 7320, hdnanyah, “Jeh has been gra-
cious’); The name was common among the Jews.
In its Heb form it is frequently found in the
OT (eg. 1 Ch 25 4; Jer 281; Dni 1 6). See
HANANIAG.

Husband of Sapphira (Acts 5 1-10). He and
his wife sold their property, aud gave to the com-


mon fund of the church part of the purchase
money, pretending it was the whole. When his
hypocrisy was denounced by Peter,
1. A Dis-  Ananias fell down dead; and three
ciple at hours later his wife met the same doom.
Jerusalem The following points are of interest.
(1) The narrative immediately follows
the account of the intense brotherliness of the
believers resulting in a common fund, to which
Barnabas had made a generous contribution (Acts
4 32-37). The sincerity and spontaneity of the
gifts of Barnabas and the others set forth in dark
relief the calculated deceit of Ananias. The
brighter the light, the darker the shadow. (2) The
crime of Ananias consisted, not in his retaining a
part, but in his pretending to give the whole. He
was under no compulsion to give all, for the com-
munism of the early church was not absolute, but
purely voluntary (see esp. 5 4). Falsehood and
hypocrisy (‘lie to the Holy Spirit” ver 3), rather
than greed, were the sins for which he was so severely
punished. (3) The severity of the judgment can
be justified by the consideration that the act was
“the first open venture of deliberate wickedness”
(Meyer) within the church. The punishment was
an “awe-inspiring act of Divine church-discipline.”’
The narrative does not, however, imply that Peter
consciously willed their death. His words were
the occasion of it, but he was not the deliberate
agent. Even the words in ver 9b are a prediction
rather than a judicial sentence.
A disciple in Damascus, to whom the conversion
of Saul of Tarsus was made known in a vision, and
who was the instrument of his physical
2. A Dis- and spiritual restoration, and the
ciple at means of introducing him to the other
Damascus Christians in Damascus (Acts 9 10-
19). Paul makes honorable mention
of him in his account of his conversion spoken at
Jerus (Acts 22 12-16), where we are told that
Ananias was held in high respect by all the Jews
in Damascus, on account of his strict legal piety.
No mention is made of him in Paul’s address before
Agrippa in Caesarea (Acts 26). In late tradition,
he is placed in the list of the seventy disciples of
Jesus, and represented as bishop of Damascus, and
as having died a martyr’s death.
A high priest in Jerus from 47-59 AD. From
Jos (Ant, XX, v,2; vi, 2; ix,2; BJ, II, xvii, 9)
we glean the following facts: He was


3. AHigh the son of Nedebaeus (or Nebedaeus)
Priest at and was nominated to the_ high-
Jerusalem priestly office by Herod of Chalcis.


In 52 AD he was sent to Rome by
Quadratus, legate of Syria, to answer a charge of
oppression brought by the Samaritans, but the
emperor Claudius acquitted him. On his return
to Jerus, he resumed the office of high priest. He
was deposed shortly before Felix left the province,
but continued to wield great influence, which he
used in a lawless and violent way. He was 2
typical Sadducee, wealthy, haughty, unscrupulous,
filling his sacred office for purely selfish and politi-
cal ends, anti-nationalist in his relation to the
Jews, friendly to the Romans. He died an igno-
minious death, being assassinated by the popular
zealots (sicariz) at the beginning of the last Jewish
war. In the NT he figures in two passages. (1)
Acts 23 1-5, where Paul defends himself before the
Sanhedrin. The overbearing conduct of Ananias
in commanding Paul to be struck on the mouth
was characteristic of the man. Paul’s ire was for
the moment aroused, and he hurled back the
scornful epithet of “whited wall.’ On being called
to account for “reviling God’s high priest,” he
quickly recovered the control of his feelings, and
gaid “I knew not, brethren, that he was high priest:


Ananias
Andrew


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


130


for it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil of a ruler
of thy people.” This remark has greatly puzzled
the commentators. The high priest could have
been easily identified by his position and official
seat as president of the Sanhedrin. Some have
wrongly supposed that Ananias had lost his office
during his trial at Rome, but had afterward usurped
it during a vacancy (John Lightfoot, Michaelis,
etc). Others take the words as ironical, “How
could I know as high priest one who acts so un-
worthily of his sacred office?” (so Calvin). Others
(e.g. Alford, Plumptre) take it that owing to de-
fective eyesight Paul knew not from whom the
insolent words had come. Perhaps the simplest
‘explanation is that Paul meant, ‘I did not for the
moment bear in mind that I was addressing the
high priest’’ (so Bengel, Neander, etc). (2) In Acts
24 1 we find Ananias coming down to Caesarea in
person, with a deputation from the Sanhedrin, to
accuse Paul before Felix. D. Mrati Epwarns


ANANIAS (Apoc), an-a-ni’as: (1) ’Avavlas, RV
ANNIS, RVm Annias (1 Esd 5 16). See ANNis.
(2) A son of Emmer (1 Esd 9 21)=Hanani, son of
Immer in Ezr 10 20. (3) A son of Bebai (1 Esd
9 29)=Hananiah in Ezr 10 28. The two last are
mentioned in the list of priests who were found to
have strange wives. (4) One of those who stood by
Esdras while he read the law to the people (1 Esd 9
43)=Anaiah in Neh 8 4. (5) One of the Levites
who explained the law to the people (1 Esd 9 48)
=Hanan in Neh 8 7. (6) Ananias the Great, son
of Shemaiah the Great; a kinsman of Tobit, whom
Raphael the angel, disguised as a man, gave out to
be his father (Tob 5 12f). (7) Son of Gideon, men-
tioned as an ancestor of Judith (Jth 81). (8) An-
other Ananias is mentioned in Three (ver 66).

D. Miatt Epwarps

ANANIEL, a-nan‘i-el (?AvaurA, Ananiél, ‘God
is gracions”’): An ancestor of Tobit (Tob 1 I).


ANATH, a’nath (M22, ‘dndth): Father of Sham-
gar (Jgs 8 31; 5 6). This name is connected with
the Phoen and Can goddess ‘An4t, which was also
worshipped in Egypt. She is mentioned in monu-
ments of the 18th Dynasty, coupled with the war-
goddess Astart (Moore, Judges, 105-896; DB; EB).


ANATHEMA, a-nath’é-ma (dvd0epa, andthema):
This word occurs only once in the AV, viz. in the
phrase ‘“‘Let him be anathema. Maranatha” (1 Cor
16 22); elsewhere the AV renders anathema by “‘ac-
cursed” (Rom 9 3; 1 Cor 12 3; Gal I 8.9), once by
“curse’’ (Acts 23 12). Both words—anathéma and
anathema—were originally dialectical variations and
had the same connotation, viz. offering to the gods.
The non-Attic form—anathema—was adopted in
the LXX as a rendering of the Heb hérem (see
AccuRSED), and gradually came to have the sig-
nificance of the Heb word—“anything devoted to
destruction.” Whereas in the Gr Fathers anathe-
ma—as hérem in rabbinic Heb—came to denote
excommunication from society, in the NT the
word has its full force. In common speech it evi-
dently became a strong expression of execration,
and the term connoted more than physical destruc-
tion; it invariably implied moral worthlessness. In
Rom 9 8 Paul does not simply mean that, for the
sake of his fellow-countrymen, he is prepared to
face death, but to endure the moral degradation
of an outcast from the kingdom of Christ. In
1 Cor 12 3 the expression, “Jesus is anathema”—
with its suggestion of moral unfitness—reaches the
lowest depths of depreciation, as the expression,
“Jesus is Lord,” reaches the summit of appreciation.

Tuomas Lewis


ANATHOTH, an’a-thoth (MU, ‘dnathoth;
»Avaedb, Anathdth): A town which lay between
Michmash and Jerus (Isa 10 30), in the territory
of Benjamin, assigned to the Levites (Josh 21 18).
It was the native place of Abiathar (1 K 2 26),
and of the prophet Jer (Jer 1 1; 11 21 ff, etc).
Here lay the field which, under remarkable eircum-
stances, the prophet purchased (Jer 32 7 ff). Two
of David's distinguished soldiers, Abiezer (2 8 23 27)
and Jehu (1 Ch 12 3), also hailed from Anathoth.
It was again occupied by the Benjamites after the
return from the Exile (Neh 11 82, etc). It is iden-
tified with ‘Andié, two and a quarter miles N.E. of
Jerus, a small village of some fifteen houses with re-
mains of ancient walls. There are quarries in the
neighborhood from which stones are still carried to
Jerus. It commands a spacious outlook over the
uplands to the N., and especially to the 8.E., over
the Jordan valley toward the Dead Sea and the
mountains of Moab. There is nothing to shelter it
from the withering power of the winds from the
eastern deserts (Jer 4 11; 18 17, etc). .

W. Ewine

ANATHOTHITE, an’a-thoth-it (M270, ha-
‘anntthétht): RV form of AV Anethothite, Ane-
tothite, Antothite. An inhabitant of Anathoth, a
town of Benjamin assigned to the Levites. ‘The Ana-
thothites are (1) Abiezer, one of David’s thirty
heroes (2 S 23 27; 1 Ch 11 28; 27 12), and (2)
Jehu who came to David at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 8).


ANCESTORS, an’ses-térs (D"JUN", 17’shonim,
“first ones’): The word ancestor appears in the
Eng. Bible only once (Lev 26 45). The Heb word,
the ordinary adj. ‘‘first,’’ occurs more than 200
times, and in a few places might fairly be rendered
ancestors (e.g. Dt 19 14; Jer 11 10). In speaking
of ancestors the OT ordinarily uses the word for
“fathers” (abhoth).


ANCHOR, an’kér.
ANCIENT, An’shent: This word renders several


See Surps.


Heb words: (1) Dp, kedhem, which denotes
“beforetime,” “yore”; generally the remote past
(ef Dt 338 15, “ancient mountains”; Jgs 5 21,
Kishon, the “ancient river’; Isa 19 11 “ancient


kings”). (2) ]PT, zaken, “old” in years. Whereas
the AV generally renders the word by “old’”’ (or
“elders” when the pl. form is found) in six cases
“ancient” is used and ‘ancients’? in nine cases.
See Ancients. (8) pdt, ‘slam, which denotes
‘Jong duration’—past or future. In regard to the
pastit suggests remote antiquity. The connotation
may be discovered in such expressions as: “the
years of a. times” (Ps 77 5); ‘a. land-mark”’ or


-“paths’’ (Prov 22 28; Jer 18 15); “a. people” or


“nation’’ (Isa 44 7; Jer 5 15); “a. high places”
(Ezk 86 2). (4) p°MY, ‘atttk. This word—really
Aram.—comes from a stem which means ‘to ad-
vance,”’ i.e. in age; hence old, aged (1 Ch 3 22).
(5) WW, ydshish, lit. “weak,” “impotent,” hence
decrepit, aged; a rare and poetical word, and found
only in Job. It is rendered ‘‘ancient”’ only in one
instance (Job 12 12 AV). Tuomas LEwis


ANCIENT OF DAYS (71 P'AY, ‘attik yomin,
=Aram.): On PMY, ‘aittk, see ANciENT (4). The
expression is used in reference to God in Dnl
(7 9.13.22) and is not intended to suggest the exis-
tence of God from eternity. It was the venerable
appearance of old age that was uppermost in the
writer's mind. “What Daniel sees is not the eternal
God Himself, but an aged man, in whose dignified
and impressive form God reveals Himself (cf Ezk
I 26)” (Keil).


181


ANCIENTS, 4dn-shents: This word (except in
one instance) renders the Heb word D°2P7, e*kenim,
(pl. of Jp}, zaékén), which should always be tr?
“old men” or “elders.” The Heb word never has
the connotation which ‘ancients’? has in modern
Eng. The words “I understand more than the
ancients” (Ps 119 100 AV) do not mean that the
Psalmist claims greater wisdom than his distant
forbears but than his contemporaries with all their
age and experience. In the parallel clause ‘“teach-
ers’ is the corresponding word. In such phrases
as “ancients of the people’ (Jer 19 1 AV), “an-
cients of the house of Israel” (Ezk 8 12), ‘elders’
would obviously be the correct rendering, as in RV.
Even in Isa 24 23 (“before his ancients gloriously”
ERV) “elders” is the right tr (ARV). The writer
probably alludes to the Sin. theophany witnessed by
the “seventy . ... elders’? (Ex 24 9-18). Gener-
ally speaking the word suggests the experience, in-
sight and practical acquaintance with life which age
ought to bring with it (Ps 119 100; Ezk 7 26).
In one instance (1 S 24 18) ‘ancients’ is the right
rendering for the Heb word D"2727p, kadhmonim,
which means ‘‘men of former times.”


ANGLE anich  Seskaeuns ee


ANDREW, an’drd0 (Av8péas, Andréas, i.e.
“manly.” The name has also been interpreted as
“the mighty one, or conqueror’): Andrew was
the first called of the Twelve Apostles.

I. In New Testament.—Andrew belonged to
Bethsaida of Galilee (cf Jn 1 44). He was the

brother of Simon Peter and his father’s
1. Early name was John (cf Jn 1 42; 21
History and 15.16.17). He occupies a more promi-
First Call nent place in the Gospel of Jn than

in the synoptical writings, and this
is explicable at least in part from the fact that
Andrew was Gr both in language and sympathies
(cf infra), and that his subsequent labors were inti-
mately connected with the people for whom Jn
was immediately writing. There are three stages
in the call of Andrew to the apostleship. The first
is described in Jn 1 35-40. Andrew had spent his
earlier years as a fisherman on the Sea of Galilee,
but on learning of the fame of John the Baptist, he
departed along with a band of his countrymen to
Bethabara (RV ‘“‘Bethany’’) beyond Jordan, where
John was baptizing (Jn 1 28). Possibly Jesus
was of their number, or had preceded them in their
pilgrimage. There Andrew learned for the first
time of the greatness of the ‘‘Lamb of God” and
“followed him’? (Jn 1 40). He was the means at
this time of bringing his brother Simon Peter also
to Christ (Jn 1 41). Andrew was probably a
companion of Jesus on his return journey to Galilee,
and was thus present at the marriage in Cana of
Galilee (Jn 2 2), in Capernaum (Jn 2 12), at the
Passover in Jerus (Jn 2 13), at the baptizing in
Jadaea (Jn 3 22), where he himself may have taken
part (cf Jn 4 2), and in Samaria (In 4 5).

On his return to Galilee, Andrew resumed for a

time his old vocation as fisherman, till he received

his second call. This happened after
2. Second John the Baptist was cast into prison
Call and (cof Mk 1 14; Mt 4 12) and is de-
Final scribed in Mk 1 16-18; Mt 4 18.19.
Ordination The two accounts are practically

identical, and tell how Andrew and his
brother were now called on definitely to forsake
their mundane occupations and become fishers of
men (Mk 1 17). The corresponding narrative of
Lk varies in part; it does not mention Andrew by
name, and gives the additional detail of the miracu-
lous draught of fishes. By some it has been re-
garded as an amalgamation of Mk’s account with


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ananias
Andrew


Jn 21 1-8 (see Jamus, Son oF ZEBEDEE). After a
period of companionship with Jesus, during which,
in the house of Simon and Andrew, Simon’s wife’s
mother was healed of a fever (Mk 1 29-31; ef
Mt 8 14.15; Lk 4 38.39), the call of Andrew was
finally consecrated by his election as one of the
Twelve Apostles (Mt 10 2; Mk 3 18; Lk 6 14;

Acts 1 18).
Further incidents recorded of Andrew are: At
the feeding of the five thousand by the Sea of
Galilee, the attention of Jesus was


3. Sub- drawn by Andrew to the lad with five
sequent barley loaves and two fishes (Jn 6
History 8.9). At the feast of the Passover,


the Greeks who wished to ‘“‘see Jesus”
inquired of Philip, who turned for advice to An-
drew, and the two then told Jesus (Jn 12 20-36).
On the Mount of Olives, Andrew along with Peter,
James and John, questioned Jesus regarding the
destruction of Jerus and the end of the world
(Mk 13 3-23; cf also Mt 24 3-28; Lk 21 5-24).

II. In Apocryphal Literature.—The name of
Andrew’s mother was traditionally Joanna, and
according to the ‘‘Genealogics of the Twelve Apos-
tles” (Budge, Contendings of the Apostles, II, 49)
he belonged to the tribe of Reuben, the tribe of his
father. A fragment of a Coptic gospel of the 4th
or 5th cent. tells how not only Thomas (Jn 20 27),
but also Andrew was compelled, by touching the
feet. of the risen Saviour, to believe in the bodily
resurrection (Hennecke, Neutestamentlichen Apokry-
phen, etc, 38, 39). Various places were assigned as
the scene of his subsequent missionary labors. The
Syr Teaching of the Apostles (ed Cureton, 34) men-
tions Bithynia, Eusebius gives Scythia (HE, III,
i, 1), and others Greece (Lipsius, <Apokryphen
Apostelgeschichten, I, 63). The Muratorian Frag-
ment relates that John wrote his gospel in conse-
quence of a revelation given to Andrew, and this
would point to Ephesus (cf Hennecke id, 459).
The Contendings of the Twelve Apostles (for his-
toricity, authorship, ete, of this work, cf Budge,
Contendings of the Apostles, Intro; Hennecke,
Handbuch zu den neutestamentlichen Apokryphen,
351-58; RE, 664-66) contains several parts dealing
with Andrew: (1) ‘‘The Preaching of St. Andrew and
St. Philemon among the Kurds’”’ (Budge, II, 163 ff)
narrates the appearance of the risen Christ to His
disciples, the sending of St. Andrew to Lydia and his
conversion of the people there. (2) The ‘Preaching
of St. Matthias in the City of the Cannibals” (Budge,
II, 267 ff; REH, 666) tells of how St. Matthias, on
being imprisoned and blinded by the Cannibals,
was released by St. Andrew, who had been brought
to his assistance in a ship by Christ, but the two
were afterward again imprisoned. St. Matthias
then caused the city to be inundated, the disciples
were set free, and the people converted. (8) ‘The
Acts of St. Andrew and St. Bartholomew” (Budge,
II, 188 ff) gives an account of their mission among
the Parthians. (4) According to the ‘““Martyrdom
of St Andrew” (Budge, II, 215) he was stoned and
crucified in Scythia.

According to the surviving fragments of ‘The
Acts of St. Andrew,” a heretical work dating
probably from the 2d cent., and referred to by
Eusebius (HE, III, ii, 5), the scene of St. Andrew’s
death was laid in Achaia. There he was imprisoned.
and crucified by order of the proconsul Eges (or
Acgeates), whose wife had been estranged from him
by the preaching of St. Andrew (cf Hennecke, 459-
73, Pick, Apocryphal Acts, 201-21; Lipsius, I,
543-622). A so-called “Gospel of St. Andrew” is
mentioned by Innocent I (Ep, I, ii, 7) and Augus-
tine (Contra Advers. Leg. et Prophet., I, 20), but this
is probably due to a confusion with the above-
mentioned “Acts of St. Andrew.”


Andronicus
Angel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


132


The relics of St. Andrew were discovered in
Constantinople in the time of Justinian, and part of
his cross is now in St. Peter’s, Rome. St. Andrew
is the patron saint of Scotland, whither his arm is
said to have been transferred by St. Regulus. The
ascription to him of the decussate cross is of late
origin.

IH. Character.—There is something significant
in Andrew’s being the first called of the apostles.
The choice was an important one; for upon the
lead given by Andrew depended the action of the
others. Christ perceived that the soul’s unrest,
the straining after higher things and a deeper
knowledge of God, which had induced Andrew to
make the pilgrimage to Bethany, gave promise of
a rich spiritual growth, which no doubt influenced
Him in His decision. His wisdom and _ insight
were justified of the after event. Along with a keen-
ness of perception regarding spiritual truths was
coupled in Andrew a strong sense of personal con-
viction which enabled him not only to accept Jesus
as the Messiah, but to win Peter also as a disciple
of Christ. The incident of the Feeding of the Five
Thousand displayed Andrew in a fresh aspect:
there the practical part which he played formed a
striking contrast to the feeble-mindedness of Philip.
Both these traits—his missionary spirit, and his
decision of character which made others appeal to
him when in difficulties—were evinced at the time
when the Greeks sought to interview Jesus. Andrew
was not one of the greatest of the apostles, yet he
is typical of those men of broad sympathies and
sound common sense, without whom the success of
any great movement cannot be assured.

C. M. Kerr

ANDRONICUS, an-dro-ni’kus (*Av8pévexos, An-
dréntkos) :

(1) A deputy of Antiochus Epiphanes, who,
while ruling at Antioch, excited the Jews by the
murder of Onias, and, upon their formal complaint,
was executed by his superior (2 Macc 4 32-38);
generally distinguished from another officer of the
same name, also under Antiochus (2 Mace 6 23).

(2) A kinsman of Paul, residing at Rome (Rom
16 7). He had been converted to Christianity
before Paul, and, like Paul, had suffered imprison-
ment, although when and where can only be sur-
mised. When he and Junias, another kinsman of
Paul, are referred to as “of note among the apostles,”
this may be interpreted as either designating the
high esteem in which they were held by the Twelve,
or as reckoning them in the number of apostles. The
latter is the sense, if ‘‘apostle’’ be understood here
in the more general meaning, used in Acts 14 14
of Barnabas, in 2 Cor 8 23 of Titus, in Phil 2 25
of Epaphroditus, and in the Did of “the traveling
evangelists or missionaries who preached the gospel
from place to place” (Schaff, The Teaching of the
Twelve Apostles, 67; see also Lightfoot on Philip-
pians, 196). On this assumption, Andronicus was
one of the most prominent and successful of the
traveling missionaries of the early church.

H. E. Jacoss

ANEM, a’nem (027, ‘dném, “two springs’;
*Avép, Andm): Anem is mentioned with Ramoth
among the cities of Issachar assigned to the priests,
the sons of Gershom (1 Ch 6 73). In the parallel
list (Josh 21 29), there are mentioned Jarmuth
and En-gannim, corresponding to Ramoth and
Anim, therefore Anim and En-gannim (Jenin) are
identical. As the name denotes (Anem=‘“‘two
springs”; En-gannim=“‘the spring of gardens”),
it was well watered. Anem is identified by Euse-
bius with Aner, but Conder suggests the village of
“Anim,” on the hills W. of the plain of Esdraelon
which represents the Anea of the 4th cent. AD


(Onom s.v. “Aniel” and “Bethara”),a city lying 15
Rom miles from Caesarea, which had good baths.
M. O. Evans
ANER, 4’nér (139, ‘dnér; LXX Aivav, Aundn;
Sam, D939, ‘anram, “sprout,” “waterfall’”’): One of
the three ‘‘confederates” of Abraham in his pursuit
after the four kings (Gen 14 13.14). Judging from
the meanings of the two other names, Mamre being
the name of the sacred grove or tree (J) and synony-
mous with Hebron (P); and Eschol—a name of a
valley (lit. “grape cluster’) from which the personal
names are derived—it may be expected to explain
thename Anerinasimilarway. Dillmann suggested
the name of a range of mountains in that vicinity
(Comm. ad loc. and Rosen in ZDMG, XII, 479;
Skinner, Genesis, 365). S. CoHon |


ANER, a/nér (139, ‘anér, meaning doubtful):
A Levitical town in Manasseh, W. of the Jordan
(1 Ch 6 70). Gesenius and others identified it
with Taanach of Josh 21 25. There is, however,
no agreement, as to its location.


ANETHOTHITE, an’e-thoth-it:
Anathothite (thus RV 2 § 23 27).


ANETOTHITE, an’e-toth-it: AV form of Ana-
thothite (thus RV 1 Ch 27 12).


ANGEL, 4n’jel (ayo, mal’akh; LXX and NT,
ayyedos, dggelos) :
I. Dezrinirion anp Scripture TERMS
Il. Anerts in OT
1. Nature, Appearances and Functlons
2. The Angelic Host
3. The Angel of the Theophany

III. Aneuts in NT
1. Appearances
2. The Teaching of Jesus about Angels
3. Other NT References

IV. Dzve.ropmMent or tHe Doctrine

V. Tue Reauity or ANOELS
LITERATURE

I. Definition and Scripture Terms.—The word
angel is applied in Scripture to an order of super-
natural or heavenly beings whose business it is
to act as God’s messengers to men, and as agents
who carry out His will. Both in Heb and Gr the
word is applied to human messengers (1 K 19 2;
Lk 7 24); in Heb it is used in the singular to
denote a Divine messenger, and in the plural for
human messengers, although there are exceptions
to both usages. It is applied to the prophet
Haggai (Hag 1 13), to the priest (Mal 2 7), and
to the messenger who is to prepare the way of the
Lord (Mal 3 1). Other Heb words and phrases
applied to angels are b’né ha-élohim (Gen 6 2.4;
Job 16; 21) and bené ’élim (Ps 29 1; 89 6),
i.e. sons of the 'ééhim or ’élim; this means, accord-
ing to a common Heb usage, members of the class
called ’élahim or ’élim, the heavenly powers. It
seems doubtful whether the word ’édhim, standing
by itself, is ever used to describe angels, although
LXX so translates it in a few passages. The most
notable instance is Ps 8 5; where RV gives,
“Thou hast made him but little lower than God,”
with ERVm reading of “the angels” for “God”
(cf He 2 7.9); kedhdshim “holy ones” (Ps 89 5.7),
a name suggesting the fact that they belong to God;
‘tr, ‘trim, “watcher,” “watchers” (Dnl 4 13.17.23).
Other expressions are used to designate angels
collectively: sddh, ‘‘council’” (Ps 89 7), where
the reference may be to an inner group of exalted
angels; ‘édhah and kahdl, “congregation” (Ps 82 1;
89 5); and finally cabha’, ¢ebha’oth, “host,” “hosts,”
as in the familiar phrase “the God of hosts.”

In NT the word dggelos, when it refers to a
Divine messenger, is frequently accompanied by
some phrase which makes this meaning clear,
eg. “the angels of heaven” (Mt 24 36). Angels


AV form of


133


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Andronicus
Angel


belong to the “heavenly host” (Lk 2 13). In
reference to their nature they are called “spirits”
(He 1 14). Paul evidently referred to the ordered
ranks of supra-mundane beings in a group of words
that are found in various combinations, viz. ar-
chat, “principalities,” exoustat, “powers,” thrénot,
“thrones,” kuriététes, “dominions,” and dundmeis,
also translated ‘“‘powers.”’ The first four are ap-
parently used in a good sense in Col 1 16, where it
is said that all these beings were created through
Christ and unto Him; in most of the other pas-
sages in which words from this group occur, they
seem to represent evil powers. We are told that
our wrestling is against them (Eph 6 12), and
that Christ triumphs over the principalities and
powers (Col 2 15; cf Rom 8 38; 1 Cor 16 24).
In two passages the word archdggelos, “archangel”
or chief angel, occurs: ‘‘the voice of the archangel”
(1 Thess 4 16), and ‘Michael the archangel”

(Jude ver 9).
if, Angels in OT.—Everywhere in the OT the
existence of angels is assumed. The creation of
angels is referred to in Ps 148 2.5 (cf


1. Nature, Col 1 16). They were present at the
Appear- creation of the world, and were so filled
ances and with wonder and gladness that they
Functions ‘shouted for joy” (Job 38 7). Of their

nature we are told nothing. In general


they are simply regarded as embodiments of their
mission. Though presumably the holiest of created
beings, they are charged by God with folly (Job
4 18), and we are told that “he putteth no trust
in his holy ones” (Job 15 15). References to the
fall of the angels are only found in the obscure and
probably corrupt passage Gen 6 1-4, and in the
interdependent passages 2 Pet 2 4 and Jude ver 6,
which draw their inspiration from the Apocryphal
book of Enoch. Demons are mentioned (see Dr-
Mons); and although Satan appears among the sons
of God (Job 1 6; 2 1), there is a growing tendency
in later writers to attribute to him a malignity that
is all his own (see Satan).

As to their outward appearance, it is evident
that they bore the human form, and could at. times
be mistaken for men (Ezk 9 2; Gen 18 2.16).
There is no hint that they ever appeared in female
form. The conception of angels as winged beings,
so familiar in Christian art, finds no support in
Scripture (except, perhaps Dnl 9 21; Rev 14 6,
where angels are represented as “flying’”’). The
cherubim and seraphim (see CHERUB; SERAPH)
are represented as winged (Ex 26 20; Isa 6 2);
winged also are the symbolic living creatures of
Ezk (Ezk 1 6; cf Rev 4 8). ;

As above stated, angels are messengers and instrv-
ments of the Divine will. As a rule they exercise
no influence in the physical sphere. In several
instances, however, they are represented as de-
stroying angels: two angels are commissioned to
destroy Sodom (Gen 19 13); when David num-
bers the people, an angel destroys them by pesti-
lence (2 S 24 16); it is by an angel that the Assyr
army is destroyed (2 K 19 35); and Ezekiel
hears six angels receiving the command to destroy
those who were sinful in Jerus (Ezk 9 1.5.7). In
this connection should be noted the expression
“angels of evil,” i.e. angels that bring evil upon men
from God and execute His judgments (Ps 78 49;
ef 1S 16 14). Angels appear to Jacob in dreams
(Gen 28 12; 81 11). The angel who meets Balaam
is visible first to the ass, and not to the rider (Nu 22
22 ff). Angels interpret, God’s will, showing man
what is right for him (Job 33 23). The idea of
angels as caring for men also appears (Ps 91 11f),
although the modern conception of the possession
by each man of a special guardian angel is not found
in OT.


The phrase ‘‘the host of heaven” is applied to
the stars, which were sometimes worshipped by
idolatrous Jews (Jer 83 22; 2 K 21


2. The 8; Zeph 1 5); the name is applied
Angelic to the company of angels because of
Host their countless numbers (ef Dnl 7 10)


and their glory. They are represented
as standing on the right and left hand of Jeh (1 K
22 19). Hence God, who is over them all, is con-
tinually called throughout OT “‘the God of hosts,”
“Jeh of hosts,” ‘“Jeh God of hosts’; and once “the
prince of the host” (Dn!l 8 11). One of the principal
functions of the heavenly host is to be ever praising
the name of the Lord (Ps 103 21; 148 1f). In
this host there are certain figures that stand out
prominently, and some of them are named. The
angel who appears to Joshua calls himself ‘prince
of the host of Jeh’ (Josh 6 14 f). The glorious
angel who interprets to Daniel the vision which he
saw in the third year of Cyrus (Dnl 10 5), like the
angel who interprets the vision in the first year of
Belshazzar (Dn! 7 16), is not named; but other
visions of the same prophet were explained to him
by the angel Gabriel, who is called ‘‘the man
Gabriel,” and is described as speaking with “a
man’s voice’ (Dnl 9 21; 8 15f). In Daniel we
find occasional reference made to “princes”: “the
prince of Persia,” “the prince of Greece’’ (10 20).
These are angels to whom is intrusted the charge
of, and possibly the rule over, certain peoples.
Most notable among them is Michael, described
as ‘one of the chief princes,” “the great, prince who
standeth for the children of thy people,” and, more
briefly, “your prince’ (Dnl 10 13; 12 1; 10 21);
Michael is therefore regarded as the patron-angel
of the Jews. In Apoc Raphael, Uriel and Jeremiel
are also named. Of Raphael it is said (Tob 12 15)
that he is “one of the seven holy angels who pre-
sent the prayers of the saints” to God (cf Rev 8 2,
“the seven angels that stand before God”). It
is possible that this group of seven is referred to in
the above-quoted phrase, ‘‘one of the chief princes.”
Some (notably Kosters) have maintained that the
expressions ‘‘the sons of the éldhim,” God's ‘‘coun-
cil” and “congregation,” refer to the ancient gods
of the heathen, now degraded and wholly subor-
dinated to Jeh. This rather daring speculation has
little support m Scripture; but we find traces of a
belief that the patron-angels of the nations have
failed in establishing righteousness within their allot-
ted sphere on earth, and that they will accordingly
be punished by Jeh their over-Lord (Isa 24 21 f;
Ps 82; cf Ps 68 1f RVm; cf Jude ver 6).
This angel is spoken of as “the angel of Jeh,”’
and ‘the angel of the presence (or face) of Jeh.”
The following passages contain refer-
3. The ences to this angel: Gen 16 7 fi—
Angel of the the angel and Hagar; Gen 18—
Theophany Abraham intercedes with the angel for
Sodom; Gen 22 11 fi—the angel in-
terposes to prevent the sacrifice of Isaac; Gen 24
7.40—Abraham sends Eliezer and promises him
the angel’s protection; Gen 31 11 ff—the angel
who appears to Jacob says “I am the God of
Beth-el”; Gen 32 24 fi—Jacob wrestles with the
angel and says, “I have seen God face to face”;
Gen 48 15 f—Jacob speaks of God and the angel
as identical; Ex 3 (cf Acts 7 30 ff)—the angel
appears to Moses in the burning bush; Ex 13 21;
14 19 (cf Nu 20 16)—God or the angel leads Israel
out of Egypt; Ex 23 20 fi—the people are com-
manded to obey the angel; Ex 32 34—33 17 (cf Isa
63 9)—Moses pleads for the presence of God with
His people; Josh 6 13—6 2—the angel appears to
Joshua; Jgs 2 1-5—the angel speaks to the people;
Jgs 6 11 ff--the angel appears to Gideon.
A study of these passages shows that while the


Angel
Angle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


134


angel and Jeh are at times distinguished from each
other, they are with equal frequency, and in the
same passages,’ merged into each other. How is
this to be explained? It is obvious that these
apparitions cannot be the Almighty Himself,
whom no man hath seen, or can see. In seeking
the explanation, special attention should be paid
to two of the passages above cited. In Ex 23 20 ff
God promises to send an angel before His people
to lead them to the promised land; they are com-
manded to obey him and not to provoke him “for
he will not pardon your transgression: for my
name is in him.” Thus the angel can forgive sin,
which only God can do, because God’s name, i.e.
His character and thus His authority, are in the
angel. Further, in the passage Ex 32 34—33 17
Moses intercedes for the people after their first
breach of the covenant; God responds by promising,
“Behold, mine angel shall go before thee’; and
immediately after God says, “I will not go up in
the midst of thee.” In answer to further pleading,
God says, “(My presence shall go with thee, and I
will give thee rest.” Here a clear distinction is
made between an ordinary angel, and the angel who
carries with him God’s presence. The conclusion
may be summed up in the words of Davidson in
his OT Theology: “In particular providences one
may trace the presence of Jeh in influence and
operation; in ordinary angelic appearances one
may discover Jeh present on some side of His
being, in some attribute of His character; in the
angel of the Lord He is fully present as the covenant,
God of Ilis people, to redeem them.” The ques-
tion still remains, Who is the theophanic angel?
To this many answers have been given, of which
the following may be mentioned: (1) This angel
is simply an angel with a special commission;
(2) He may be a momentary descent of God into
visibility; (8) He may be the Logos, a kind of
temporary preincarnation of the second person of
the Trinity. Each has its difficulties, but the last
is certainly the most tempting to the mind. Yet
it must be remembered that at best these are only
conjectures that touch on a great mystery. It is
certain that from the beginning God used angels
in human form, with human voices, in order to
communicate with man; and the appearances of
the angel of the Lord, with his special redemptive
relation to God’s people, show the working of that
Divine mode of self-revelation which culminated
in the coming of the Saviour, and are thus a fore-
shadowing of, and a preparation for, the full reve-
lation of God in Jesus Christ. Further than this it
is not safe to go.
WI. Angels in NT.—Nothing is related of angels
in NT which is inconsistent with the teaching of
OT on the subject. Just as they are
1. Appear- specially active in the beginning of
ances OT history, when God’s people is being
born, so they appear frequently in con-
nection with the birth of Jesus, and again when a
new order of things begins with the resurrection.
An angel appears three times in dreams to Joseph
(Mt 1 20; 2 13.19). The angel Gabriel appears to
Zacharias, and then to Mary in the annunciation
(Lk 1). An angel announces to the shepherds the
birth of Jesus, and is joined by a “multitude of the
heavenly host,” praising God in celestial song
(Lk 2 8 ff). When Jesus is tempted, and again
during the agony at Gethsemane, angels appear to
Him to strengthen His soul (Mt 4 11; Lk 22 48).
The verse which tells how an angel came down to
trouble the pool (Jn 5 4) is now omitted from the
text as not being genuine. An angel descends to
roll away the stone from the tomb of Jesus (Mt 28
2); angels are seen there by certain women (Lk 24
23) and (two) by Mary Magdalene (Jn 20 12).


An angel releases the apostles from prison, directs
Philip, appears to Peter in a dream, frees him .
from prison, smites Herod with sickness, appears
to Paul in a dream (Acts 5 19; 8 26; 10 3; 12
7 ff; 12 23; 27 23). Once they appear clothed
in white; they are so dazzling in appearance as
to terrify beholders; hence they begin their message
with the words “Fear not” (Mt 28 2-5).
It is quite certain that Our Lord accepted the
main teachings of OT about angels, as well as the
later Jewish belief in good and bad
2. The angels. He speaks of the ‘angels
Teaching of in heaven” (Mt 22 30), and of ‘‘the
Jesus about devil and his angels’? (Mt 26 41).
Angels According to Our Lord the angels of
God are holy (Mk 8 88); they have
no sex or sensuous desires (Mt 22 30); they have
high intelligence, but they know not the time of the
Second Coming (Mt 24 36); they carry (in a
parable) the soul of Lazarus to Abraham’s bosom
(Lk 16 22); they could have been summoned to
the aid of Our Lord, had He so desired (Mt 26 53);
they will accompany Him at the Second Coming
(Mt 25 31) and separate the righteous from the
wicked (Mt 18 41.49). They watch with sym-
pathetic eyes the fortunes of men, rejoicing in the
repentance of a sinner (Lk 15 10; cf 1 Pet 1 12;
Eph 3 10; 1 Cor 4 9); and they will hear the
Son of Man confessing or denying those who have
confessed or denied Him before men (Lk 12 8 f).
The angels of the presence of God, who do not
appear to correspond to our conception of guardian
angels, are specially interested in God’s little ones
(Mt 18 10). Finally, the existence of angels is
implied in the Lord’s Prayer in the petition, “Thy
will be done, as in heaven, so on earth” (Mt 6 10).
Paul refers to the ranks of angels (‘‘principalities,
powers,” etc) only in order to emphasize the com-
plete supremacy of Jesus Christ. He


3. Other teaches that angels will be judged by
NT Refer- the saints (1 Cor 6 3). He attacks
ences the incipient Gnosticism of Asia Minor

by forbidding the worship of angels
(Col 2 18). He speaks of God’s angels as “elect,”


because they are included in the counsels of Divine
love (1 Tim 5 21). When Paul commands the
women to keep their heads covered in church be-
cause of the angels (1 Cor 11 10) he probably
means that the angels, who watch all human
affairs with deep interest, would be pained to see
any infraction of the laws of modesty. In He (1 14)
angels are described as ministering spirits engaged
in the service of the saints. Peter also emphasizes
the supremacy of Our Lord over all angelic beings
(1 Pet 3 22). The references to angels in 2 Pet
and Jude are colored by contact with Apoc lit.
In Rev, where the references are obviously sym-
bolic, there is very frequent mention of angels.
The angels of the seven churches (1 20) are the
guardian angels or the personifications of these
churches. The worship of angels is also forbidden
(22 8f). Specially interesting is the mention of
elemental angels—‘the angel of the waters”
(16 5), and the angel “that hath power over fire”
(14 18; cf 7 1; 19 17). Reference is also made
to the “angel of the bottomless pit,” who is called
Apapnon or APpoLuyon (q.v.), evidently an evil
angel (9 11 AV, RV “abyss”). In 12 7ff we are
told that there was war between Michael with his
angels and the dragon with his angels.

IV. Development of the Doctrine.—In the
childhood of the race it was easy to believe
in God, and He was very near to the soul. In
Paradise there is no thought of angels; it is God
Himself who walks in the garden. A little later
the thought of angels appears, but God has not
gone away, and as “the angel of Jeh” He appears


135


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Angel
Angie


to His people and redeems them. In these early
times the Jews believed that there were multitudes
of angels, not yet divided in thought into good
and bad; these had no names or personal charac-
teristics, but were simply embodied messages. Till
the time of the captivity the Jewish angelology
shows little development. During that dark
period they came into close contact with a poly-
theistic people, only to be more deeply confirmed
in their monotheism thereby. They also became
acquainted with the purer faith of the Persians,
and in all probability viewed the tenets of Zoroas-
trianism with a more favorable eye, because of the
great kindness of Cyrus to their nation. There
are few direct traces of Zoroastrianism in the later
angelology of the OT. It is not even certain that
the number seven as applied to the highest group
of angels is Pers in its origin; the number seven
was not wholly disregarded by the Jews. One
result of the contact was that the idea of a hierarchy
of the angels was more fully developed. The con-
ception in Dnl of angels as ‘“‘watchers,’’ and the
idea of patron-princes or angel-guardians of nations
may be set down to Pers influence. It is probable
that contact with the Persians helped the Jews to
develop ideas already latent in their minds. Ac-
cording to Jewish tradition, the names of the
angels came from Babylon. By this time the
consciousness of sin had grown more intense in the
Jewish mind, and God had receded to an immeas-
urable distance; the angels helped to fill the gap
between God and man.

The more elaborate conceptions of Daniel and
Zechariah are further developed in Apoc, especially
in 2 Esd, Tob and 2 Macc.

In the NT we find that there is little further
development; and by the Spirit of God its writers
were saved from the absurdly puerile teachings of
contemporary Rabbinism. We find that the Sad-
ducees, as contrasted with the Pharisees, did not
believe in angels or spirits (Acts 23 8). We may
conclude that the Sadducees, with their material-
istic standpoint, and denial of the resurrection,
regarded angels merely as symbolical expressions
of God’s actions. It is noteworthy in this con-
nection that the great priestly document P makes
no mention of angels. The Book of Revelation
naturally shows a close kinship to the books of
Ezk and Dol. ee

Regarding the rabbinical developments of angel-
ology, some beautiful, some extravagant, some
grotesque, but all fanciful, it is not necessary here
to speak. The Essenes held an esoteric doctrine of
angels, in which most scholars find the germ of the

ic eons.

en The Reality of Angels.—A belief in angels,
if not indispensable to the faith of a Christian,
has its place there. In such a belief there is
nothing unnatural or contrary to reason. Indeed,
the warm welcome which human nature has
always given to this thought, is an argument
in its favor. Why should there not be such an
order of beings, if God so willed it? For the
Christian the whole question turns on the weight
to be attached to the words of Our Lord. _All are
agreed that He teaches the existence, reality, and
activity of angelic beings. Was He in error be-
cause of His human limitations? That is a con-
clusion which it is very hard for the Christian to
draw, and we may set it.aside. Did He then adjust
His teaching to popular belief, knowing that what
He said was not true? This explanation would
seem to impute deliberate untruth to Our Lord, and
must equally be set aside. So we find ourselves
restricted to the conclusion that we have the guar-
anty of Christ’s word for the existence of angels;
for most Christians that will settle the question.


The visible activity of angels has come to an
end, because their mediating work is done; Christ
has founded the kingdom of the Spirit, and God’s
Spirit speaks directly to the spirit of man. This
new and living way has been opened up to us by
Jesus Christ, upon whom faith can yet behold the
angels of God ascending and descending. Still
they watch the lot of man, and rejoice in his sal-
vation; still they join in the praise and adoration
of God, the Lord of hosts; still can they be regarded
as ‘‘ministering spirits sent forth to do service for
the sake of them that shall inherit salvation.”


Lireratuns.—aAll OT and NT theologies contain dis-
cussions. Among the clder becks Oehler’s OT Theology
and Hengstenberg’s Christology of OT (for ‘‘angel of
Jeh’"’) and among modern ones Davidson's OT Theology
are specially valuable: The ablest supporter of the
theory that the ‘‘sons of the Elohim” are degraded gods
is Kosters, ‘‘ Het onstaan der Angelologie cnder Israel,”
TT 1876. See also arts. on ‘‘Angel''in HDB (by David-
son), BB, DCG, Jew Enc, RE (by Cremer). Oremer’s
Biblico-Theological NT Lexicon should be consulted s.v.
“aggelos.'' For Jewish beliefs see also Edersheim’s Life
and Times of Jesus, If, Appendix xiii. On the Pauline
angolology see Everling, Die paulinische Angelologie. On
the general subject see Godet, Biblical Studies; Mozley,
The Word, ch lix, and Latham, A Service of Angels.


Joun Macartney WILSON
ANGEL OF GOD. See ANGEL.


ANGEL OF JEHOVAH. See AnceEt (II, 3).


ANGELS OF THE SEVEN CHURCHES: It
is evident from the contexts of the various Biblical
passages in which the word ‘“‘angel’’ appears, that
the word does not always represent the same idea.
In such passages as Dn] 12 1 and Acts 12 15 it
would seem that the angel was generally regarded
as a superhuman being whose duty it was to guard
a nation or an individual, not unlike the jenet of
the Arabs. However, in Mal 2 7 and 3 1 (Heb) the
word is clearly used to represent men. In the NT
also, there are passages, such as Jas 2 25 (Gr), in
which the word seems to be applied to men. The
seven angels of the seven churches (Rev 1 20)
received seven letters, fig. letters, and therefore it
would seem that the seven angels are also fig. and
may refer to the seven bishops who presided over
the seven churches of Asia. Or the angels may be
regarded as the personifications of the churches.

E. J. Banxs

ANGER, an’gér: In the OT, the tr of several
Heb words, esp. of SS, ’aph (lit. “nostril,’”’ “counte-
nance’’), which is used some 45 times of human, 177
times of Divine, anger (OHL). The word occurs
rarely in the NT (Mk 3 5; Eph 4 31; Col 3 8;
Rev 14 10), its place being taken by the word
“wrath” (see WRaTH). As a tr of words denoting
God's ‘‘anger,”’ the Eng. word is unfortunate so far as
it may seem to imply selfish, malicious or vindictive.
personal feeling. The anger of God is the response
of His holiness to outbreaking sin. Particularly
when it culminates in action is it rightly called His
“wrath.’’ The OT doctrine of God’s anger is con-
tained in many passages in the Pent, Pss and the
prophets. In Prov men are dissuaded from anger
(15 1; 27 4), and the “slow to anger’ is commended
(15 18; 16 32; 19 11). Christians are enjoined to
put away the feeling of self-regarding, vindictive
anger (Eph 4 31; Col 3 8), and to cherish no desire
of personal revenge (Eph 4 26). F. K. Farr


ANGLE, an’g’l: Used in Isa 19 8 for a Heb noun
that is rendered “hook” in Job 41 1: ‘The fishers
shall lament, and all they that cast angle [hook] into
the Nile shall mourn.” For a striking fig. use of it
see Hab 1 15 where, speaking of the wicked devour-
ing the righteous, ‘making men as the fishes of the
sea,” the prophet says: ‘They take up all of them
with the angle, they catch them in their net” (RV
uses singular).


Angling
Annus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


136


ANGLING, an’gling: Angling, i.e. fishing with
a hook or angle, was little known among the an-
cients. The fish were chiefly taken by casting nets,
etc (see Mt 13 47). Cf e.g. “Then did Deucalion
first the art invent of angling’ (Davors, Secret of
Angling,1). See Net.


ANGLO-SAXON VERSIONS, an-glo-sax’on viir’-
shuns. See ENGLISH VERSIONS.


ANGUISH, an’gwish: Extreme distress of body,
mind or spirit; excruciating pain or suffering of
soul, e.g. excessive grief, remorse, despair. Chiefly
expressed in OT, by four derivatives of PZ, uk,
“straitened,’’ ‘‘pressed,”’ and “WZ, gar, and two deriv-
atives signifying ‘‘straitness,” ‘narrowness,’ hence
distress; also T2W, shabhag, “giddiness,” ‘‘confusion
of mind”; San, hal, ‘‘to twist’’ with pain, “writhe.”’
So in the NT, @At/:s, thlipsis, “‘a pressing together,”
hence affliction, tribulation; c7evoxwpla, stenoché-
ria, ‘narrowness of place,” hence extreme affliction ;
avv0x%, sunoché, “a holding together,” hence dis-
tress. The fundamental idea in these various terms
is pressure—being straitened, compressed into a
narrow place, or pain through physical or mental
torture. Used of the physical agony of child-birth
(Jer 4 81; 6 24; 49 24; 50 43; Jn 16 21); of
distress of soul as the result of sin and wickedness
(Job 15 24; Prov 1 27; Rom 2 9); of anguish of
spirit through the cruel bondage of slavery (Ex 6 9)
and Assyr oppression (Isa 8 22); of the anxiety and
pain of Christian love because of the sins of fellow-
disciples (2 Cor 2 4). Dwicut M. Pratr


ANIAM, a-ni’am (03732, ‘dnt‘am, “lament of
the people’): A son of Shemidah of Manasseh
(1 Ch 7 19).


ANIM, a’/nim (0°22, ‘anim, “springs’”’): One of
the cities of the hill country of Judah mentioned
immediately after Eshtemoa (Josh 15 50). It is
probably represented by the double ruin of el
Ghuwein situated S. of es Semu‘a. The surface
remains are Byzantine—a Christian town called
Anem was here in the 4th cent., but it is clearly an
ancient site of importance (PEF, III, 408; Sh,
XXV).


ANIMAL, an’i-mal: See uuder the various names
and also general art. on ZoGLoGy.


ANISE, an‘is, or DILL, dil; (RVm, Gvnfov,
dnéthon): Not the true anise, Pimpinella anisum,
as was supposed by AV translators, but Dill,
Anethum graveolens. This is an annual or biennial
herb of NO Umbelliferae, growing from one to
three feet high, with small yellow flowers and
brownish, flattened, oval fruits 4 in. long. It
grows wild in lands bordering on the Mediterranean.
The seeds have an aromatic flavor and are used as
condiment in cooking, as carminative in medicine.
“Dill water” is a favorite domestic remedy.
Jesus said (Mt 23 23): “Woe unto you scribes
and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye tithe mint and
anise and cummin, and have left undone the
weightier matters of the law,” etc. In the tract,
Ma‘asérath (4 5) it is mentioned that this plant
(Heb shabhath), its stem, leaves and seed, was
subject to tithe. (See cut.)

E. W. G. Masterman

ANKLE, an’k’! (in older edd of AV ancle):
From Heb D'GDN A, mé ’Gph*sayim, lit. “water of
ankles,” i.e. shallow water (Ezk 47 3); “ankle-
bones” (Acts 3 7) from c¢vdpér,  sphudrén;
“ankle chains’ (AV ‘“chains”), from a Heb root
meaning ‘to walk about proudly” (Nu 31 50).
The same Heb word is tr4 “bracelet” (2 8 1 10),


but in Isa 3 20 another word from the same root
“ankle chains” (AV “ornaments of the legs”). Cf
ANKLET (Isa 3 18).


Anise—Anethum graveolens.


ANKLET, ANKLE-CHAIN, anklet, an’k’l-chan:
“Anklets” is rightly found in Isa 3 18 RV, and
“snkle-chains” m Nu 81 50 RV. A cognate word
of essentially the same meaning is used in Isa 3
20, and is rendered by AV “ornaments of the legs.”
It was these “anklets’’ that Isaiah represented the
ladies of Jerusalem as “rattling” as they walked
(Isa 8 16 to end), “making a tinkling with their
feet’; and a part of the punishment threatened
is, “The Lord will take away the bravery of their
tinkling ornaments about their feet” (Isa 3 16 AV).


4
Egyptian Anklets. 1-4, Ancient; 5, Modern.


ANNA, an‘a ("Avva, Anna [WH, Haénna; see
Intro, 408]; Heb equivalent M30, hannah, signi-
fying ‘grace’ 1S 1 2):

(1) The wife of Tobit (Tob 1 9).

(2) A “prophetess,”’ daughter of Phanuel, of the
tribe of Asher, and thus a Galilean, living in Jerus
at the time of Jesus’ birth (Lk 2 36-38). “Of a
great age,” she must have been considerably over
100 years, having been a widow 84 years after a
short married life of seven (see RV). Exceptionally
devout and gifted in spirit, she worshipped so con-
stantly “with fastings and supplications night and
day,” that she is said to have “departed not from
the temple.” Some have mistakenly supposed


137


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Angling
Annus


that this signified permanent residence in the
temple. The fact that her lineage is recorded
indicates the distinction of her family. Tradition
says that the tribe of Asher was noted for the beauty
and talent of its women, who, for these gifts, were
qualified for royal and high-priestly marriage.
While the tribe of Asher was not among the tribes
that returned from the Bab exile to Pal, many of
its chief families must have done so as in the case
of the prophetess. The period of war and national
oppression, through which Anna’s early life was
passed, created in her, as in the aged Simeon, an
intense longing for the “redemption’’ promised
through the Messiah. See Simeon. This hope
of national deliverance sustained her through more
than four decades of patient waiting. In the birth
of Jesus her faith was abundantly rewarded, and
she became a grateful and ceaseless witness ‘‘to
all them that were looking for the redemption of
Jerusalem,” that the day of their spiritual deliver-
ance had come.


Lirerature.—See Edersheim, Life and Times of Jesus,
I, 200-201; Geikie, Life and Words of Christ, I, 133-34.


Dwicut M. Pratr


ANNAAS, an’a-as (Zavdas, Sandas, 1 Esd 6 23,
RV SANAAS): The Senaah of Ezr 2 35.


ANNAS, an’as (‘Avvas, Annas; WH Hannas; Jos
Ananos, the Gr form of Heb 720), hanan; ‘“merci-
ful,” “gracious”; cf Neh 8 7, etc):

(1) A high priest of the Jews, the virtual head
of the priestly party in Jerus in the time of Christ,
a man of commanding influence. He was the son
of Seth (Jos,Sethi), and was elevated to the high-
priesthood by Quirinins, governor of Syria, 7
AD. At this period the office was filled and va-
cated at the caprice of the Rom procurators, and
Annas was deposed by Valerius Gratus, 15 AD.
But though deprived of official status, he continued
to wield great power as the dominant member of
the hierarchy, using members of his family as his
willing instruments. That he was an adroit
diplomatist is shown by the fact that five of his
sons (Ant, XX, ix, 1) and his son-in-law Caiaphas
(Jn 18 13) held the high-priesthood in almost
unbroken succession, though he did not survive
to see the office filled by his fifth son Annas or
Ananus IJ, who caused Jas the Lord’s brother to
be stoned to death (cir 62 AD). Another mark of
his continued influence is, that long after he had
lost. his office he was still called “high priest,” and
his name appears first wherever the names of the
chief members of the sacerdotal faction are given.
Acts 4 6, “And Annas the high priest was there,
and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as
many as were of the kindred of the high priest.”
Annas is almost certainly called high priest in
Jn 18 19.22, though in vs 13.24 Caiaphas is
mentioned as the high priest. Note especially the
remarkable phrase in Lk 3 2, “in the high-priest-
hood of Annas and Caiaphas,” as if they were
joint holders of the office. The cases in which
Jos gives the title “high-priest”’ to persons who no
longer held the office afford no real parallel to this.
The explanation seems to be that owing to age,
ability and force of character Annas was the virtual,
though Caiaphas the titular, high priest. He
belonged to the Sadducean aristocracy, and, like
others of that class, he seers to have been arro-
gant, astute, ambitious and enormously wealthy.
He and his family were proverbial for their rapacity
and greed. The chief source of their wealth seems
to have been the sale of requisites for the temple
sacrifices, such as sheep, doves, wine and oil, which
they carried on in the four famous “booths of the
sons of Annas” on the Mount of Olives, with a
branch within the precincts of the temple itself.


During the great feasts, they were able to extort
high monopoly prices for their goods. Hence our
Lord’s strong denunciation of those who made the
house of prayer “‘a den of robbers” (Mk 11 15-19),
and the curse in the Talm, ‘Woe to the family of
Annas! woe to the serpent-like hisses” (Pes 57a).
As to the part he played in the trial and death of
our Lord, although he does not figure very prom-
inently in the gospel narratives, he seems to have
been mainly responsible for the course of events.
Renan’s emphatic statement is substantially cor-
rect, ‘Annas was the principal actor in the terrible
drama, and far more than Caiaphas, far more
than Pilate, ought to bear the weight of the male-
dictions of mankind” (Life of Jesus). Caiaphas,
indeed, as actual high priest, was the nominal
head of the Sanhedrin which condemned Jesus, but
the aged Annas was the ruling spirit. According
to Jn 18 12.13, it was to him that the officers who
arrested Jesus led Him first. ‘The reason given
for that proceeding [“for he was father-in-law of
Caiaphas”] lays open alike the character of the
man and the character of the trial’ (Westcott, in
loc.). Annas (if he is the high priest of Jn 18 19-23,
as seems most likely) questioned Him concerning
His disciples and teaching. This trial is not
mentioned by the synoptists, probably because
it was merely informal and preliminary and of a
private nature, meant to gather material for the
subsequent trial. Failing to elicit: anything to his
purpose from Jesus, “Annas therefore sent him
bound unto Caiaphas the high priest” (Jn 18 24
AV is incorrect and misleading) for formal trial
before the Sanhedrin, “but as one already stamped
with a sign of condemnation” (Westcott). Doubt-
less Annas was present at the subsequent pro-
ceedings, but no further mention is made of him
in NT, except that he was present at the meeting
of the Sanhedrin after Pentecost when Peter and
John defended themselves for preaching the gospel
of the resurrection (Acts 4 6).

(2) Head of a family who returned with Ezra
(1 Esd 9 32), called “Harim” in Ezr 10 31.

D. Miauty Epwarps

ANNIS, an’is (AV Ananias; RVm Annias; ’Avvels,
Anneis B, ’Avwds, Annids A): The name of a
family in the list of the returning exiles (1 Esd 6
16). The name is not given in the || list in Ezr
and Neh.


ANNUL, DISANNUL, a-nul’, dis-a-nul’: God,
as the Supreme Ruler, can disannul His covenant
for cause (Isa 28 18); man, through wilfulness
and transgression, as party of the second part, may
break the contract and thus release Jeh, as party
of the first part (Job 40 8; Isa 14 27), though
there are some purposes and laws which the Al-
mighty will carry out in spite of ungodly rage and
ravings (Gal 3 15 AV); or an old law or covenant
might be conceived as disannulled by a new one
(Gal 3 17), or because of its becoming obsolete
and ineffective (He 7 18). For the first idea, the
Heb employs "23, kaphar=‘“‘to cover,” “to ex-
piate,” “condone,” ‘‘placate,” “cancel,” “cleanse,”
“disannul,” “purge,” “put off” (Isa 28 18); and
the Gr (Gal 3 15), atheiéd = “‘to set aside,” “dis-
esteem,” “neutralize,” “violate,” “frustrate.” One
covenant disannulling another by ‘“‘conflict of laws’
is expressed by akuréé, “to invalidate,” “disannul,”
“make of no effect.” Atheté6 is employed to ex-
press also the disannulling through age and disuse
(He 7 18). Frank E. Hirsca


ANNUS, an’us (A, "“Awvovs, Annous, B, Anni-
ovth; AV Anus=Bani, Neh 8 7): One of the
Levites who interpreted the law to the people
(1 Esd 9 48).


Annuus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


138


Antediluvian


ANNUUS, an’t-us ("Avvovvos, Announos): Re-
turned with Ezra from Babylon to perform the
functions of a priest in Jerus (1 Esd 8 48). Omitted
in Ezr 8 19.


ANOINT, a-noint’, ANOINTED, a-noint’ed
(arelbw, aleiphd, xplw, chrid): Refers to a very
general practice in the East. It originated from the
relief from the effect of the sun that was expe-
rienced in rubbing the body with oil or grease.
Among rude people the common vegetable or animal
fat was used. As society advanced and refine-
ment became a part of civilization, delicately per-
fumed ointments were used for this purpose.
Other reasons soon obtained for this practice than
that stated above. Persons were anointed for
health (Mk 6 13), because of the widespread belief
in the healing power of oil. It was often employed
as a mark of hospitality (Lk 7 46); as a mark of
special honor (Jn 11 2); in preparation for social
occasions (Ruth 3 3; 2 Sam 14 2; Isa 61 3). The
fig. use of this word (chrid) has reference strictly to
the coming of the Holy Spirit upon the individual
(Lk 4 18; Acts 4 27; 10 38). In this sense it is
God who anoints (He 19; 2 Cor 1 21). The
thought is to appoint, or qualify for a special dignity,
function or privilege. It is in this sense that the
word is applied to Christ (Jn 1 41m; Acts 4 27;
10 38; He 1 9; cf Ps 2 2; Dnl 9 25). See also
ANOINTING. Jacop W. Karp


ANOINTING, a-noint’ing: A distinction was
made by the ancient Hebrews between anointing
with oil in private use, as in making one’s toilet
(FAO, skh), and anointing as a religious rite (NW),
mashah).

(1) As regards its secular or ordinary use, the
native olive oil, alone or mixed with perfumes, was

commonly used for toilet purposes, the
i. Ordinary very poor naturally reserving it for
Use special occasions only (Ruth 3 3). The

fierce protracted heat and biting lime
dust of Palestine made the oil very soothing to the
skin, and it was applied freely to exposed parts of
the body, especially to the face (Ps 104 15).

(2) The practice was in vogue before David’s
time, and traces of it may be found throughout the
OT (see Dt 28 40; Ruth 3 3; 2S 12 20; 14 2;
2 Chron 28 15; Ezk 16 9; Mic 6 15; Dnl 10 3)
and in the NT (Mt 6 17, etc). Indeed it seems to
have been a part of the daily toilet throughout the
East.

(3) To abstain from it was one token of mourning
(28 14 2; cf Mt 6 17), and to resume it a sign
that the mourning was ended (2 S 12 20; 14 2;
Dnl 10 3; Jth 10 3). It often accompanied the
bath (Ruth 3 3; 2 8 12 20; Ezk 16 9; Sus 17),
and was a customary part of the preparation for a
feast (Eccl 9 8; Ps 23 5). One way of showing
honor to,a guest was to anoint his head with oil
(Ps 23 5; Lk 7 46); a rarer and more striking
way was to anoint his feet (Lk 7 38). In Jas 6
14, we have an instance of anointing with oil for
medicinal purposes, for which see OIL.

Anointing as a religious rite was practised through-
out the ancient East in application both to persons

and to things.
2. Religious (1) It was observed in Canaan long
Use before the Heb conquest, and, ac-

cordingly, Weinel (Stade’s Zettschrift,
XVIII, 50 ff) holds that, as the use of oil for gener-
al purposes in Israel was an agricultural custom
borrowed from the Canaanites, so the anointing
with sacred oil was an outgrowth from its regular
use for toilet, purposes. It seems more in accord-
ance with the known facts of the case and the terms
used in description to accept the view set forth by


Robertson Smith (Religion of the Semites, 2d ed,
233, 383 ff; cf Wellhausen, Reste des arabischen
Heidenthums, 2d ed, 125 ff) and to believe that the
sikh or use of oil for toilet purposes, was of agricul-
tural and secular origin, and that the use of oil for
sacred purposes, mdshah, was in origin nomadic and
sacrificial. Robertson Smith finds the origin of the
sacred anointing in the very ancient custom of
smearing the sacred fat on the altar (maceébhah),
and claims, rightly it would seem, that from the first
there was a distinct and consistent usage, distin-
guishing the two terms as above.

(2) The primary meaning of mashah in Heb,
which is borne out by the Arab., seems to have
been “to daub” or ‘‘smear.” It is used of painting
a ceiling in Jer (22 14), of anointing a shield in Isa
(21 5), and is, accordingly, consistently applied to
sacred furniture, like the altar, in Ex 29 36 and
Dnl 9 24, and to the sacred pillar in Gen 31 13:
“where thou anointedst a pillar.”

(3) The most significant uses of mdéshah, however,
are found in its application, not to sacred things,
but to certain sacred persons. The oldest and most
sacred of these, it would seem, was the anointing
of the king, by pouring oil upon his head at his
coronation, a ceremony regarded.as sacred from the
earliest times, and observed religiously, not in
Israel only, but in Egypt and elsewhere (see Jgs
98.15; 18916; 101; 2819 10; 1K 1 39.
45; 2 K 9 3.6; 1112). Indeed such anointing
appears to have been reserved exclusively for the
king in the earliest times, which accounts for the
fact that ‘‘the Lord’s anomted’’ hecame a synonym
for “king” (see 18 123.5; 2611; 28 1 14;
Ps 20 6). It is thought by some that the practice
originated in Egypt, and it is known to have been
observed as a rite in Canaan at a very early day.
Am Tab 37 records the anointing of a king.

(4) Among the Hebrews it was believed not only
that it effected a transference to the anointed one
of something of the holiness and virtue of the deity
in whose name and by whose representative the
rite was performed, but also that it imparted a
special endowment of the spirit of Jeh (cf 1 S 16
13; Isa 61 1). Hence the profound reverence for
the king as a sacred personage, ‘‘the anointed”
(Heb, m*shith YHWH), which passed over into
our language through the Gr Christos, and appears
as “Christ.”

(5) In what is known today as the PC, the high
priest is spoken of as “‘anointed’”’ (Ex 29 7; Lev
43; 8 12), and, in passages regarded by some as
later additions to the PC, other priests also are thus
spoken of (Ex 30 30; 40 13-15). Elijah was told
to anoint Elisha as a prophet (1 K 19 16), but
seems never to have done so. 1 K 19 16 gives us
the only recorded instance of such a thing as the
anointing of a prophet. Isa 61 1 is purely meta-
phorical (ef Dillmann on Lev 8 12-14 with ICC on .
Nu 3 3; see also Nowack, Lehrbuch der hebrdischen
Archdologie, II, 124).

LitERaTURE.—Jew Enc, art. ‘Anointing’; BJ, IV,
ix, 10; DB, art. ‘‘ Anointing,”' etc.

Gro. B. Hacer


ANON, a-non’ (ci8€os, euthéds, ed0bs, euthiis): In
AV of Mk 1 30; Mt 13 20, for “straightway” of
RY, i.e. ‘without delay,” “immediately.”


ANOS, a’nos ("Avos, Ands=Vaniah (Ezr 10 36):
A son of Bani who put away his “strange wife”
(1 Esd 9 34).


ANSWER, an’sér: In our Eng. Bible the word
“answer” does not always mean a simple reply to
a question.

Six different words are tr’ by answer. (1) It
is frequently used where no question has been


139


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Annuus
Antediluvian


asked and in such cases it means a word, a state-


ment. (2) It also means a response (Job 21 34;

34 36). (3) It often means a declara-
1. Inthe tion or proclamation from God where
OT no question has been asked. See the


many passages that.read: ‘The Lord
answered and said.’ (4) The other words tré
“answer” or “answered” in the OT are unimportant
shadings and variations.
The words tr’? “answer” are not so varied.
(1) It sometimes means an apology, a defence
(1 Pet 3 15: Acts 24 10.25). (2) It
2. Inthe may mean simply “to say’? (Mk 9 6).
NT (3) It may mean a revelation from
God (Rom 11 4). (4) It is also used
to apply to unspoken thoughts of the heart, esp.
in the sayings of Jesus; also by Peter to Sapphira
(Acts 5 8). G. H. Gerpernine


ANSWERABLE, an’sér-a-b’1: This word is found
in the OT only. Moses and Ezekiel alone use it
(Ex 38 18; Ezk 40 18; 46 7; 48 13.18). It is
used in the OE sense of “corresponding to,” “in
harmony with.” Bunyan uses it in the same sense
(Holy War, Clar. Press ed, 92).


ANT (M3'9), nemdlah=Arab. namalah): The
word occurs only twice in the Bible, in the familiar
passages in Prov (6 6; 30 25) in both of which
this insect is made an example of the wisdom of
providing in the summer for the wants of the
winter. Not all ants store up seeds for winter


Brown Ant—Formica brunnea.


2. lts natural size. 3, Cocoon, 4. Male.


5, 7. Natural sizes of 4 and 6.


1. Worker or neuter.
6. Female.


use, but among the ants of Pal there are several
species that do so, and their well-marked paths are
often seen about Palestinian threshing-floors and
in other places where seeds are to be obtained. The
path sometimes extends for a great distance from
the nest. Aurrep Exy Day


ANTEDILUVIAN PATRIARCHS, an-té-di-li’vi-
an pa’tri-arks: Ten patriarchs who lived before the
Flood are listed in the genealogical table


1. The of Gen 5, together with a statement of
Ten Ante- the age of each at the birth of his son,
diluvian the number of years that remained to
Patriarchs him till death, and the sum of both


periods or the entire length of his life.

The first half of the list, from Adam to Maha-
lalel inclusive, together with Enoch and ‘Noah is
the same in the three texts, except that the Sept
has 100 years more in the first column in each case
save that of Noah,and 100 years less in the second
column. See Curonotoey or OT.

Divergence exists in the case of Jared, Methuselah
and Lamech only. Even here the longevity of
Jared and Methuselah is given similarly in the
Heb and the Sept; and probably represents the
reading of the source, especially since the different


data in the Sam text bear evidence of adjustment
to a theory. The customary excess of 100 years
in the Sept over the other texts for
2. Diver- the age of the patriarch at the birth
gences be- of the son, and the variously divergent
tween the data for the total age of Jared, Me-
Three Texts thuselah and Lamech are, therefore,
the matters that await explanation.
The general superiority of the Heb text of the
Pent as a whole to the Sam text and the Sept is no
longer questioned by Bib. scholars. But whether
the superiority obtains in this particular passage
has given rise to long and earnest discussion. Keil
and Delitzsch in their commentaries on Genesis,
Preuss (Zetirechnung der Septuaginta, 1859, 30ff),
Noldeke (Untersuchung zur Kritik des AT, 1869,
112), and Eduard Kénig (ZKW, 1883, 281 ff),
hold to the originality of the Heb data. Bertheau
(Jahrbticher fir deutsche Theologie, XXIII, 687 ff)
and Dillmann ascribe prior authority to the Sam
numbers in Gen 5, but to the Heb numbers in
Gen 11. Klostermann argues for the originality of
the Sept (Pentateuch, Neue Folge, 1907, 37-39).


2 Fas EE SAM STAN Supruaaint*
a
a6 q ci |
Bo Ea Eg | &§
& fa} o| o a o| o@ fan} 6/2
a6 o |A|S) wo |e] oe | TS
a i a S | e |
aa g Ob he g a ee g OD |
- < a 4 Orb a Cale 3 is)
i a E=|
yt 3|3 2 a | 3 s 3) 2)%
| geile} 8 |ele| 8] eis
ce aie|a| <4 lela; a) a ja
Adam...... 130/800)930| 130/800/930) 230 |700 |930
Seth....... 105|807/912| 105)807|912; 205 |707 |912
Enoash..... 10)815|905 10/815|905;} 190 |715 |905
Kenan..... 70|840)910 70|840/910| 170 |740 |910
Mahalalel. . 65/830/895 65|830/895| 165 |730 1895
Jared...... 162/800/962 62/785/847| 162 |800 |962
moch..... 65|300/365 65)300}365) 165 (200 |365
Methuselah 187/782 /969 67|653/720] 167+ 802/969
Lamech... 182|/595|777 53|600/653] 188 [565 |753
Noah...... 500 pate 500 SOO ae cfe vs
To the :
Flood 100 100)... 100 |....
Hewes je Ee Ss
Creation of
man to
tho Flood.| 1,656 years |1,307 years | 2,242 years


* Jos (Ant, I, iil, 4) states only the age at son’s birth and the total length
of life; and in texts O and E (see Niese) agrees with the Sept as tabulated,
except that the longevity of Jared is given as 969 (but texts S, P and L as 962)
and of Lamech as 707, and the ago of Methuselah at son‘s birth as 187 (texts
Sand P 177).

+So Lucian; but A reads 187 and 782, and compare Jos.


It is agreed by all that the divergences between
the texts are mainly due, not to accidental corrup-


tion, but to systematic alteration.
3. Diver- Accordingly two tasks devolve upon
gences not the investigator, namely (1) the re-


Accidental moval of accidental corruptions from
the numerical data in the several
texts and (2) the discovery of a principle that
underlies and explains the peculiarities in each one
or in two of the three sets of data.
On the interpretation that the names denote
individuals and that no links have been omitted
in the genealogy, readers of the Sept


4. Differ- noticed that according to its data
ent Ex- Methuselah survived the flood, and
planations in order to avoid this incongruity


a scribe changed the 167 years, as-
cribed to his age at the birth of his son, to 187
ears. This reading was early in existence, and
was followed by Jos. Holding the same theory
regarding the genealogy, the Samaritans noticed
that by their data three men, Jared, Methuselah,
and Lamech, survived the Flood. To correct the


Antediluvian


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


140


apparent mistake, without tampering with the age
of these three men at parenthood, their longevity
was reduced sufficiently to enable them to die in
the year of the Deluge. If the Heb text in its
present form is not original, and is to be emended
from the Sam and Sept, the same difficulty inhered
in it. To overcome this difficulty, perhaps, 100
years were borrowed from the years that elapsed
between parenthood and death and were added
to the age of the three men at the time of begetting
ason. This relieved the matter as far as Jared
was concerned and perhaps in the case of Lamech
also, and the borrowing of an additional 20 years
set Methuselah right also. If the original number
for Lamech was 53 in the Heb, as in the Sam, then
it was necessary to increase the time between
Methuselah’s birth and the Flood not 20, but 49
years. These 49 years could not be added directly
to either Methuselah’s or Lamech’s age at begetting
a son without making this age exceed 200 years,
and thus be out of proportion; and accordingly the
49 years were distributed.

The difference of a cent. in the age assigned to
the patriarchs at the son’s birth which distin-
guishes the data of the Heb in most cases from the
Sept, and likewise from the Sam in several instances,
in Gen 6 and regularly until Nahor in 11 10-26,
is commonly explained in the following manner or
in a similar way: namely, when any of these long-
lived patriarchs was found recorded as having
begotten a son at a more youthful age than 150
years, the translators of the Sept added 100 years;
on the other hand the Sam struck off 100 years
when necessary in order that no one save Noah
might be recorded as reaching 150 years of age
before entering upon parenthood, and added 100
years when the record made a patriarch become
father of a son before attaining even 50 years. A
different explanation is, however, attempted, and
the reason for the constant variant is sought in the
purpose to construct an artificial chronology; for
on interpreting the names as denoting individual
persons and the genealogy as proceeding from
father to son without break, a method employed
as early as the Ist cent. of the Christian era
(Ant, I, iii, 3), the time that elapsed between the
creation of man and the Deluge was 1,656 years
according to the Heb text, 1,307 according to the
Sam text, and 2,242 according to the Sept; and
numerous attempts have been made to bring one
or other of these totals into arithmetical relation
with some conceivable larger chronological scheme.
A conspectus of these studies is furnished by De-
litzsch (Newer Commentar tiber die Genesis, 136-
39), Dillmann (Genesis, 6te Aufl, 111-13), and
most recently by Skinner (Critical and Exegetical
Comm. on Genesis, 135, 136, 234). The different ex-
planations that are offered naturally vary in plausi-
bility; but all possess the common fault of lacking
cogency at critical points and somewhere doing
violence to the data.

In Gen 4 there are two distinct genealogies, one
proceeding through Cain and the other through

Seth. Since Hupfeld, the representa-
5. The tive critics who partition Genesis have
Relation of generally reached the conclusion that
the Cainite both of these genealogies were found in
and Sethite the primary document of J or in an
Genealogies ancient recension of it (Wellhausen,

Composition des Hexateuchs*, 8-14;
Delitasch, Neuer Commentar, etc, 126; Kautzsch
und Socin; Dillmann, Geneszs*, 104, 116; Budde,
Urgeschichte, 182, 527-31; Driver, Introduction™,
14, 21; Strack, Genesis?, 23; Gunkel, Genesis, 49;
Skinner, Genesis, 2, 14, 99 [4]; Stade on the other
hand regards 4 25.26; 6 29 as the compilation of


a redactor, ZATW, X1V, 281). In Gen 5 there is
also a genealogy through Seth to Noah.


Portions assigned to J (see above) iP
Gen 4 17-24 ' 4 25.26; 6 29; 9) 5 3-32 (except
: 20-27 28c.29)
Adam Adam
Cain [Kain] Cain and Seth Seth
Enoch Enosh Enosh
‘Trad Kenan
Mehujael Mahalalel
Methushael Jared
Lamech Enoch
Jabal and Jubal, Methuselah
Tubal-Cain and Lamech
Naamah
Noah Noah
Shem, Ham Shem, Ham
and Japheth and Japheth


By removing vs 25 and 26 of ch 4 from their
present position and placing them before ver 1 or,
as Guthe does, before ver 17; and by
6. Resem- exscinding the word ‘‘Eve’’ from ver 1
blances and and understanding “the man” (hdé-
Differences ’ddhdm) to be Enosh; and by exscind-
in the Two ing from ver 25 the words “again,”
Lists “another,” and “instead of Abel, for
Cain slew him’; and by introducing
the words ‘and Lamech begat”’ before ‘“‘a son” in
6 28.29 and inserting this material in ch 4 between
vs 18 and 19 or after ver 24: then the two geneal-
ogies of ch 4 are reduced to one and, so far as the
names are concerned, have become almost identical
with the Sethite genealogy contained in ch 6. In
fact. the resemblances between the six names in
4 17.18 with six in ch 5 have from the first been
the basis of every attempt to identify the two
genealogies (Buttmann, Mythologus, 170-72). The
procedure is violent (see strictures, Skinner, Gene-
sis, 99). It is a serious objection also that the
work of reconstruction has been conducted without
thought of the possible bearing of the tribal theory
of the genealogies on this problem.

It is important to note that the number of links
in the two genealogies may indicate that Jabal,
Jubal, and Tubal-Cain, who mark stages of develop-
ing culture, lived several generations before Noah.
It was ancient Sem belief that civilization was far
advanced before the Flood, and was continued in
its various forms by the survivors (Berosus; and
inscription 13, col. i. 18 in Lehmann’s Shamash-
shumukin). However, for the sake of comparison,
the six links in the genealogical chain of the Cainites
are placed side by side with those of the Sethites
so as the better to reveal the resemblances and
differences.


CAINITES SETHITES
Kain Kenan [ = Kainan]
Enoch Mahalalel [praise of God]
‘Trad Jared
Mehujael (smitten of God] Enoch
Methushael Methuselah (correctly,
Methushelabh]
Lamech h i


Lamec
Jabal and Jubail, Shem, Ham and Japheth


Cain and Naamah


Tubal-


Of these names two, Enoch and Lamech, occur
in each genealogy, though Enoch does not occupy
the same place in both lists. Kenan is readily
derived’ from the same root as Kain. Instead of
‘Irad the original Hebrew text may have been
‘Idad, as was read by the LX X, A and Lucian.
But, accepting ‘Irad as original, ‘Irad and Jared
may conceivably have been distorted in the oral
tradition; yet as they stand they are radically
different, and one might as well compare Prussia
and Russia, Swede and Swiss, Austria and Austra-
lia. Methushael is written in the Sept exactly
as is Methuselah; but both names are fully estab-


141


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Antediluvian


lished by textual evidence and are fine Semitic
names. Methushael particularly is of good Bab
form, meaning “man of God’’; archaic in Heb or
smacking of the northern dialect, but quite intelli-

gible to the Israelite.
The resemblance between the six consecutive
names in the two lists is indeed striking, but the
differences are also great; and the


T. The wisdom of caution in pronouncing
Need of judgment is suggested and empha-
Caution sized by a comparison of two lists

from the later history of the people
of Israel. The twelve kings of Judah compared


with their nineteen contemporaries in northern
Israel show almost as many resemblances as the
ten Cainites to the twelve Sethites, Adam as the
common ancestor not being reckoned. The two
series begin with Rehoboam and Jeroboam, names
as similar externally as ‘Irad and Jared. Ahaziah
of Israel was almost contemporary with Ahaziah of
Judah; Jehoram was on the throne of Judah while
Jehoram ruled over Israel, the reign of Jehoash
of Judah overlapped that of Jehoash of Israel, and
Jehoahaz of Israel preceded about half a century
Ahaz, or, as his name appears in Assyr inscriptions,
Jehoahaz of Judah. If there can be two contem-
porary dynasties with these coincidences, surely
there could be two antediluvian races with an equal
similarity in the names. Then, too, the material
differences between the Cainite and Sethite lines are
great. Cain is the son of Adam; whereas Kenan
is the third remove, being descended through Seth
and Enosh. The two Enochs seeem to have
nothing in common save the name (4 17.18; 5
22.23). The character of the two Lamechs is
quite different, as appears from their speeches
(4 19.23; 6 28.29). The line of Cain terminated
in Lamech and his four children, of whom the three
sons became of note in the annals of civilization;
whereas the line of Seth continued through Noah,
the hero of the Flood, and his three sons who were
known only as the ancestors of peoples. More-
over, even excluding the section of Genesis assigned
to P, the two lines were distinguished from each
other, and most of the characteristic differences
between them were clearly set forth, in the most
ancient form of the Heb tradition, as it is actually
known (Green, Unity of Genesis, 48-49; Delitzsch,
Neuer Commentar, etc, 126, 127, 132, 140; Strack,
Genesis®, 22, 23, § III).

The order of narration in the Book of Genesis is
also significant. It indicates the writer’s percep-
tion of a profound difference between the two races.
The narrative regarding Cain and his descendants
is completed, according to invariable custom in the
Book of Genesis, before the line of Seth, in which
eventually Abraham appeared, is taken up and its
history recorded (Green, Unity of Genesis, 49;
Delitzsch, Newer Commentar, etc, 126). ‘Thus at
each stage of the history the story of the branch
line is told before the fortunes are recited of the
direct line of promise.

Berosus, a priest of Marduk’s temple at Baby-
lon about 300 BC, in the second book of his history

tells of the ten kings of the Chaldaeans


8. The who reigned before the Deluge. He
Register of says? that
Gen 6 and The first king was Avoros of [the city of']
Berosus’ Babylon, a Chaldaean. [He gave out
St a report about himself that God had
List of An- appointed him to be shepherd of the
tediluvian people.’] He reigned teu sars. [4 sar
Kings is thirty-six hundred years.’]
§ And afterwards Auaparos [his son reigned


three sars®, °].
And [after him3] AMELON [a Chaldaean‘], who was of [the
city of, 5] Pautibibla [reigned thirteeu sars'].
Then AMMENON the Chaldaean [ot Pautibibla reigned
twelve sars?, 5].


Then Mecauaros of the city of Pautibihla, and he
reigned eighteen sars.


And after him Daonos the shepherd of Pautibibla
reigned ten sars.

Then Evevoracuos of Pautibibla reigned eighteen sars.

Then Amempsinos, a Chaldaean of Laraucha, reigned;
and he, the eighth, was king ten sars. Next OrTraRrTes
a Chaldaean of Larancha, reigaed; and he [the ninth!]
was king eight sars.


And flast of all‘], upon the death of Otiartes, his son
Xisouthros reigned eighteen sars. In his time the
great deluge occurred. Thus, when summed up, the
kings are teu; and the sars are one hundred and
twenty for four hundred aud thirty-two thousand
years, reaching to the Flood!].

The original Bab form of seven of these ten names
has been detcrmined with a fair degree of certainty.
Alaparos is in all probability a misreading by a
copyist of the Gr Adaparos (Hommel, PSBA, XV,
243 ff; Zimmern, KAT, 530 ff), and accordingly
represents Adapa, followed perhaps by another ele-
ment beginning with the letter 7; Amelon and
Ammenon are equivalent to the Bab nouns amélu
(Delitzsch, Wo lag das Paradies? § 149; Hom-
mel, PSBA, XV, 243 ff; Zimmern, KAT’, 530 ff),
man, and ummanu (Hommel, PSBA, XV, 243 ff;
Zimmern, KA T%, 530 ff), workman; HEuedorachos
is Enmeduranki (pronounced Evveduranki) (Zim-
mern, KAT, 530ff); Amempsinos is probably
Amelu-Sin (Delitzsch, Wo lag das Paradies? 149;
Hommel, PSBA, XV, 243 ff; Zimmern, KAT,
530 ff), servant of the moon-god; Otiartes, a mis-
reading of the Greek Opartes, is Ubara-Tutu
(Delitzsch, Wo lag das Paradies? 149; Hommel,
PSBA, XV, 243 ff; Zimmern, KAT%, 530 ff),
meaning servant of Marduk; and Xisouthros is
Hasts-atra (Haupt, KAT?, 503; Zimmern, KAT,
530 ff), equivalent to Atra-hasts, an epithet given
to the hero of the Flood.

Several of these names are well known in Baby-
lonian literature: Adapa was a human being, a
wise man, a wizard, who failed to obtain immor-
tality. He was an attendant at the temple of
Ea in the town of Eridu, prepared bread and water
for the sanctuary and provided it with fish. Per-
haps it was his connection with the temple that
led to his being called son of Ea, and described as
created or built by Ea (Schrader, Keilinschrift-
liche Bibliothek, VI, 91-101). Similarly King
Esarhaddon calls himself the faithful son, child of
Beltis; and Ashurbanipal claims to have been
created or built by the gods Ashur and Sin in the
womb of his mother (cf Adam, the son of God,
Lk 8 38). Enmeduranki, whose name has been
interpreted as possibly meaning chief priest of
Duranki, the meeting place of sky and earth, was
a king of Sippar, a city whose patron deity was the
sun-god Shamash. He was a notable wise man
who, it seems, was reputed to have been taken by
the gods Shamash and Ramman into their fellow-
ship and made acquainted with the secrets of
heaven and earth (KAT, 530f). As among the
Hebrews the priests were descended from Aaron,
so among the Babylonians Enmeduranki was re-
garded as the ancestor of the wizards and sooth-
sayers or the founder of their guild. Amel-Sin is
elsewhere mentioned as the wise one of Ur (KAT,
537). In the Babylonian account of the Flood the
hero is addressed as son of Ubara-Tutu. It is
worth mention that legends grew up about the hero
of the Flood, as they have about other historical
personages since; and he even appears like some


1Syncellus quoting Alexander Polyhistor. 2Syncellus quoting Apollo-
dorus. 3Syncellus quoting Abydenus. 4Syncellus quoting Ahydenus con-
cerning the deluge. Eusebius, Armenian Chronicle, quoting Alexander
Polyhistor, ® Eusebius, Armenian Chronicle, quoting Abydenus. The royal
names have been transmitted with substantial uuiformity, except the third,
fifth, seventh and ninth. Amelon (2) is given os Amillaros (3) and Alnelon
(5, 6); Megalaros (2, 3) appears also as Amegalarus (5, 6); Euedorachos (2) as
Eudoreschos (3), Edoranchus (5), and Edoreschus (6); and Ardates (1) as
Otiartes (2, 5). For texts and readings see Richter, Berosi Chaldaeorum
Historiae, 52-56; Migne, Patrologia Greeca, X1X, ‘‘¥usehii Chronicorum,"’
Lib. 1, cap. i et vi, pp. 106, 121; Schoene, Husebii Chronicorum, Lib. L,
Pp. 7, 81.


Antediluvian
Antelope


ancient kings, with the determinative for god
before his name. Adapa also, who was classed
with the wizards, early came to have a place in
story.
The first name in the list of Berosus is Aloros.
Professor Hommel would understand the original
Bab form to have been Aruru, a god-
9. Corre- dess. The identification is precarious,
spondences to say the least; and evidently it was
not the conception of the Bab priest,
for it makes his line of kings begin with a god-
dess. He should have called Aloros a queen.
Professor Hommel regards Adapa also as a deity,
contrary to the statements of the tale itself; thus
holding that the second Bab king like the first was
a Divine being. On such an interpretation the
Bab and Heb lists are not identical, for the Heb
genealogy commences in Adam, human being.
With the third name, however, certain remarkable
correspondences begin to appear. The third Bab
king is Amelu, man, and the third patriarch is
Enosh, also meaning man; the, fourth king is
Ummanu, artificer, and the fourth patriarch is
Kenan, a name derived from a root meaning to
form or fabricate. The seventh king is Enmedn-
ranki, who apparently was reputed to have been
summoned by the gods Shamash and Ramman into
their fellowship and made acquainted with the
secrets of heaven and earth; and the seventh
patriarch was Enoch who walked with God (like
Noah, Gen 6 9; see KAT, 540). The tenth king,
like the tenth patriarch, was the hero of the Flood.
These facts are capable of two interpretations:
either the two catalogues are fundamentally dif-
ferent, having been constructed for different pur-
poses, yet as they deal with prominent persons
belonging to the same period of history and to the
same country, cross each other at various points
and culminate in the same individual (as do the
genealogies of Mt 1 and Lk 3); or else when the
unexplained names of both lists shall have been
finally interpreted, the two catalogues will be found
to represent the same tradition.
Differences between the catalogues exist, which
in some instances may be more apparent than real.
(1) In the Babylonian list the descent
10. Differ- of the government from father to son
ences is asserted in two instances only,
namely, from the first king to the
second and from the ninth to the tenth. The Heb
asserts kinship, however remote, between the suc-
cessive links. Yet the two records are quite com-
patible with each other in this respect on the
theory (see below) that the Heb genealogy was
shortened by omissions in order to name but ten
generations. (2) Each of the ten patriarchs is
assigned a long life; each of the ten kings has a
greatly longer reign. The contrast is twofold:
between the number of years in corresponding
cases, and between length of life and length of
reign. But instead of this difference indicating
non-identity of the two lines, it may be found, when
the Sem tradition is fully known, to afford the
explanation for the duration of life which is assigned
to the patriarchs. (3) There is no arithmetical
ratio between the years connected with the corre-
sponding names of the twolists. Andthesymmetry
of the numbers in the Bab transmission is open to
the suspicion of being artificial. The number of
kings is ten; the sum of their united reigns is one
hundred and twenty sars, a multiple of ten and of
the basal number of the Bab duodecimal system.
There are three reigns of ten sars each, and three
successive reigns which taken together, 3-+13-++12,
make ten and eighteen sars. Taking the reigns
in the order in which they occur, we have as their
duration the series 10, 18+10, 18, 10, 18, 10, 8,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


142


and 18 (Davis, Genesis and Semitic Tradition,
96-100; Strack, Genesis’, 24).
Three explanations of the genealogy in Gen 5
may be mentioned. (1) An interpretation, current
at the time of Jos (Ant, I, iu, 4) and
11. The In- adopted by Archbishop Usher in
terpretation 1650 in his attempt to fix the dates of
of the the events recorded in the Scriptures,
Genealogy assumes an unbroken descent from
in Gen 5 father to son, during ten generations,
from Adam to Noah. On this theory
the time from the creation of man to the Flood is
measured by the sum of the years assigned to the
patriarchs at the birth of the son and successor,
together with Noah’s age when he entered the Ark;
so that all the years from the creation of Adam to
the Flood were 1,656 years. The extraordinary
longevity of these patriarchs is accounted for by
the known physical effects of sin. Sin works
disease and death. Man was not as yet far re-
moved from his state of sinlessness. The physical
balance between man sinless and man the sinner
had not been attained (cf Delitzsch, Genesis’, 139;
see Ant, I, iii, 9). But after all are we really justi-
fied in snpposing that the Heb author of these
genealogies designed to construct a chronology
of the period? He never puts them to such a use
himself. He nowhere sums these numbers. No
chronological statement is deduced from them.
There is no computation anywhere in Scripture
of the time that elapsed from the Creation or from
the Deluge, as there is from the descent into
Egypt to the Exodus (Ex 12 40), or from the
Exodus to the building of the temple (1 K 6 1;
Green, Bibliotheca Sacra, 1890, 296). (2) A
second method of interpretation assumes that links
of the genealogy have been intentionally omitted
in order that exactly ten may be named. It is
based on the phenomena presented by other Heb
genealogical registers. atthew, for example,
has outlined the lineage of Christ from Abraham.
The history naturally divides into three sections,
and to give the tabulation symmetry Matthew
names twice seven generations in each division, in
one instance omitting three famous kings of Judah
and saying “Joram begat Uzziah.”’ As Joram is said
to have begotten Uzziah, his grandson’s grandson,
so Enoch may be said to have begotten Methuselah,
although the latter may have been Enoch’s great-
grandson or remoter descendant. The book of
Genesis is divided by its author into ten sections,
each introduced by the same formula (2 4; 5 1;
6 9, etc). In’the period from the creation of man
to the birth of Abraham the crisis of the history was
the Flood. Twice ten generations are named in
the symmetrical register, ten before the Flood,
Adam to Noah, and ten after the Flood, Shem to
Abraham; and the latter period in its turn is di-
vided into two equal parts, and five generations
are named for the time to, and five for the time
after, the birth of Peleg, in whose days ‘the earth
was divided’ (11 10-26; 10 25; cf perhaps i1
1-9). On this conception of the tables, which is
fully justified, there is no basis in the genealogy
from Adam to Noah for the calculation of chro-
nology. The table was constructed for a different
purpose, and the years are noted for another reason
than chronology (Green, Bibliotheca Sacra, 1890, 285-
303; Warfield, Princeton Theological Review, 1911,
2-11; cf Dillmann, Genesis®, 106 “dritte Absicht”’).
The longevity is explained as it is on Usher’s inter-
pretation of the data (see above). (3) A third
method of interpretation understands the pa-
triarchal name to denote the individual and his
family spoken of collectively. The person and
tribe form one conception. This method also
agrees with the phenomena presented by Heb


143


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Antediluvian
Antelope


genealogical registers. Thus, Keturah bears to
Abraham Jokshan, and Jokshan begat Sheba and
Dedan, tribes and the countries they inhabited
(Gen 25 1-5). Mizraim, as Egypt was called by
the Hebrews, begat the Lydians and other ancient
peoples (10 18); and Canaan begat the town of
Sidon and such famous tribes as the Jebusite and
the Amorite (vs 15-18). Similarly, countries like
Media, Ionia (Javan), Tubal and Meshech, and
peoples named by gentile adjectives in the plural
number, like Kittim and Dodanim, are listed as
sons of Japheth; and Ethiopia, Egypt, Punt and
Canaan, and districts in Arabia ke Sheba and
Havilah are recorded as descendants of Ham
(2-7). Moreover, outside of genealogies, in com-
mon parlance Israel denotes a man and the tribe
that sprang from him; David, the king of that
name and the dynasty he founded (1 K 12 16;
éf Jer 30 9); Nebaioth, a people and its prince
(Gen 25 13.16; 28 9). Sometimes the family
takes its name from its progenitor or later leading
member; sometimes the name of the tribe or of the
country it inhabits is given to its chief representa-
tive, as today men are constantly addressed by
their family name, and nobles are called by the
name of their duchy or county. It is quite in
accordance with usage, therefore, that Noah, for
example, should denote the hero of the Flood and
the family to which he belonged. The longevity
is the period during which the family had promi-
nence and leadership; the age at the son’s birth
is the date in the family history at which a new
family originated that ultimately succeeded to the
dominant position. If no links have been omitted
in constructing the register, the period from the
creation of man to the Flood is measured by the
sum of the ages of Adam and his successors to
Noah and 600 years of the life of Noah, amounting
to 8,225 years. Thus, the family of Seth origi-
nated when Adam was 130 years old (Gen 5 3).
Adam and his direct line were at the head of
affairs for 930 years (5), when they were super-
seded by the family of Seth. In Seth, 105 years
after it attained headship, the family of Enosh
took its rise (6). Seth, after being at the head of
affairs for 912 years (8) was succeeded by the
family of Enosh, in the year of the world 1842.
And so on. Joun D. Davis


ANTEDILUVIANS, an-té-di-li’vi-ans: Accord-
ing to the ordinary interpretation of the genealogi-
cal tables in Gen 5 the lives of the

1. Chronol- antediluvians were prolonged to an
ogy Uncer- extreme old age, Methuselah attain-
tain ing that of 969 years. But before
accepting these figures as a basis of
interpretation it is important to observe that the
Heb, the Sam and the Sept texts differ so radically
in their sums that probably little confidence can
be placed in any of them. The Sept adds 100
years to the age of six of the antediluvian patriarchs
at the birth of their eldest sons. This, taken with
the great uncertainty connected with the trans-
mission of numbers by the Heb method of notation,
makes it unwise to base important conclusions upon
the data accessible. The most probable interpre-
tation of the genealogical table in Gen 5 is that
given by the late Professor Wiliam Henry Green,
who maintains that it is not intended to give
chronology, and does not give it, but only indicates
the line of descent, as where (1 Ch 26 24) we read
that “Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of
Moses, was ruler over the treasures”; whereas,
while Gershom was the immediate son of Moses,
Shebuel was separated from Gershom by several
generations. According to the interpretation of
Professor Green all that we can certainly infer from


the statement in Heb that Adam was 130 years old
when he begat Seth, is that at that age the line
branched off which culminated in Seth, it being per-
mitted, according to Heb usage, to interpolate as
many intermediate generations as other evidence
may oe As in the genealogies of Christ in
the Gospels, the object of the tables in Genesis is
evidently not to give chronology, but the line of


descent. This conclusion is supported
2. Mean- by the fact that no use is made after-
ing of ward of the chronology, whereas the


Genealogies line of descent is repeatedly empha-
sized. This method of interpretation
allows all the elasticity to prehistoric chronology
that any archaeologist may require. Some will get
further relief from the apparent incredibility of the
figures by the interpretation of Professor A. Win-
chell, and Rev. T. P. Crawford (Winchell, Pre-
adamites, 449 ff) that the first number gives the age
of actual life of the individual while the second
gives that of the ascendancy of his family, the name
being that of dynasties, like Caesar or Pharaoh.
The n¢philim (giants) and the mighty men born
of “the sons of God” and the “daughters of men”
(Gen 6 4.5) are according to the best
3. The interpretation “giants in wickedness,”
Nephilim being the fruit of intermarriage be-
tween the descendants of Seth (‘‘sons
of God” who called on the name of Jeh, Gen 4 26),
and the “daughters of men.” The idea that “sons
of God” refers to angels or demigods has no support
in Scripture. On this familiar designation of the
worshippers of the true God see Ex 4 22; Dt 14 1;
32, repeatedly; Isa 1 2; 43 6; 45 11; Hos 1 10;
11 1. Intermarriage with depraved races such as
is here intimated produced the results which were
guarded against in the Mosaic law prohibiting
marriages with the surrounding idolatrous nations.
The word Nephilim in Gen 6 4 occurs again only
in Nu 13 33 (AV “giants”). But the word is more
probably a descriptive term than the name of a
race. In the older Gr VSS it is tr4 “violent men.”
The antediluvians are, with great probability,
identified by some geologists (Sir William Dawson,
e.g.) with glacial or paleolithic man,
4. The Ice whose implements and remains are
Age found buried beneath the deposits of
glacial floods in northern France,
southern England, southern Russia, and in the
valleys of the Delaware, Ohio and Missouri rivers
in America. The remains of “paleolithic’’ men
reveal only conditions of extreme degradation and
savagery, in which violence reigned. The sparse
population which was spread over the northern
hemisphere during the closing floods of the Glacial
period lived in caves of the earth, and contended
with a strange variety of gigantic animals which
became extinct at the same time with their human
contemporaries. See DELUGE.


Lrteratore.—Green, ‘Primeval Chronology,’’ Bib-
liotheca Sacra, April, 1890; Dawson, Modern Science
in Bible Lands; B. B. Warfield, ‘On the Antiquity and
the Unity of the Human Race,” Princeton Theol. Review,
January, 1911; Winchell, Pre-adamites; Wright, Ice Age
in North America, 5thed; Man and the Glacial Pertod, and
Scientific Confirmations of Old Testament History.


Grorcr FREDERICK WRIGHT
. ANTELOPE, an’té-lop (RV; AV ‘wild ox,”
INT, 6 [Dt 14 5], and “wild bull,” NM, ta’ [Isa
51 20]; épvé, érue [LXX in B has ds cevtAlov
HplepOov, hos seutlion hémiephthon, lit. ‘“‘like a
half-cooked_beet-root”): The dorcas gazelle (Ga-
zella dorcas) is widely distributed in Syria, Pal
and Arabia. The recently discovered Merrill’s
gazelle (Gazella Merrilli) inhabits the hilly country
near Jerus and is not commonly distinguished from
the dercas gazelle. Probably the only other ante-
lope within this range is the Arabian oryx (Oryz


Anthedon
Anthropology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


144


beatriz). Tristram cites two African species (the
bubaline antelope, Bubalis mauretanica, and the
addax, Addax nasomaculatus) as existing in the Sin
peninsula, southern Pal and Arabia, but he did not
collect specimens of either and was probably misled
by statements of the Arabs which in both cases
really referred to the oryx. The only naturalist
who has ever penetrated into N.W. Arabia is Mr.
Douglas Carruthers, who went in 1909 on a col-
lecting expedition for the Syrian Protestant College
at Beirat, his object being to obtain the oryx and
any other large antelopes which might be found
there. Through observation and repeated inquiry
he became convinced that neither the addax nor the
bubaline antelope is found in Arabia. Tristram
says the addax is called maha’ and the bubaline
antelope bakar-ul-wahsh, both of which names are
in fact used by the Arabs for the oryx, which is
also according to Doughty called wadihah.


Antelope—Oryz beatriz.


C°bhi in the list of clean animals in Dt 14 5 (AV
‘Soebuck”; RV “gazelle’”’) is quite certainly gazelle,
Arab. zabi (q.v.), so it is quite possible that t’6 may
be the oryx. It is noteworthy that it is rendered
oryx (épvé) in the LXX. It must be borne in mind
that ré’m or r’ém, rendered “unicorn” (q.v.) in
AV and ‘wild ox” in RV, may perhaps also be the
oryx. That the oryx should be called by two
names in the Bible need not be considered strange,
in view of the indefiniteness of Sem ideas of natural
history, which is directly evidenced by the three
names now used for this animal by the Arabs.

The slightly different form ia’ (AV “wild bull”;
RV “antelope”) found in Isa 51 20 (“Thy sons have
fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as an
antelope in a net’) may quite as well refer to the
oryx as to any other animal. According to Gese-
nius the word is derived from the verb ié@’ah, ‘‘to
outrun,” which would be appropriate for this or
any antelope.

The accompanying illustration is from a photo-
graph of a well-grown female oryx in the zodlogical
gardens at Cairo, which is 35 in. high at the shoulder
anc whose horns are 21 in. long. An adult male
measures 40 in. at the shoulders, 59 in. from tip of
nose to root of tail, and the longest horns known
measure 27} in. The color is pure white with
dark brown or black markings. It is a powerful


animal and its horns may inflict dangerous wounds.
lt inhabits the deserts of Arabia and its remarkably
large hoofs seem well adapted to traversing the
sands. It feeds upon grasses and upon certain
succulent roots, and the Bedawin declare that it
never drinks. Under its name of maha’ it is cele-
brated in Arab. poetry for the beauty of its eyes.
Cf the Homerie ‘‘ox-eyed goddess Hera’’ (Sodms
mérva “Hpn). Bakar-ul-wahsh, the name most
commonly used by the Bedawin, means ‘‘wild cow”
or ‘‘wild ox,” which is identical with the tr of 16
in the AV. Aurrep ELy Day


ANTHEDON, an-thé’don: A city of Pal, rebuilt
along with Samaria, Ashdod, Gaza, and other
cities, at Gabinius’ command (Jos, Ani, XIV, v, 3).


ANTHOTHIJAH, an-tho-th’ja (NMI, ‘an-
thothiyah, “belonging to Anathoth’’[?]): A son of
Shasak of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 24), written in AV
Antothijah.


ANTHROPOLOGY, an-throé-pol’o-ji:
I. Terms Empioyvep
II. Narure or Man: Bisrican Concerrion
III. Oriein or Man FROM Scripture Account: Nar-
RATIVES OF CREATION
IV. Uniry or raz Race: Variovs THEORIES
V. Evo.iutrionary THEORY as TO ORIGIN OF Man
1. Darwinism
2. Difficulties
3. Objections
4. The New Evolutionism
5. Evolution and Genesis
VI. Primitive AND Present CoNbDITIONS oF Man:
ANTIQUITY OF Man
LifBRATURE
Under this heading is grouped whatever the Bible
has to say regarding man’s origin, nature, destiny
and kindred topics. No systematized doctrine con-
cerning man is found in Scripture; but the great
facts about human nature and its elements are pre-
sented in the Bible in popular language and not in
that of the schools. Delitzsch has well said: ‘There
is a clearly defined psychology essentially proper
to Holy Seripture, which underlies all the Biblical
writers, and intrinsically differs from that many-
formed psychology which lies outside the circle
of revelation. .... We do not need first of all
to force the Biblical teaching: it is one in itself”
(Biblical Psychology, 17, 18). What is said of the
psychology of Seripture may with good reason be
applied to its anthropology.
if, Terms Employed.—Several words are used in
the OT for our word Man.
"iS, ’adhaém, either as the name of the first
man, (cf Lk 3 38; Rom 6 14; 1 Cor 15 45); or
as an appellative—ihe man; or, as the
1. *Adham generic name of the human race (LXX
dnthripos; Vulg homo). The origin
of the name is obscure. In Gen 2 7 Adam is con-
nected with ’ddhamah, from the earthly part of
man’s nature (dust out of the ’dédhdmah),.as the
earth-born one. The derivation of Adam from
*ddhamah, however, is disputed—among_ others
by Dillmann: “Sprachlich ldsst sich die Ableitung
aus Adamah nicht vertheidigen’? (Genesis, 53).
Delitzsch refers to Jos (Ant, I, i, 2), who main-
tained that Adam really meant purrhdés (“red as
fire’), in reference to the redness of the earth, out
of which man was formed. “He means,” adds
Del., “the wonderfully fruitful and aromatic red
earth of the Hauran chain of mountains, which is
esteemed of marvelously strong and healing power,
and which is believed to be self-rejuvenescent”
(N. Comm. on Gen, 118). The connection with
Edom in Gen 25 30 may perhaps point in the same
direction. A connection has also been sought with
the Assyr admu (“child’’), especially the young of
the bird, in the sense of making or producing (De-
litazsch; Oxford Dictionary); while Dillmann draws


145


attention to an Ethiopic root adma, “pleasant,”
“agreeable,” “charming’—a derivation, however,
which he rejects. Suffice it to say, that no certain
derivation bas yet been found for the term (thus
Dillmann, ‘ein sicheres Etymon fiir Adam ist noch
nicht gefunden,” Gen, 53). Evidently in the word
the earthly side of man’s origin is indicated.
The phrase OTN], ben-’ddham, “son of man”
(Nu 23 19; Job 26 6; Ezk 28) is frequently
found to denote man’s frailty and
2. Son unworthiness in the sight of God. So
of Man in the much-disputed passage in
Gen 6 2, where the “sons of God”
are contrasted with the degenerate ‘‘daughters of
men” (benoth hd-addham). See also Ps 11 4; 12
1.8; 142. On the other hand the dignity of man
is sometimes indicated in the word Adam. ‘Thus
in Eccl 7 28, “One man (‘@dhaém) among a thou-
sand have I found: but a woman among all those
have I not found.”
WRN, ’éndsh (Ps 8 4; 10 18; 903; 108 15;
frequently in Job and Ps), man in his impotence,
~ _. frailty, mortality (like the Gr brotés)
3. ’Enosh as against ’ish, man in his strength and
vigor. In Gen 4 26 the word_be-
comes a proper name, applied to the son of Seth.
Delitzsch derives it from a root ’dnash (related to
the Arab. and Assyr), signifying “to be or become
frail.’ To intensify this frailty, we have the
phrase in Ps 10 18, ‘’éndsh [man] who is.of the
earth.”
DN (ish), LXX anér; Vulg, vir, male as against
female, even among lower animals (Gen 7 2); hus-
7 band as contrasted with wife (tshshah,
4. "Ish Gen 2 23.24); man in his dignity and
excellence (Jer 5 1: “seek, .... if
ye can find a man”); persons of standing (Prov
8 4, where ‘%sh is contrasted with bené ’ddhdm,
“Unto you, O men, I call; and my voice is to thesons
of men”)—‘“like the Attic dndres and anthrépot,
wisdom turning her discourse to high and low, to
persons of standing and to the proletariat” (Delitzsch
on Prov). Delitzsch maintains, that ’tsh points
to a root ’dsh “‘to be strong,” and ’ishshah to ’anash,
as designating woman in her weakness (cf 1 Pet
37: “the weaker vessel”). ‘Thus ’ishshah and
’Endsh come from a like verbal stem and fundamental
notion” (Delitzsch, A New Comm. on Gen, 145).
The term ’zsh is sometimes used generally, as the
Gr tis, the French on, to express “anyone,” as in
Ex 2114; 16 29. es
23, gebher, W925, gibbdr, man in his strength.
The term is applied to men as contrasted with
women and children (Job 3 3), “a
5. Gebher male child,’ in opposition to a female
(LXX drsén); also in contrast to non-
combatants (Ex 10 11) and in NT, see Mt 8 9;
Jn 1 6, where anthropos is used. Thus we read:
‘Neither shall a man [gebher] put on a woman’s
garment” (Dt 22 5). Heroes and warriors are
specially indicated by the term in such phrases as
“mighty man of valor’ (Jgs 6 12). Sometimes
animals are denoted by the term, as in Prov 30 30
(“mightiest among beasts’); sometimes it is ap-
plied to God (Isa 10 21) and to the Messiah (Isa
9 6). In combination with ’Zsh it gives intensity
to the meaning, asin 1 § 14 52 “any mighty man.’
Of the Gr terms anthrépos stands for man
generally—a human being (Mt 12 12; Mk 10 27);
though it is sometimes used to indicate
6. Anthro- man in his imperfection ahd weakness
pos (1 Cor 3 3.4), in such expressions as
“to speak as a man” (Rom 8 5 AV),
gospel “after man” (Gal 1 11), “after the manner
of men” (1 Cor 15 82) etc; or as showing the con-
‘trast between the perishable and the imperishable


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Anthedon
Anthropology


(2 Cor 4 16, where the “outward man” is repre-
sented as slowly dying, while the “inward man” is
being renewed from day to day). Thus Paul con-
trasts the ‘natural man” (1 Cor 2 14), the ‘“‘old
man,” with the “new” (Rom 6 6; Col 3 9.10).

Anér, Lat vir—man in his vigor as contrasted
with woman in her weakness (1 Cor 11 3; 1 Pet

r 3 7): sometimes, however, standing
7. Aner for “men in general’ (Mk 6 44:
“They that ate the loaves were five

thousand men”—andres).

Il. The Nature of Man.—The Biblical idea
of man’s nature may be summed up in the words of

St. Paul, “of the earth, earthy” (1 Cor
1. Biblical 165 47), as compared and contrasted
Terms with the statement in Gen 1 27:
“God created man in his own image.”
This act of creation is described as the result of
special deliberation on the part of God—the
Divine Being taking counsel with Himself in the
matter (ver 26). Man therefore is a creature,
formed, fashioned, shaped out of “earth” and
made after the “image of God.” More than one
word is employed in the OT to express His idea:
(1) bara’, “create,” a word of uncertain derivation,
occurring five times in Gen 1, to indicate the origin
of the universe (ver 1), the origin of life in the
waters (ver 24), the origin of man (ver 27), and
always in connection with God’s creative work,
never where “second causes” are introduced.
(2) yde¢ar, “fashion,” “form,” “knead” (Gen 2 7),
“of the dust of the ground.” (3) bandh, “build,”
in special reference to the creation of woman, “‘built
out of the rib’ (Gen 2 22).

By God’s special interposition man becomes a
nephesh hayyah (‘a living soul’), where evidently
there is a reference to the breath of life, which man
shares with the animal world (Gen 1 20.21.24);
yet with this distinction, that “God Himself
breathed into man’s nostrils the breath of life’’
dit. “breath of lives,” nishmath hayyim). With a
single exception, that of Gen 7 22, the word
neshamah, “breath,” is confined to man. In Job
reference is made to his creative act, where Elihu
says: “‘There is a spirit in man, and the breath
[nishmath| of the Almighty [shaddaz] giveth them
understanding” (Job 32 8); cf also Isa 42 5: “He
.... giveth breath (n*shamah) unto the people.”
Man therefore is a being separated from the.rest of
creation and yet one with it.

This distinction becomes more clear in the declara-
tion that man was made in the “image” (celem,

etkon, tmago), and after the likeness


2. Image  (d’miith, homotésis, similitudo) of
and God. The question has been asked
Likeness whether the two terms differ essentially


in meaning; some maintaining that
‘Gmage’”’ refers to the physical, “likeness” to the
ethical side of man’s nature; others holding that
‘Gmage’’ is that which is natural to man, was created
with him, was therefore as it were stamped upon
him (conereata), and “likeness” that which was
acquired by him (acquisita); while others again
declare that “image” is the concrete and “likeness”
the abstract for the same idea. There is very little
scriptural ground for these assertions. Nor can’
we accept the interpretation of the older Socinians
and some of the Remonstrants, that God’s image
consisted in dominion over all creatures, a reference
to which is made in Gen 1 28.
Turning to the narrative itself, it would appear
that the two terms do not denote any real distinc-
tion. In ver 27 gelem (“image’’)
3. Meaning alone is used to express all that sepa-
of Terms rates man from the brute and links him
to his Creator. Hence the expression
‘Gn our image.” In ver 26, however, the word


Anthropology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


146


dmith (“similitude”’) is introduced, and we have
the phrase ‘‘after our likeness,” as though to indicate
that the creature bearing the impress of God’s
“Image” truly corresponded in “‘likeness’’ to the
original, the ectype resembling the archetype.
Luther has translated the clause: ‘An image which
is like unto us’—ein Bild das uns gleich sei—and
in the new Dutch (Leyden) of the OT by Kuenen,
Hooijkaas and others, it is rendered: “as our
image, like unto us’—als ons evenbeeld ons gelij-
kende. The two words may therefore be taken as
standing to each other in the same relation in which
copy or model stands to the original image. ‘The
idea in ¢celem—says Delitzsch—is more rigid, that
of d°mith more fluctuating and so to speak more
spiritual: in the former the notion of the original
image, in the latter that of the ideal predominates.”
At any rate we have scriptural warrant (see espe-
cially Gen 9 6; Jas 3 9) for the statement, that
the “image is the inalienable property of the race”
(Laidlaw), so that offence against a fellow-man is a
desecration of the Divine image impressed upon
man. Calvin has put it very clearly: Imago Det
est integra naturae humanae praestantia(‘‘Theimage
of God is the complete excellence of human nature’).
Other questions have been asked by early Church
Fathers and by Schoolmen of later days, which
may here be left out of the discussion.
4. Subsid- Some, like Tertullian, considered the
iary Ques- ‘‘image”’ to be that of the coming Christ
tions (Christi futuri); others have main-
tained that Adam was created ajter
the image of the Logos (the Word, the second
person in the Trinity), which was impressed upon
man at his creation. Of all this Scripture knows
nothing. There man is represented as made after
the image of ‘‘Elohim,” of the Godhead and not
of one person of the Trinity. Paul calls man “the
image and glory (etkén kat déza) of God” (1 Cor
11 7). We may safely let the matter rest there.
The strange theory, that the image of God indicates
the sphere or element into which man was created,
may be mentioned without further discussion (on
this see Bohl, Dogmatik, 154 and Kuijper, De
vleeschwording des Woords).
In what then does this image or likeness consist?
Certainly in what is inalienably human—a body
as the temple of the Holy Ghost
5. Con- (the “earthly house” of 2 Cor 5 1),
stituents of and the rational, inspiring, inbreathed
Image spirit. Hence man’s personality, link-
ing him to what is above, separating
him from whai is beneath, constitutes him a being
apart—a rational, self-conscious, self-determining
creature, intended by his Creator for fellowship
with Himself. ‘The animal feels the Cosmos and
adapts himself to it. Man feels the Cosmos, but
also thinks it” (G. H. Lewes, Problems of Life
and Mind). Light is thrown on the subject by the
NT, and esp. by the two classical texts: Eph 4 24
and Col 3 10, where the ‘‘new man”’ is referred to
as “after God hath been created in righteousness
and holiness of truth’ and “renewed unto knowl-
edge after the image of him that created him.”
Knowledge, righteousness and holiness may fitly
be considered elements in the character of man as
originally designed by God. Likeness to God there-
fore is man’s privilege above all created beings.
What was said of the Son of God absolutely, “He is
the express image [character] of God,” is applied to
man relatively: the created son is not the only-
begotten Son. The created son was “‘like unto God”
(homotdsis; 1 Jn 3 2), and even in his degrada-
tion there is the promise of renewal after that image:
the eternal, only-begotten Son is God’s equal (Phil 2
6.7), though he became a servant and was made in
the likeness (homotémati) of men.


This likeness of man with God is not merely a
Scriptural idea. Many ancient nations seem to
have grasped this thought. Man’s golden age was
placed by them in a far-off past, not in a distant
future. St. Paul quotes a pagan poet in Acts
17 28, ‘We are also his offspring” (Aratus of Soli,
in Cilicia, a countryman of the apostle). This
statement also occurs in the beautiful hymn to
Jupiter, ascribed to Cleanthes, a Stoic native of
Assos in the Troad, and contemporary of Aratus.
Psychologically and historically therefore the Bible
view is justified.

ill, The Origin of Man.—The Divine origin
of man is clearly taught in the early chapters of

Gen, as has just been seen. Two
1. Scriptur- narratives from different sources are
al Account supposed to have been combined by

an unknown R to form a not very
harmonious whole. It is the purpose of criticism
to determine the relationship in which they stand
to each other and the dates of their composition.
In both accounts man is the crowning glory of
creation. The first account (Gen 1 1—2 8) is
general, the second particular (Gen 2 4-25); in
the first we have an account of man’s appearance
on a prepared platform—a gradual rise in the scale
of organized existence from chaos upward to the
climax, which is reached in man. There is recog-
nized order in the whole procedure, represented by
the writer as a process which occupied six days, or
periods, measured by the appearance and dissipa-
tion of darkness. In the first period, chaotic dis-
turbance is succeeded by the separation of light
from darkness, which in its turn is followed by the
separation of water from dry land, and to this a
second period is assigned. Then gradually in the
next four periods we have in orderly sequence the
rise of vegetable life, the formation of the creatures
of the deep, of the air, of the dry land. When all
is prepared man is called into being by a special
fiat of the Almighty. Moreover, while other crea-
tures were produced “after their kind,” man alone
as @ unique conception of the Divine Intelligence is
made to appear upon the scene, called into existence
by direct Divine interposition, after a, Divine type,
and in distinction of sex; for both man and wife,
in a later chapter, are called by the same name:
Adam (Gen 6 2). Such is the scope of the first
narrative. No wonder, then, that Scripture
elsewhere calls the first man “the son of God”
(Lk 3 38). It need not be determined here, wheth-
er the account is strictly chronological, whether the
“days’’ are interludes between successive periods of
darkness and not periods of twenty-four hours
regulated by the rising and setting of the sun, or
whether the whole narrative is but a prose poem of
creation, not strictly accurate, or strictly scientific.

In the second narrative (Gen 2 2-25) the order
of procedure is different. Man here is not the

climax, but the center. He is a
2. The Two creature of the dust, but with the
Narratives breath of God in his nostrils (Gen

2 7), holding sway over all things, as
God’s vice-gerent upon earth, creation circling
around him and submitting to his authority. To
this is added a description of man’s early home and
of his home-relationships. The second narrative
therefore seems on the face of it to be supplemen-
tary to the first, not contradictory of it: the agree-
ments indeed are far greater than the differences.
“The first may be called typical, the second, physio-
logical. The former is the generic account of
man’s creation—of man the race, the ideal; the
latter is the production of the actual man, of the
historic Adam” (Laidlaw).

The differences between the two narratives have
been magnified by supporters of the various docu-


147


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Anthropology


mentary hypotheses. . They are supposed to differ
in style—the first ‘‘displaying clear marks of study
and deliberation,” the second being
3. Con- ‘fresh, spontaneous, primitive” (Dri-
trasts ver, Genesis). They differ also in
representation, i.e. in detail and order
of events—the earth, in the second narrative not
emerging from the waters as in the first, but dry
and not fitted for the support of vegetation, and
man appearing not last but first on the scene,
followed by beasts and birds and lastly by woman.
The documents are further supposed to differ in
their conception of Divine interposition and a con-
sequent choice of words, the first employing words,
like “creating,” “dividing,” “making,” ‘‘setting,”’
which imply nothing local, or sensible in the Divine
nature, the second being strongly anthropomorphic
—Jeh represented as ‘moulding,’ ‘“‘placing,”
“taking,” “building,” etc—and moreover locally
determined within limits, confined apparently to
a garden as His accustomed abode. Without
foreclosing the critical question, it may be replied
that the first narrative is as anthropomorphic as the
second, for God is there represented as “‘speaking,”’
“setting” (117; 2 17), “delighting in” the work
of His hands (1 31), ‘‘addressing”’ the living crea-
tures (ver 22), and “resting” at the close (2 2).
As to the home of Jeh in a limited garden, we are
expressly told, not that man was admitted to the
home of his Maker, but that Jeh specially ‘planted
a garden” for the abode of man. The order of
events may be different; but certainly the scope and
the aim are not.
More serious have been the objections raised on
scientific grounds. The cosmogony of Gen has


4, Objec-
tions


been disputed, and elaborate compari- |


sons have been made between geo-
logical theories as to the origin of the
world and the Mosaic account. The
points at issue are supposed to be the following:
ecology knows of no “periods” corresponding to the
“days’ of Gen; “vegetation” in Gen appears
before animal life, geology maintains that they
appear simultaneously; ‘fishes and birds” in Gen


preceded all land animals; in the geological record |


“birds” succeed “fishes’’ and are preceded by nu-
merous species of land animals eo Driver, Gen-
esis). To this a twofold reply has been given: (1)
The account in Gen is not scientific, or intended to
be so: it is a prelude to the history of human sin
and of Divine redemption, and gives a sketch of the
world’s origin and the earth’s preparation for man as
his abode, with that one object in view. The
starting-point of the narrative is the creation of the
universe by God; the culminating point is the crea-
tion of man in the image of God. Between these
two great events certain other acts of creation in
orderly sequence are presented to our view, in so
far as they bear upon the great theme of sin and
redemption discussed in the record. The aim is
practical, not speculative; theological, not scientific.
The whole creation-narrative must he judged from
that point of view. See Cosmocony. (2) What has
struck many scientists is not so much the difference


or disharmony between the Mosaic and the geologi-:


cal record, as the wonderful agreements in general
outline apart from discrepancies in detail. Geolo-
gists like Dana and Dawson have expressed this
as clearly as Haeckel. The latter;e.g., has openly
given utterance to his “just and sincere admiration
of the Jewish lawgiver’s grand insight into nature
and his simple and natural hypothesis of creation
_. .. which contrasts favorably with the ue
mythology of creation current among most or the
amine eudienal! (History of Creation, I, 37, 38).
He draws attention to the agreement hetween the
Mosaic account, which accepts “the direct action


of a constructive Creator,” and the non-miraculous
theory of development, inasmuch as ‘‘the idea of
separation and differentiation of the originally
simple matter and of a progressive development”

is to be found in ‘“‘the Jewish lawgiver’s” record.
Latterly it has been maintained that Israel was
dependent wen Babylon for its creation-narrative;
ut even the most serious supporters


5. Baby- of this view have had to concede that
lonian the first introduction of Bab myth into
Origin the sacred narrative ‘must remain a


aek matter of conjecture,” and that “it
is incredible, that the monotheistic author of Gen
1, at whatever date he lived, could have borrowed
any detail, however slight, from the polytheistic
epic of Marduk and Tiamat” (Driver, Gen, 31).
The statement of Bauer in his Hebrdische Mythologie,
1802: “Es ist heut zu Tage ausser allen Zweifel
gesetzt, dass die ganze Erzdhlung ein Mythus ist”’
(It is beyond all doubt, that the whole narrative is
a myth), can no longer be satisfactorily maintained;
much less the assertion that we have here an intro-
duction of post-exilic Bab or Pers myth into the

Heb narrative (cf Van Leeuwen, Anthropologie).
Whether the division of the narrative into Elo-
histic and Jehovistic documents will stand the test
of time is a question which exercises


6. Later a great many minds. Professor Eerd-
Critical mans of Leyden, the present occupant
Views of Kuenen’s chair, has lately main-


tained that a “thorough application
of the critical theories of the school of Graf-Kuenen-
Wellhausen leads to highly improbable results,’
and that ‘‘the present OT criticism has to reform it-
self?’ (HJ, July, 1909). His own theory is worked
out in his Alttestamentiliche Studien, to which the
reader is referred.
IV. The Unity of the Race.—The solidarity of
the race may be said to-be as distinctly a doctrine
of science as it is of Scripture. It is
1. Its implied in the account of the Creation
Solidarity and of the Deluge. It is strongly
affirmed by St. Paul in his address to
the Athenians (Acts 17 26), and is the foundation
of the Bib. scheme of redemption (Jn 3 16). The
human racein the OT is described as “‘sons of Adam”
(Dt 32 8 AV), as derived from one pair (Gen 1 27;
3 20), as having its origin in one individual (Gen
2 18; cf 1 Cor 11 8, where woman is described as
derived ‘from man’). Hence the term “‘Adam’’ is
applied to the race as well as to the individual (Gen
1 26; 2 5.7; 3 22.24; 5 2); while in the NT this
doctrine is applied to the history of redemption—
Christ as the “‘second Adam” restoring what was
lost in the “first Adam” (1 Cor 16 21.22.47-49).
Outside of Holy Scripture various theories have
been held as to the origin, antiquity and primeval
condition of the human race. That
of polygenism (plurality of origin)
has found special favor, partly as
co-adamitism, or descent of different
races from different progenitors (Paracelsus and
others), partly as pre-adamitism, or descent of dark-
colored races from an ancestor who lived before
Adam—the progenitor. of the Jews and the light-
colored races (Zanini and esp. de la Peyrére).
But no serious attempts have yet been made to
divide the human race among a number of separately
originated ancestors.
The Bib. account, however, has been brought
into discredit by modern theories of evolution.
Darwinism in itself does not favor


2. Various
Theories


3. Evolu- polygenism; though many _interpret-
tionary ers of the evolutionary hypothesis
View have given it that application. Dar-


win distinctly repudiates polygenism.
He says: ‘Those naturalists who admit the principle


Anthropology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


148


of evolution will feel no doubt, that all the races
of man are descended from a single primitive
stock” (Descent of Man, 2d ed, 176); and on a
previous page we read: ‘Man has been studied
more carefully than any other animal, and yet there
is the greatest possible diversity amongst capable
judges, whether he should be classed as a single
species, or race, or as two (Verey), as three (Jac-
quinot), as four (Kant), five (Blumenbach), six
(Buffon), seven (Hunter), eight (Agassiz), eleven
(Pickering), fifteen (Bory St. Vincent), sixteen
(Desmoulins), twenty-two (Morton), sixty (Craw-
ford), or as sixty-three, according to Burke’ (p.
174).

V. Evolutionary Theory as to the Origin of Man.
—Modern science generally accepts the theory of
evolution. Darwin gave to the hypothesis a char-
acter it never had before; but since his day its
application has been unlimited. ‘From the organic
it is extended to the inorganic world; from our
planet and the solar system to the cosmos, from
nature to the creations of man’s mind—arts, laws,
institutions, religion. We speak in the same breath
of the evolution of organic beings and of the steam
engine, of the printing-press, of the newspaper,
now even of the atom” (Orr, God’s Image in Man,
84). And yet, in spite of this very wide and far-
reaching application of the theory, the factors that
enter into the process, the method or methods by
which the great results in this process are obtained,
may still be considered as under debate. Its appli-
cation to the Bible doctrine of man presents serious
difficulties.

Darwin’s argument may be presented in the
following form. In Nature around us there is to

be observed a struggle for existence,
1. Darwin- to which every organism is exposed,
ism whereby the weaker ones are elimi-

nated and the stronger or best-fitted
ones made to survive. Those so surviving may
be said metaphorically to be chosen by Nature for
that purpose—hence the term “natural selection,”
assisted in the higher forms of life by ‘sexual
selection,’ under the influence of which the best-
organized males are preferred by the females, and
thus as it were selected for propagation of the
species. The properties or characteristics of the
organisms so chasen are transmitted to their de-
scendants, so that with indefinite variability ‘from a,
few forms or from one, into which life has been
originally breathed, endless forms most beautiful
and most wonderful have been, or are being evolved”
(Origin of Species, 6th ed, 429). Applying this
mode of procedure to the origin of man, the strength


of the argument is found to lie in the analogies.


between man and the brute, which may be summed
up as follows: (1) morphological peculiarities in
the structure of the bodily organs, in their liability
to the same diseases, in their close similarity as
regards tissues, blood, etc; (2) embryological char-
acteristics, in the development of the human being,
like the brute, from an ovule, which does not differ
from and passes through the same evolutionary
process as that of any other animal; (8) the exist-
ence of rudimentary organs, which are considered
to be either absolutely useless, in some cases harmful,
often productive of disease, or in any case of very
slight service to the human being, pointing back
therefore—so it is maintained—to an animal
ancestry, in which these organs may have been
necessary; (4) mental peculiarities of the same
character, but perhaps not of the same range, in
the brute as in man though the differences between
the two may be as great as between ‘‘a terrier and a
Hegel, a Sir William Hamilton, or a Kant”; (5)
paleontological agreements, to show that a compari-
son of fossil remains brings modern civilized man and


his primeval, anthropoid ancestor into close corre-
spondence. Latterly Friedenthal’s experiments, in
regard to blood-transfusion between man and the
ape, have been introduced into the argument by
evolutionists.

The difficulties which beset the theory are so
great that naturalists of repute have subjected it

to very severe criticism, which cannot
2. Diffi- be disregarded. Some, like Du Bois-
culties Reymond, have openly declared that
supernaturalism has gained the day
(“es scheint keine andere Ausnahme iibrig zu sein,
als sich dem Supranaturalismus in die Arme zu wer-
fen” (cf Bavinck, Gereformeerde Dogmatik, TI, 548).
Others, like Virchow, have to the last pronounced
against Darwinism as an established hypothesis,
and a simian ancestry as an accepted fact (“auf dem
Wege der Speculation ist man zu der Affen-Theorie
gekommen: man hatte eben so gut zu anderen
theromorphischen Theorien kommen kénnen, z. B.
zu einer Elefanten-Theorie, oder zu einer Schaf-
Theorie’’—i.e. one might as well speak of an ele-
phant- or a sheep- or any other animal-theory as
of an ape-theory). This was in 1892. When two
years later the discovery of the so-called pithe-
canthropus erectus, supposed to be the “missing
link” between man and the lower animals, came un-
der discussion, Virchow held as strongly, that
“neither the pithecanthropus nor any other anthro-
poid ape showed any of the characteristics of
primeval man.” This was in 1896.

The difference of opinion among scientists on
this point seems to be great. While Darwin him-
self uncompromisingly held to the simian ancestry
of man, several of his followers reject that line of
descent altogether. This may be seen in the


‘Cambridge volume, dedicated to the memory of


the British naturalist. Schwalbe, while instancing
Cope, Adloff, Klaatsch and others as advocating a
different ancestry for man, acknowledges, though
reluctantly, that “the line of descent disappears
in the darkness of the ancestry of the mammals,”
and is inclined to admit that ‘man has arisen inde-
pendently” (Darwinism and Modern Science, 134).
Two things therefore are clear, viz. that modern


“science does not indorse the favorite maxim of


Darwin, Natura non facit saltum, ‘“Nature does not
make a jump,” with which according to Huxley he
“has unnecessarily hampered himself?’ (Lay Ser-
mons, 342), and that “man probably arose by a
mutation, that is, by a discontinuous variation of
considerable magnitude” (J. A. Thomson, Darwin-
ism and Human Life, 123). Granted therefore
an ascent in the scale of evolution by “leaps” or
“lifts,” the words of Otto (Naturalism and Re-
ligion, 133) receive a new meaning for those who
accept as historic the tradition recorded in the early
chapters of Gen: ‘There is nothing against the
assumption, and there is much to be said in its
favor, that the last step, or leap, was such an im-
mense one, that it brought with it a freedom and
richness of psychical life incomparable with any-
thing that had gone before.”

The objections raised against the Darwinian
theory are in the main threefold: (1) its denial of

teleology, for which it substitutes
3. Objec- natural selection; (2) its assumption,
tions Sum- that the evolutionary process is by
marized slow and insensible gradations; (38)

its assertion, that organic advance has
been absolutely continuous from the lowest form
to the highest (Orr, God’s Image in Man, 108).
This may be illustrated a little more fully:

(1) Chance versus creation.—The denial of teleol-
ogy is clear and distinct, though Professor Huxley
has spoken of a “wider teleology,” by which how-
ever he simply meant (Critiques and Addresses, 305)


149


that the teleologist can defy his opponent to prove
that certain changes in structure were not intended
to be produced. In Darwinism the choice seems to
lie between chance and creation. Mind, purpose,
forethought, intention, Divine guidance and super-
intendence are banished from the evolutionary proc-
ess. Darwin himself, though originally inclined to
call in the aid of a creator (Origin of Species, 6th ed,
429), regretted afterward, that he “had truckled to
public opinion and used the pentateuchal term, by
which he really meant appearance by some wholly
unknown process” (Life and Letters, IlI, 18).
Admittedly Darwin attributed too great a power
to natural selection. He himself in the Descent
of Man considered it ‘one of the greatest oversights”
in his work, that “he had not sufficiently considered
the existence of many structures which are neither
beneficial nor injurious,” and that he had “probably
attributed too much to the action of natural selec-
tion on the survival of the fittest”? (Descent of Man
[2d ed], 61). Dr. A. R. Wallace, though like Darwin
acknowledging the potency of natural selection,
considers its operations to be largely negative.
Writing to his friend he says: ‘‘Nature does not so
much select special varieties, as exterminate un-
favorable ones” (Darwin’s Life and Letters, III, 46).
It is this very insistence on a method of advance
by slow and imperceptible gradations that has met
with strong opposition from the very beginning.
“Natural selection’? Darwin writes, “acts solely
by accumulating slight, successive, favorable
variations; it can produce no great or sudden
modifications; it can only act by short and slow
steps’ (Origin of Species [6th ed], ch 15). The proc-
ess therefore according to Darwin is wholly fortu-
itous. This non-teleological aspect of Darwinism
is characteristic of many treatises on evolution.
Weismann states with great clearness and force, that
the philosophical significance of the theory les in
the fact that “mechanical forces” are substituted
for “directive force” to explain the origin of useful
structures. Otto speaks of its radical opposition to
teleology. And yet an ardent supporter of Darwin-
ism, Professor J. A. Thomson, admits that “‘there
is no logical proof of the doctrine of descent’’
(Darwinism and Human Life, 22)—a statement
which finds its counterpart in Darwin’s letters:
“We cannot prove that a_single species has
changed” (Life and Letters, III, 25). Still more
clearly, almost epigrammatically this is indorsed
by Professor J. A. Thomson: ‘The fact of evolution
forces itself upon us: the factors elude us” (Bible
of Nature, 153), and again: ‘Natural selection
explains the survival of the fittest, not the arrival
of the fit” (Gb 162). Still more extraordinary is
the view expressed by Korchinsky that struggle
“prevents the establishment of new variations and
in reality stands in the way of new development.
Ti is rather an unfavorable than advantageous
factor” (Otto, Nature and Rel, 182). Wearein fact
being slowly led back to the teleology which by
Darwin was considered fatal to his theory. Scien-
tists of some repute are fond of speaking of direct-
ive purpose. ‘Wherever we tap organic nature,”
says Professor J. A. Thomson, “it seems to flow
with purpose” (Bible of Nature, 25); and again,
“Tf there is Logos at the end [of the long evolution-
ary process ending in man] we may be sure it was
also at the beginning” (ib 86). Where there is
purpose there must be mind working with purpose
and for a definite end; where there is mind there may
be creation at the beginning; where creation is
granted, an overruling Providence may be accepted.
If natural selection “prunes the growing tree 3; if
it be “a directive, not an originative factor” (J. A.
Thomson, Darwinism and Human Life, 193); if
it produces nothing, and the evolutionary process


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Anthropology


is dependent upon forces which work from within
and not from without, then surely the Duke of
Argyll was right in maintaining (Unity of Nature,
272) that “creation and evolution, when these
terms have been cleared from intellectual confusion,
are not antagonistic conceptions mutually exclusive.
They are harmonious and complementary.’ The
ancient narrative, therefore, which posits God at
the beginning, and ascribes the universe to His
creative act, is after all not so unscientific as some
evolutionists are inclined to make out.

(2) Variability indefinite—Indefinite variability,
assumed by the theory, is not supported by fact.
Development there doubtless is, but always within
carefully defined limits: at every stage the animal
or plant is a complete and symmetrical organism,
without any indication of an everlasting progression
from the less to the more complex. Reversion to
type seems ever to have a development proceeding
indefinitely, and the sterility of hybrids seems to be
Nature’s protest against raising variability into a
law of progression. It has been repeatedly pointed
out, that variations as they arise in any organ are
not of advantage to its possessor: “A very slight
enlarged sebaceous follicle, a minute pimple on the
nose of a fish, a microscopic point of ossification or
consolidation amongst the muscles of any animal
could (hardly) give its possessor any superiority
over its fellows” (Elam, Winds of Doctrine, 128).

(8) Existing gaps—Nor can it be denied that no
theory of evolution has been able to bridge the
chasms which seem to exist between the various
kingdoms in Nature. A gradual transition from
the inorganic to the organic, from the vegetable to
the animal kingdom, from one species of plant or
animal to another species, from the animal to man,
is not found in Nature. This is acknowledged by
scientists of repute. Du Bois-Reymond has main-
tained that there are seven great enigmas, indicating
a sevenfold limit to investigation, viz. (a) the exist-
ence of matter and force; (6) the origin of motion;
(c) the origin of life; (d) the appearance of design
in Nature; (e) the existence of consciousness; (f)
intelligent thought and the origin of speech; (g) the
question of freewill. Others have found equally
serious difficulties in a theory of descent which
ignores the existence of such gaps. Thus Dr. A.R.
Wallace—a strong upholder of the theory of natural
selection—allows that “there are at least three
stages in the development of the organic world,
when some new cause or power must necessarily
have come into action,” viz. at the introduction of
life, at the introduction of sensation and_conscious-
ness and at the introduction of man” (Darwinism,
474-75).

(4) Applied to man.—When the theory is applied
to the human species the difficulties are enormously
increased. Psychically man is akin to, yet vastly
different from, the brute. Consciousness, thought,
language (called by Max Miller “the Rubicon”
between the human and the animal world), moral-
ity, religion cannot easily be explained under any
theory of evolution. The recognition of moral
obligations, the freedom of choice between moral
alternatives, the categorical imperative of con-
science, the feeling of responsibility and the pain of
remorse are unaccounted for by the doctrine of de-
scent. Man stands apart, forming psychologically
a kingdom by himself, “infinitely divergent from
the simian stirps’” (Huxley, -Man’s Place in Nature,
103)—the riddle of the universe, apart from the
Biblical narrative. In the very nature of things the
conscious and the unconscious lie far apart. ‘The
assertion of the difference between them does not
rest on our ignorance, but on our knowledge of the
perceived distinction between material particles
in motion and internal consciousness related to a


Anthropology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


150


self” (Orr, Homiletic Review, August, 1907). There
can be no transition from the one to the other.
The ‘‘gulf” remains in spite of all attempts to bridge
it. Strong supporters of Darwinism have acknowl-
edged this. Thus Dr. A. R. Wallace, though vig-
orously maintaining the ‘essential identity of man’s
bodily structure with that of the higher mammals
and his descent from some ancestral form com-
mon to man and the anthropoid apes,” discards
the theory that ‘man’s entire nature and all his
faculties, moral, intellectual, spiritual, have been


derived from their rudiments in lower animals”— |


a theory which he considers unsupported by ade-
quate evidence and directly opposed to many well-
ascertained facts (Darwinism, 461; Natural Selec-
tion, 322 ff).

(5) Transitional forms absent—The absence of
transitional forms is another difficulty which strikes
at the very root of Darwinism. Zittel, a paleon-
tologist of repute, indorsed the general opinion,
when in 1895 at Zurich he declared, that the extinct
transitional links are slowly not forthcoming, except
in ‘“‘a small and ever-diminishing number.” The
derivation of the modern horse from the ‘Eohip-
pus,” on which great stress is sometimes laid, can
hardly be accepted as proved, when it is maintained
by scientists of equal repute, that no ‘Eohippus,”
but ‘“Palaeotherium” was the progenitor of the ani-
mal whose ancestry is in dispute. And as for man,
the discovery by Dr. E. Du Bois, in the island of
Java, of the top of a skull, the head of a leg bone, a
few teeth of an animal supposed to be a man-like
mammal, does not convey the absolute proof de-
manded. From the very first, opinion was strangely
divided among naturalists. Virchow doubted
whether the parts belonged to the same individual,
and considered Du Bois’ drawings of the curves of a
skull-outline to prove the gradual transition from the
skull of a monkey to that of a man as imaginary.
Of twenty-four scientists, who examined the re-
mains when originally presented, ten thought they
belonged to an ape, seven to a man, seven to some
intermediate form (Otto, Naturalism and Religion,
110). At the Anthropological Congress held at
Lindau in September, 1899, “Dr. Bumiller read a
paper in which he declared that the supposed ‘pith-
ecanthropus erectus’ is nothing but a gibbon, as
Virchow surmised from the first” (Orr, in Expos,
July, 1910).

Evolutionism apparently is undergoing a great


change. Among others Fleischmann, and Dennert
in Germany have submitted Dar-
4, The winism to a keen and _ searching


New Evolu- criticism. The latter especially, as a
tionism scientist, raises a strong protest

against the acceptance of the Dar-
winian theory. He closes his researches with the
remarkable words: “The theory of descent is
accepted by nearly all naturalists. But in spite
of assertions to the contrary, the theory has not
yet been fully [ganz unzweifelhaft] proved... ..
Darwinism on the other hand, i.e. the doctrine of
natural selection through struggle for existence, has
been forced back all along the line” (vom Sterbelager
des Darwinismus, 120). With equal vigor Professor
Hugo de Vries, of Amsterdam, has recently taught
a ‘theory of mutation,” a term applied by him to
“express the process of origination of a new species,
or of a new specific character, when this takes place
by the discontinuous method at a single step” (Lock,
Recent Progress in the Study of Variation, 113).
New species, according to De Vries, may arise
from old ones by Jeaps, and this not in long-past
geological times, but in the course of a human life
and under our very eyes. This theory of “hal-
matogenesis,” or evolution by leaps and not by
insensible gradations, was not unknown to scientists.


Lyell, who was a slow convert to Darwinism, in his
Antiquity of Man, admitted the possibility of ‘‘oc-
casional strides, breaks in an otherwise continuous
series of psychical changes, mankind clearing at
one bound the space which separated the highest
stage of the unprogressive intelligence of inferior
animals from the first and lowest form of improv-
able reason of man.” Even Professor Huxley, one
of the staunchest supporters of Darwinism, acknowl-
edged that ‘Nature does make jumps now and then,”’
and that ‘‘a recognition of the fact is of no small
importance in disposing of many minor objections to
the doctrine of transmutation” (Orr, God’s Image in
Man, 116). Less conciliatory than either De Vries
or Huxley is Eimer, who, while repudiating the
“chance” theory of Darwinism, sets against it “defi-
nitely directed evolution,” and holds that “natural
selection is insufficient in the formation of species”
(Otto, Naturalism and Religion, 174). Evidently
the evolution theory is undergoing modifications,
which may have important bearing on the inter-
pretation of the Mosaic narrative of creation and
especially on the descent of man. Man may there-
fore, from a purely scientific point of view, be an
entirely new being, not brought about by slow
and gradual ascent from a simian ancestry. He
may have been introduced at a bound, not as
a semi-animal with brute impulses, but as a ra-
tional and moral being, “internally harmonious,
with possibilities of sinless development, which
only his free act annulled.” If the new theory
of “mutational” evolution be accepted, the scrip-
tural view of man’s origin will certainly not be
discredited.

This much may fairly be granted, that within
certain limits Scripture accepts an eyo au en aty
ower


process. In regard to the
6. Evolu- animals the creating (Gen i 21), or
tion and making (ver 28), is not described as
Genesis an immediate act of Almighty Power,


but as a creative impulse given to
‘water and earth, which does not exclude, but rather
calls into operation the powers that are in the sea
and dry land (vs 11.20.24 AV): ‘And God said, Let
the earth bring forth grass .... Let the waters
bring forth abundantly the moving creature.”
It is only in the creation of man that God works
immediately: “And God said, Let us make man in
ourimage . .. . And God created man”’ (vs 26.27).
The stride or Jump of Lyell and Huxley, the “hal-
matogenesis” of De Vries are names which in the
simple narrative disappear before the pregnant
sentence: ‘‘And God said.” Theologians of repute
have given a theistic coloring to the evolution .
theory (cf Flint, Theism, 195 ff), inasmuch as devel-
opment cannot be purposeless or causeless, and
because “Nature is but effect whose cause is God.”
The deathblow which, according to Professor Huxley,
the teleological argument has received from Darwin,
may after all not be so serious. At any rate Lord
Kelvin (Sir William Thomson) in 1871 before the
British Association openly pleaded for ‘‘the solid
and irrefragable argument so well put forward by
Paley .... teaching us, that all living things
depended upon an everacting Creator and Ruler.”
See Evo.vtion.
VI. Primitive and Present Conditions of Man.—
The newer anthropology has carried the human
race back to a remote antiquity.


1. The Ordinary estimates range between
Time-Dis- 100,000 and 500,000 years. Extra-
tance of ordinary computations go far beyond
Man’s these numbers. Haeckel, e.g. speaks
Origin of “Sirius distances” for the whole


evolutionary process; and what this
means may easily be conjectured. The sun is
92,700,000 miles away from the earth, and Sirius


151


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Anthropology


is a million times as far from us as we are from the
sun, so that the time-distance of man from the
very lowest organisms, from the first germ or seed
or ovule, is according to Haeckel almost incalculable.
The human race is thus carried back by evolution-
ists into an immeasurable distance from the present
inhabitants of the earth. Several primeval races
are by some declared to have existed, and fossil
remains of man are supposed to have been found,
bringing him into touch with extinct animals. The
time-computations of evolutionists, however, are
not shared by seientists in general. ‘These
millionaires in time have received a rude blow,
when another Darwin, Sir G. H. Darwin of Cam-
bridge, demonstrated that the physical conditions
were such that geology must limit itself to a
period of time inside of 100,000 years’? (Orr, God’s
Image, etc, 176). Professor Tait of Edinburgh
limited the range to no more than 10,000,000 years
and he strongly advised geologists to “hurry up
their calculations.” “I dare say,” he says, “many
of you are acquainted with the speculations of Lyell
and others, especially of Darwin, who tells us, that
even for a comparatively brief portion of recent
geological history, three hundred millions of years
will not suffice! We say, so much the worse for
geology as at present understood by its chief author-
ities” (Recent Advances in Phys. Science, 168).


Recently, however, attention has been drawn to.


new sources of energy in the universe as the result
of radio-activity. Duncan, in The New Knowledge,
contrasts the old conception, according to which
God made the universe and started it at a definite
time to run its course, with the need, which though
it does not distinctly teach, at least is inclined to
maintain, that the universe is immortal or eternal,
both in the future and the past (p. 245). If this view
be correct the Darwinian “eons” of time may be
considered restored to the evolutionist. On the
other hand it appears that Lord Kelvin seriously
doubted the validity of these speculations. Pro-
fessor Orr writes: “In a personal communication
Lord Kelvin states to me that he thinks it ‘almost
infinitely improbable’ that radium had any appreci-
able effects on the heat and light of the earth or sun,
and suggests it as ‘more probable that the energy
of radium may have come originally in connection
with the excessively high temperatures’ produced
by gravitational action” (Homiletic Review, Aug.,
1906).
ea to primeval man there is no agreement
among scientists. Some, like Delaunay, de Mortil-
let, Quatrefages, believed that man
2. Antiquity existed in the Tertiary; while others,
of Primeval such as Virchow, Zittel, Prestwich,
Man Dawson, maintain that man appeared
on the scene only in the Quaternary.
As the limits between these periods are not well
defined a decision is by no means easy. Even if
man be found to have been a contemporary of
extinct animals, such as the mammoth, the in-
ference from this fact would be equally just, not
that man is as old as the extinct animal, but that
the animal is as young as man and that the period
assigned to these fossil remains must be brought
considerably nearer to present-day life.
Calculations based on the gravels of the Somme,
on the cone of the Tiniére, on the peat-bogs of
France and Denmark, on fossil bones
3. Various discovered in caves of Germany and
Calculations France, on delta-formations of great
rivers like the Nile and the Mississippi,
on the “kitchen middings” of Denmark, and the
lake-dwellings of Switzerland, must be carefully
scrutinized. Sir J. W. Dawson, a geologist of great
repute, has made the deliberate statement, that
“possibly none of these reach farther back than six


or seven thousand years, which according to Dr.
Andrews have elapsed since the close of the boulder-
clay in America,”’ and that ‘‘the scientific pendulum
must swing backward in this direction’ (Story of
the Earth and Man, 293). The “ice-age,’’ formerly
hypothetically calculated, has latterly been brought
within calculable distance. G.F. Wright, Winchell!
and others have arrived at the conclusion that the
glacial period in America, and consequently in
Europe, does not lie more than some eight or ten
thousand years behind us. If such be the case,
the antiquity of man is brought within reasonable
limits, and may consequently not be in contra-
diction to the Biblical statements on this point.
If the careful and precise calculations of Dr. Andrews
on the raised beaches of Lake Michigan are accepted,
then N. America must have risen out of the waters
of the Glacial period some 5,500 or 7,500 years ago;
and if so, the duration of the human period in that
continent is fixed and must be considerably reduced
(Dawson, Story, etc, 295). One of the latest
deliverances on this subject is that of Professor
Russell of the University of Michigan (1904),
who maintains that ‘‘we find no authentic and well-
attested evidence of the presence of man in America
either previous to or during the Glacial period.”
He is confident, that “all the geological evidence
thus far gathered bearing on the antiquity of man
in America points to the conclusion that he came
after the Glacial epoch.” Where all is vague and
experts differ great caution is necessary in the
arrangement of dates and periods of time. If
moreover a comparatively rapid post-glacial sub-
mergence and reélevation is accepted, as some
naturalists hold, and man were then on the earth,
the question may fairly be asked, whether this
subsidence did not “constitute the deluge recorded
in that remarkable ‘log-book’ of Noah preserved
to us in Gen” (Dawson, op. cit., 290).
The chronology of ancient nations—China,
Babylon, Egypt—has been considered as subversive
of the scriptural view as to the dge of
4. Chro- the human race. But it is a well-
nology known fact, that experts differ very
seriously upon the point. Their cal-
culations range, for Egypt—starting from the reign
of King Menes—from 5,867 (Champollion) to
4,455 (Brugsch), and from 3,892 (Lepsius) to 2,320
(Wilkinson). As to Babylon Bunsen places the
starting-point for the historic period in 3,784,
Brandis in 2,458, Oppert in 3,540—a difference
of thousands of years (cf Bavinck, Geref. Dogmatik,
II, 557). Perhaps here, too, future research will
bring the scientific and the Biblical view into fuller
harmony. At any rate Hommel’s words on_all
these calculations require careful study: ‘The
chronology for the first thousand years before
Christ is fairly fixed: in the second thousand BC
some points seem to be fixed: in the third thousand,
ie. before 2000 BC, all is uncertain.” In this
connection it may be mentioned, that attempts
have frequently been made to cast discredit on the
chronology of the early chapters of Gen. Suffice
it to say that the calculations are based on the
genealogies of the patriarchs and their descendants,
and that the generally accepted dates assigned to
them by Archbishop Ussher and introduced into
the margins of some editions of the Bible are not
to be trusted. The LXX differs in this respect
from the Heb text by more than 1,500 years: pre-
cise chronological data are not and cannot be
given. The basis of calculation is not known.
Perhaps we are not far wrong in saying that, “if
we allow, say, from 12,000 to 15,000 years since the
time of man’s first appearance on the earth, we do
ample justice to all the available facts’ (Orr,
God’s Image, ete, 180). See Coronoxoey.


Anthropomorphism THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


152


That all these discussions have a bearing upon
our view of man’s primitive conditions can easily
be understood. According to Scrip-


5. Man’s ture man’s destiny was to ‘replenish
Primitive the earth, and subdue it; and have
Condition dominion over fish, fowl and every


living thing’ (Gen 1 28), as God’s
steward (oikénomos, Titus 1 7), as fellow-laborer
with God (sunergés, 1 Cor 3 9). Hence he was
placed by God in the garden of Eden (gan b**édhen;
LXX. parddeisos tés trophés; Vulg paradisus volup-
tatis, “paradise of delight”). The sitnation of
that garden is carefully described, though the
proper site remains unknown (Gen 2 14.15).
Some, like Driver, consider this an ideal locality
(Genesis, 57); others take a very wide range in fixing
upon the true site. Every continent has been
chosen as the cradle of the race—Africa, among
others, as the home of the gorilla and the chim-
panzee—the supposed progenitors of humanity.
In America, Greenland and the regions around the
North Pole have had their supporters. Certain
parts of Europe have found favor in some quarters.
An imaginary island—Lemuria—situated between
the African and Australian continents—has been
accepted by others. All this, however, lies beyond
the scope of science, and beyond the range of
Scripture. Somewhere to the east -of Pal, and
in or near Babylonia, we must seek for the cradle
of humanity. No trace of primeval man has been
found, nor has the existence of primeval races been
proved. The skulls which have been found (Nean-
derthal, Engis, Lansing) are of a high type, even
Professor Huxley declaring of the first, that “it
can in no sense be regarded as the intermediate
between Man and the Apes,” of the second, that
itis “afair, average skull, which might have belonged
to a philosopher, or might have contained the
thoughtless brains of a savage’ (Man’s Place in
Nature, 156, 157). Of the Lansing skeleton found
in Kansas, in 1902, this may at least be said—
apart from the question as to its antiquity-—that
the skull bears close resemblance to that of the
modern Indian. Even the skull of the Cro-Magnon
man, supposed to belong to the paleolithic age,
Sir J. W. Dawson considers to have carried a brain
of greater size than that of the average modern man
(Meeting-Place of Geology and History, 54). Prime-
val man can hardly be compared to the modern
savage; for the savage is a deteriorated representa-
tive of a better type, which has slowly degenerated.
History does not know of an unaided emergence
from barbarism on the part of any savage tribe;
it does know of degradation from a better type.
Whatever view we take of the original state of man,
the following points must be borne in mind: we
need not suppose him to have been a humanized
ape, rising into true manhood by a slow and gradual
process; nor need we picture him either as a savage
of pronounced type, or as in every sense the equal
of modern man, ‘‘the heir of all the ages.” Serip-
ture represents him to us as a moral being, “with
possibilities of sinless development, which his own
free act annulled.” There the matter may rest,
and the words of a non-canonical Scripture may
fitly be applied to him: ‘God created man to be
immortal, and made him to be an image of His
own eternity” (Wisd 2 23 AV). See also Psy-
CHOLOGY.


LrreraturEe.—Darwin, Origin of Species, Descent of
Man; Lock, Recent Progress in the Study of Variation,
etc; A. R. Wallace, Darwinism, Natural Selection; Sir
J. W. Dawson, Story of the Earth and Man, Origin of
World acc. to Revelation and Science, Meeting-Place of
Geology and History; R. Otto, Naturalism and Religian;
Cambridge Memorial vol, Darwin and Modern Science;
J. H. Stirling, Darwinianism; J. Young, Evolution and
Design; J. Orr, God's Image in Man; J. A. Thomson,
Bible of Nature, Darwinism and Human Life; Weismann,


GNIS IR getop


Essays on Heredity; Bavinck, Gereformeerde Dogmatik;
Van Leeuwen. Bijbelsche Anthropologie; Laidlaw, Bible
Doctrines of Man; O. Zéckler, Vom Urstand des Menschen;
A. Fleischmann, Die Darwin'sche Theorie; EH. Dennert,
Vom Sterbelager des Darwinismus, Bibel und Naturwissen-
schaft; Huxley, Man's Place in Nature; Herzog, RE, arts.
“ Geist’ and “Seele’’; Driver, Genesis; Delitzsch, Gene-
sis; Dillmann, Die Genesis, etc, etc.
J. I. Marais


ANTHROPOMORPHISM, an-thro-po-mor’fiz’m:


Definition of the Term

OT Anthropomorphisms

. In What Senses an Anthropomorphic Element Is

Necessary ota Gs

Anthropomorphism and the Exigencies of Human

Thinking

- Anthropomorphism and Theism

Symbolic Forms of Thought

. Philosophic Pantheism

. Anthropomorphism and Personalized or Mediated

Knowledge ;

From Greek Polytheism to Modern Ethical Mono-

theism

. Greek Thought

. Anthropomorphism of Israel

. Twofold Nature of the Anthropomorphic Difficulty

. Need of Rising Higher

. God in Christ the True Solution

By this term is meant, conformably with its ety-

mological signification, i.e. as being in the form or
likeness of man, the attribution to God

1. Defini- of human form, parts or passions, and

tion the taking of Scripture passages which

speak of God as having hands, or eyes,

or ears, in a literal sense. This anthropomorphic

procedure called forth Divine rebuke so early as Ps

50 21: “Thou thoughtest that I was altogether

such a one as thyself.” Fear of the charge of an-
thropomorphism has had a strangely

2. OT An- deterrent effect upon many minds, but

thropomor- very needlessly so. Even that rich

phisms storehouse of apparently crude anthro-
pomorphisms, the OT, when it ascribes

to Deity physical characters, mental and moral

attributes, like those of man, merely means to make

the Divine nature and operations intelligible, not

to transfer to Him the defects and limitations of

human character and life.

In all really theistic forms of religion, there is an
anthropomorphic element present, for they all
presuppose the psychological truth


9


8. Anthro- of a certain essential likeness between
pomorphic God and man. Nor, perfect as we
Element a may our theistic idea or conception of


Necessity Deity, can we, in the realm of spirit,
ever wholly eliminate the anthropo-
morphic element involved in this assumption,
without which religion itself were not. It is of
the essence of the religious consciousness to recog-
nize the analogy subsisting between God’s relations
to man, and man’s relations to his fellow. We are
warned off from speaking of “the Divine will” or
‘the Divine purpose,” as too anthropomorphic—
savoring too much of simple humanity and human
psychology—and are bidden speak only of “the
Divine immanence” or “the Divine ground of our
being.” But these speculative objections really
spring from a shallow interpretation of the primary
facts of human consciousness, which, in the deepest

realm of inner experience, claims the
4, Anthro- indefeasible right to speak of the Divine
pomorphism nature in human terms, as may best
and Hu- be possible to our being. The proper
man Think- duty or function of philossone is to
ing take due account of such direct and

primary facts of our nature: the basal
facts of our being cannot be altered to suit her
convenience.

Ii we were to interpret the impalpable and omni-
present Energy, from which all things proceed,
in terms of force, then, as Fiske said, “there is
scarcely less anthropomorphism lurking in the
phrase ‘Infinite Power,’ than in the phrase ‘In-


153


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Anthropomorphism


finite Person.’” Besides which, the soul of man


could never be content with the former phrase,
for the soul wants more than dynam-
5. Anthro- ics. But if we have ascribed to God
pomorphism certain attributes in keeping with the
and Theism properties of the one Protean force
behind all nature-manifestations, it has
been to help purge our conception of God of ob-
jectionable anthropomorphic elements. The ex-
igencies of human thinking require us to symbolize
the nature of Deity in some psychical way whereby
He shall have for us some real meaning; hence
those quasi-personal or anthropomorphic forms of
expression, which inhere in the most perfected con-
ceptions of Deity, as well as in the crude ideas of
unreflective spiritism. And if all anthropomorphism
could be dissipated by us, we should in the process
have demolished theism—a serious enough issue for
religion.
Even speech has been declared to be a sensuous
symbol, which makes knowledge of God impossible.
To such an extent have the hyper-
6. Symbolic critical objections to anthropomor-
Thought pom been pressed. Symbol of the
ivine, speech may, in this sense, be;
but it isa symbol whereby we can mark, distinguish
or discern the super-sensible. Thus our abstract
conceptions are by no means sensuous, however the
language may originally have set out from a sensu-
ous significance. Hence it would be a mistake to


suppose that our knowledge of God must remain!


anthropomorphic in content, and cannot think
the Absolute Being or Essence save in symbolic
form. It is a developmental law of religion—as
of spirit in general—that the spiritual grows always
more clearly differentiated from the symbolic
and sensuous. The fact that our knowledge of
God is susceptible of advance does not make the
idea. of God a merely relative one. God’s likeness
to man, in respect of the attributes and elements
essential to personal spirit, must be presupposed
as a fundamental reality of the universe. In this
way or sense, therefore, any true idea of God must
necessarily be anthropomorphic.

We cannot prove in any direct’ manner—either
psychological or historical—that man_ was really
made in God’s image. But there is
no manner of doubt that, on the other
hand, man has always made God in
his (man’s) own image. Man can
do no otherwise. Because he has purged his con-
ceptions of Deity after human pattern, and no
longer cares much to speak of God as a Jealous or
repentant or punitive Deity, as the case may be,
it yet by no means follows that “the will of God”
and “the love of God” have ceased to be of vital
interest or primary importance for the religious
consciousness. All man’s constructive powers—
intellectual, aesthetical, ethical, and spiritual—
combine in evolving such an ideal, and believing
in it as the personal Absolute, the Ideal-Real in
the world of reality. Even in the forms of philo-
sophic pantheism, the factors which play in man’s
personal life have not ceased to project themselves
into the pantheistic conceptions of the cosmic proc-
esses or the being of the world.

But man’s making of God in his (man’s) own
image takes place just because God has made man

in Hisownimage. For the God, whom


7. In Pan-
theism


8. Person- man makes for himself, is, before all
alized or things, real—no mere construction of
Mediated his intellect, no figure or figment of


Knowledge his imagination, but the prtus of all

things, the Primal, Originative Reality.
Thus we see that any inadequacy springing out of
the anthropomorphic character of our religious
knowledge or conceptions is not at all so serious as


might at first sight be supposed, since it is due merely
to the necessarily personalized or mediated ehar-
acter of all our knowledge whatsoever. For all
our experience is human experience, and, in that
sense, anthropomorphic. Only the most pitiful
timidity will be scared by the word ‘“anthropomor-
phism,” which need not have the least deterrent
effect upon our minds, since, in the territory of
spirit, our conceptions are purged of anthropo-
morphic taint or hue, the purer our human con-
sciousness becomes.
To say, as we have done, that all knowledge is
anthropomorphic, is but to recognize its partial,
fallible, progressive or developmental
9. Religious character. It is precisely because this
Progress _is true of our knowledge of God that
our improved and perfected concep-
tions of God are the most significant feature in the
religious progress of humanity. Only in course of
the long religious march, wherein thought has shot up
through the superincumbent weight of Greek poly-
theism into monotheism, and emerged at last into
the severely ethical monotheism of our time, has
religion been gradually stripped of its more crude
anthropomorphic vestments. It cannot too clearly
be understood that the religious ideal, which man
has formed in the conception of the Absolute Per-
sonality, is one which is rooted in the realm of actu-
ality. Not otherwise than as a metaphysical unity
can God be known by us—intelligible only in the
light of our own self-conscious experience.
It is a mere modern—and rather unillumined—
abuse of the term anthropomorphic which tries
to affix it, as a term of reproach, to
10. Greek every hypothetical endeavor to frame
Thought a conception of God. In the days
of the Greeks, it was only the ascrip-
tion to the gods of human or bodily form that led
Xenophanes to complain of anthropomorphism.
This Xenophanes naturally took to be an illegiti-
mate endeavor to raise one particular kind of being
—one form of the finite—into the place of the
Infinite. Hence he declared, ‘There is one God,
greatest of all gods and men, who is like to mortal
creatures neither in form nor in mind.”
But the progressive anthropomorphism of Greece
is seen less in the humanizing of the gods than in
the claim that ‘‘men are mortal gods,”
11. Anthro- the idea being, as Aristotle said, that
pomorphism men become gods by transcendent
of Israel merit. In this exaltation of the nature
of man, the anthropomorphism of
Greece is in complete contrast with the anthro-
pomorphism of Israel, which was prone to fashion
its Deity, not after the likeness of anything in the
heavens above, but after something in the earth
beneath. Certain professors of science have been
mainly responsible for the recent and reprehensible
use of the term, so familiar to us, for which we owe
them no particular gratitude.
The anthropomorphic difficulty is a twofold one.
Religion, as we have just shown, must remain
anthropomorphic in the sense that we
12. Difficul- cannot get rid of imputing to the
tyofAn- universe the forms of our own mind
thropomor- or life, since religion is rooted in our
phism Two- human experience. As we have al-


fold ready hinted, however, religion is in
no worse case in that respect than
science. For nothing is more idle than the pre-


tension that science is less anthropomorphic than
religion—or philosophy either—as if science were
not, equally with these, an outcome and mani-
festation of human thinking! It is surely most
obvious that the scientist, in any knowledge of re-
ality he may gain, can, no more than the religionist
—or the metaphysician—jump off his own shadow,


Antichrist


or make escape from the toils of his own nature
and powers. For knowledge of any sort—whether
religious or scientific or philosophical—a certain
true anthropomorphism is necessary, for it is of the
essence of rationality. Nature, of which science
professes a knowledge, is really a man-made image,
like unto its human maker. Say what science will,
this is the objectively real of science—a cognition
which, critically viewed, is only subjectively valid.
There is no other way by which science can know
the being of the world than after the human pattern.
It is, however, a serious issue that this human ele-
ment or factor has often unduly penetrated the
realm of the Divine, subordinating 1t and dragging

it down to human aims and conceptions.
Hence arises the second aspect of the anthro-
pomorphic difficulty, which is, the need of freeing
religion from anthropomorphic tend-


13. Need  ency, since it can be no satisfactory
of Rising _revealer of truth, so long asits more or
Higher less unrefined anthropomorphism con-


tracts or subjugates reality to the con-
ditions of a particular kind of being. It is perfectly
clear that religion, whose every aim is to raise man be-
yond the limitations of his natural being, can never
realize its end, so long as it remains wholly within
the human sphere, instead of being something uni-
versal, transcendent, and independent. This is
precisely why religion comes to give man’s life the
spiritual uplift whereby it rises to a new center of
gravity—a true center of immediacy—in the uni-
verse, rises, indeed, beyond time and its own finitude
to a participation in the universal and transcendent
life of the Eternal. It does so without feeling need
to yield to the anthropomorphic tendency in our
time to attribute a necessity in God for an object
to love, as if His egoistic perfection were not capable
of realizing love’s infinite ideal in itself, and without
dependence upon such object.
We affirm that God in Christ, in revealing the
fact of the likeness of man being eternal in God,
disclosed the true anthropomorphism
14. God in of our knowledge of God—it is with
Christ respect to the essential attributes and
elements of personal spirit. It is
easy to see how the early ascriptions to God of the
form and members of the' human body, and other
non-essential accompaniments of personality, arose.
The scriptural representations as to God’s hand,
eye, and ear, were declared by Calvin to be but
adaptations to the slow spiritual progress of men—
an infantile mode of talk, as Calvin puts it, like that
of nurses to children. But we have got finely clear
of essential anthropomorphism, if, with Isa 56 8,
we fully recognize that God’s “thoughts are not”
our “thoughts,’”’ nor God’s “ways” our “ways.”


Lirerature.—BE. Caird, Evolution of Religion, 1893;
J. Martineau, A Study of Religion, 1889; J. Fiske, The
Idea of God, 1901; J. Orr, God's Image in Man, 1905; D.
B. Purinton, Christian Theism, 1889; J. Lindsay, Recent
Advances in Theistic Philosophy of Religion, 1897; Studies
in European Philosophy, 1909.

James Linpsay

ANTICHRIST, an’ti-krist (avrlypieros, antichris-
tos):

I. In toe OT

Il. In tree NT
1. The Gospels
2. Pauline Epistles
3. Johannine Epistles
4. Bk of Revelation
III, In Arocatyrtic WRITINGS
IV. Iw Parristic Writines
V. Mepiarvan Views
1. Christian


2. Jewish
VI. Post-RerorRMATION ViEWSs
LITERATURE


The word “antichrist” occurs only in 1 Jn 2
18.22; 4 3; 2 Jn ver 7, but the idea which the
word conveys appears frequently in Scripture.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


154


I. In the OT.—As in the OT the doctrine con-
cerning Christ was only suggested, not developed,
so is it with the doctrine of the Anti-
Antichrist christ. That the Messiah should be
in the OT the divine Logos, the only adequate
expression of God, was merely hinted
at, not stated: so Antichrist was exhibited as the
opponent of God rather than of His anointed. In
the historical books of the OT we find “Belial” used
as if a personal opponent of Jeh; thus the flagitiously
wicked are called in AV “sons of Belial” (Jgs 19 22;
20 13), “daughter of Belial” (1 8 1 16), etc. The
RV translates the expression in an abstract sense,
“base fellows,” “wicked woman.” In Dnl 7 7.8
there is the description of a great heathen empire,
represented by a beast with ten horns: its full an-
tagonism to God is expressed in a little eleventh
horn which had “‘a mouth speaking great things” and
“made war with the saints” (vs 8.21). Him the ‘An-
cient of Days’ was to destroy, and his kingdom was
to be given to a ‘Son of Man’ (vs 9-14). Similar
but yet differing in many points is the description
of Antiochus Epiphanes in 8 9-12.23-25.
I. In the NT.—In the Gospels the activity of
Satan is regarded as specially directed against
Christ. In the Temptation (Mt 4
1. Anti- 1-10; Lk 4 1-18) the Devil claims
christ in the the right to dispose of “all the king-
Gospels doms of the world,” and has his claim
admitted. The temptation is a strug-
gle between the Christ and the Antichrist. In the
parable of the Tares and the Wheat, while He that
sowed the good seed is the Son of Man, he that
sowed the tares is the Devil, who is thus Anti-
christ (Mt 13 37-39). Our Lord felt it the keenest
of insults that His miracles should be attributed to
Satanic assistance (Mt 12 24-32). In Jn 14 30
there is reference to the ‘‘Prince of the World’”’ who
“hath nothing” in Christ.
The Pauline epistles present a more developed
form of the doctrine. In the spiritual sphere Paul


identifies Antichrist with Belial.
2. Anti- “What concord hath Christ with
christ in the Belial?” (2 Cor 6 15). 2 Thess,
Pauline written early, affords evidence of a
Epistles considerably developed doctrine being


commonly accepted among believers.
The exposition of 2 Thess 2 3-9, in which Paul
exhibits his teaching on the ‘Man of Sin,’ is very
difficult, as may be seen from the number of con-
flicting attempts at its interpretation. See Man
oF Sin. Here we would only indicate what seems
to us the most plausible view of the Pauline doctrine.
It had been revealed to the apostle by the Spirit
that the chyrch was to be exposed to a more tre-
mendous assault than any it had yet witnessed.
Some twelve years before the epistle was penned,
the Rom world had seen in Caligula the portent
of a mad emperor. Caligula had. claimed to be
worshipped as a god, and had a temple erected to
him in Rome. He went farther, and demanded
that his own statue should be set up in the temple
at Jerus to be worshipped. As similar causes
might be expected to produce similar effects, Paul
interpreting ‘what the Spirit that was in him did
signify,” may have thought of a youth, one reared
in the purple, who, raised to the awful, isolating
dignity of emperor, might, like Caligula, be struck
with madness, might, like him, demand Divine
honors, and might be possessed with a thirst for
blood as insatiable as his. The fury of such an
enthroned maniac would, with too great probability,
be directed against those who, like the Christians,
would refuse as obstinately as the Jews to give
him Divine honor, but were not numerous enough
to make Rom officials pause before proceeding
to extremities. So long as Claudius lived, the


155


manifestation of this “lawless one’ was restrained;
when, however, the aged emperor should pass
away, or God’s time should appoint, that ‘lawless
one” would be revealed, whom the Lord would
“slay with the breath of his mouth” (ver 8).
Although many of the features of the ‘‘Man of
Sin” were exhibited by Nero, yet the Messianic
kingdom did not come, nor did Christ
3. Anti- return to His people at Nero’s death.
christ in the Writing after Nero had fallen, the
Johannine apostle John, who, as above remarked,
Epistles alone of the NT writers uses the term,
presents us with another view of Anti-
christ (1 Jn 2 18.22; 4 3; 2 Jn ver 7). From the
first of these passages (“‘as ye have heard that anti-
christ cometh’’), it is evident that the coming of
Antichrist was an event generally anticipated by
the Christian community, but it is also clear that
the apostle shared to but a limited extent in this
popular expectation. He thought the attention of
believers needed rather. to be directed to the
antichristian forces that were at work among and
around them (‘‘even now have .... arisen many
antichrists’). From 1 Jn 2 22; 4 3, 2 Jn ver 7
we see that the apostle regards erroneous views of
the person of Christ as the real Antichrist. To
him the Docetism (i.e. the doctrine that Christ’s
body was only a seeming one) which portended
Gnosticism, and the elements of Ebionism (Christ
was only a man), were more seriously to be dreaded
than persecution.
In the Book of Revelation the doctrine of Anti-
ebrist receives a further development. If the tra-
-ditional date of the Apocalypse is
4, Anti- to be accepted, it was written when
christ in the the lull which followed the Neronian
Book of persecution had given place to that
Revelation under Domitian—‘‘the bald Nero.”
The apostle now feels the whole im-
perial system to be an incarnation of the spirit of
Satan; indeed from the identity of the symbols,
seven heads and ten horns, applied both to the
dragon (12 3) and to the Beast (13 1), he appears
to have regarded the raison d’étre of the Rom
Empire to be found in its incarnation of Satan.
The ten horns are borrowed from Dnl 7, but the
seven heads point, as seen from Rev 17 9, to the
“seven hills’? on which Rome sat. There is, how-
ever, not only the Beast, but also the “image of the
beast” to be considered (13 14.15). Possibly this
symbolizes the cult of Rome, the city being regarded
as a goddess, and worshipped with temples and
statues all over the empire. From the fact that
the seer endows the Beast that comes out of the
earth with “two horns like unto a lamb” (13 11),
the apostle must have had in his mind some system
of teaching that resembled Christianity; its rela-
tionship to Satan is shown by its speaking “as a
dragon” (ver 11). The number 666 given to the
Beast (ver 18), though presumably readily under-
stood by the writer’s immediate public, has proved
a riddle capable of too many solutions to be now
readily soluble at all. The favorite explanation
Neron Késar (Nero Caesar), which suits numeri-
cally, becomes absurd when it implies the attribu-
tion of seven heads and ten horns. There is no
necessity to make the calculation in Heb; the
corresponding arithmogram in the Sib Or, 1 328—
30, in which 888 stands for Jesous, is interpreted
in Gr. On this hypothesis Lateinos, a suggestion
preserved by Irenaeus (V, 30) would suit. If we
follow the analogy of Daniel, which has influenced
the Apocalyptist so much, the Johannine Anti-
christ must be regarded as not a person_but a
kingdom. In this case it must be the Rom Empire
that is meant.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Antichrist


HI. In Apocalyptic Writings.—Although from
their eschatological bias one would expect that the
Jewish Apocalytic Writings would be


Antichrist full of the subject, mention of the
in the Antichrist occurs only in a few of the
Apocalyptic apocalypses. The earliest certain no-
Writings tice is found in the Sibylline books


(1 167). We are there told that
“Beliar shall come and work wonders,” and “that
he shall spring from the Sebasteni (Augusti)” a
statement which, taken with other indications,
inclines one to the belief that the mad demands of
Caligula, were, when this was written, threatening
the Jews. There are references to Beliar in the
XII P, which, if the date ascribed to them by Dr.
Charles, i.e. the reign of John Hyrcanus I, be
assumed as correct, are earlier. Personally we
doubt the accuracy of this conclusion. Further,
as Dr. Charles admits the presence of many inter-
polations, even though one might assent to his
opinions as to the nucleus of the XII P, yet these
Beliar passages might be due to the interpolator.
Only in one passage is ‘“Beliar” antichristos as dis-
tinguished from antitheos; Dn] 5 10.11 (Charles’ tr),
“And there shall rise unto you from the tribe of
Judah and of Levi the salvation of the Lord, and
he shall make war against Beliar, and execute
everlasting vengeance on our enemies, and the
captivity shall he take from Beliar and turn dis-
obedient hearts unto the Lord.” Dr. Charles
thinks he finds an echo of this last clause in Lk 1 17;
but may the case not be the converse?

The fullest exposition of the ideas associated
with the antichrist in the early decades of Christian
history is to be found in the Asc Isa. In this we
are told that ‘Beliar”’ (Belial) would enter into
“the matricide king” (Nero), who would work great
wonders, and do much evil. After the expiry of
1,332 days during which he has persecuted the
plant which the twelve apostles of the Beloved
have planted, “the Lord will come with his angels
and with armies of his holy ones from the seventh
heaven, with the glory of the seventh heaven, and
he will drag Beliar into Gehenna and also his
armies” (4 3.18, Charles’ tr). If the date at which
Beliar was supposed to enter into Nero was the
night on which the great fire in Rome began, then
the space of power given to him is too short by 89
days. From the burning of Rome till Nero’s
death was 1,421 days. It is to be noted that there
are no signs of the writer having been influenced
either by Paul or the Apocalypse. As he expected
the coming of the Lord to be the immediate cause
of the death of Nero, we date the writing some
months before that event. It seems thus to afford
contemporary and independent evidence of the
views entertained by the Christian community as
to Antichrist. a

IV. In Patristic Writings.—Of the patristic
writers, Polycarp is the only one of the Apostolic

Fathers who refers directly to Anti-
Patristic christ. He quotes John’s words,
References ‘Whosoever doth not confess that
to Anti- Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is
christ Antichrist” (7), and regards Docetism

as Antichrist in the only practical
sense. Barnabas, although not using the term,
implies that the fourth empire of Daniel is Anti-
christ; this he seems to identify with the Rom
Empire (4 5). Irenaeus is the first-known writer
to occupy himself with the number of the Beast.
While looking with some favor on Lateinos, he
himself prefers Tedtan as the name intended (6 30).
His view is interesting as showing the belief that
the arithmogram was to be interpreted by the Gr
values of the letters. More particulars as to the
views prevailing can be gleaned from Hippolytus,


Antilegomena
Antioch


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


156


who has a special work on the subject, in which he
exhibits the points of resemblance between Christ
and Antichrist (On Christ and Antichrist, 4.14.15.
19.25). In this work we find the assertion that
Antichrist springs from the terms of Jacob’s bless-
ing to Dan. Among other references, the idea of
Commodian (250 AD) that Nero risen from the
dead was to be Antichrist has to be noticed. In
the commentary on Revelation attributed to Vic-
torinus of Petau there is, inserted by a later hand,
an identification of Genseric with the “Beast” of
that book. It is evident that little light is to be
gained on the subject from patristic sources.

V. Mediaeval Views.—Much time need not be
spent on the mediaeval views of Antichrist in either
of the two streams in which it flowed, Christian
and Jewish.

The Christian was mainly occupied in finding
methods of transforming the names of those whom

monkish writers abhorred into a
1. Christian shape that would admit of their being
Views reckoned 666. The favorite name for

this species of torture was naturally
Maometis (Mohammed). Gregory IX found no
difficulty in accommodating the name of Frederic
II so as to enable him to identify his great antago-
nist with ‘‘the beast coming up out of thesea’”’: this
identification the emperor retorted on the pope.
Rabanus Maurus gives a full account of what Anti-
christ was to do, but without any attempt to label
any contemporary with the title. He was to work
miracles and to rebuild the temple at Jerusalem.
The view afterward so generally held by Protestants
that the papacy was Antichrist had its representa-
tives among the sects denounced by the hierarchy
as heretical, as the Aathari. In various periods the
rumor was spread that Antichrist had been already
born. Sometimes his birthplace was said to be
Babylon, sometimes this distinction was accorded
to the mystical Babylon, Rome.

The Jewish views had little effect on Christian
speculation. With the Talmudists Antichrist was

named Armilus, a variation of Romulus.
2. Jewish Rome is evidently primarily intended,
Views but Antichrist became endowed with

personal attributes. He makes war
on Messiah, son of Joseph, and slays him, but is in
turn destroyed by Messiah, Son of David.

VI. Past-Reformatian Views.—In immediately
post-Reformation times the divines of the Romish

church saw in Luther and the Reformed
Post- churches the Antichrist and Beast of
Reformation Revelation. On the other hand the
Theories of Protestants identified the papacy and
Antichrist the Roman church with these, and
with the Pauline Man of Sin. The
latter view had a certain plausibility, not only from
the many undeniably antichristian features in the
developed Rom system, but from the relation in
which the Romish church stood to the city of Rome
and to the imperial idea. The fact that the Beast
which came out of the earth (Rev 13 11) had the
horns of a lamb points to some relation to the
lamb which had been slain (6 6). Futurist inter-
preters have sought the Antichrist in historical
persons, as Napoleon III. These persons, however,
did not live to realize the expectations formed of
them. The consensus of critical opinion is that
Nero is intended by the Beast of the Apocalypse,
but this, on many grounds, as seen before, is not
satisfactory. Some future development of evil may
more exactly fulfil the conditions of the problem.
Literaturp.—Bousset, Der Antichrist; “The Anti-
christ Legend,'' Expos T, contains an admirable vidimus
of ancient authorities in the subject. See arts. on sub-
ject in Schenkel's Bib. Lex. (Hausrath); Herzog's RE,


2d ed (Kahler), 3d ed (Sieffert); EB (Bousset); with
Commentaries on 2 Thess and Rey. A full account of


the interpretations of the ‘‘Man of Sin'’ may be seen in
Dr. John Eadie's essay on that subject in his Comm. on


Thess.
ae J. E. H. Toomson
ANTILEGOMENA, an-ti-le-gom’e-na. See Bi-


BLE; Canon or NT; Dreutero-CanonicaL Books.


ANTI-LIBANUS, an-ti-lib’a-nus. See Lepanon.


ANTIMONY, an’ti-mé-ni. See Cotor.

ANTIOCH, an’ti-ok, OF PISIDIA, pi-sid’i-a
CAvridxera moos ITiriblg, Antidcheia prés Pisidia,
or ’Avridxera 4 ITeSla, Antidcheia hé Pisidia=
“Pisidian”):

(1) Antioch of Pisidia was so called to distin-
guish it from the many other cities of the same

name founded by Seleucus Nicator
1. History (301-280 BC) and called after his

father Antiochus. It was situated in
a strong position, on a plateau close to the west-
ern bank of the river Anthios, which flows down
from the Sultan Dagh to the double lake called
Limnai (Egerdir Gél). It was planted on the ter-
ritory of a great estate belonging to the priests of
the native religion; the remaining portions of this
estate belonged later to the Rom emperors, and
many inscriptions connected with the cult of the
emperors, who succeeded to the Divine as well as
to the temporal rights of the god, have survived.
(See Sir W. M. Ramsay’s paper on ‘““The Tekmoreian
Guest-Friends” in Studies in the History and Art
of the Eastern Rom Provinces, 1906.) The plateau
on which Antioch stood commands one of the roads
leading from the East to the Maeander and Ephe-
sus; the Seleucid kings regularly founded their
cities in Asia Minor at important strategical points,
to strengthen their hold on the native tribes. There
is no evidence that a Gr city existed on the site of
Antioch before the foundation of Seleucus. Ram-
say must be right in connecting Strabo’s statement
that Antioch was colonized by Greeks from Mag-
nesia on the Maeander with the foundation by Seleu-
cus; for it is extremely unlikely that Greeks could
have built and held a city in such a dangerous
position so far inland before the conquest of Alex-
ander. Pre-Alexandrian Gr cities are seldom to be
found in the interior of Asia Minor, and then only
in the open river valleys of the west. But there
must have been a Phrygian fortress at or near
Antioch when the Phrygian kings were at the height
of their power. The natural bouridary of Phrygian
territory in this district is the Pisidian Mts., and
the Phrygians could only have held the rich valley
between the Sultan Dagh and Egerdir Lake against
the warlike tribes of the Pisidian mountains on
condition that they had a strong settlement in the
neighborhood. We shall see below that the Phry-
gians did occupy this side of the Sultan Dagh, con-
trolling the road at a critical point.

The Seleucid colonists were Greeks, Jews and
Phrygians, if we may judge by the analogy of
similar Seleucid foundations. That there were
Jews in Antioch is proved by Acts 13 14.50, and
by an inscription of Apollonia, a neighboring city,
mentioning a Jewess Deborah, whose ancestors
had held office in Antioch (if Ramsay’s interpreta-
tion of the inscription, The Cities of St. Paul, 256, is
correct). In 189 BC, after the peace with Antiochus
the Great, the Romans made Antioch a “free city”’;
this does not mean that any change was made
in its constitution but only that it ceased to pay
tribute to the Seleucid kings. Antony gave An-
tioch to Amyntas of Galatia in 39 BC, and hence it
was included in the province Galatia (see GaLa-
tra) formed in 25 BC out of Amyntas’ kingdom.
Not much before 6 BC, Antioch was made a Rom


157


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Antilegomena
Antioch


colony, with the title Caesareia Antiocheia; it was
now the capital of southern Galatia and the chief of
a series of military colonies founded by Augustus,
and connected by a system of roads as yet in-
sufficiently explored, to hold down the wild tribes of
Pisidia, Isauria and Pamphylia.
Much controversy has raged round the question
whether Antioch was in Phrygia or in Pisidia at
the time of St. Paul. Strabo defines
2. Pisidian Antioch as a city of Phrygia toward
Antioch Pisidia, and the same description is im-
_,  Plied in Acts 16 6, and 18 23. Other
authorities assign Antioch to Pisidia, and it ad-
mittedly belonged to Pisidia after the province of
that name was formed in 295 AD. In the Pauline
period it was a eity of Galatia, in the district of
Galatia called Phrygia (to distinguish it from other
ethnical divisions of Galatia, e.g. Lycaonia). This
view is certain on a study of the historical conditions
(see Ramsay, The Church in the Roman Empire,
25f), and is supported by the fact that Phrygian
inscriptions (the surest sign of the presence of a
Phrygian population, for only Phrygians used the
Phrygian language) have been found around An-
tioch. See Pistpta. This corner of Phrygia owed
its incorporation in the province Galatia to the
military situation in 39 BC, when Amyntas was
entrusted with the task of quelling the disorderly
Pisidian tribes. No scheme of military conquest in
the Pisidian mountains could omit this important
strategical point on the N.W. This fact was
recognized by Seleucus when he founded Antioch
by Antony when he gave Antioch to Amyntas, an
by Augustus when he made Antioch the chief of
his military colonies in Pisidia. A military road,
built by Augustus, and called the Royal Road, led
from Antioch to the sister colony of Lystra. Ac-
cording to the story preserved in the legend of ‘Paul
and Thekla,” it was along this road that Paul and
Barnabas passed on their way from Antioch to
Jeonium (Acts 13 51; ef 2 Tim 3 11; see Ramsay,
The Church in the Roman Empire, 27-36).
Latin continued to be the official language of
Antioch, from its foundation as a Rom colony until
the later part of the 2d cent. AD. It


3. Lan- was more thoroughly Romanized than
guage and any other city in the district; but the
Religion Gr spirit revived in the 3d cent., and


the inscriptions from that date are in

Gr. The principal pagan deities were Men and

Cybele. Strabo mentions a great temple with large

estates and many hierédoulot devoted to the service
of the god.

Antioch, as has been shown above, was the

military and administrative center for that part of


* Galatia which comprised the Isaurian, -


4, Paul at
Antioch


Pisidian and Pamphylian mountains,
and the southern part of Lycaonia. It
was hence that Rom soldiers, officials,
and couriers were despatched over the whole area,
and it was hence, according to Acts 13 49, that
Paul’s mission radiated over the whole region. (On
the technical meaning of “‘region’’ here, see Pisip14.)
The ‘devout and honorable women” (AY) and the
“chief men” of the city, to whom the Jews addressed
their complaint, were perhaps the Rom colonists.
The publicity here given to the action of the women
is in accord with all that is known of their social
position in Asia Minor, where they were often priest-
esses and magistrates. The Jews of Antioch con-
tinued their persecution of Paul when he was in
Lystra (Acts 14 19). Paul passed through Antioch
a second time on his way to Perga and Attalia (Acts
14 21). He must have visited Antioch on his second
journey (Acts 16 6; Ramsay, The Church in the
Roman Empire, 74 ff), and on his third (Acts 18 23;
ib 96).


LiteratTuRre.—Antioch was identified by Arundel, Dis-
coveries in Asia Minor, I, 2812, with the ruins north of
Yalovadj. A full account of the city in the Gr and Rom
periods is given in Ramsay, The Cities of St. Paul, 247—
314. The inscriptions are published in CIG, 3979-81;
LeBas, III, 1189 ff, 1815-25; CIL, III, 289 ff; Sterrett,
Epigraphical Journey in A.M.,121 ff; Wolfe Expedition in
A.M., 218 ff; Ephem. Epigr.,V,575; Athen, Mitih., XIV,
114. Add to this list (horrowed from Pauly-Wissowa)
the inscriptions published in Ramsay's article on ‘‘The
Tekmoreian Gnest-Friends, '' referred to above. For the
Phrygian inscriptions of the Antioch district, see Ramsay's
paper in Jahresh. Oest. Arch. Inst., VAI1, 85.


W. M. Caper

ANTIOCH, an’ti-ok, IN SYRIA (’Avridxeia, An-
tiécheia) :

(2) Antioch in Syria—In 301 BC, shortly after
the battle of Ipsus, which made him master of
Syria, Seleucus Nicator founded the city of Antioch,
naming it after his father Antiochus. Guided, it
was said, by the flight of an eagle, he fixed its site
on the left bank of the Orontes (the El-‘Asi) about
15 miles from the sea. He also founded and forti-
fied Seleucia to be the port of his new capital. The
city was enlarged and embellished by successive
kings of the Seleucid Dynasty, notably by Seleucus
Callinicus (246-226 BC), and Antiochus Epiphanes
(175-164 BC). In 83 BC, on the collapse of the
Seleucid monarchy, Antioch fell into the hands of
Tigranes, king of Armenia, who held Syria until his
defeat by the Romans fourteen years later. In
64 BC the country was definitely annexed to Rome
by Pompey, who granted considerable privileges
to Antioch, which now became the capital of the
Rom province of Syria. In the civil wars which
terminated in the establishment of the Rom
principate, Antioch succeeded in attaching itself
constantly to the winning side, declaring for Caesar
after the fall of Pompey, and for Augustus after the
battle of Actium. A Rom element was added to
its population, and several of the emperors contrib-
uted to its adornment. Already a splendid city
under the Seleucidae, Antioch was made still more
splendid by its Rom patrons and masters. It was
the “queen of the East,” the third city, after Rome
and Alexandria, of the Rom world. About five
miles distant from the city was the suburb of
Daphne, a spot sacred to Apollo and Artemis.
This suburb, beautified by groves and fountains,
and embellished by the Seleucidae and the Romans
with temples and baths, was the pleasure resort of
the city, and “‘Daphnic morals” became a by-word.
From its foundation Antioch was a cosmopolitan
city. Though not a seaport, its situation was
favorable to commercial development, and _it
absorbed much of the trade of the Levant. Se-
leucus Nicator had settled numbers of Jews in it,
granting them equal rights with the Greeks (Ant,
XII, iii, 1). Syrians, Greeks, Jews, and in later
days, Romans, constituted the main elements of
the population. The citizens were a vigorous,
turbulent and pushing race, notorious for their
commercial aptitude, the licentiousness of their
pleasures, and the scurrility of their wit. Litera-
ture and the arts, however, were not neglected.

In the early history of Christianity, Antioch
occupies a distinguished place. The large and
flourishing Jewish colony offered an immediate
field for Christian teaching, and the cosmopolitan-
ism of the city tended to widen the outlook of the
Christian community, which refused to be confined
within the narrow limits of Judaism. Nicolas,
a, proselyte of Antioch, was one of the first deacons
(Acts 6 5). Antioch was the cradle of gentile
Christianity and of Christian missionary enter-
prise. It was at the instance of the church at
Antioch that the council at Jerus decided to relieve
gentile Christians of the burden of the Jewish law
(Acts 15). Antioch was Paul’s starting-point in
his three missionary journeys (Acts 13 1 ff; 15


Antiochians
Antiochus VI


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


158


36 ff; 18 23), and thither he returned from the
first two as to his headquarters (Acts 14 26 ff;
18 22). Here also the term ‘Christian,’ doubtless
originally a nickname, was first applied to the fol-
lowers of Jesus (Acts 11 26). The honorable record
of the church at Antioch as the mother-church of
gentile Christianity gave her a preéminence which
she long enjoyed. The most distinguished of her
later sons was St. John Chrysostom. The city
suffered severely from earthquakes, but did not lose
its importance until the Arab conquest restored
Damascus to the first. place among Syrian cities.
Antioch still bears its ancient name (Antakiyeh), but
is now a poor town with a few thousand inhabitants.
C. H. Tomson

ANTIOCHIANS, an-ti-d’ki-ans (?Avrioxeis, An-
tiocheis, peculiar to the Apoc, 2 Macc 4 9.19):
Antiochus Epiphanes was on the throne of Syria
from 175 to 164 BC. His determined policy
was to Hellenize his entire kingdom. The greatest
obstacle to his ambition was the fidelity of the Jews
to their historic religion. Many worldly Hebrews,
however, for material advantage were willing to
apostatize, among them, Jason, the brother of the
faithful high priest Onias III. With a large sum
of money (2 Macc 4 7-10) he bribed Antiochus
to appoint him high priest in his brother’s stead.
This office, being, since Ezra’s time, political as well
as religious, made him virtually the head of the
nation. He promised, on condition the king would
permit him to build a Gr gymnasium at Jerus,
‘to train up the youth of his race in the fashions
of the heathen,” and to enrol the Hellenized people
as Antiochians, i.e. to give all Jews who would
adopt Gr customs and the Gr religion the rights and
privileges of citizens of Antioch. The granting
of this request made Jason the head of the Gr party
at Jerus. ‘Such was the height of Gr fashions,
and the increase of heathenish manners” under his
perverted high-priesthood, that the priests under
him lost conrage to “serve any more at the altar,
but despising the temple and neglecting the sacri-
fices, hastened” to ally themselves with the Grecians.
When the sacrifice of Hercules was observed in
connection with the Grecian games at Tyre “Jason
sent special messengers from Jerus, who were
Antiochians” (2 Macc 4 19) with a large contri-
bution of money. This Hellenizing program was
supported by a decree of Antiochus which enjoined
uniformity of worship throughout his dominions.
He forbade the further observance of Jewish fes-
tivals, Sabbath, sacrifices in the temple and the
rite of circumcision. His ambition included the
like subjugation of Egypt, but being thwarted in
his expedition thither by Rom envoys, he returned


to Jerus to vent his anger on the Jews who refused:


to deny the faith of their fathers. The persecu-
tions inflicted by the king upon these devout
Jews abounded in every atrocity. Al! sacred
books of the law that could be found were burned.
This attempt to Hellenize the Jews was pushed
to every remote rural village of Pal. The universal
peril led the Samaritans, eager for safety, to repu-
diate all connection and kinship with the Jews.
They sent ambassadors and an epistle asking to
be recognized as belonging to the Gr party, and to
have their temple on Mt. Gerizim named “The
Temple of Jupiter Hellenius.” The request was
granted. This was evidently the final breach be-
tween the two races indicated in Jn 4 9, “For Jews
have no dealings with Samaritans.”

Among those who refused to be enrolled as
Antiochians was Mattathias, an aged priest of
the order of Joarib. Mourning the terrible prof-
anation of the holy city and temple he retired
with his five sons to his ancestral estates among
the mountains N.W. of Jerus. The emissaries of


Antiochus followed him thither and commanded
him to offer sacrifices upon a heathen altar. He was
promised special royal favor in case of obedience.
The indignant priest not only “had no ear for the
temptations of an abhorred Hellenism,” but in his
fury instantly slew the apostate priest who attempted
to comply with the command. He killed also the
king’s commissioner and tore down the detested
altar.

This act of heroism became the dawn of a new
era. The people rallied to Mattathias’ support.
The rebellion grew in power. After a year of
inspiring leadership “‘the venerable priest-captain”’
died, having first committed “the cause of the law”
to his sons, henceforth called Maccabees, from
‘Judas Maccabaeus, the son to whom he committed
his work. Their victorious career brought to an
end the Hellenizing process and the Gr party to
which the Antiochians belonged. See also ANTIO-
cuus IV.

Lirerature.—Ant, XII, v; Stanley, History of the
Jewish Church, III, § 48; Riggs, History of the Jewish
People, ch ii, §§ 15-26 (Kent's Hist. Series, IV).

Dwicur M. Prarr

ANTIOCHIS, an-ti’o-kis (Avruoxis, Antiochis):
A concubine of Antiochus Epiphanes who had
presented her with the two Cilician cities, Tarsus
and Mallus. Dissatisfied with this the cities made
insurrection (2 Macc 4 30).


ANTIOCHUS, an-ti’o-kus (Avrloxos, Antiochos;
A, ’Avripaxos, Antimachos [1 Macc 12 16]): The
father of Numenius, who in company with Anti-
pater, son of Jason, was sent by Jonathan on an
embassy to the Romans and Spartans to renew “the
friendship’ and “former confederacy” made by Judas
(1 Mace 12 16; 14 22; Ant, XIII, vi, 8).


ANTIOCHUS I, an-ti’o-kus (’Avrloxos Zwrip,
Antioches Sdtér, “savior’’): B. 323 BC; d. 261,
son of Seleucus Nicator. He fell in love with his
stepmother, Stratonike, and became very ill. His
father, when he discovered the cause of his son’s
illness, gave her to him in 293, and yielded to
him the sovereignty over all the countries beyond
the Euphrates, as well as the title of king. When
Seleucus returned to Macedonia in 281, he was
murdered by Ptolemaeus Ceraunus. Antiochus
thus became ruler of the whole Syrian kingdom.
He waged war on Eumenes of Pergamum, but with-
outsuccess. For the victories of his elephant corps
over the Gauls, who had settled in Asia Minor, he
received the surname of Soter (‘‘Deliverer’). It
was in a battle with these inveterate foes of his
country that he met his death (261 BC). See also
SELEUCIDAE. J. E, Harry


- ANTIOCHUS II, surnamed Theos (e6s, Theds,
“god’’): Son and successor of Antiochus I (261-246
BC). He made _a successful war on Ptolemy
Philadelphus of Egypt, but was obliged to buy
peace in 250 by divorcing his wife, Laodicc, and
by marrying Ptolemy’s daughter, Berenice. After
the death of Ptolemy, ‘‘the king of the south” (Dnl
11 6) 248 BC, he recalled Laodice and named her
eldest son (Seleucus Kallinikos) as his successor
to the throne; but Laodice (probably because she
feared a second repudiation) had Berenice, her
child, and Antiochus all murdered (246 BC). The
Milesians gave him the surname of Theos in grati-
tude for his liberating them from the tyranny of
Timarchus. (See Arrian, I, 17, 10, and 18, 2;
Jos, Ant, XII, iii, 2; Dittenberger, Sylloge Inser.
Graec, 166~71.) J. KE. Harry


ANTIOCHUS III (Méyas, Mégas, ‘The Great,”
mentioned in 1 Macc 1 10; 8 6-8): Son of Seleu-
cus Kallinikos; succeeded to the throne of Syriain


WATER WHEEL ON RIVER ORONTES AT ANTIOCH


159


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE: ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Antiochians
Antiochus VI


+» =e


222 BC; put to death his general, Hermeas, and
then led an army against Egypt. Theodotus sur-
rendered to him Tyre, Ptolemais and his naval
fleet. Rhodes and Cyzicus, as well as Byzantium
and Aetolia, desired peace, but Antiochus declined
to accept their terms. He renewed the war, but
was defeated at Raphia in 217, and was obliged to
give up Phoenicia and Coelesyria; Seleucia, how-
ever, he retained. He undertook to bring under his
sway again all the territory of the Far East. His
expedition against Bactria and Parthia gained for
him the surname of “The Great.” In 209 he
carried away the treasure of the goddess Aine in
Ecbatana, defeated the Parthians, and in 208
marched against the Bactrians. Later he made a
treaty with an Indian rajah, and then returned to


Tetradrachm (Attic talent) of Antiochus Til.


the West by way of Arachosia and Carmania,
forcing the Gerraean Arabs to furnish him with
frankincense, myrrh and silver. Then he took
Ephesus, which he made his headquarters. In 196
he had crossed the Hellespont and rebuilt Lysi-
machia. Hannibal visited Antiochus in Ephesus
the next year and became one of the king’s advisers.
He sought the friendship also of Eumenes of Per-
gamum, but without success. Rome now requested
the king not to interfere in Europe, or to recognize
the right of the Romans to protect the Greeks in
Asia. A war broke out in 192, and Antiochus was
persuaded to come to Greece. The Aetolians
elected him their general, who asked the Achaeans
to remain neutral. But the patriotic Philopoemen
decided that an alliance with Rome was to be
preferred. Antiochus first captured Calchis; then
succeeded in gaining a footing in Boeotia, and later
made an effort to get posse of Thessaly, but
retired on the approach of the Macedonian army.
In 191 the Romans made a formal declaration of
war on Antiochus, who, being at that time in Acar-
nania, returned to Calchis, and finally sailed back
to Ephesus. Tbe Romans regained possession of
Boeotia, Euboea and Sestus; but Polyxenidas de-
feated the Rom fleet near Samos, which island, to-
gether with Cyme and Phocaea, fell into the hands
of Antiochus. The victorious Polyxenidas, however,
soon sustained a crushing defeat at the hands of the
Romans, and Antiochus abandoned Lysimachia,
leaving an open road to Asia to the Romans. He
was finally defeated at Magnesia and sent word to
Scipio, who was at Sardis, that he was willing to
make peace; but Scipio ordered him to send envoys
to Rome. <A decision was reached in 189; the
Asiatic monarch was obliged to renounce everything
on the Rom side of the Taurus; give up all his ships
of war but ten and pay 15,000 talents to Rome, and
500 to Eumenes. Antiochus marched against the
revolted Armenians in 187. In order to replenish
his exhausted treasury, he attempted to plunder a
temple and both he and his soldiers were slain by


the Elymaeans. ; ; e
evan eee olae: v.40.21; Livy xxxi.l4; xxxiil.
19 ff; Jos, Ant, XII; Heyden, Res ab Ant; Babelon, Rois
de Syrie, 77-86; Dnl 11 a tae De Antiochi IIIT
k ‘inster, ;
Magni rebus gestis (Mins J: B: Haney


ANTIOCHUS IV (Emavis, Epiphants, é-pif’-
a-ntz, “Tllustrious”): Son of Antiochus III who
became king after his brother, Seleucus IV, had
been murdered by Heliodorus. As a boy Antio-
chus lived at Rome as a hostage. The Pergamene
monarchs, Eumenes and Attalus, succeeded in
placing upon the throne the brother of Seleucus,
although Heliodorus had wished to ascend the
throne himself. The young king was even more
enterprising than his fatber. He was called in to
settle a quarrel between Onias III and his brother,
Jason, the leader of the Hellenizing faction in Jerus,
and Onias was driven out (2 Mace 4 4-6). Jason
became high priest in his stead (2 Macc 4 9-16;
1 Mace 1 10-15; Ant, XII, v, 1). Antiochus him-
self afterward visited Jerus and was signally honored
(2 Mace 4 22). On the death of Ptolemy VI in
173, Antiochus laid claim to Coelesyria, Pal and
Phoenicia; whereupon war broke out between Syria
and Egypt. In this war Antiochus was victorious.
Ptolemy Philometor was taken prisoner, and Antio-
chus had himself crowned king of Egypt (171—167)
at Memphis; whereupon Alexandria revolted and
chose Ptolemy’s brother as their king. The Rom
ambassador, Popilius Laenas, demanded the sur-
render of Egypt and the immediate withdrawal of
its self-constituted king. Antiochus yielded; gave
up Pelusium and withdrew his fleet from Cyprus,
but retained Coelesyria, Pal and Phoenicia.

While Antiochus was on a second campaign in
Egypt, he heard of the siege of Jerusalem. He
returned immediately, slew many thousands of the
inhabitants and robbed the temple of its treasures
(1 Mace 1 20-24; 2 Macc & 11-21). By his pro-
hibition of the Jewish worship and his introduc-
tion or substitution of the worship of the Olym-
pian Zeus (1 Macc 1 54; 2 Macc 6 2; Ant, XII,
v, 4) he brought about the insurrection of the
Jews, under the Maccabees, upon whom he made
an unsuccessful war in 167-164 BC. After this
war Antiochus retired to the eastern provinces
and died, after having failed in an attack on the
temple of the Sun in Elymais, in Persia. See also
ABOMINATION OF DESOLATION; ANTIOCHIANS.

J. E. Harry

ANTIOCHUS V (Himarwp, Eupdtor, ““Noble-
born’’): Son and successor to Antiochus Epiphanes,
ascended the throne as a mere boy (163-161 BC)
under the guardianship of Lysias, who led an ex-
pedition to the relief of Jerusalem, which had been
besieged by Judas Maccabaeus (1 Macc 6 18-30;
Ant, XII, ix, 4), who was defeated (1 Macc 6 42).
Antiochus then besieged Jerusalem. Peace was
finally concluded on the condition that the Jews
should not be compelled to change any of their
national customs (1 Macc 6 55-60; Ant, XII, ix,
7). Philp, the king’s foster-brother (2 Macc 9
29), was defeated at Antioch, but soon afterward
Lysias and Antiochus were themselves defeated by
Demetrius Soter, son of Seleucus Philopator (1
Mace 7 4; 2 Mace 14 2; Ant, XII, x, 1; Polyb.
xxxi.19; Livy Epit. 46). J. E. Harry


ANTIOCHUS VI (surnamed Theos [@eds], or,
according to coins, Dionysus Epiphanes): Was the
son of Alexander Balas, who claimed to be the son
of Antiochus Epiphanes. Alexander left the
throne to his son in 146 BC. The young king
retired to Arabia—perhaps through compulsion.
The shrewd diplomatist and skilful general, Try-
phon, succeeded first in winning over to his side the
two leaders of the Jews, Jonathan and Simon, and
then, by force of arms, in making the Syrians recog-
nize his protégé. As soon as the monarchy had
been firmly established, Tryphon unmasked his
projects: he had been ambitious only for himself;
Antiochus had been only an instrument in his hands.


Antiochus VII
Apocalyptic Lit.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


160


In 143, after a reign of a little more than three years,
Antiochus was assassinated by Tryphon, who as-
cended the throne himself (1 Mace 13 31; Avi,
XIII, vii, 1; Livy Epit. 55). J. E. Harry


ANTIOCHUS VII (surnamed Sidetes, 28477,
Sidétés, after Sida in Pamphylia, where he was
educated): Younger son of Demetrius Soter and
brother of Demetrius Nicator, whose wife, Cleo-
patra, he married when Demetrius was taken
prisoner by the Parthians. Antiochus overthrew
the usurper, Tryphon, and ascended the throne
himself and reigned from 139 to 130 BC. He
defeated John Maccabaeus and besieged Jerus
(Ant, XIII, viii, 2), but concluded a favorable peace
(Ant, XIII, vii, 3) from fear of Rome. Later he
waged war with the Parthians and was slain in
battle (1 Mace 16 2-9.28-31). J. E. Harry


ANTIPAS, an’ti-pas ’Avriwas): The name is an
abbreviation of Antipater: (1) A name of Herod
“the tetrarch” (in Jos), son of Herod the Great, the
brother of Archelaus (Mt 14 1; Lk 3 1; 9 7; Acts
13 1). See Heron. (2) A martyr of the church of
Pergamum, described as “‘my witness, my faithful
one” (Rev 2 13).


ANTIPATER, an-tip’a-tér (Avrtratpos, An-
tipatros): One of two envoys sent by the senate of
the Jews to the Romans and Spartans (1 Mace 12
16; 14 22).


ANTIPATRIS, an-tip’a-tris (Avriwarpis, An-
tpatris): Is mentioned in Scripture only once, in
connection with the descent of Paul from Jerus to
Caesarea (Acts 23 31). References will be found
in Ant, XIII, xv,1; XVI, v, 2; BJ, I, xxi, 9. It
was a town built by Herod the Great, and called
after his father Antipater. It is probably identical
with the modern Ras el-‘Ain, “fountain head,” a
large mound with ruins at the source of Nahr el-
‘Aujeh, in the plain to the N.E. of Jaffa. There are
remains of a crusading castle which may be the
Mirabel of those times. W. Ewine


ANTIQUITY, an-tik’wi-ti (WAT , kadhmah, from
Dip, kadham, “to precede in time,” “to be old”):
In Ezk 16 55; 36 11, rendered “former”; in Ps
129 6, “before.” Tr4 “antiquity” only in Isa 23 7
to indicate the primeval age of Tyre, which Strabo
terms, ‘after Sidon,” the oldest Phoen city. De-
litzsch renders it ‘‘whose origin is from the days of
the olden time.”


ANTONIA, an-td’ni-a. See JERUSALEM.


ANTOTHIJAH, an-to-thi’‘ja. See ANTHOTHIJAH.
ANTOTHITE, an’toth-it: AV form of Ana-
THOTHITE (q.v.) (thus RV) (1 Ch 11 28; 12 3).


ANUB, a’nub (27:9, ‘anabh, “tipe”’): A de-
scendant of Judah and son of Hakkoz (AV Coz)
1 Ch 48.

ANUS, a’nus. See Annus (Apoc).

ANVIL, an’vil (Q7, pa‘am): The word is used
only once to mean anvil. The passage (Isa 41 7)
refers to the custom still very common of workmen
encouraging each other at their work. See Crarts.
Just how pretentious the anvil of the ancients was
we do not know. Most work requiring striking
or beating, from the finest wrought jewelry to the
largest copper vessels, is now done on an anvil shaped
like an inverted letter L which is driven into a


block of wood, or into the ground, or into a crack
between two of the stone slabs of the workman’s
floor. The only massive anvils seen in the country
today are modern and of foreign make.
James A. Patcu

APACE, a-pis’ (‘at a pace’): With “come,”
2S 18 25; “flee,” Jer 46 5, for “rapidly,” “‘has-
tily,” “fast,” corresponding to a Heb idiom that
adds emphasis or intensity to an idea by repetition
of the word or its equivalent.


APAME, a-pa’mé, ap’a-mé (Ardpy, Apdmé): A
conenbine of Darius and a daughter of Bartacus the
Tllustrions, whose behavior to the king is referred to
in a speech of Zerubbabel before the king to prove
to him the great power of women (1 Hsd 4 29).
See Barracus; ILLUsTRIOUs.


APART, a-pirt’ (43, badh, “separation,” i.e.
alone, by oneself; 3), niddah, “uncleanness,”’
i.e. something put away: ‘an abomination’):
In Zec 12 12-14 the former word is used eleven
times with powerful effect to indicate the separation
of families and the isolation of wives through ex-
cessive grief in Jerus on account of the slain Mes-
siah. The latter word signifies removal from cere-
monial uncleanness (Lev 16 19; 18 19; Ezk 22
10). In Gr, kar’ tdlar, kat’ dian, “by themselves,”
of marked significance as expressing Christ’s desire
for privacy in prayer, alone or with His disciples;
either in a desert (Mt 14 18); a mountain (ver 23);
or a high mountain, at the time of the transfiguration
(17 1.19), thus suggestive of the secrecy of prayer
and communion with God. Used with reference
also to Christ’s disclosures of His purpose and of the
purport of His teaching in private to His disciples
(Mt 20 17). Dwicat M. Pratt


APE, ap (S"P, képh): The word occurs only in
the two || passages (1 K 10 22; 2 Ch 9 21) in
which the magnificence ‘of Solomon is illustrated
by the things which are brought to him from foreign
countries. Apes are mentioned with gold, silver,
ivory and peacocks. Peacocks are natives of
India and Ceylon. Apes and ivory may have been
brought from
India or Af-
rica. Gold and
silver may
have come
from these or
other quarters.
An Indian ori-
gin may be
inferred from
the fact that
the Heb koph,
the Gr kébos
(x@Bos) and the Eng. ape are akin to the Sanskrit
kapi, which is referred to the root kap, kamp, ‘“‘to
tremble”; but the question of the source of these
imports depends upon what is understood by Tar-
SHIsH and OpuirR (q.v.). Canon Cheyne in EB (s.v.
“Peacock’’) proposes a reading which would give
“gold, silver, ivory and precious stones” instead of
“gold, silver, ivory, apes and peacocks.”’ Assuming
however, that animals are here referred to, the word
ape should be understood to mean some kind of
monkey. The word ape is sometimes used for the
tailless apes or anthropoids such as the gorilla, the
chimpanzee and the orang-outang, as opposed to the
tailed kinds, but this distinction is not strictly held
to, and the usage seems formerly to have been freer
than now. AuFrrep Envy Day


APELLES, a-pel’éz (AredAfis, Apellés): A
Christian at Rome to whom Paul sends greetings


Monkey from the Praenestine Mosaic.


161 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA {ntiochus Vit
(Rom 16 10). He is described by Paul as “the | The modern Fk or Aftk (for both forms are heard)


approved in Christ,” i.e. ‘that approved Christian’”’
(Denney). In some way unknown to us Apelles
had been tested and he had proved faithful (cf
Jas 112; 2 Tim 2 15). It is a common name.
Many commentators refer to Horace (Satires,
i.5.100): ‘“Credat Judaeus Apella, non ego.”


APHAEREMA, a-fér’é-ma (Adalpepa, A phai-
rema and Aphérema; AV Apherema). One of
three districts taken from Samaria and added to
Judaea by Demetrius Nicator (1 Mace 11 34).
Cf Ant, XIII, iv, 9.


APHARSATHCHITES, af-ar-sath’kits, APHAR-
SACHITES, a-far’sak-its (NIDMO WY , ’dpharsath-
khaye’): A tribe living in Samaria that protested
against the rebuilding of the Temple, and brought
their complaint to Darius (Ezr 4 9; 5 6; 6 6).
The tribe has not yet been recognized with any cer-
tainty in the inscriptions. Rawlinson identifies
them with the Persians; other scholars deny that
any Assyr king was ever so situated as to have been
able to obtain colonists from Persia. Some main-
tain with Marquardt that the term is not the name
of a tribe, but the title of certain officers under
Darius. Fred. Delitzsch suggests the inhabitants of
one of the two great Medean towns “Partakka”
and “‘Partukka’’ mentioned in Esarhaddon’s inscrip-
tions. Andreas plausibly connects it with the Assyr
Suparsak (Muss-Arnolt, Assyr Dict., 1098), Saqu (3)
“general”; Scheft takes it from an old Iranian word
aparasarka, “lesser ruler.”’ H. J. Wour


APHARSITES, a-fir’sits (STDTDN, *épharsaye’):
A tribe transferred to Samaria by Asnappar of
Assyria (Ezr 49). Rawlinson identifies them
with the APHARSACHITES (q.v.), taking Apharsites
to be an accidental repetition of the same word.
He understands ‘‘the Persians” to be meant in both
cases. Others identify them with a Median tribe
mentioned in the inscriptions of Sennacherib as
dwellers in the district of Parsua.


APHEK, a’fek (PPS, ’dphék, ‘fortress’; ’"Adék,
Aphék):

(1) In Josh 12 18 we should probably read with
the LXX “the king of Aphek in Sharon.” This
may correspond to Aphek in 1841. It wasa
royal city of the Canaanites whose king was slain
by Josh. Probably it is the Aphek mentioned by
Jos as being near io Antipatris (BJ, II, xix, 1).
Kakon, a strong position commanding the main
entrance to Samaria might suit; but the name has
perished. Pave

(2) (Gr Taphék or Aphekd): A city in the lot
of Asher (Josh 13 4). The inhabitants were not
ejected by Asher, nor is it said that they became
tributary (Jgs 1 31). In this passage it 1s written
aphik (Heb). It may be represented by ’Afka on
Nahr Ibrahim, although this is probably farther north
than we should expect. en ;

(3) To this place the Philis gathered their hosts,
while the Israelites pitched by the fountain which
is in Jezree! (1 S 29 1). It has been generally
supposed that these two positions were over against
each other, and that therefore Aphek must be sought
in the plain of Esdraelon. No place answering
this description has been found here. Fuki‘ah
on Mount Gilboa is plainly impossible. If, however,
this was only the rallying point of the Philis from
which they went up to Jezreel (ver 11), it may be
identical with the Aphek in the plain of Sharon
(cf 1 above). :

(4) A city on the plateau east of the Jordan,
where disaster befell Benhadad (1 K 20 26.30).

,The same place may be intended in 2 K 13 17.


on the brow of the hill beyond Kal‘at el-Hugn,
east of the Sea of Galilee, probably represents this
ancient city. Ewine


APHEKAH, a-fé’ka (SPDR, 'dphékah, “force”
or “‘strength’”): An unidentified city in the hill
country of Judah (Josh 16 53).

APHEREMA, a-fer’é-ma. See APHAEREMA(Apoc).


APHERRA, a-fer’a (Adeppd, Apherré): Head of
a family of children of Solomon’s servants in the
post-exilic list, one of cight listed in 1 Esd 5 34
after Pochereth-hazzebaim of Ezr 2 57=Neh 7 59.

APHIAH, a-fiia (IMDS, 'dphith): A Benja-
minite and an ancestor of King Saul (1 8 9 1).


APHIK, 4’fik: Variant of APHEK (q.v.).


APHRAH, af’ra: AV form for RV BETH-LE-
APHRAH (Mic 1 10).


APHSES, af’séz: AV form for RV HAPPIZZEZ
(1 Ch 24 15).


APOCALYPSE, a-pok’a-lips. See ApocaLypric
LITERATURE; REVELATION or JOHN.


APOCALYPSE OF BARUCH, ba’ruk.
ApocaLypTic LITERATURE.


APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE, a-pok-a-lip’tik
lit’ér-a-tir:


See


INTRODUCTORY


I. Bacxerounp or APOCALYPTIC
1. Judaism and Hellenism
2. Political Influences
Il, Genera, CHARACTERISTICS OF APOCALYPTIC

1. Differences from Prophecy in Content
2. Differences from Prophecy in Literary Form

III. Avtuorsrip or Jewisa APOCALYPTIC WORKS
1. Pecudepicreniic Authors not Known Individ-


ually

. General Resemblance and Mutual Dependence
Show Them Products of One Sect

5 cares Jewish Sects Comprise Whole Literary

ass

. Not the Product of the Sadducees nor of the
Pharisees

. Probably Written by the Essenes


Works Entittep APOCALYPTIC


I. Apocauyrses Proper
1. Enoch Books: (1) History of the Books; (2)
Summary; (3) Language; (4) Date; (5) In-
ternal Chronology: The Book of Noah; (6) Ex-
ternal Chronology; (7) Slavonic Enoch; (8)
Secrets of Enoch
2. Apocalypse of Baruch: (1) Summary; (2) Struc-
ture; (3) Language; (4) Date; (5) Relation to
Other Books; (6) The Rest of the Words of
Baruch
3. The Assumption of Moses: (1) Summary; (2)
Structure; (3) Language; (4) Date; (5) Rela-
tion to Other Books
4. The Ascension of Isaiah: (1) Summary; (2)
Structure; (3) Language; (4) Date
{1) Summary;


a Pp WO


5. The Fourth Book of Esdras:
(2) Structure; (3) Language; (4) Date
II. LeGenpary Works
The Book of Jubilees: (1) Summary; (2) Structure;
(3) Language; (4) Date
III. Psaumic PsfuDEPIGRAPRA
1. The Psalter of Solomon: (1) Summary; (2)
Language: (3) Date; (4) Christology
2. The Odes of Solomou: (1) Relation to Pistis
Sophia and Summary; (2) Date
IV. Testaments “
1. Testameuts of the Twelve Patriarchs: (1) Sum-
mary: (a) Reuben; (b) Simeon; (c) Levi;
$2 Judah; (e) Issachar; (f) Zebulun; (g) Dan;
h) Naphtali; (¢) Gad; (7) Asher; (k) Joseph;
(1) Benjamin; (2) Structure; (3) Language;
(4) Date and Authorship; (5) Relation to Other
Books
2. Testament of Adam
3. Testament of Abraham
4. Testament of Job: (1) Summary; (2) Structure;
(3) Language; (4) Date and Authorship
V. SrpyLuine ORACLES
VI. ConcLusion
LitERATURE


Apocalyptic Lit.


A series of pseudepigraphic works, mainly of
Jewish origin, appeared during the period between
210 BC and 200 AD. They have many features in
common. The most striking is the resemblance
they all bear to the Book of Daniel. Following
this model, most of them use “vision” as a literary
device by which to introduce their conceptions of
the remote future. A side product of this same
movement was the composition, mainly in Alex-
andria, of the Sibylline books. The literary device
of “vision” was one used in the Aeneid by Virgil,
the classical contemporary of a large number of
these works. One peculiarity in regard to the
majority of these documents is the fact that while
popular among the Christian writers of the first
Christian cents., they disappeared with the advent
of the Middle Ages, and remained unknown until
the first half of the 19th cent. was well on in its
course.

INTRODUCTORY

I. Background of Apocalyptic.—When the Jews

came back from Babylon to Palestine, though

surrounded by heathen of various
1. Judaism creeds, they were strongly mono-
and theistic. The hold the Persians had of
Hellenism the empire of 8.W. Asia, and their reli-

gion—Zoroastrianism—so closely akin
to monotheism, prevented any violent attempts
at perverting the Jews. With the advent of the
Gr power a new state of things emerged. Certainly
at first there does not seem to have been any direct
attempt to force them to abandon their religion,
but the calm contémpt of the Hellene who looked
down from the superior height of his artistic culture
on all barbarians, and the influence that culture
had in the ruling classes tended to seduce the Jews


into idolatry. While the governing orders, the-


priests and the leaders of the Council, those who
came in contact with the generals and governors
of the Lagids of Egypt, or the Seleucids of Syria,
were thus inclined to be seduced into idolatry,
there was a large class utterly uninfluenced by Hel-
lenic culture, and no small portion of this class hated
fanatically all tampering with idolatry. When the
dominion over Pal passed out of the hands of the
Ptolemies into that of the house of Seleucus, this
feeling was intensified, as the Syrian house re-
garded with less tolerance the religion of Israel.
The opposition to Hellenism and the apprehension
of it naturally tended to draw together those who
shared the feeling. On the one side was the scribist
legal party, who developed into the Pharisaic sect;
on the other were the mystics, who felt the personal
power of Delty. These afterward became first the
Chasidim, then later the Essenes. These latter
gradually retired from active participation in
national life. As is natural with mystics their
feelings led them to see visions and to dream
dreams.’ Others more intellectual, while they wel-
comed the enlightenment of the Greeks, retained
their faith in the one God. To them it seemed
obvious that as their God was the true God, all
real enlightenment must have proceeded from Him
alone. In such thinkers as Plato and Aristotle
they saw many things in harmony with the Mosaic
law. They were sure that there must have been
links which united these thinkers to the current
of Divine revelation, and were led to imagine of
what sort these links necessarily were. The names
of poets such as Orpheus and Linus, who survived
only in their names, suggested the source of these
links—these resemblances. Hence the wholesale
forgeries, mainly by Jews, of Gr poems. On the
other hand, there was the desire to harmonize Moses
and his law with the philosophical ideas of the
time. Philo the Alexandrian, the most con-
spicuous example of this effort, could not have been


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


162


an isolated phenomenon; he must have had many
precursors. This latter movement, although most
evident in Egypt, and probably in Asia Minor, had
a considerable influence in Judaea also.

Political events aided in the advance of both
these tendencies. The distinct favor that Antio-
chus the Great showed to the Greeks
and to those barbarians who Hellen-
ized, became with his son Antiochus
Epiphanes a direct religious perse-
cution. This emphasized the protest of the Chasi-
dim on the one hand, and excited the imagination
of the visionaries to greater vivacity on the other.
While the Maccabees and their followers were
stirred to deeds of valor, the meditative visionaries
saw in God their refuge, and hoped for deliverance
at the hand of the Messiah. They pictured to
themselves the tyrant smitten down by the direct
judgment of Jehovah. After the death of Epiph-
anes, the Maccabeans bad become a power to
be reckoned with, and the visionaries had less
excitement from external events till the Herodian
family found their way into supreme power. At
first the Herodians favored the Pharisaic party as
that which supported John Hyrcanus I, the friend
of Antipater, the father of Herod the Great, and
the Essenes seem to have taken Herod at first into
their special favor. However, there was soon a
change. In consequence of the compliance with
heathen practices, into which their connection with
the Romans forced the Herodians, the more reli-
gious among the Jews felt themselves compelled to
withdraw all favor from the Idumean usurper, and
to give up all hope in him. This naturally excited
the visionaries to new expectation of Divine inter-
vention. Behind the Herodians was the terrible
iron power of Rome. The Romans had inter-
vened in the quarrel between John Hyrcanus II
and his brother Aristobulus. Pompey had dese-
crated the temple by intruding into the Holy of
Holies. The disastrous overthrow that he suffered
at the hands of Caesar and his miserable end on the
shores of Egypt seemed to be a judgment on him for
his impiety. Later, Nero was the especial mark for
the Apocalyptists, who by this time had become
mainly Christian. Later Rom emperors impressed
the imagination of the Apocalyptists, as the Fla-
vians.

IL General Characteristics of Apocalyptic.—
Both in matter and form apocalyptic lit. and the

writings associated with it differ
1. Differ- from the prophetic writings of the
ences from preceding periods. As already men-
Prophecy in tioned, while the predictive element
Content is present in Apocalypses, as in Proph-

ecy, it is more prominent and relates
to longer periods and involves a wider grasp of the
state of the world at large. Apocalypse could only
have been possible under the domination of the
great empires. Alike in Prophecy and in Apocalypse
there is reference to the coming of the Messiah,
but in the latter not only is the Messianic hope more
defined, it has a wider reference. In the Prophets
aud Psalmists the Messiah had mainly to do with
Israel. ‘He will save his people’; “He will die
for them”; “His people shall be all righteous.”
All this applies to Israel; there is no imperial out-
look. In the Apocalypses the imperial outlook is
prominent, beginning with Daniel in which we find
the Messianic kingdom represented by a “son of
man” over against the bestial empires that had pre-
ceded (Dnl 7 13) and reaching the acme of Apoca-
lypse, if not its conclusion, in the Rev of St.
John: ‘The kingdom of the world is become the
kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ”? (Rev 11
15). While the prophet was primarily-a preacher
of righteousness, and used prediction either as a


2. Political
Influences


163


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocalyptic Lit.


guarantee, by its fulfilment, of his Divine mission,
or as an exhibition of the natural result of rebellion
against God’s righteous laws, to the Apocalyptist
prediction was the thing of most importance, and
in the more typical Apocalypse there is no moral
exhortation whatever.
_In the literary form employed there are marked
differences between Apocalyptic and Prophecy.
Both make use of vision, but in Proph-
2. Differ-  ecy, in the more restricted sense of
ences from the word, these visions are as a rule
Prophecy implied, rather than being described.
in Literary Although Isaiah calls the greater part
Form of his Prophecy ‘‘vision,’’ yet in only
one instance does he describe what he
sees; as a rule he assumes throughout that his
audience knows what is visible to him. The only
instance (ch 6) in which he does describe his
vision is not at all predictive; the object is exhorta-
tion. In the case of the Apocalypses the vision
is the vehicle by which the prediction is conveyed.
In Ezekiel there are visions, but only one of these—
“the valley of dry bones’’—is predictive. In it
the symbols used are natural, not, as always in
Apocalypses, arbitrary. Cf in Daniel’s vision of
the Ram and the He-goat (ch 8). In Ezekiel the
dry bones naturally suggest death, and the process
by which they are revivified the reader feels is the
natural course such an event would take did it
come within the sphere of ordinary experience;
while in what is told of the horns on the head of the
Gr goat there is no natural reason for the changes
that take place, only a symbolical one. Thisis still
more marked in the vision of the Eagle in 4 Esd 11.
What may be regarded as yet more related to the
form is the fact that while the Prophets wrote in a
style of so elevated prose that it always hovered
on the border of poetry—indeed, frequently passed
into it and employed the form of verse, as Isa 26 1—
the apocalyptists always used pure prose, without
the elaborate parallelism or cadenced diction of Heb
poetry. The weird, the gorgeous, or the terrible
features of the vision described are thrown into all
the higher relief by the baldness of the narrative.
Il, Authorship of Jewish Apocalyptic Works.
—In most cases the question of authorship is one
that has to be discussed in regard to
1. Pseu- each work individually. A number of
depigraphic the characteristics of these works render
Authors such a procedure impossible in regard
not Known tothem. If we put to the one side the
Individually two Apocalypses that form part of
the canon, they are all pseudonymous,
as En and Bar, or anonymous, as the Book of
Jub. Many of them in addition show traces of
interpolation and modification by later hands. If
we had a full and clear history of the period during
which they were written, and if its literature had
to a great extent been preserved to us we might
have been in a position to fix on the individual;
but as matters stand, this is impossible. At the
same time, however, from internal evidence, we
may form some idea of the surroundings of those
who have written these works. From the striking
resemblance in general style which they exhibit,
and from the way in which some of them are related
to the others, many of these works seem to have
been the product of similar circumstances. Even
those most removed from the rest in
2. Products type and general attitude are nearer
of One Sect them than they are to any other class
of work. All affirmative evidence
thus points to these works having been composed
by authors that were closely associated with each
other. The negative evidence for this is the very
small traceable influence these works had on later
Jewish thought. Many of them are quoted by the


Christian Fathers, some of them by NT writers.
The whole of these works have been preserved to
us through Christian means. A large number have
been preserved by being adopted into the OT
canon of the Ethiopic church; a considerable num-
ber have been unearthed from Ambrosian Library
in Milan; most of them have been written in Pal by
Jewish writers; yet no clear indubitable sign of the
knowledge of these books can be found in the Talm.
The phenomenon here noted is a striking one.
Works, the majority of which are written in Heb
by Jews, are forgotten by the descend-

3. Jewish ants of these Jews, and are retained
Sects by gentile Christians, by nations who
were ignorant of Heb and preserved
them in Gr, Lat or Ethiopic translations. A char-
acteristic of the Judaism during the period in
which these books were appearing was the power
exercised by certain recognized sects. If one takes
the most nearly contemporary historian of the Jews,
Jos, as one’s authority, it is found how prominent
the three sects, Pharisees, Sadducees and Essenes,
were. To a certain extent this is confirmed by
the Gospels and the Acts, with this noticeable ex-
ception—the Essenes are never mentioned by name.
The scribes, the literary class among

4. Not from the Jews, all belonged to one or other
Sadducees of these ruling sects. Consequently
these works must have proceeded from

members of one of those sects. Their mutual
resemblance precludes their authors from belonging
some to one sect and some to another. We know
pretty exactly from Jos and the NT what the char-
acter and tenets of the Sadducees were. They were
the priestly sacerdotal class, and were above all,
political schemers. They received only the Pent
as authoritative, and had no share in the Mes-
sianic hopes of which the Prophets were full. They
believed neither in angel nor spirit, and had no
hope of immortality (Acts 23 8). Jos compares
them with the followers of Epicurus among the
Greeks. Nothing could be farther removed from
the spirit and doctrines of the Apocalypses than all
this. The Messianic hopes bulk largely; angels
are prominent, their hierarchies are described and
their names given. The doctrine of immortality
is implied, and the places of reward and punish-
ment are described. ‘The Apocalypses cannot there-
fore be attributed to the Sadducees. There is
greater plausibility in attributing them to the
Pharisees. So far as doctrines are concerned, there
is no doubt that the agreement is relatively close.
There are, however, difficulties in accepting this
view of their origin. With the fall of

5. Nor fromthe Jewish state, the Sadducees dis-
the Phari- appeared when there was no field for
sees political activity, and when with the
destruction of the temple there were

no more sacrifices to require the services of Aaronic
priests. Nearly contemporancously the Essenes
disappeared in Christianity. The Pharisees alone
remained to carry on the traditions of Judaism.
We have in the Talm the result of Pharisaic literary
activity. The Mish is the only part of this mis-
cellaneous conglomeration which is at all nearly
contemporary with the works before us. It has
none of the characteristics of the apocalyptic
writings. The later Hagadic Midr have more
resemblance to some of these, noticeably to the
Book of Jub. Still, the almost total want of any
references to any of the Apocalypses in the recog-
nized Pharisaic writings, and the fact that no
Jewish version of any of these books has been pre-
served, seems conclusive against the idea that the
Apocalypses owed their origin to the Pharisaic
schools. The books that form the ordinary Apoc
are in a different position. The majority, if not


Apocalyptic Lit.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


164


the whole of them, were received into the Jewish
canon of Alexandria. Some of them are found in
Heb or Aram., as Ecclus, Tob and Jth. None of
the Apocalypses have been so found. This leads
necessarily to the conclusion that the Pharisees did
not write these books.
By the method of exclusions, we are led thus to
adopt the conclusion of Hilgenfeld, that they are
the work of the Essenes. We have,
6. Probably however, positive evidence. We know
from from Jos that the Essenes had many
Essenes secret sacred books. Those books
before us would suit this description.
Further, in one of these books (4 Esd) we find a
story which affords an explanation of the existence
of these books. 2 (4) Esd 14 40-48 tells how to
Ezra there was given a cup of water as it were fire
to drink, and then he dictated to five men. These
men wrote in characters which they did not under-
stand “for forty days,’ until they had written
“four score and fourteen books’ (RV). He is com-
manded, “The first that thou hast written publish
openly, and let the worthy and unworthy read it: but
keep the seventy last that thou mayest deliver them
to such as be wise among thy people.” While the
twenty-four books of the ordinary canon would be
open to all, these other seventy books would only
be known by the wise—presumably, the Essenes.
This story proceeds on the assumption that all
the Biblical books had been lost during the Bab
captivity, but that after he had his memory quick-
ened, Ezra was able to dictate the whole of them;
but of these only twenty-four were to be published
to all; there were seventy which were to be kept
by a society of wise men. This would explain how
the Books of En and Noah, and the account of the
Asm M could appear upon the scene at proper
times, and yet not be known before. In the last-
named book there is another device. Moses tells
Joshua to embalm (hedriare) the writing which
gives an account of what is coming upon Israel.
Books so embalmed would be liable to be found
when Divine providence saw the occasion ripe.
These works are products of a school of associates
which could guard sacred books and had prepared
hypotheses to explain at once how they had re-
mained unknown, and how at certain crises they
became known. All this suits the Essenes, and
especially that branch of them that dwelt as Coeno-
bites beside the Dead Sea. We are thus driven to
adopt Hilgenfeld’s hypothesis that the Essenes
were the authors of these books. Those of them
that formed the Community of Engedi by their
very dreamy seclusion would be especially ready
to see visions and dream dreams. To them it
would seem no impossible thing for one of the
brotherhood to be so possessed by the spirit of
Enoch or of Noah that what he wrote were really
the words of the patriarch. It would not be incon-
ceivable, or even improbable, that Moses or Josh
might in a dream open to them books written long
before and quicken their memories so that what
they had read in the night they could recite in the
day-time. As all the Essenes were not dwellers
by the shores of the Dead Sea, or ‘‘associates with
the palms of Engedi,” some of the writings of this
class, as we might expect, betray a greater knowl-
edge of the world, and show more the influence of
events than those which proceeded from the
Coenobites. As to some extent confirmatory of this
view, there is the slight importance given to sacrifice
in most of these works.


Works EntTiTLep APOCALYPTIC
In the classification of plants and animals in
natural science the various orders and genera pre-
sent the observer with some classes that have all


the features that characterize the general class
prominent and easily observable, while in others
these features are so far from promi-
nent that to the casual observer they
are invisible. This may be seen in the
apocalyptic writings: there are some
that present all the marks of Apocalypses, such as
the Book of Enoch, the Asm M and the Apoc
Bar. They all claim to be revelations of the future
—a future which begins, however, from the days of
some ancient saint—and then, passing over the
time of its actual composition, ends with the coming
of the Messiah, the setting up of the Messianic
kingdom and the end of the world. There are
others, like the Book of Jub, in which the revelation
avowedly looks back, and which thus contain an
amount of legendary matter. One of the books
which are usually reckoned in this class, has, unlike
most of the Apocalypses, which are in prose, taken
the Book of Psalms as its model—the Ps Sol.
A very considerable number of the works before
us take the form of farewell counsels on the part
of this or that patriarch. The most famous of
these is the X1I P. Although the great majority
have been written in Heb or Aram by Jews resident
in Pal, the Sibylline books, composed to a great
extent by Jews of Alexandria, present an exception
to this.

Weshall in the remainder of the art. consider these
sub-classes in the order now mentioned: (1) Typical
Apocalypses; (2) Legendary Testaments; (3) Psalmic;
(4) Testaments; (5) Sibylline Oracles.

I. Apocoalypses Proper.—As above indicated,
all these take the Book of Daniel as their model,
and imitate it more or less closely. One peculiarity
in this connection must be referred to. While we
have already said these later Apocalypses were
practically unknown by the Jews of a couple of
cents. after the Christian era, the Book of Dnl
was universally regarded as authoritative alike by
Jews and Christians. In considering these works,
we shall restrict ourselves to those Apocalypses
that, whether Jewish or Christian by religion, are
the production of those who were Jews by nation.

The most important of these is the Book, or
rather, Books of Enoch. After having been quoted
in Jude and noticed by several of the
Fathers, this work disappeared from
the knowledge of the Christian church.

(1) History of the books.—Fairly
copions extracts from this collection of books had
been made by George Syncellus, the 8th cent.
chronographer. With the exception of those
fragments, all the writings attributed to Enoch had
disappeared from the ken of European scholars.
In the last quarter of the 18th cent. Bruce, the
Abyssinian traveler, brought to Europe three copies
of the Book of En in Ethiopic, which had been
regarded as canonical by the Abyssinian church,
and had consequently been preserved by them.
Of these three copies, one he retained in Kinnaird
House, another he presented to the Bodleian Library
in Oxford, the third he gave to the Royal Library
in Paris. For more than a quarter of a cent. these
manuscripts remained as unknown as if they had
still been in Abyssinia. In the year 1800 Sylvestre
de Sacy published an art. on Enoch in which he
gave a tr of the first sixteen chs. This was drawn
from the Parisian copy. ‘Twenty-one years after
Archbishop Laurence published a tr of the whole
work from the MS in the Bodleian. Seventeen
years after he published the text from the same
MS. The expedition to Magdala under Lord
Napier brought a number of fresh MSS to Europe;
the German missionaries, for whose release the
advance had been undertaken, brought a number
to Germany, while a number came to the British


Classes of
Books


1. Books
of Enoch


165


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocalyptic Lit.


Museum. Some other travelers had brought from
the East MSS of this precious book. Flemming,
the latest R of the text, claims to have used 26
MSS. It needs but a cursory study of the Ethiopic
text to see that it is a tr from a Gr original. The
quotations in George Syncellus confirmed this,
with the exception of a small fragment published by
Mai. Until the last decade of nace cent. Syncellus’
fragments formed the only remains of the Gr text
known. In 1892 M. Bouriant published from MSS
found in Gizeh, Cairo, the Gr of the first 32 chs.
More of the Gr may be discovered in Egypt. Mean-
time we have the Gr of chs 1-32, and from the
Vatican fragment a portion of ch 89. A study of
the Gr shows it also to have been a tr from a Heb
original. Of this Heb original, however, no part
has come down to us.

As we have it, it is very much a conglomeration
of fragments of various authorship. It is impossible
to say whether the Gr trauslator was the collector
of these fragments or whether, when the mass of
material came into his hands, the interpolations
had already taken place. However, the probability,
judging from the usual practice of translators, is
that as he got the book, so he translated it.

(2) Summary of the book.-~The first chapter gives
an account of the purpose of the book, chs 2-6
an account of his survey of the heavens. With 6
begins the book proper. Chs 6-19 give an account
of the fallen angels and Enoch’s relation to them.
Chs 20-36 narrate Enoch’s wanderings through
the universe, and give an account of the place of
punishment, and the secrets of the West and of the
center of the earth. This may be regarded as the
First Book of Enoch, the Book of the Angels.
With ch 87 begins the Book of Similitudes. The
first Similitude (chs 37-44) represents the future
kingdom of God, the dwelling of the righteous and
of the angels; and finally all the secrets of the
heavens. ‘This last portion is interesting as reveal-
ing the succession of the parts of this conglomera-
tion—the more elaborate the astronomy, the later;
the simpler, the earlier. The second Similitude
(chs 45-57) brings in the Son of Man as a super-
human if not also superangelic being, who is to
come to earth as the Messiah. The third Simili-
tude occupies chs 58-71, and gives an account of
the glory of the Messiah and of the subjugation
of the kings of the earth under Him. There is
interpolated a long account of Leviathan and
Behemoth. There are also Noachian fragments
inserted. The Book of the Courses of the Lumi-
naries occupies the next eleven chs, and subjoined
to these are two visions (chs 83-90), in the latter
of which is an account of the history of the world
to the Maccabean Struggle. Fourteen chs which
follow may be called ‘The Exhortations of Enoch.”
The exhortations are emphasized by an exposition
of the history of the world in 10 successive weeks.
It may be noted here that there is a dislocation.
The passage 91 12 contains the 8, 9, and 10 weeks,
while ch 93 gives an account of the previous 7.
After ch 104 there are series of sections of varying
origin which may be regarded as appendices.
There are throughout these books many inter-
polations. The most observable of these are what
are known as ‘“‘Noachian Fragments,” portions in
which Noah and not Enoch is the hero and spokes-
man. There are, besides, a number of universally
acknowledged interpolations, and some that are
held by some to be interpolated, are regarded by
others as intimately related to the immediate con-
text. The literary merit of the different portions
is various: of none of them can it be called high.
The Book of Similitudes, with its revelations of
heaven and hell, is probably the finest.

(3) The language.—We have the complete books


only in Ethiopic. The Ethiopic, however, is not,
as already observed, the original language of the
writings. The numerous portions of it which still
survive in Gr, prove that at all events our Ethiopic
is a tr from the Gr. The question of how far it is
the original is easily settled. The angels assemble
on Mt. Hermon, we are told (ch 6), and bind them-
selves by an oath or curse: “and they called it
Mount Hermon because they had sworn and bound
themselves by mutual imprecation upon it.’ This
has a meaning only in Heb or Aram., notin Gr. A
very interesting piece of evidence of the original
language is got from a blunder. In 90 38 we are
told that ‘they all became white bullocks, and the
first was the Word” (nagara). As for the appear-
ance of this term, from its connection it is obvious
that some sort of bullocks is intended. In Heb
the wild ox is called r’ém (Aram.rima). The Gr
translators, having no Gr equivalent available,
transliterated as rém or réma. This the translators
confused with J’éma, ‘a word.” It is impossible
to decide with anything like certainty which of the
two languages, Heb or Aram., was the original,
though from the sacred character ascribed to Enoch
the probability is in favor of its being Heb.

(4) The date—The question of date is twofold.
Since Enoch is really made up of a collection of
books and fragments of books, the question of the
temporal relation of these to each other is the
primary one. The common view is that chs 1-36
and 72-91 are by the same author, and form the
nucleus of the whole. Although the weighty
authority of Dr. Charles is against assigning these
portions to one author, the resemblances are
numerous and seem to us by no means so super-
ficial as he would regard them. He, with most
critics, would regard the Book of Similitudes as
later. Nevertheless, we venture to differ from this
view, for reasons which we shall assign.

(5) The Book of Noah.—The fragments of the
Book of Noah above alluded to present an intru-
sive element in the Book of En. These, though
fairly numerous, are not so numerous as Dr. Charles
would claim. Those that show clear traces not
only of being interpolations, but also of being inter-
polations from this Book of Noah,are found only
in those portions of the Book that appear to he
written by the author of chs 37-71. In them and
in the Noachian fragments there are astronomical
portions, as there are also in the portion that seems
to proceed from another hand, chs 1-36, 72-91.
When these are compared, the simplest account of
the phenomena of the heavens is found in the non-
Noachian portions, the first noted chs 37-71,
92-107; the next in complexity is that found in the
Noachian interpolations; the most complex is
that contained iu chs 72-91. This would seem to
indicate that the earliest written portion was
chs 37-71, 92-107. Our view of the date of this
middle portion of En, the Book of Similitudes, is
opposed by Dr. Stanton (Jewish and Christian
Messiah, 60-63, 241-44), who maintains that it is
post-Christian. For this decision he rests mainly
on the use of the title ‘Son of Man.” This title,
he says, as applied to the Messiah, is unknown in
rabbinic lit. Rabbinic lit. is all so late as to be of
no value. The Mish has few traces of Messianic
belief, and was not committed to writing till the
end of the 2d cent., when the difference between
church and synagogue was accentuated. He
further states that it was not understood by the
Jews who heard our Lord, and brings as proof
Jn 12 34, “The Son of Man must be lifted up.
Who is this—the Son of Man?” Dr. Stanton
(Jewish and Christian Messiah, 241) so translates
the passage. To us, the last clause is a mistr.
The Gr usage in regard to howitos ho would lead


Apocalyptic Lit.


us to translate: “Who is this peculiar kind of Son
of Man?” This is the meaning which suits the
context. Our Lord had not in all the preceding
speech used the title “Son of Man’ of Himself.
This sentence really proves that the multitude re-
garded the title as equivalent to Messiah or Christ.
It might be paraphrased, ‘‘The Christ ahideth ever;
how sayest thou then, the Christ must be lifted up?
Who is this Christ?” In fact, Our Lord’s adoption
of the title is unintelligible unless it were under-
stood by His audience as a claim to being Messiah.
It had the advantage that it could not be reported to
the Romans as treasonable. There are supplemen-
tary portions of En which may be neglected. At
first sight 10 1-3 appear to declare themselves as
Noachian, but close inspection shows this to be a
misapprehension. If we take the Gr text of Syn-
cellus, Uriel is the angel sent to Noah. The Ethi-
opic and Gizeh Gr are at this point clearly corrupt.
Then the introduction of Raphael implies that the
first portion of this ch and this Raphael section
are by the same author. But the Raphael section
has to do with the binding of Azazel, a person in-
timately connected with the earlier history of the
Jews. Should it be objected that according to the
Massoretic reckoning, as according to that of the

XX, Noah and Enoch were not living together,
it may be answered that according to the Sam
they were for 180 years contemporaries. In ch
68 Noah speaks of Enoch as his grandfather, and
assumes him to be a contemporary of himself.
Moreover, we must not expect precise accuracy
from Apocalyptists.

(6) Relation of external chronology—When the
internal chronology of the book is fixed, the way
is open for considering the relation of external
chronology. Dr. Charles has proved that the
Book of Jub implies the Noachian portion in the
Enoch Books. There are notices of the existence
of a Book of Noah (10 18). There is reference
also to a Book of En (21 10). Dr. Charles would
date the Book of Jub between 135 and 105 BC.
If, then, the Book of Noah was already known,
and, as we have seen, the Book of En was yet older,
it would be impossible to date En earlier than 160
BC. Personally we are not quite convinced of the
correctness of Dr. Charles’s reasonings as to the
date of the Book of Jub, as will be shown at more
length later. There appears to us a reference in
En 66 5 to the campaign of Antiochus the Great
against the Parthians and the Medes. Early in
his reign (220 BC) he had made an expedition to
the East against the revolted provinces of Media
and Persia, which he subdued. This was followed
(217 BC) by a campaign in Pal, which at first suc-
cessful, ended in the defeat of Raphia. In the year
212 BC he made a second expedition to the East,
in which he invaded India, and subdued into al-
liance the formidable Parthian and Bactrian king-
doms. The expectation was natural that now,
having gained such an access of power and repu-
tation, Antiochus would desire to wipe out the
dishonor of Raphia. It was to be anticipated that
along with the nationalities from which ordinarily
the Syr armies were recruited, the Parthians would
be found, and the earlier subdued Medes. The
description of the treading down of the Jand of the
Elect is too mild for a description of the desecra-
tion wrought by Epiphanes. If we are right, we
‘ may fix on 205 BC, as the probable date of the
nucleus. The Book of the Luminaries of the
Heavens which we feel inclined to attribute to the
same hand as chs 1-36 contains a history of Israel]
that terminates with the Maccabean Struggle
still proceeding. Dr. Charles would date this por-
tion 161 BC. Personally, we should be inclined
to place it a few years earlier. He would place


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


166


chs 1-36 before the Maccabean Struggle. Accord-
ing to our thinking the genuine Noachian fragments
fall between these. The Book of Noah seems to
have existed as a separate book in the time when
the Book of Jub was written. It is dependent on
Enoch, and therefore after it. The use of portions
taken from it to interpolate in the En Books must
have taken place before the Maccabean Struggle.
There are other passages that have every appear-
ance of being interpolations, the date of which it is
impossible to fix with any definiteness.

(7) The Slavonic Enoch—lIn the year 1892 the
attention of Dr. Charles was directed to the fact
that a Book of En was extant in Slavonic. Perusal
proved it not to be a version of the book before us,
but another and later pseudepigraphic book,
taking, as the earlier had done, the name of Enoch.
It is totally independent of the Ethiopic En Book,
as is seen by the most cursory consideration. It
begins by giving an account of En’s instruction to
his descendants how he had been taken up to the
seventh heaven. Another manuscript adds other
three heavens. In the third (?) heaven Enoch is
shown the place of the punishment of the wicked.
In the description of the fourth heaven there is
an account of the physical conditions of the uni-
verse, in which the year is said to be 3653 days;
but the course of the sun is stated as a course of 227
days; which appears to be all that is accounted for.
Here the independence of the Slavonic En is clear,
as the Ethiopic En makes the year 364 days. There
are many points of resemblance which show that
the writer of the Slavonic En had before him the
book which has come down to us in Ethiopic, but
the relationship is not by any means so close as
to be called dependence. The definite numbering
of the heavens into seven or teu is a proof of its
later date. It is related to the XII P, and also to
the Asc Isa. We cannot quite acknowledge the
cogency of the proofs that any portion of this Book
has been composed in Gr: hence we cannot agree
with Dr. Charles that it was composed in Alexan-
dria. The resemblances to Philo are too few and
slight to be convincing. That some of it was origi-
nally Heb Dr. Charlesadmits. The date Dr. Charles
assigns to it—1-50 AD—seems reasonable, with this
qualification, that it seems nearer the later than
the earlier of these dates. A double tr, with the
certainty of some interpolations and the probability
of many more, makes any decided judgment as
to date hazardous, so much has to depend on
resemblances between books in cases where it is
impossible to decide which is dependent on which.
It is at once an interesting and a valuable addition
to our knowledge of the mind of the age preceding
the publication of the gospel.

(8) Secrets of Enoch—In imitation of this Book
and in some sense in dependence on it was written
a rabbinic Book of the Secrets of En. It is attrib-
uted to Rabbi Ishmael, who was a prominent figure
in the rebellion of Barcochbs. En is there noted
as Metatron. It follows to some extent the course
of the Slavonic Book of En. It is this book that is
referred to in the Talm, not the more important
book quoted by Jude.

Though not without its value in estimating the
trend of pre-Christian speculation, the Apocalypse

of Bar did not influence thought in


2. Apoca~ the way that the Books of En have
lypse of done. It is neither quoted nor re-
Baruch ferred to by any of the Christian


Fathers. Irenaeus (V, 33) quotes a
saying which he attributes to Our Lord on the
authority of Papias, who claims to have in this
attribution the authority of John behind him.
This saying we find in the Apocalypse before us,
though considerably expanded. In regard to this,


167


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocalyptic Lit.


in the first place we have only the Lat VS of Iren-
aeus, not the Gr original. In the next place, even
though the Lat may be a faithful tr of the Gr, still
it is only a quotation from a lost book, which itself
records traditions. The fact that it isin the shortest
form in the book before us would seem to indicate
that it is the original. If that is so, we may regard
it as having a certain vogue among the Essenian
school and their sympathizers. In the Syr Apoc-
rypha published by Lagarde there is a small book
entitled ‘“‘The Epistle of Baruch the Scribe.” This
occurs at the end of our Apocalypse of Bar. In
Cyprian’s Test. contra Jud., III, 29, we have a
passage of considerable length attributed to Bar,
afew words of which agree with a passage in this
Apocalypse. Hippolytus quotes an oath used by
certain Gnostics which he says is found in the Book of
Bar. There are features in the passage thus quoted
which seem to be echoes of the book before us.
This was all that was known of the Apocalypse
of Bar until the last half-cent., when Ceriani dis-
covered a Syr version of it in the Ambrosian Li-
brary in Milan, nearly complete.

(1) Summary of the book.—It begins after the
model of a prophecy: ‘The word of the Lord came
to Baruch, the son of Neriah, saying.’ In this he
follows the phraseology of Jeremiah. He and Jer-
emiah are commanded to leave Jerus as God is about
to pour forth His judgment upon it. Baruch en-
treats God for his city, and God shows him that the
punishment will betemporary. ThentheChaldaeans
come to fulfil what God has threatened, but Baruch
is shown the angel ministers of Divine vengeance
saving the sacred vessels by calling upon the earth
to swallow them up. Then the angels helped the
Chaldaeans to overthrow the walls of Jerus.. Not-
withstanding that in the canonical Book of Jer (43
6.7) and in 2 K the prophet goes down to Egypt,
Baruch declares that Jeremiah is sent to comfort the
captives in Babylon, while he, Baruch, is to remain
in Judaea. He mourns over Jerus and denounces
woes in Babylon (chs 1-12). While he is standing
upon Mt. Zion he is called into colloquy with God as
to the method of Divine dealing with Judah, and a
revelation is promised him (chs 13-20). This rev-
elation is introduced by a prayer of Baruch followed
by a colloquy with the Almighty. Baruch asks,
“Will that tribulation continue a long time?” He
is answered that there will be twelve successive dif-
ferent forms of judgment which shall come. Then
follows an enigmatic sentence, ‘““T'wo parts weeks of
seven weeks” are “‘the measure and reckoning of the
time” which probably means that each of the parts
is a jubilee or half a cent. At the expiry of this
period the Messiah isto appear. Here a description
is given of the glories of the Messianic kingdom in
the course of which occurs the passage already re-
ferred to as quoted by Papias (chs 21-30). The
writer, forgetting what he has already said of the
desolation of Jerus, makes Bar assemble the Elders
of Jerus and announce that he is going to retire into
solitude. In his retirement he has a vision of a
wooded hill, and at the foot of it is a vine growing
and beside the vine a spring of water. This
fountain swelled and became tempestuous, sweep-
ing away all the forest on the hill but one great
cedar. It, too, falls at length. The interpreta-
tion is given. The forest is the fourth Empire of
Daniel—the Rom—the many magistracies being
symbolized by the numerous trees of the forest. The
Messiah is the vine and thefountain. It is probable
that Pompey is the leader referred to (chs 31-40).
Then follows a colloquy of Baruch first with God,
then with his son and the Elders of the people. A
long prayer with God’s answer which includes a de-
scription of the punishment of the wicked and_ the
reward of the righteous—the latter is next given


with greater fulness (chs 41-62). Another vision is
given to Baruch of twelve showers of rain alternately
bright and_ dark and a final torrent blacker than
anything else and closed by a bright light. The
angel Ramiel comes to Baruch to interpret the vision.
It represents the history of Israel to the return to
Judaea under the decree of Cyrus. The last dark
waters represent the Maccabean Struggle. It would
seem as if the vision carried the conflict on to the
fratricidal conflict between John Hyrcanus JI and
Aristobulus (chs 63-77). Then follows the epistle
to the nine and a half tribes (chs 78-87).

_ (2) Structure.—Preliminary to anything further
is the discussion of the state of the poole hee far
it is one, how far it is composite or interpolated.
That it contains different portions is obvious on
the slightest careful study. The first portion that
the reader marks off is the “epistle to the nine tribes
and a half.” As has already been mentioned this
portion appears independently and is preserved by
Lagarde in his Libri Vet. Test. Apocryphi, in which
collection it precedes the ordinary apocryphal
Book of Bar. The last section, which relates how
this epistle was sent to the nine tribes and a half by
an eagle, is omitted. The last section (ch 79) has
been added, and has been modified in order to intro-
duce this epistle. It is not at allin the spirit of the
rest of this Apocalypse that the tribes carried away
captive by “Salmanasser, king of Assyria” have
any share in the blessings revealed in the vision.
The epistle itself merely narrates the capture of the
city, and the help of the angels who hid the sacred
vessels. It is to be noted that in the earlier portion
of this Apocalypse itis the earth that opens her
mouth and swallows down the sacred vessels.
Another division reveals itself on further scrutiny.
From the beginning to the end of ch 30 the course |
of the narrative is fairly continuous. A revelation
is promised, and in the end we have a picture of the
glory and plenty of the times of the Messiah. The
next section begins with an exhortation which has
little bearing on what has preceded. Then follows
the vision of the forest and the surviving tree. The
colloquy and the prayers that follow, to ch 52, are
all connected, though not closely. But close con-
nection is not to be expected from an oriental and
an Apocalyptist. -Then follow the sections con-
nected with the vision of the twelve showers of rain,
anditsinterpretation. There are thus five independ-
ent sections exclusive of interpolations which may
be due to different writers.

(3) Language—In the first place it is clear that
the Syr in which the work has come down to us is
itself a tr from Gr. The MS of Ceriani states this
in its title. This is confirmed by Graecisms filter-
ing through, as ho Manasseh in 66 1, where ho
represents the Gr article. In some cases the read-
ings that are unintelligible can be explained by tr
back into Gr, as shown by Dr. Charles. The most
convincing is the use made of this book by the
writer of the “Rest of the Words of Bar,’’ who
wrote in Gr. Although not a few scholars have
followed Langen in maintaining that Gr was the
original tongue, careful investigation proves that
behind the Gr was Heb. The strongest of these
proofs is that the echoes of Seriptural texts_are
almost invariably from the Heb as against the LXX.
Thus in 6 8 Jer three times addresses the earth
and calls upon it to hear the word of the Lord. So
it isin the MT and in the Vulg, but not in the LXX,
where the word “earth” is only given twice. There
are several other instances. Dr. Charles has care-
fully compared the idiomatic phrases and sees
proof that usages of the MT have been preserved
in the Gr, and thence conveyed to the Syr. The
most interesting of these is the peculiar Heb idiom
of infinitive with finite verb to emphasize the action


Apocalyptic Lit.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


168


narrated. This is rendered in LXX sometimes by
cognate noun and verb, and sometimes by participle
and verb. The examples chosen by Dr. Charles
have the disadvantage that none of them show the
effect on this idiom of passing through the two
languages, Gr and Syr. In Paulus Tellensis there
are examples—e.g. 2 K 18 33. He is scarcely
accurate in saying that this idiom never occurs in
the Pesh unless it is in the Gr. See Lk 1 22;
Jn 13 29, etc, as examples to the contrary. The
proof seems conclusive that Heb was the original
language of this Apocalypse, and that it was first
tr? into Gr, and from that into Syr. From this
it follows almost necessarily that its place of origin
was Pal. That it has had practically no effect
on Jewish lit., and was potent enough among the
Christians to lead a Christian about the middle of
the 2d Christian cent. to compose an addition to it,
proves to our thinking its Essenian origin.

(4) Daie—Although the writer assumes the
destruction of Jerus by the army of the Chaldaeans,
he evidently has no conception of what such a
catastrophe would really mean. He has no con-
ception of the length of time occupied by a siege,
the terrors of famine, or the desolation that follows
the capture of a city. Jos tells us (BJ, VII, i, 1)
that save a portion of the west wall and three
towers, the city was utterly razed to the ground—
“there was nothing left to make those who came
there believe that ever it had been inhabited.”
Yet, when endeavoring to realize the similar de-
struction which had befallen the city under Neb-
uchadnezzar, he speaks of himself sitting “before
the gates of the temple” (10 5), when the gates
had wholly disappeared. Again, he assembles the
people and their elders “after these things” ‘‘in
the valley of the Kedron.” The Apocalypse must
be dated at all events considerably before 70 AD.
On the other hand, it is subsequent to the first part
of En; it assumes it as known (56 10-13). Buta
closer discrimination may be reached. In the vision
of the wood and the one tree that survives we have
Pompey pointed out clearly. The multitude of
trees points to the numerous magistracies of Rome.
(Cf description of Senate of Rome in 1 Macc 8 15.)
The seer in his vision sees all these swept away and
one remaining. It could not be an emperor, as
that title was regarded as equivalent to “‘king,’”’
as Nero in the Asc Isa is called ‘the matricide king.”
The only other besides Pompey likely to be pointed
to would be Julius Caesar. But the fall of the great
desecrator of the temple, which the seer foresaw,
would not have failed to be noted as succeeded by
that of Caesar who had conquered him. It is diffi-
cult for us to realize the position Pompey occupied
in the eyes especially of the eastern world before
the outbreak of the civil war. Cicero’s letters and
his oration Pro lege Manilia show the way Pompey
filled the horizon even in republican Rome, in a
society most of the prominent members of which
claimed a descent that would have enabled them
to look down on Pompey. But in the East he had
enjoyed dictatorial powers. His intervention in
the contest between the brothers John Hyrcanus
II and Aristobulus could not fail to impress the
Jews, and his desecration of the temple would mark
him off for a very special destruction. The date
is so far before the death of Pompey (48 BC)—
though after the desecration of the temple—that
the possibility of anyone entering into conflict
with him is not dreamed of. When we turn to the
twelve showers, we are led to the time of this struggle
also as that which shall immediately precede the
coming of the Messiah. Another note of time is to
be found in ch 28—‘‘The measure and reckoning
of the time are two parts, weeks of seven weeks.”
This we regard as two jubilees—i.e. approximately


acent. The point to be fixed is the time from which
this cent. is to be reckoned. To our idea it must be
from some event connected with the temple. Such
an event was the dedication of the temple by
Judas Maccabaeus in the 148th year of the Seleucid
era—that is, 163 BC. A cent. brings us exactly
to the year of Pompey’s capture of Jerus and
desecration of the temple. Thus three different
lines converge in pointing to 60 or 59 BC as the
date at which this book was written.

(5) Relation to other books —The strange mingling
of knowledge of Scripture and ignorance of it is
a phenomenon to be observed. The very first
clause contains a gross anachronism, whatever ex-
planation may be given of the statement. Taken
with what follows, the statement is that Jerus was
taken by Nebuchadnezzar, “in the 25th year of
Jeconiah, king of Judah.” This naturally ought
to mean the 25th year of the reign of Jeconiah,
but he only reigned three months. Whether the
date is reckoned from his life or his captivity, it
will not suit the date of the capture of Jerus by the
Chaldaeans. Another strange blunder appears in
the subjoined “Epistle of Bar’; the number of
northern tribes who rebelled against Rehoboam
is confused, with that of the tribes settled on the
west of Jordan, and that of the tribes following the
House of David with that of those on the east of
Jordan. Yet the general course of Biblical history
is quite understood. The author seems fairly
well acquainted with Jer and Ps, as there are fre-
quent echoes of these books. Most marked is the
connection between this Apocalypse and the other
books of the same class. This connection is not so
obvious in quotable sentences as in the general
atmosphere. This is very marked in regard to the
En books, Ethiopic and Slavonic. In the case of
the latter, of course, the resemblance is not imi-
tation on the part of the writer of this Apocalypse.
One marked distinction, one that precludes any
thought of direct imitation, is the elaborate angel-
ology of the En books as compared with the one
name which appears in the Apocalypse of Bar.
The book with which the present Apocalypse has
closest relation is 2 (4) Esd. Dr. Charles has given
at the end of his tr of the work before us (Apoc of
Baruch, 171) a long list of resemblances, not always
of equal value. Sometimes the references are
inaccurate. The main thing to be observed is that
while 2 Esd_ as we have it has on the one hand a
markedly Christian coloring, which it seems im-
possible to attribute to interpolation, and on the
other, to have seen the desolation of Jerus under
the Romans, there is no Christian element in the
genuine Baruch, and the desolation is more senti-
mental as proved by the inability to realize the
conditions consequent on the capture of the city by
victorious enemies.

(6) The words of Baruch.—One of the evidences
of the influence our Apocalypse had in the Christian
community is the composition by a Christian of “The
Rest of the Words of Bar’ (or Jer). This was found,
like so many other treasures, by Ceriani in the Am-
brosian Library, Milan. Jer is the principal spokes-
maninthe book. It is revealed to him that Jerusis
to be given into the hands of the Chaldaeans, and he
announces this to Baruch. He is desirous to save
Abimelech (Ebedmelech), and prays God for him,
and Abimelech is sent away out of the city while
the angels are overturning it. He goes to the vine-
yard of Agrippa and falls asleep. His sleep con-
tinues sixty years. When, arising from sleep, he
enters Jerus again he does not recognize it. An


, angel leads him to Baruch who had made his abode


in a tank. Baruch writes to Jeremiah, who has
departed to Babylon. His letter is conveyed by
an eagle. Jer on receipt of this epistle collects all


169


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocalyptic Lit.


the captives and leads them back to Jerus. Certain
of them would not submit to the law in all its
strictness, but, turning aside, founded Samaria.
After some time Jeremiah dies, rises again on the
third day and preaches Christ as the Son of God,
and is stoned by the Jews. A noticeable thing is
the relatively accurate account of the date of
Christ’s appearance after the return from the
captivity, 477 years, only it must be calculated
from the reign of Artaxerxes and to the resurrection.
This, however, would make Jeremiah nearly two
hundred years old. Such a thing, however, is not
a matter that would disturb a Jewish chronologer.
“The Rest of the Words of Baruch” seems to have
heen written by a Christian Jew in Pal before the

rebellion of Barcochba.
In the Epistle of Jude is a reference to a conflict
between the archangel Michael and Satan, when
they “disputed about the body of


3. The As- Moses.” Origen (de Princip, 1ii.2)
sumption attributes this to a book he calls As-
of Moses —censio Mosis. Clement. Alexandrinus


gives an account of the burial of
Moses quoted from the same book. There are
several references to the book up to the 6th cent.,
but thereafter it disappeared till Ceriani found
the fragment of if which is published in the Acta
Sacra et Profana (Vol I). This fragment is in
Lat. It is full of blunders, some due to transcrip-
tion, proving that the last scribe had but an im-
perfect knowledge of the tongue in which he
wrote. Some of the blunders go farther back and
seem to have been due to the scribe who tr‘ it from
Gr. Even such a common word as thilpsis (‘‘afflic-
tion’) he did not know, but attempted, by no
means with conspicuous success, to transliterate
it as clipsis. So with alléphuloi “foreigners,”
the common LXX equivalent of “Philistine,” and
yet commoner skéné (‘‘a tent’’) and several others.
It probably was dictated, as some of the blunders
of the copyist may be better explained as mistakes
in hearing, as fynicis for Phoenices, and venient
for veniet. Some, however, are due to blunders
of sight on the part of the translator, as monses
for moyses. From this we may deduce that he
read from a MS in cursive characters, in which
vy and v were alike. This Milan MS has been
frequently edited. Dr. Charles has suggested with
great plausibility that there were two works, a
Testament of Moses, and an Assumption, and that
these have been combined; and, while Jude ver 9
is derived from the Assumption, as also the quota-
tion in Clement of Alexandria, he thinks that Jude
ver 16 is derived from separate clauses of the
Testament. It may be observed that in the
fragment. which has been preserved to us, neither
the passages in Clement nor that referred to in Jude
ver 16 are to be found. :

(1) Summary of the book.—Moses, now in the
plain of Moab, calls Joshua to him and gives him
commands for the people. He had already blessed
them tribe by tribe. Now he calls his successor
to him and urges him to be of good courage. He
tells him that the world has been created for Israel,
and that he, Moses, had been ordained from before
the foundation of the world to be the mediator
of this covenant. These commands are to be
written down and preserved in clay jars full of
cedar oil. This sentence is added to explain the
discovery and publication. A rapid summary of
the history of Israel to the fall of the Northern
Kingdom follows. The successive reigns are called
years—eighteen years before the division of the
kingdom, 15 Judges and Saul, David and Solomon,
and nineteen after, the kings from Jeroboam to
Hoshea. The Southern Kingdom has twenty
years or reigns. The Southern Kingdom was to


* judgment.


fall before Nebuchadnezzar, the king from the
East who would cover the land with his cavalry.
When they are in captivity one prays for them.
Here follows a prayer modeled on Dnl 9 4-19—
almost a version of it. In this connection it may be
noted that of the ten tribes it is asserted they will
multiply among the Gentiles. There is a sudden
leap forward to the time of the Gr domination.
Singularly, the period of the Maccabees does not
appear in this sketch of history. The times of
Judas Maccabaeus are not mentioned, but the kings
of his house, the descendants of Simon, are referred
to as “Kings ruling shall rise from them, who shall
be called priests of the Most High God.” To them
follows Herod, rex petulans, ‘who will not be of the
race of the priests.” He will execute judgment
on the people like those of Egypt. Herod is to
leave children who will reign after him for a short
period. The Rom emperor is to put an end to
their rule and to burn up Jerus. Then comes a
mutilated chapter, which, while following in the
narrative, may yet be only another aspect of the
oppression. The Roman officials figure duly as
the source of this, and the Sadducean high-priestly
party as their instruments. The resemblance to
the terms in which Our Lord denounces the Phari-
sees leads one to think that they, too, are meant
by the Essene authors. We have noted above that
the Maccabean period is completely omitted. The
persecution under Antiochus appears in chs 8 and 9.
With Dr. Charles we are inclined to think they
have been displaced. In ch 9 occurs the reference
to the mysterious Taxo with his seven sons. Dr.
Charles is quite sure the reference is to the seven
sons of the widow who suffered before Antiochus
Epiphanes as related in 2 Macc 7 (4 Macc 8-17),
but the “mother” is the prominent person in all
the forms of the story, while in no form of it is their
father mentioned. It is to be noted that if T of
this mysterious name, represents ™ in the Heb
(=400), and & represents the letter 0 (=60) which
occupies the same place in the Heb alphabet, and
if the O represents 1 (= 6), adding those numbers
together we have the number 466, which is the
sum of the letters of Shimeon. But nothing in the
history of the second son of Mattathias resembles
the history of the mysterious Taxo. On this subject
the reader is recommended to study Charles, Assump-
tion of Moses, 32-34. Taxo recommends his sons,
having fasted to retire into a cave, and rather to
die than to transgress the commands of God. In
this conduct there is a suggestion of the action of
several of the pious in the beginning of the An-
tiochus persecutions. Taxo then breaks into a
song of praise to God, in the course of which he
describes the final discomfiture of the enemies of
God and of His people. The establishment of
the Messianic kingdom is to be 250 times after
the Assumption of Moses. The interpretation of
this is one of the difficulties in regard to this Apoc-
alypse. Langen takes the times as equivalent to
decades, and Dr. Charles as year-weeks. The
latter seems a more probable meaning of “time,”
as more in the line of Jewish thought. It should
be noted that Dr. Charles thinks tlius adventum
refers not to the Messiah’s coming, but to the last
In answer to the declaration of Moses
as to his approaching death, Joshua rends his gar-
ments and breaks forth into lamentations, wonder-
ing who will lead on the people when his master
has departed. There is one phrase that seems to
imply a tincture of classical culture. Joshua says
of Moses, “‘All the world is thy Sepulchre,” which
seems to be a reminiscence of Pericles’ funeral
oration (Thucyd. ii.4), “The whole earth is the
monument of men of renown.’”’ He then casts him-
self at the feet of Moses. His master encourages


Apocalyptic Lit THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


him and promises him success.
fragment ends.
after this would occur the passage quoted by
Clement of Alexandria, and still later that quoted
in Jude.

(2) Structure.—It seems to have been united with
one, if not two other books, a ‘Testament of
Moses” and our Book of Jub. It would seem that
in the present work we have mostly the ‘‘Testa-
meat.’ The insertion of the word receptione after
morte in 10 12 indicates that when this copy was
made the two writings were united. As above
remarked, there appears to have been a displace-
ment of chs 8 and 9; they ought to have been
placed between chs 4 and 5.

(3) Language.—As already mentioned, the MS
found by Ceriani in the Ambrosian Library is in
Lat. No one, however, has maintained that this
was the language in which it was originally written.
It is evidently a tr from the Gr. A number of
Gr words are transliterated, some of them common
enough. So clearly does the Gr shine through, that
Hilgenfeld has reproduced what he imagines the
Gr text to have been. That having been settled,
a further question rises, Is the Gr the original
tongue, or was it, too, a tr from a Sem original?
The first. alternative is that adopted by Hilgenfeld.
His arguments from the alleged impossibility of
certain grammatical constructions being found in
Heb are due to mistake. The presence of such
words as Allofile and Deuteronomion simply prove
that in translating a book which claimed to be
written about Moses, the writer followed the diction
used by the LXX, just as Archbishop Laurence
in translating En used the diction of the AV of the
Bible. These questions have been ably investigated
by Dr. Charles in his edition of the Asm M (42-45).
He shows a number of Sem idioms which have
persisted through the Gr—some cases in which
the meaning can only be got by reconstructing the
Heb text. Again, corruption can only be explained
by means of a Sem text. It might be suggested
that a falsarius writing in Gr would naturally
employ the diction of the LXX as has been done
frequently in English; the diction of the AV is
used to cover the imitation of a sacred book. The
fact that style was so little regarded as a means of
settling dates and authorship renders this unlikely.
The more delicate question of which of the two
Sem tongues—Aram. or Heb—is employed, is more
difficult to settle. There are, however, one or two
cases in which we seem to see traces of the vay
(waw) conversive—a construction peculiar to Heb—
e.g. 8 2, “Those who conceal [their circumcision]
he will torture and has delivered up to be led to
prison.” The ignorance of the scribe may, however,
be invoked to explain this. On the other hand,
the change of tense is so violent that even an ig-
norant scribe would not be likely to make it by
mistake. Over and above, a narrative attributed
to Joshua and asserted to be written down by him
at the dictation of Moses, would necessarily be in
Heb. From this we would deduce that Heb rather
than Aram. has been the Sem original.

(4) Date.—The identification of the rex petulans
with Herod and the statement that he should be
succeeded by his sons who should reign a short
time, fix the date of the composition of the work
before us within narrow limits. It must have
been written after the death of Herod and also
after the deposition of Archelaus, 6 AD, and before
it was seen that Antipas and Philip were secure on
their thrones. Thus we cannot date it later than
7 or 8 AD. The intense hatred of the Herodians
was a characteristic of this time. Later they came
to be admired by the patriotic party.

(5) Relation to other books.—The most striking


At this point the


It is to be expected that shortly |


170


phrase is the name given to Moses—arbiter tes-
tamenti, ‘‘the mediator of the covenant,’’ which we
find repeatedly used in the Epistle to the He:
mesités is the Gr tr of mdkhith in Job 9 33, but in
translating the Epistle to the He into Heb De-
litzsch uses sarsdr, a purely rabbinic word. Another
rendering is m&nagé*h. ‘There are several echoes
in this book of passages in the OT, as the address
to Josh (1 1 ff) is parallel with Dt 31 7/. The
prayer in ch 4, as before observed, is modeled on
Dnl 9 4-19. There are traces of acquaintance
with the Psalter of Solomon in ch 5 as compared
with Ps 4. In these there appear to be echoes of
the present work in Our Lord’s description of the
Pharisees, when we compare Mt 23 with ch 5.
There is a fragment published by Ceriani en-
titled ‘History and Life [diégésis kat politeia) of
Adam, Which Was Revealed by God to Moses,
His Servant.” It is an account of the life of our
first. parents after the death of Abel to their own
death. It has been composed to all appearance
in Gr, and really belongs not to Mosaic ht., but to
that connected with Adam. It is to be noted that
to Cain and Abel other names are given besides
those so well known. They are called Adiaphotos
and Amilabes, names of no assignable origin. There
are no evidences of Christian influence; from this
one would be led to regard it as a Jewish writing;
as the middle of it has been lost, any decision is to
be made with caution.
The Ascension of Isaiah was often referred to by
name in the works of early Christian Fathers, espe-
cially by Origen. It is called by him


4, The “The Apocryphon of Isaiah.” Epiph-
Ascension anes gives it the title by which it is
of Isaiah = more commonly known. Now that


we have the book, we find numerous
echoes of it. Indeed, Origen claims that He 11 37
contains a reference to it in speaking of saints who
were sawn asunder. Justin Martyr speaks of the
death of Isaiah in terms that imply an acquaintance
with this book. Jt had disappeared till Archbishop
Laurence found a copy of it in Ethiopic on a London
book-stall. The capture of Magdala brought
home more manuscripts. A portion of it had been
priuted in Venice from a Lat version.

(6) Summary.—In the 26th year of his reign
Hezekiah calls Isaiah before him to deliver certain
writings into hishand. Isaiah informs him that the
devil Sammael Malkira would take possession of
his son Manasseh, and that he, Isaiah, will be sawn
asunder by his hand. On hearing this, Hezekiah
would order his son to be killed, but Isaiah tells him
that the Chosen One will render his counsel vain.
On the death of his father, Manasseh turned his
hand to serve Berial Matanbukes. Isaiah retired
to Bethlehem, and thence, with certain prophets—
Mic, Joel and Hab—and also Hananiah and his
own son Joab, he removed to a desert mountain.
Balkira, a Sam, discovered their hiding-place.
They are brought before Manasseh, and Isaiah is
accused of impiety because he has said that he has
seen God, yet God had declared to Moses, “There
shall no flesh see my face.’ He had also called
Jerus, Sodom, and its rulers, those of Gomorrah.
For Berial (Belial) had great wrath against Isaiah
because he had revealed the coming of Christ and
the mission of the apostles. At this point there
appears to be a confusion between the first coming
of Christ and His second. Lawless elders and
shepherds are referred to as appearing, and it is
assumed the elders of the church and the pastors are
intended, though this is not necessarily so. There
certainly was much contention in the churches, as
we know, concerning the question of circumcision.
The reference, however, may be +o the rulers and
elders of Israel who crucified Our Lord. Then


171


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocalyptic Lit.


follows the account of the incarnation of Beliar in
Nero, “the matricide monarch,” and the persecution
of the twelve apostles, of whom one will be delivered
into his hand—the reference here being probably
to the martyrdom of Peter. If it is Paul, then
it is a denial of Peter’s martyrdom at Rome alto-
gether; if it is Peter, it means the denial of Paul’s
apostleship. The reign of the Antichrist is to be
“three years, seven months and twenty-seven
days,’’ that is, on the Rom reckoning, 1,335 days.
This would seem to be calculated from Nero’s
persecution of the Christians. He makes a singu-
lar statement: ‘‘The greater number of those who
have been associated together in order to receive
the Beloved he will turn aside after him’’—a, state-
ment that implies a vastly greater apostasy under
the stress of persecution than we have any record
of from other sources. A good deal is to be said
for the insertion of 1,000 in the number 332 in 4 14,
so as to make it read 1,332. At the end of this
period “the Lord will come with His angels and will
drag Beliar into Gehenna with his armies.” Then
follows a reference to the descent of the Beloved
into Sheol. The following chapter gives an account
of the martyrdom of Isaiah, how he was “sawn in
sunder with a wooden saw,’ and how Balkira
mocked him, and strove to get Isaiah to recant.
With ch 6 begins the Ascension proper. This
ch, however, is merely the introduction. It is in
ch 7 that the account is given of how the prophet
is carried up through the firmament and then
through heaven after heaven to the seventh. A
great angel leads him upward. In the firmament
he found the angels of the devil envying one another.
Above this is the first heaven where he found a
throne in the midst, and angels on the right and the
left, the former of whom were the more excellent. So
it was in the second, third, fourth and fifth heavens.
Each heaven was more glorious than that beneath.
In the sixth heaven there was no throne in the midst
nor was there any distinction between angels on the
right and left; all were equal. He is then raised
to the seventh heaven—the most glorious of all—
where he sees not only God the Father, but also the
Son and the Holy Spirit. As to the Son we are
told that he should descend, and having assumed
human form should be crucified through the in-
fluence of the Prince of this World. Having
descended into Sheol, he spoiled it, and ascended
up on high. In ch 10 there is a more detailed ac-
count of the descent of the Son through the suc-
cessive heavens, how in each He assumed the aspect
of the angels that dwelt therein, so that they did
not know Him. In the Firmament, the quarreling
and envying appeared at first to hinder Him. In
ch 11 we have a semi-docetic account of the mirac-
ulous birth. With the declaration that it was on
account of these revelations that he, Isaiah, was
sawn in sunder, the Apocalypse ends.

(2) Structure —Dr. Charles has maintained that
three works are incorporated—the Testament of
Hezekiah, the Martyrdom of Isaiah and the Vision
of Isaiah. The names have been taken from those
given to this work in patristic literature, and are
not strictly descriptive of the contents, at least
of the first. The confused chronology of the work
as we have it may to some extent be due to tran-
scription and translation. From the opening para-
graph, there appears to have been an Apocryphon
attributed to Hezekiah. Manasseh is called
into his father’s presence in order that here may be
delivered to him words of righteousness “‘which the
king himself had seen” “of eternal judgment, the
torments of Gehenna and the Prince of this World
and his angels and of his principalities and powers”
—a phrase which implies a knowledge of the Epistle
to the Eph on the part of the writer. The contents


given thus summarily are not further detailed. The
Vision of Isa does not give any account of the powers
and principalities of Satan’s kingdom. It would
seem better to regard the present work as composed
of two—the Martyrdom of Isaiah and the Vision
or Ascension proper. The references backward and
forward seem to imply a similarity of authorship in
both parts. This would seem to suggest that the
editor and author were one and the same person.
There is a knowledge of Rom affairs at the time of
Nero’s fall so much beyond what anyone living in
Pal could attain that Rome would seem to be the
place of composition.

(8) Language—The immediate original from
which the tr, Ethiopic, Lat and Sclavonic were made
appears to have been Gr. It is clear in regard to
the Ethiopic where the proper names which end
in Heb in A and in the Gr transcription end in s, as
Hezekias, Isaias, the latter is followed, but Manas-
seh is Manassa. An interesting case is to be found
in 2 12: Mikayas is called ‘“‘son of Amida,’”’ where
“Amida” stands for Imlah. In the Ethiopic trans-
literation ’aléph is generally used for the initial yadh
as a vowel, as it is in “Israel’? (Ethiopic Asreal);
hence “Imida”’ might as correctly represent the
name. Then as A (d) and A (J) are like each other
the change is explained. Although certainly as said
above, Gr has been the immediate original, it is
possible if not even probable that behind the Gr
there was Heb. The structure of the sentences
suggests the same thing (see 2 5 Gr). The mys-
terious name given to Berial, MattanbOikus—
which, unfortunately, we have not in Gr—seems to
be intelligible only in the idea that it has a Heb
etymology, matian bikah, ‘‘the gift of emptiness,”
the latter word being equivalent to “the void,”
“the abyss.” The title given to Sammael, Malkira
seems naturally to mean king of ‘‘the watchers’
—‘irim, the angels who, as related in En (10 5),
did not continue in their first estate, but defiled
themselves with women. So Belkira is “Lord of
the fort’’—ba‘al kir. There thus seems to be a
probability that like so many others of this class,
the ‘‘Ascension” was originally written in Heb.

(4) Date.—No one reading the ‘‘Ascension” can
fail to feel that he has to do with a Christian docu-
ment, and one belonging to the very beginning of
Christian history. There may have been an ear-
lier Jewish Apocalypse behind, though to our think-
ing that does not seem necessary. It is made up of
two documents, but the Christian element appears
to be woven into the structure of both portions.
That it is to be dated early in the history of the
church may be seen from the expectation of Christ’s
speedy reappearance in the world in His parousia.
The conflict in the church between elders and
shepherds gives a picture of the struggle between
Judaizers and the Pauline Christians on the other
side. The emphasis laid on the éwelve, the omission
of all reference to Paul, indicates that it was Juda-
izing. The docetic account of the birth of Jesus,
its independence of the canonical Gospels, all speak
of an early date. The date, however, it seems to
us, can be fixed with great certainty. The reign of
Berial, who has come down upon Nero and incar-
nated himself in him is to be three years, seven
months and twenty-seven days, in all 1,335 days
(4 12), the number in the end of Dnl (12 12).
This number, it may be noted, is reached by reck-
oning the years and months according to the
Julian Calendar, proving this Apocalypse to have
been written in Rome. But the number is sin-
gularly near the actual duration of Nero’s reign
after the persecution had begun. From _ the
burning of Rome (July 19, 64) to the death of
Nero (June 9, 68) was 1,421 days—that is, 86 days
more. It was at least a month after the confla-


Apocalyptic Lit.


gration that the persecution began, and longer till
the mad orgy of cruelty when Christians wrapt
in pitch and set on fire illuminated Nero’s gardens.
If a Christian in Rome saw the persecution, he
might hope for the end of this reign of terror, and
fix on the number he found in Daniel. It would
seem that already the 1,290 days had been over-
passed, so he hopes that the 1,335 days will see the
end of the tyrant. There is a difficulty in the 332
days of 4 14. The temptation is great to hold
with Liicke, Dillmann and Charles that 1,000 has
dropped out, and that the last figure ought to be 5;
then we have the same number. In that case, this
Apocalypse must have been written after the news
of the rebellion of Vindex bad reached Rome, but
before the death of Nero. If we may adopt this
—though the fact that the shorter no. is found in
all three Ethiopic MSS makes this method of add-
ing a figure necessary to an explanation one to be
avoided—this would point to the time immediately
preceding Nero’s death. The difficulty is, where
did the author get the number? If it is correct,
it is probably the arithmogram of some name of
Satan. Berial gives 322 by gematria. It would seem
that another mark of time is given in the martyrdom
of Peter, which may be dated 64 AD. Another
negative note is the absence of any reference to the
fall of Jerus. Had it happened, Jew though the
writer was, his love for his crucified Master would
have led him to see the vengeance of heaven on
the city which had put Him to death, and exult in
it. It must have been written in the course of
the year 68.

Unlike the books we have been discussing hitherto

4 Esd has never disappeared from the knowledge

of the church. It has, however, come
5. The 4th down to us primarily in a Lat trans-
Book of lation of a Gr original. Archbishop
Esdras Laurence discovered an Ethiopic ver-

sion of it. Later an Armenian version
with Lat translation was published in Venice.
An Arab. version is alsoin existence. It was received
into the Apocrypha of the Anglican church, though
excluded from that of Germany; by the Council of
Trent 1 Esd and 2 Esd of our Apocrypha were
excluded from the Roman Catholic canon, and
placed after Rev, along with Pr Man.

(1) Summary.—The first two chs contain a
prophecy after the model of Isa. Not a few pas-
sages show the influence of the NT on it. Cf
2(4) Esd 1 30 with Mt 23 37, and 2(4) Esd 2
45 with Rev 7 13. With ch 3 there is a new begin-
ning. This opens with a prayer which occupies
the whole ch. In answer, Uriel is sent from God
and reveals to Ezra by various symbols the plan of
God in regard to Israel. This goes on to the middle
of ch 5, and forms the first vision. After fasting
seven days, a new communication is made by Uriel
to Ezr. It begins as the former did with a prayer.
Then follows a series of questions intended to bring
out the limited understanding of man. When
these are finished, Uriel gives an account of the his-
tory of the world from the creation. This vision
ends with 6 35. The third vision is very interest-
ing, as a large section of 70 vs had been lost, and
were recovered only comparatively recently. This
vision contains an account of Creation as it is in
Gen, only rhetorical expansions occur, and a full
description is given of Leviathan and Behemoth.
Ezra is shown the heavenly Zion in vision as difficult
of access. The portion recently discovered contains
an account of the place of punishment, and there
is mention of Paradise. The end of this is a prayer
of Ezra, which seems an dndopendent composi-
tion (8 20). The fourth vision begins with 9 26.
In it Ezra is shown a woman weeping, who is inter-
preted to be Zion. She is transformed into a city


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


|


172


(10 27). The fifth vision is the most important.
It begins with an eagle appearing, which has three
heads and twelve wings. This is interpreted as
referring to the Rom empire. It would seem that
this had been added to, as in addition to the twelve
wings, eight other wings are spoken of. A _ lion
appears who rebukes and destroys the eagle with the
twelve wings. This lion is the Messiah and his
kingdom. The sixth vision begins with ch 13 and
contains an account of the coming of Christ. In
the seventh we have an account of the re-writing
of the books at the dictation of Ezra, and the reten-
tion of the seventy secret sacred books. In what
has preceded we have followed the scheme of
Fritzsche. The last ch proceeds from the same
pen as do the opening chs, and is combined with
them by Fritzsche and called the Fifth Book of
Esd


(2) Structure-——As has been indicated above,
4 Ksd is marked off into several distinct portions,
preceded by Ezra fasting, and introduced by a
prayer on the part of the prophet. Kabisch has a
more elaborate scheme than Fritzsche. Like him,
he recognizes seven visions, and like him he sepa-
rates off the first ch and the last 17, 15, 16, as by a
different hand from the rest of the book. But in
addition, be recognizes additions made by a R
throughout the book. To us the scheme appears
too elaborate.

(3) Language.—As above mentioned, the immedi-
ate source of the Lat text appears to have been Gr.
There is very little to enable us to settle the ques-
tion whether Gr was the language in which this
book was composed, or whether even the Gr is a
tr from Heb or Aram. There are many echoes
of the other Scriptures, but no direct quotations,
so there is nothing to show whether the author used
the Heb text or the LXX. The proper names do
not supply any clue. Although there are so many
versions of the Gr, they are all so paraphrastic
that the Gr in most cases is not by any means cer-
tain. The few vs quoted in Gr by Clemens Alex-
andrinus do not afford space enough to discover
through them if there is any other language behind.
It possibly was written in Heb, as it seems to have
been written in Pal.

(4) Date—From the tone of the book there is
no doubt that it was written after the capture of
Jerus by Titus. Had it been due to the later cata-
clysm, when the rebellion of Barcochba was over-
thrown, a Christian Jew would not have manifested
such sorrow. The break between the church
and the synagogue was complete by that time.
Further, had this book been written under Hadrian,
the previous disaster would have been referred to.
Over and above the distinctly and avowedly Chris-
tian passages, there are numerous echoes of the NT
Scriptures. The fifth vision affords notes of time
which would be more unambiguous if there had
not been additions made. The eagle with the three
heads and twelve wings is declared to be the fourth
monarchy of Daniel, and by the context this is
shown to be imperial Rome. The question that
has exercised critics is the portion of the Rom history
referred to. Liicke regarded the reference to be to
rulers prominent in the time of Sulla, and the three
heads to be the first triumvirate. This view implies
a knowledge of Rom politics not possessed by any
Jew of the pre-Christian period. Further, the
echoes of NT language which occur (cf 2[4] Esd
51 with Lk 18 8; 2[4) Esd 6 5 with Rev 7 3,
etc) determine the decision against any idea that it
was pre-Christian. The realization of the horrors
of the overthrow of Jerus is too vivid to be
the result merely of imagination. Another theory
would see in the three heads the three Septimians,
Severus and his sons Caracalla and Geta. Thia


173


would find a place for the eight under-wings, as
that is exactly the number of emperors between
Domitian and Severus, if one neglects the short


reign of Didius Julianus. The destruction of “the |


two under wings that thought to have reigned”
(2[4] Esd 11 31) would be fulfilled in the defeat
and death of Pescennius Niger and Clodius Albinus.
The fact that it is the right-hand head that devours
the head to the left fits the murder of Geta the
younger son, by Caracalla, the elder. Against this
view is the fact that the book is quoted by Clemens
Alexandrinus. Further, the eight under-wings are
said to be kings “whose times shall be small, and
their years swift”? (2[4] Esd 12 20). Though this
might be said of Nerva, it could not be affirmed
of Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius or Marcus
Aurelius. We are thus restricted to the view which
maintains that the three heads are the three Fla-
vians. The twelve wings are the first emperors, be-
ginning with Julius Caesar. The reign of Augustus
is longer than any of the monarchs that succeeded
him, and it is noted that the second wing was to have
that distinction (2[4] Esd 12 15). The date then
may be placed between the death of Titus and that
of Domitian—that is, from 81 to 96. The Lion who
rebukes the Eagle for his unrighteousness is the
Messiah—the Christ—in His second coming, when
He shall come in the glory of His kingdom. The
Christians had begun to doubt the speedy coming
of the Master; hence He is spoken of as “kept unto
the end of days” (2 Esd 12 32). Such are the

Apocalypses, strictly speaking.
II. Legendary Works.—The Book of Jub is the
only one which survives of this class of composition.
The portion of Ase Isa which contains


Book of the account of his martyrdom has
Jubilees much of this character. It, however,

has been conjoined to the Apocalyptic
“Ascension.” It would seem that in some copies


the Asm M was added to this work as a supplement.
It is frequently cited as lepto Genesis—sometimes
leptogenesis, and again microgenesis, ‘‘the little
Genesis.” This title cannot be meant to refer to
its actual size, for it is considerably longer than the
canonical book. It may either mean that this book
is to be less regarded than the canonical Genesis,
or that it is taken up with lepiéd—‘“minutiae.’
Another, and possibly more plausible explanation is
to be found in the Heb or Aram. There is a rab-
binic book known as B*ré’shtth Rabba’, in which the
whole of Gen is expanded by Midrashic additions,
amplifications and explanations, to many times the
size of the work before us, which, in comparison,
would be Beré’shith Zata’—‘the small Genesis.”’
The main difficulty is that the Jewish work, B.
Rabbah, cannot. well be dated earlier than 300 AD.
We owe the work before us mainly—in its complete
form—like so many others, to its inclusion in the
canon of the Ethiopic church. Portions of it in
Lat and Syr have been found in the second main
source of apocalyptic lit. in recent times, the Ambro-
sian Library of Milan. There have been several
editions of the Ethiopic text. : ee:
(1) Summary.—It is difficult to give anything like
asummary of the Book of Jub in the ordinary sense
of the word. Roughly speaking, the canonical
Book of Gen is the summary. e writer has
omitted many features and incidents, but these have
been more than compensated for by additions and
expansions. Most of these omissions have an
apologetic aim. The acts of deception of which
Abraham was guilty in Egypt and toward Abime-
lech in regard to Sarah, the similar act of Isaac,
would involve matters difficult to palliate. The
way Simeon and Levi entrapped the Shechemites
into being circumcised and then took advantage
of their condition to murder them, is omitted also.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocalyptic Lit.


Jacob’s devices to increase his flocks at Laban’s
expense are also passed over in silence. The most
marked omission is the blessing of Jacob in Gen 49.
This is to be explained by the way the writer has
praised Simeon and Levi earlier, which Jacob’s
denunciation of them flatly contradicts. Many of
the additions have a similar apologetic intention, as
the statement that Dinah was twelve years old at
the time of the rape, the presents Jacob gave to his
peuee four times a year, etc. When Jacob deceives

is father, he does not say he is Esau, but only “I
am thy son.” There are longer additions, chiefly
ceremonial. Two incidents narrated at length are
the warfare of the Amorites against Jacob (34 1-9),
and the war of Esau (37 and 38).

(2) Structure —The most marked characteristic
of the book is that from which it has its most com-
mon name, “The Book of Jub,” the dating of events
by successive Jubilees. The whole history of the
world is set in a framework of Jubilees and every
event is dated by the Jubilee of the world’s history
in which it had occurred, and the year-week of that
Jubilee and the year of that week. The writer has
carried his septenary principle into the year and
made the days in it, as did the writer of one of the
En books, a multiple of seven, 364=7X52 days. It
does not seem to have been interpolated.

(3) Language —Like so many more of the pseu-
depigrapha, the Ethiopic, from which our modern
tr® have been made, has heen tr? from a Gr original,
which in turn has had aSem source. It is somewhat
difficult to form a decision as to which of the two
Sem languages in use in Pal was that in which it
was composed. Certainly some, as Frankel, have
maintained that it was written in Gr first of all.
This is contrary to ancient evidence, as Jerome
refers to the use of rissah, “a stadium,” as used in
the Book of Jub. More can be said for an Aram.
original. The use of Mastéma for Satan, and the
plurals in in, point in that direction. Dr. Charles’s
arguments seem to us to settle the matter in favor
of Heb. Cf the case of 47 9, in which bath, “a
daughter,” is confused with bayzth, ‘‘a house.” One
of his arguments is not so conclusive: 2 9 wahaba,
“gave,” appears where “appointed” is the meaning
—a confusion of meanings only possible from the
double meaning of nathan, as the Aram. yahabh has
the same double force: “See I have made thee
[yeh*bhéthakh] a God to Pharaoh” (cf Pesh Ex 7 1).
These indications are few, but they seem sufficient.

(4) Date—The formidable authority of Dr.
Charles and that of Littmann are in favor of an
early date—before the quarrel of John Hyrcanus
with the Pharisees. Our reading of the history is
different from that of either of these scholars. The
Hassidh party had been lukewarm to the Macca-
beans from the latter portion of the pontificate of
Judas Maccahaeus; the insult offered to Hyrcanus
at his own table was the enmity reaching its height.
If with Dr. Charles we assume the author to be a
Pharisee, then the date is impossible. The Phari-
saic party were never enthusiastic supporters of
the Maccabeans, except when Alexandra threw her-
self into their arms. Two characteristics of this
book strike the reader—its apologetic tone, and its
hatred of Edom. During the time of John Hyr-
canus the nation did not assume an apologetic atti-
tude. It had thrown off the Syrian-Gr domination
and repelled the attempt to Hellenize its religion.
It would be only Greeks, or those under Gr influ-
ences, that would necessitate the apologetic atti-
tude. We are driven to the Herodian period when
Romans abounded in the court and Greeks and
Graeculi were frequent, when those who, being
Jews and knowing Heb, yet had imbibed Hellenic
culture, and readily saw the points where assault
might be made on their faith and its sacred literature.


Apocalyptic Lit. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


174


This date would explain the hatred of Edom. We
therefore would place it about the death of Herod—
from 5 BC to 6 AD.

Unlike the other books of this class, much of
it has been found in the Talm; hence, though we
still think the author to have been an Essene, we
think that he had much sympathy with the Phari-
saic school in its latest’ development.

Ill. Psalmic Pseudepigrapha.—The Ps Sol is
the one of all the pseudepigrapha which seems to

have hovered most nearly on_ the
1. Psalter border of deutero-canonicity. Even
of Solomon 4 Esd, as not being found in Gr,

scarcely can be counted an exception,
as it was never admitted into the canon of Alexan-
dria. The famous Codex Alexandrinus, as its
table of contents proves, originally contained the
book before us. In several catalogues of books
that were acknowledged, by some at least, to be
authoritative, it is named—sometimes to be de-
clared uncanonical. Like so many other books—
Jewish and Christian—during the Middle Ages, it
sank into oblivion. A MS of it was first noticed by
Hoeschel the librarian in the Library at Augsburg,
in the beginning of the 17th cent., and published
by de la Cerda in 1626. This MS has since been
lost. More recently, four other Gr MSS have been
brought to light. From these, with the assistance
of de la Cerda’s text, it has repeatedly been pub-
lished. The name given to it, “The Psalter of
Solomon,” seems purely gratuitous; the writer
makes no claim, direct or indirect, to be the Son
of David.

(1) Summary—The present collection consists
of 18 pss closely modeled as to line of thought and
diction on the canonical Pss. The first ps announces
the declaration of war, but is occupied with the
denunciation of hypocrites. The second describes
a siege of Jerus and acknowledges that the distresses
of the siege have been deserved, but ends by the
description of the death of the besieger on the coast
of Egypt. The third ps is one of thanksgiving on
the part of the righteous. In the fourth we have
the description and denunciation of a hypocrite
in terms which suggest strongly Our Lord’s words
against the Pharisees. It is evidently directed
against a prominent individual member of the San-
hedrin. On the generally received date, Antipater
may be the person denounced. The fifth ps is a
prayer for mercy from God and an appeal to His
loving-kindness. The sixth is occupied with a
description of the blessedness of the righteous. The
short ps which follows is a prayer of Israel under
chastisement, intreating God not to remove His
tabernacle from their midst. The eighth ps de-
scribes the siege of the temple and denounces the
sins of the inhabitants of Jerus, which had brought
the Smiter from afar against them, and a prayer for
restoration to favor. Israel, a captive, prays to
God for forgiveness in the ninth ps. In the tenth
we have the blessedness of the man who submits to
the chastening of the Lord. The theme of the elev-
enth is the return of the captives. The idea of the
following ps is not unlike the middle stanza of Ps
120 of the canonical Psalter. The next has as its
theme the blessedness of the righteous and the evil
estate of the wicked. The fourteenth has a similar
subject. The next begins with the sentiment so
frequent in the canonical Pss: ‘When I was in
trouble I called upon the Lord.” The ps which
follows is experimental in the sense of the old
Puritans. The seventeenth ps is the most im-
portant, as it is Messianic, and exhibits the hopes
prevalent among the Jews at the time when it was
written. The eighteenth gives a description of the
blessedness of the return of the Jews to Divine
favor. Messrs. Ryle and James would divide this


ps into two, as there seems to be a conclusion at the
tenth ver with the sign diapsalma. Moreover,
a slightly different theme is introduced at this point,
but there is a reference in the Pistis Sophia to the
19th ps, and this is not the oneimplied. There seems
to be some probability that a Lat tr once existed
from references, though few, in the Lat Fathers;
but no MS of it has yet been. discovered. A Syr
tr has been discovered by Dr. Rendel Harris, along
with a number of other pss also attributed to Solo-
mon, which he has called “Odes.” Of these more
will be said below.

(2) Language.—That the Gr of these pss is a
tr from the Heb may be proved by what seem to
have been errors in translation, as loti etpein, “‘to
say,” where the sense implies “to destroy,” from
the double meaning of dabhar, “to say,” and later
“to destroy’; héds enikése, “till he conquered,”
where the meaning must be “forever” or ‘“continu-
ously,’”’ equivalent to ‘adh, la-necah, which might be
taken as in Aram., and tr? asin the Gr. Further,
the general character, the frequent occurrence of
en in senses strained in Gr but suiting thoroughly
the Heb preposition 2, the omission of the substan-
tive verb, the general simplicity in the structure of
the sentences, serve to confirm this. For fuller
elucidation tbe reader is directed to Ryle and James
ed of this book (Ixxviii-lxxxiv). Hilgenfeld has
urged some arguments in favor of Gr being the origi-
nal language. These really prove that the trans-
lator was very much influenced in making his
translation by the LXX version of the canonical
Psalter.

(8) Date-—While Ewald would place it back in
the time of Epiphanes, if not even earlier, and
Movers and Delitzsch would place it about the time
of Herod, the description of the siege does not
suit any siege but that of Pompey. Still more the
death of the proud oppressor who besieged the
Temple suits down to the minutest detail the death
of Pompey, and suits that of no other. This is the
opinion of Langen, Hilgenfeld, Drummond, Stanton,
Schiirer, Ryle and James. The pss, however, were
written at various dates between 64 BC, the year
preceding the Pompeian siege, and the death of
Pompey 46 BC. Tbe common critical idea is that
it is the Psalter of the Pharisees. The singular
thing is that though the writer reverences the
Temple, he speaks nothing of the sacrifices, and
shows no horror at the dishonor of the high priests—
the attitude one would expect, not from a Pharisee,
but from an Essene.

(4) Christology—The main interest of this
pseudepigraphon is its Christology, which is princi-
pally to be seen in the 17th ps. The Messiah is to

e of the seed of David: He is to come on the down-
fall of the Asmoneans, to overthrow the Romans in
turn. He is to gather the dispersed of Israel, and is
to subject the Gentiles to His rule. The character
of this rule is to be spiritual, holy, wise and just.
All these features indicate a preparation for the
coming of Him who fulfilled the expectation of the
Jews in a way which they had so little dreamed of.

The students of Gnosticism in perusing the
Pistis Sophia, one of the few literary remains left

us by those bizarre heresies, found


2. The repeated quotations from the Ps Sol,
Odes of not one of which was to be found in the
Solomon received collection. There was one


numbered reference, but it was to the
19th psalm, whereas only eighteen were known to
exist. Lactantius has a quotation from the Ps Sol
which, like those in Pistis Sophia, has no place in
the “eighteen.” It was obvious that there were
more Solomonic writings that were called Psalms
than those ordinarily known. In the beginning
of 1909 the learned world was startled by the in-


175


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocalyptic Lit.


formation that Dr. Rendel Harris had found on his
shelves the missing Ps Sol in a Syr tr. The MS
was defective both at the beginning and end, but
there was, after all, little missing of the whole book.
The title and the colophon were of course wanting.
It begins with the new Psalms, or, to give them
Dr. Harris’ title, “Odes,” which are followed by
those till now known.

(1) Relation to “Pistis Sophia.’—This cannot
have been the order of the time when Pistis Sophia
was published, as the first of these odes is quoted
as the 19th. There are forty-two of them. They
are the work of a Christian. The doctrine of the
Trinity is present; very prominent is the miracu-
lous birth of the Saviour; the descent upon Mary of
the Holy Ghost in the form of a dove; the crucifix-
ion, and the descent into Hades; and, though less
clearly, the resurrection. One striking thing is the
resemblance of the account of the virgin birth to
that we find in the Asc Isa.

(2) Date-——Dr. Rendel Harris dates these Chris-
tian odes in the last quarter of the 1st cent., and
there seems every reason to agree with this. The
relation the 19th ps (Ode 37) bears to the Asc Isa
is not discussed by him, but to our thinking, the
Asc Isa seems the more primitive.

IV. Testaments.—Although, strictly speaking,
Jewish law had no place for “testamentary disposi-
tions” by those about to die—“the portion of goods”
that fell to each being prescribed—yet the dying
exhortations of Jacob addressed to his sons, the
farewell song of Moses, David’s deathbed counsels
to Solomon, were of the nature of spiritual legacies.
Under Gr and Rom law testaments were the regular-
ly understood means of arranging heritages; with
the thing the name was transferred, as in the Mish,
Babha’ Bathra’ 16 261, "pr, dayytiké, so also
in Syr. Theideaof these pseudepigrapha is clearly
not drawn from the ‘‘Last Will and Testament,”
but the dying exhortations above referred to.

Gen 49 in which Jacob addresses his sons gath-
ered round his dying bed furnished the model for

a number of pseudepigraphic writings.


1. The Of these the longest known is XII P.
Testament In it the writer imagines each of the
of the sons of Jacob following his father’s
Twelve example and assembling his descend-
Patriarchs ants in order that he might give his


dying charge. While Jacob addressed

each of his sons separately, the sons of none of
his sons, save those of Joseph, became at all promi-
nent; so in the case of the sons of Jacob they
each address their descendants as a whole. These
Testaments are occupied with moral advices mainly.
The sin most warned against is incontinence. |

(1) Summary.—(a) Reuben: The first Patriarch
whose Testament is given is Reuben. While he
bewails the sin that deprived him of his birthright,
he gives an account of the various propensities that
tend to sin, and accommodates each of these with
an evil spirit—spirits of deceit. He gives details
of his sin, which, resembling those given in the Book
of Jub, differs in an apologetic direction. This
apologetic effort is carried farther in the Targ of the
pseudo-Jonathan. In it Reuben is declared to have
disordered the bed of Bilhah because it was put
beside his mother’s, and he was accused of impurity
with her; but the Spirit revealed to Jacob that he
was not guilty. 4

(b) ‘Simeon: The next Testament is that of
Simeon. The crime that seems to have most
affected Jacob, if we may judge by Gen 49 5-7,
was the murder of the Shechemites by Simeon and
Levi. That, however, is not touched upon in the
Testament; his envy of Joseph is what he most
repents of. A stanza, however, is inserted, warning
against fornication (ver 3).


(c) Levi: The Testament of Levi follows. It is
mainly apocalyptic. The murder of the Shechem-
ites is regarded as a wholly estimable action, and is
commended by God. The treachery of the cir-
cumcision is not mentioned at all. He tells how
he was admitted in dream to the third heaven. In
another vision he is clothed with the, garments of
the priesthood. After a piece of autobiography
followed by general admonitions Levi tells what he
had Icarned from the writing of Enoch. He tells
how his descendants will fall away and become
corrupt. It is to be noted that fornication becomes
very prominent in the picture of the future. The
destruction of Jerus is foretold, and the captivity
of Judah among all nations. This cannot refer to
the setting up of the “Abomination of Desolation”
by Epiphanes. The Temple was not laid waste,
although it was desecrated; and there did not
follow on the desecration by Epiphanes the scatter-
ing of the Jews unto all nations. It scems neces-
sary to understand by this wasting the capture of
Jerus by Titus. Consequently, the ‘new priest’’ of
ch 18 seems to us the priest “after the order of
Melchizedek” according to the NT interpretation.

(d) Judah: Judah is the next whose Testament
is given. He first declares his own great personal
prowess, slaying a lion, a bear, a boar, a leopard and
a wild bull. When the Canaanite kings assailed
Jacob as related in the Book of Jub, he showed his
courage. Several warlike exploits, of which we only
learn here, he relates. The assault made by the
descendants of Esau upon the sons of Jacob and
Jacob’s victory is related in the manner and nearly
in the terms of the account in the Book of Jub.
He mentions with a number of explanatory and
excusatory details his sin in the matter of Tamar.
He denounces covetousness, drunkenness and forni-
cation. Then he commands his descendants to look
to Levi and reverence him. Then follows a Mes-
sianic passage which seems most naturally to bear a
Christian interpretation.

(e) Issachar: The Testament of Issachar is much
shorter than either of the two preceding ones.
After telling the story of the mandrakes, he dwells
on husbandry. As is noted by Dr. Charles, this
is at variance with the rabbinic representation of
the characteristics of the tribe. He, too, denounces
impurity and drunkenness.

(f) Zebulun: Zebulun’s Testament is little longer
than that of Issachar. This Testament is greatly
occupied with the history of the sale of Joseph in
which Zebulun protests he took only the smallest
share and got none of the price.

(g) Dan: The Testament of Dan also is short.
He confesses his rage against Joseph, and so warns
against anger. Here also are warnings against
whoredom. The Messiah is to spring from Judah
and Levi. Dr. Charles thinks the first of these
was not in the original, because it would naturally
have been ‘tribes,’ not “tribe,” as it is. This is
somewhat hasty, as in 1 K 12 23 (LXX) we have
the precisely similar construction prés pdnta oikon
Totida kat Beniamin, a sentence which represents
the construction of the Heb. In this there is a
Messianic passage which describes the Messiah as
delivering the captives of Beliar.

(h) Naphtali: The Testament that follows, that
of Naphtali, has apocalyptic elements in it. It
opens with the genealogy of Bilhah, his mother,
whose father is said to be Rotheus. His vision
represents Levi seizing the sun and Judah the moon.
The young man with the twelve palm branches
seems to be a reference to the Apostles. Joseph
seizes a bull and rides on it. He has a further
dream in which he sees a storm at sea and the
brethren being separated. Again there is a refer-
ence to the recurrent theme of sexual relation (ch 8).


Apocalyptic Lit. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


176


(i) Gad: The subject of the Testament of Gad is
hatred. Gad is associated with Simeon as being
most filled with wrath against Joseph.

(7) Asher: Asher urges whole-hearted obedience
to righteousness, as the apostle James does in his
epistle.

(k) Joseph: One of the most important of these
Testaments is that of Joseph. The opening is
occupied with a prolonged description of the tempta-
tion of Joseph by Potiphar’s wife. There is in
that connection the unhealthy dwelling on sexual
matters which is found in monkish writers. There
are not a few resemblances to the language of the
Gospels (cf 1 6 and Mt 26 36). There is a more
important passage (19 8): “And I saw that from
Judah was born a virgin wearing a linen garment,
and from her was born a lamb, and on his left hand
there was, as it were, a lion: and all the beasts rushed
against him, and the lamb overcame them, and
destroyed them, and trod them under foot.” This
to us is clearly Christian. Dr. Charles, without
apocalyptic evidence to support him, would amend
it and change the reading.

(1) Benjamin: The Testament of Benjamin is
very much an appendix to that of Joseph. It
opens with the account Joseph gave Benjamin of
how he was sold to the Ishmaelites. He exhorts his
descendants against deceit, but, as all his brethren,
he warns them against fornication. There is a
long Christian passage which certainly seems an
interpolation, as it is not found in some of the texts,
though others have all vs. The text concerning
Paul (11 1.2) appears in varying forms in all VSS.

(2) Structure—That these ‘Testaments’ have
been interpolated is proved by the variations in the
different texts. Dr. Charles has, however, gone
much farther, and wherever there is a Christian
clause has declared it an obvious interpolation.
For our part, we would admit as a rule those pas-
sages to be genuine that are present in all the forms
of the text. The Gr text was first in, so to say,
recent times edited by Grosseteste, bishop of Lincoln,
in the 13th cent. Since then other MSS have been
found, and a Slavonic and an Aram. version. We
are thus able to check the interpolations. In es-
sence the Christian passage in T Jos is found in
all versions.

(3) Language.—Dr. Charles makes a very strong
case for Heb being the original language. His
numerous arguments are not. all of equal value.
While some of the alleged Hebraistic constructions
may be actually so, not a few may be explained by
imitation of the language of the LXX. As an
example of the first, cf T Jud (7): échlos bartis=
hél kabhédh, “a numerous host.” On the other
hand T Reub 3 8: “understanding in the Law,”
is a turn of expression that might quite well be
common among Gr-speaking Jews. Of passages
that are only explicable by retranslation, as in T
Jos 11 7, “God ... . increased him in gold and
silver and in work,” this last turn is evidently due
to the translator’s rendering ‘dbhuddah, “servant,”’
as if it were ‘dbhddhah, ‘“‘work.’’? On the whole,
we are prepared to amend the decision elsewhere,
and admit that the probability is that this book,
like so many more of the same class, has been trans-
lated from Heb.

(4) Date and authorship —Dr. Charles declares
the author to have been a Pharisee who wrote in the
early part of the reign of John Hyrcanus I. The
initial difficulty with this, as with the other pseude-
pigrapha in attributing a Pharisaic authorship, is the
preservation of the book among the Christian com-
munities, and the ignorance or the ignoring of it
among the Jews. The only sect of the Jews that
survived the destruction of Jerus was that of the
Pharisees. The Sadducees, who were more a politi-


cal than’a religious party, disappeared with the
cessation of the Jewish state. When Judaism be-
came merely a religion—a church—not a_nation,
their function was gone. The third sect, the Essenes,
disappeared, but did so into the Christian church.
If the writer had been an Essene, as we suppose he
was, the preservation of this writing by the Chris-
tians is easily explicable. If it were the work of a
Pharisee, its disappearance from the literature of
the synagogue is as inexplicable as its preservation
by the Christians. The constant harping on the
sin of fornication—in T Naph 8 8 even marital
intercourse is looked at askance—indicates a state
of mind suitable to the tenets of the Essenes. The
date preferred by Dr. Charles, if the author is a
Pharisee, appears to us impossible. The Pharisees
had, long before the final break, been out of sym-
pathy with the Maccabeans. The Chasidim de-
serted Judas Maccabaeus at Elasa, not improbably
in consequence of the alliance he had made with the
heathen Romans, and perhaps also his assumption
of the high-priesthood. Further, the temple is
laid waste and the people driven into captivity
unto all nations (T Levi 15 1). This does not
suit the desecration of the temple under Epiphanes.
During that time the temple was not laid waste.
The orgies of the worship of Bacchus and of Jupiter
Olympius dishonored it, but that is a different
thing from its being laid waste. The scattering
unto all nations did not take place then. Some
were taken captive and enslaved, but this was not
general. The description would only apply to
destruction of the temple by Titus and the enslaving
and captivity of the mass of the inhabitants of
Jerus. The ‘‘New Priest” cannot refer to the
Maccabeans, for they were Aaronites as much as
Alcimus or Onias, though not of the high-priestly
family. This change of the priesthood only has
point if it refers to the priesthood of Christ as in He
712. If Dr. Charles is right in maintaining that
2 Macc in its account of Menelaus is to be preferred
to Jos, the change of the priesthood was not un-
precedented, for Menelaus was a Benjamite, not
a Levite. Yet 1 Macc takes no notice of this
enormity. Further, there are the numerous pas-
sages that are directly and indirectly Christian.
Dr. Charles certainly marks them all as interpola-
tions, but he gives no reason in most of the cases for
doing so. That the omission of such passages does
not dislocate the narrative arises from the simpler
construction of Sem narrative, and is therefore not
to be regarded as conclusive evidence of interpola-
tion. The reference to Paulin T Ben 11, occurring
in all the sources, although with variations, also
points to a post-Christian origin. For these reasons,
we would venture to differ from Dr. Charles and
regard the XII P as post-Christian, and to be dated
in the first quarter of the 2d cent. AD.

(5) Relation to other books.—From the decision
we have reached in regard to the date of these
Testaments, it follows that all the many resem-
blances which have been noted between them and
the books of the NT are due to imitation on the
part of the Testaments, not the reverse. A case
in point is T Jos 1 6 where the resemblance to Mt
25 31-86 is close; only, whereas in the Gospel the
judge approves of the righteous on account of their
visiting the sick and the imprisoned, and condemns
the wicked because they did not do so, in T Jos
God ministers to His servants. The Testament is
really an imitation of the passage in the Gospel.
The direct visiting of the afflicted, whatever the
form of the affliction, was a thing of everyday
occurrence. To think of the Almighty doing so is
the result of a bold metaphor. One familiar with
the Gospel narrative might not unnaturally think
of God’s dealings with the saints in terms drawn from


177


Our Lord’s description of the Last Judgment. In
T Naph 2 2 the figure of the potter and the clay
is, as in Rom 9 21, applied to God’s power over
His creatures. The passage in the T Naph is
expanded, and has not the close intimate connection
with the argument that the Pauline passage has.
While none of the other resemblances give one any
ground to decide, these instances really carry the
others with them. We may thus regard the resem-
blances to the NT in XII P as due to the latter’s
copying of the former. i

The Testament of Adam survives merely in a

group of fragments published first by Renan in the

Journal Astatique (1853). A Gr frag-
2. The ment was published by M. R. James.
Testament A portion of it is apocalyptic, and
of Adam gives an account of the adoration

offered by all the different classes of
God’s creatures. More strictly of the nature of a
Testament is a Syr fragment entitled “More of
Adam Our Father.” It contains a prophecy of the
incarnation, and appears to be of late date. It
was used by the Sethites.

The Testament of Abraham is a late document.
It opens with representing Abraham at his tent-

door. One recension declares his age
3. The then to be 995 years. Michael comes
Testament to him. The purpose for which
of Abraham Michael bas been sent: is to reveal to

Abraham that he must die. He hesi-
tates to do this. When, however, the fatal message
ig revealed, Abraham will not yield up his spirit at
first. He is after a while persuaded, and as a
reward, before his death he has a revelation: there
is given to him a vision of the whole world in the
widest sense—the world of spirits as well. Seeing
a soul, which, weighed in the balance, is nearly being
found wanting, by his intercession the soul is ad-
mitted to Paradise. There are several traces of
Christian influence; many of the thoughts and
phrases are similar to those to be found in the Gos-
pels. At the same time, although to one who had
read John’s Gospel the statement of Our Lord that
Abraham had seen His day “and was glad” (Jn 8
55.56) would inevitably have led a Christian writer
to have exhibited Abraham as secing in vision the
day of Christ. The writer's failure to do so seems
to show that he was not a Christian. The echoes of
the Gospel in the language and the want of that dis-
tinctive Christian mark is to be explained if we
regard the translator as a Christian, while the orig-
inal Midr was the work of a Jew. The language
was probably Aram. There are two Gr recensions,
one longer than the other. There is an Arab.
version which appears to be a tr direct from Aram.
As there is no reference to the coming of Christ,
this Testament is probably pre-Christian. The
tr may be dated early in the 2d cent., as Origen
knew it.

In Arab. there is a MS of the Testaments of Isaac
and Jacob. They are late and Christian. The
latter is founded on the last ch of Gen.

More interesting is the Testament of Job pub-
lished in Anecdota Apocrypha by M. R. James in

1897. It purports to be an account


4. Testa- of his sufferings related by Job himself.
ment of It appears to be the work of a Jew,
Job tr? by a Christian. The position of


Satan in the Midr is not so subordinate
as in the drama. Elihu, when not confused with
Eliphaz, is regarded as inspired by Satan. p

(1) Summary.—It begins with Job, “who is
called Jobab,” summoning his seven sons and
three daughters. The list of the sons forms a
singular assemblage of names, most probably of
Sem origin. Most of them are certainly Gr words,
though not Gr proper names—Chorés and N¢tké,


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocalyptic Lit.


“dance” and “victory,” Hudén, “of pigs,” Phéros,
“tribute.” The other names are Tersi, Phiphi,
Phrouén. He tells his descendants how he had
been called in the night and had had it revealed
to him that the sacrifices that had been offered
previously in the great temple near him were not
offered to God, but to Satan. He was ordered to
destroy the temple thus devoted to false worship.
He did so, but knew that Satan would seek him,
to take his revenge. Satan came disguised as a
beggar, and Job, recognizing him, ordered his
porteress to give him a burned cake of bread, all
ashes. Satan reveals himself and threatens Job.
With ch 9 begins an account of Job’s wealth and
lordly beneficence founded on the canonical book.
It continues to ch 16. This portion is an expansion
of the canonical Job. In some portions there are
marked variations. Job is a king, and since this
is so, the power of Persia is invoked to overthrow
him. After twenty years his friends come to con-
dole with him. They also are kings. Sitis his
wife is bemoaning her children. Job declares he
sees them crowned with heavenly beauty. On
learning this, Sitis dies, and so rejoins her children.
The speeches of the friends are much condensed,
and scarcely of the same character as those in the
canonical book. Lyric passages are introduced.
The most singular difference from the canonical
book is the réle assigned to Elihu. Job says,
“Elihu inspired by Satan addressed to me rash
words” (ch 42). God then speaks to Job in the
whirlwind and blames Elihn. Job sacrifices for
the three friends, and Eliphaz in a lyric piece con-
gratulates himself and his friends, and declares
that the lamp and glory of Elihu will be quenched
(ch 43). By a second wife we are told Job had
the seven sons and three daughters who are sum-
moned to his bedside. Closing his narrative
(ch 44) Job exhorts kindness to the poor. In the
end of the book his successive daughters speak.
He had divided his property, now double what it
had originally been, among his seven sons and had
left the daughters unprovided for. He, however,
bestows upon them other gifts. Three golden
vessels are brought him and given them, three
cords besides, and each one has a several endowment.
The first daughter, called, as in LXX, Hemera,
(Jemima in the canonical Job), had another heart
given her, and she spoke in the tongue of the angels.
Casia (Keziah), the second danghter, also had a
changed heart, and it was given to her to speak in
the dialect of the principalities (drchdn). Then the
third daughter girded herself, and with the changed
heart it was given her to speak in the language of
the Cherubim. This daughter is called Amaltheias
Kéras, the rather strange tr of Keren Haphukh
adopted by the LXX. All the names are transferred
from that source. A brother of Job named Nereus
(or Nereias) is introduced, who records further gifts
to these daughters—a lyre to the first, a censer to
the second and a drum to the third. This brother
is a relative of whose existence we have no hint
elsewhere. He is introduced to supply the con-
clusion to the narrative.

(2) Structure—It would appear that from chs
1 to 45 is the original Testament in which Job is
the speaker. In chs 46-51 a new state of matters
comes into prominence, in which Nereus is the
speaker. The last two chs seem decidedly to be
additions: the new gifts to the daughters seem un-
explained. Of course, oriental authors do not look
so strictly to the unity of parts as do Occidentals.

(3) Language—The dependence on the LXX
would suggest that Gr was the original tongue.
One or two phenomena point to a Sem tongue being
behind the Gr. The names of Job’s daughters
are taken from the LXX; those of the seven sons


Apocalyptic Lit.
Apocrypha


178


have been invented. As we have seen, they are
not Gr names, but are probably really Hellenized
VSS of some Sem appellations. At the same time,
they do not seem to be Heb, but rather Aram.
It would seem to have been tr4 by one familiar
with the NT.

(4) Date and authorship.—It has no direct refer-
ences to Christian doctrines or the facts of Christian
history. This seems conclusive against its having
a Christian origin. The reason that would lead a
Christian to compose such a document would be to
give a further prophetic evidence for the mission of
his Master. He would have no object in making
Job out to be a connection of Israel, unless he were
so himself. Dr. James thinks the writer to have
been a Jewish Christian of the 2d cent. resident
in Egypt. By the 2d cent. few Jews passed from
Judaism to the faith of Jesus: the break between
church and synagogue had become complete. That
Job is made king of all Egypt (ch 28) may indicate
some relationship to that country, as if the writer
had identified Job with Psammeticus, the Egyp king
overthrown by Cambyses. This, however, may
have been due to the translator. If the original
language were Sem—Aram. or Heb—the probability
is that the author wrotein Pal. There are no direct
signs to indicate the date. There is no appearance
of knowledge of Rome. The fire of the opposition
to the Seleucids had died down. It may have been
written in the reign of Alexander.

V. The Sibylline Oracles.—The burning of the
Capitol (83 BC) and the destruction of the famous
Sibylline books led Sulla to search in Italy and
Greece for any Oracles that might replace the con-
tents of the vols which had been burnt. About half
a cent. later Augustus revived the search for Oracles.
Such a demand would naturally produce a supply.
It would seem that certain Jews of Alexandria,
eager to propagate the faith of their fathers, in-
vented vs in the shape in which these Oracles had
been preserved, as we learn from Herodotus—i.e.
in hexameter lines and in the epic dialect in which
Homer and Hesiod had written. Those in Herodo-
tus are mainly from the Oracle of Delphi. From
Pausanias, who quotes several of them, we learn that
the Oracles attributed to the various Sibyls were
delivered in a similar style. Hence these Jewish
forgeries were written in epic hexameters. Later,
this industry was pursued with even greater zeal

‘by Christians. These have been collected into
several books—some 15 are named—of which some
have been lost. The books are made up of frag-
ments of different ages. The first book begins
with the creation, and narrates the history of the
race to the flood and the going out of Noah from the
ark. Then the history of Our Lord is given suc-
cinctly, the miracle of the loaves, the crucifixion,
and the destruction of Jerus. In it Hades is de-
rived from ‘‘Adam.” Reference is made to the
sin of the watchers, as in En, and an arithmograph
is given which seems to be fulfilled in Theds Séfér.
The second book is modeled largely on Our Lord’s
eschatological discourses, many passages bearing a
distinct echo of it. It may be noted that the four
archangels of the Book of En—Michael, Gabriel,
Raphael and Uriel—are introduced. The third
is by much the longest, but it is a confused mass of
fragments. There is early reference to the con-
quest of Egypt by Rome; the building of the tower
of Babel, the siege of Troy, the conquest of Alex-
ander and many other events appear. The fourth
book is Christian throughout. After praise to
the Christians, there is a sketch of the history of
the great empires, beginning with the Assyrians
and ending with Alexander; then an account of
Nero appearing from the East and doing evil fills
the end of all things. The fifth book begins with


an account of the successive emperors from Julius
Caesar to the Antonines. Then a new song begins
with Egypt, and wanders off indefinitely, referring
to Xerxes crossing the Hellespont, the impurities
of Rome, and ending with Egypt and the burning
up of all things. The sixth is short—28 lines in
praise of the Cross; and the seventh is fragmentary.
In the eighth is the arithmogram and acrostic:


IHCOYC XPICTOC OEOY YIOC C@THP
CTAYPOC, Jésous christés theot hutés sitér stat-


ros. The remaining books have similar charac-
teristics. The place of composition is evidently
Egypt, as, whatever the immediate context may
be, the writer gravitates to Egypt; and the authors
are Jews or Jewish Christians. The dates of the
various fragments of which this collection is com-
posed fall between the first triumvirate and the age
of Diocletian. ;

VI. Conclusion.—There are many points in ©
which the theology of the Apocalyptic prepared
the way for that of Christianity. These, however,
are more naturally taken up under their special
headings. Angelology is much more developed in
certain apocalyptic writings than it is in Christian-
ity, if we except the writings published under the
name of Dionysius the Areopagite. Most of them
are occupied with the coming Messiah. The
Christology of these writings is decidedly in advance
of that of the OT. That question, however, is
discussed under its appropriate heading. Closely
connected with this is the doctrine of God, or
theology proper. In this, too, there is an approxi-
mation to the Christian doctrine of the Trinity.
With these writers the doctrine of the Last Things
is always brought into close relationship to that of
the Messiah. His coming is the signal for the end
of the world, the last judgment, the punishment of
the wicked and the reward of the righteous. What
we have just said applies mainly to the strictly
Jewish and pre-Christian Apocalypses. In the
Christian Jewish Apocalypses the place the incarna-
tion and the miraculous birth hold is worthy of
special note. The representation in regard to the
latter of these subjects is independent of the gospel
narrative. Connected with this independence of
the written Scriptures are the variations these
writings introduce into history. Many of these are
due to apologetic reasons, not a few to the desire
to enhance the national glory. The reverence for
the letter of Scripture, so markedly characteristic
of the rabbinic teachings found in the Talm, is not
found in the apocalyptic writings. Apocalyptic
thus presents a stage in the doctrine of Scripture.


LiveRaturRE.—On Apocalyptic generally: Deane,
Pseudepigrapha; Derembourg, Histoire de la Palestine;
Drummond, Jewish Messiah; Ewald, History of Israel,
tr V; Gritz, Geschichte der Juden, III; Hilgenfeld,
Messias Judaeorum; Jidische Apocalyptik; Kautzsch, Die
Apocryphen und Pseudepigraphen des Alten Testaments;
Langen, Paldstina zur Zeit Christi; Renan, Histoire du
Peuple d'Israel; Schtirer, Jewish People, tr V; Stanton,
Jewish and Christian Messiah; Thomson, Books Which
Influenced Our Lord. On special books: Enoch (Text,


Ethiopic): Laurence, Dillmann, Flemming; (English):
Laurence, Schodde, Charles. Slavonic Book of Enoch:
Morfill. Baruch (Text, Syriac): Ceriani; (inglish):


Charles, The Assumption of Moses (Text, Latin): Ceriani;
(English): Charles, The Ascension of Isaiah (Text, Ethi-
opic): Laurence, Dillmann; (English): Charles, Fourth
Book of Esdras (Text, Latin): Vulg; (English): A poc RV
Book of Jubilees (Text, Ethioplc): Dillmann, Charles;
(English): Schodde, Charles, Psalier of Solomon (Text,
Greek): Pick, Ryle and James; (English): Whiston, Pick,
Ryle and James, Rendel Harris (from Syriac). Odes of
Solomon (English): Rendel Harris, Testaments of the XII
Patriarchs (Text, Greek): Sinker, Charles; (English):
Sinker, Charles, Testaments of Abrahamand Job; Texts and
Studies; Sibylline Oracles (Text): Alexandre, Rzach.


: J. E. H. Toomson
APOCRYPHA, a-pok’ri-fa:
I. DEFINITION
II], Tae Name ApocryrpHa


179


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Apocalyptic Lit.
Apocrypha


1. Original Meanings
(1) Classical
(2) Hellenistic
NT


(3) In
(4) Patristic
2. ‘‘Esoteric” In Gr Philosophy, ctc
III. Usaoce as To Arocryrua :
1. Early Christian Usage
‘ Apocalyptie’’ Literaturc
2. The Eastern Church
(1) ‘Esoteric’ Literature(Clement of Alex., etc)
(2) Change to ‘‘ Religious’’ Books (Origen, etc)
(3) SA saa Books (Athanasius, Niccphorus,
etc
(4) “List of Slxty"’
3. The Western Church
(1) The Decretum Gelasii
(2) '‘Non-Canonical" Books
4. The Reformers
Separation from Canonical Books
. Heb Words for '‘ Apocrypha"
(1) Do Such Exist ?
(2) Views of Zahn, Schiirer, Porter, etc (génaz,
genizim)
(3) Reasons for Rejection '
6. Summary
IV. Contents ofr THE APOCRYPHA
1. List of Books
2. Classification of Books
V. Orntginayn LancuaGrs OF THE APOCRYPHA
VI. Date or Toe APOCRYPHAL WRITINGS
LITERATURE

I. Definition.—The word Apocrypha, as usually
understood, denotes the collection of religious
writings which the LXX and Vulg (with trivial
differences) contain in addition to the writings
constituting the Jewish and Protestant canon.
This is not the original or the correct sense of the
word, as will be shown, but it is that which it bears
almost exclusively in modern speech. In critical
works of the present day it is customary to speak
of the collection of writings now in view as “the
Old Testament Apocrypha,” because many of the
books at least were written in Heb, the language of
the OT, and because all of them are much more
closely allied to the OT than tothe NT. But there
is a “New” as well as an “Old” Testament Apoc
consisting of gospels, epistles, etc. Moreover the
adj. ‘“Apocryphal” is also often applied in modern
times to what are now generally called ‘‘Pseudepi-
graphical writings,” so designated because ascribed
in the titles to authors who did not and could not
have written them (e.g. Enoch, Abraham, Moses,
etc). The persons thus connected with these books
are among tbe most distinguished in the traditions
and history of Israel, and there can be no doubt that
the object for which such names have been thus used
is to add weight and authority to these writings.

The late Professor E. Kautzsch of Halle edited a
German tr of the Old and New Testament Apocrypha,
and of the Pseudepigraphical writings, with excellent
introductions and valuahle notes hy the best German
scholars. Dr. Edgar Hennecke has edited a similar
work ou the New Testament Apocrypha. Nothing in
the Eng. language can he compared with the works
edited by Kautzsch and Hennecke in either scholarship
or usefulness. [A similar Eng. work to that edited by
Kautzsch is now passing through the (Oxford) press,
Dr. R. H. Charles being the editor, the writer of this art.
being one of the contributors. ]

IL The Name Apocrypha.—The investigation
which follows will show that when the word ‘‘Apoc-
ryphal” was first used in ecclesiastical writings it
bore a sense virtually identical with ‘“esoteric’’: so
that “apocryphal writings” were such as appealed
to an inner circle and could not be understood by
outsiders. The present connotation of the term
did not get fixed until the Protestant Reformation
had set in, limiting the Bib. canon to its present
dimensions among Protestant churches. J

(1) Classical—The Gr adjective aardkpudos, apo-
kruphos, denotes strictly “hidden,” concealed,

of a material object (Eurip. Herc. Fur.
1. Original 1070). Then it came to signify what
Meanings is obscure, recondite, hard to under-
stand (Xen. Mem. 3.5, 14). But it


never has in classical Gr any other sense.


(2) Hellenistic——In Hellenistic Gr as represented
by the LXX and the NT there is no essential
departure from classical usage. In the LXX (or
rather Theodotion’s version) of Dnl 11 43 it
stands for “hidden” as applied to gold and silver
stores. But the word has also in the same text
the meaning ‘‘what is hidden away from human
knowledge and understanding.” So Dnl 2 20
(Theod.) where the apokrupha or hidden things
are the meanings of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream re-
vealed to Daniel though “hidden” from the wise
men of Babylon. The word has the same sense
in Sir 14 21; 39 3.7; 42 19; 48 25; 43 32.

(3) Inthe NT.—In the NT the word occurs but
thrice, viz. Mk 4 22 and the || Lk 8 17; Col 2 3.
In the last passage Bishop Lightfoot thought we
have in the word apokruphoi (treasures of Christ
hidden) an allusion to the vaunted esoteric knowl-
edge of the false teachers, as if Paul meant to say
that it is in Christ alone we have true wisdom and
knowledge and not in the secret books of these
teachers. Assuming this, we have in this verse
the first example of apokruphos in the sense ‘‘eso-
teric.”’ But the evidence is against so early a use
of the term in this—soon to be its prevailing—
sense. Nor does exegesis demand such a meaning
here, for no writings of any kind seem intended.

(4) Patristic—In patristic writings of an early
period the adj. apokruphos came to be applied to
Jewish and Christian writings containing secret
knowledge about the future, etc, intelligible only
to the small number of disciples who read them
and for whom they were believed to be specially
provided. To this class of writings belong in par-
ticular those designated Apocalyptic (see Aroca-
LypTic LiTrRATURE), and it will be seen as thus
employed that apokruphos has virtually the mean-
ing of the Gr esoterikos.

A brief statement as to the doctrine in early Gr
philosophy will be found helpfnl at this point.

From quite early times the philoso-
2. “Esoter- phers of ancient Greece distinguished
ic” in Gr __ between the doctrines and rites which
Philosophy, could be taught to all their pupils,
etc and those which could profitably be
communicated only to a select circle
called the initiated. The two classes of doctrines
and rites—they were mainly the latter— were
designated respectively ‘‘exoteric”’ and “esoteric.”
Lucian (d. 312; see Vit. Auct. 26) followed by many
others referred the distinction to Aristotle, but as
modern scholars agree, wrongly, for the é&wrepi-
xol Aéyot, exdterikoi légot, of that philosopher denote
popular treatises. The Pythagoreans recognized
and observed these two kinds of doctrines and
duties and there is good reason for believing that
they created a corresponding double lit. though
unfortunately no explicit examples of such lit. have
come down to us. In the Gr mysteries (Orphic,
Dionysiac, Eleusinian, etc) two classes of hearers
and readers are implied all through, though it is a
ity that more of the lit. bearing on the question
baa not been preserved. Among the Buddhists
the Samga forms a close society open originally to
monks or bhikhus admitted only after a most rigid
examination; but in later years nuns (bhikshunis)
also have been allowed admission, though in their
case too after careful testing. The Vinaya Pitaka
or “Basket of Discipline’ contains the rules for en-
trance and the regulations to be observed after
entrance. But this and kindred lit. was and is
still held to be caviare to outsiders. See tr in the
Sacred Books of the East, XI (Rhys Davids and
Oldenberg).

II. Usage as to Apocrypha.—It must be borne
in mind that the word apocrypha is really a Gr adj.
in the neuter pl., denoting strictly ‘things hidden.”


Apocrypha


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


180


But almost certainly the noun b7blia is understood,
so that the real implication of the word is ‘‘apocry-
phal books” or “writings.” In this article apocry-
pha will be employed in the sense of this last, and
apocryphal as the equivalent of the Gr apokruphos.
Apocalyptic literature.—The word apocrypha was
first used technically by early Christian writers
for the Jewish and Christian writings


1. Early usually classed under “Apocalyptic”
Christian (see Apocatyptic Literature). In
Usage this sense it takes the place of the


classical Gr word esoterika and bears
the same general meaning, viz. writings intended for
an inner circle and capable of being understood by
no others. These writings give intimations regard-
ing the future, the ultimate triumph of the kingdom
of God, etc, beyond, it was thought, human discovery
and also beyond the intelligence of the uninitiated.
In this sense Gregory of Nyssa (d. 395; De Ordin.,
II, 44) and Epiphanius (d. 403; Haeres, 51 3) speak
of the Apocalypse of John as “apocryphal.”
Christianity itself has nothing corresponding to
the idea of a doctrine for the initiated or a lit. fora
select few. The gospel was preached


2. The in its first days to the poor and ig-
Eastern norant, and the reading and studying
Church of the sacred Scriptures have been


urged by the churches (with some
exceptions) upon the public at large.

(1) Esoteric literature.—The rise of this con-
ception in the eastern church is easily understood.
When devotees of Gr philosophy accepted the
Christian faith it was natural for them to look at
the new religion through the medium of the old
philosophy. Many of them read into the canonical
writings mystic meanings, and embodied those
meanings in special books, these last becoming
esoteric lit. in themselves: and as in the case of
apocalyptic writings, this esoteric lit. was more
revered than the Bibleitself. Inasimilar way there
grew up among the Jews side by side with the
written law an oral law containing the teaching of
the rabbis and regarded as more sacred and authori-
tative than the writings they profess to expound.
One may find some analogy in the fact that among
many Christians the official lit. of the denomination
to which they belong has more commanding force
than the Bible itself. This movement among Gr
Christians was greatly aided by gnostic sects and
the esoteric lit. to which they gave rise. These
Gnostics had been themselves influenced deeply
by Bab and Pers mysticism and the corresponding
lit. Clement of Alexandria (d. 220) distinctly men-
tions esoteric books belonging to the Zoroastrian
(Mazdean) religion.

Oriental and esp. Gr Christianity tended to give
to philosophy the place which the NT and western
Christianity assign the OT. The preparation for
the religion of Jesus was said to be in philosophy
much more than in the religion of the OT. It will
be remembered that Marcian (d. end of 2d cent.
AD), Thomas Morgan, the Welsh 18th-cent. deist
(d. 1743) and Friedrich Schleiermacher (d. 1834)
taught this very same thing.

Clement of Alexandria (see above) recognized
4(2) Esd (to be hereafter called the Apocalypse of
Ezra), the Asm M, etc, as fully canonical. In
addition to this he upheld the authority and value
of esoterical books, Jewish, Christian, and even
heathen. But he is of most importance for our
present purpose because he is probably the earliest
Gr writer to use the word apocrypha as the equiva-
lent of esoterika, for he describes the esoteric books
of Zoroastrianism as apocryphal.

But the idea of esoteric religious lit. existed at an
earlier time among the Jews, and was borrowed from
them by Christians. It is clearly taught in the


Apocalyptic Esdras (2 or 4 Esd) ch 14, where it is
said that Ezra aided by five amanuenses produced
under Divine inspiration 94 sacred books, the
writings of Moses and the prophets having been lost
when Jerus.and the temple were destroyed. Of this
large number of sacred books 24 were to be pub-
lished openly, for the unworthy as well as the
worthy, these 24 books representing undoubtedly
the books of the Heb OT. The remaining 70 were
to be kept for the exclusive use of the “‘wise among
the people’: i.e. they were of an esoteric character.
Perhaps if the Gr original of this book had been
preserved the word “‘apocrypha” would have been
found as an epithetic attached to the 70 books.
Our Eng. VSS are made from a Lat original (see
2(4) Ezra or the Apocatyptic Esp. Modern
scholars agree that in its present form this book
arose in the reign of Domitian 81-96 AD. So that
the conception of esoteric lit. existed among the
Jews in the 1st cent. of our era, and probably still
earlier.

It is significant of the original character of the
religion of Israel that no one has been able to point
to a Heb word corresponding to esoteric (see below).
When among the Jews there arose a lit. of oral
tradition it was natural to apply to this last the
Gyr notion of esoteric, esp. as this class of lit. was
more highly esteemed in many Jewish circles than
the OT Scriptures themselves.

(2) Non-canonical religious books —The next step
in the history of the word ‘‘apocrypha’”’ is that by
which it came to denote religious books inferior in
authority and worth to the Scriptures of the OT
and NT. This change of attitude toward non-
canonical writings took place under the influence
of two principles: (1) that no writer could be in-
spired who lived subsequent to the apostolic age;
(2) that no writing could be recognized as canonical
unless it was accepted as such by the churches in
general (in Lat the principle was—gquod ubique,
quod semper, quod ab omnibus). Now it was felt
that many if not most of the religious writings
which came in the end of the 2d cent. to be called
“apocryphal” in a disparaging sense had their
origin among heretical sects like the Gnostics, and
that they had never commanded the approval of
the great bulk of the churches. Origen (d. 253)
held that we ought to discriminate between books
called “apocryphal,” some such having to be firmly
rejected as teaching what is contrary to the Scrip-
tures. More and more from the end of the 2d
cent., the word “apocrypha” came to stand for
what is spurious and untrustworthy, and esp. for
writings ascribed to authors who did not write them:
i.e. the so-called ‘‘Pseudepigraphical books.”

Trenaeus (d. 202) in opposition to Clement of
Alexandria denies that esoteric writings have any
claims to credence or even respect, and he uses the
Gr word for “apocryphal” to describe all Jewish
and Christian canons. To him, as later to Jerome
(d. 420), “canonical” and “apocryphal’’ were an-
tithetic terms.

Tertullian (d. 230) took the same view: “apocry-
phal” to him denoted non-canonical. But both
trenaeus and Tertullian meant by apocrypha in
paouae the apocalyptic writings. uring the

licene period, and even earlier, sacred books were
divided by Christian teachers into three classes:
(1) books that could be read in church; (2) books
that could be read privately, but not in public;
(3) books that were not to be read at all: This
classification is implied in the writings of Origen,
Clement of Alexandria, Athanasius (d. 373), and in
the Muratorian Fragments (about 200 AD).

(3) “Spurious” books.—Athanasius, however, re-
stricted the word apocrypha to the third class, thus
making the corresponding adj. synonymous with


181


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Apocrypha


“spurious.” Nicephorus, patriarch of Constanti-
nople (806-15 AD) in his chronography (belonging
essentially to 500 AD according to Zahn) divides
sacred books thus: (1) the canonical books of the
OT and NT; (2) the Antilegomena of both Testa-
ments; (3) the Apocrypha of both Testaments.

The details of the Apoc of the NT are thus enu-
merated: (1) Enoch; (2) The 12 Patriarchs; (3) The
Prayer of Joseph; (4) The Testament of Moses;
(5) The Assumption of Moses; (6) Abram; (7)
Eldad and Modad; (8) Elijah the Prophet; (9)
Zephaniah the Prophet; (10) Zechariah, father of
John; (11) The Pseudepigrapha of Baruch, Ha-
bakkuk, Ezekiel and Daniel.

The books of the NT Apoc are thus given:
(1) The Itinerary of Paul; (2) The Itmerary of
Peter; (3) The Itinerary of John; (4) The Itinerary
of Thomas; (5) The Gospel according to Thomas;
(6) The Teaching of the Apostles (the Didache);
(7) and (8) The Two Epistles of Clement; (9)
Epistles of Ignatius, Polycarp and Hermas.

The above lists are repeated in the so-called
Synopsis of Athanasius. The authors of these
so-called apocryphal books being unknown, it was
sought to gain respect for these writers by tacking
onto them well-known names, so that, particularly


in the western church, “apocryphal” came to be


almost synonymous with ‘‘pseudepigraphical.”’

Of the OT lists given above nos. 1, 2, 4, 5 are
extant wholly or in part. Nos. 3, 7, 8 and 9 are
lost though quoted as genuine by Origen and other
eastern Fathers. They are all of them apocalypses
designated apocrypha in accordance with early usage.

(4) “List of Sixty.’—In the anonymous ‘‘List
of Sixty,” which hails from the 7th cent., we
have represented probably the attitude of the
eastern church. It divides sacred books into three
classes: (1) The sixty canonical books. ‘Since the
Protestant canon consists of but 57 books it will be
seen that in this list books outside our canon are
included. (2) Books excluded from the 60, yet of
superior authority to those mentioned as apocry-
phal in the next class. (3) Apocryphal books, the
names of which are as follows: (a) Adam; (0)
Enoch; (c) Lamech; (@) The 12 Patriarchs;
(e) The Prayer of Joseph; (f) Eldad and Modad;
(g) The Testament of Moses; (hk) The Assumption
of Moses; (i) The Psalms of Solomon; (j) The
Apocalypse of Elijah; (k) The Ascension of Isaiah;
(1) The Apocalypse of Zephaniah (see no.'9 of the
OT Apoc books mentioned in the Chronography of
Nicephorus); (m) The Apocalypse of Zechariah;
(n) The Apocalyptic Ezra; (0) The History of
James; (p) The Apocalypse of Peter; (g) The Itin-
erary and Teaching of the Apostles; (r) The Epis-
tles of Barnabas; (s) The Acts of Paul; (¢) Apoc-
alypse of Paul; (u) Didascalia of Clement; (v)
Didascalia of Ignatius; (w) Didascalia of Polycarp;
(x) Gospel according to Barnabas; (y) Gospel ac-
cording to Matthew.

The greater number of these books come under
the designation “apocryphal” in the early sense
of “apocalyptic,” but by this time the word had
taken on a lower meaning, viz. books not good for
even private reading. Yet the fact that these
books are mentioned at all show that they were
more highly esteemed than heathen and than even
heretical Christian writings. The eastern churches
down to the present day reject the meaning of ‘‘apoc-
rypha” current among Protestants (see definition
above), and their Bible includes the OT Apoc, mak-
ing no distinction between it and the rest of the
Bible.

(1) The “Decretum Gelasii.”—In the western
church the word apocrypha and the corresponding
adj. had a somewhat different history. In genera]
it may be said that the western church did not


adopt the triple division of sacred books prevalent
in the eastern church. Yet the Decretum Gelasii

(6th cent. in its present form) has
3. Western a triple list which is almost certainly
Church that of the Rom synod of 382 under

Damasus, bishop of Rome, 366 to
384. It is as follows: (1) the canonical books of
both Testaments; (2) writings of the Fathers ap-
proved by the church; (3) apocryphal books re-
jected by the church. Then there is added a list
of miscellaneous books condemned as_ heretical,
including even the works of Clement of Alexandria,
Tertullian, and Eusebius, these works being all
branded as ‘“apocryphal.’? On the other hand
Gregory of Nyssa and Epiphanius, both writing
in the 4th cent., use the word “apocrypha” in the
old sense of apocalyptic, i.e. esoteric.

(2) Non-canonical books —Jerome (d. 420) in the
Prologus Galeatus (so called because it was a de-
fence and so resembled a helmeted warrior) or
preface to his Lat version of the Bible uses the
word “Apoc” in the sense of non-canonical books.
His words are: Quidquid extra hos (i.e. the 22
canonical books) inter Apocrypha ponendum: “Any-
thing outside of these must be placed within the
Apocrypha’ (when among the Fathers and rabbis the
OT is made to contain 22 [not 24] books, Ruth and
Lam are joined respectively to Jgs and Jer). He
was followed in this by Rufinus (d. cir 410),in turns
Jerome’s friend and adversary, as he had been
anticipated by Irenaeus. The western church as
a whole departed from Jerome’s theory by includ-
ing the antilegomena of both Testaments among
the canonical writings: but the general custom of
western Christians about this time was to make
apocryphal mean non-canonical. Yet Augustine
(d. 430; De Cwwitate Det, XV, 23) explained the
“apocrypha”’ as denoting obscurity of origin or
authorship, and this sense of the word became the
prevailing one in the West.

Separation from canonical books —But it is to the
Reformers that we are indebted for the habit of

using Apoc for a collection of books ap-
4, The pended to the OT and generally up to
Reformers 1827 appended to every printed English

Bible. Bodenstein of Carlstadt, usu-
ally called Carlstadt (d. 1541), an early Reformer,
though Luther’s bitter personal opponent, was the
first modern scholar to define “‘Apoc” quite clearly
as writings excluded from the canon, whether or
not the true authors of the books are known, in
this, going back to Jerome’s position. The adj.
“apocryphal” came to have among Protestants
more and more a disparaging sense. Protestant-
ism was in its very essence the religion of a book,
and Protestants would be sure to see to it that the
sacred volume on which they based their religion,
including the reforms they introduced, contained
no book but those which in their opinion had the
strongest claims to be regarded as authoritative.
In the eastern and western churches under the
influence of the Gr (LXX) and Lat (Vulg) VSS the
books of the Apoc formed an integral part of the
canon and were scattered throughout the OT, they
being placed generally near books with which they
have affinity. Even Protestant Bibles up to 1827
included the Apoc, but as one collection of distinct
writings at the end of the OT. It will be seen
from what has been said that notwithstanding the
favorable attitude toward it of the eastern and
western churches, from the earliest times, our Apoc
was regarded with more or less suspicion, and the
suspicion would be strengthened by the general
antagonism toward it. In the Middle Ages, under
the influence of Reuchlin (d. 1532)—great scholar
and Reformer—Heb came to be studied and the
OT read in its original language. The fact that


Apocrypha
Apocrypha! Acts


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


182


the Apoc is absent from the Heb canon must have
had some influence on the minds of the Reformers.
Moreover in the Apoc there are parts inconsistent
with Protestant principles, as for example the doc-
trines of prayers for the dead, the intercession of the
saints, etc. The Jews in the early Christian cents.
had really two Bibles: (1) There was the Heb
Bible which does not include the Apoc, and which
circulated in Pal and Babylon; (2) there was the
Gr version (LXX) used by Gr-speaking Jews
everywhere. Until in quite early times, instigated
by the use made of it by Christians against them-
selves, the Jews condemned this version and made
the Heb canon their Bible, thus rejecting the books
of the Apoc from their list of canonical writings,
and departing from the custom of Christian churches
which continued with isolated remonstrances to
make the Gr OT canon, with which the Vulg
agrees almost completely, their standard. It is
known that the Reformers were careful students of
the Bible, and that in OT matters they were the
pupils of Jewish scholars—there were no other
competent teachers of Heb. It might therefore
have been expected that the OT canon of the
Reformers would agree in extent with that of the
Jews and not with that of the Gr and Lat Chris-
tians. Notwithstanding the doubt which Ryle
(Canon of the OT*, 156) casts on the matter, all the
evidence goes to show that the LXX and therefore
the other great Gr VSS included the Apoc from the
first onward.

But how comes it to be that the Gr OT is more
extensive than the Heb OT? Up to the final
destruction of Jerus in 71 AD the temple with its
priesthood and ritual was the center of the religious
thought and life of the nation. But with the
destruction of the sanctuary and the disbanding of
its officials it was needful to find some fresh bind-
ing and directing agency and this was found in the
collection of sacred writings known by us as the
OT. By a national synod held at Jamnia, near
Jaffa, in 90 AD, the OT canon was practically
though not finally closed, and from that date one
may say that the limits of the OT were once and
for all fixed, no writings being included except those
written in Heb, the latest of these being as old as
100 BC. Now the Jews of the Dispersion spoke
and wrote Gr, and they continued to think and
write long after their fellow-countrymen of the
homeland had ceased to produce any fresh original
lit. What they did produce was explanatory of
what had been written and practical.

The Gr Bible—the Sept—is that of the Jews in
Egypt and of those found in other Gr-speaking
countries. John Wycliffe (d. 1384) puts the Apoc
together at the end of the OT and the same course
was taken by Luther (1546) in his great German
and by Miles Coverdale (d. 1568) in his Eng. tr.

Is it quite certain that there is no Heb word or
expression corresponding exactly to the word

“apocrypha” as first used by Chris-
5. Hebrew tian writers, i.e. in the sense “esoteric’’?
Words for One may answer this by a decisive
Apocrypha negative as regards the OT and the

Talm. But in the Middle Ages
Kabbalah (lit. “tradition’’) came to have a closely
allied meaning (cf our “‘kabbalistic’’).

(1) Do such exist?—Is there in Heb a word or
expression denoting ‘non-canonical,” ie. having
the secondary sense acquired by “apocrypha’”’?
This question does not allow of so decided an
answer, and as matter of fact it has been answered
in different ways.

(2) Views of Zahn, et al—Zahn (Gesch. des
neutest. Kanons, I, i, 123 ff); Schirer (RE, I,
623); Porter (HDB, 1) and others maintain that
the Gr word “Apocrypha ( Biblia)” is a tr of the


|


Heb S¢pharim genizim, lit. ‘books stored away.”
If this view is the correct one it follows that the
distinction of canonical and non-canonical books
originated among the Jews, and that the Fathers
in using the word apocrypha in this sénse were
simply copying the Jews substituting Gr words for
the Heb equivalent. But there are decisive reasons
for rejecting this view.

(8) Reasons for rejection —(a) The verb gdanaz
of which the passive part. occurs in the above
phrase means “‘to store away,” “to remove from
view’’—of things in themselves sacred or precious.
It never means to exclude as from the canon.

(b) When employed in reference to sacred books
it is only of those recognized as canonical. Thus
after copies of the Pent or of other parts of the Heb
Bible had, by age and use, become unfit to be read
in the home or in the synagogue they were ‘‘buried”
in the ground as being too sacred to be burnt or
cut up; and the verb denoting this burying is
ganaz. But those buried books are without excep-
tion canonical.

(c) The Heb phrase in question does not once
occur in either the Bab or the Jerus Talm, but
only in rabbinical writings of a much later date.
The Gr apocrypha cannot therefore be a rendering
of the Heb expression. The Heb for books defi-
nitely excluded from the canon is S*pharim_hi-
conim=“‘outside’ or “extraneous books.” The
Mish (the text of the Gemara, both making up
what we call Talm) or oral law with its additions
eame to be divided analogously into (1) The Mish
proper; (2) the external (higénah) Mish: in Aram.
called Baraiytha’.

What has been said may be summarized:

(1) Among the Protestant churches the word
Apoc is used for the books included in the LXX and
Vulg, but absent from the Heb Bible.
This restricted sense of the word can-
not be traced farther back than the
beginning of the Reformation.

(2) In classical and Hellenistic Gr the adj.
apokruphos denotes “‘hidden’’ of visible objects, or
obscure, hard to understand (of certain kinds of
knowledge).

(8) In early patristic Gr this adj. came into use
as a synonym of the classical Gr esoterikos.

(4) In later patristic Gr (Irenaeus, etc) and in
Lat works beginning with Jerome, Gr apokruphos
meant non-canonical, implying inferiority in sub-
ject-matter to the books in the canon.

(4) By the Protestant Reformers the term ‘“apoc-
rypha” (“apocryphal “books” being understood)
came to stand for what is now called the “OT
Apoc.” But this usage is confined to Protestants,
since in the eastern church and in the Rom branch


6. Sum-
mary


‘of the western church the OT Apoc is as much an


integral part of the canon as Genesis or Kings or
Psalms or Isaiah.

(5) There are no equivalents in Heb for apok-
ruphos in the sense of either ‘‘esoteric” or in that of
“non-canonical.”

IV. Contents of the Apocrypha.—The following
is a list of the books in the Apoc in the order in which

they occur in the Eng. VSS (AV and
1. Listof RV): (1) 1 Esdras; (2) 2 Esdras (to
Books be hereafter called “The Apocalyptic
Esdras”); (3) Tobit; (4) Judith; (5)
The Rest of Esther; (6) The Wisdom of Solomon;
(7) Ecclesiasticus (to be hereafter called “‘Sirach’’);
(8) Baruch, with the Epistle of Jeremiah; (9) The
Song of the Three Holy Children; (10) The History
of Susanna; (11) Bel and the Dragon; (12) The
Prayer of Manasses; (13) 1 Maccabees; (14) 2
Maccabees.

No. 5 in the above, ‘Addition to Esther,” as it
may be called, consists of the surplusage (107 out


188


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Apocrypha
Apocrypha) Acts


of 270 verses) of the Book of Esther as it occurs in
the best MSS of the LXX and in the Vulg over the
text in the Heb Bible. These additions are in
the LXX scattered throughout the book and are
intelligible in the context thus given them, but not
when. brought together as they are in the collected
Apoc of our Eng. VSS and as they are to some extent
in Jerome’s Lat version and the Vulg (see Century
Bible, Ezra, Neh and Esther, 294f). Nos. 9-11
in the above enumeration are additions made in
the Gr LXX and Vulg VSS of Daniel to the book
as found in the MT. It will be well to name them
“Additions to Daniel.”” The bringing together of
the writings of the Apoc into an apart collection
was due in a large measure to Jerome, who separated
many of the apocryphal additions from their
original context because he suspected their gen-
uineness. His version influenced the Vulg, which
follows Jerome’s version closely.

Though it is generally true that the Apoc is the
excess of the Gr (LXX) and Lat (Jer, Vulg)
over the Heb (MT) Bibles, the statement needs

ualification. 2 (4) Ezra, i.e. the Apocalyptic Ezra

Esdras), is absent from the LXX, from Jerome’s

version, and also from Luther’s Bible, but it occurs
in the Vulg and in the Eng. and other modern VSS
of the Apoc. On the other hand 3 and 4 Macc
occur in the best MSS of the LXX, but the Vulg,
following Jerome’s version, rejects both as do
modern VSS (Eng. etc) of the Apoc. Moreover
it has to be pointed out that in the Vulg proper
the Prayer of Manasses and 1 (3) Esdras and the
Apocalyptic Esdras are appended to the NT as
apocryphal.

(1) Historical—The books of the Apoc_ proper
may be thus classified: (a) 1 and 2 (i.e. 3) Esdras;

b) 1 and 2 Maccabees; (c) Additions
2. Classifi- to Daniel (nos. 9-11 in the above list);
cation of (d) Additions to Esther; (e) The
Books Epistle of Jeremy (usually appended
to Baruch); (f) Prayer of Manasses.

(2) Legendary.—(a) Book of Baruch (sometimes
classed with prophetic books, sometimes with
Apocalypses); (b) Tobit; (c) Judith.

(3) Apocalyptic—The Apocalyptic Esdras or 2
(4) Esdras.

(4) Didactic—(a) The Wisdom of Solomon; (0)
Sirach (Ecclesiasticus). ‘

R. H. Charles, our greatest living authority on
the Apocalyptic and Apocryphal writings, embraces
the following under the heading ‘Hellenistic Jew-
ish Literature,” the rest coming under the heading
“Palestinian Jewish Literature’ (Enc Brit, 11th
ed, II, 177): (1) The Additions to Daniel and Esther
(2) The Epistle of Jeremy; (3) 2 Macc; (4) The
Wisdom of Solomon.

V. Original Languages of the Apocrypha.—The
bulk of the Apoc was written originally in the Gr
language and existed at the first in that language
alone. The following books were however written
in Heb: Tobit, Judith, Sirach, Baruch (part prob-
ably in Gr), and 1 Macc. In these cases some pre-
fer regarding Aram. as the original language in at
least parts of the above books. For detailed infor-
mation see under the several books.

VI. Date of the Apocryphal Writings.— The
question of date as it applies to the separate books of
the Apoc will be discussed in connection with the
arts. dealing with the several books. But a general
statement regarding the extreme limits between
which all the books were completed may safely be
made. The oldest apocryphal book is Sirach, which
in its original Heb form belongs to between 190-170
BC. In its Gr form the best modern scholars agree
in fixing it at between 130-120 BC. None of the
books can well belong to a date later than 100 AD,
though some (2 Esd, etc) may be as late as that.


The whole of the Apoc may with more than average
certainty be said to have been written some time
between 200 BC and 100 AD. It will be seen that
it is an inaccurate assumption that the Apoc was in
all its parts of later date than the latest parts of the

T. The canonical Book of Daniel and many of
the Psalms are of later date than Sirach and 1
Esdras, and there are cogent reasons for giving the
canonical Esther a later date than any of the books
named and perhaps than Judith, as well (see, how-
ever, DanieL; Estuer). But it is quite certain that
by far the greater part of the Apoc is of later date
than the OT; it is therefore of the utmost. impor-
tance as reflecting the state of the Jews and the
character of their intellectual and religious life at the
various periods represented. And in later years
much use has been made of it.

Lirerature.—The Gr text of the Apoc is given in the
various editions of the LXX (except the Apocal Ptic
Esdras, not extant in Gr). The best editions of the tax
are those by Tischendorf revised by E. Nestle (1887);
and Swete (1895-99 and later editions). Critical _edi-
tlons of the Apoc bave been issued by A. Fabricius (Ham-
burg, 1722-23); Apel (ib 1804) and a very valuable
edition by O. T. Fritzsche (Leipzig, 1871) which includes
the Lat version of the Apocalyptic Esdras—without the
missing fragment. There are several modern transla-
tions, far the best being that in German edited by E.
Kautzsch, containing Introductions, general and special,
and valuable notes by the best German scholars. In
English besides the RV there is the useful Variorum ed,
edited by C. J. Ball. An Eng. critical edition of the
Apoce edited by R. H. Charles, with introd. notes, is now
being printed at Oxford and will be very valuable.

The best commentary is that by O. F. Fritsche and
Cc. L. W. Grimm, Kurzgef. Exeg. Handbuch, 1851-60; but
the commentary by Bissell in Lange’s Series of Commen-
taries and that edited by Wace, in the Speaker's Bible
Series, are meritorious.

Introductory matter will be_found in the_various
Bible Dictionariess.v.: see esp. H. E. Ryle in DB (1893),
Schiirer (R #2), but esp. in the valuable fntro to the OT in
Gr, by H. B. Swete (1900), HDB (C. F. Porter), and R. H.
Charles (Enc Brit). See also the Finleitungen by Konig,
Budde (A. Bertholet has written_the part dealing with the
Apoc), and Schiirer, Geschichte, III, 1898 (Eng. tr, II, fii),
where much lit. isspecified. For monographs on tbeseveral
books of the Apoc or discussing special points, see the


special articles. Tuomas Witton Davies
APOCRYPHAL ACTS, a-pok’ri-fal akts:


A. GENERAL INTRODUCTION
I. The Meaning of “Apocryphal”’
1. Secret
2. False and Heretical
3. Extra-canonical
II. General Characteristics
1. Romance
2. The Supernatural
3. Sexual Asceticism
4. Heretical Teaching
5. Religious Feeling
III. Origin
1. Reverence for Apostles
2. Pious Curiosity _
3. Apostolic Authority Desired
4. Interests of Local Churches
IV. Sources
1. Canonical Acts
2. Traditions
3. Romances of Travel
V. Ecclesiastical Testimony
1. Eastern
2. Western
3. Photius :
4. Ecclesiastical Condemnation
VI. Authorship ’
VII. Relationship of Different Acts
VIII. Value
1. As History eae?
2. As Records of Early Christianity
IX. Influence
Literature
B, Tue Separate Acts
I. Aets of Paul
II. Acts of Peter
III. Acts of John
IV. Acts of Andrew
V. Acts of Thomas


A. GeEneraL INTRODUCTION
I. The Meaning of ‘‘Apocryphal.’’--As applied
to early-Christian writings the term “apocryphal”
has the secondary and conventional sense of ‘“‘extra-
canonical.”


Apocryphal Acs THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


184


Originally, as the etymology of the word shows |


(Gr apokripto=“‘hide’), it denoted what was
“hidden” or “secret.” In this sense
“apocryphal” was, to begin with, a
title of honor, being applied to writings
used by the initiated in esoteric circles and highly
valued by them as containing truths miraculously
revealed and kept secret from the outside world.
Just as there were writings of this kind among the
Jews, so there were in Christian circles, among
gnostic sects, apocrypha, which claimed to em-
body the deeper truths of Christianity, committed
as a secret tradition by the risen Christ to His

apostles.
When the conception of a catholic church began
to take shape, it was inevitable that these secret
writings should have been regarded with


1. Secret


2. False suspicion and have been ultimately for-
and bidden, not only because they fostered
Heretical _the spirit of division in the church, but


because they were favorable to the
spread of heretical teaching. By a gradual and in-
telligible transference of ideas “apocryphal,” as
applied to secret writings thus discredited by the
church, came to have the bad sense of spurious and
heretical. In this sense the word is used both by
Irenaeus and Tertullian.

Short of being stigmatized as false and heretical
many books were regarded as unsuitable for reading
in public worship, although they might
be used for purposes of private edi-
Canonical fication. Chiefly under the influence

of Jerome the term “apocryphal”
received an extension of meaning so as to include
writings of this kind, stress now being laid on their
non-acceptance as authoritative Scriptures by the
church, without any suggestion that the ground of
non-acceptance lay in heretical teaching. It is
in this wide sense that the word is used when we
speak of “Apocryphal Acts.” Although the Acts
which bear this name had their origin for the most
part in circles of heretical tendency, the description
of them as “apocryphal” involves no judgment as
to the character of their contents, but simply denotes
that they are Acts which were excluded from the
NT canon because their title or claims to recognition
as authoritative and normative writings were not
admitted by the church. This definition limits the
scope of our investigation to those Acts which
belong to the 2d cent., the Biblical Acts having
secured their place as an authoritative scripture by
the end of that cent. See further, APocrYPHA.

Il. General Characteristics.— The Apocryphal
Acts purport to give the history of the activity of

the apostles in fuller detail than the
1. Romance canonical Acts. The additions to the

NT narrative found in them are highly
flavored with romance and reveal an extravagant
and unhealthy taste for the miraculous. Wonderful
tales, the product of an exuberant fancy, often
devoid of delicacy of feeling and always out of
touch with reality, are frecly heaped one upon the
other. The apostles are no longer conceived as
living on the ordinary levels of humanity; their
human frailties, to which the canonical writers are
not blind, have almost entirely disappeared; they
walk through the world as men conversant with the
mysteries of heaven and earth and possessed of
powers to which no limit can be set. They have
the power to heal, to exorcise demons, to raise the
dead; and while marvelous deeds of that nature
constantly recur, there are other miracles wrought
by the apostles which remind one of the bizarre
and non-moral prodigies of the Childhood Gospel of
Thomas. A smoked fish is made to swim; a broken
statue is made whole by the use of consecrated
water; a child of seven months is enabled to talk


8. Extra-


with a man’s voice; animals receive the power of

human speech.
The romantic character of the Apocryphal Acts
is intensified by the frequent introduction of
the supernatural. Angelic messengers


2. The appear in vision and in dream; heaven-
Super- ly voices are heard; clouds descend
natural to hide the faithful in the hour of


danger and lightnings smite their
foes; the terrifying forces of Nature, earthquake,
wind and fire, strike dismay into the hearts of the
ungodly; and martyrs die transfigured in a blaze
of unearthly glory. Especially characteristic of
these Acts are the appearances of Christ in many
forms; now as an old man, now as a comely youth,
now asa child; but most frequently in the likeness
of this or that apostle. (It is interesting to observe
that Origen is familiar with a tradition that Jesus
during His earthly life could change His appear-
ance when and how He pleased, and gives that as a
reason for the necessity of the traitor’s kiss. Cf
also Mk 16 9.12.)
One must not suppose from the foregoing that
the Apocrypha! Acts with their profusion of roman-
tic and supernatural details were de-
3. Sexual signed merely to exalt the personality
Asceticism of the apostles and to satisfy the preva-
lent desire for the marvelous. They
had a definite practical end in view. They were
intended to confirm and popularize a type of Chris-
tianity in strong reaction against the world, in
which emphasis was laid on the rigid abstinence
from sexual relations as the chief moral requirement.
This sexual asceticism is the dominant motif in all
the Acts. The “‘contendings” of the apostles, their
trials and their eventual martyrdom are in almost
every case due to their preaching the sinfulness of
conjugal life and to their success in persuading
women to reject the society of their husbands.
The Acts are penetrated throughout by the convic-
tion that abstinence from marriage is the supreme
condition of entering upon the highest life and of
winning heaven. The gospel on its practical side
is (to use the succinct expression of the Acts of Paul)
‘the word of God regarding abstinence and the
resurrection.”
Besides inculcating an ascetic morality the Apocry-
phal Acts show traces more or less pronounced of
dogmatic heresy. All of them with
4. Heretical the exception of the Acts of Paul
Teaching represent a docetic view of Christ;
that is to say, the earthly life of Jesus
is regarded merely as an appearance, phantasmal
and unreal. This docetic Christology is most
prominent in the Acts of John, where we read that
when Jesus walked no footprints were discernible;
that sometimes when the apostle attempted to lay
hold of the body of Jesus his hand passed through
it without resistance; that when the crowd gathered
round the cross on which to all appearance Jesus
hung, the Master Himself had an interview with His
disciple John on the Mount of Olives. The cruci-
fixion was simply a symbolical spectacle; it was only
in appearance that Christ suffered and died. Allied
with the docetic Christology is a naive Modalism,
according to which there is no clear distinction
between the Father and the Son.
In spite of the unfavorable impression created by
the flood of miraculous and supernatural details,
a the pervading atmosphere of sexual
5. Religious asceticism and the presence of dog-
Feeling matic misconception, it is impossible
not to feel in many sections of the
Apocryphal Acts the rapture of a great spiritual
enthusiasm. Particularly in the Acts of John,
Andrew and Thomas there are passages (songs,
prayers, homilies), sometimes of genuine poetic


185


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocryphal Acts


beauty, which are characterized by religious
warmth, mystic fervor and moral earnestness. The
mystical love to Christ, expressed though it fre-
quently is in the strange language of gnostic thought,
served to bring the Saviour near to men as the
satisfaction of the deepest yearnings of the soul
for deliverance from the dark power of death.
The rank superstition and the traces of uncon-
quered heathenism should not blind us to the fact
that in the Apocryphal Acts we have an authentic
if greatly distorted expression of the Christian faith,
and that through them great masses of people were
confirmed in their conviction of the spiritual pres-
ence and power of Christ the Saviour.

Hf. Origin.—-The, Apocryphal Acts had their
origin at a time when the canonical Acts of the
Apostles were not yet recognized as alone authori-
tative. Various motives contributed to the appear-
ance of books dealing with the life and activity of
the different apostles.

Behind every variety of motive lay the profound
reverence for the apostles as the authoritative deposi-

taries of Christian truth. In apostolic


1. Rever- times the sole authority in Christian
ence for communities, outside OT Scripture,
Apostles was “the Lord.” But as the creative


period of Christianity faded into the
past, “the apostles” (in the sense of the college of
the Twelve, including Paul) were raised to a pre-
eminent, position alongside of Christ with the object
of securing continuity in the credentials of the
faith. The commandments of the Lord had been
received through them (2 Pet 3 2). In the Ig-
natian epistles they have a place of acknowledged
supremacy by the side of Christ. Only that which
had apostolic authority was normative for the
church. The authority of the apostles was uni-
versal. They had gone into all the world to preach
the gospel. They had, according to the legend
referred to at the beginning of the Acts of Thomas,
divided among themselves the different regions of
the earth as the spheres of their activity. It was
an inevitable consequence of the peculiar reverence
in which the apostles were held as the securities
for Christian truth that a lively interest should
everywhere be shown in traditional stories about
their work and that writings should be multiplied
which purported to give their teaching with fulness
of detail.
The canonical Acts were not calculated to satisfy
the prevailing desire for a knowledge of the lite
and teaching of the apostles. For one
2. Pious thing many of the apostles are there
Curiosity ignored, and for another the informa-
tion given about the chief apostles
Peter and Paul is little more than a meager outline
of the events of their life. In these circumstances
traditions not preserved in the canonical Acts were
eagerly accepted, and as the actual history of the
individual apostles was largely shrouded in ob-
scurity, legends were freely invented to gratify
the insatiable curiosity. The marvelous character
of these inventions is a testimony to the supernatural
level to which the apostles had been raised in popu-
lar esteem.
As in the case of the apocryphal Gospels, the
chief motive in the multiplication of apostolic
romances was the desire to set forth
3. Apostolic with the full weight of apostolic
Authority authority conceptions of Christian life
Desired and doctrine which prevailed in certain
circles. (1) Alongside the saner and
catholic type of Christianity there existed, espe-
cially in Asia Minor, a popular Christianity with
perverted ideals of life. On its practical side the
Christian religion was viewed as an ascetic disci-
pline, involving not only abstinence from animal


a readier acceptance.


food and wine but also (and chiefly) abstinence
from marriage. Virginity was the Christian ideal.
Poverty and fastings were obligatory on all. The
Apocryphal Acts are permeated by this spirit, and
their evident design is to confirm and spread con-
fidence in this ascetic ideal by representing the
apostles as the zealous advocates of it. (2) The
Apocryphal Acts were also intended to serve a
dogmatic interest. Heretical sects used them as a
means of propagating their peculiar doctrinal views
and sought to supplement or supplant the tradition
of the growing catholic church by another tradition
which claimed to be equally apostolic.

A subsidiary cause in the fabrication of apostolic
legends was the desire of churches to find support

for the claims which they put forward
4. Interests for an apostolic foundation or for
of Local some connection with apostles. In
Churches some cases the tradition of the sphere

of an apostle’s activity may have been
well based, but in others there is a probability that
stories of an apostolic connection were freely in-
vented for the purpose of enhancing the prestige of
some local church.

IV. Sources.—In general it may be said that the
Apocryphal Acts are full of legendary details. In

the invention of these everything was
1. Canoni- done to inspire confidence in them as
cal Acts historically true. The narratives ac-

cordingly abound in clear reminis-
cences of the canonical Acts. The apostles are
cast into prison and are marvelously set at liberty.
Converts receive the apostles into their houses.
The description of the Lord’s Supper as “the break-
ing of bread” (Acts 2 42.46) is repeated in the
Apocryphal Acts and is strictly apposite to the
ritual there set forth in which there is frequently
no mention of wine in the celebration of the sacra-
ment. In the Acts of Paul the author evidently
used the canonical Acts as the framework of his
narrative. This dependence on the canonical Acts
and the variety of allusions to details in them
served to give an appearance of historical truthful-
ness to the later inventions and to secure for them
The fact that the canonical
Acts were so used clearly shows that they had a
position of exceptional authority at the time when
the Apocryphal Acts were written.

The legendary character of the Apocryphal Acts
does not preclude the possibility of authentic
details in the additions made to the
canonical history. There must have
been many traditions regarding the
apostles preserved in Christian com-
munities which had a foundation in actual fact.
Some of these would naturally find a place in
writings which were designed in part at least to sat-
isfy the popular curiosity for a fuller knowledge of
the apostles. It is certain that there is some sub-
stratum of historical fact in the episode of Paul’s
association with Thecla (Acts of Paul). The de-
scription of Paul’s appearance given in the same
connection is in all likelihood due to trustworthy
historical reminiscence. But it must be confessed
that the signs of the presence of reliable traditions
are very scanty. The few grains of historical fact
are hidden in an overwhelming mass of material
whose legendary character is unmistakable. :

Although a formal connection with the canonical
Acts is recognizable and reliable traditions are to a

slight extent incorporated in the Apoc-


2. Tradi-
tions


3. Ro- ryphal Acts, it is unquestionable that
mances of as a whole they are the creation of
Travel the Hellenic spirit which reveled in


the miraculous. A noteworthy type
of popular literature whose influence is apparent on
almost every page of the Apocryphal Acts was that


186


Apocryphal Acts THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


of the travel-romance. The most famous example
of this romantic literature is the Life of the neo-
Pythagorean preacher, the great| wonder-worker
Apollonios of Tyana, who died about the end of the
Ist cent. AD. The marvelous deeds reported to
have been wrought by him on his travels were freely
transferred in a somewhat less striking form to
other teachers. It is in the atmosphere of these
romances that the Apocryphal Acts had their
birth. In particular the Acts of Thomas recall the
history of Apollonios. For just as Thomas was a
missionary in India, so ‘‘Apollonios as a disciple of
Pythagoras had traveled, a peaceful Alexander, to
the Indian wonderland and there preached his
master’s wisdom” (Geffcken, Christliche Apokry-
phen, 36).

V. Ecclesiastical Testimony.—From the nature
of his reference to the canonical Acts it is probable
that the writer of the Muratorian Canon (cir 190
AD) had the existence of other Acts inmind. ‘The
Acts of all the apostles,” he says, ‘are written in
a single book. Luke relates them admirably to
Theophilus, confining himself to such as fell under
his own notice, as he plainly shows by the omission
of all reference either to the martyrdom of Peter
or to the journey of Paul from Rome to Spain.”
During the 3d cent. there are slight allusions to
certain of the Apocryphal Acts, but it is only inthe
4th cent. that distinct references are frequent in
writers both of the East and of the West. A few of
the more important references may be given here.
(For a full account of the ecclesiastical testimony
see Harnack, Gesch. der altchr. Lit., I, 116 ff.)

Among eastern writers Eusebius (d. 340) is the
first to make any clear reference to Apocryphal

Acts. He ‘speaks of ‘‘Acts of An-
1. Eastern drew, of John and of the other apos-
Testimony tiles,” which were of such a character

that no ecclesiastical writer thought
it proper to invoke their testimony. Their style
and their teaching showed them to be so plainly
of heretical origin that he would not put them even
among spurious Scriptures, but absolutely rejected
them as absurd and impious (H#, III, 25.6.7).
Ephraem (d. 373) declares that Acts were written
by the Bardesanites to propagate in the name of the
apostles the unbelief which the apostles had de-
stroyed. Epiphanius (cir 375) repeatedly refers to
individual Acts which were in use among heretical
sects. Amphilochius of Iconium, a contemporary
of Epiphanius, declares that certain writings
emanating from heretical circles were “not Acts of
the apostles but accounts of demons.” The Second
Synod of Nicaea (787 AD), in the records of which
those words of Amphilochius are preserved, dealt
with apocryphal literature and had under special
consideration the Acts of John to which the Icono-
clasts appealed. In the synod’s finding these Acts
were characterized as ‘‘this abominable book,” and
on it the judgment was passed: ‘‘Let no one read it;
and not only so, but we judge it worthy of being
committed to the flames.”

In the West from the 4th cent. onward refer-
ences are frequent. Philastrius of Brescia (cir 387)

testifies to the use.of Apocryphal Acts

2. Western among the Manichaeans, and declares
Testimony that although they are not suitable
for general reading they may be read

with profit by mature Christians (De Haeres, 88).
The reason for this favorable judgment is to be
found in the pronounced ascetic tendency of the
_ Acts, which was in line with the moral ideal preva-
lent at that time in the West. Augustine refers
repeatedly to apocryphal Acts in use among the
Manichaeans and characterizes them as the work of
“eobblers of fables” (sutoribus fabularum). The
Manichaeans accepted them as true and genuine;


and in respect of this claim Augustine says: ‘“They
would in the time of their authors have been counted
worthy of being welcomed to the authority of the
Holy Church, if saintly and learned men who were
then alive and could examine such things had
acknowledged them as speaking the truth” (Con-
tra Faustum, XXII, 79). The Acts of John and
the Acts of Thomas are mentioned by Augustine
by name. He also refers to Leucius as the author
of Apocryphal Acts. Turribius of Astorga (cir
450) speaks of Acts of Andrew, of John, of Thomas,
and attributes them to the Manichaeans. Of the
heretical teaching in the Acts of Thomas, Turri-
bius singles out for special condemnation baptism
by oil instead of by water. Leucius is mentioned
as the author of the Acts of John. The Acts of
Andrew, Thomas, Peter, and Philip are condemned
as apocryphal in the Gelasian Decree (496 AD)
and in the same condemnation are included “all
books written by Leucius, a disciple of the devil.”
The fullest and most important reference to the
Apocryphal Acts is found in Photius, the Patriarch
of Constantinople in the second half
8. Photius of the 9th cent. In his Bzbliotheca,
which contains an account of 280
different books which he had read during his ab-
sence on a mission to Bagdad, we learn that among
these was a volume, “the so-called Wanderings of
the Apostles, in which were included Acts of Peter,
John, Andrew, Thomas, Paul. The author of these
Acts, as the book itself makes plain, was Leucius
Charinus.”” The language had none of the grace
which characterized the evangelic and apostolic
writings. The book teemed with follies and contra-
dictions. Its teaching was heretical. In particular
it was taught that Christ had never really become
man. Not Christ but another in His place had
been crucified. After referring to the ascetic doc-
trine and the absurd miracles of the Acts and to
the part which the Acts of John had played in the
Iconoclastic Controversy, Photius concludes: “In
short this book contains ten thousand things which
are childish, incredible, ill-conceived, false, foolish,
inconsistent, impious and godless. If anyone were
to call it the fountain and mother of all heresy, he
would not be far from the truth.”
There is thus a consensus of ecclesiastical testi-
mony as to the general character of the Apocryphal
Acts. They were writings used by a
4. Ecclesi- number of heretical sects but regarded


astical by the church as unreliable and harm-
Condemna- ful. It is probable that the corpus of
tion the Acts in five parts referred to hy


Photius was formed by the Mani-
chaeans of North Africa, who attempted to have
them accepted by the church in place of the canoni-
cal Acts which they had rejected. These Acts in
consequence were stamped by the church with a
heretical character. The sharpest condemnation is
that pronounced by Leo I (cir 450) who declares
that “they should not only be forbidden but should
be utterly swept away and burned. For although
there are certain things in them which seem to have
the appearance of piety, yet they are never free of
poison and secretly work through the allurements of
fables so that they involve in the snares of every
possible error those who are seduced by the narra-
tion of marvelous things.”” The Acts of Paul, which
show no trace of dogmatic heresy, were included in
the ecclesiastical censure owing to the fact that
they had received a place at the end of the corpus.
Many teachers in the church, however, made a
distinction between the miraculous details and the
heretical doctrines of the Acts, and while they
rejected the latter they retained the former. Wit-
ness the words of an orthodox reviser in regard to
his heretical predecessor: “Quaedam de virtutibus


187


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocryphal Acts


quidem et miraculis quae per cos Dominus fecit,
vera dixit; de doctrina vero multa mentitus est.”

VI. Authorship.—In the notice of Photius
( Bibliotheca cod. 114) all the five Acts are ascribed
to one author, Leucius Charinus. Larlier writers
had associated the name of Leucius with certain
Acts. In particular he is, on the witness of
several writers, declared to be the author of the
Acts of John. As these Acts show, the author
professes to be a follower and companion of the
apostle, and Epiphanius (Haeres, 61 6) mentions one
named Leucius as being in the entourage of John.
This notice of Epiphanius, however, is of doubtful
value, as it probably rested on the association in his
mind of the name of Leucius with the Acts of John.
Whether or not there is any truth in the ascription
of these Acts to a disciple of John must be left
undecided, but the probabilities are against there
being any. Be that as it may, when the different
Acts were collected, the name of the reputed author
of the Acts of John was transferred to the whole
collection. This probably happened not later than
the 4th cent. Although all the Acts are certainly
not from one hand (the difference of style is sufficient
pe of this), there are so many striking similarities

etween some of them as to suggest a possible com-
mon authorship in those cases or at least a relation
of literary. dependence.

VII. Relationship of Different Acts.—That some
connection existed between the different Acts was
clearly recognized in early times, and it was doubt-
less due to this recognition that they were gathered
together in a corpus under the name of one author.
It is acknowledged that there is a close relationship
between the Acts of Peter and the Acts of John,
some holding that they are the work of the same
author (James, Zahn), others that the former are
dependent on the latter (Schmidt, Hennecke),
while others again believe that their origin in the
same theological school and in the same ecclesiastical
atmosphere sufficiently explains all similarities
(Ficker). The Acts of Andrew, too, reveal a near
kinship to the Acts of Peter. But however the
matter may stand in regard to literary dependence,
the affinity between the different Acts in a material
sense is manifest. All are pervaded by the ascetic
spirit; in all Christ appears in the form of the apos-
tle; in all women visit the apostle in prison. In
respect of theological doctrine the Acts of Paul
stand by themselves as anti-gnostic in tendency,
but the others agree in their docetic view of Christ’s
person; while in the Acts of John, Peter and Thomas,
there is a similar mystical doctrine of the cross.

VU. Velue.—As a source for information about
the life and work of the apostles the Apocryphal
Acts are almost entircly worthless.
A possible exception in this respect
is the section of the Acts of Paul
dealing with Paul and Thecla, although
even there any historical elements are almost lost
in the legendary overgrowth. The spheres of the
apostles’ work, so far as they are mentioned only
in these Acts, cannot be accepted without question,
although they may be derived from reliable tradi-
tion. Taken as a whole the picture given in the
Apocryphal Acts of the missionary labors of the
apostles is a grotesque caricature.

The Apocryphal Acts, however, though worthless
as history, are of extreme value as throwing light

on the period in which they were


1. As
History


2. As written. They belong to the 2d cent.
Records of and are a rich quarry for information
Early about the popular Christianity of that


Christianity time. They give us a vivid picture of

the form which Christianity assumed
in contact with the enthusiastic mystery-cults and
gnostic sects which then flourished on the soil of


Asia Minor. We sce in them the Christian faith
deeply tinged with the spirit of contemporary pa-
ganism; the faith in Christ the Saviour-God, which
satishied the widespread yearning for redemption
from the powers of evil, in association with the as
yet unconquered elements of its heathen environ-
ment. (1) The Acts show us popular Christianity
under the influence of gnostic ideas as contrasted with
the Gnosticism of the schools which moves in a
region of mythological conceptions, cold abstrac-
tions and speculative subtleties. At the basis of
Gnosticism lay a contempt for material existence;
and in the Christianity of the Apocryphal Acts we
see the practical working up of the two chief ideas
which followed from this fundamental position, a
docetic conception of Christ’s person and an ascetic
view of life. In this popular religion Christ had
few of the features of the historic Jesus; He was
the Saviour—God, exalted above principalities and
powers, through union with whom the soul was
delivered from the dread powers of evil and entered
into the true life. The manhood of Christ. was sub-
limated into mere appearance; and in particular
the sufferings of Christ were conceived mystically
and symbolically, ‘‘sometimes in the form that in
the story of His sufferings we see only the symbol
of human sufferings in general; sometimes in the
form that Christ who is present in His church shares
in the martyr-sufferings of Christians; sometimes,
again, in the form that the sin, weakness and un-
faithfulness of His people inflict upon Him ever-
renewed sufferings” (Pfleiderer, Prim. Christianity,
Ill, 181). The ethical influence of Gnosticism is
apparent in the spirit of strict asceticism which is
the most characteristic feature of these Acts. It
is true that the ascetic ideal obtained not only in
gnostic but also in orthodox church circles, as we
gather from the Acts of Paul as well as from other
sources. The prominence of the strict ascetic ideal
in early Christianity is intelligible. The chief battle
which the Christian faith had to fight with Hellenic
heathenism was for sexual purity, and in view of
the coarseness and laxity which prevailed in sexual
relations it is not surprising that the Christian
protest was exaggerated in many cases into a
demand for complete continence. This ascetic
note in primitive Christianity was emphasized by
the spirit of Gnosticism.and finds clear expression
in the Acts which arose either in gnostic circles or
in an environment tinged with gnostic ideas. It
goes without saying that the influence of these
romances which are so largely concerned with
sexual morality and occasionally are unspeakably
coarse, was to preoccupy the mind with unhealthy
thoughts and to sully that purity of spirit which
it was their intention to secure. There are, how-
ever, other ethical elements in these Acts which are
in complete harmony with a true Christian morality.
(2) The Apocryphal Acts are an invaluable source
for information about early-Christian forms of
worship. The ritual of the sacraments is fully
described in the Acts of Thomas. Some of the
prayers found in the Acts are pervaded by a warm
religious spirit and are rich in liturgical expression.
(3) The beginnings of Christian hymnology may
be traced in the Acts of Thomas, in which occur
gnostic hymns breathing the fantastic oriental
spirit. (4) Apparent in the Acts throughout is
the excessive love for the supernatural and the
religious enthusiasm which flourished in Asia Minor
in the 2d cent. (cf especially the dance of the dis-
ciples round Jesus in the Acts of John: ch 94 ff).
1X. Influence.—The Apocryphal Acts had a
remarkable influence in the later history of the
church. After the establishment of Christianity
under Constantine men turned their eyes to the
earlier years of struggle and persecution. A deep


Apocryphal Acts THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


188


interest was awakened in the events of the heroic
age of the faith—the age of martyrs and apostles.
Acts of martyrs were eagerly read, and in particular
the Apocryphal Acts were drawn upon to satisfy
the desire for a fuller knowledge of the apostles
than was afforded by the canonical books. The
heretical teaching with which the apostolic legends
were associated in these Acts led to their condemna-
tion by ecclesiastical authority, but the ban of the
ehurch was unavailing to eradicate the taste for
the vivid colors of apostolic romance. In these
circumstances church writers set themselves the task
of rewriting the earlier Acts, omitting what was
clearly heretical and retaining the miraculous and
supernatural elements. And not only so, but the
material of the Acts was freely used in the fabrica-
tion of lives of other apostles, as we find in the
collection of the so-called Abdias in the 6th cent.
The result was that from the 4th to the 11th cent.
literature of this kind, dealing with the apostles, grew
apace and ‘formed the favorite reading of Chris-
tians, from Ireland to the Abyssinian mountains
and from Persia to Spain” (Harnack). Apostolic
legends were reproduced in religions poems; they
appeared in martyrologies and calendars; they
formed the subject of homilies on the feast-days of
the apostles, and incidents from them were depicted
in Christian art. New cycles of legends arose in
the Syrian and Coptic churches; and the Coptic
legends were translated into Arab. and from Arab.
into Ethiopic (Gadla Hawary4t—The Contendings
of the Apostles). Literature of this kind was
the fruitful mother of every kind of superstition.
“Whole generations of Christians [as Harnack says],
yes, whole Christian nations were intellectually
blinded by the dazzling appearance of these tales.
They lost the eye not only for the true light of his-
tory but also for the light of truth itself” (Gesch.
der altchr. Lit., J, xxvi). It is noteworthy that the
apocryphal correspondence with the Corinthians in
the Acts of Paul was received as canonical in the
Syrian and Armenian churches.


LireraturE.—The Apocryphal Acts form the sub-
ject of a voluminous literature. The earlier editions of
the available texts by Fabricius (1703) and Tischendorf
(1851) have been completely superseded by Lipsius-
Bonnet, Acta A postolorum apocrypha (1891-1903), which
contains texts not only of the earlier but also of many
of the later Acts. Translations of earlier Acts with
valuable introductions aro to be found in Hennecke,
NT Apokryphen (1904), while critical discussions and
elucidation of the text are given in Hennecke, Handbuch
zu den NT Apokryphen (1904). These two works are
indispensable to the student. English trs of earlier
Acts with short introductions in Pick, Apoeryphal Acts
(1909). The critical work of Lipsius on these Acts was
epoch-making: Die apokryphen Apostelgeschichten und
Apostellegenden (1883-90). Full lists of literature may
be found in Hennecke and Pick. The following may be
mentioned here: Zahn, Geschichte des NT Kanons, II,
832 ff (1892); Forschungen_zur Gesch. des NT Kanons,
VI, 14 ff, 194 ff (1900): Harnack, Geschichte der ait-
christlichen Literatur, I, 116 ff (1893); II, 493 ff, 541 ff
(1897): James, Apocrypha Anecdota (Texts and Studies,
V,1, 1897); Ehrhard, Die altchristliche Litteratur u. 7,
Erforsch. (1900); C. Schmidt, ‘‘Die Alten Petrusakten”
(TU, IX, 1, 1903). Useful as setting forth the religious
significance of the Acts are Pfleiderer, Primitive Chris-
tianity, III, 170 ff (tr 1910); Liechtenhahn, Die Ofen-
barung im Gnosticismus (1901). The chapterin Salmon's
Intro to the NT (325 ff) may be consulted. A short
account of the Acts written with full knowledge is given
in Geffcken, Christliche Apokryphen (Religionsgeschicht-
liche Volksbiicher, 1908).


B. Tue Separate Acts


The Apocryphal Acts dealt with in this article
are the Leucian Acts mentioned by Photius in his
Bibliotheca. As we now have them they have
undergone revision in the interest of ecclesiastical
orthodoxy, but in their original form they belonged
to the 2d cent. It is impossible to say how much
the Acts in their present form differ from that in
which they originally appeared, but it is evident at
many points that the orthodox revision which was


meant to eliminate heretical elements was not by
any means thorough. Passages which are distinctly
gnostic were preserved probably because the reviser
did not understand their true meaning.

f, Acts of Paul.—Origen in two passages of his

extant writings quotes the Acts of Paul with

approval, and it was possibly due to
1. Eccle- _ his influence that these Acts were held
siastical in high regard in the East. In the
Testimony Codex Claromontanus (3d cent.), which

is of eastern origin, the Acts of Paul
are treated as a catholic writing and take rank with
the Shepherd of Hermas and the Apocalypse of
Peter. Eusebius, who utterly rejects ““The Acts of
Andrew, John and the rest of the apostles,” puts
the Acts of Paul in the lower class of debated
writings alongside Hermas, Epistle of Barnabas,
Did, the Apocalypse of John, ete (H##, III, 25.4).
In the West, where Origen was viewed with sus-
picion, the Acts of Paul were apparently discredited,
the only use of them as a reliable source being found
in Hippolytus, the friend of Origen, who however
does not mention them by name. (The reference
by Hippolytus is found in his commentary on
Daniel. He argues from Paul’s conflict with the
wild beasts to the credibility of the story of Daniel
in the lions’ den.)

Of the Acts of Paul only fragments remain.
Little was known of them until in 1904 a trans-

lation from a badly preserved Coptic
2. Contents version was published by C. Schmidt,

and the discovery was made that the
well-known Acts of Paul and Thecla were in reality
a part of the Acts of Paul. From the notes regard-
ing the extent of the Acts given in the Cod. Claro-
montanus and in the Stichometry of Nicephorus
we gather that the fragments amount to about one-
fourth of the whole.

(1) Of these fragments the longest and the most
important is the section which came to have a
separate existence under the name The Acts of
Paul and Thecla. When these were separated
from the Acts of Paul we cannot tell, but this had
happened before the time of the Gelasian Decree
(496 AD), which without making mention of the
Acts of Paul condemns as apocryphal the Acts of
Paul and Thecla. (a) An outline of the narrative
is as follows: At Iconium, Thecla, a betrothed
maiden, listened to the preaching of Paul on vir-
ginity and was so fascinated that she refused to have
anything further to do with her lover. On account
of his influence over her, Paul was brought before
the proconsul and was cast into prison. There
Thecla visited him with the result that both were
brought to judgment. Paul was banished from the
city and Thecla was condemned to be burned.
Having been miraculously delivered at the pile
Thecla went in search of Paul and-when she ha
found him she accompanied him to Antioch. (There
is confusion in the narrative of Antioch of Pisidia
and Syrian Antioch.) In Antioch an influential
citizen, Alexander by name, became enamored of her
and openly embraced her on the street. Thecla,
resenting the familiarity, pulled off the crown
which Alexander wore and in consequence was
condemned to fight with the wild beasts at the
games. Until the day of the games Thecla was
placed under the care of Queen Tryphaena, then
living in Antioch. When Thecla was exposed in
the amphitheater a lioness died in defending
her against attack. In her peril Thecla cast
herself into a tank containing seals and declared:
“In the name of Jesus Christ I baptize myself on
my last day.” (It was with reference partly to
this act of self-baptism that Tertullian gave the
information about the authorship of these Acts:
infra 3.) When it was proposed to have Thecla


189


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocryphal Acts


torn asunder by maddened bulls Queen Tryphaena
fainted, and through fear of what might happen
the authorities released Thecla and handed her
over to Tryphaena. Thecla once again sought
Paul and having found him was commissioned by
him to preach the Word of God. This she did
first at Iconium and then in Seleucia where she died.
Various later additions described Thecla’s end, and
in one of them it is narrated that she went under-
ground from Seleucia to Rome that she might be
near Paul. Finding that Paul was dead she re-
mained in Rome until her death. (6) Although
the Thecla story is a romance designed to secure
apostolic authority for the ideal of virginity, it is
probable that it had at least a slight foundation in
actual fact. The existence of an influential Thecla-
cult at Seleucia favors the view that Thecla was a
historical person. Traditions regarding her asso-
ciation with Paul which clustered round the temple
in Seleucia built in her honor may have provided
the materials for the romance. In the story there
are clear historical reminiscences. Tryphaena is
a historical character whose existence is established
by coins. She was the mother of King Polemon II
of Pontus and a relative of the emperor Claudius.
There are no grounds for doubting the information
given us in the Acts that she was living at Antioch
at the time of Paul’s first visit. The Acts further
reveal striking geographical accuracy in the men-
tion of ‘the royal road” by which Paul is stated to
have traveled from Lystra on his way to Iconium
—a statement which is all the more remarkable
because, while the road was in use in Paul’s time
for military reasons, it was given up as a regular
route in the last quarter of the lst cent. In the
Acts Paul is described as ‘‘a man small in stature,
bald-headed, bow-legged, of noble demeanor, with
meeting eyebrows and a somewhat prominent
nose, full of grace. He appeared sometimes like
a man, and at other times he had the face of an
angel.” This description may quite well rest on
reliable tradition. On the ground of the historical
features in the story, Ramsay (The Church in the
Roman Empire, 375 ff) argued for the existence of
a shorter version going back to the 1st cent., but
this view has not been generally accepted. (c) The
Acts of Paul and Thecla were very widely read and
had a remarkable influence owing to the wide-
spread reverence for Thecla, who had a high place
among the saints as ‘‘the first female martyr.”
References to the Acts in the Church Fathers are
comparatively few, but the romance had an ex-
traordinary vogue among Christians both of the
East and of the West. In particular, veneration
for Thecla reached its highest point in Gaul, and in
a poem entitled “The Banquet” (Caena) written
by Cyprian, a poet of South-Gaul in the 5th cent.,
Thecla stands on the same level as the great char-
acters of Biblical history. The later Acts of Xan-
thippe and Polyxena are entirely derived from the
Acts of Paul and Thecla.

(2) Another important fragment of the Acts of
Paul is that containing the so-called Third Epistle
to the Corinthians. Paul is represented as being
in prison at Philippi (not at the time of Acts 16
23 ff, but at some later time). His incarceration
was due to his influence over Stratonice, the wife
of Apollophanes. The Corinthians who had been
disturbed by two teachers of heresy sent a letter
to Paul describing their pernicious doctrines, which
were to the effect that the prophets had no author-
ity, that God was not almighty, that there was no
resurrection of the body, that man had not been
made by God, that Christ had not come in the
flesh or been born of Mary, and that the world
was not the work of God but of angels. Paul was
sorely distressed on receipt of this epistle and,


“under much affliction,” wrote an answer in which
the popular gnostic views of the false teachers are
vehemently opposed. This letter which abounds
in allusions to several of the Pauline epistles is
chiefly remarkable from the fact that it found a
place, along with the letter which called it forth,
among canonical writings in the Syrian and Ar-
menian churches after the 2d cent. The corre-
spondence was strangely enough believed to be
genuine by Rinck who edited it in 1823. The original
Gr version has not been preserved, but it exists in
Coptic (not quite complete), in Armenian and in
two Lat tr? (both mutilated), besides being incor-
porated in Ephraem’s commentary (in Armenian
tr). The Syr version has been lost.

(3) Besides the two portions of the Acts of Paul
mentioned above there are others of less value, the
Healing of a Dropsical Man at Myra by the apostle
(a continuation of the Thecla-narrative), Paul’s -
conflict with wild beasts at Ephesus (based on
the misunderstanding of 1 Cor 15 32), two short
citations by Origen, and a concluding section
describing the apostle’s martyrdom under Nero, to
whom Paul appeared after his death. Clement
of Alexandria quotes a passage (Strom., VI, 5, 42 f)
~—a fragment from the mission-preaching of Paul—
which may have belonged to the Acts of Paul; and
the same origin is possible for the account of
Paul’s speech in Athens given by John of Salisbury
(cir 1156) in the Policraticus, 1V, 3. 2

From a passage in Tertullian (De Baptismo, ch
17) we learn that the author of the Acts of Paul

was “a presbyter of Asia, who wrote


8. Author- the book with the intention of increas-
ship and ing the dignity of Paul by additions
Date of his own,” and that ‘‘ he was removed


from office when, having heen con-
victed, he confessed that he had done it out of love
to Paul.” This testimony of Tertullian is sup-
ported by the evidence of the writing itself which,
as we have seen, shows in several details exact
knowledge of the topography and local history of
Asia Minor. A large number of the names occur-
ring in these Acts are found in inscriptions of
Smyrna, although it would be precarious on that
ground to infer that the author belonged to that
city. It is possible that he was a native of a town
where Thecla enjoyed peculiar reverence and that
the tradition of her association with Paul, the
preacher of virginity, was the chief motive for his
writing the book. Along with this was linked the
motive to oppose the views of some Gnostics (the
Bardesanites). The date of the Acts of Paul is the
latter half of the 2d cent., probably between 160
and 180 AD.

The Acts of Paul, though written to enhance the
dignity of the apostle, clearly show that both in
respect of intellectual equipment and
in breadth of moral vision the author,
ter and with all his love for Paul, was no
Tendency kindred spirit. The intellectual level

of the Acts is low. There is through-
out great poverty in conception; the same motif
occurs without variation; and the defects of the
author’s imagination have their counterpart in a
bare and inartistic diction. NT passages are
frequently and freely quoted. The view which the
author presents of Christianity is narrow and one-
sided. Within its limits it is orthodox in sentiment;
there is nothing to support the opinion of Lipsius
that the work is a revision of a gnostic writing.
The frequent occurrence of supernatural events
and the strict asceticism which characterize the
Acts are no proof of gnostic influence. The dog-
matic is indeed anti-gnostic, as we see in the corre-
spondence with the Corinthians. “The Lord
Jesus Christ was born of Mary, of the Seed of David,


4, Charac-


Apocryphal Acts THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


190


the Father having sent the Spirit from heaven
into her.” The resurrection of the body is assured
by Christ’s resurrection from the dead. Resurrec-
tion, however, is only for those who believe in it—
in this we have the one thought which betrays any
originality on the part of the author: ‘they who
say that there is no resurrection shall have no
resurrection.” With faith in the resurrection is
associated the demand for strict sexual abstinence.
Only they who are pure (i.e. who live in chastity)
shall see God: ‘Ye have no part in the resurrection
unless ye remain chaste and defile not the flesh.”
The gospel which the apostle preached was “the
word regarding self-control and the resurrection.”
In the author’s desire to secure authority for a
prevalent form of Christianity, which demanded
sexual abstinence as a condition of eternal life, we
recognize the chief aim of the book. Paul is
represented as the apostle of this popular concep-
tion, and his teaching is rendered attractive by the
miraculous and supernatural elements which satis-
fied the crude taste of the time.
LitEeRATURE.—Books mentioned under ‘' Literature”
{p. 188); C. Schmidt, ‘‘Die Paulusakten” (Neue Jahr-
bicher, 217 ff, 1897), Acta Pauli (1904); dealing with
Acts of Paul and Thecla: Ramsay, The Church in the
Roman Empire (Ath ed, 1895); Conybeare, The Apology
and Acts of Apollonius ... . (1894); Cabrol, La légende
de sainte Thécle (1895); Orr, The NT Apoe Writings


(introd. tr, and notes, 1903). For further lit. see Hen-
necke, Handbuch, etc, 358 ff; Pick, Apoc Acts, 1, 8f.


Hl. Acts of Peter.—A large portion (almost two-
thirds) of the Acts of Peter is preserved in a Lat
translation—the Actus Vercellenses, so
1. Contents named from the town of Vercelli in
Piedmont, where the MS containing
them Kes in the chapter-library. A Coptic frag-
ment discovered and published (1903) by C.
Schmidt contains a narrative with the subscription
Praxts Petrou (Act of Peter). Schmidt is of opinion
that this fragment formed part of the work to which
the Actus Vercellenses also belonged, but this is some-
what doubtful. Thefragment deals with an incident
in Peter’s ministry at Jerus, while the Act. Vercell.,
which probably were meant to be a continuation of
the canonical Acts, give an account of Peter’s con-
flict with Simon Magus and of his martyrdom at
Rome. References in ecclesiastical writers (Philas-
trius of Brescia, Isidore of Pelusium and Photius)
make it practically. certain that the Act. Vercell.
belong to the writing known as the Acts of Peter,
which was condemned in the rescript of Innocent I
(405 AD) and in the Gelasian Decree (496 AD).

(1) The Coptic Fragment contains the story of
Peter’s paralytic daughter. One Sunday while
Peter was engaged in healing the sick a bystander
asked him why he did not make his own daughter
whole. To show that God was able to effect the
cure through him, Peter made his daughter sound
for a short time and then bade her return to her
place and become as before. He explained that the
affliction had been laid upon her to save her from
defilement, as a rich man Ptolemy had been enam-
ored of her and had desired to make her his wife.
Ptolemy’s grief at not receiving her had been such
that he became blind. As the result of a vision he
had come to Peter, had received his sight and had
been converted, and when he died he had left a piece
of land to Peter’s daughter. This land Peter had
sold and had given the proceeds to the poor. Augus-
tine (Contra Adimantum, 17.5) makes a reference to
this story but doesnot mention Actsof Peter. There
are also two references to the incident in the Acts
of Philip. In the later Acts of Nereus and Achil-
leus the story is given with considerable changes,
the name of Peter’s daughter, which is not men-
tioned in the fragment, being given as Petronilla.

(2) The contents of the Actus Vercellenses fall
into three parts: (a) The first three chapters which


clearly are a continuation of some other narrative
and would fitly join on to the canonical Acts tell of
Paul’s departure to Spain. (6) The longest sec-
tion of the Acts (4-32) gives an account of the con-
flict between Peter and Simon Magus at Rome.
Paul had not been gone many days when Simon,
who ‘‘claimed to be the great power of God,” came
to Rome and perverted many of the Christians.
Christ appeared in a vision to Peter at Jerus and
bade him sail at once for Italy. Arrived at Rome
Peter confirmed the congregation, declaring that
he came to establish faith in Christ not by .words
merely but by miraculous deeds and powers (allu-
sion. to 1 Cor 4 20; 1 Thess 1 5). On the en-
treaty of the brethren Peter went to seek out Simon
in the house of one named Marcellus, whom the
magician had seduced; and when Simon refused to
see him, Peter unloosed a dog and bade it go and
deliver his challenge. The result of this marvel
was the repentance of Marcellus. A section follows
describing the mending of a broken statue by
sprinkling the pieces with water in the name of
Jesus. Meantime the dog had given Simon a
lecture and had pronounced on him the doom of
unquenchable fire. After reporting on its errand
and speaking words of encouragement to Peter, the
dog expired at the apostle’s feet. A smoked fish
is next made to swim. The faith of Marcellus
waxed strong at the sight of the wonders which
Peter wrought, and Simon was driven out of his
house with every mark of contempt. Simon,
enraged at this treatment, came to challenge Peter.
An infant of seven months speaking in a manly
voice denounced Simon and made him speechless
until the next Sabbath day. Christ appeared in a
vision of the night encouraging Peter, who when
morning was come narrated to the congregation
his triumph over Simon, ‘‘the angel of Satan,’’ in
Judaea. Shortly afterward, in the house of Marcel-
lus which had been “cleansed from every vestige of
Simon,” Peter unfolded the true understanding of
the gospel. The adequacy of Christ to meet every
kind of need is shown in a characteristic passage
which reveals docetic traits: ‘‘He will comfort you
that you may love Him, this Great and Small One,
this Beautiful and Ugly One, this Youth and Old
Man, appearing in time yet utterly invisible in
eternity, whom a human hand has not grasped,
who yet is now grasped by His servants, whom
flesh had not seen and now sees,’ etc. Next in a
wonderful blaze of heavenly light blind widows
received their sight and declared the different forms
in which Christ had appeared to them. A vision of
Marcellus is described in which the Lord appearing
in the likeness of Peter struck down with a sword
“the whole power of Simon,” which had come in
the form of an ugly Ethiopian woman, very black
and clad in filthy rags. Then follows the conflict
with Simon in the forum in presence of the senators
and prefects. Words were first exchanged between
the combatants; then from words it came to deeds,
in which the power of Peter was signally exhibited
as greater than Simon’s in the raising of the dead.
Simon was now discredited in Rome, and in a last
attempt to recover his influence he declared that
he would ascend to God. Before the assembled
crowd he flew up over the city, but in answer to
Peter’s prayer to Christ he fell down and broke
his leg in three places. He was removed from Rome
and after having his limb amputated died. (c) The
Actus Vercellenses close with an account of Peter’s
martyrdom (33-41). Peter had incurred the
enmity of several influential citizens by persuading
their wives to separate from them. Then follows
the well-known “Quo vadis?” story. Peter being
warned of the danger he was in fied from Rome;
but meeting Christ and learning that He was


191


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apoeryphal Acts


going to the city to be crucified again, Peter re-
turned and was condemned to death. At the place
of execution Peter expounded the mystery of the
cross. He asked to be crucified head downward,
and when this was done he explained in words
betraying gnostic influence why he had so desired
it. After a prayer of a mystical nature Peter gave
up the ghost. Nero was enraged that Peter should
have been put to death without his knowledge, be-
cause he had meant to heap punishments upon him.
Owing to a vision he was deterred from a rigorous
persecution of the Christians.
Peter’s martyrdom is also found in the Gr original.)
It is plain from the account given of these Acts
that they are entirely legendary in character. They
have not the slightest value as records
2. Histori- of the activity of Peter. They are
cal Value _ in reality the creation of the ancient
spirit which delighted in the marvelous
and which conceived that the authority of Chris-
tianity rested on the ability of its representatives to
surpass all others in their possession of supernatural
power. The tradition that Simon Magus exercised
a great influence in Rome and that a statue was
erected to him (10) may have had some basis in fact.
Justin Martyr (Apol, 1, 26, 56) states that Simon
on account of the wonderful deeds which he wrought
in Rome was regarded as a god and had a statue
set up in his honor. But grave doubts are thrown
on the whole story by the inscription SEMONI
SANCO DEO FIDIO SACRUM which was found
on a stone pedestal at Rome in 1574. This refers
to a Sabine deity Semo Sancus, and the misunder-
standing of it may have led to Justin’s statement
and possibly was the origin of the whole legend of
Simon’s activity at Rome. The tradition that Peter
died a martyr’s death at Rome is early, but no reli-
ance can be placed on the account of it given in the
Acts of Peter. .
Nothing can be said with any certainty as to the
authorship of the Acts of Peter. James (Apocrypha
Anecdota, II) believes them to be


8. Author- from the same hand as the Acts of
ship and John, and in this he is supported by
Date Zahn (Gesch. des NT Kanons, I, 861).


But all that can definitely be said 1s
that both these Acts had their origin n the same
religious atmosphere. Both are at home on the
soil of Asia Minor. Opinion is not unanimous on
the question where the Acts of Peter were written,
but a number of small details as well as the general
character of the book point to an origin in Asia
Minor rather than at Rome. There is no knowl-
edge of Rom conditions, while on the other hand
there are probable reminiscences of historical per-
sons who lived in Asia Minor. The date is about
the close of the 2d cent. :

The Acts of Peter were used by heretical sects
and were subjected to ecclesiastical censure. That

however does not necessarily imply a
4, General heretical origin. There are traces
Character in them of a spirit which in later

times was regarded as heretical, but
they probably originated within the church in an
environment strongly tinged by gnostic ideas. We
find the principle of gnosticism in the stress that is
laid on understanding the Lord (22). The gnostic
view that the Scripture required to be supplemented
by a secret tradition committed to the apostles is
reflected in several passages (20 in particular).
At the time of their earthly fellowship with Christ
the apostles were not able to understand the full
revelation of God. Each saw only so far as he
was able to see. Peter professes to communicate
what he had received from the Lord “‘in a mystery.”
There are slight traces of the docetic heresy. The
mystical words of Peter as he hung on the cross are


(The account of


suggestive of gnostic influence (83f). In these
Acts we find the same negative attitude to creation
and the same pronounced ascetic spirit as in the
others. “The virgins of the Lord” are held in
special honor (22). Water is used instead of wine
at the Eucharist. Very characteristic of the Acts
of Peter is the emphasis laid on the boundless mercy
of God in Christ toward the backsliding (especially 7).
This note frequently recurring is a welcome revela-
tion of the presence of the true gospel-message in
communities whose faith was allied with the grossest,
superstition.

Litpraturse.—Books mentioned under ‘‘ Literature”
(p. 188), In addition, Ficker, Die Petrusakten, Bettrdge
zu ihrem Verstdndnis (1903); Harnack, ‘ Patristische Mis-
cellen’’ (7U, V, 3, 1900).

IN, Acts of John.—According to the Stichom-
etry of Nicephorus the Acts of John in their com-

plete state formed a book about the
1. Contents same length as the Gospel of Matthew.

A number of sections which show links
of connection with one another are extant—about
two-thirds of the whole. The beginning of the Acts
is wanting, the existing narrative commencing at 18.
What the contents of the earlier chapters were we
cannot surmise. In Bonnet’sreconstruction the first
fourteen chapters deal with John’s journey from
Ephesus to Rome and his banishment to Patmos,
while 15-17 describe John’s return to Ephesus from
Patmos. The sections given by Bonnet may contain
material which belonged to the original Acts, but it
is improbable that they stood at the beginning of
the work, as it seems clear that the narrative com-
mencing at 18 describes John’s first visit to Ephesus.
The first extant portion of the Acts (18-25) narrates
that Lycomedes ‘the commander-in-chief of the
Ephesians” met John as he drew near the city and
besought him on behalf of his beautiful wife Cleo-
patra, who had become paralyzed. When they
came to the house the grief of Lycomedes was so
great that he fell down lifeless. After prayer to
Christ John made Cleopatra whole and afterward
raised Lycomedes to life again. Prevailed upon
by their entreaties John took up his abode with
them. In 26-29 we have the incident of the pic-
ture of John which played so prominent a part
in the discussion at the Second Council of Nicaea.
Lycomedes commissioned a friend to paint a picture
of John and when it was completed he put it in his
bedroom with an altar before it and candlesticks
beside it. John discovering why Lycomedes re-
paired so frequently to his room, taxed him with
worshipping a heathen god and learned that the
picture was one of himself. This he believed only
when a mirror was brought that he might see him-
self. John charged Lycomedes to paint a picture of
his soul and to use as colors faith in God, meekness,
love, chastity, etc. As for the picture of his hody it
was the dead picture of a dead man. Chs 30-36
narrate the healing of infirm old women, and in the
theater where the miracles were wrought John gave
an address on the vanity of all earthly things and
on the destroying nature of fleshly passion. In
37-45 we read that in answer to the prayer of John
the temple of Artemis fell to the ground, with the
result that many people were won to the worship
of Christ. The priest of Artemis who had been
killed through the fall of the temple was raised to
life again and became a Christian (46f). After
the narration of further wonders (one of them the
driving of bugs out of a house) follows the longest
incident of the Acts, the inexpressibly repulsive
story of Drusiana (62-86), which was used as the
theme of a poem by the nun Hroswitha of Gan-
dersheim (10th cent.). The following section gives
a discourse of John on the life, death and ascension
of Jesus (87-105) which is characterized by distinct


Apocryphal Acts THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


192


docetic traits, a long passage dealing with Christ’s
appearance in many forms and with the peculiar
nature of His body. In this section occurs the
strange hymn used by the Priscillianists, which
purports to be that which Jesus sang after supper
in the upper room (Mt 26 30), the disciples dancing
round Him in a ring and responding with Amen.
Here too we find the mystic doctrine of the Cross
revealed to John by Christ. Chs 106-15 narrate
the end of John. After addressing the brethren
and dispensing the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper
with bread alone, John ordered a grave to be dug;
and when this was done, he prayed, giving thanks
that he had been delivered from ‘‘the filthy mad-
ness of the flesh’ and asking a safe passage through
the darkness and dangers of death. Whereupon
he lay down quietly in the grave and gave up the
ghost.

The Acts of John, it need hardly be said, have not
the slightest historical value. They are a tissue of
legendary incidents which by their
miraculous character served to insin-
uate into the popular mind the dog-
matic conceptions and the ideal of life
which the author entertained. The Acts however
are in harmony with the well-founded tradition that
Ephesus was the scene of John’s later activity.
Very remarkable is the account of the destruction
of the Artemis-temple by John—a clear proof that
the Acts were not written in Ephesus. The Ephe-
sian temple of Artemis was destroyed by the Goths
in 262 AD.

The Acts of John are the most clearly heretical of
all the Acts. The docetic traits have already been

referred to. The unreality of Christ’s
3. General bodily existence is shown by the
Character changing forms in which He appeared

(88-90), by His ability to do without
food (93) and without sleep (‘I never at any time
saw His eyes closing but only open,” 89), by His
leaving no footprint when He walked (93), by the
varying character of His body when touched, now
hard, now soft, now completely immaterial (89,
93). The crucifixion of Jesus, too, was entirely
phantasmal (97, 99). The ascension followed
immediately on the apparent crucifixion; there was
no place for the resurrection of One who had never
actually died. Gnostic features are further dis-
cernible in the disparagement of the Jewish Law
(94), in the view which lays emphasis on a secret
tradition committed by Christ to the apostles (96)
and in the contempt for those who were not en-
lightened (‘Care not for the many, and them that
are outside the mystery despise,” 100). The
historical incidents of Christ’s sufferings are sub-
limated into something altogether mystical (101);
they are simply a symbol of human suffering, and
the object of Christ’s coming is represented as being
to enable men to understand the true meaning of
suffering and thus to be delivered from it (96).
The real sufferings of Christ are those caused by
His grief at the sins of His followers (106f). He is
also a partaker in the sufferings of His faithful
people, and indeed is present with them to be their
support in every trial (103). The Acts of John
also reveal a strong encratite tendency, although
that is not so pronounced as in the Acts of Andrew
and of Thomas. Nowhere however do we get a
more horrifying glimpse into the depths of corrupt
sexualism than in these Acts. The writing and
circulation of the story of Drusiana cast a lurid
light on the gross sensual elements which sur-
vived in early Hellenic Christianity. Apart from
this there are passages which reveal a warm and
true religious feeling and some of the prayers are
marked by glow and unction (112 ff). The Acts
show that the author was a man of considerable


2. Histori-
cal Value


literary ability; in this respect they form a striking

contrast to the Acts of Paul.
The author of the Acts of John represents him-
self as a companion of the apostle. He has par-
ticipated in the events which he


4. Author- describes, and in consequence the
ship and narrative possesses a certain lively
Date quality which gives it the appearance


of actual history. The author accord-
ing to testimony which goes back to the 4th
cent. was Leucius, but nothing can with any cer-
tainty be said of him (see above A, VJ). It is
possible that in some part of the Acts which is lost
the author mentioned his name. The early date
of the Acts is proved by a reference in Clement of
Alexandria (cir 200) to the immaterial nature of
Christ’s body, the passage plainly indicating that
Clement was acquainted with the Acts or had heard
another speak of them (Hypotyposeis on I Jn 1 1).
The probable date is between 150 and 180 and
Asia Minor is the place of origin.

The Acts of John exerted a wide influence. They

are in all probability the earliest of the Apocryphal
Acts and those written later owe much
5. Influence to them. The Acts of Peter and of
drew show so close affinities with
the Acts of John that some have regarded them as
being from the same hand; but if that be not so,
there is much to be said for the literary dependence
of the former on the latter. We are probably right
in stating that the author of the Acts of John was
the pioneer in this sphere of apostolic romance and
that others eagerly followed in the way which he
had opened up. That the Acts of John were read
in orthodox circles is clear from the reference in
Clement of Alexandria. In later days however
they were regarded with suspicion. - Augustine
quotes part of the hymn (95) which he read in a
Priscillianist work sent him by a bishop Ceretius
and makes severe animadversions on it and on the
claim advanced regarding it that it had been
revealed in secret to the apostles. The second
Synod of Nicaea (787 AD) passed judgment on the
Acts of John in words of great severity (see
above A, V,1). The stories found in the Acts had,
however, before this time passed into orthodox
tradition and had been used by Prochorus (5th
cent.), a supposed disciple of John, in the compo-
sition of his travel-romance dealing with the apostle,
as well as by Abdias (6th cent.) whose work con-
tains material from the older Acts which is not other-
wise preserved.

Literature.—sSee under “ Literature"’ (p. 188); also
Zahn, Acta Joannis (1880).

IV, Acts of Andrew.—The first mention of these
Acts which are referred to frequently by ecclesias-
tical writers is in Eusebius (HZ, III, 25, 6). They
are there, along with other Acts, rejected as absurd
and impious. Epiphanius refers to them in several
passages (Haeres, 47, 61, 68) as being in use among
various heretical sects which practised a strict ascetic
morality. Early writers attribute them to Leucius,
the author of the Acts of John.

Of the Acts of Andrew only small portions remain.
A fragment is preserved by Euodius of Uzala (d. 424),

a contemporary of Augustine, and a
1. Contents longer piece, found in a MS of the 10th

or 11th cent., containing lives of saints
for November, was identified by Bonnet as belong-
ing to the Acts of Andrew. The account of the
death of Andrew is preserved in many forms; that
which has the most appearance of retaining the form
of tbe original Acts being found in a letter of the
presbyters and deacons of the churches of Achaia.
(1) The fragment of Euodius gives two short pas-
sages describing the relations of Maximilla with her
husband Hgetes, whose claims.she resisted. (2) The


193


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocryphal Acts


longest section of the Acts deals with Andrew’s im-
prisonment because be had induced Maximilla to
separate from her husband “Aegeates” and to live a
life of chastity. (‘‘Aegeates,”’ which occurs as the
name of Maximilla’s husband, denotes in reality “a
native of Aegae,” Aegae being a town in the vicinity
of Patrae, where Andrew was described as carrying
on his work.) The section opens in the middle of
an address spoken to the brethren by Andrew in
prison, in which they were enjoined to glory in their
fellowship with Christ and in their deliverance from
the baser things of earth. Maximilla with her com-
panions frequently visited the apostle in prison.
Aegeates expostulated with her and declared that
if she did not resume relations with him he would
subject Andrew to torture. Andrew counseled her
to resist the importunity of Aegeates, and delivered
an address on the true nature of man and stated
that torture bad no terrors for him. If Maximilla
should yield, the apostle would suffer on her ac-
count. Through ber fellowship with his sufferings
she would know her true nature and thus escape
from affliction. Andrew next comforted Stratocles,
the brother of Aegeates, who declared his need of
Andrew, the sower in him of the “seed of the word
of salvation.” Andrew thereafter announced his
crucifixion on the following day. Maximilla again
visited the apostle in prison, ‘the Lord going before
her in the form of Andrew.” To a company of the
brethren the apostle delivered an address, in which
he discoursed on the deceitfulness of the devil, who
first had dealt with men as a friend but now was
manifest as an enemy. (3) When brought to the
place of crucifixion Andrew addressed the cross
which he joyfully welcomed. After being bound
to the cross be bung smiling at the miscarriage of
the vengeance of Aegeates, for (as he explained)
“a, man who belongs to Jesus because he is known
of Him is armed against every vengeance.” For
three days and nights Andrew addressed the people
from the cross, and they, moved by his nobilty
and eloquence, went to Aegeates, demanding that
he should be delivered from death. Aegeates,
fearing the wrath of the people, went to take An-
drew down from the cross, but the apostle refused
deliverance and prayed to Christ to prevent his
release. After this he gave up the ghost. He was
buried by Maximilla, and Aegeates soon afterward
cast himself down from a great height and died.
The encratite ideal in its most pronounced form
is exhibited in the Acts of Andrew. (In view of
this, and of Andrew’s association else-
2. General where in ecclesiastical tradition with a
Character strict asceticism, there is a curious
irony in the fact that in some parts of
Germany Andrew is the patron saint of maidens
seeking husbands. In the Harz and in Thiringen
St. Andrew’s Night [November 30] is considered by
maidens the most favorable time for the vision of
their future husbands.) The gnostic spirit is re-
vealed in the feeling for the preéminent worth of
the spiritual man (6). The true nature of man is
pure; the weakness and sin are the work of the
“evil enemy who is averse to peace.” In seducing
men he did not come out openly as an enemy but
pretended friendship. When the light of the world
appeared the adversary of man was seen in his
true colors. Deliverance from sin comes through
enlightenment. The mystical view of sufferings
(9) reminds us of the similar view in the Acts of
John. The addresses of the apostle are charac-
terized by religious earnestness and warmth (words
flow from his ie ‘dike a stream of fire” 12), and
by a profound sense of the Divine pity for sinful
and tempted men. :
The only detail in the Acts of Andrew which has
a claim to be considered historical is his activity at


Patrae on the Corinthian Gulf. (Patrae is not
actually mentioned in the fragmentary Acts, but

that the scene of the imprisonment and
3. Histori- martyrdom of Andrew is laid in that
cal Value city may be inferred from the name

“Aegeates’’—see above 1 [2].) Ecclesi-
astical tradition speaks with great uncertainty of
the sphere of Andrew’s missionary labors, Scythia,
Bithynia and Greece being all mentioned. It may
be regarded as probable that Andrew came to
Greece and suffered martyrdom at Patrae, although
one must reckon with the possibility that the
account of his work and crucifixion there was in-
vented for the purpose of representing the church
at Patrae as an apostolic foundation. The cruci-
fixion of the apostle on the so-called St. Andrew’s
cross is a later tradition.

V. Acts of Thomas.—These Acts exist in a
complete state and their great popularity in church
circles is shown by the large number of MSS which
contain them. It is probable that they were written
originally in Syr and that they were later freely
translated into Gr and worked over from the Catholic
point of view.

In the Stichometry of Nicephorus the Acts of
Thomas are mentioned as containing 1,600 stichoi

(ines of about sixteen syllables), one-

1. Contents fifth fewer than the Gospel of Mark.
If this notice is correct, the form in

which we have the Acts is very much more extended.
In the Gr versions the Acts are divided into thirteen
“deeds” followed by the martyrdom of Thomas.
Some idea of the contents may be given as follows:
(1) At a meeting of the apostles in Jerus, Thomas
had India allotted to him as his sphere of service.
He was unwilling to go, but at last consented when
the Lord sold him to a messenger from King Gunda-
forus in India. On the journey to India, Thomas
came to the city of Andrapolis where the nuptials
of the king’s daughter were being celebrated. In
these the apostle took part and sang a hymn in
praise of the heavenly wedding. The king asked
Thomas to pray for his daughter and after he had
done so the Lord appeared in the form of Thomas
and won the newly married pair to a life of sexual
abstinence. The king incensed at this sought
Thomas, but the apostle had departed. (2) Ar-
rived in India Thomas undertook to build a palace
for King Gundaforus. He received money for
this purpose but gave it away in alms. The king
discovering this cast Thomas into prison, but
afterward released him when he learned from his
brother who came back from the dead that Thomas
had built a heavenly palace for him. Gundaforus
and his brother became Christians. (8) Traveling
farther east Thomas found a youth who had been
slain by a dragon because of a woman whom both
desired. The dragon at the command of Thomas
sucked the poison from the youth’s body and itself
died. The young man, restored to life, embraced
the ideal of sexual abstinence and was counseled
to set his affections on Christ. (4) The story of a
speaking colt. (5) Thomas delivered a woman
from the power of a filthy demon. An account is
iven of the celebration of the Eucharist (with
read alone) which includes a gnostic prayer. (6)
A youth partaking of the Eucharist was convicted
of sin and confessed that he had killed a maiden
who refused to live with him in unchaste intercourse.
The maiden was raised to life and gave an account
of her experience in hell. (7) Thomas was besought
by a commander named Sifor to deliver his wife
and daughter from a demon of uncleanness. (8)
While they were on their way to the commander’s
house the beast which drew the carriage became
exhausted and four wild asses allowed themselves
to be quietly yoked. One of the wild asses was


Apocryphal Acts
Apocryphal Gsp.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


194


instructed by Thomas to exorcise the demons which
dwelt in the women. (9) A woman, Mygdonia,
married to Charis, a near relative of Ising Misdai,
listened to a discourse of the apostle and was
led to reject the society of her husband. Charis
complained to the king about the magician who had
put a spell upon his wife and Thomas was cast
into prison. At the request of his fellow-prisoners
Thomas prayed for them and recited a hymn
(known as ‘“‘the hymn of the soul’”’) which is entirely
gnostic in character. (10) Mygdonia received
the seal of Jesus Christ, being first anointed with
oil, then being baptized, then receiving the Eu-
charist in bread and water. Thomas was released
from prison, and Sifor, his wife and his daughter all
received the seal. (11) Tertia the queen was sent
by Misdai to reason with Mygdonia and as a result
she herself was won to the new life. Thomas was
then brought to the place of judgment. (12) There
Vazan, the king’s son, talked with the apostle and
was converted. The king gave orders that Thomas
should be tortured with hot plates of iron, but when
these were brought water gushed forth from the
earth and submerged them. Then follow an ad-
dress and prayer of Thomas in prison. (13) The
apostle was visited in prison by the women and
by Vazan and thereafter Vazan along with others
was baptized and received the Eucharist, Thomas
coming from prison to Vazan’s house for this pur-
pose. (14) Thomas was put to death by the com-
mand of the king, being pierced with lances, but
afterward he showed himself to his followers. Later
a son of Misdai was cured of an unclean spirit by
dust taken from the apostle’s grave and Misdai him-
self became a Christian.
The Acts of Thomas are in reality a treatise in
the form of a travel-romance whose main design
was to set forth abstinence from sexual
2. Charac- intercourse as the indispensable con-
ter and dition of salvation. In the addresses
Tendency of Thomas, however, positive Christian
virtues are emphasized; and in par-
ticular the duty and the recompense of compassion
are strikingly exhibited in the story of the building
of the heavenly palace. The Acts clearly had their
origin in gnostic circles and were held in high
estimation by various encratite sects. The original
Acts underwent revision in the interest of ortho-
doxy. The hymns and dedication-prayers which
showed marked gnostic features were probably
retained because their meaning was not understood.
As Lipsius says, speaking of “the hymn of the soul”:
“The preservation of this precious relic of gnostic
poetry we owe to the happy ignorance of the
Catholic reviser, who had no idea what heretical
serpent lurked beneath the beautiful flowers of this
poem.” The hymn, probably written by Barde-
sanes, the founder of a gnostic sect, narrates in the
form of an allegory the descent of the soul into the
world of sense, its forgetfulness of its heavenly
origin, its deliverance by the Divine revelation
which awoke it to a consciousness of its true dig-
nity, and its return to the heavenly home from
which it came. In the opinion of some, however,
the hymn is falsely called “the hymn of the soul.”
As Preuschen says: “It describes rather the descent
of the Saviour to the earth, His deliverance of the
soul which languishes there in the bondage of
evil, and His return to the heavenly kingdom of
light. One may characterize the whole as a gnos-
tic embellishment and extension of Phil 2 5-11”
(Hennecke, [Zandbuch, etc, 587). In whichever way
the hymn is to be interpreted, it is a poem of great
beauty and rich in oriental imagery. The ascrip-
tions of praise to Christ in the addresses of the apostle
are sometimes couched in noble language and always
suffused by great warmth of feeling. Throughout


the Acts we have miraculous and supernatural
elements in abundance. Christ frequently appears
in the likeness of Thomas who is represented as his
twin-brother. The full name of the apostle is Judas
Thomas—Judas the Twin. In 66ff there is a
graphic account of the tortures of the damned, which
remind one of the Apocalypse of Peter.

It goes without saying that the Acts of Thomas,
which are a romance with a purpose, are in no
sense a historical source for informa-
tion about the apostle. The author
however has made use of the names of
historical persons. King Gundaforus
(Vifidafra) is known from other sources as an Indo-
Parthian ruler in the Ist cent. AD. It is very
doubtful whether the tradition preserved in the
Acts as to the activity of Thomas in India is trust-
worthy. The earliest tradition with which we are
acquainted places the sphere of his missionary
labors in Parthia. Syrian tradition states that he
died at Edessa, where in the 4th cent. there was
a church dedicated to him. Thomas is also indi-
rectly associated with Edessa in the Abgar Legend,
in which we read that Thaddaeus who founded the
church at Edessa was sent by Thomas. In the
existing form of the Acts of Thomas we have a
combination of the traditions regarding India and
Edessa; we read (170) that some time after the
apostle’s death his bones were carried ‘into the
regions of the West.” Early tradition knows
nothing of Thomas as a martyr; according to a
statement of the Valentinian Heracleon (cir 170)
quoted by Clement of Alexandria (Strom, IV, 9)
the apostle died quietly in his bed. The name of
the apostle is given in the Acts as Judas Thomas,
and this we also find in the Doctrine of Addai and
elsewhere. The statement in the Acts that the
apostle was a twin-brother of Jesus was no doubt
suggested by the meaning of the name Thomas
(=“twin”) and by the desire to enhance the dig-
nity of the apostle. In 110 (in the Hymn of the
Soul) there is a reference to the still existing Par-
thian kingdom, and as that kingdom came to an
end in 227 AD, the poem must have been written
before that date. The hymn, however, does not
seem to have belonged to the original Acts, which
probably were in existence before the end of the
2d cent.

Lirerature.—Besides books mentioned under'' Litera-
ture” (p. 188) Thilo, Acta Sancti Thomae apostoli (1823);
Hoffman, ZN TW (1903, 273-309); Preuschen, Zwei ynos-
tische Hymnen (1904); Hilgenfeld, ZWT (1904, 229-41).
The Syrian Acts of Thomas were ed and trd by W. Wright,
Apecryphal Acts of the Apostles (1871); also Bevan, in
Texts and Studies, V, 3 (1897). The later Ethiopic ver-
sion is found in Malan, The Conflicts of the Holy Apostles


(1871), and in Budge, The Contendings of the Apostles (2
vols containing Ethiopic text and tr, 1899-1901).


A. F. Finpuay


APOCRYPHAL EPISTLES, a-pok’ri-fal 6-pis’l’s:
A few epistles have been attributed to the Virgin
Mary, but these are very late and without value.
The following epistles fall to be noted as apocryphal:

The letter attributed to Our Lord is given in
Eusebius (HE, I, 13) who records that in his day a

copy of the letter was to be found

1. Letter among the archives of Edessa. Ab-
Attributed garus, king of Osroene, which was a
to Our Lord small country in Mesopotamia, writes
: from Edessa, the capital, to Our Lord,
asking for fedtng. and offering Him protection.
Our Lord sends back a short letter saying that
He cannot leave Palestine, but that, after His as-
cension, a messenger will come and heal Abgarus.
The letters are obviously spurious. Osroene was
actually Christianized about the beginning of the
3d_cent., and the legend took shape and received
official sanction in order to show that the country


3. Histori-
ca] Value


195


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Apocryphal Acts
Apocryphal Gsp.


had received the Gospel at a much earlier date.
See ABGar.
The Clementine Homilies is a work of fiction
attributed to Clement of Rome; it was actually
written about the end of the 2d cent.
2. Letter or the beginning of the 3d. At the
Attributed” beginning of it there is set a letter of
to Peter Peter to James. In it Peter counsels
James not to show the book containing
Peter’s preaching except to a limited circle, and
makes a violent attack upon the apostle Paul. It
is thus evidently Ebionitic in tendency, and is, like
the homilies to which it is prefixed, spurious.
(1) The Epistle from Laodicea.—The mention of
such an ep in Col 4 16 evidently tempted some-
one to forge a letter. It is written


3. Letters in Latin, and consists of 20 vs; it is a
Attributed mere cento of Pauline phrases strung
to Paul together. It is mentioned in the


Muratorian Fragment (170 AD); and
by the end of the 4th cent. it had a wide circula-
tion. It is now almost universally rejected as
spurious. See CoLossians; EpHesians; EPIisTLE
To LaopicEANs.

(2) Lost Epistle to the Corinthians.—In 1 Cor
6 9 a letter to the Corinthians is mentioned which
appears to have been lost. Ina 5th cent. Armenian
VS of the Scriptures there is inserted after 2 Cor
a short letter from the Corinthians to Paul, and one
from Paul to the Corinthians. These are also
found in Syr, and were evidently accepted in
many quarters as genuine at the end of the 4th
cent. They formed a part of the Apocryphal
Acts of St. Paul, and date from about 200 AD.
See CoriINTHIANS.

(3) An Epistle to the Alexandrines.—This is men-
tioned only in the Muratorian Fragment, and has
not come down to us.

(4) Letters of Paul to Seneca.—This is a corre-
spondence in Latin, six of the letters being attributed
to Paul and eight to Seneca. Regarding this
correspondence Lightfoot says: ‘“This correspond-
ence was probably forged in the 4th cent., either to
recommend Seneca to Christian readers, or to rec-
ommend Christianity to students of Seneca.’”’ It
had a wide circulation in the Middle Ages.

Lireratore.—See art. “ Apocrypha" in EB and RE.
For text of Peter's letter to James, see Roberts’ and
Donaldson's Ante-Nicene Christian Library, XVII. For
the Pauline letters consult Zahn, Geschichte des NT Ka-
nons, If. For Paul's Laodicean letter, see Lightfoot's
Comm. on Col (where the text of the letter is given); and
for the letters to Seneca, Lightfoot's Comm. on Phil, Dis-
sertation II, with Appendix.

Joun Macartney WILSON


APOCRYPHAL GOSPELS, a-pok’ri-fal gos’pels:


I. IstvropucTorRY
1. Early Gospels
2, Canonical Gospels
3. Apocryphal Gospels
4, Gospel according to the Hebrews
II. Hereticat GOspEis
1. Gospel of the Ebionites
2. Gospel of the Egyptians
3. Gospel of Marcion
4. Gospel of Peter
5. Gospel of the Twelve Apostles
6. Gospels of Barnabas and Bartholomew
SUPPLEMENTARY OR LEGENDARY GOSPELS
1. Gospels of the Nativity
(a) Protevangelinum of James
(b) Pseudo-Matthew
(c) The Nativity of Mary
(d) Gospel of Joseph the Carpenter
(e) The Passing of Mary E
2. Gospels of the Infancy or Childhood
(a) Gospel of Thomas .
(b} Arabic Gospel of the Childhood
3. Gospels of the Passion and Resurrection
(a) Gospel of Peter (as above)
(b) Gospel of Nicodemus, containing
(1) Acts of Pilate
(2) Descent of Jesus into the Lower World
(c) Other Fabrications
LireRATURE


II.


The apocryphal gospels form a branch of the
apocryphal literature that attended the formation
of the NT canon of Scripture. Apocryphal here
means non-canonical. Besides gospels, this litera-
ture included acts, epistles and apocalypses.

i, Introductery.—The introduction to the third
canonical Gospel shows that in the days of the
writer, when the apostles of the Lord
were still living, it was a common
practice to write and publish accounts
of the acts and words of Jesus. It has
even been maintained (S. Baring-Gould, Lost and
Hostile Gospels, xxiii, London, 1874) that at the
close of the 1st cent., almost every church had its
own gospel with which alone it was acquainted.
These were probably derived, or professed to be
derived, from the oral reports of those who. had
seen, heard, and, it may be, conversed with Our
Lord. It was dissatisfaction with these composi-
tions that moved Luke to write his Gospel.
Whether any of these ante-Lukan documents are
among those still known to us is hardly longer
doubtful. Scholars of repute—Grotius, Grabe,
Mill—were in earlier times disposed to place the
Gospel of the Hebrews, the Gospel of the Ebionites,
and the Gospel of the Egyptians among those
alluded to by Luke, some holding the Gospel
of the Hebrews to be as early as just after the
middle of the 1st cent. More recent criticism
does not allow so early an appearance for those
gospels, though a fairly early date is still postu-
lated for the Gospel of the Hebrews. The Prot-
evangelium of James (noticed below) is still held
by some as possibly falling within the Ist cent.
(4B, I, 259).

However this may be, there can be no doubt that
by the close of the 1st cent. and the early part of

2d, opinion was practically unani-
2. Canoni- mous in recognition of the authority
cal Gospels of the four Gospels of the canonical
Scriptures. Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons


1. Early
Gospels


(180 AD), recognizes four, and only four Gospels, as


‘pillars” of the church. The Harmonies of Theoph-
jlus, bishop of Antioch (168-80 AD), and of Tatian,
and the Apology of Justin Martyr carry back the
tradition to a much earlier period of the cent., and,
as Liddon proves at considerable length (Bampton
Lectures, 2d ed, 210-19), ‘‘it is scarcely too much
to assert that every decade of the 2d cent. fur-
nishes its share of proof that the four Gospels as a
whole, and St. John’s in particular, were to the
church of that age what they are to the church of
the present.’ The recent attempt of Professor
Bacon of Yale to get rid of the important authority
of Irenaeus (The Fourth Gospel in Research and
Debate, New York, 1910) will not succeed; it has
been shown to be merely assertive where there
is no evidence and agnostic where evidence is ap-
parently demonstrative. During the last cent. the
Gospels, as regards their composition, credibility
and historicity, were subjected to the most searching
and unsparing criticism which, though intimations
of it weré previously not wanting, may be said to
have begun when Strauss, to use Liddon’s words,
“shocked the conscience of all that was Christian
in Europe” by the publication of his first Life of
Jesus. The methods pursued in this work consisted
largely in the application to the sacred books, and
especially to the Gospels, of the principles of criti-
cism that had for forty years previously been used
in estimating the structure and composition of
some of the literary products of antiquity; and the
controversy excited by this criticism can hardly
yet be said to have subsided. This is not the place
for entering upon an account of the controversy;
it may be sufficient here to say that the traditional
positions of the church have been ably defended,


Apocryphal Gsp. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


and in particular, that the claims of the canonical

Gospels have been abundantly maintained.
Whatever was the fate of the ante-Lukan and
other possible 1st-cent. gospels, it is with the 2d
cent. and the formation of an author-


3. Apocry- itative canon that the apocryphal
phal Gos- gospels, such as we now have, for the
pels most part begin to appear. In the


days of the reproduction of documents
by manuscript, of restricted communications be-
tween different localities, and when the church was
only as yet forming and completing its organiza-
tion, the formation and spread of such gospels
would be much easier than now. The number of
such gospels is very considerable, amounting to
about fifty. These exist mainly in fragments and
scattered notices; though some, as pointed out
below, are either entire or nearly so. The apparent
number has probably been increased by the use of
different names for the same document. Thirty
aré named by Hofmann with more or less explana-~
tion in RE, I, 511; a complete list is given in
Fabricius (Cod. Apoc NT, I, 355 ff). bionis-
tic and gnostic circles were specially prolific of
such gospels. “It would be easy,” says Salmon
(Intro, Ist ed, 239) “to make a long list of names
of gospels said to have been in use in different
gnostic sects; but very little is known as to their
contents, and that little is not such as to lead us
to attribute to them the very slightest historical
value.”” Of many indeed no more is known than
the names of the authors, such as the gospels of
Basilides, of Cerinthus, of Apelles, of Matthias,
of Barnabas, of Bartholomew, of Eve, of Philemon
and many others. The scholars and authorities
of the early church were quite well aware of the
existence and aims of these productions. It is
noteworthy also that they had no hesitation in
characterizing them as they deserved. The Mar-
cosians, according to Irenaeus, adduced ‘an un-
speakable number of apocryphal and spurious
writings, which they themselves had forged, to
bewilder the minds of the foolish”; and Eusebius
(H#, III, 25) gives the following list of spurious
and disputed books: ‘That we have it in our
power to know both these books [the canonical] and
those that are adduced by the heretics under the
name of the apostles such, viz., as compose the
gospels of Peter, of Thomas, and of Matthew, and
certain others beside these or such as contain the
Acts of Andrew and John, and of the other apostles,
of which no one of those writers in the ecclesiastical
succession has condescended to make any mention
in his works: and, indeed, the character of the style
itself is very different from that of the apostles,
and the sentiments, and the purport of these things
that are advanced in them, deviating as far as
possible from sound orthodoxy, evidently prove
they are the fictions of heretical men: whence they
are not only to be ranked among the spurious
writings but are to be rejected as altogether ab-
surd and impious.” In the appendix to Westcott’s
Intro to the Study of the Gospels will be found, with
the exception of those recently discovered in Egypt,
a complete list of the non-canonical sayings and
deeds ascribed to Our Lord as recorded in the pa-
tristic writings; and also a list of the quotations
from the non-canonical gospels where these are only
known by quotations.

The aim of the apocryphal gospels may be re-
garded as (1) heretical or (2) supplemental or
legendary: that is to say, such as either were
framed in support of some heresy or such as assume
the canonical gospels and try to make additions—
largely legendary—to -them. Before considering
these it may be well to take separate account of
the Gospel according to the Hebrews.


196


The undoubted early date of this gospel, the
character of most of its not very numerous quota-
tions, the respect with which it is


4. The uniformly mentioned by early writers,
Gospel Ac- and the esteem in which it is at present
cording to held by scholars in general, entitle
the He- the Gospel according to the Hebrews
brews to special notice. Apart from the


: tradition, to which it is not necessary
to attach too great importance, that represented
Our Lord as commanding His disciples to remain for
twelve years in Jerus, it is reasonable to suppose
that for the Christian communities resident in
Jerus and Pal a written gospel in their own language
(Western Aram.) would soon be a necessity, and
such a gospel would naturally be used by Jewish
Christians of the Diaspora. Jewish Christians,
for example, settled in Alexandria, might use this
gospel, while native Christians, as suggested by
Harnack, might use the Gospel of the Egyptians,
till of course both were superseded by the four
Gospels sanctioned by the church. There is no
proof however that the gospel was earlier than the
Synoptics, much less that it was among the ante-
Lukan gospels. Harnack, indeed, by a filiation of
documents for which there seems hardly sufficient
warrant, placed it as early as between 65 and 100

Salmon, on the other hand (Intro, Lect X)
concludes that “the Nazarene gospel, so far from
being the mother, or even the sister of one of our
canonical four, can only claim to be a grand-
daughter or grand-niece.” Jerome (400 AD) knew
of the existence of this gospel and says that he
translated it into Gr and Lat; quotations from it are
found in his works and in those of Clement of Alex-
andria. Its relation to the Gospel of Matthew,
which by almost universal consent is declared to
have been originally written in Heb (i.e. Aram.),
has given rise to much controversy. ‘The preva~
lent view among scholars is that it was not the
original of which Matthew’s Gospel was a Gr tr,
but still that it was a fairly early composition.
Some, like Salmon and Harnack, are disposed to
regard Jerome’s Heb Gospel as to all intents a
fifth gospel originally composed for Palestinian
Christians, but which became of comparatively
insignificant value with the development of Chris-
tianity into a world-religion. Besides two refer-
ences to the baptism of Jesus and a few of his
sayings, such as—“‘Never be joyful except when ye
shall look upon your brother in love”; ‘Just now
my Mother, the Holy Spirit, took me by one of my
hairs and bore me away to the great’ mountain
Thabor’’—it records the appearance of Our Lord
to James after the resurrection, adduced by Paul
(1 Cor 15 7) as one of the proofs of that event;
but of course Paul might have learned this from the
lips of James himself as well as from ordinary
tradition, and not necessarily from this gospel.
This indeed is the principal detail of importance
which the quotations from this gospel add to what
we know from the Synoptics. In other divergences
from the Synoptics where the same facts are re-
corded, it is possible that the Gospel according
to the Hebrews may relate an earlier and more
reliable tradition. On the other hand, the longest
quotation, which gives a version of Christ’s in-
terview with the Rich Young Ruler, would seem
to show, as Westcott suggests, that the Synoptics
give the simpler and therefore the earlier form
of the common narrative. Many scholars, how-
ever, allow that the few surviving quotations of
this gospel should be taken into account in con-
structing the life of Christ. The Ebionites gave
the name of Gospel of the Hebrews to a mutilated
gospel of Matthew. This brings us to the heretical
gospels.


197


Il. Heretical Gospels.—The Ebionites may be
described generally as Jewish Christians who
aimed at maintaining as far as possible


1. Gospel the doctrines and practices of the OT
of the and may he taken as representing
Ebionites originally the extreme conservative


section of the Council of Jerusalem
mentioned in Acts 15 1-29. They are frequently
mentioned in patristic literature from the 2d to
the 4th cents., and the prolonged gnostic con-
troversies of those times may well have founded
among them different sects or at least parties.
Accordingly Jerome, a writer of the 4th cent.,
states (Hp ad August. 122 13) that he found in
Pal Jewish Christians known as Nazarenes and
Ebionites. Whether these were separate sects
or simply supporters of more liberal or narrower
views of the same sect cannot well be determined.
Some, such as Harnack and Uhlhorn, have held that
the two names are general designations for Jewish
Christians; others regard the Ebionites as the most
retrograde and the narrowest of Jewish Christians,
while the Nazarenes were more tolerant of difference
of belief and practice. The Gospel of the Ebionites
or the Gospel of the Twelve Apostles, as it was also
called, represented along with the Gospel of the
Hebrews (noticed above) this Judaeo-Christian
spirit. Some fragments of the Gospel of the
Ebionites are preserved in Epiphanius (d. 376).
He speaks of the Nazarenes as “having the Gospel
according to Matthew in a most complete form,
in Heh” (i.e. Aram.), though he immediately adds
that he does not know whether “they removed the
genealogies from Abraham to Christ,” that is to
say, whether they accepted or rejected the virgin
birth of Christ. In contrast with this statement he
says that the Ebionites had a gospel “called the
Gospel according to Matthew, not entire and per-
fectly complete, but falsified and mutilated, which
they call the Hebrew gospel.” The extant frag-
ments from the gospel are given in Westcott (Intro,
437f). They “show that its value is quite secondary
and that the author has simply compiled it from the
canonical, and especially from the Synoptic Gospels,
adapting it at the same time to the views and prac-
tices of gnostic Ebionism” (DCG, I, 505).
Three short and somewhat mystic verses are all
that are left of what is known as the Gospel of the
Egyptians. They occur in Book III


2. Gospel of the Stromaicis of Clement of Alex-
of the andria, who devoted that book to a
Egyptians refutation of Encratism, that is, the


rejection, as absolutely unlawful, of
the use of marriage, of flesh meat and of wine.
Already in the Pauline Epistles are met parties with
the ery (Col 2 21) ‘Handle not, nor taste, nor
touch,” and (1 Tim 4 3) “forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from_meats.” ‘The vs
in Clement read as follows: “When Salome asked
how long will death prevail? The Lord said,
As long as ye women bear children: for I have come
to destroy the function of women. And Salome
said to him: Did I not well then in not bearing
children? And the Lord answered and said, Hat
of every herb, but do not eat of that which is bitter.
And when Salome asked when the things would be
known about which she had enquired, the Lord
said, When ye trample on the garment of shame,
and when the two shall be one, and the male with
the female neither male nor female.” . The words
assuredly vary much from the usual character of
those of Our Lord. Modern writers vary as to
their encratite tendency and as to how far the
Gospel of the Egyptians was practical. With so
little to go upon, if is not easy to form a conclusion.
It may have contained other passages on account of
which Origen deemed it heretical. It was used by


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocryphal Gsp.


the Naassenes and Sabellians. The date of the
Gospel is between 130 and 150.
The Gospel of Marcion would seem to have been
intended as a direct counteractive to the Aram.
gospels. A native of Pontus and the
3. Gospel son of a bishop, Marcion settled at
of Marcion Rome in the first half of the 2d cent.
and became the founder of the anti-
Jewish sect that acknowledged no authoritative
writings but those of Paul. This work forms a
striking example of what liberties, in days before
the final formation of the canon, could be taken
with the most authoritative and the most revered
documents of the faith, and also as showing the
free and practically unlimited nature of the con-
troversy, of which the canon as finally adopted was
the result. He rejected the OT entirely, and of the
NT retained only the Gospel of Lk, as being of
Pauline origin, with the omission of sections de-
pending on the OT and ten epistles of Paul, the
pastoral epistles heing omitted. The principal
Church Fathers agree upon this corruption of
Lk’s Gospel by Marcion; and the main importance
of his gospel is that in modern controversy it was
for some time assumed to be the original gospel of
which Lk’s Gospel was regarded as merely an
expansion. The theory was shown first in Germany
and afterward independently in England to be quite
untenable. It was lately revived by the author of
Supernatural Religion; but Dr. Sanday’s work on
The Gospels in the Second Century (ch viii) may he
said to have closed the controversy. (Cf also Sal-
mon’s Intro, Lect XI.)
Until about a quarter of a cent. ago no more
was known of the Gospel of Peter than of the
crowd of heretical gospels referred to
4, Gospel above. From Eusebius (HE, VI,
of Peter 12, 2) it was known that a Gospel of
Peter was in use in the church of
Rhossus, a town in the diocese of Antioch at the
end of the 2d cent., that controversy had arisen as
to its character, and that after a careful examina-
tion of it Serapion, bishop of Antioch (190-203),
had condemned it as docetic. Origen (d. 253 AD),
in his commentary on Mt 10 17, refers to the
gospel as saying that ‘“‘there are certain brothers
of Jesus, the sons of Joseph by a former wife, who
lived with him before Mary.’ Eusebius further
in HE, III, 3, 2 knows nothing of the Gospel
according to Peter being handed down as a catholic
writing, and in H#, III, 25, 6 he inclndes the
Gospel of Peter among the forged heretical gospels.
Theodoret, one of the Gr ecclesiastical historians
(390-459), says that the Nazarenes used a gospel
called “according to Peter.” The gospel is also
referred to in Jerome (De Viris Illustr., ch 1) and
it is condemned by the Decretum Gelasianum
(4967). Salmon (Intro, 231) remarks: “Of the
book no extracts have been preserved, and appar-
ently it never had a wide range of circulation.”
These words were written in 1885. In the follow-
ing year the French Archaeological Mission, work-
ing in upper Egypt, found in a tomb, supposed to he
a monk’s, at Akhmim (Panopolis), a parchment con-
taining portions of no less than three lost Christian
works, the Book of Enoch, the Gospel of Peter and
the Apocalypse of Peter. These were published
in 1892 and have given rise to much discussion.
The gospel has been carefully reproduced in fac-
simile and edited by competent scholars. The
fragment is estimated to contain about half of the
original gospel. It begins in the middle of the
history of the Passion, just after Pilate has washed
his hands from all responsibility and ends in the
middle of a sentence when the disciples at the end
of the Feast of Unleavened Bread were betaking
themselves to their homes. ‘But I [Simon Peter,


Apocryphal Gsp. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


the ostensible writer] and Andrew my brother took
our nets and went to the sea; and there was with us
Levi the son of Alphaeus whom the Lord... .. ue
Harnack (Texte und Untersuchungen, IX, 2, 2d ed,
76) exhibits about thirty new traits contained in the
Petrine account of the Passion and burial. These
are given in detail in an additional volume of the
Ante-Nicene Library: Recently Discovered MSS, etc,
Edinburgh, 1897. But Dr. Swete (Gospel of Peter,
xv, London, 1893) shows that “even details which
seem to be entirely new or which directly contradict
the canonical narrative, may have been suggested by
it’”’: and he concludes that notwithstanding the large
amount of new matter which it contains, “there is
nothing in this portion of the Petrine Gospel which
compels us to assume the use of sources other than
the canonical gospels.’ To Professor Orr (NT
Apocryphal Writings, xix f) the gnostie origin of the
gospel seems clear in the story given of the Resur-
rection; and its docetic character—that is, that it
proceeded from those who held that Christ had
only the semblance of a body—from the statement
that on the cross Jesus was silent as one who felt
no pain, and from the dying cry from the cross,
“My power, my power, thou hast forsaken me,”’
the really Divine Christ having departed before
the crucifixion. The date of the gospel has been
placed by some in the first quarter, and by others
in the third quarter, of the2d cent. For the other
newly discovered “Sayings of Jesus,’’ see Loata.

A Gospel of the Twelve is mentioned by Origen
(Hom. I, in Luc), and a few fragments of it are
preserved by Epiphanius (Haeres, 30 13-16, 22).
It commenced with the baptism, and was used by
the Ebionites. It was written, Zahn thinks, about
170 AD. A Gospel of Barnabas and Gospel -of
Bartholomew are condemned in the decree of Pope
Gelasius. The latter is mentioned by Jerome
(Prooem ad Matt).

II, Supplemental or Legendary Gospels.—Iin
all of the gospels of this class it is noteworthy that
considering the desire of the writers of non-canonical
gospels to multiply miracles, no notice is taken of
the period in the life of Christ that intervened be-
tween his twelfth year and his thirtieth. The
main reason for the omission probably is that no
special dogmatic end was to be served by the narra-
tive of this period of the Saviour’s life. Where
access cannot be had to these documents in their
original languages, it may be useful to point out that
a good and full translation of them may be found
in Vol XVI of Clark’s Ante- Nicene Library, Edin-
burgh, 1870.

1. Gospels of the Nativity: (a) The earliest of
these documents is the Protevangelium of James.

James is supposed to be the Lord’s


1. The brother. The title ‘“Protevangelium”
Protevan- or First Gospel—a catching title which
gelium of assumes much and suggests more—
James was given to this document by Pos-


tellus, a Frenchman, who first pub-
lished it in Latin in the year 1552. In the Gr
and Syr MSS, it is known by various other titles,
such as, The History of James concerning the Birth
of the All-Holy and LEver- Virgin Mother of God
and of Her Son Jesus Christ. Tischendorf in the
notes to ch i of his Hvang. Apoc gives a long list
of the names descriptive of it in the various MSS.
In the Gelasian Decree depriving it of canonical
authority it is simply styled Evangelium nomine
Jacobi minoris apocryphum. In this document the
birth of Mary is foretold by angelic announcement
to her parents, Joachim and Anna, as was that of
Jesus to Mary. It contains in twenty-five chs the
period from this announcement to the Massacre
of the Innocents, including accounts of the early
training of Mary in the temple, the Lukan narra-


198


tive of the hirth of Christ with some legendary
additions, and the death of Zacharias by order of
Herod for refusing to give information regarding
the place of concealment of Elisabeth and the
child John who, in their flight during the massacre,
are miraculously saved by the opening of a moun-
tain. At ch 18 a change takes place in the narra-
tive from the third to the first person, which has
been taken (NT Apoc Writings by Professor Orr,
D.D., London, 1903) to suggest an Essenian-
Ebionitic origin for the document, and at least to
argue for it a composite character, which again
may account for the great variety of view taken of
its date. It has been assigned (HB, I, 259) to the
1st cent. Zahn and Kriiger place it in the first
decade, many scholars in the second half of the
2d cent.; while others (e.g. Harnack) place it in
its present form as late as the middle of the 4th
cent. Good scholars (Sanday, The Gospels in the
Second Cent.) admit references to it in Justin Mar-
tyr which would imply that possibly in some older
form it was known in the first half of the 2d cent.
In its latest forms the document indicates the ob-
vious aim of the writer to promote the sanctity and
veneration of the Virgin. It has been shown to
contain a number of unhistorical statements. It
was condemned in the western church by Popes
Damasus (382), Innocent I (405) and by the De-
cretum Gelasianum (496?). It would seem ag if
the age thus deprived of the Protevangelium de-
manded some document of the same character to
take its place.
(6) A forged correspondence between Jerome and
two Italian bishops supplied a substitute in the
Gospel of the Pseudo-Matthew, which
2. Gospel Jerome was falsely represented to have
of Pseudo- rendered in Lat from the original Heb
Matthew of Mt. The gospel is known only
in Latin and, as already indicated,
is not earlier than the 5th cent. The Protevangel-
ium is freely used and supplemented from some
unknown (probably gnostic) source, and further
miracles especially connected with the sojourn in
Egypt have been wrought into it with others added
from the Childhood Gospel of Thomas. Some of the
miracles recorded of Egypt are represented as
fulfilments of OT prophecy, as when (ch 18) the
adoration of the infant Jesus by dragons recalls the
fulfilment of what was said by David the prophet:
“Praise the Lord from the earth, ye dragons: ye
dragons and all ye deeps”; or as when (ch 19)
lions and panthers adored them, showing the com-
pany the way in the desert, “bowing their heads
and wagging their tails and adoring Him with great
reverence,” which was regarded as a fulfilment of
the prophecy: ‘Wolves shall feed with lambs and
the lions and the ox shall eat straw together.”
In this gospel, too, appears for the first time the
notice of the ox and the ass adoring the child Jesus
in the manger, of which much was made in Christian
art. The gospel is further eked out by the relation
of several of the miracles connected with the Gospel
of the Childhood.
(c) The Gospel of the Nativity of Mary was
written in Lat. It goes over much the same ground
as the earlier portion of the Pseudo-
3. Nativity Matthew, but so differs from it as to
of Mary indicate a later date and a different
author. It includes more of the mirac-
ulous clement and daily angelic visits to Mary
during her residence in the temple. This gospel
makes Mary leave the'temple in her 14th year;
according to the gospel next described, where the
narrator is represented as the Son of Mary Himself,.
she left the temple in her 12th year, having lived
in it nine years. It was for long held to be the
work of Jerome, and from this gospel was almost


199


entirely formed the ““Golden Legend” which largely
took the place of the Scriptures in the 13th cent.
throughout Europe before the invention of print-
ing. It was among the books early printed in some
countries where (as in England) it might not be safe
to print the Scriptures. Its services to mediaeval
literature and art should not blind us to the fact
that it was a forgery deliberately introduced into
the service of the church about the 6th cent., when
the worship of Mary was specially promoted in the

church.
(d) To the same class of compositions belongs
the Gospel of Joseph the Carpenter. Originally
written in Coptic, it was translated


4, The into Arab., in which language with a
Gospel of Lat VS it was published in 1722.
Joseph the The composition is devoted to the
Carpenter glorification of Joseph, a cult which


was specially favored by the mono-
physite Copts. It dates from the 4th cent. It
contains in 22 chs the whole history of Joseph and
relates in the last part the circumstances of his
death at the age of 111 years. These are of some
importance for the history of dogma.
(e) Transitus Mariae: although not strictly a
gospel of the Nativity notice may here be taken of
the account of St. John the Theologian


5. The of the Falling Asleep (koimésis) of the
Passing of Holy Mother of God or as it is more
Mary commonly called ‘‘the Passing of


Mary” (éfransitus Mariae). It was
originally written in Gr, but appears also in Lat
and several other languages. Two years, it seems,
after the ascension of Jesus, Mary, who paid fre-
quent visits to the ‘‘Holy tomb of our Lord to burn
incense and pray” was persecuted by the Jews and
prayed her Son that He would take her from the
earth. The archangel Gabriel brings an answer
to her prayers and announces that after three days
she shall go to the heavenly places to her Son, into
true and everlasting life. Apostles from their
graves or from their dioceses are summoned to her
bedside at Bethlehem and relate how they were
occupied when thesummonsreached them. Miracles
of healing are wrought round the dying bed; and
after the instantaneous transportation of Mary and
the attendant apostles to Jerus, on the Lord’s
Day, amidst visions of angels Christ Himself
appears and receives her soul to Himself. Her
body is buried in Gethsemane and thereafter trans-
lated to Paradise. Judged by its contents which
reveal an advanced stage of the worship of the
Virgin and also of church ritual, the document
cannot have been produced earlier than the end
of the 4th or the beginning of the 5th cent., and it
has a place among the apocryphal documents
condemned by the Gelasian Decree. By this time
indeed it appears as if the writers of such documents
assumed the most unrestricted license in imagining
and embellishing the facts and situations regarding
the gospel narrative. .

2. The Gospels of the Childhood: (a) Next to
the Protevangelium the oldest and the most, widely
spread -of the apocryphal gospels is the


1. The Gospel of Thomas. It is mentioned
Gospel of | by Origen and Irenaeus and seems to
Thomas have been used by a gnostic sect of the

Nachashenes in the middle of the 2d
cent. It was docetic as regards the miracles re-


corded in it and on this account was also acceptable
to the Manichees. The author was one of the Mar-
cosians referred to by Irenaeus. Great variations
exist in the text, of which there are only late catholic
reeasts, two in Gr, one in Lat and one in Syr. One
of the Gr versions is considerably longer than the
other, while the Lat is somewhat larger than either.
They are very largely concerned with a record of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Apocryphal Gsp.


miracles wrought by Jesus before He was 12 years of
age. They depict Jesus as an extraordinary but by
no means a lovable child. Unlike the miracles of the
canonical Gospels those recorded in this gospel are
mainly of a destructive nature and are whimsical
and puerile in character. It rather shocks one to
read them as recorded of the Lord Jesus Christ. The
wonder-worker is described by Renan as “un gamin
omnipotent et omniscient,’ wielding the power
of the Godhead with a child’s waywardness and
petulance. Instead of being subject to His parents
He is a serious trouble to them; and instead of
growing in wisdom He is represented as forward and
eager to teach His instructors, and to be omniscient
from the beginning. The parents of one of the
children whose death He had caused entreat Joseph,
“Take away that Jesus of thine from this place for
he cannot dwell with us in this town; or at least
teach him to bless and not to curse.” Three or
four miracles of a beneficent nature are mentioned;
and in the Lat gospel when Jesus was in Egypt and
in his third year, it is written (ch 1), ‘“‘And seeing
boys playing he began to play with them, and he
took a dried fish and put it into a basin and ordered
it to move about. And it began to move about.
And he said again to the fish: ‘Throw out the salt
which thou hast, and walk into the water.’ And
it so came to pass, and the neighbors seeing what
had been done, told it to the widowed woman in
whose house Mary his mother lived. And as soon
as she heard it she thrust them out of her house
with great haste.” As Westcott points out in his
Intro to the Study of the Gospels, 444, “In the
apocryphal miracles we find no worthy conception
of the laws of providential interference; they are
wrought to supply present wants or to gratify
present feelings, and often are positively immoral;
they are arbitrary displays of power, and without
any spontaneity on our Lord’s part or on that of
the recipient.” Possibly the compilers of the 1st-
cent. narratives above mentioned had in many
cases deemed it expedient to make the miraculous
an essential—even a too prominent—part of their
story; and this may be the reason why John in the
opening of the Fourth Gospel declared all the re-
ported miracles of the Childhood to be unauthorized
by the statement that the first miracle was that
performed, after the beginning of the public min-
istry, at the marriage at Cana of Galilee. ‘This
beginning of his signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee,
and manifested his glory; and his disciples believed

on him” (Jn 2 11).
(b) The Arab. Gospel of the Childhood is a com-
posite production. Though first published in
Arab. with a Latin translation in 1697,


2. Arabic its Syr origin may be inferred from the
Gospel of use of the era of Alexander the Great.
the Child- in ch 2, from the acquaintance of the
hood writer with oriental learning, and from


that of the child Jesus, when in Egypt,
with astronomy and physics. The popularity of
the book among the Arabs and Copts in Egypt
may also be explained by the fact that the most
important of its miracles take place during the
Sojourn in Egypt. It is noteworthy also that
according to this gospel (ch 7) it was on the ground
of a prophecy of Zoroaster regarding the birth of the
Messiah that the Magi undertook their journey to
Bethlehem. Some of its stories also appear in the
JXoran and in other Mohammedan writings. Chs 1-
9 are based on the canonical Gospels of Matthew
and Luke and on the E recewennenum of James,
while chs 26 to the end are derived from the Gospel
of Thomas. The intermediate portion of the work
is thoroughly oriental in character and reads like
extracts from the Arabian Nights. It is not easy
to treat seriously the proposal to set productions


Apocryphal Gsp. Hh INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Apollyon


200


like these on anything approaching equality with
the canonical Gospels. The gospel also has much to
do with the growth of the veneration of the Virgin.
3. Gospels of the Passion and Resurrection: The
principal documents in this connection are the
Gospel of Nicodemus and to some


1. Gospel extent, as above shown, the Gospel of
of Nico- Peter. The Gospel of Nicodemus is a
demus name given not earlier than the 13th


cent. to a duplicate composition the
two parts of which were (1) the Acta Pilati or
Acts of Pilate and (2) the Descent of Christ to
the Lower World. The document professes to be
a translation into Gr from the Heb, and to have
been made in the 17th year of the emperor Theo-
dosius and the 6th of Valentinian. It exists in six
forms, two Gr and one Lat of the Acts of Pilate, and
two Lat and one Gr of the Descent to the Lower
World. The general consensus of scholars places
the composition in the 5th cent., though Tischendorf,
relying upon references in Justin and Tertullian,
places it in the 2d, a date by which it is quite
possible for the legend to have. arisen. Possibly
there has been some confusion between the report
on the proceedings connected with the trial and
crucifixion of Jesus that had to be furnished to the
emperor, as required by the rules of the Rom civil
service, and the extended record of the proceedings
contained in the Gospel of Nicodemus. The writer
was obviously a Jewish Christian. He wrote for
this class and was anxious to establish his record
by evidence from the mouths of the enemies of
Jesus and especially of the officials connected with
the events before and after the death of Jesus.
Pilate in particular is shown to be favorable to
Jesus and—a gap that must have struck many
readers of the canonical narratives—several of those
on whom miracles of healing had been wrought
come forward to give evidence in favor of Jesus—a
most natural step for a late narrator to suppose as
having taken place in a regular and formal trial,
but one which, as may be gathered from the silence
of the canonical writers, was omitted in the tur-
bulent proceedings of the priestly conspiracy that
ended with the crucifixion. With all the writer’s
acquaintance with Jewish institutions “he shows
himself in many points ignorant of the topography
of Pal; thinks, e.g. that Jesus was crucified in the
garden in which he was seized (ch 9) and places Mt.
Mamilch or Malek (S. of Jerus) in Galilee, and
confounds it with the Mount of Ascension” (Orr,
op. cit., xix). The second part of the gospel—The
Descent of Christ to the Lower World—is an ac-
count of an early and widely accepted tradition not
mentioned in any canonical Gospel but based upon
i Pet 3 19: ‘‘He went and preached unto thespirits
in prison.’ Two saints who were raised at His
resurrection relate how they had been confined in
Hades when the Conqueror appeared at its entrance,
how the gates of brass were broken and the prisoners
released, Jesus taking with Him to Paradise the
souls of Adam, Isaiah, John the Baptist and other
holy men who had died before Him. The docu-
ment is purely imaginary: its only importance is in
showing how this article of the creed was regarded
in the 4th cent.

Of even less importance are some late fabrications
referring to Pilate sometimes in the MSS attached
to the Gospel of Nicodemus, such as Pilate’s Letter
to the emperor Tiberius; Pilate’s Official Report,
above referred to; the Paradoses of Pilate and the
Death of Pilate, who, after condemnation to the
most disgraceful death, is represented as dying
by his own hand. In the Narrative of Joseph of
Arimathea the writer gives a loose rein to his imagi-
nation.

The study of the documents above described


fully justifies the observation of the editors of the
Ante-Nicene Library that while they afford us
“curious glimpses of the state of the Christian con-
science, and of modes of thought in the first centuries
of our era, the predominant impression which they
leave on our minds is a profound sense of the im-
measurable superiority, the unapproachable sim-
plicity and majesty, of the Canonical Writings.”


LiteRATURE.—In addition to the books quoted ahove
may be mentioned the following: Fabricius, Codex
Apocryphus, 1719; the collections and prolegomena of
Thilo (1832); Tischendorf, Gospels, 1853; Ellicott,
“On the Apocryphal Gospels’? in Cambridge Hssays,
1856; Lipsius, art. ‘‘Gospels (Apoc)"’ in Dict. of Christ.
Biog.; Dr. W. Wright in Journal of Sacred Lit. (January
aud April, 1865) on the Syr VSS of the Protevangelium,
The Gospel of Thomas, and the Transitus Mariae:
Studia Sinaitica (No. XI, 1902) giving new Syr nee


of the Protevangelium and Transitus Mariae.
Findlay, art. ‘‘ Acts (Apoc),’’ where will be found a very
copious body of references to works, British and foreign,
dealing with all branches of the subject.
J. HurcHison

APOLLON], ap-o-lo’ni-a (AmodAwvia, A polld-
nia): A town in Mygdonia, a district in Mace-
donia. It was situated a little to the south of Lake
Bolbe, on the Via Egnatia, the great Rom road
leading from the coast of the Adriatic to the river
Hebrus (Maritza), one of the mam military and
commercial highways of the empire: it lay between
Amphipolis and Thessalonica, a day’s journey (Livy
xlv.28) or about 30 Rom miles from the former and
38 from the latter. The foundation of the town may
perhaps be attributed to about 432 BC; in any case,
coins are extant which attest its existence in the 4th
cent. BC (Head, Historia Numorum, 181). Pauland
Silas passed through the town on their journey from
Philippi to Thessalonica, but do not appear to have
stayed there (Acts 17 1). The name seems to have
survived in the modern Pollina (Leake, Northern
Greece, III, 458; Cousinéry, Voyage dans la Macé-
doine, I, 115). Marcus N. Ton


APOLLONIUS, ap-o-lé‘/ni-us (CAroAAdv0os,
Apollénios): A common name among the Syro-
Macedonians. Prideaux (Connexion) interrupts
his narrative of the year 148 BC to give an account
of the different persons who bore this name. (1)
Son of Thrasaeus (2 Macc 3 5) who was governor
of Coele-Syria (Pal and Phoenicia) under Seleucus
Philopator, when Heliodorus came to Jerus to
rob the temple, and afterward, by his authority
in that province, supported Simon the governor of
the temple at Jerus against Onias the high priest.
He was also chief minister of state to King Seleucus.
But on the accession of Antiochus Epiphanes, Apol-
lonius, in some way becoming obnoxious to the new
king, left Syria and retired to Miletus. (2) A
son of (1) who, while his father resided at Miletus,
was brought up at Rome along with Demetrius,
son of Seleucus Philopator, and at that time held
as a hostage by the Romans. This Apollonius
lived in great intimacy with Demetrius, who, on
recovering the crown of Syria, made him governor
of Coele-Syria and Phoenicia, the same government
which his father held under Seleucus Philopator.
He seems to have been continued in the same
government by Alexander (1 Mace 10 69) but he
revolted from him to embrace the interest of Deme-
trius. (3) Son of Menestheus, and favorite and
chief minister of Antiochus Epiphanes (2 Mace 4
21). He went as ambassador from Antiochus,
first to Rome (Livy xlii.6) and afterward to Ptolemy
Philometor, king of Egypt (2 Macc 4 21). This
is generally held to be the same who is said to have
been over the tribute (1 Macc 1 29; 2 Macc 5
24) and who, on the return of Antiochus from his
last expedition into Egypt, was sent with a detach-
ment of 22,000 men to destroy Jerusalem. He
attacked the Jews while keeping the Sabbath day


201


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA reas Gsp.


holy and slew great multitudes of them (2 Macc 5
24-27). (4) Governor of Samaria in the time of
Antiochus Epiphanes. He was slain in battle by
Judas Maccabaeus (1 Mace 3 10.11; Ani, XII,
vii, 10). (5) Son of Gennaeus (2 Macc 12 2); as
governor of a toparchy in Pal under Antiochus
Eupator he proved a bitter enemy of the Jews.
J. Hurcuison

APOLLOPHANES, ap-o-lof’a-néz, a-pol-é-fa’néz
(Azoddobavns, Apollophdnés): A Syrian killed by
Judas Maccabaeus (2 Macc 10 37).


APOLLOS, a-pol’os (AmodAds, A pollés, the short
form of Apollonius): Apollos was a Jew of Alex-
andrian race (Acts 18 24) who reached Ephesus in
the summer of 54 AD, while St. Paul was on his
third missionary journey, and there he ‘spake
and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus”
(Acts 18 25). That he was eminently fitted for the


task is indicated by the fact of his being a “learned .


Wt


man,” “mighty in the scriptures,’ “fervent in
spirit,” “instructed in the way of the Lord” (vs
24.25). His teaching was however incomplete in
that he knew “only the baptism of John” (ver 25),
and this has given rise to some controversy. Ac-
cording to Blass, his information was derived from
a written gospel which reached Alexandria, but it
was more probably the fruits of what Apollos had
heard, either directly or from others, of the preach-
ing of John the Baptist at Bethany beyond Jordan
(cf Jn 1 28). Upon receiving further instruction
from Priscilla and Aquila (Acts 18 26), Apollos
extended his mission to Achaia, being encouraged
thereto by the brethren of Ephesus (ver 27). In
Achaia “he helped them much that had believed
through grace; for he powerfully confuted the Jews,
and that publicly, showing by the scriptures that
Jesus was the Christ” (vs 27.28). During Apollos’
absences in Achaia, St. Paul had reached Ephesus
and learned of what had been taught by Apollos
there (19 1). As St. Paul was informed that the
Ephesians still knew nothing of the baptism of the
Spirit (vs 2-4), it is probable that Apollos had not
imparted to his hearers the further instruction he
had received from Priscilla and Aquila, but had
departed for Achaia shortly after receiving it. St.
Paul remained upward of two years among the
Ephesians (vs 8.10), and in the spring of 57 AD he
wrote the First Epistle to the Corinthians. By this
time Apollos was once more in Ephesus (cf 1 Cor
16 12). Itis incredible that this epistle of St. Paul
could have been prompted by any feelings of jealousy
or animosity on his part against Apollos. It was
rather the outcome of discussion between the two
regarding the critical situation then existing in Cor-
inth. The mission of Apollos had met with a certain
success, but the breeding of faction, which that
very success, through the slight discrepancies in his
teaching (cf 1 Cor 1 12; 3 4) with that of Paul or
of Cephas, had engendered, was utterly alien to his
intentions. The party spirit was as distasteful to
Apollos as it was to St. Paul, and made him reluc-
tant to return to the scene of his former labors
even at the desire of St. Paul himself (16 12). The
epistle voiced the indignation of both. St. Paul
welcomed the codperation of Apollos (3 6: “I
planted, Apollos watered”). It was not against
his fellow-evangelist that he fulminated, but against
the petty spirit of those who loved faction more than
truth, who saw not that both he and Apollos came
among them as “God’s fellow-workers” (8 9), the
common servants of the one Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ. This view is also borne out by the tenor of
Clement’s Ep. to the Cor (cf Hennecke, Neutesta-
mentliche Apokryphen, 84-112, esp. 105): nor does
it conflict with the passages 1 Cor 12 1-7; 2 Cor
$1; 11 16, where St. Paul seems to allude to


Apollos’ eloquence, wisdom, and letter of com-
mendation. St. Paul wrote thus not in order to
disparage Apollos, but to affirm that, even without
these incidental advantages, he would yield to none
in the preaching of Christ crucified.

The last mention of Apollos is in the Ep.to Titus,
where he is recommended along with Zenas to
Titus (Titus 3 13). He was then on a journey
through Crete (1 5), and was probably the bearer
of the epistle. The time of this is uncertain, as the
writing of the Ep. to Titus, though generally ad-
mitted to have been after the release of St. Paul
from imprisonment at Rome, has been variously
placed at 64-67 AD. See Titus, Ep. To.

C. M. Kerr
_APOLLYON, a-pol’i-on ('AmodAtwv, A pollidn;
JIIAN , "dbhaddin, “destroyer’’): Present part. of
the vb. dodo, “to destroy.”

I. Definition.—A proper name, original with the
author of the Apocalypse and used by him once
(Rev 9 11) as a tr of the Heb word ‘‘Abaddon”
(see ABADDON) to designate an angel or prince of
the lower world.

Il. OT Background.—The term Abaddon (“de-
struction”) appears solely in the Wisd lit. of the OT

and in the following narrow range of


1, Funda- instances: Job 26 6; 28 22; 31 12; Ps
mental 88 11; Prov 15 11. In all these pas-
Meaning sages save one (Job 31 12) the word is


combined either with Sheol, “death,”
or ‘‘the grave,” in such a way as to indicate a purely
eschatological term based upon the advanced idea
of moral distinctions in the realm of the dead. In
the one exceptional passage (Est 8 6 is incorrectly
referred to—the word here is different, viz. JTAN,
’abhedhadn) where the combination does not occur,
the emphasis upon the moral element in the ‘‘de-
struction” mentioned is so definite as practically
to preclude the possibility of interpreting the term
in any general sense (as Charles, HDB, art.
“Abaddon”; per con., Briggs, 1CC, “Psalms”
inloc.; BDB, sub loc.). The meaning of the word,
therefore, is: the place or condition of utter ruin
reserved for the wicked in the realm of the dead.
One other feature of OT usage is worthy of con-
sideration as throwing ght upon Rev 9 11.
Abaddon and the accompanying
2. Personi- terms “Death” and Sheol are personi-
fication fied (as in Job 28 22) and represented
as living beings who speak and act
(cf Rev 6 8).
IH, NT Usage.—The starting-point of the
Apocalyptist’s use of ‘‘Apollyon” is to be found


in the fundamental meaning of
1. The “Abaddon” as moral destruction in
Starting- the underworld, together with the
Point occasional personification of kindred


terms in the OT. The imagery was

in general terms familiar while the NT writer felt
perfectly free to vary the usage to suit his own
particular purposes. :
(1) Since Apollyon is a personification he is not
to be identified with Satan (cf Rev 9 1 where
Satan seems to be clearly indicated)

2. Apollyon or with any other being to whom
not Satan historical existence and definite char-
but Part of acteristics are ascribed. He is the
an Ideal central figure in an ideal picture of
Description evil forces represented as originating
in the world of lost spirits and allowed

to operate destructively in human life. They are
pictured as locusts, but on an enlarged scale and
with the addition of many features inconsistent
with the strict application of the figure (see vs 7-10).
The intention is, by the multiplication of images
which the author does not attempt to harmonize,


Apostasy
Apostle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


202


to convey the impression of great power and far-
reaching destructiveness. (2) This interpretation
finds additional support in the writer’s significant
departure from the familiar usage. In the OT the
place of destruction is personified—in Rev 9 11,
personal forces issue from the Abyss, of which the
presiding genius is Destruction in person. The
seer’s picture is equally independent of the tradi-
tion represented by the Talm (Shab f. 55) where
Abaddon is personified as jointly with Death presi-
dent over six destroying angels. These modifica-
tions are evidently due to the exigencies of the
pictorial form. It is clearly impossible to portray

forces proceeding from the place of ruin
3. Apollyon in the charge of the place itself.


Necessary The importance of the conception of
to the Apollyon to the completeness of the
Picture picture should not be overlooked. It


is intended to represent these forces as
having a certain principle of internal unity and as
possessors of the power of effective leadership.

As to the specific significance of the vision of the
locusts as a whole it is not easy to reach a conclusion.

Professor Swete suggests (Comm. on
4. General Apocalypse in loc.) that ‘the locusts
Significance of the abyss may be the memories of
of the the past brought home at times of
Description divine visitation; they hurt by re-

calling forgotten sins.” It seems to
us more probable that it represents an actual his-
torical movement, past or to come, demoniacal in
origin and character, human in the mode of its
operation and the sphere of its influence, used by
God for a scourge upon mankind and kept in re-
straint by His grace and power. See ABannon.

Louis Marrazws Swrer

APOSTASY, a-pos’ta-si, APOSTATE, a-pos’-
tat (| aworracla, hé apostasia, “‘a standing away
from”): l.e. a falling away, a withdrawal, a de-
fection. Not found in the EV, but used twice in
the NT, in the Gr original, to express abandon-
ment of the faith. Paul was falsely accused of
teaching the Jews apostasy from Moses (Acts 21
21); he predicted the great apostasy from Christian-
ity, foretold by Jesus (Mt 24 10-12) which would
precede “the day of the Lord” (2 Thess 2 2).
Apostasy, not in name but in fact, meets scathing
rebuke in the Epistle of Jude, e.g. the apostasy of
angels (ver 6). Foretold, with warnings, as sure to
abound in the latter days (1 Tim 4 1-3; 2 Thess
23; 2 Pet 3 17). Causes of: persecution (Mt
24 9.10); false teachers (Mt 24 11); temptation
(Lk 8 13); worldliness (2 Tim 4 4); defective
knowledge of Christ (1 Jn 2 19); moral lapse (He
6 4-6); forsaking worship and spiritual living (10
25-31); unbelief (3 12). Biblical examples: Saul
(1S 18 11); Amaziah (2 Ch 25 14.27); many dis-
ciples (Jn 6 66); Hymenaeus and Alexander (1 Tim
1 19.20); Demas (2 Tim 4 10). For further illus-
tration see Dt 18 13; Zeph 1 4-6; Gal 5 4; 2 Pet
2 20.21.

“Forsaking Jehovah” was the characteristic and
oft-recurring sin of the chosen people, esp. in their
contact with idolatrous nations. It constituted
their supreme national peril. The tendency ap-
peared in their earliest history, as abundantly seen
in the warnings and prohibitions of the laws of
Moses (Ex 20 3.4.23; Dt 614; 1116). The
fearful consequences of religious and moral apostasy
appear in the curses pronounced against this sin,
on Mount Ebal, by the representatives of six of the
tribes of Israel, elected by Moses (Dt 27 13-26;
28 15-68). So wayward was the heart of Israel,
even in the years immediately following the national
emancipation, in the wilderness, that Joshua found
it necessary to re-pledge the entire nation to a
new fidelity to Jeh and to their original covenant


before they were permitted to enter the Promised
Land (Josh 24 1-28). Infidelity to this covenant
blighted the nation’s prospects arid growth during
the time of the Judges (Jgs 2 11-15; 10 6.10.13;
15 12 10). It was the cause of prolific and ever-
increasing evil, civic and moral, from Solomon’s
day to the Assyr and Bab captivities. Many of the
kings of the divided kingdom apostatized, leading
the people, as in the case of Rehoboam, into the
grossest forms of idolatry and immorality (1 K 14
22-24; 2 Ch 12 1). Conspicuous examples of such
royal apostasy are Jeroboam (1 K 12 28-32); Ahab
(1 K 16 30-33); Ahaziah (1 IX 22 51-53); Jehoram
(2 Ch 21 6.10.12-15); Ahaz (2 Ch 28 1-4); Ma-
nasseh (2 Ch 33 1-9); Amon (2 Ch 33 22). See
IpoLatry. Prophecy originated as a Divine and
imperative protest against this historic tendency to
defection from’ the religion of Jeh.

In classical Gr, apostasy signified revolt from a
military commander. In the Roman Catholic
church it denotes abandonment of religious orders;
renunciation of ecclesiastical authority; defection
from the faith. The persecutions of the early
Christian cents. forced many to deny Christian
discipleship and to signify their apostasy by offer-
ing incense to a heathen deity or blaspheming the
name of Christ. The emperor Julian, who probably
never vitally embraced the Christian faith, is known
in history as ‘‘the Apostate,’ having renounced
Christianity for paganism soon after his accession to
the throne.

An apostate’s defection from the faith may be
intellectual, as in the case of Ernst Haeckel, who,
because of his materialistic philosophy, publicly and
formally renounced Christianity and the church;
or it may be moral and spiritual, as with Judas, who
for filthy lucre’s sake basely betrayed his Lord.
See exhaustive art. on “Apostasy” in Jew Enc.

Dwicut M. Pratr

APOSTLE, a-pos’l (améerodos, apédstolos, lit.
“one sent forth,” an envoy, missionary): For
the meaning of this name as it meets us in the NT,
reference is sometimes made to classical and Jewish
parallels. In earlier classical Gr there was a dis-
tinction between an dggelos or messenger and an
apostolos, who was not a mere messenger, but a
delegate or representative of the person who sent
him. In the later Judaism, again, apostoloi were
envoys sent out by the patriarchate in Jerus to
collect the sacred tribute from the Jews of the
Dispersion. Itseems unlikely, however, that either
of these uses bears upon the Christian origin of a
term which, in any case, came to have its own dis-
tinctive Christian meaning. To understand the word
as we find it in the NT it is not necessary to go be-
yond the NT itself. To discover the source of its
Christian use it is sufficient to refer to its immediate
and natural signification. The term used by Jesus,
it must be remembered, would be Aram., not Gr,
and apostolos would be its literal equivalent.

In the NT history we first hear of the term as
applied by Jesus to the Twelve in connection with

that evangelical mission among the ©


1. The villages on which He dispatched them
Twelve at an early stage of His public ministry

(Mt 10 1ff; Mk 3 14; 6 30; Lk 6
13; 9 1ff). From a comparison of the Synoptics


it would seem that the name as thus used was not
a general designation for the Twelve, but had
reference only to this particular mission, which was
typical and prophetic, however, of the wider mission
that was to come (cf Hort, Christian Ecclesia,
23-29). Luke, it is true, uses the word as a title
for the Twelve apart from reference to the mission
among the villages. But the explanation probably
is, as Dr. Hort suggests, that since the Third Gospel
and the Book of Acts formed two sections of what


203


was really one work, the author in the Gospel
employs the term in that wider sense which it came
to have after the Ascension.

When we pass to Acts, ‘‘apostles”’ has become an
ordinary name for the Eleven (Acts 1 2.26), and
after the election of Matthias in place of Judas, for
the Twelve (2 37.42.48, etc). But even so it does
not denote a particular and restricted office, but
rather that function of a world-wide missionary
service to which the Twelve were especially called.
In His last charge, just before He ascended, Jesus
had commissioned them to go forth into all the
world and preach the gospel to every creature
(Mt 28 19.20; Mk 16 15). He had said that they
were to be His witnesses not only in Jerus and
Judaea, but in Samaria (contrast Mt 10 5), and
unto the uttermost part of the earth (Acts 1 8).
They were apostles, therefore, qua _missionaries—
not merely because they were the Twelve, but be-
cause they. were now sent forth by their Lord on a
universal mission for the propagation of the gospel.

The very fact that the name ‘apostle’ means
what it does would point to the impossibility of

confining it within the limits of the
2, Paul Twelve. (The ‘twelve apostles’ of
Rev 21 14 is evidently symbolic;
ef in 7 3 ff the restriction of God’s sealed servants
to the twelve tribes.) Yet there might be a tend-
ency at first to do so, and to restrict it as a badge of
honor and privilege peculiar to that inner circle
(cf Acts 1 25). If any such tendency existed,
Paul effectually broke it down by vindicating for
himself the right to the name. His claim appears
in his assumption of the apostolic title in the open-
ing words of most of his epistles. And when his
right to it was challenged, he defended that right
with passion, and especially on these grounds: that
he had seen Jesus, and so was qualified to bear
witness to His resurrection (1 Cor 9 1; ef Acts 22
6 ff); that he had received a call to the work of
an apostle (Rom 11; 1 Cor 11, etc; Gal 2 7;
ef Acts 13 2ff; 22 21); but, above all, that he
could point to the signs and seals of his apostleship
furnished by his missionary labors and their fruits
(1 Cor 9 2; 2 Cor 12 12; Gal 2 8). It was by
this last ground of appeal that Paul convinced
the original apostles of the justice of his claim. He
had not been a disciple of Jesus in the days of His
flesh; his claim to have seen the risen Lord and
from Him to have received a personal commission
was not one that could be proved to others; but
there could be no possibility of doubt as to the seals
of his apostleship. It was abundantly clear that
“he that wrought for Peter unto the ayeep of
the circumcision wrought for [Paul] also unto the
Gentiles’? (Gal 2 8). And so perceiving the grace
that was given unto him, Peter and John, together
with James of Jerus, recognized Paul as apostle to
the Gentiles and gave him the right hand of fellow-
ship (ver 9). :

It is sometimes said by those who recognize
that there were other apostles besides the Twelve

and Paul that the latter (to whom


3. The some, on the ground of 1 Cor 15 7;
Wider Gal 1 19, would add James the Lord’s
Circle brother) were the apostles par excel-


lence, while the other apostles men-
tioned in the NT were apostles in some inferior
sense. It is hardly possible, however, to make out
such a distinction onthe ground of NT usage. There
were great differences, no doubt, among the apostles
of the primitive church, as there were among the
Twelve themselves—differences due to natural
talents, to personal acquirements and experience,
to spiritual gifts. Paul was greater than Barnabas
or Silvanus, just as Peter and John were greater
than Thaddaeus or Simon the Cananaean. But


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Apostasy
Apostle


Thaddaeus and Simon were disciples of Jesus in the
very same sense as Peter and John; and the Twelve
and Paul were not more truly apostles than others
who are mentioned in the NT. If apostleship
denotes missionary service, and if its reality, as
Paul suggests, is to be measured by its seals, it
would be difficult to maintain that Matthias was
an apostle par excellence, while Barnabas was not.
Paul sets Barnabas as an apostle side by side with
himself (1 Cor 9 5f; Gal 29; cf Acts 13 2f;
14 4.14); he speaks of Andronicus and Junias as
“of note among the apostles” (Rom 16 7); he
appears to include Apollos along with himself among
the apostles who are made a spectacle unto the
world and to angels and to men (1 Cor 4 6.9); the
natural inference from a comparison of 1 Thess 1 1
with 2 6 is that he describes Silvanus and Timothy
as ‘apostles of Christ”; to the Philippians he men-
tions Epaphroditus as ‘your apostle’ (Phil 2 25
RVm), and to the Corinthians commends certain
unknown brethren as ‘the apostles of the churches”
and ‘‘the glory of Christ” (2 Cor 8 23 RVm). And
the very fact that he found it necessary to denounce
certain persons as “false apostles, deceitful workers,
fashioning themselves into apostles of Christ’
(11 13) shows that there was no thought in the
primitive church of restricting the apostleship to a
body of 12 or 13 men. “Had the number been
definitely restricted, the claims of these interlopers
would have been self-condemned” (Lightfoot, Gala-
tians, 97).
When we come to the Did, which probably lies
beyond the boundary-line of NT history, we find
the name “apostles” applied to a
4. Apostles whole class of nameless missionaries—
in Didache men who settled in no church, but
moved about from place to place as
messengers of the gospel (ch 11). This makes it
difficult to accept the view, urged by Lightfoot
(op. cit., 98) and Gwatkin (HDB, IJ, 126) on the
ground of Lk 24 48; Acts 18.22; 1 Cor 9 1,
that to have seen the Lord was always the primary
qualification of an apostle—a view on the strength
of which they reject the apostleship of Apollos and
Timothy, as being late converts to Christianity who
lived far from the scenes of Our Lord’s ministry.
Gwatkin remarks that we have no reason to suppose
that this condition was ever waived unless we throw
forward the Did into the 2d cent. But it seems
very unlikely that even toward the end of the
Ist cent. there would be a whole class of men, not
only still alive, but still braving in the exercise of
their missionary functions all the hardships of a
wandering and homeless existence (cf Did 11 4-6),
who were yet able to bear the personal testimony of
eye-witnesses to the ministry and resurrection of
Jesus. In Lk 24 48 and Acts 1 8.22 it is the
chosen company of the Twelve who are in view.
In 1 Cor 9 1 Paul is meeting his Judaizing oppo-
nents on their own ground, and answering their
insistence upon personal intercourse with Jesus by a
claim to have seen the Lord. But apart from these
passages there is no evidence that the apostles of
the early church were necessarily men who had
known Jesus in the flesh or had been witnesses of
His resurrection— much less that this was the
primary qualification on which their apostleship was
made to rest.
We are led then to the conclusion that the true
differentia of the NT apostleship lay in the mission-
ary calling implied in the name, and
6. The that all whose lives were devoted to
Apostleship this vocation, and who could prove
by the issues of their labors that God’s
Spirit was working through them for the conversion
of Jew or Gentile, were regarded and described as
apostles. The apostolate was not a limited circle


Apostle
Apostles’ Creed


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


204


of officials holding a well-defined position of author-
ity in the church, but a large class of men who
discharged one—and that the highest—of the func-
tions of the prophetic ministry (1 Cor 12 28;
Eph 4 11). It was on the foundation of the apostles
and prophets that the Christian church was built,
with Jesus Christ Himself as the chief corner-stone
(Eph 2 20). The distinction between the two classes
was that while the prophet was God’s spokesman to
the believing church (1 Cor 14 4.22.25.30.31), the
apostle was His envoy to the unbelieving world
(Gal 2 7.9).

The call of the apostle to his task might come in a
variety of ways. The Twelve were called personally
by Jesus to an apostolic task at the commencement
of His earthly ministry (Mt 10 1ff||), and after
His resurrection this call was repeated, made per-
manent, and given a universal scope (Mt 28 19.20;
Acts 1 8). Matthias was called first by the voice
of the general body of the brethren and thereafter
by the decision of the lot (Acts 1 15.23.26). Paul’s
call came to him in a heavenly vision (Acts 26
17-19); and though this call was subsequently
ratified by the church at Antioch, which sent him
forth at the bidding of the Holy Ghost (43 1 ff),
he firmly maintained that he was an apostle not
from men neither through man, but through Jesus
Christ and God the Father who raised Him from
the dead (Gal 11). Barnabas was sent forth
(exapostéll6 is the vb. used) by the church at Jerus
(Acts 11 22) and later, along with Paul, by the
church at Antioch (13 1); and soon after this
we find the two men described as apostles (14 4).
It was the mission on which they were sent that
explains the title. And when this particular mis-
sion was completed and they returned to Antioch
to rehearse before the assembled church “all things
that God had done with them, and that he had
opened a door of faith unto the Gentiles” (ver 27),
they thereby justified their claim to be the apostles
not only of the church, but of the Holy Spirit.

The authority of the apostolate was of a spiritual,
ethical and personal kind. It was not official, and
in the nature of the case could not be transmitted to
others. Paul claimed for himself complete inde-
pendence of the opinion of the whole body of the
earlier apostles (Gal 2 6.11), and in seeking to
influence his own converts endeavored by manifes-
tation of the truth to commend himself to every
man’s conscience in the sight of God (2 Cor 4 2).
There is no sign that the apostles collectively exer-
cised a separate and autocratic authority. When
the question of the observance of the Mosaic ritual
by gentile Christians arose at Antioch and was
referred to Jerus, it was “the apostles and elders”
who met to discuss it (Acts 15 2.6.22), and the
letter returned to Antioch was written in the name
of “the apostles and the elders, brethren” (ver 23).
In founding a church Paul naturally appointed the
first local officials (Acts 14 23), but he does not
seem to have interfered with the ordinary adminis-
tration of affairs in the churches he had planted.
In those cases in which he was appealed to or was
compelled by some grave scandal to interpose, he
rested an authoritative command on some express
word of the Lord (1 Cor 7 10), and when he had
no such word to rest on, was careful to distinguish
his own judgment and counsel from a Divine com-
mandment (vs 12.25.40). His appeals in the latter
case are grounded upon fundamental principles of
morality common to heathen and Christian alike
(1 Cor 5 1), or are addressed to the spiritual
judgment (10 15), or are reinforced by the weight
of a personal influence gained by unselfish service
and by the fact that he was the spiritual father of
his converts as having begotten them in Christ
Jesus through the gospel (4 15 f).


It may be added here that the expressly mission-
ary character of the apostleship seems to debar
James, the Lord’s brother, from any claim to the
title. James was a prophet and teacher, but not an
apostle. As the head of the church at Jerus, he
exercised a ministry of a purely local nature. The
passages on which it has been sought to establish his
right to be included in the apostolate do not furnish
any satisfactory evidence. In 1 Cor 15 7 James is
contrasted with ‘‘all the apostles” rather than in-
cluded in their number (cf 9 5). Andin Gal 1 19
the meaning may quite well be that with the excep-
tion of Peter, none of the apostles was seen by Paul in
Jerus, but only James the Lord’s brother (cf RVm).


Lirerature.— Lightfoot, Galatians, 92-101; Hort,
Christian Ecclesia, Lect II; Weizsacker, The Apostolic Age,
II, 291-99; Lindsay, The Church and the Ministry, 73-90.


J. C. Lamperr

APOSTLES’ CREED, kréd, THE: The Apostles’
Creed is the oldest creed, and lies at the basis of

most others. Though not, as the long-
The Oldest current legend of its origin affirmed,
Creed the direct work of the Apostles, it has

its roots in apostolic times, and em-
bodies, with much fidelity, apostolic teaching. It
will be seen immediately that it had an important
place in the early church, when as yet no creed hut
itself existed. The oldest usage of the term “Rule
of Faith” (regula fidet), now commonly given to the
Scriptures, has reference to this creed. It was the
creed that could be appealed to as held by the
church in all its great branches, and so as forming
the test of catholicity. It was as resting on this
ereed that the church could be called “catholic
and apostolic.” Of late the creed has been the
subject of great controversy, and violent attempts
have been made to thrust out some of its chief
articles from the Christian faith. This is a special
reason for considering the foundations on which
these articles of faith rest.

I. Form of the Creed.—In the first: place, what
ts the creed? Here, first of all, it is to be pointed
out that the received form of the creed is not its
oldest or original form. The creed exists in two
forms—a shorter and a longer; the former, known
as the Old Rom Form, going back certainly as
early as the middle of the 2d cent. (about 140 AD),
the latter, the enlarged form, in its present shape, of
much later date. Its final form was probably given
to it in 8. Gaul not before the middle of the 5th
cent. (in one or two clauses, as late as the 7th). It
is desirable, at the outset, to put these two forms
of the creed (in translation) clearly before the reader.

First, the Old Rom Form is given from the Gr
of Marcellus, of Ancyra, 341 AD. It runs thus:

“T believe in God the Father Almighty. And in
Jesus Christ His only (begotten) Son our Lord,

who was born of the Holy Ghost and


1. Old the Virgin Mary; crucified under Pon-
Roman tius Pilate, and buried; the third day
Form He rose from the dead; He ascended


into heaven, and sitteth at the right
hand of the Father, from thence He shall come to
judge the quick and the dead. And in the Holy
Ghost; the boly Church; the forgiveness of sins;
the resurrection of the body; (the life everlasting).’
The last clause is omitted in the Latin form pre-
served by Rufinus, 390 AD.
The Received Form of the creed reads thus:
“T believe in God the Father Almighty; Maker
of Heaven and Earth; and in Jesus Christ His
only (begotten) Son our Lord; who


2. The was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
Received born of the Virgin Mary; suffered
Form under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,


dead, and buried; He descended into
hell; the third day He rose from the dead; He


205


ascended into heaven; and sitteth at the right hand
of God the Father Almighty; from thence He shall
come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe
in the Holy Ghost; the holy catholic Church; the
communion of saints; the forgiveness of sins; the
resurrection of the body; and the life everlasting.
Amen.”

Such is the form of the creed. Something must
now be said of its origin and history. :

II, Origin of the Creed.—The legend was that
the creed took shape at the dictation of the Twelve
Apostles, each of whom contributed a special article.
Thus Peter, it was alleged, under the inspiration
of the Holy Ghost, commenced, “I believe in God
the Father Almighty”; Andrew (or according to
others, John) ,continued, “And in Jesus Christ,
His only Son, our Lord’’; James the elder went on,
“Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,’ ete.
This legend is not older than the 5th or 6th cent.,
and is absurd on the face of it.

The real origin of the creed has now been traced
with great exactness. The original germ of it is to

be sought for in the baptismal con-


1. Baptis- fession made by converts in the re-
mal Con- ception of that rite. The primitive
fession confession may have contained no


more than “I believe that Jesus is the
Son of God,” but we have evidence within the
NT itself that it soon became enlarged. Paul
speaks of the ‘form of teaching’’ delivered to con-
verts (Rom 6 17), and reminds Timothy of ‘the
good [beautiful] confession” he had made in sight
of many witnesses (1 Tim 6 12). Similar language
is used of Christ’s confession before Pilate (ver 13).
We may perhaps conjecture from the epistles that
Timothy’s confession contained references to God
as the author of life, to Jesus Christ and His descent
from David, to His witness before Pontius Pilate,
to His being raised from the dead, to His coming
again to judge the quick and the dead (1 Tim 6
13; 2 Tim 2 8; 41). Early Christian writers, as
Ignatius (110 AD), and Aristides the apologist (cir
125 AD), show traces of other clauses.

In any case, the fact is certain that before the
middle of the 2d cent. the confession at baptism
had crystallized into tolerably settled
shape in all the greater churches. We
have accounts given us of its contents
(besides the Old Rom Form) in Ire-
naeus, Tertullian, Novatian, Origen, etc; and they
show substantial unity with a certain freedom of
form in expression. But the form in the Rom
church came gradually to be the recognized type.
After the middle of the cent., the confession rose
to new importance as the result of the gnostic
controversies, and assumed more of the character
of aformal creed. It came to he known as the ‘‘Rule
of Truth,” or “Rule of Faith,” and was employed
to check the license of interpretation of Scripture
of these fantastic heretical speculators. The creed
had originated independently of Scripture—in the
early oral teaching and preaching of the apostles;
hence its value as a witness to the common faith.
But it was not used to supersede Scripture; it was
held to corroborate Scripture, where men by their
allegorical and other perversions sought to wrest
Scripture from its real sense. It was employed as
a check on those who’sought to allegorize away the
Christian faith.

Ill. History of the Creed.—The Old Rom
Form of the creed was, as said above, certainly in

use by the middle of the 2d cent.,


2. “Rule
of Faith’”’


1. The in Rome; probably a considerable
Roman time before. We have it in both its
Creed Gr and Lat forms (the Gr being prob-


ably the original). The Lat form is
given by Rufinus about 390 AD who compares it


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Apostle
Apostles’ Creed


with the creed of his own church of Aquileia—a
very old church. The Gr form is preserved by
Marcellus, of Ancyra, in the 4th cent. The old
shorter form of the creed long maintained itself.
We find it in England, e.g. up to nearly the time of
the Norman Conquest (in 8th or 9th cent. MSS

in British Museum).
The Received Form of the creed has a much more
obscure history. The additional clauses came in at
different times, though in themselves


2. The some of them are very old. The
Received addition to the first art., e.g. “Maker
Creed of heaven and earth,” first appears in


in this form in Gaul about 650 AD,
though similar forms are found in much older creeds.
Another addition, “(He descended into hell,” meets
us first in Rufinus as part of the creed of Aquileia,
but is probably also oldin that church. It is known
that the creed had assumed nearly its present shape
(perhaps without the above clauses, and that on the
communion of saints) by the time of Faustus of
Reiz, about 460 AD. Thence it spread, and had
reached Ireland apparently before the end of the
7th cent. In England it appears a cent. later,
about 850 AD (from the court of Charlemagne?),
and from the beginning of the 10th cent. it largely
superseded the older form. The same applies to
other countries, so that the Gallican form is now the
one in common use. Two significant changes may
be noted in the form given to it. In England,
whose form we follow, the Reformers substituted
for “‘the resurrection of the flesh” the words, “the
resurrection of the body,’ and in Germany the
Lutherans change the word ‘‘catholic” to “Chris-
tian,” in “the holy catholic Church.”’

IV. Structure of the Creed.—The Apostles’
Creed, it will be perceived, has no theological or

metaphysical character. It is not
1. Its only the oldest, but the simplest and
Trinitarian least developed of all creeds. It is a
Form simple enumeration, in order, of the

great verities which the church was
known to have held, and to have handed down from
the beginning—which Scripture also taught. Origi-
nating from the baptismal confession, it naturally
follows the Trinitarian order suggested by the cus-
tomary formula for baptism. The first art. declares
belief in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven
and earth. The second to the seventh arts. declare
belief in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord, and
in the great facts embraced in the gospel testimony
regarding Him. The eighth art. affirms belief in
the Holy Ghost, to which are appended the addi-
tional clauses, declaring belief in the holy catholic
church, the communion of saints, the forgiveness
of sins, the resurrection of the flesh (body), and the
life everlasting.

It will help to show the kind of heresies the church
of that age had to contend with, and what the
earnest struggles of the Fathers of the time (using
the Apostles’ Creed as a bulwark), if we append
here the Creed of Apelles, a 2d-cent. Gnostic, as
reconstructed by Principal Lindsay (The Church
and the Ministry, 222) from Hippolytus:

“We believe, that Christ descended from the
Power above, from the Good, and that He is the
Son of the Good; that He was not
born of a virgin, and that when He
did appear He was not devoid of flesh.
That He formed His Body by taking
portions of it from the substance of the universe,
ie. hot and cold, moist and dry; That He received
cosmical powers in the Body, and lived for the time
He did in the world; That He was crucified by: the
Jews and died; That being raised again after three
days He appeared to His disciples; That He showed
them the prints of the nails and (the wound) in His


2. Creed
of Apelles


Apostles
Apparition


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


206


side, being desirous of persuading them that He
was no phantom, but was present in the flesh; That
after He had shown them His flesh He restored
it to the earth; That after He had once more loosed
the chains of His Body He gave back heat to what
is hot, cold to what is cold, moisture to what is
moist, and dryness to what is dry; That in this
condition He departed to the Good Father, leaving
the Seed of Life in the world for those who through
His disciples should believe in Him.”

V. Modern Controversies.—It was mentioned
that of late the Apostles’ Creed has been the sub-
ject of many attacks and of keen controversies.
In Germany, particularly, quite a fierce controversy
broke out in 1892 over the refusal of a Lutheran
pastor, named Schrempf, to use the creed in the
administration of baptism. He did not believe
in its arts. about the virgin-birth of Christ, the resur-
rection of the flesh, etc. The offender was deposed,
but a great battle ensued, giving rise to an enormous
literature. The conflict has been overruled for
good in leading to a more thorough examination
than ever before of the history and meaning of the
creed, but it has given precision also to the attacks
made upon it. A leading part in this controversy
was taken by Professor Harnack, of Berlin, whose
objections may be regarded as_ representative.
Professor Harnack, and those who think with him,
criticize the creed from a twofold point of view:
(1) They deny that in all respects it represents
true apostolical doctrine—this not only in its later
arts., but even in such an art. as that affirming the
virgin-birth of Christ: (2) They deny that the
meaning we now put on many of the clauses of the
creed is its true original meaning, i.e. we use the
words, but with a different sense from the original
framers.

In considering these objections, it is always to be
remembered that those who urge them do so from
the standpoint of rejection of most
that is usually considered essential
to Christianity. There is in their
‘view no incarnation, no real Godhead
of Christ, no real miracle in His life (only faith-
cures), no resurrection from Joseph’s tomb. This
no doubt takes the bottom from the Apostles’
Creed, but it takes the bottom also out of apostolic
Christianity. Where Harnack, for instance, ob-
jects that ‘‘Father” and “Son” in the first and second
arts. of the creed have no Trinitarian reference,
but relate only, the former to God’s relation to
creation, the latter, to Christ's historical appearance,
the reply can only be the whole evidence in the NT
for a Trinitarian distinction and for the essential
Divinity of Christ. When it is declared that the
virgin-birth is no part of the early Christian tra-
dition, one can only appeal to the evidence of the
fact in the Gospels, and recall that no section of the
Christian church, except a heretical branch of the
Ebionites, and some of the gnostic sects, is known
to have rejected it. (See Vircin-Birru.) For de-
tailed replies to Harnack’s criticisms, Dr. Swete’s
book on the Aposiles’ Creed may be consulted.


Literatuns.—aA list of the voluminous pamphlet
literature produced by, the German controversy on the
Apostles’ Creed may be seen in Nippold’s Die theolo-
gische Hinzelschule, II, 232-33. The most important
contributions are those of Harnack (Das apostolische
Glaubensbekenntniss, also ET); Kattenbusch, and
Cremer. Cf also Schaff, Creeds of Christendom, I, 14-23;
II, 45-55. Special works are: Pearson, Exposition of
the Creed (1659); Kattenbusch, Das apostolische Sym-
bolum, 2 vols (1894-1900); Zahn, Das anpostolische
Symbolum (1893); ET (1899); H. B. Swete, The Apostles’
Creed and Primitive Christianity (1894);:A. C. McGiffert,
The Anposties’ Creed, Its Origin, Its Purpose, and Its
Historical Interpretation (1902). James ORR


APOSTLES, GOSPEL OF THE TWELVE. See
APOCRYPHAL GOSPELS.


Harnack’s
Criticism


APOSTOLIC AGE, ap-os-tol’ik 4j: (1) When the
disciples realized that they had seen the risen
Christ for the last time and that

1. The it had now become their duty to
Mission spread His message, they gathered
themselves together and restored the
number of ‘witnesses’ to the appointed Twelve.
Immediately afterward the outpouring of the Holy
Spirit gave them the signal to begin work. At first
this work was rigidly centered in Jerus, and the
first journeyings were the result of forcible disper-
sion and not of planned effort fActs 11 19). But
pilgrims to the feasts had carried away the gospel
with them, and in this way Christianity had been
spread at least as far as Damascus (9 2.19). The
dispersion itself widened the circle-to Cyprus and
to Antioch and marked the beginning of the gentile
work (11 19-20). Here the extreme prominence
of St. Paul’s ministry in the NT should not obscure
the success of the other missionaries. When the
apostles began their journeys we do not know but
at the time of Gal 1 19 only St. Peter represented
the Twelve in Jerus. ‘St. Paul mentions their
extended work in 1 Cor 9 5.6 and it seems certain
that St. Peter was in Rome shortly before his death.
The troubles caused St. Paul by the Judaizers at
least give evidence of the missionary zeal of the
latter. Barnabas and Mark worked after their
separation from St. Paul (Acts 15 39) and gentile
Christianity existed in Rome long before the latter’s
arrival there (Rom 1 13). By the year 100 it ap-
pears that Christianity extended around the Medi-
terranean from Alexandria to Rome (and doubtless
farther, although data are scanty), while Asia
Minor was especially pervaded by it. (2) Many
factors coéperated to help the work: Peace was
universal and communication was easy. Gr was
spoken everywhere. The protection given Judaism
sheltered from civil interference. The presence of
Judaism insured hospitality and hearers for at least
thefirst effortsto convert. The Jews’ own proselytiz-
ing zeal (Mt 23 15) had prepared Gentiles to receive
Christianity. And not the least element was the
break-up of the old religions and the general looking
to the East for religious satisfaction. (3) For the
methods, St. Paul’s procedure is probably typical.
Avoiding the smaller places, he devoted himself
to the cities as the strategic points and traveled
in a direct route, without side-journeys. In this
way a “‘line of fire’ (Harnack) was traced, and the
flame could be trusted to spread of its own accord
to each side of the road. So as fruits of St. Paul’s
work at Ephesus there appear churches at Colossae
and Laodicea some hundred and twenty miles away
(Col 2 1; 4 16). The churches founded needed
revisiting and confirming, but when the apostle
felt that they could shift for themselves, he felt
also that his work in the East was over (Rom 16 23).
The members of the earliest Jerus church thought
of themselves simply as Jews who had a true under-
standing of the Messiah and so con-

2. Jerusa- stituting a new “way” or “party”
lem Church (hardly ‘“‘sect’’) in Judaism (Acts 22
4, esp.). At first they were suffered

to grow unmolested and their right to exist was
apparently unquestioned, for the Sadducean actions
of Acts 4 1; 6 17 were in, the nature of police
precautions. And it is significant that the first
attack was made on a foreigner, St. Stephen. He
seems to have angered the crowds by preaching
the impending destruction of the Temple, although
he was martyred for ascribing (practically) Divine
honors to Jesus (7 56). Yet the apostles were not
driven from the city (8 1) and the church was able
to continue its development. In 41, the Rom repre-
sentatives gave way to the Pharisaically inclined
Agrippa I and (for reasons that are not clear)


207


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Apostles
Apparition


persecution broke out in which St. James was
martyred and St. Peter delivered only by a miracle
(Acts 12). With the resumption of Rom rule in
44 the persecution ceased. Some peaceable mode
of living was devised, as appears from the absence
of further allusions to troubles (cf Acts 21 17-26)
and from the accounts of Josephus and Hegesippus
of the esteem in which James the Lord’s brother
was held. His martyrdom (in 62?) was due to the
tension that preceded the final revolt against Rome,
in which the Christians of Jerus took no part.
Instead, they retired across the Jordan to Pella
(Rev 12 13-17), where they formed a close,
intensely Jewish body under the rule of the de-
scendants of Christ’s brethren according to the
flesh. Some mission work was done farther to the
east but in the 2d cent. they either were absorbed
in normal Christianity or became one of the factors
that produced Ebionism.
Many members of this body (and, doubtless,
other Jewish Christians outside it) showed various
degrees of inability to understand the
3. Judaists gentile work. The acceptance of an
uncircumcised Christian as ‘saved’?
offered fairly slight difficulty (Gal 2 3; Acts 15).
But to eat with him was another thing and one that
was an offence to many who accepted his salvation
(Gal 2 12.13). The rigorous conclusion that the
Law bound no Christian was still another thing
and one that even St. James could not accept
(Acts 21 21). At the time of Gal 2 9, the “pil-
lars’ were as yet not thinking of doing gentile
work. St. Paul’s controversies are familiar and
probably the last friction did not end until the fall
of Jerus. But the difficulties grew gradually less
and 1 Pet is evidence that St. Peter himself finally
accepted the full status of Gentiles.
From the Rom power Christianity was safe at
first, as the distinctions from Judaism were thought
too slight to notice (Acts 18 14-16;
4. Relations 26 19). (Troubles such as those of
with Rome Acts 17 9 were due to disturbance
of the peace.) So the government was
thought of as a protector (2 Thess 2 7) and spoken
of in the highest terms (Rom 13 1; 1 Pet 2 13.14).
But, while absolute isolation was not observed (1
Cor 10 27), yet the Christians tended more and
more to draw themselves into bodies with little
contact with the world around them (1 Pet 4 3-5),
so provoking suspicion and hostility from their
neighbors. Hence they were a convenient scape-
goat for Nero after the burning of Rome. It is
uncertain how far his persecution spread or how
far persecutions occurred from his time until the
end of the reign of Domitian (see Peter, First
EpistteE oF), but in Rev Rome has become the
symbol for all that is hostile to Christ.
Influence of the “pagan” religions on Christian-
ity is not very perceptible in the 1st cent. But
syncretism was the fashion of the day
6. “Hellen- and many converts must have attempt-
ism” ed to combine the new religion with
views that they held already (or that
they learned still later). Apparently little attention
was paid to this attempt, if restricted to entirely
minor details (1 Cor 15 29?), but in Col 2 8-23 a
vital matter is touched. The danger is more acute
in the Pastorals (1 Tim 1 4; 4 3; Titus 3 9) and
in Rev 2 great harm is being done. And Jude, 2
Pet, and 1 Jn contain direct polemics against the
systems so arising, the beginnings of what in the
2d_ cent. appeared as Gnosticism. ;
For further details see the separate articles,
esp. Ministry; New Testament Canon; and (for
life in the Apostolic Age) Sprrrruat Girts.


Lirerature.—See the separate articles. Works with
the title Apostolic Age are by Gilbert (brief), Bartlet (use-


ful), Purves (very conservative), Ropes, McGiffert, and
Weizsicker. The last three are for critical study.


Burton Scotr Easton
APOSTOLICAL CHURCH ORDINANCES.
See Dipacue.


APOSTOLICAL CONSTITUTIONS. See Dr
DACHE.


_APOSTOLICAL COUNCIL, ap-os-tol‘i-kal koun’-
sil: The assembly of the apostles and elders held
in Paeay (49 AD), an aceount of which is given in

cts 16.


APOSTOLIC FATHERS: An appellation usu-
ally given to the writers of the lst cent. who em-
ployed their pens in the cause of Christianity. See
Sus-Apostoiic LITERATURE.


APOSTOLIC FATHERS, EPISTLES OF. See
Sus-Apostoiic LITERATURE.


APOTHECARY, a-poth’é-k4-ri: Found in EV
eight times in the OT and Apoc for Heb word
rendered more accurately “perfumer’” by RV in
Ex 30 25.35; 87 29; Eccl 10 1; though inconsist-
ently retained elsewhere (2 Ch 16 14 ERV; Neh
3 8 ERV [cf mJ); Sir 38 8; 49 1). See Perrumer.


APPAIM, ap’a-im, ap’-i-im (D°BN, 'appayim,
“nostrils’”’): A son of Nadab of the house of Jerah-
meel, of Judah (1 Ch 2 30f).


APPAREL, a-par’el: The Eng. equivalent of six
Heb and three Gr words, variously signifying all
kinds of raiment, chiefly garments costly and beauti-
ful: ornamental (2 8 1 24); royal, as of Ahasuerus
(Est 6 8), of Herod (Acts 12 21, éo6ys, esthés); of
kings’ daughters (2 8 18 18); priestly (Ezr 3 10);
also mourning (28 14 2). In 18 17 38.39 “ap-
parel” replaces “armor” of AV: “Saul clad David
with his apparel,’ probably some close-fitting gar-
ment worn under the armor, or sometimes without
it. Severe judgment was pronounced on Jewish
princes who clothed themselves with “strange’’
(AV), i.e. “with foreign apparel” (Zeph 1 8; cf Isa
2 6-8). “Modest apparel” as against ‘‘costly rai-
ment” is commended as suited to Christians (1 Tim
29; luariopts, himatismds, and xaragcrody, katastolé).
Angels are robed in white apparel (Acts 1 10; cf Lk
24 4, “dazzling’’). Fig. of the glorious and red (sug-
gestive of the wine-press) apparel of the Messiah
(Isa 63 1.2), and of “a meek and quiet spirit”
(1 Pet 3 4). Dwicut M. Prarr


APPARENTLY, a-par’ent-li (AN, mar’eh, RV
‘manifestly,’ signifying in the only place so tr¢
[Nu 12 8] ‘in the form of seeing” [Keil and De-
litasch], i.e. “an appearance,” “a similitude,”’ a
manifestation of the invisible God in human form):
This is the OT manner of Divine revelation “in the
person and form of the angel of Jeh’’: ‘In the bush
I did manifestly reveal myself, and talked with
Moses” (2 Esd 14 3). God talked with Moses
openly, without figure, in a direct manner reveal-
ing to him His will in the clear distinctness of a
spiritual communication: ‘With him will I speak
mouth to mouth, even manifestly, and not in dark
speeches; and the form of Jeh shall he behold.”


. O. Evans

APPARITION, ap-a-rish’un (Wdadpa, indalma,
émdvera, epiphdneia; pdvracpa, phdntasma): This
word is not found in the OT or NT canon, AV or
ARV, but occurs twice in RV and thrice in Apoe
AV as follows: Wisd 17 3, Gr indalma, RV
“spectral form’; 2 Mace 3 24, Gr epiphaneia,
RV “apparition,” RVm “manifestation”; 2 Mace
6 4, Gr epiphaneia, RV “vision,” RVm “mani-
festation.” NT, RV: Mt 14 26; Mk 6 49; Gr
phantasma, ARV “ghost,” AV “Spirit.”


Appeal
Apple of the Eye


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


208


APPEAL, a-pél’: If an appeal be, as it properly
is, a petition for the removal of a case that has been
decided for rehearing and review and final decision
by a higher court, we find no such instance either
in the OT or the NT.

In the institution of judges by Moses (Ex 18 26),
the reference: “The hard cases they brought
unto Moses, but every small matter they judged
themselves,” indicates simply a distribution of
cases between two courts, but gives no trace of
any provision for the rehearing of any case, by a
higher court, that has already been decided by a
lower. In Dt 17 8-18, directions are given that a
lower court, under certain conditions, shall ask a
higher for instructions as to procedure, and shall
strictly follow the order prescribed: nevertheless,
the decision itself belongs to the lower court. When
its sentence was once given, there was no appeal.

In the NT, the provision of the Rom law, for an
appeal from a lower to a higher court, is clearly
recognized, although the case of Paul in Acts 25
does not strictly fall within its scope. The Rom
law originally gave a citizen the right of appeal to
the tribune of the people, but, with the establish-
ment of the Empire, the emperor himself assumed
this function of the tribune, and became the court
of last resort. The case of Paul, however, had not
been tried before Festus, nor any verdict rendered,
when (Acts 26 10.11) he utters the proper legal
formula: “I appeal unto Caesar” (Kaloapa ém-
xadrodpat, Kaisara epikalouimat). That Rom citi-
zens could insist upon such procedure, as right, is
not perfectly certain (HJP, II, 2:279). Paul evi-
dently acted upon the suggestion of the governor
himself (ver 9), who seems to have been desirous
of avoiding the responsibility of a case involving
questions most remote from his ordinary attention.
At first sight, Paul’s decision to appeal seems pre-
mature. He throws away his chance of acquittal by
Festus, and acts upon the assumption that he has
been already condemned. Acts 26 32 shows that
the possibility of his acquittal had amounted almost
to a certainty. His course is explicable only by
regarding his appeal the master stroke of a great
leader, who was ready to take risks. In the propo-
sition of Festus, he grasps at what bad been an
object of hope long deferred. For many years,
he had been desiring and praying to get to Rome
(Acts 19 21; Rom 1 11.15; 16 23.24). The Lord
had just assured him (Acts 23 11), that as he had
testified at Jerus, ‘“‘so must thou bear witness also
at Rome.” With this promise and direction in view,
he hastens toward the world’s capital and the
center of the world’s influence, in the seemingly
precipitate words, “I appeal,” which a lower order
of prudence would have deferred until he had first
been condemned. H. E. Jacops


APPEAR, a-pér’: Of eight Heb originals the
chief is MN), ra’ah, “to be seen.” Used mainly of
God’s self-revelations in person and in dreams and
visions: “Jehovah appeared unto Abram” (Gen
12 7); to Moses (Ex 3 2); to Solomon (1 K 8 5).
All originals used of Nature’s processes, of the
appearing, i.e. coming of the morning (Ex 14 27);
stars (Neh 4 21); flowers, flocks of goats, tender
grapes (Cant 2 12; 4 lm; 7 12m). SoNT &¢é@nv
éphthén, passive of hérdd, “I see,” “to be seen’
used esp. of angelic revelations and visions: as on
the Mount of Transfiguration (Mt 17 3); an angel
(Lk 111); the risen Lord (Lk 24 34); cloven
tongues at Pentecost (Acts 2 3); vision to Paul
ae 16 9); a great wonder in heaven (Rev 12 1

).

érrdvw, opiind, in Acts 1 3, of Christ appear-
ing after his suffering; atvoua:, phatnomai, “to
shine,” like the above with the added thought of a


resplendent, luminous revelation, as of the Bethle-
hem star (Mt 27); the bringing to light of
sin (Rom 7 13 AV). Also gavepsw, phanerda, ‘‘to
make manifest,” used exclusively of the post~-
resurrection appearances and second coming of
Christ and of the disclosures of the great judgment
day. See Col 3 4; 2 Cor 6 10; Rev 3 18 and
seven other passages AV. Dwicut M. Pratr


APPEARANCE, a-pér’ans (N'A, mar’ech; chicfly
used of the mystic and supernatural visions of
Ezekiel and Daniel): A semblance, as of lightning,
wheels, sapphire stone (Ezk 1 14.16.26); Gabriel’s
overpowering revelation (Dnl 8 15; see also 10
6.18). In the NT refers exclusively, through three
Gr words, mpécwrov, présdpon, “sight,’’ “counte-
nance,” to “outward appearance” (2 Cor 10 7 AV);
and its possibly deceptive nature: dys, épsis, “Judge
not according to a.” (Jn 7 24); “them that glory in
a.” (2 Cor 6 12; ef 18 16 7). See also 1 Thess
6 22 ERVm (eidos=“sight’’).


APPEARING, a-pér’ing (4roKddvufis, apokdlupsis,
‘an unveiling’; érupavera, epiphdneia, ‘a manifesta-
tion’): Exclusively technical, referring in the six
passages where found to the return, the millennial
advent of Christ (e.g. 1 Pet 1 7 AV; 2 Tim 1 10;
Titus 2 18).


APPEASE, a-péz’: ‘“To make one at peace.” Esau
is appeased, i.e. placated, won over by means of
presents (Gen 32 20). One “‘slow to anger appeas-
eth strife,” ie. puts an end to it (Prov 16 18).
RV changes “appeased” of AV in Acts 19 35 into
“quieted” (Gr katastéllé, “put down,” ‘“suppress,”’
‘Sestrain,” referring to a popular commotion).


APPERTAIN, ap-ér-tan’: Only once in EV, viz:
in Jer 10 7, for MS, ya@’ah, “it becometh,” “it is
seemly,” Vulg “Tuum est enim decus,” “it is Thy
honor.” Generally in the sense of “‘to belong to”
(Lev 6 5, “to whom it appertaineth”’); Neh 2 8,
“the castle which appertained to the house” (Tob
6 12; 1 Esd 8 95; 1 Macc 10 42).


APPETITE, ap’é-tit (1, hat, WD3, nephesh):
This word occurs four times in OT text and once
in AVm. Once (Job 38 39) it is a tr of hai, ‘life’;
“Canst thou... . satisfy the appetite (life) of the
young lions?” Twice (Prov 23 2; Eccl 6 7; also
Isa 66 11, AVm) itisatrof nephesh: Prov 23 2,
ba‘al nephesh ‘“‘a man given to appetite’; Eccl 6 7,
“the nephesh is not filled.” In Isa 66 11, “strong
of nephesh” is tr’ “greedy.” Nephesh means origi-
nally “breath,” hence ‘‘the soul,” psuché, “‘the vital
principle,” “life”; therefore in certain expressions
referring to the sustaining of life the nephesh
hungers (Prov 10 3), thirsts (Prov 25 25), fasts
(Ps 69 10). Nephesh then comes to mean the seat
of the senses, affections, emotions, and to it is
ascribed love, joy, desire (cf Dt 12 20; Prov 6
30 RVm; Mic 7 1, where the nephesh “‘desires”’).
The idea of desire or appetite of the nephesh may
include all forms of longing; e.g. lust (Jer 2 24;
“her desire” is lit. “the desire of her nephesh’’),
the appetite for revenge (Ps 41 2, “the will of his
enemies” is lit. “the nephesh,” etc). The next step
is to identify the nephesh with its desire, hence in
the cases above nephesh is tr’ ‘appetite.’ Inthe 4th
case (Isa 29 8) “His soul hath appetite’ is a free
tr of naphsha shdkékah, lit. “His soul runneth to
and fro.” 8. F. Hunter


APPHIA, af’i-a, ap'fi-a (Amwpla, Apphia, dative
case of Apphia; in Philem 2, though Apphia, Am-
phia, and Appia, also occur): A Christian of Colos-
sae, probably the wife of Philemon; certainly a


209


member of his household, greeted as “the sister”
RVm. In the Greek church, November 22 is
sacred to her memory. It has been supposed,
since this epistle concerns one household exclusively,
that Apphia was Philemon’s wife and the mother
or sister of Archippus (q.v.). She was stoned to
death with Philemon, Onesimus, and Archippus in
the reign of Nero. (See Lightfoot, Col., 372.)


APPHUS, af’us, ap’fus: A name borne by Jona-
than, the fifth son of Mattathias (Amgovs, Apphous,
1 Macc 2 5). All the brothers, according to this
passage, had double names; John is said to have
been called Gaddis; Simon, Thassi; Judas, Macca-
baeus; Eleazar, Avaran; Jonathan, Apphus (1 Mace
2 2-5). The latter were probably the names which
Mattathias gave his sons, while the former were
received later when they ‘became “leaders of the
people.” The common explanation of the word
“Apphus” relatesit to the Syr WDM, hoppis, “the
dissembler”’; but Torrey (art. “Maccabees,” EB)
points out that we have no means of ascertaining
with what guttural consonant the word began, or
what Sem consonant the Gr s (s) represents. Both
the form and meaning of the name are, therefore,
still to be explained. H. J. Woir


APPII FORUM, ap’i-i fa’rum, transliteration of
Lat; APPIUS, ap‘i-us, MARKET OF (RV) (Arnlov
épov, Appiou phéron): Appi Forum (Cicero ad
Att. 2.10; Suetonius 7'ib. 2: Appii Forum; Vulg
RV: Forum Appi; Horace Satires i.5; Pliny, Nat.
Hist., ii.64; xiv.61,; CIL, X, 6824), or Market
of Appius, was a town situated at the forty-third
milestone on the Appian Road (39} English miles
from Rome, a single day’s journey for energetic
travelers) according to the imperial itineraries (Ant,
108; Hierosol. 611; Geog. Rav. 4.34). Its existence
probably dates from the time of Appius Claudius
Caecus (Suet. Tib. 2; cf Mommsen, Rém. Forsch., I,
308), who laid out the famous highway from Rome to
Capua in 312 BC. In the Ist cent. it had the rank
of a municipality (Pliny, iii.64). Its importance as
a highway station is due chiefly to the canal which
ran by the side of the road from there to within a
short distance of Tarracina (at the sixty-second
milestone), affording an alternative means of
conveyance (Strabo v.3.6). It was customary to
cover this section of the journey, passing through
the Pontine Marshes, by night in canal boats
drawn by mules. Horace (Sat. i.5) offers a lively
picture of the discomforts of the trip, mentioning the
importunate inn-keepers and intolerable drinking
water at Appii Forum, the gnats and frogs which
were enemies to repose, and the exasperating pro-
crastination of the muleteer.

The Christian brethren in Rome went out along
the Appian Road to welcome the apostle Paul upon
hearing of his arrival at Puteoli. One party awaited
him at Three Taverns yore oe proceeded as
far as Appii Forum (Acts 15).

Pe Georcre H. ALLEN

APPLE, ap”!, APPLE-TREE (MBH , tapputh):
A fruit tree and fruit mentioned chiefly in Cant,
concerning the true nature of which there has been
much dispute.

Cant 23 says: “As the apple-tree among the
trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons.
I sat down under his shadow with great delight”;
Cant 8 5: “Under the apple-tree I awakened thee:
there thy mother was in travail with thee, there
was she in travail that brought thee forth.” Of
the fruit it is said, Cant 2 3: “His fruit was sweet
tomy taste’; Cant 2 5: “Stay ye me with raisins,
refresh me with apples”; Cant 7 8: “‘the smell of
thy breath [Heb “‘nose”’] like apples.”

n all the above references the true apple, Pyrus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 42?


eal
Apple of the Eye


malus, suits the conditions satisfactorily. The
apple tree affords good shade, the fruit is sweet, the
perfume is a very special favorite with the people of
the East. Sick persons in Pal delight to hold an
apple in their hands, simply for the smell. (Cf
Arabian Nights, “Prince Hassan and the Pari-
banou.”) Further the Arab. for apple tuffah is
without doubt identical with the Heb tappih.
The apple was well known, too, in ancient times; it
was, for example, extensively cultivated by the
Romans.

The one serious objection is that apples do
not easily reach perfection in Pal; the climate is too
dry and hot; farther north in the Lebanon they
flourish. At the same time it is possible to exagger-
ate this objection, for with careful grafting and
cultivation exceedingly good apples may be pro-
duced in the mountain regions. Apple trees there
need special care and renewal of the grafts, but there
is no impossibility that at the time of the writing
of Cant skilled gardeners should have been able
to produce sweet and perfumed apples in Pal. .
Small but very sweet and fragrant apples are now
grown at Gaza. Good apples are now plentiful
in the market at Jerus, but they are chiefly impor-
tations from the North.

On account of the above difficulty three other
fruits have been suggested by various writers. Two
doubtless have been brought forward with a view
to Prov 25 11: ‘A word fitly spoken is like apples
of gold in network of silver,” but the reference
would certainly seem to be to some silver filigree
work ornamented with gold modeled to look like
fruit rather than to any actual fruit. The citron
and the apricot (Tristram) have both been suggested
as the true tappu*h. The former, which is a native
of Persia, does not appear to have been introduced
into Pal until well into the Christian era and the
apricot, though an attractive substitute for the
apple and today one of the most beautiful and pro-
ductive of fruit trees, can hardly have been estab-
lished in Pal at the time of the scriptural references.
It is a native of China and is said to have first begun
to find its way westward at the time of Alexander
the Great.

The third of the fruits is the quince, Cydonia
vulgaris (N.O. Rosaceae), and this had more serious
claims. It flourishes in Pal and has been long
indigenous there. Indeed it is probable that even
if tappu*h was a name for apple, it originally in-
cluded also the closely allied quince. The greatest
difficulty is its harsh and bitter taste. Further the
Mish distinguishes the tappu“h from the quince,
which is called parish, and from the crab apple or
hazor (Kohler in Jew Enc, II, 28). The quince along
with the apple was sacred to Aphrodite, the goddess
of love.

On the whole there does not appear to be any
sufficient reason for rejecting the tr of the AV and
RV; the Biblical references suit it; the identity of
the Heb and Arab. words favor it and there is no
insuperable objection on scientific grounds.

The word tappath appears in two place names,
Brru-TapPuAH and Tappuad (q.V.).

E. W. G. MasterMan

APPLE, ap”l, OF THE EYE: The eyeball, or
globe of the eye, with pupil in center, called ‘‘apple”’
from its round shape. Its great value and careful
protection by the eyelids automatically closing
when there is the least possibility of danger made
it the emblem of that which was most precious and
jealously protected. The Heb terms for it were,
ishén, dimin. of “tsh, “man,” little man or_manni-
kin, referring perhaps specially to the pupil, prob-
ably from “‘the little image one sees of himself when
looking into another’s pupil” (Davies’ Lexicon).
“He kept him (Israel) as the apple of his eye”


Aprles of Sodom THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


210


(Dt 32 10); ‘Keep me as the apple of the eye,” lit.,
“as the apple, the daughter of the eye” (Ps 17 8).
‘Keep my law [RVm‘“‘teaching’’] as the apple of
thine eye” (Prov 7 2). Cf Prov 7 9 where it is
used to denote what is the center (ARV, “in the
middle of the night’; ERV “in the blackness of
night”; m “Heb pupil [of the eye]’’); babhah perhaps
an “opening,” “gate”; others regard it as a mimetic
word akin to Lat pupa, pupilla (“He that toucheth
you toucheth the apple of his eye,” i.e. Jeh’s; Zec
2 8); bath-‘ayin, ‘daughter of theeye”’; “Give thy-
self no respite, let not the apple of thine eye cease”
(Lam 2 18), which means, either “sleep not,” or
“cease not to weep.” «den, kéré, “young girl,’
“pupil of the eye’: ‘‘He (the Lord) will keep the
good deeds [RV “‘bounty’’] of a man as the apple of
the eye” (Ecclus 17 22); the LXX also has koré in
all instances except Lam 2 18, where it has 6vydrnp,
thugdtér, ‘“‘daughter.” W. L. WaLker


APPLES OF SODOM, sod’um: Jos (BJ, IV,
. vill, 4) says that ‘the traces [or shadows] of the
five cities [of the plain] are still to be seen, as well
as the ashes growing in their fruits, which fruits
have a color as if they were fit to be eaten; but if
you pluck them with your hands they dissolve
into smoke and ashes.” What this ‘Dead Sea
fruit”’ is, is uncertain. The name ‘Dead Sea apples”
is often given to the fruit of the Solanum Sodo-
maean, “a prickly shrub with fruit not unlike a
small yellow tomato.’ Cheyne thinks that the
fruits referred to by Jos (cf Tacitus Hist. v.37)
may be either (1) those of the ‘osher-tree (‘isar,
Calotropis procera, described by Hasselquist [ Travels,
1766]), found in abundance about Jericho and near
the Dead Sea, which are filled with dust when they
have been attacked by an insect, leaving the skiu
only entire, and of a beautiful color. Tristram
describes the fruit as being ‘‘as large as an apple
of average size, of a bright yellow colour, hanging
three or four together close to the stem’’; or as sug-
gested by Tristram (2) those of the wild colocynth;
the fruit is fair of aspect with a pulp which dries
up into a bitter powder (ZB, art. “Sodom,” col.
4669, n. 2). This colocynth is supposed to be the
“wild vine’? mentioned 2 K 4 39. The “vine of
Sodom” of Dt 32 32 has been supposed to bear the
“Dead Sea fruit”; but most modern writers regard
the passage as figurative. WALKER


APPLY, a-pli’: Purely an OT term representing
five Heb originals which signify respectively, ‘‘to
enter,” “to incline,” ‘to give,” “to go about,” ‘‘to
put or place,” in each instance spoken of the heart
in its attitude to wisdom (Ps 90 12 AV); instruc-
tion (Prov 23 12); understanding (2 2); knowl-
edge (22 17).


APPOINT, a-point’: This word is used for the
expression of a large variety of ideas and the tr of
almost as many words.

3p}, ndkabh=“‘stipulate’ (Gen 30 28). IPB,
pakadh=‘put into office’ (Gen 41 34; Nu 1 50;
Est 2 3); “select”? (Jer 61 27); “put in charge’
(Jer 49 19; 50 44); “assign” (Nu 4 27; Jer 15
3); “send” (Lev 26 16); “designate,” “select’’
(Ex 21 13; Nu 419; 28 7 10; Isa 61 3);
“single out” (18 811.12; Hos 111). 73,
nathan = “designate,” ‘“‘select”’ (Nu 35 6 AV; Josh
20 2 AV; Ezk 45 6); “set aside’ (Ex 30 16).
MW, shith = “designate,” “select”? (Job 14 18;
Isa 26 1). So also TOY, ‘amadh (1 Ch 16 16;
Neh 73); so M2W, shdlah (1K 69); Mp,
karah (Nu 36 11). 2, ¢dwah=“choose” (2 8
6 21). “WB, bahar=“select” (2 8 15 15 AV).
“OS, ’Gmar=“command” (1 K 5 6 AV). ridnus,


tithémi= “designate,” “select? (Mt 24 51; Lk 12
46). A careful reading of the above passages will
bring to mind the doctrine that with reference to
the world’s work, God Himself calls men into office,
selecting them from among the multitude and set-
ting them aside for His special purposes; and that
He calls to His assistance not only men but also
events and forces of Nature (Lev 26 16).
Frank E. Hrrscu

APPREHEND, ap-ré-hend’: Occurs in the NT
in two meanings: “to arrest’? (midfw, pidzd; Acts
12 4; 2 Cor 11 32 RV, ‘‘take”’); and ‘“‘to seize,”
“srasp,” “take into one’s possession,” “attain,”
‘Gnquire eagerly” (xaradauBdvw, katalambdnd, ARV
“laid hold on,” “laid fast hold of,’’ Phil 3 12.13;
Eph 3 18). InJn 1 5, “The darkness apprehended
it not,” RVm gives “overcame not.” See Com-
PREHEND. : :


APPROVE, a-proov’: This word, as ordinarily
used, means “to entertain a favorable opinion
concerning” (Ps 49 13; Lam 3 36). Its Biblical
and archaic use conveys a much stronger meaning
and is equivalent to its use in legal formalities of
today, “to approve a bill,” i.e. by some act, gener-
ally a signature, to express approval. In NT, a
number of times, for Gr dokimdzé, “‘to test, try,
make proof of,” and its derivative, dékimos, “tested,”
“tried.” The word will, in almost every case,
imply that the proof is victoriously demonstrated,
the proved is also approved, just as in English we
speak of “tried men” (Trench, Gr Synonyms of NT).
Tt is the word most frequently used for the testing
of ores. That which does not stand the test is
adékimos, “reprobate.” Cf Jer 6 30 AV: “repro-
bate silver.”” That which stands the test is dokimos,
“approved.” ‘Salute Apelles the approved in
Christ” (Rom 16 10); “they that are approved”
(1 Cor 11 19); ‘Present thyself approved unto
God” (2 Tim 2 15); when he hath been ‘‘ap-
proved” (Jas 1 12). See also Rom 14 18.22; 1
Thess 2 4. H. E. Jacoss


APRON, a’prun: Appears only in Gen 3 7 and
Acts 19 12 EV. (Eng. na-prun, N. of England
nap-peon, from Low Lat, through Fr. nape, nappe,
“napkin.” The » was dropped owing to false
division of the art. a from the noun; thus “a nap-
ron” became “an apron:” In Gen 3 7 it is used
to translate a Heb word rendered “‘girdles” in RVm:
‘“And they sewed fig-leaves together and made them-
selves aprons.” In Acts 19 12 cimxivOa, simikin-
thia, stands for semicinctia, which is really a Lat
word meaning “half-girdle,” i.e. girdles going only
half round the body and covering the front of the
person: “Unto the sick were carried away from
his [Paul’s] body handkerchiefs [souddria, rendered
“napkins” Lk 19 20; Jn 11 44; 20 7] or aprons.”
The word denotes here, probably, a workman’s apron,
perhaps those of Paul himself; though it seems
more natural to suppose that the people brought
their own “handkerchiefs” or “aprons”’ to Paul to
secure the miraculous effect desired. The garments,
at any rate, were such as could be easily removed
and carried back and forth. (See Rich, Dict. of
Rom and Gr Ant, s.v., for illust.; also Pope’s
Lexicon, s.v.). Gro. B. Eager


APT (lit. “‘fitted”): Applied to one distinguished
for readiness in meeting demands of some special
situation, or emergency. For this, there is no
specific Biblical word in either OT or NT. It
occurs always in the English tr® in paraphrases, as
“apt for war’ (2 K 24 16), “apt to teach,” Gr
“didaktikés” (1 Tim 3 2; 2 Tim 2 24).


AQUEDUCT, ak’wé-dukt. Sec CisteRn.


211


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 4Pples of Sodom


AQUILA, ak’wi-la (Antdas, Ahiilas, ‘an eagle’):
Aquila and his wife Priscilla, the diminutive form
of Prisca, are introduced into the narrative of the
Acts by their relation to Paul. He meets them first
in Corinth (Acts 18 2). Aquila was a native of
Pontus, doubtless one of the colony of Jews men-
tioned in Acts 2 9; 1. Pet 11. They were refugees
from the cruel and unjust edict of Claudius which
expelled all Jews from Rome in52 AD. The decree,
it is said by Suetonius, was issued on account of
tumults raised by the Jews, and he especially men-
tions one Chrestus (Suetonius Claud. 25). Since
the word Christus could easily be confounded by
him to refer to some individual whose name was
Chrestus and who was an agitator, resulting in
these disorders, it bas been concluded that the
fanatical Jews were then persecuting their Chris-
tian brethren and disturbances resulted. The
cause of the trouble did not concern Claudius, and
so without making inquiry, all Jews were expelled.
The conjecture that Aquila was a freedman and
that his master had been Aquila Pontius, the Rom
senator, and that from him he received his name
is without foundation. He doubtless had a Heb
name, but it is not known. Jt was a common cus-
tom for Jews outside of Pal to take Rom names, and
it is just that that this man does, and it is by that
name we know him. Driven from Rome, Aquila
sought refuge in Corinth, where Paul, on his second
missionary journey, meets him because they have
the same trade: that of making tents of Cilician
cloth (Acts 18 3). The account given of him does
not justify the conclusion that he and his wife were
already Christians when Paul met them. Had that
been the case Lk would almost certainly have said
so, esp. if it was true that Paul sought them out on
that account. Judging from their well-known ac-
tivity in Christian work they would have gathered
a little band of inquirers or possibly converts, even
though they had been there for but a short time.
It is more in harmony with the account to conclude
that Paul met them as fellow-tradespeople, and
that be took the opportunity of preaching Christ
to them as they toiled. There can be no doubt that
Paul would use these days to lead them into the
kingdom and instruct them therein, so that after-
ward they would be capable of being teachers
themselves (Acts 18 26). Not only did they
become Christians, but they also became fast and
devoted friends of Paul, and he fully reciprocated
their affection for him (Rom 16 3.4). They ac-
companied him when he left Corinth to go to Ephe-
sus and remained there while he went on his journey
into Syria. When he wrote the first letter to the
church at Corinth they were still at Ephesus, and
their house there was used as a Christian assembly-
place (1 Cor 16 19). The decree of Claudius ex-
cluded the Jews from Rome only temporarily, and so
afterward Paul is found there, and his need of friends
and their affection for him doubtless led them also
to go to that city (Rom 16 3). At the time of the
writing of Paul’s second letter to Tim they have
again removed to Ephesus, possibly sent there by
Paul to give aid to, and further the work in that
city (2 Tim 4 19). While nothing more is known
of them there can be no doubt that they remained
the devoted friends of Paul to the end.

The fact that Priscilla’s name is mentioned several
times before that of her husband has called forth
a number of conjectures. The best explanation
seems to be that she was the stronger character.

Jacon W. Kapp

AR, ar, AR OF MOAB, md’ab (ANTA™NY, “W,
‘ar, ‘dr-mo'abh; "Hp, E’r; ’Apotp, Aroér or Znelp,
Séeir): The city of Ar is named in a snatch of an-
cient song (Nu 21 15), lit. “the site of Ar.” It is


identical with “Ar of Moab” (ver 28; Isa 15 1).
This is probably the place called the City of Moab in
Nu 22 36, where the Heb is ‘ir md’abh. It is
probably also intended by “the city that is in the
middle of the valley” (Dt 2 36; Josh 13 9.16;
2 8 24 5). It lay ‘on the border of the Arnon,
which is in the utmost part of the border” (Nu 22
36). A possible identification might be the ruin
noted by Burckhardt, in the floor of the valley, on
a piece of pasture-land below the confluence of the
Lejjun and the Méjib. Buhl however thinks that
not a city but a Moabite district somewhere in the
region south of the Arnon may be intended (GAP,
269). Ewine


ARA, 4’ra (SUN, ‘dra’, meaning unknown): A
son of Jether of the tribe of Asher (1 Ch 7 38).


ARAB, a’rab (278, ‘drabh, “ambush”): A. city
in the hill country of Judah, probably the site of
the ruins Er-Rabiyeh 8. of Hebron (Josh 15 52).


ARAB, ar’ab, ARABIANS,
ARABIA,


ARABAH, ar’a-ba, a-ra’ba (MAIN, ha-‘drabhah,
“the Arabah’’): This word indicates in general a
barren district, but is specifically applied in whole
or in spent to the depression of the Jordan valley,
extending from Mount Hermon to the Gulf of
Akahah. In the AV it is transliterated only once
(Josh 18 18) describing the border of Benjamin.
Elsewhere it is rendered “plain.” But in the RV
it is everywhere transliterated. South of the Dead
Sea the name is still retained in Wady el-Arabah.
In Dt 1 1; 2 8 (AV “plain’’) the southern portion
is referred to; in Dt 3 17; 4 49; Josh 3 16;11 2;
12 3 and 2 K 14 25 the name is closely connected
with the Dead Sea and the Sea of Chinnereth (Gen-
nesaret). The allusions to the Arabah in Dt 11 30;
Josh 8 14; 12 1; 18 18; 2S 229; 4 7; 2 K 26
4; Jer 39 4; 52 7 indicate that the word was gener-
ally used in its most extended sense, while in Josh
11 16, and 12 8 it is represented as one of the great,
natural divisions of the country.

The southern portion, which still retains the name
of Arabah, is included in the wilderness of Zin
(Nu 34 8). According to the survey of Lord
Kitchener and George Armstrong made in 1883,
under the auspices of the Pal Exploration Fund,
its length from the head of the Gulf of Akabah to
the Dead Sea is 112 miles. The lowest point of
the watershed is 45 miles from Akabah, and 660
feet. above tide (1,952 above the Dead Sea). The
average width of the valley up to this point is about
6 miles, but here a series of low limestone ridges
(called Er Risheh) rising 150 feet above the plain
runs obliquely across it for a distance of 10 miles,
narrowing it up to a breadth of about one-half
mile. North of this point, opposite Mount Hor,
the valley widens out to 13 miles and then gradually
narrows to 6 miles at the south end of the Dead
Sea. At Ain Abu Werideh, 29 miles north of the
watershed, the valley is at the sea-level—1,292 feet
above that of the Dead Sea. North of the water-
shed, the main line of drainage is the Wady el-Jeib,
which everywhere keeps pretty close to the west
side of the valley. At Ain Abu Werideh it is joined
by numerous wadies descending from the Edomite
mountains on the east, which altogether water an
oasis of considerable extent, covered with a thicket
of young palms, tamarisks, willows and reeds.
Twenty-four miles farther north the Arabah breaks
down suddenly into the valley of the Dead Sea
or the Ghér, as it is technically called. Lor
Kitchener’s report is here so vivid as to be worthy
of literal reproduction. ‘The descent to the Ghér


a-ra’bi-aus. See


Arabah
Arabia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


212


was down a sandy slope of 300 feet, and the change
of climate was most marked, from the sandy desert
to masses of tangled vegetation with streams of
water running in all directions, birds fluttering from
every tree, the whole country alive with life;
nowhere have I seen so great and sudden a con-
trast” (Mount Seir, 214). The descent here
described was on the eastern side of the semi-
eircular line of cliffs formed of sand, gravel, and
mar] which inelose the Ghér at the south end, and
which are probably what are referred to in Josh
15 3 as the “ascent of Akrabbim.’’ The ordinary
route, however, leading to the plain of the Arabah
from the Dead Sea is up the trough worn by the
Wady el-Jeib along the west side of the valley.
But this route would be impracticable during the
rainy season after the cloudbursts which occasion-
ally visit this region, when torrents of water pour
down it, sufficient to roll bowlders of considerable
size and to transport an immense amount of coarse
sediment.


Philtsting Plain


Elovation


g
y

i
West E
3
Feet EI
3000


Shephelah
} | Judean Plateau


the watershed, 45 miles from Akabah, the western
side of the Arabah is bordered by strata of Cre-
taceous (chalk) limestone rising pretty contin-
uously to a height of from 2,000 to 3,000 feet above
sea-level, no older rocks appearing upon that. side.
But upon the eastern side older sandstones (Nubian
and lower Carboniferous) and granitic rocks border
the plain, supporting, however, at a height of 2,000
or 3,000 feet Crétaceous limestones corresponding
to those which descend to the level of the gorge on
the western side (Fig. 1). Throughout this entire
distance, therefore, the strata have either slipped
down upon the western side or risen upon the east-
ern side, or there has been a movement in both
directions. The origin of this crevasse dates from
the latter part of the Cretaceous or the early part
of the Tertiary period.

But in post-Tertiary times an expanded lake filled


the region, extending from the Waters of Merom
to Ain Abu Werideh, a distance of about 200 miles,
rising to an elevation of about 1,400 feet above the


d

S

5

4

3

g

E East
3 Elovation
E


LEGEND


7 a
a cg


Upper Cretaceous Flinty Chalk (Senonian )


Limestone (Cenomanian)
Sandstono ( 3 )


Permo-Carbontferous Sandstone and Limestone,
[SS F [Ancient eryotelline porphyry, dlorito eto.,


Fie. 1.—Gerouoorcar Cross-Section or SOUTHERN PALESTINE, THROUOH BETHLEHEM, AFTER BuaNcKENHORN.


South of the Dead Sea a muddy plain, known as
the Sebkah, extends 6 miles, filling about one-half
of the width of the Ghér. During most of the year
the mud over this area is so thin and deep that it
is impossible to cross it near its northern end. This
whole area between the ‘ascent of Akrabbim’’ and
the Dead Sea has evidently been greatly transformed
by the sedimentary deposits which have been
brought in by the numerous tributary wadies during
the last 4,000 years, the coarser material having
encroached upon it from either side, and the fine
material having been deposited over the middle
portion, furnishing the clay which is so embarrass-
ig to travelers. (For further considerations upon
this point see Drap Sra; Citres or THE Puatn.)

The Arabah in its whole extent occupies a portion
of the great geological fault or crevasse in the
earth’s crust which extends from An-
tioch near the mouth of the Orontes
southward between the Lebanon and
the Anti-Lebanon Mountains to the
valley of the Jordan and the Dead
Sea, and onward to the Gulf of Akabah, whence it
can be traced with considerable probability through
the Red Sea and the interior lakes of Africa. The
most remarkable portion of this phenomenal crevasse
is that which extends from the Waters of Merom
to the springs of Ain Abu Werideh; for through
this entire distance the Arabah is below sea-level,
the depression at the Dead Sea being approxi-
mately 1,292 feet. See Deap Sra. Throughout
the entire distance from the Waters of Merom to


1. Geology
of the
Region


present level of the Dead Sea, but not sufficiently
high to secure connection with the ocean either
through the Arabah proper or across the valley of
Esdraelon. This body of water was, on the aver-
age, 30 miles wide and over the northern part of
the Dead Sea had an extreme depth of 2,700 feet.
The most distinct evidence of the existence of this
enlargement of the lake is to be found at Ain Abu
Werideh, where Hull reports “banks of horizontally
stratified materials .... sometimes of coarse
material, such as gravel; at other times consisting
of fine sand, loam, or white marl, with very even
stratification, and containing blanched semi-fossil
shells of at least two kinds of univalves, which
Professor Haddon has determined to be Melania
tuberculata Mill, and Melanopsis Saulcyi, Bourg”
(Mount Seir, 99, 100). These are shells which are
now found, according to Tristram, in great numbers
in semi-fossil condition in the marl deposits of the
Dead Sea, and both of these genera are found in the
fluvio-marine beds formed in the brackish or salt
water of the Isle of Wight. The existence of the
shells indicates the extent to which the saline waters
of the Dead Sea were diluted at that time (Figs. 2, 3).
It should be added, however, that species somewhat
similar still exist around the borders of the Dead
Sea in lagoons where fresh water is mingled in
large quantities with that of the Dead Sea. This
is especially true in eddies near the mouth of the
Jordan. (See Merrill, Hast of the Jordan.) Hun-
tington in 1909 confirms the fact that these high-
level shore lines are found on both sides of the Dead


213


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Arabah
Arabia


Sea, though for some reason they have not been
traced farther north.

At lower levels, especially at that which is 650
feet above the Dead Sea, there is, however, a very
persistent terrace of gravel, sand and clay marking
a shore line all the way from the south end of the
Dead Sea to Lake Galilee. This can be seen run-
ning up into all the wadies on either side, being
very prominent opposite their mouths, but much
eroded since its deposition. On the shores of the
lake between the wadies the line is marked by a
slight accumulation of coarse material. Below the
650-foot line there are several other minor strands
marking periods when the subsiding waters were
for a short time stationary.

This period of enlargement of the waters in the
Arabah is now, with abundant reason, correlated
with the Glacial epoch whose influence was so gencr-
ally distributed over the northern hemisphere in
early post-Tertiary times. There were, however,
no living glaciers within the limits of the Arabah
Valley — Mount Hermon not being sufficiently
large to support any extensive ice-sheet. The
nearest glacier of any extent was on the west side
of the Lebunon Mountains, 40 to 50 miles north of
Beirit, where according to my own observations
one descended from the summit of the mountains
(10,000 feet high) 12 miles down the valley of the
Kadesha River to a level 5,500 feet above the sea,
where it built up an immense terminal moraine
several miles across the valley, and 5 miles up it
from its front, upon which is now growing the cele-
brated grove of the Cedars of Lebanon. (See
Records of the Past, Am. ser., V, 195-204.) The
existence of the moraine, however, had been noted
by Sir Joseph Hooker forty years before. (See
Nat. Hist. Rev., January, 1862.)


Fi. 2.—Shells from Ancient Bed of the Salt Sea.


But while there were no glaciers in the Arabah
Valley itself, there, as elsewhere, semi-glacial condi-
tions extended beyond the glacial limits a consider-
able distance into the lower latitudes, securing the
increased precipitation and the diminished evapora-
tion which would account for the enlargement of the
bodies of water occupying inclosed basins within
reach of these influences. The basin of Great
Salt Lake in Utah presents conditions almost, pre-
cisely like those of the Arabah, as do the Caspian
and Aral seas, and lakes Urumiah, Van, and various
others in central Asia. During the Glacial epoch
the water level of Great Salt Lake rose more than
1,000 feet higher than now and covered ten times
its present area. At the same time the Aral Sea
discharged into the Caspian Sea through an outlet
as large as Niagara. When the conditions of the
Glacial epoch passed away the evaporation again
prevailed, until the water areas of these inclosed
basins were reduced to the existing dimensions
and the present equilibrium was established between

.the precipitation and the evaporation.


While it is susceptible of proof that the close of
this epoch was geologically ‘recent, probably not
more than 10,000 years ago (see Wright, Ice Age
in North America, 5th ed, ch xx), the present. condi-
tions had become established approximately long
before the time of Abraham and the development
of civilization in Babylonia and Egypt.


Fig. 3.— White Marl and Silt near the Dead Sea.


East of the Arabah between the Dead Sea and
Akabah numerous mountain peaks rise to the
height of more than 4,000 feet above tide level,
the highest being Mount Hor, though back of it
there is a limestone range reaching 5,000 feet.
This mountainous region contains numerous fer-
tile areas and furnishes through its numerous wadies
a considerable amount of water to favor vegetation.
The limestone floor of the Arabah south of the Dead
Sea is deeply covered with sand and gravel, washed
in from the granitic areas from the east. This greatly
favors the accumulation of sediment at the mouths of
the wadies emptying into the south end of the Ghér.

At present the Egyp government maintains a
fort and harbor at Akabah, but its authority does

not extend into the imterior. The
2. History Arabah has, however, from time im-

memorial furnished a caravan route
between northern Arabia and the Sinaitic Penin-
sula. It was this which supported the great em-
porium of Petra. The Israelites traversed its
southern portion both on their way from Horeb to
Kadesh-barnea and on their return, when the
king of Edom refused passage through his land
(Nu 20 21; Dt 2 3). This opposition compelled
them to turn up the forbidding Wady el-Ithem,
which opens into the Arabah a few miles north of
Akabah and leads to the Pilgrim route between
Damascus and Mecca. The terrors of this passage
are referred to in Nu 21 4, where it is said ‘the
soul of the people was much discouraged because of
the way.” Around Akabah itself there are still
groves of palms, the existence of which, at the time
of the Exodus, is indicated by the name Elath (Dt 2
8), “‘a grove of trees.”

Lireraturse.—Burckhardt, Travels in Syria and_the
Holy Land, 1822; De Laborde, Voyage en Orient, 1828;
Hull, Mount Seir, Sinai, and Western Pal, 1889; ‘The
Physical Geol. and Geog. of Arabia Petreea,’’ etc, in
PEF, 1886; Lartet, Voyage d'exploration de la Mer
Morte, t. 3™¢, 1880; Rohinson, BR, 1855; Stanley, Sinai
and Pal’, 1860; Blankenkorn, ‘‘Entstehung u. Gesch.
des Todten Meeres,”’ in ZDPYV, 1896; Ritter. ‘Comp.
Geog. of Pal and the Sinaitic Peninsula," 1866, tr by Wm.
L. Gage; Huntington, Pal and Its Transformation, 1911.

Grorce FREDERICK WRIGHT

ARABATTINE, ar-a-ba-ti’né. Scc AKRABATTINE


(Apoc).


ARABIA, a-ri/bi-a (AY, ‘drabh, ’ApaBia, Ara-

bia):
I. Name anpb SITUATION

1. Name

2. Situation and Configuration

II. Puysicat Featurss

1. The Desert :

. Climate

. Mountains

Rivers

5. Oases and Wells

OLITICAL Divisions

. Ancient Divisions

. Modern Divisions

. Political Situation

Chief Towns


won


ITI.


J


PT len


Arabia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


214


IV. Fora anp Fauna

1. Flora .

2. Fauna
V. Inwasirants
. Classification
. Extinct Tribes
. South Arabian. Tribes
. Migration of Tribes
., North Arabian Tribes
. Other Tribes
. Foreign Elements
ELIGION


AORN


qn


Vi.
- Monotheism
. The Ka'bah, Pilgrimages and Fairs
. Judaism
. Christianity

5. Sabianism

6. Seekers after Truth: Islam
LITERATURE

I. Name and Situation.—The Heb word ‘drabh

always denotes, strictly speaking, not the country,
but the people of Arabia taken col-
lectively, and especially the nomadic
Arabs. The name of the country does
not occur in the OT, but in the NT it is used to
denote the Syrian desert or the peninsula of Sinai.


RON


1. Name


100 miles from the sea, with a subsidiary watershed
running along the south; and the principal outlets
for the drainage run in a N.E. direction. The
whole of Arabia stretches from about 13° to about
36° north of the equator, and it lies between 33°
and 60° east of Greenwich. Its area is about eight
times that of the British Isles, or nearly 1,000,000
square miles.
I. Physical Features.—Although Arabia is con-
sidered by geographers as part of the continent of
Asia, it belongs in almost every respect,
1. The to Africa. The great bulk of the country
Desert is desert, of fine sand in the southern
part, but consisting of coarse sand (the
nefaid), gravel and flints in the northern. It is in
fact an offshoot from the great African Sahara. Of
the southern half little is known, and it has never
been crossed by the foot of European. The north-
ern has been traversed in many directions; it has
numerous caravan routes, and some important.
towns are situated in the heart of it. Arabian fancy


ee


Surrounded as it is on three sides by the sea—
by the Indian Ocean on the south, and its two
branches, the Red Sea on the west

2. Situation and the Persian Gulf on the ecast—
and Config- and on the fourth side by the desert
uration of Syria, the country of Arabia is to
all intents and purposes an island; and

it is named by its inhabitants and by those who
speak their language “the Island of the Arabs.”
In configuration the country is roughly of the form
of a parallelogram, about 1,000 miles in length by
500 or 600 miles broad. This parallelogram is not
of uniform altitude, but the generally even surface
is tilted to one corner in such a way that the most
southerly point contains mountains rising to 10,000
feet in height, whilst the N.E. corner is almost on
a level with the sea. The altitudes of the inter-
vening portions are in proportion to their situation
with respect to these extremes. Thus the mountains
of the 8... corner have an altitude of from 5,000 to
6,000 feet, those of the N.W. of 4,000 or 5,000,
whereas those which are’situated near the middle
of the W. coast rise to 8,000 feet, and the plateau
which forms the northern half of the interior of the
peninsula is between 3,000 and 4,000 feet above
sea-level. In consequence of this configuration
the main watershed of the country runs parallel
to the W. coast at a distance of between 50 and


MoperRN Arass ENCAMPED IN THE VALLEY OF ACHOR.


has peopled the desert with strange creatures not
of human kind (cf Isa 18 21; 34 14), and fancy
has been justified by the common phenomena of
the mirage and the Fata Morgana (Isa 35 7; 49
10). To the keen sight of the nomad the glowing
desert heat is visible as a fine gossamer (Isa 18 4).
Perhaps this is the meaning of shdrabh in 35 7;
49 10 also. It is quite certain, however, that the
whole of Arabia and especially the northern borders
in the neighborhood of the Sinai peninsula and
eastward to the south of Pal and the country of
Edom, were at one time very much better watered
than they are at the present day. For centuries
a constant process of desiccation has been going on.
Indeed, persons now living can remember the exist-
ence of wells one or two generations ago, where
now there are none. It follows that this district
must formerly have supported a very much larger
population that it does at present.
It will be obvious that the climate of Arabia must
vary greatly in its different parts, the temperature
and rainfall depending not so much
2. Climate upon latitude as upon altitude, so that
within a few miles the greatest ex-
tremes co-exist. In the southern angle where
the mountains are highest there are two rainy
seasons, one in spring the other in autumn, so that
this province well deserves its Grecian name of


215


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Arabia


Arabia Felix. In the higher reaches of this province, | dotted over all the inhabited parts of Arabia and


for example, at its capital San‘a, snow falls in
December; while on the coast of the Red Sea at
Loheia, scarcely 100 miles distant, the thermometer
rarely falls below 80°. In the Red Sea 93° is a
common reading in the shade in summer, while the
heat of the Persian Gulf, owing to its steep shores
and great evaporation, is hardly endurable by a
European. In the N.W. province, in which are
situated the two sacred cities of Mecca and Medina,
the rainfall is unreliable and takes the form of
heavy thunder showers which occasion frequent
floods in the former town, and are, owing to the
arborial denudation of the country, of little use
for the purpose of agriculture or irrigation. These
winter rains may commence as early as September,
and by December at latest the new pasture will have
covered the ground. Hence the true spring in
northern Arabia, or in Syria, falls in our autumn,
but there is not the distinction of former and latter
rain (cf Hos 6 3) whichobtainsin Pal. Theclimate
of the northern central plateau is described by Pal-
grave as one of the mdst salubrious in the world.

As has been indicated above, the backbone of
the peninsula is the mountain range which runs

down its western side. In its north-
3. Moun- ern parts this is said to be an exten-
tains sion of the limestone ranges of the
Lebanon and Anti-Libanus. In its
midmost reaches it attains an elevation of be-
tween 8,000 and 9,000 feet, and at its southern
extremity it spreads out into the plateau of Arabia
Felix, where its highest peaks have an altitude of
as much as 11,000 feet. In the 8.E. corner of the
peninsula the range of Jebel Akhdar runs parallel
to that on the W., and is connected with it along
.the S. coast by a range of less elevation. In the
interior the northern plateau is intersected by
numerous irregular mountain ranges of moderate
length, of which the most frequently mentioned are
Jebel Aja and Jebel Selma, which face one another
in the Shammar country.

The course of the rivers is determined by the
direction of the mountain ranges. As has been
said the drainage is mainly from W. to
E., but the fact is that Arabia is a
land almost without rivers. The only
quarter in which perennial streams are found is
Arabia Felix, and to some extent they occur along
the 8. coast. The rest of the peninsula is destitute
of rivers and lakes. The scour (seyl) from the
winter thunder showers cuts out for itself a
torrent bed (wadi), which, however, may be filled
only once or twice in a generation, and even so
dries up as soon as the rain ceases. The most
important of these wadis is the W. Sirhan, which
runs from the Hauran in a S8.E. direction to the
Jauf (see Duman), the W. el-Kora to the N. of
Medina, the W. el-Hamth between Medina and
Mecea, and the W. Duweisir to the 5. of Mecca.
Larger than any of these however is the W. er-
Rumma, which extends from the neighborhood of
Medina to the head of the Persian Gulf. It has
never been explored, and is filled with water only
at long intervals.

In these circumstances the Arabs have to seek
their water supply elsewhere than in their rivers.

In many places the surface of the
5. Oases ‘country sinks into a depression down
and Wells +o the level of permanent water, thus

forming an oasis, which word is prob-
ably none other than the Arab. wadt. The best
known of these occur at Kheibar and Teima (see
Tema) to the N. of Medina, and also at Tabuk to
the N.W. The W. Duweisir is itself practically
an oasis of a length of three days’ journey. In
addition to these natural depressions there are also


4, Rivers ;


along the caravan routes numerous wells, these
routes following naturally the course of the wadis.
These wells are plentiful in the W. Sirhan, and a
number were sunk by command of Zubeida the
wife of Harun al-Rashid, along the Pilgrim way
from Persia to Mecca; but the most famous of all
is the well of Zemzem in the Holy City itself. It is
said that the water in it flows, so that it is probably
one of those subterranean rivers which are not
uncommon in Arabia. Its water, however, is


Modern Arabs.


heavy and brackish and causes indigestion, and the
sweetest water obtainable in Mecca for drinking
purposes was originally brought by Zubeida from
a source some 15 miles distant. The purest water
of all is that which collects after rain in the hollows
of the numerous outcrops of lava which occur at
frequent intervals and in great masses along the
western mountain ranges. A spot where lava pre-
dominates is called a harrah (from the Arabic verb
“to be hot’’), and several of these volcanic regions
still show signs of activity.
U1. Political Divisions. —The peninsula of Arabia
was divided by the ancient geographers into
three parts: A. Petraea, A. Deserta
1. Ancient and A. Felix. The first of these
Divisions names, which is found in Ptolemy,
means, not A. the Rocky, but that
part of A. in which is situated the city of Petra
(see SELA), and it also includes the peninsula of
Sinai. It is identical with the desert of the Wander-
ings. A. Deserta is a translation from the Gr
A. érémos of Strabo (cir 24 AD). It denotes the
extreme north of the continent of A. which is
thrust in like a wedge between the fertile lands
which drain into the Euphrates on the E. and into
the Jordan valley on the W. It is thus equivalent
to the Syrian Desert. The third term, A. Felix,
is also a tr from the Gr—A. eudaimdn—which is
again a tr, or rather a mistranslation of the Arab.
El-Yemen. This last name denotes the country
to the right hand, ie. the S, just as the Arab.
Es-Shem (Syria) means the country to the left
hand, or to the N. El-Yemen, however, was inter-
preted as equivalent to El-Eyman, the Fortunate
or Happy, a name which the district truly deserves.
Since before the time of Mohammed (6th cent.)
A. has been divided into seven or eight tribal or
political states, the boundaries of
2. Modern which are for the most part clearly
Divisions defined by intervening deserts or
uninhabited tracts. The most im-
portant of these from a religious point of view is
the Hijaz, which may be described as the northern
half of the western coast, stretching from the Red
Sea to a distance of between 100 and 200 miles
inland. The whole of the coast line, indeed, where
the land is low lying is called the Tihama. This


Arabia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


216


may, however, be considered as belonging to the
adjacent high Jand beneath which it lies. Hijaz
means “Barrier,” and the district is so called
because it consists mainly of the mountain ranges
which separate the great northern central plateau
from the Tihima. This last name is connected with
a root meaning “to be unwholesome.’’ Whether
the district gave its origin to the verb, or the verb
gave its denomination to the district, the name is
equally appropriate. The chief importance of the
Hijaz arises from the fact that in it are situated the
two holy cities of Mecca and Medina—the cradle
and the grave of the Prophet. It is thus the
religious center of the Islamic world. The Yemen
forms the southern corner of the peninsula. It is
identical with A. Felix, and its physical character-
istics have been described above. The Hijaz often
fell to the sovereign of Egypt, but for the last four
centuries it has, like Egypt, been subject to the
Turk. It is only within the last fifty years, on the
other hand, that the sultan has attempted to en-
force his sovereign rights in the Yemen. The
southern coast of A. is generally designated as
Hadramaut, although in strictness that appellation
is properly applicable to a section of it only. The
eastern corner of A. is taken up by Oman, a state
which has generally claimed and secured a position
of independence. Both it and the southern states
are now under the protection of the Indian govern-
ment. The country adjacent to Oman toward the
N. formed the province of El-Bahrein (‘the Two
Seas’), but this name is now restricted to a large
island at the western end of it and some smaller
islands famous for their pearl fishery. The remain-
ing province of El- Hasa is occupied by practically
independent tribes. From many points of view
the most interesting province of A. is the great
‘northern central plateau called Nejd, that is,
“high land.” From its situation it is least suscep-
tible to foreign influence. It contains some fairly
large towns, but the bulk of its population live, as
their fathers have done from time immemorial, the
life of the Bedawi. Two small provinces remain
to be noticed. Between the Yemen and the Hijaz
lies the district of ‘Astr, which largely resembles the
first-named province in its physical features. To
the E. of Nejd lies the district of Yema@ma, which
used to be the territory of an important tribe.
On the whole the political situation in A. today
bears a considerable resemblance to that which
obtained immediately before the mis-
8. Political sion of, Mohammad. At that time
Situation (about 600 AD) the N.W. parts of the
peninsula were more or less subject to
the Byzantine emperor, while the whole FE. and 8.
coasts were under the sway of Persia. Today the
W. coast of A. is again subject to Constantinople,
and the E. and 8. coasts are under the protection
of an eastern power—in this case the government of
India.
The principal towns of A. and the other centers of
population owe their existence to the natural fea-
tures of the country and have probably
remained the same in all ages, just
as those of Pal bave, and even their
population does not seem to have
altered much. Thus Mecca owes its existence to
the presence of the famous well Zemzem; Teima,
Kheibar and Tabuk to their oases; Mascat, the
capital of Omin, to its natural harbor; and so on.
An exception is the ancient town of Saba (see
Suepa) or Marib, which probably sprang up as the
result of the building in prehistoric times of a
gigantic dam for the purposes of irrigation. When
the dam burst in the 2d or 8d Christian cent., the
population dispersed. Owing to the absence of a
census it is not possible to make accurate state-


4. Chief
Towns


ments regarding the population of an eastern town,
and estimates by European travelers always vary
greatly. Speaking generally, the cities of A. of the
first magnitude appear to have some 35,000 inhabit-
pies aneuEe Mascat is said to have as many as
60,000.

IV. Flora and Fauna.—The peninsula of A.
belongs, as has been said, in its physical features
to Africa, and its flora and fauna are
those of that continent. Of all the
products of the soil by far the most
important is the date palm. It flourishes in every
oasis. In the Wadi Duweisir alone it is said one
may ride straight on for three days without leaving
the shelter of the palm groves. The dates, which
are the staff of life of the Arab, differ in quality in
each locality, each district producing a variety of
its own. In the Yemen, with its varied altitudes,
almost every kind of fruit and vegetable known in
temperate latitudes is cultivated on the terraced
mountain sides. Vines are grown, as Ibn Khaldin
remarks, for the sake of the berry, not for the
purposes of wine making. The vine is common
to Arabia and Pal, whereas the date palm has
almost gone out of cultivation in the latter
country. On the other land the olive, which is so
important in the northern country is almost un-
known in the southern. The olive is constantly
referred to in the Bible (Jgs 9 8 and often), the
date never. From the 8S. coast especially are ex-
ported frankincense, balsam, myrrh and other
aromatic plants; and cotton is cultivated in the
province of Oman. Cereals flourish in the Yemen
and tobacco is grown wherever possible in A. The
coffee of the Yemen is famous; it is exported to
Constantinople and named from the port of export
Mokha coffee; but the bulk of it is consumed within .
A. itself. Coffee and tobacco are the only two arti-
cles of consumption which are used in A. today,
and which have not been used from time immemo-
rial. Coffee was probably introduced into A. from
Gallaland on the African mainland two or three
cents. ago. The Arabs are most inveterate coffee
drinkers. Tobacco was probably first brought
from English ships at Constantinople in the reign
of James I. It is cultivated in every oasis, unless
in the interior in Nejd, where its use is discouraged
on religious grounds. There is only one other
point in regard to which the Arabs of today differ
from the Arabs of Mohammed’s time—the use of
gunpowder. Except in respect of the three com-
modities just mentioned,everyday life in the desert
today goes on exactly as it did 1,600 years ago.
Forest trees are extremely rare in A., but a species
of tamarisk called ghada which grows in the northern
nefiid is proverbial for the quality of charcoal it
affords and is a favorite food of the camel. An
acacia called katdd is likewise a by-word on account
of its long spines. The wood is used for making
camels’ saddles; it grows in the Tihaima. As in
Pal and in most countries which have been in-
habited for many thousands of years, the larger
trees have long been cut down for fuel or for build-
ing purposes.

Among beasts of prey panthers, wolves, hyaenas,
jackals and (it is said) even lions are found in A.
Many of the tribes are named after
these and other animals. The wild
ox or oryx (see Unicorn) is rarely
seen, but gazelles are plentiful. Apes abound in
the Yemen, as they do all along the N. of Africa,
and are kept as pets (ef 1 K 10 22). By far the
most important domestic animal is the camel.
Without it many parts of the country would be
uninhabited. It is commonly supposed that the
best breed of horses comes from Nejd, but this
appears to be an error. In Nejd the camel is


1. Flora


2. Fauna


217 |


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Arabia


the indispensable beast of burden and mount;
horses are comparatively useless there. The best
Arabian horses are reared in Mesopotamia. Studs
are, indeed, kept by the emirs of Nejd, but the
horses are small and of little use. The pedigrees
of the best horses go back, according to tradition,
to the time of Solomon (1 K 10 28). Dogs are
trained to hunt the wild ox, to tend sheep and to
watch the camp. All domestic animals—dogs,
horses, mules, asses—receive names as with us.
The ostrich is rarely met with, but is found as far
north as the Jauf; it no doubt found its way into
A. from Africa. A common bird is the kata or
sand grouse. It is noted for going straight to its
watering place. “Better guided than a kata’ is a
common proverb. Hawks and falcons are found,
and falconry among the Arabs was a favorite sport.
In A. the locust, so far from being a scourge wher-
ever it appears, is a valuable article of food. It is
eaten not only by human beings (Mt 3 4), but also
by dogs, horses and even beasts of prey. As might
be expected in a rocky and sun-scorched land like
A., scorpions and various sorts of serpents abound.
The chameleon (Lev 11 30) is common here. It is
used as a simile for fickle people and those who do
not fulfil their promises. It may be regarded asa
substitute for the thermometer, as on very hot days
it ascends trees or any high places. Another sign of
extreme heat is that the vipers writhe on the ground.
The Persian Gulf, especially the Bahrein archi-
pelago, is famous for its pearls, while the Red Sea
is noted for its coral reefs, which have caused many
ashipwreck. It is believed that in the interior of
Hadramaut there are many mineral deposits in-
cluding gold.
V. Inhabitants.—The inhabitants of A. are di-
vided into three classes. There are in the first place
a number of tribes: which became
1. Classifi- extinct, and which are not connected
cation genealogically with those which sur-
; vived. The latter are divided into
two great stems, the south Arabian and indigenous
branch descended from Kahtan, and the north
Arabian or immigrant tribes descended from _Ish-
mael, the son of Abraham. There is naturally a
good deal of inconsistency in the various traditions
of the origins of these tribes and their subsequent
history. oe :
Of the extinct tribes the most familiar name is
that of Amlak or Amlik (Amalek). By the Ara-
bian genealogists he is variously
described as a grandson of Shem and
as a son of Ham. In Gen 36 12 he
is a son of Esau’s son, Eliphaz, by
Timna. They are said to be first met with in
Chaldaea, from which they were expelled on the rise
of the Assyr power under Nimrod. They migrated
into Ar, occupying in turn the Bahrein, Oman, the
Yemen, and finally the Hijaz, where they are said
to have been the first settlers at Yathrib (Medina)
and also to have occupied land round Mecca and
Kheibar. In the time of Abraham they were ex-
pelled from Mecca on the arrival of two new tribes
from the S., those of Jurhum and Kattira (Gen
25 1). Later, it is said, David, during the rebellion
of Absalom, took up his quarters in Kheibar and
ruled over the surrounding districts. According
to another tradition Moses sent an expedition
against the Amalekites in the Hijaéz, on which
occasion the Israelites, disobeying his orders,
spared their king Arkam (cf Rekem, Nu 31 8;
Josh 13 21)—a reminiscence of the incident in the
life of Saul (1 8 15). In any case the Amalekites
were supplanted in the northern Hijaz by Jewish
tribes, who continued there until the time of Mo-
hammad. The Amalekites migrated into Egypt
and southern Pal. The Pharaohs of the time of


2. Extinct
Tribes


Abraham, Joseph and Moses are represented to
have been Amalekites. Finally, broken up by
Josh, they fled into northern Africa, where they
are said to have grown into the Berber races. The
rest of the tribes which became extinct like the
Amalekites are of less interest for the present pur-
pose, being unconnected with the Bible narrative.
They are mentioned in the Koran, in which book
their destruction is attributed to their idolatrous
proclivities and to their rejection of the mono-
theistic prophets. The best known and most im-
portant are ‘Ad and Thamid. ‘Ad is variously
named the son of Amalek and the son of Uz (Gen
10 23). The tribe dwelt in the deserts behind the
Yemen. They became polytheists; the prophet
Hiid was sent to them; they rejected him, and were
destroyed by a hurricane. The remnant grew into
a new tribe, whose chief, Lokman, built the great
dam at Marib. In the end they were conquered
by a tribe of Kahtan. Thamid was closely related
to ‘Ad, being a son of Aram the father of Uz.
They were driven out of the Yemen and settled in
the northern Hijaiz; they rejected their prophet
Salih and were destroyed by an earthquake accom-
panied by a loud noise. The rock-cut sepulchral
monuments of Medain Salih in the Wadi el-Kora
are still pointed out as their dwellings. They
were, therefore, considered to have been troglodites
like the Horites of the Bible. A second pair were
the brother tribes of Tasm and Jadis, grandsons
of Aram. Tasm oppressing Jadis, the latter rose
and almost exterminated the former, only to be in
turn destroyed by a king of the Yemen. Their

home was Yemaima.
The southern Arabs claim to be descended from
an ancestor called Kahtan son of ‘Abir, son of
: Shalikh, son of Arfakhshad, son of


3. South Shem, son of Noah. Kahtan is un-
Arabian doubtedly the Biblical Joktan (Gen
Tribes 10 26), and the names of his descend-


ants reappear as Arab. place names.
Indeed the tenth chapter of Gen throws much light
on the earliest history of A. and the movements
of the tribes. Thus the fact that Sheba and
Dedan appear as grandsons of Cush, that is, as
Abyssinian tribes descended from Ham, in Gen 10
7 and again as descendants of Keturah and Abra~
ham in 25 3 points to the fact that parts of these
tribes migrated from the one country to the other.
Havilah m Gen 10 7 may similarly be connected
with Havilah in 10 29, the intercourse between
8.W. Arabia and the opposite coast of Africa being
always very close. Among the sons of Joktan are
mentioned Almodad, Hazarmaveth, Uzal (Izal),
Sheba, Ophir, Havilah. In Almodad we have
probably the Arab. El-Mudad, a name which occurs
among the descendants of Jurhum, son of Yaktan
(Joktan). Hazarmaveth is obviously Hadramaut.
Uzal is the ancient name of San‘a, the capital of the
Yemen. Sheba is the Arab. Sabaor Marib. Ophir
and Havilah were probably in S. or E. Arabia. In
Gen 10 30 it is said that the camping grounds of
these tribes stretched from Mesha as you go toward
Sephar, the mountain of the East, that is, probably
from the N. of the Persian Gulf to the center of
8. Arabia, Sephar being Zafar, the capital of the
S. Arab kingdom near to the present Mirbat.
Many of the most illustrious tribes are descended
from Kahtan, and some of them still survive. A
constant stream of migration went on


4, Migra- toward the N. Thus the tribe of
tion of Jurhum left the Yemen on account of
Tribes drought and settled in the Hijaz and


the Tihama, from which they drove
out the Amalekites, and were in turn driven out by
Koda'‘a, another Kahtanite tribe. After that they
disappear from history and are reckoned among the


Arabia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


218


extinct tribes. Koda‘a was a descendant of Him-
yar. The Himyarites founded, about the 1st cent.
BC, a kingdom which lasted for five centuries.
The king bore the title of Tubba‘, and the capital
was successively Marib (Saba), Zafar and San‘a.
Qne of their monarchs was the queen Bilkis whom
the Arabian historians identify with the queen of
Sheba who visited Solomon, though she must have
lived much later. The story of the meeting is
given in the Koran, ch 38. A chief occasion on
which many of the tribes left the district N.E. of
the Yemen was the bursting of the great dam, built
by Lokman at Marib, about the 2d cent. AD.
A section of these grew into the Arabian kingdom of
Ghassan, whose capital was Damascus and many
of whose kings bore the name Al-Harith (Aretas,
2 Cor 11 32). This kingdom lasted till the time of
Mohammad (7th cent.) and was in alliance with the
Rom and Gr empires. On the opposite side of the
Syrian desert the Lakhmid kingdom of Al-Hira on
the Euphrates (also of Kahtanite origin) was allied
to Persia. The two Arabian “‘buffer-states’’ were

almost constantly at war with one another.
Among the Arabs Ishmael holds the place occu-
pied by Isaac in the Heb tradition. It was to the
valley, afterward the site of the town


5. North of Mecca, that Abraham conducted
Arabian Hagar and her son, and that Ishmael
Tribes grew up and became the father of a


great nation. The locality is full of
spots connected by tradition with his life history,
the ground where Hagar searched for water, the
well Zemzem of which Gabriel showed her the
place, the mount Thabir where Abraham would
have sacrificed his son (Ishmael), and the graves
of Hagar and Ishmael. The Jurhum, among
whom Ishmael grew up, gave him seven goats:
these were the capital with which he began life.
He married a woman of Jurhum. He had twelve
sons (Gen 25 16) of whom Kaidar and Nabat are
the best known, perhaps the Cedrei and Nabataei
of Pliny; other sons were Dumah and Tema (q.v.).
The subsequent history of the Ishmaelites is lost,
for several generations until we come to ‘Adnan,
who is said to have been defeated by Nebuchad-
nezzar, when the latter invaded Arabia. All the
Ishmaelite tribes are descended from ‘Adnan.
They are the north Arabian tribes, as opposed to the
Kahtanite or south Arabian. One of them, Koreish,
under their chief, Kosay, became master of Mecca,
driving out Koda‘a. Later, as the tribe of the
Prophet, they became the rulers of Arabia and
the aristocracy of the Muslim empire; and the
descendants of Mohammad remain to this day the
only hierarchy known to Islim.
There are one or two other branches which are
not included in the above classification: such are
the Nabateans (see NeBaioru), and
6. Other —_ the descendants of Esau and Keturah.
Tribes The Nabateans are not generally
reckoned among the Arabian tribes.
They were an Aramaean stock, the indigenous in-
habitants of Mesopotamia, and spoke not Arabic
but Aramaic. They founded a kingdom in A. of
which the capital was Petra (see Seua). This
was the most famous of their colonies, and it
endured, at first in alliance with the Romans and
later in subjection to them, for 500 years—from
the 2d cent. BC to the 3d cent. AD. Petra was
an important trading emporium, but, when the
trade left the overland routes and was carried by
way of the Red Sea, it quickly fell into poverty and
oblivion. The descendants of Esau are named in
Gen 36 1ff; they were allied to the Hittites and
Ishmaelites. Among the tribes descended from
Keturah are Jokshan and Midian, Sheba and Dedan
(Gen 25 2 ff).


disabilities, is a large Jewish population.


In Arabia there was and still,-in spite of religious
i Before
the age of Mohammad they lived
chiefly in the N.W., the two best
known tribes—An-Nadir and Koreiza
—occupying Yathrib (Medina). After
the rise of Islam they were expelled from A.; but
at the present time there are probably some 60,000
Jews in the Yemen alone. There has always been
a close connection between the 8. and W. of A. and
the opposite African coast. Especially in the 6th
cent. there was a large influx of Abyssinians into the
Yemen, as there still is into the western districts.
A like intermixture of population went on between ~
Zanzibar and Oman.

VI. Religion.—The religion of the greater part
of the Arabs before the time of Mohammad con-
sisted of a vague deism combined with
a primitive form of stone-worship.
This is chiefly true of the Ishmaelite
tribes descended from Modan, a great-
grandson of ‘Adnan, and among them it is espe-
cially true of Koreish. The origin of this stone
worship may have been that as each family was
forced to hive off from the main stock and quit
the sacred territory around Mecca, it carried with
it a stone as a monument of the homeland. This
stone soon became a fetich. It was worshipped by
stroking it with the hand. Before setting out on a
journey a man would perform this religious duty,
and also immediately on his return, before even
visiting his wife and family. The best known
idols of the pagan Arabs, from the mention of them
in the Koran, are Al-Lat, Al-Ozza and Al-Manat
(Kor 53 19.20), worshipped by the Thakif at Taif,
by the two tribes of Medina, the Aus and the
Khazraj, and by Koreish, in a shrine near Mecca,
respectively. Koreish had also a great idol named
Hubal in the “house of God” at Mecca, which con-
tained other idols besides. The deity in each case
was probably at first a large bowlder of stone, then
a portable image was made, apparently in human
form. They were regarded as feminine and called
the daughters of God. Indeed, Al-Lat is appar-
ently merely the feminine of Allah (God). The
deities mentioned in the Koran (71 23), Yaghith,
Ya‘tk and Nesr, were worshipped in the Yemen.
It is certain, however, that the idolatry of the Arabs
of “the Ignorance”’ (Jahiliyah, “roughness,” “‘gno-
rance”’; cf Acts 17 30)—so native writers name
the ages before Mohammad (Koran 3 148, etc)—
has been greatly exaggerated by Mohammadan
historians. It is remarkable that the words denot-
ing an idol, sanam and wethen, are not Arab. roots,
and the practice of idolatry seems also to have been
an importation from without. Even the idolatrous
Arabs believed in a supreme deity, whose daughters
the idol deities were, and with whom they had
powers of intercession. They therefore were rather
images of saints than of gods. As Renan has said,
the desert is monotheistic; it is too empty to give
birth to a pantheon, as the fruitful plains of India
could do. At the present day the desert Arabs are
more strictly monotheistic than the Muslims them-
selves. Their religion consists in nothing save a
vague belief in God.

Though there were many houses of God in the
country, the chief religious resort even before the

time of Mohammad was Mecca. The
2. The House of God (see BETHEL) here was
Ka'ba, called the Ka‘ba, which is the English
Pilgrimages word “cube,” the building being so


7. Foreign
Elements


1. Mono-
theism


and Fairs called from its shape. It was believed
to have been built by Abraham and
Ishmael. The honor of acting as guardians of the


House was a subject of rivalry among the tribes.
The office was held consecutively by the tribes of


219


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Arabia


Jurhum, Koda‘a and Koreish, and last by the grand-
father and uncles of Mohammad. These, there-
fore, correspond to the tribe of Levi in Israel. It
is said to have contained a large number of images,
but it is remarkable that the nearer our authorities
get to the time of Mohammad the smaller is the
number of images mentioned. The chief of these,
Huhal, is not named in the Koran. The worship
took the form of circumamhbulation (¢aw4af), running
or marching round the sanctuary (cf Ps 26 6).
An annual visitation was and still is made by those
living at a distance, and sacrifices are offered. This
is the hajj or pilgrimage; the same name is used
fpr the corresponding rite among the Hebrews
(Ex 10 9 and often). These religious assemblies
were combined with fairs, at which markets were
held and a considerable trade carried on. Before
the time of Mohammad the great annual fair was
held at Okaz, a place still pointed out about three
days’ journey E. of Mecca and one day W. of Taif.
Here were not only all kinds of commercial trans-
actions carried on—auctions, sales, settling of
accounts and payment of blood-wit, but an academy
was held at which poets recited their odes, and
received judgment upon their merits. These fairs
were generally held in the sacred months, that is,
the first, seventh, eleventh and twelfth months, in
which fighting was forbidden. They had therefore

a great civilizing and pacifying influence.
Before the time of Mohammad Judaism pre-
vailed extensively in Arabia, especially in the
Hijaz. It began no doubt with the


3. Judaism migration of famili¢s due to disturhed .


political conditions at home. The con-
quest of Pal by Nebuchadnezzar, by the Seleucids,
by the Romans under Pompey, Vespasian and
finally Hadrian, drove many Jews to seek peace
and safety in the deserts out of which their fore-
fathers had come. Thither St. Paul also withdrew
after his conversion (Gal 117). Two of these
emigrant tribes, the Nadir and Koreiza, settled at
Medina, first in independence, then as clients of the
Aus and Khazraj. In the end they were harried
and destroyed by Mohammad. The Jewish colony
at Kheibar met the same fate. Several free Arab
tribes also professed the Jewish faith, especially
certain branches of Himyar and Kinda, both
descendants of Kahtan, the former in southern, the
latter in central Arabia. Judaism was introduced
into the Yemen by one of the Tubbas, probably in
the 3d cent. AD, but it was not until the hegin-
ning of the 6th cent. that it made much headway.
At that epoch the Tubba Dhu Nuwis became a
fierce protagonist of this creed. He seems to have
attacked the Aus and Khazraj to whom the Jews
of Yathrib (Medina) were subject. He instituted
against the Christians of Nejran, a territory lying
to the N.E. of the Yemen, a persecution which
brought upon-him the vengeance of the Byzantine
emperor and of the Negus of Abyssinia and in-
volved his kingdom and dynasty in ruin. | ;
Judaism did not hold such a large place in Arabia
as did Christianity. The apostle Bartholomew is
said to have carried the gospel thither.
4, Chris- One of the Jurhum kings who may have
tianity lived about the heginning of the 2d
cent. AD is named Abd el-Masih
(“Christ’s slave’). There is said to have heen a
representation of the Virgin Mary and her Son in
the Ka‘ba. The Christian emperor Constans
(337-50) sent the Bishop Theophilus into 8. Arabia
in order to obtain toleration for the Christians.
The mission was successful. Churches were built
at Zafar, at Aden, and on the shore of the Persian
Gulf. The emperor’s real object was doubtless
political—to counteract the influence of Persia in
these regions. Most of the Yemenite tribes were


at this time pagan: they worshipped the idols men-
tioned ahove (Koran 71 23). Brae time after we
find the Abyssinian sovereign describing himself in
the inscriptions at Axum as king of the Himyarites.
This supremacy would he favorable to the spread
of Christianity. One of the chief seats, however,
of the Christian religion, was at the above-mentioned
Nejran, the territory of the tribe Harith ibn Ka‘b,
whom ecclesiastical writers seem to denote by Are-
thas son of Caleb. It was this tribe that Dhu Nuwas,
Tubha of the Yemen, on his conversion to Judaism,
attacked. He threw all the Christians who held by
their faith into a trench of fire in which they were
burned (Koran 85 4). News of this atrocity was
either carried by those who escaped or sent by
the Lakhmid, king of Al-Hira, to the emperor Justin
I, who, in turn, either directly or through the
patriarch of Alexandria, invoked the codéperation
of the Axumite king. The result was that the
Abyssinians invaded the Yemen and overthrew the
Himyarite dynasty. Christianity then hecame the
prevailing religion of 8. Arabia. The Abyssinians
were in their turn, however, expelled by the Per-
sians, under whom all religions—Christianity, Ju-
daism and paganism—were tolerated, until they
all disappeared before Islam. Several of the
Lakhmid kings of Al-Hira, although they were
from circumstances under the influence of the
Persian Zoroastrianism, professed Christianity.
Nu‘man I who reigned at the end of the 4th and
beginning of the 5th cent., perhaps under the
influence of Simon Stylites, retired from the world
and hecame an ascetic. Mundhir II, in the middle
of the 6th cent., seems to have come temporarily
under the influence of the Eutychian heresy.
Nu'mdn V, one of his successors, was also con-
verted to Christianity. But the kingdom in which
Christianity flourished most was naturally that in
closest contact with the Byzantine empire—the
kingdom of the Ghassanids, although it seems not
to have heen until after the conversion of Con-
stantine that this was the.case. From his reign
date the monasteries of which the ruins are still
visible in the Ghassanid country. The powerful
Ishmaelite tribe of Taghlib, whose settlements
were in Mesopotamia was also converted to Chris-
tianity through similar influences, but not until
the end of the 6th cent. Some members of the
Kahtanite Koda‘a professed the same religion, as
did the Kelb in the Jauf.
_ In the Koran a third creed is bracketed with
those of the Jews and Christians as entitled to
toleration—that of the Sabians. These
5. The are monotheists who also worshipped
Sabians the stars or the angels. The name
Sabian has no connection with Sahaean
which is derived from the name of the town of
Saba. An account of their religion, taken from
Abu’l Faraj (Bar Hebraeus), the Jacobite bishop,
who wrote ahout the middle of the 13th cent.,
will be found in Sale’s Koran, Preliminary Dis-
course, sec. I. Sale, however, identified Sabianism
with the primitive religion of the Arahs, which
Mohammad sought tosupplant. This is impossible,
however, in view of the fact that Mohammad
tolerated the one and proscribed the other. Since
the publication of Chwolson’s Ssabier und Ssa-
bismus it has been recognized that under the term
Sahians are included two very different groups of
people. In the first place the devotees of the old
Sem idolatry which flourished at Harran assumed the
name Sabian to enable them to claim the pro-
tection afforded by the Koran. It is the tenets of
these Harranians of which Chwolson’s work con-
tains an exposition. The true Sabians, however,
were a survival of primitive Christian Gnosticism;
whence they were also called Mandaeans. From


Arabian
Arah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


220


their frequent ablutions they received their name
derived from the Aram. ¢*bha‘', to “baptize,’”’ the
‘ayin being softened to ’aléph, and connected with
St. John the Baptist.

The Jews, Christians and Sabians are called in
the Koran “the people of the book,” that is, those
to whom a revelation had been vouchsafed, and
who were in consequence of this tolerated. In one
passage of the Koran (22 17) a fourth religion is
added to these—the Magian, or Zoroastrian, intro-
duced from Persia.

Shortly before the appearance of Mohammad a
number of thinking persons had become dissatisfied

with the old Arabian religion of their
6. Seekers ancestors, and yet had not joined the
after Truth Christian or Jewish faith. They gave

up the worship of idols, studied the
various sacred books, and sought to find out the
true way. They are considered in the Koran as
having been of the true faith even before Mo-
hammad had appeared. About a dozen are men-
tioned by the historians, of whom the most impor-
tant are four—Waraka the cousin of Mohammad’s
wife Khadija; Othman who became a Christian;
Obeidallah who became a Christian and then a
Muslim; Zeid who traveled in pursuit of Truth,
but did not attach himself to any one faith.
The Heb prophets and those who accepted their
doctrines are regarded as belonging to the same
class. A person who is a monotheist, and who yet
does not attach himself to any particular creed is
called in the Korin a Hanif. This pure religion
is called the religion of Abrabam. Mohammad
claimed to restore this primeval religion in Islim.
By John of Damascus Mohammad was regarded
as the founder of a Christian sect. It is probable
that but for his appearance Christianity would have
spread over the whole of Arabia.


LITERATURE. — Caussin de Perceval, Essai sur l’his-
toire des Arabes; Sprenger, Die alte Geographie Arabiens;
Hamdani, ed, Miiller, Geographie der arabischen Halb-
tinsel; Niebuhr, Travels through Arabia; Burckhardt,
Travels in Arabia; Wellsted, Travels in Arabia; Burton,
Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to El-Medinah and
Meccah; Palgrave, Journey through Central and Eastern
Arabia; _ Blunt, Pilgrimage to Nejad; Hurgronje,
Mecca; Doughty, Travels in Arabia Deserta; Harris, A
Journey through the Yemen; Briinnow and Domazewski,
Die Provincia Arabia; Musil, Arabia Deserta; Glaser,
Skizze der Geschichte und Geographie Arabiens.

Tuomas Hunter WEIR


ARABIAN. See ARasia.


ARABIC GOSPEL OF THE INFANCY. See
APOCRYPHAL GOSPELS.


ARABIC HISTORY OF JOSEPH THE CAR-
PENTER. See ApocRYPHAL GOSPELS.


ARABIC LANGUAGE, ar’a-bik lan’gw&j: For
the student of the Bible the Arab. language is of
interest, first, as one of the members of the Sem
group of languages, to which belong the Heb and
Aram. tongues of the Bible; secondly, as one of the
languages into which the Bible and other church
literature were early tr? and in which a Christian
lit. was produced; and thirdly, as the vernacular
of Mohammed and his followers, the classical tongue
of that religious system which is the offspring of a
degenerate Judaism and Christianity. ;

Scholars are generally agreed in grouping the
Arabic and Ethiopic together as a South-Sem

branch of the Sem stock. For the


1. Philo- geographical and ethnological back-
logical ground of the Arab. language, see
Character- Arapia. A general characteristic of
ization this tongue of the desert is its remark-


able retention into a late historical
period, of grammatical features obliterated or in
process of obliteration in the other Sem tongues at


their earliest emergence in lit.; so that in the period
since the golden age of its lit., the Arab. has been
undergoing changes in some respects analogous to
those which its sister-dialects underwent in their
pre-literary or earliest literary stage. Thus, for
example, the case-endings of nouns, lost in Aram.
and Canaanitish (including Heb), all but lost in the
Abyssinian dialects, beginning to be disregarded in
even the early (popular) Bab, lost also in the dialects
of modern Arab. are in full vitality throughout the
classical period of Arab. literature.

The Arab. language itself, ancient and modern, di-
vides into a vast number of dialects, many of which
have attained the distinction of producing a lit.
greater or less. But the dialect of the tribe of
Koreish, to which Mohammed belonged, is the one
that, naturally, by the circumstance of the Korfn’s
composition and diffusion, has become the norm of
pure Arabic. Old Arab. poems, some of them pro-
duced in “the Ignorance,” that is, before the days of
Mohammed, are in substantially the same dialect
as that of the Koran, for it appears that Bedouin
tribes ranging within the limits of the Arabian desert
spoke an Arabic little differentiated by tribal or
geographical peculiarities. On the other hand the
inhabitants of the coast of the Indian Ocean from
Yemen to Oman, and of ‘the island of Socotra off
that coast, spoke an Arabic differing widely from
that of the northern tribes. The various dialects
of this “South-Arabic,” known partly through their
daughter-dialects of today (Mehri, Socotri, etc),
partly from the numerous and important inscrip-
tions (““Minaean” and “Sabaean”) found in Yemen
by recent travelers, notably Halévy and Glaser,
show a closer affinity than do the ‘North-Arabic”
with the Abyssinian dialects (Ge’ez, i.e. ‘‘Ethiopic,”’
Tigre, Tigrifia, Amharic, etc), as might indeed be
expected from the admitted S. Arabian origin of
the Habesh-tribes or Abyssinians.

For the interpretation of the OT the Arab. lan-
guage has been of service in a variety of ways. In
the department of lexicography it has thrown light
not only on many a word used but once in the Bible
or too seldom for usage alone to determine its
meaning, but also on words which had seemed clear
enough in their Biblical setting, but which have
received illustration or correction from their usage
in the immense bulk and range of Arab. lit. with
its enormous vocabulary. For the modern scien-
tific study of Heb grammar, with its genetic method,
Arab. has been of the greatest value, through the
comparison of its cognate forms, where, in the
main, the Arab. has the simpler, fuller and more
regular morphology, and through the comparison of
similar constructions, for which the highly developed
Arab. syntax furnishes useful rubrics. In addition
to this the Arab. language plays a prominent part,
perhaps the foremost part, in the determination of
those laws of the mutation of sounds, which once
governed the development and now reveal the mutual
relationships of the various Sem languages.

The script which we know as Arab. script, with
its numerous‘ varieties, developed out of the vulgar
Aram. alphabet in N. Arabia; diacritical points
were added to many of those letters, either to dis-
tinguish Arab. sounds for which no letter existed,
or to differentiate letters the forms of which had
become so similar as to create confusion. In Yemen
another script arose early, that of the inscriptions
above mentioned, admirably clear and adapted to
express probably all the chief varieties of consonantal
sounds in actual use, though quite without vowels.

For Arab. VSS of the Bible, see Aranic VER-
sions. Outside of the Scriptures themselves there
was most felt by Christian communities living in
the Arab.-speaking world (primarily, though not
exclusively, in Egypt and Byaa) the need of a


221 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA oe
Christian lit. suited to the tastes of the time and | Franks, Chinese, for the Hcb names. Saadiah’s


region. Apocryphal and legendary material makes
up a large part, therefore, of the list
2. Christian of Christian Arab. lit. See Apoc-
Arabic RYPHAL GosPELs. But this material
Literature was not original. With the small
degree of intellectual activity in those
circles it is not surprising that most of such ma-
terial, and indeed of the entire literary output,
consists of translations from Syr, Gr or Coptic,
and that original productions are few in number.
Of these last the most noteworthy are the follow-
ing: theological and apologetic tracts by Theodore,
bishop of Haran, the same who held the famous
disputation with Mohammedan scholars at the
court of Caliph Al-Mamun early in the 9th cent.;
apologetic and polemic writings of Yahya ibn Adi
of Tekrit, and of his pupil Abu Ali Isa ibn Ishaq,
both in the 10th cent.; the Arab. works of Bar
Hebraeus, better known for his numerous Syr com-
positions, but productive also of both historical
and theological works in Arab. (13th cent.); in
Egypt, but belonging to the same Jacobite or Mo-
nophysite communion as the above, the polemic
and homiletic productions of Bishop Severus of
Eshmunain (10th cent.), and, a generation earlier
than Severus and belonging to the opposing or
Melkite Egyp church, the chronicle of Eutychius,
patriarch of Alexandria, continued a cent. later by
Yahya ibn Said of Antioch; large compilations of
church history, church law and theological mis-
cellany by the Coptic Christians Al-Makin, Abu
Ishaq ibn Al-Assal, Abu’l-Barakat and others, the
leaders in a general revival of Egyp Christianity
in the 13th cent.; on the soil of Nestorianism,
finally, the ecclesiastical, dogmatic and exegetical
writings of Abulfaraj Abdallah ibn At-Tayyib,
(11 cent.), the apologetic compositions of his con-
temporary, Elias ben Shinaya, the historian, and the
Nestorian church chronicle begun in the 12th cent.
by Mari ibn Suleiman and continued two cents.
later by Amr ibn Mattai and Saliba bar Johannan.


After this date there is no original literature produced


by Arab.-speaking Christians until the modern in-
tellectual revival brought about by contact with

European Christianity. .
What Aram., Gr and Lat have been successively
in the history of Christianity, all this, and more,
‘Arab. has been in the history of Islam.


3. The The language of its founder and his
Literary “helpers,” the language of the Koran
Vehicle “sent down” from God to Moham-
of Islam med by the angel Gabriel, the lan-


guage therefore in which it has always
been preserved by the faithful, untranslated,
whithersoever it has spread in the wide world of
Islam, Arab. is identified with Islam in its origin, its
history, its lit. and its propaganda. All the points
of contact between the religion of the Bible and the
religion of the Koran, literary, historical, apologetic
and missionary, are alike in this, that they demand
of the intelligent student of Christianity a sym-
pathetic acquaintance with the genius and the mas-
terpieces of the great Arab. tongue.
J. Oscar Born
ARABIC VERSIONS, ar’a-bik vdr’shuns: Arab.
tr® of the Bible must have been made at a very early
date, for Christianity and Judaism had penetrated
far into Arabia by the 6th cent. of our era, but the
oldest of which a copy has come down to our time
is that of Saadiah the Gaon (942 AD). This ver-
sion was made directly from the MT and is said
to have covered the whole of the OT, but much of
it is no longer extant. It is characterized by an
avoidance of anthropomorphisms (e.g. Gen 6 2,
“gong of nobles” and “daughters of common people”’)
and by giving modern equivalents, e.g. Turks,


Pent was first printed at Constantinople in 1546
and was incorporated into the Paris (1629-45) and
London (1657) Polyglots. When, after the rise
of Islam, Arab. became the common language of
Syria, Egypt and N. Africa, tr? were made from the

XX, from the Pesh and from Coptic. In the
Polyglots the tr of Joshua is, like the Pent, made
from the MT, as also portions of Kings and Nehe-
miah, with ines polaHtone from the Pesh. Judges,
Ruth, 1 and 2 Samuel, 1 and 2 Kings (in parts),
1 and 2 Chronicles (?), Nehemiah (in parts) and Job
have been tr’into Arab. from Syr. The remaining
books (Prophets, Psalms, Proverbs, etc) are from
the LXX, and that according to Codex A. In the
NT the Gospels have been tr¢ from the Vulg, and
the remaining books, although from the Gr, are
late. A revised edition of the versions in Walton’s
Polyglot was published by J. D. Carlyle, professor
of Arab. in Cambridge, and printed at Newcastle
by Sarah Hodgson in 1811. A very fine tr of the
entire Bible in classical Arab. has been issued by
the Jesuit Fathers in Beirft, and a simpler version
in Arab. which can be understood by the common
people, educated_and uneducated alike, was made
hy the late Dr. Cornelius Van Dyck of the Syrian
Protestant College and published by the American
Press in Beirft. Dr. Van Dyck had the benefit
of the help and advice of the Sheikh Nasif al-
YAziji.

A large number of MSS of the Bible in Arab., in
whole or in part, are to be found in the British
Museum, the Bibliothéque Nationale and the great
libraries of the Continent, but none of them are of
sufficient age to make them of value for the criticism
of the text. Tomas HUNTER WEIR


ARABOTH, ar’a-both. See ARUBBOTH.


ARAD, a’rad (TW, ‘drddh; ’ApaS, Ardd):

(1) A city mentioned four times in the OT. In
AV it is twice mistakenly rendered as the name of
a king (Nu 211; 33 40). Three times it is
spoken of as in the South Country, one mention
using the phrase ‘the wilderness of Judah which
is in the South Country of Arad’ (Jgs 1 16), that
is, the part of the wilderness of Judah which is in
the South Country near Arad. It was situated
near the frontier of Judah and Simeon, being
grouped with Debir, Hormah, Makkedah, etc
(Josh 12 14). Arad and other cities joined in
attacking Israel in the fortieth year of the sojourn
in the wilderness (Nu 21 1-3), and Israel vowed
to “make their cities a devoted thing.” In the
case of Zephath, one of the cities, this vow was
fulfilled after the death of Joshua (Jgs 1 17). The
Kenite relatives of Moses had their inheritance near
Arad (Jgs 116). In the form a-ru-dé the city is
mentioned by Shishak of Egypt as among the places
which he conquered in Pal. The identification of
the site with Tel Arad, about 17 miles 8. of Hebron,
seems to be generally accepted.

(2) One of the descendants of Elpaal the son of
Shaharaim, mentioned among the descendants of
Benjamin (1 Ch 8 15). Witus J. BEECHER


ARADUS, ar’a-dus ("Apafos, Arados, 1 Macc 15
23): Gr name of the OT Arvap (q.v.),a city on the
coast of Phoenicia.


ARAH, 4'ra (1128, ’drah, “traveler” ?): (1) The
son of Ulla, an Asherite (1 Ch 7 39). (2) The
head of a family that returned from the exile with
Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 5; Neh 7 10). He is some-
times identified with Arah of Neh 6 18 whose
granddaughter became the wife of Tobiah, the Am-
monite who tried to thwart Nehemiah in rebuilding
Jerus.


Aram
Aramaic Lang.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


222


ARAM, a’ram (DN, dram): (1) A son of Shem
(Gen 10 22; 1Chi 17). See ARAMEANS; Syria.
(2) A grandson of Nahor (Gen 22 21). (3) A
descendant of Asher (1 Ch 7 34). (4) ’Apdz,
Ardém, AV: Gr form of Ram (thus RV Mt 1 3.4;
Arni Lk 3 33), grandson of Perez.


ARAMAEANS, ARAMEANS, ar-a-mé’ans: Often
in AV and RV Syrians. See SYRIA.


ARAMAIC LANGUAGE, ar-a-ma/ik lan’gw4j
(VON , dramith; AV Syrian, Syriac; SYRIAN
in RV):

Early Notices in Scripture

Extra-Biblical Evidences of Aramaic

The Script of Aramaic

Dialects of Aramaic

Grammatical Peculiarities

Comparison of Aramaic of Sinjirli with That of Bible
Comparison of Aramaic of Assouan with That of
Daniel

. Elephantine Papyri

. Comparison with Aramaic of Targums

10. Chief Differences in Latter

LITERATURE

The name is given to a form of Sem speech, most
nearly related to Heb and Phoen, but exhibiting
marked peculiarities, and subsisting in different dia-
lects. Its original home may have been in Meso-
potamia (Aram), but it spread N. and W., and, as
below shown, became the principal tongue through-
out extensive regions. After the return from the
Captivity, it displaced Heb as the spoken language
of the Jews in Pal. In its eastern form it is known
as Syr. In its occurrence in the OT, it formerly,
though incorrectly, generally bore the name Chaldee.
The present article deals with it chiefly in its OT
relations.

If we neglect two words which occur in Gen 31 47,
the earliest notice of the use of this language in

Scripture is in the request which the


O90 NOPE


1. Early representatives of Hezekiah make
Notices of to Rabshakeh: ‘Speak, I pray thee,
Aramaicin to thy servants in the Syr language”
Scripture (dramith, 2 K 18 26; Isa 36 11).


The narrative from which we have
made this excerpt, even if it stood alone, would
prove that Aram., “the Syr language,” was so dif-
ferent from Heb, ‘the Jews’ language,” that it
was not understood by the inhabitants of Jerus.
Further, it shows that Aram. was the ordinary
language of Assyr diplomacy. We next meet with
Aram. in a ver in Jer 10 11 which appears to be an
answer put into the mouths of the Jews as a reply
to any attempt to seduce them to the worship of
idols. If we assume the traditional date of Daniel
to be correct, the six chs in that book (Dnl 2
4—7 28), forming the greater part of the whole,
are the next and most important occurrence of
Aram. in Scripture. There are, further, passages
in Ezr 4 8—6 18; 7 12-26, amounting approxi-
mately to three chs, in which Aram. isused. In the
NT several Aram. words and phrases occur, modified
by having passed through Gr.

Formerly our knowledge of Aram. earlier than the
Tgs and the Pesh was restricted to the above-
noticed passages of Scripture. Now,


2. Extra- however, discoveries, still compara-
Biblical tively recent, have put us in a differ-
Evidences ent position. In the closing decade
of Aramaic of last cent. extensive inscriptions were


discovered in Sinjirli, in the neigh-
borhood of Aleppo, dated in the reigns of Tiglath-
pileser and the Sargonid monarchs, and one that
seems earlier. More recent has been the discovery
of the Assouan papyri; these bear dates which
synchronize with Ezra and Nehemiah. Earlier
than these in discovery, but between them in date
of origin, are weights of the reign of Sargon, with


two inscriptions, one, official, in cuneiform, which
not only gives the designation. of the weight, but
relates the name and titles of the king; the other,
popular, in Aram., which only tells the weight.
More striking is the fact that frequently, in regard
to contract tablets, while the binding document is
in cuneiform character and the Assyr language,
the inscription on the clay envelope which served
as a docquet is in Aram., language and letter. This
affords proof that at all events before the reign of
Tiglath-pileser Aram. was the eae speech for

cornmerce and diplomacy all over S.W. Asia.
When we come in contact with it, Aram. is a fully
formed alphabetical language, and has attained a
further stage of development than the


3. The Assyr with its cumbrous cuneiform.
Script of To the end, Assyr was largely ideo-
Aramaic graphic and hieroglyphic. The same


Inscriptions group of symbols represented very
different sounds according to circum-
stances, and widely differing meanings were con-
nected with the same sound, with the consequent
necessity for determinatives. The alphabet em-
ployed in Aram. is practically that found on the
Moabite Stone. It evidently stands at the end of
a long process of evolution. It is probable that a
hieroglyphic stood behind it; whether it is derived
from the Hittite (Conder), or from Egyp (Rougé),
or Assyr (Delitzsch), or is of independent origin
(Gesenius), cannot be determined. Aram. is, like
Heb and Assyr, a North Sem tongue, standing in a
manner between them. It is more regular in its
formation than either of the others, a character that
may to some extent be due to its use as a lingua
franca over so wide a territory. Aram. was the
official language of the extensive Pers empire, as it
had been to some extent that of its predecessor, the
empire of Assyria. It may be regarded as having
been generally understood from Asia Minor on the
N., to the Cataracts of the Nile on the 8., and from
the mountains of Media on the E., to the Mediter-
ranean on the W. Its history has been long; spoken,
as we learn by inscriptions, from before the days of
‘Tiglath-pileser, it is still spoken on the banks of the
Tigris and the Euphrates.
These extensive limits, geographical and chrono-
logical, imply dialectic differences. Means of
communication were so _ ineffective
4. Dialects that the distance between the eastern
of Aramaic and western limits would require
greater time to traverse, than does that
which separates America from Europe, or New York
from Brazil. The primary dialectic distinction was
between eastern Aram. (Syr) and western (formerly
called Chaldee). The peculiarity which most promi-
nently distinguishes these is the preformative of the
imperfect; in the western, as in Heb and Arab., it is
yodh, while in the eastern it is nun or lamedh. Each
of these has sub-dialects. In Pal, besides the Chaldee
of the Jewish Tgs, there was Sam; in it, besides
many foreign elements in the vocabulary, the use
of ‘ayin instead of vav in the preterite of ‘ayin-vav
verbs is the most striking feature. The sub-dialect
of eastern Aram.is Mandaean; it is characterized
by the use of the matres lectionis instead of vowel
signs. From the inscriptions and the papyri it
would seem to follow that the eastern peculiarities
are the more recent—changes introduced through
passage of time. In eastern Aram. the script
ecame more cursive than in western, which_re-
tained the square character we associate with Heb:
except the Sam, which used a still earlier script,
less removed from the angular style of the inscrip-
tions. The script of the Assouan papyri indicated
a tendency toward the later square character.
Although an article like the present is not the
place to give a full grammar of Aram., yet we may


223


advert to some of the more prominent peculiarities,
common to all branches of the language, which dis-

tinguish it from Heb, the best-known
6. Gram- of north Sem tongues. The peculiarity
matical Pe- that most strikes the beginner in Aram.
culiarities is the want of the article, and the
of Aramaic presence instead of the siatus em-

phaticus, which follows the syntactic
rules of the Heb article. The next thing likely to
attract attention is the use of the relative pronoun
2i or di as if it were a preposition meaning “of.”
While in Heb the passive voice is generally indi-
cated in the derived conjugations by internal
vocalic changes, as the pu‘al from the pi‘el; in
Aram. the syllable ’eth (It) or ith (W) is prefixed
(earlier hith). Instead of the Heb causative hiph il
there is the ’aph‘él (earlier haph‘él with its passive
’ethtaph‘al or “ittaph‘al (earlier hoph‘al). The causa-
tive had also shaph‘él and taph‘él forms, which oc-
casionally are found. While in the Tgs and the OT
Pesh the syllable yath is the sign of the accusative
(earlier vath, asin the Sinjirli inscriptions), the letter
lamedh serves that purpose in Aram. which is not a
tr from Heb. A characteristic of later Aram. prom-
inent in the Pesh of the NT is the facility with which
it adopted words and phrases from Gr which had
already largely displaced it as the common language.
New Syr shows a similar facility in regard to Arab.
and Pers.

A question of very considerable importance to
the Biblical student is the relation in which the

Aram. of Daniel and Ezra stands to that
6. Compari- of the Sinjirli inscriptions and that of
son of the the more nearly contemporary Assouan
Aramaic papyri. In making the comparison we
of Sinjirli must bear in mind that the Heb MT is
with That of the result of transcriptions extending
the Bible over 1,500 or 1,200 years, according as

we take the traditional or the critical
dates for the books in question. This implies
probably a score or more of transcriptions each with
its quota of variations from the original. While
the variations introduced by any one transcription
might be few and unimportant, they would all be
in the direction of lateness, and cumulatively might
easily become very great. The late Heb of Ec-
clesiastes, notwithstanding its ascription to Solo-
mon, shows how little the idea of the chronology
of style entered into the thoughts of the scribes of
those days, to check this tendency to moderniza-
tion. It follows that while the presence of late
peculiarities proves nothing but the inaccuracy
of the copyist, early grammatical forms and modes
of spelling are nearly indisputable evidences of
antiquity.

The Stnjirli inscriptions, if we neglect the less
important, are three, the Panammu inscription, the
Hadad inscription and the Barrekab inscription
(Bauenschrifi, Sachau). The first and_ last of
these are dated in the rele of Tiglath-pileser, the
middle one is placed by Sachau in the preceding
cent. It ought to be noted that, when first dis-
covered, it was a matter of doubt whether the
inscriptions should not be reckoned as Heb, rather
than Aram. The close affinity between them and
Heb js shown in various ways. By arelation among
the north Sem tongues similar to that among the
Aryan languages expressed by Grimm’s law, where
letters with the s-sound appear in Heb, in later
Aram. we find corresponding letters with the t-
sound. But in the Sinjirli inscriptions we do not
find this mark of the later language; thus we have
shekél, not thekél, shlathin instead of élathin,
zhabh for dhehabh, etc. That this is not due to the
proximity of Heb is proved by the fact that on the
weights in Sargon’s palace we find shekel. Thus the
Sinjirli inscriptions date from a period when Heb


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Aram
Aramaic Lang.


and Aram. had not been completely differentiated.
There are other points of likeness. Instead of the
’aphél and ’ethtaph‘al or ‘ittaph‘al of later Aramaic,
there is haph‘él and hoph‘al; instead of the ’eth or
ith as the sign of the passive, there is ith. The
vocabularies also are nearly identical. In both, the
syllable yath or vath, sign of the accusative, is
present, as if a survival, only as the support of the
oblique case of a pronoun (Dni 3 12; Sinjirli,
Had 28). The pronouns exhibit a similar resem-
blance to Heb and also to Biblical Aramaic. The
ist per. pronoun is ’anékh (once ‘andkhi in Pan.
1, 19), as in the Phoen and Moabite dialects of Heb;
’dndh occurs occasionally as in Daniel. The most
marked differences from later Aram. is z instead of
dh in the demonstrative pronoun; here there is
relation to the Heb zeh. Another case in frequent
evidence is ’arka’ instead of ’ar‘a.
More nearly contemporary with the Aram. of
Daniel and Ezra is that of the Assouan papyri.
These are carefully dated, and extend
7. Compari- from 471 BC to 411 BC; these two
son of Ara- dates include the whole reign of Ar-


maic of taxerxes I, the king whose cupbearer
Assouan Nehemiah was, and who sent him as
with That governor to Jerus, and a few years
of Daniel of his predecessor’s and successor’s


reigns. These documents, as written
with a reed pen on papyrus, and not cut with a
chisel on stone, manifest a very different style of
letter; as already said, there is some approximation
to the later square character. The resemblance
between the grammar and vocabulary of these
papyri and those of Biblical Aram. is closer than
that of the latter to the Sinjirli grammar and
diction. Where, in the more ancient Aram., we
have z, in these papyri we occasionally find the later
dh. It is not improbable that, as in Spain, a lisp-
ing pronunciation became prevalent; the dh pro-
nounced as th in “then” would in that case repre-
sent more accurately the sound actually uttered
than would z. The word already noticed, ’arka’
which generally appears in Biblical Aram. as ’ar‘a,
is a similar case. In northern Palestine the Arab.
kaf is pronounced much as if it were ‘ain, if not
even the related sound hemzeh; instances of this
spelling also sre found in the Assouan papyri.
Both of these differences are due to frequent
transcription assimilating the spelling to the pro-
nunciation. Another peculiarity is probably due to
a different cause. In Biblical Aram. the preforma-
tive of the 3d per. sing. and plur. of the impf.
of the substantive verb is lamedh. Of this pecul-
iarity Dr. Bevan gives an ingenious explanation.
If the yodh preformative were used, the resulting
word would have a resemblance to the sacred
name: to avoid this, he thinks, the yodh was
changed into a lamedh. Unfortunately this_ex-
plains too much, therefore explains nothing. Had
this been the explanation, the name “Jehu,” which
consonantally is nearly the same as the 3d per.
sing. and plur. of the substantive verb, would never
have been written as it is. Further, if Jewish rev-
erence for the Divine name expressed itself in this
way, we should expect to find this preformative
in the Tgs, which, however, we do not. Hundreds
of eases in proof may be found in Onkelos alone.
The truth is, it is a Mandaean form, which proves
that the Aram. of Daniel and Ezra is eastern. A
further peculiarity is the nun compensative; as
tinda’ (Dnl 4 23), which regularly would be tidda'.
This also is found in the Mandaean; it is, however,
also found in papyri of Assouan, an evidence that
the Mandaean characteristic was a survival from
an earlier time.
Another interesting point of contact between the
Aram. of this period and that of Daniel is exhibited


Aramaic Lang.
Arbela


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


224


in the Elephantine papyri published by Sachau.
These papyri, discovered in the island of Elephan-
tine (opposite Assouan) in 1907, are
8. Elephan- three in number, and are dated in the
tine 14th year of Darius IT (407 BC). In
Papyri the first, Il. 2, 27, 28, the second, |. 26,
and the third Il. 3, 4, we have God
called ‘‘the God of heaven,” the title given to God
throughout Dnl 2. This is also the appellation used
in the Aram. of Ezra (5 11.12; 6 9 etc.) From the
passages where it occurs it would seem that during
the Bab and Pers rule this was the recognized
governmental title of the God of the Hebrews.
As it is frequently asserted that the Aram. of
Daniel and Ezra is that of the Tgs, it is necessary
to examine the truth of this state-
9. Compari- ment. In considering this question


son with we must have regard to the history
Aramaic of these paraphrases, as only in this
of the way can we estimate truly the chrono-
Targums logical value of this ‘great’? resem-


blance, should it be found to exist.
According to Talmudic tradition the Tgs were
delivered orally, and were not committed to writing
till late in the 2d cent. of our era. A traditional
rendering was handed on from m*turg°man (n-
terpreter) to m*turg¢man. In such circumstances
archaic forms, words and idioms, are perpetuated.
The sacred always tends to preserve the antique;
in illustration we need only refer to the song of the
Fratres Arvales, a college of priests dating from
primitive Lat times and continuing to the days of
the Gordians. This sacred song of theirs preserves
to us the most ancient form of the Lat tongue,
though the inscriptions, from which we learn of it,
date from the classic period. Hence the Aram. of
the Tgs may represent the form of the language a
couple of cents. before the Christian era.
We cannot attempt to give an exhaustive sum-
mary of the differences between Biblical and
Targumic Aram., but indicate only
10. Chief some of the more obvious. Account
Differences need not be taken of yath, the sign
of the accusative, as it appears only
as representing the Heb ’eth. In verbs, reference
has already been made to the J preformative in the
substantive verb, a peculiarity which Biblical
Aram. shares with Mandaean in distinction from
other forms of the language: also to the fact that
the hith of the earlier verbal forms is replaced by
4th in the more recent 'tthp*‘él and ithpa‘al. This
also is the case with ’aph‘él (in earlier and Biblical
Aram. haph‘él), the passive of which is hoph‘al, not
ittaph'al, as in Targumic. The importance of
verbal forms in determining age is readily recog-
nized; thus in English, if the 3d per. sing. of the
verbs in an English writing is in eth we decide that
writing to belong, in fact or feigning, to a period
not later than the 17th cent. In regard to pro-
nouns, while in Biblical Aram., as in Sinjirli and
Assouan, the Ist per. sing. is ’an’é, in Targumic it
is ’énah: the plur. in Biblical Aram. is ’dnahna’
akin to ’énahnah in Assouan, whereas in the Tgs
it is usually ‘déndn, though sometimes the Biblical
form appears. The 2d per. sing. in Biblical Aram.
is ’ant as in Assouan, with the plur. ’antim (As-
souan, ’antem): in Targumic it is ati and ’attin.
To compare our own language, when we find
“thou” and “ye” in a writing, we date it as not
later than the 17th cent. The ordinary vocab-
ulary, though not without value in this respect,
is not very important chronologically. Connective
particles, however, are. Everyone acquainted with
Heb knows how frequently yésh, “is,”’ occurs;
as frequent is *%#h in Targumic. In the Bible, as
in the papyri, the form found is ‘thi. In the Tgs


=


7 stands for ‘Sf’; in the Bible and papyri it is


hén. Cognate with this, the Bible and the papyri
have lahén, ‘therefore’: this is not found in the
Tgs, which have instead ‘al-kén. In our own lan-
guage the presence of “eke” in serious prose or
poetry as a conjunction would prove the antiquity
of the composition. The fact that the distinction
between 0 and U has disappeared in the Tgs, but is
still preserved in the Bible, is a note of age that
cannot be passed over. Other examples might be
given, but these will suffice. Professor Bevan
lightly dismisses many of these differences as mere
matters of orthography; yet in French the presence
of | for u or as strengthening the zu in such words
as alz, eulx, aultres is regarded as a note of old as
distinct from modern French; yet probably the
pronunciation was not different.

In pursuing this part of the subject the latter
portion of Pusey’s first Lecture (Daniel the Prophet)
is worthy of study. Pusey had not the advantage
of contemporary documents with which to compare
Biblical Aram.; he could only emphasize the nature
and amount of the differences which separated the
language of Daniel from that of the Tgs. The
argument can now be supplemented by a yet
stronger argument from the resemblance between
the former and the contemporary papyri of Assouan,
and yet the earlier Sinjirl inscriptions.

See further, Syriac; Lancuaces or THE OT;
and ef art. “‘Aramaic’’ in EB.


LiTERATURE.—Numerous grammars and dictionaries
of the two principal dialects of Aram., eastern (Syr) and
western (Chaldee) may be seen in any catalogues. There
is an excellent compendium of the grammar of Biblical
Aram. in Delitzsch's intro to Baer's Text of Dnland Ezr.
For Sam there is a small grammar by Nicholls, also one
in the series ‘‘ Porta Linguarum Orientalium."’ Néldeke
has published grammars for Mandaean and New Syr.


J. E. H. Tomson
ARAMAIC VERSIONS. See Tarcums.


ARAM-DAMMESEEK, 4-ram-dam’es-ek: Syria of


Damascus, conquered by David (2 S$ 8 5.6). See
Syria.
ARAMITESS, ar-am-it’es, ar’am-it-es, ar’am-


it-es (MMAIN , ‘drammiydh): The term applied to
the concubine-mother of Machir, the father of Gilead
(1 Ch 7 14); the inhabitants of Gilead were thus in
part Aramaeans (Syrians) by descent.


ARAM-MAACAH, 4-ram-m@’a-ka.


ARAM-NAHARAIM,
Syria.


ARAM-REHOB, 4-ram-ré’hob. See Syrra.
ARAM-ZOBAH, 4-ram-zd’ba.


ARAN, a’ran (JIN, 'éran, “wild goat”): A son of
Dishan, the Horite (Gen 36 28; 1 Ch 1 42). It
may possibly be connected with the Yerahmelite
Oren (JN) (1 Ch 2 25; ef Curtis, Chron. ad loc.;
Dillmann, Gen ad loc.; ZDMG, L, 168); Robertson
Smith claims that this name is equivalent to the
Sam JN, “wild goat” (Jour. Phil., TX, 90). J.
Jacobs translates it by “ass” (Stud. Bib. Arch., 71).
This is one of the many totem names in the Bible.
More than one-third of the Horites, the descendants
of Seir, bear animal names, and those clans of the
Edomites connected with the Horites also have
animal names. The very name “‘Seir’ means a
“‘he-goat,’’ and Dishan, “a gazelle” (Stud. Bib. Arch.,
70-72). Gray, however, remarks that ‘‘the instance
[Aran] is most uncertain” (HPN, 108).

SAMUEL Conon

ARARAH. Same as Ararat (Tob 1 21).

ARARAT, ar’a-rat (OTIS , 'drdrdi): A mountain-


ra


ous plateau in western Asia from which flow in


See Syrra.
See


a-ram-nd-ha-ra‘im.


See Syria.


225


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Foun Lang.


different directions the Euphrates, the Tigris, the
Aras and the Choruk rivers. Its general elevation
is 6,000 feet above the sea. Lake Van, which
like the Dead Sea has no outlet, is nearly in its
center. The Bab name was Urartu, the conso-
nants being the same in both words. In 2 K 19
37 and Isa 37 38 the word is tr? in AV Ar-
menia, which correctly represents the region desig-
nated. It was to Armenia that the sons of Sen-
nacherib fled. In Jer 61 27 Ararat is associated
with Minni and Ashkenaz, which according to the
Assyr monuments lay just to the east of Armenia.
In Gen 8 4 the ark is said to have rested “upon
the mountains of Ararat,” ie. in the mountainous
region of Armenia, the plur. showing that the
mountain peak known as Ararat was not referred
to. This peak is of volcanic origin and Kes outside
the general region, rising from the lowlands of the
Araxes (Aras) River to a height of 17,000 feet,
supported by another peak seven miles distant,
13,000 feet high. It is only in comparatively
modern times tbat the present name has been given
toit. The Armenians still call it Massis, but believe,
however, that Noah was buried at Nachitchevan
near its base.

The original name of the kingdom occupying
Armenia was Bianias, which Ptolemy transliterated
Byana. Later the B was modified into V and we
have the modern Van, the present capital of the
province. The “mountains of Ararat’? on which
the ark rested were probably those of the Kurdish
range which separates Armenia from Mesopotamia
and Kurdistan. In the Bab account the place is
called “the mountain of Nizir’’ which is east of
Assyria. Likewise Berosus locates the place ‘in
the mountain of the Kordyaeans” or Kurds (Ant,
I, iii, 6), while the Syr version has Hardu in Gen
8 4 instead of Ararat. The Kurds still regard Jebel
Judi, a mountain on the boundary between Armenia
and Kurdistan, as the place where the ark rested.

This elevated plateau of Armenia has still many
attractions, and is eminently suited to have been
the center from which the human race spread in
all directions. Notwithstanding its high eleva-
tion the region is fertile, furnishing abundant
pa and producing good crops of wheat and

arley, while the vine is indigenous. Moreover
there are unmistakable indications that in early
historic times there was a much more abundant
rainfall in all that region than there is now, so that
the climate was then better adapted to the wants of
primitive man. This is shown by the elevated
beaches surrounding lakes Van, Urumiah, and,
indeed, all the lakes of central Asia. Great quanti-
ties of mammoth bones have been found in these
bordering lacustrine deposits corresponding to
those found in the glacial and postglacial deposits
of Europe and America. It should, also, be remem-
bered that the drying up of the waters of the flood
is represented to have been very gradual—it being
170 days from the time the waters began to sub-
side before Noah could disembark. It may have
been many cents. before the present conditions
were established, the climate, meanwhile, being
modified to a corresponding degree by the proximity
of vast surrounding bodies of water.

Armenia abounds in inscriptions carved on the
rocks, altar stones and columns, but they have
been only imperfectly translated. The script is
cuneiform and each letter has only a single phonetic
character attached to it. But there are intro-
duced a good many borrowed ideographs which
have assisted in the decipherment. According to
Sayce this cuneiform syllabary was_ introduced
from Assyria after the conquest of Shalmaneser
II in the 9th cent. BC.

Gerorce Freperick WricutT


ARARATH, ar’a-rath: Same as Ararat (q.v.).


ARATHES, a-ra’théz (AV Araiarthes; ’ApdOns,
Ardthés; 'ApvapdOns, Ariardthés): King of Cap-
pelods, 163-130 BC. Educated in Rome, he im-

ibed Rom ideas and became a faithful ally of
the Romans, in conformity with whose wishes he
declined a proposal of marriage with the sister of
Demetrius Soter. The latter declared war, drove
Arathes from his kingdom and set up Holophernes in
his stead. He fled to Rome about 158, and through
the good offices of the Romans succeeded in ob-
taining for himself a participation in the govern-
ment of Cappadocia. Later he again became sole
king. In 139 BC, as a result of an embassy sent
by Simon Maccabaeus, the Romans wrote letters
to Arathes (1 Macc 15 22) and other eastern kings
in behalf of the Jews. (See Diodor. XXXI, 19, 28,
32; Justin, XX XV, 1; Polyb. III, 5; XXXII, 20-30;
XXXITI, 12). J. E. Harry


ARAUNAH, a-ré’na (TIN, 'drawnadh, 2S 24
16.20 ff; TITS, ‘dranydh, 2 8 24 18, and 758,
’orndn, 1 Ch 21 15 ff; 2 Ch $ 1, all from a Heb
root meaning “to be strong”): A Jebusite from
whom David at the request of the prophet Gad
bought a threshing-floor located upon Mt. Moriah,
as a site for an altar of the Lord at the time of the
great plague (2 S 24 15ff; 1 Ch 21 15 ff), upon
which Solomon later erected the temple (2 Ch 3 1).


ARBA, CITY OF. See Krrratu-arpa.


ARBA, ar'ba (27%, ’arba', “four”): Variously
described as “the greatest man among the Anakim”
(Josh 14 15), ‘the father of Anak’ (15 13), “the
father of Anok” (21 11m). Thus he seems to
have been regarded as the ancestor of the Anakim,
and as the most famous hero of that race. He was
the reputed founder of the city called after him, on
the site of which Hebron was built (21 11).


ARBATHITE, ar’bath-itOM 227, ha-‘arbhath?):
Perhaps ‘‘a native of the Arabah.” Klostermann
suggests ‘‘a native of Beth-arabah.’’ The Arbathite
is Abi-albon (2 S 23 31), also named Abiel (1 Ch
11 32), one of David’s heroes.


ARBATTA, 4r-bat’a, AV Arbattis, ar-bat’is (év
*ApBarrows [plur.], en Arbdttois): Apparently a
district in the neighborhood of Galilee, from which
the Jews who were in danger of attack by the
heathen were carried by Simon Maccabaeus to
Jerus (1 Macc 6 21 ff). It cannot be identified
with certainty. Ewald (Hist, V, 314, Eng. tr)
favors el-Baleiha, the plain through which the
Jordan flows into the Lake of Galilee. EB (s.v.)
suggests “the Arabah, or Araboth of Jordan.”
Possibly however we should look for it in the
toparchy of Akrabattis, to the S.E. of Shechem
(BJ, II, iii, 4 f). Ewine


ARBELA, 4r-bé'la (@v ’ApBadots, en Arbélois):
This place is mentioned in 1 Macc 9 1 ff, and in
Ant, XII, xi, 1, describing the march and encamp-
ment of Bacchides. The former says that ‘‘Deme-
trius sent Bacchides and Alcimus into the land of
Judaea .... who went forth by the way that
leadeth to Galgala, and pitched their tents before
Masaloth, which is in Arbela, and after they had
won it they slew much people.” Jos says that
Bacchides “marched out of Antioch and came into
Judaea and pitched his camp at Arbela, a city of
Galilee, and having besieged and taken those that
were there in caves (for many people fled into such
places) he removed and made all the haste he
could to Jerusalem.’’ It was from the caves near


Arbite
Archaeology


the village of Arbela in Galilee that Herod dis-


lodged the robbers (Ant, XIV, xv, 4f; BJ, I, xvi,
2 ff). Jos fortified the caves of Arbela in lower
Galilee (Vita, 37), “near the lake of Gennesar”
(BJ, II, xx, 6).

The references in Jos point plainly to the caves
in the cliff forming the south wall of the tremendous
gorge of Wddy el-Hamam which opens on the
plain of Gennesaret, west of the village el-Mejdel.
A series of these caves, skilfully adapted to purposes
of refuge and defence, is still known as Qal‘at ibn
Ma‘an, ‘fortress of the son of Ma‘an.” On the
height above stand the ruins of Irbid or Irbil (both
forms are heard today), which unquestionably
represent the Arbela of Jos. The army from An-
tioch may quite well have come this way. No
name however in the least resembling Masaloth
has been recovered in this district. We may men-
tion Robinson’s suggestion (BR, II, 398, n.), that
it may stand for the Heb m¢silloth, “steps, stories,
terraces,” and may apply to the fortress in the rocks.

On the other hand the writer of 1 Mace is an
earlier authority than Jos. If we accept his
guidance, Bacchides must have crossed the plain of
Esdraelon and followed the main highway south-
ward through Samaria. Galgala may then be
identified with Jiljilia, about 8 miles N. of Bethel,
and Masaloth with Meselich, about 3 miles 8.E.
of Dothan. Onom mentions an Arbela in the great
plain, 9 miles from Legio (Lejjiin), but it is now
unknown. The phrase en arbélots might mean that
Masaloth was in the district of Arbela; but there is
no trace of this name as attaching to any tract in
this neighborhood.

One or other of these routes must have been
taken. While no certain decision can be reached,
special weight attaches to the statement of Jos, on
account of his acquaintance with the localities in
the region, and his unquestionable familiarity with
the history. See also Betu-arpeL. “W. Ewine


ARBITE, 4r’bit CANT), ha-’arbi): The Arbite
or perhaps an inhabitant of Arabia in southern
Judah (Josh 16 52). The epithet is used in con-
nection with one of David’s mighty men in 25
23 35; where Paarai the Arbite occurs. In the || list
(1 Ch 11 37) we have Naarai the son of Ezbai.


ARBONAI, ar-bd’nai, ar-bd’na-1 ’ABpavad, Abré-
nd): A torrent mentioned in Jth 2 24. Beyond
what is indicated in this passage, it is not possible
to determine the location; but from this it appears
to have been near Cilicia. Identification with the
modern Nahr Ibrahim is rejected on the ground
(1) that the ancient name of this river was Adonis,
and (2) that this does not answer to the term ‘‘tor-
rent”? applied by Judith. A_possible misreading
of “the high cities that were WIM AII,” beebher
ha-nahar (“beyond the river”; EB s.v.).


ARCH, Arch (O°, ’ayil; LXX ra alddp, td at-
ldm, in sense of “posts” or “colonnade’”’): Referred
to repeatedly in Ezk 40 16ff, but tr is an error
for “porch” or “portico.” RV gives in marg, “or,
colonnade. The meaning of the Heb word is un-
certain.” The principle of arch construction was
known to the Jews and examples of early Jewish
rude arches have been found in Pal. An arched
form need not necessarily be constructed with radi-
ating joints; it can be corbelled as at Mycenae
(Treasury of Atreus). This type of construction
has been found also in Pal.


ARCHAEOLOGY, 4r-ké-ol’o-ji, AND CRITI-
CISM, krit’i-siz’m: Archaeology, the science of
antiquities, is in this article limited to the Biblical
field, a field which has been variously delimited


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


226


(De Wette, 1814, Gesenius), but which properly in-
cludes not only all ancient facts bearing upon the
Bible which had been lost and have been recovered,
but all literary remains of antiquity bearing upon
the Bible and, also, as of the first importance, the
Bible itself (Hogarth, Authority and Archaeology, vi).
Criticism, the art of scrutiny, is here lmited
mainly, though not exclusively, to the literary
criticism of the Bible, now, following
Eichhorn, commonly called the Higher
Criticism. Thus ‘Archacology and
Criticism,” the title of this art., is
meant to designate the bearing of the archaeology
of Bible lands upon the criticism, esp. the Higher
Criticism, of the Bible. The subject as thus defined
calls for the discussion of, I. What archaeology can
do in the case—the powers, rights and authority,
that is to say, the Function of archaeology in criti-
cism; and IJ. What archaeology has done in the
case, the resulting effects of such archaeological
evidence, that is to say, the History of the bearing
of archaeology upon the criticism of the Bible.
L Function.—The function of archaeology in
criticism has only recently been given much atten-
tion and the opinions thereon have
1. Ignored varied greatly. (a) Biblical encyclo-
by Encyclo- paedists generally, until the most re-
paedists cent, have not given this subject a
place at all (HDB, EB, DB, Kitto,
Enc Bib. Lit., Hamburger, R#, Eadie, Bib. Enc).
McClintock and Strong’s Enc Bib. and Eccles Lit.
has an art. on ‘Bib. Arch.” consisting entirely of
bibliography, also an art. of a general character
under “Sac. Ant.” The Sch-Herz Enc has an art.,
The Catholic Enc, 1907, has an art. under the title
“Biblical Antiquities,” and the Jew Enc, 1902, has
an art. of five pages on ‘‘Bib. Arch.” But on the
function of archaeology in criticism there is almost
nothing anywhere.
(b) Critics have varied much in their estimate
of the value of archaeology in criticism, according
to their individual predilections and
2. Variously their critical theories, but until very
Estimated recently archaeology has not generally
hy Critics been given a commanding, or even a
prominent, place in criticism. Well-
hausen seems to declare for the dominancy of archae-
ology in criticism in the beginning of his History of
Israel, though he very much ignores it in the pages
that follow (Hist of Israel, 12). Driver (Authority
and Archaeology, 143-50), thinks ‘‘testimony of
archaeology sometimes determines the question
decisively,”’ but is ‘‘often strangely misunderstood,”
and the defeats of criticism at the hands of archae-
ology are often “purely imaginary” (LOT, 1897,
4). Orr thinks ‘archaeology bids fair before long
to contro! both criticism and history” (POT, 305-
485). Eerdmans, successor to Kuenen at Leyden,
definitely and absolutely breaks with the Well-
hausen school of criticism, chiefly on the ground
that archaeology has discredited their viewpoint
and the historical atmosphere with which they have
surrounded the OT. Wiener, the most prominent
of recent Jewish critics, also believes that a proper
apprehension of the nature of ancient institutions,
customs, documents and codes, i.e. archaeology,
and esp. the archaeology of the Bible itself, is clearly
decisive in its influence on the issue raised by the
Wellhausen school (BS, 1908-10).
(c) Archaeologists generally for a long time have
been putting forward the superior claims of their
science in the critical controversy
3. Urged (Brugsch, Egypt under the Pharaohs;
by Archae- Naville, Recueil de Travaur, IV, NS.;
ologists Petrie, Hyksos and Israelite Cittes, chs
i-iv; Researches in Sinai, 188-223;
Spiegelberg, Aufenthalt Israels in Aegypten; Stein-


Scope of
Article


227


dorf, Explorations in Bible Lands [Hilprecht], 623-
90; Sayce, Higher Criticism and the Monuments;
Hommel, Ancient Heb Tradition, xi; Jeremias, Das
alte Testament im Lichte des alten Orients).

The function of archaeology in criticism, as
fully brought to light by recent discussion, is as
follows:

1. Historical setting—Archaeology furnishes the
true historical setting of Scripture. In the criticism
of a painting, it is of the utmost importance to hang
the picture aright before criticism begins. It is
not greatly different in the criticism of lit., and
esp. Bib. lit. The patriarchs and prophets and
psalmists are the ‘old masters” of spirituality and
of religious lit.; their productions were brought
forth under certain social, political, moral and
religious conditions, and within certain surroundings
of influences, enemies, opportunities, temptations
and spiritual privileges. It is only archaeology
that can hang their pictures aright, and it is only
when thus hung that true criticism is ready to
begin. The critic is only then a critic when he has
seen how archaeology has hung the picture (BST,
1906, 366).

2. Guidance to methods.—Archaeology gives guid-
ance to the methods of criticism. This it does; (a)

: With regard to presuppositions. Pre-


4. Presup- suppositions are inevitable from our
positions mental constitutions, and necessary

to the consideration of any subject,
since all subjects cannot be considered at once.


But our presuppositions are naturally, to a large
extent, those induced by our own experience and
environment, until we are otherwise instructed.
As it is only archaeology that is able to instruct
us concerning the exact circumstances of certain
portions of the Bible it is evident that, in those
portions, without the instruction which archaeology
can give, we cannot be assured of correct presup-
positions in the critic. 4

(b) Archaeology gives guidance concerning the
canons of criticism. It is of the utmost importance
that a literature should be judged only
by the canons followed by its own
literati. The innumerable literary re-
mains of Egypt and Babylonia reveal methods and
standards very different from each other, and still
more different from those of modern western lit.,
but exhibiting to a marked degree the literary
peculiarities of the OT. In Bab lit., much attention
is paid to epochal chronology. In Egyp lit., com-
paratively little attention is given to chronology,
and what chronology there is, is seldom epochal,
but either synchronistic or merely annalistic. In
the OT there is a mixture of all these kinds of
chronology. Again, in Bab lit., there is carefulness
and some degree of accuracy; in Egyp lit., careless-
ness, slovenliness and inaccuracy are provokingly
frequent. The Scriptures of the OT are, in this
respect, in striking contrast to these other literatures,
yet nowbere in ancient oriental lit. is there the
mathematical rigidity of statement demanded in
occidental lit. today; on the other hand there is fre-
quently a brevity and abruptness of literary method
which, to western minds, appears to be fragmentari-
ness of documents. The attempt to elucidate oriental
lit. in the Bible and out of it by applying thereto the
tests and standards of western lit. isnot less disastrous
than would be the attempt to judge western lit. by
these oriental peculiarities. _ ; :

(c) Archaeology gives guidance conceruing liter-
ary form. Much of the definiteness and unity of
modern lit. is due to the arts of print-
6. Literary ing and book-binding. All archae-
Form ological lit. of Bible lands, lacking, as it

does, the influence of these arts, is, in
form, indefinite, or fragmentary, or both. These


§. Canons


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Arbite
Archaeology


peculiarities in form and the causes of the same,
archaeology makes very plain by abundant illus-
tration. It makes clear, also, that fragmentariness
and indefinitcness in oriental lit., in so far as it arises
from the literary form and not from partial de-
struction of documents, in no wise militates against
integrity.

(d) Archaeology gives guidance concerning inter-
pretation. Archaeology admonishes us of the

truism, too often overlooked, that a
7. Interpre- language or lit. means only what: it is
tation understood to mean by those from
whom it comes, so that the etymologi-
cal, syntactical and speculative methods of inter-
pretation employed in criticism, in order to be
reliable, must have the support of the historical
method. In the absence of this’ support, more
especially if contemporary history as revealed by
archaeology be antagonistic, interpretation, though
supported by all the other methods of criticism, is
very precarious. The interpretation of a rubric
by the etymological and analytical methods may be
partly or completely overthrown by a single picture
or a brief description of the priest at the altar.
For instance, it is very disquicting to compare the
remarks of commentators on Bible references to the
worship at high places with the facts revealed by the
recent discovery of high places and the worship
there conducted (Macalister, PEFS, 1903, 23-31;
Robinson, BW, January, 1901; January, 1908,
219-25, 317-18; Vincent, Canaan, 144). Archae-
ology must guide in the interpretation of ancient
lit., whether that which has just been dug up, as the
recent finds of MSS and monuments, or that which
has never been lost, as in the Bible itself.
3. Facts to test theories—Archaeology supphes
facts wherewith to test theories. There can be no
real antagonism between the facts of
8. Facts archaeology and a correct literary
and Correct criticism of trustworthy documents.
Criticism § But who or what is to determine when
Agree the criticism is correct? If there is
conflict between the facts of archae-
ology and the conclusions of criticism, which must
give way? To ask the question is to answer it.
Theory must always give way to facts. “Where
the testimony of archaeology is direct, it is of the
highest possible value, and, as a rule, determines a
question decisively; even where it is indirect, if it is
sufficiently circumstantial and precise, it may make
asettlement highly probable” (Driver, Authority and
Archaeology, 143). . '

This prerogative of archaeological facts in the
testing of critical theories must, then, of necessity
be given wide and positive recognition.

(a) No theory is to be finally accepted and made
applicable to faith and life until tested and attested

by facts; if it be a theory in the field
9. Theories of Nature, by the facts of Nature; if
Need in the field of experience, by facts of
Attestation experience; if in the field of history, by

facts of history. The Master brings
even revelation to this test when He says, “If any
man willeth to do ‘his will, he shall know of the
teaching, whether it is of God, or whether I speak
from myself” (Jn 7 17). Anything in the Bible
may be discredited by theory; as everything in
heaven and earth may be—indeed, has been—dis-
credited by theory. One might as safely abandon
the beaten track for the most alluring but uncon-
firmed appearance of an eastern desert, as turn
one’s life aside to a theory unattested by fact.
However perfect the appearance, it may, after all,
be only the mirage, and the disappointed pilgrim
may never get back to the safe road. Let theory
first be confirmed by fact; then it may be received
into the life.


Archaeology


(b) Even a theory which meets all the known
conditions of the case in hand is not by that fact
proved to be true, and therefore to be
10. Success received into the life. The most allur-
not Attes- ing danger to which criticism is sub-
tation ject is the contrary assumption that a
theory which meets all the known con-
ditions of the case in hand is thereby proved to be
true. This is not the case. Such a theory must, in
addition, be corroborated by facts independently
brought to light, or by mysteries unlocked; and even
if mysteries be unlocked, the theory is not neces-
sarily an entirely correct theory—the key that turns
the lock must be something like the key that belongs
to it, but may after all, be a false key. There
must, in any case, whether of mysteries unlocked or
of facts otherwise brought to light, be independent,
genuine evidence in addition to the adaptability of
the theory to all the known conditions of the case in
hand. And furthermore, a theory must not only
be able to meet the test of some additional facts,
but the test of all the conditions imposed by any
additional facts brought to light, and be able, also,
to incorporate these new facts as naturally as those
upon which the theory was originally constructed.

The problem is not to determine one or several of
the ways in which an event might have taken place,

but the one way in which it did take
11. Theory place. A theory which meets all the
in Life conditions of the case in hand may be

one of the several ways in which the
event might have taken place, but only by inde-
pendent, genuine, corroborative evidence is any
theory to be attested as the way in which the event
actually did take place. That this statement of
the case is correct in the experiences of life, we have
abundant evidence in the proceedings of courts
of law. The most careful procedure does not
wholly prevent false convictions. The prosecutor
presents a theory of the commission of a crime which
meets all the conditions of the case as made out by
the evidence, convinces twelve jurymen, and secures
aconviction. Yet sometimes afterward it is found
out that another person committed the crime in an
entirely different way. That the dictum under dis-
cussion is inapplicable to literature is equally well
established.

Sir Peter LePage Renouf argued with great acute~
ness and force that it is possible to assign significa-
tions to an unknown script, give meanings to the
words thus formed, construct a grammar and trans-
late inscriptions as historical statements and make
good sense, though not a single sign, or word, or con-
struction, or thought be correct (Life-work, I, 6,7).
Hesays of such a method: “It isnot difficult to make
out the Ten Commandments, the Psalms of David,
the Homeric Poems, or the Irish Melodies, on any
ancient or modern monument whatever, and in any
language you please.”

Actual examples in fulfilment of Renouf’s warn-
ing thesis are not wanting. The grotesque, yet

confident, efforts at the decipherment
12. Theory of the Egyp hieroglyphs before the
in Literature discovery of the Rosetta Stone are

not forgotten. Dr. Budge says (The
Mummy, 124): “In more modern times the first
writer at any length on hieroglyphics was Atha-
nasius Kircher, the author of some ponderous works
in which he pretended to have found the key to the
hieroglyphic inscriptions, and to translate them.
Though a man of great learning, it must be plainly
said that, judged by scholars of today, he would
be considered an impostor.” Joseph de Guignes
(1770) maimtained that China was settled by Egyp-
tians, and the Chinese characters only degenerate
Egyp hieroglyphs. Similar failures in the attempt
to decipher the Hittite hieroglyphs and translate


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


228


the Hittite inscriptions must form painful recol-
lections to distinguished scholars yet living, whose
efforts, extending in some cases not only to lists
of signs but to syllabaries, vocabularies, grammars
and translations, are now, in part, and in some
cases, in toto, rejected by the whole learned world.
However successful present or future efforts of
these scholars may prove to be, they have, in part
at least, themselves repudiated their former work.
The most plausible theory of a lit., though it seem
to embrace every detail, may, after all, be found
to be, as in one or two of the instances referred to
above, wholly false when tested by the principles
of philology and the facts of contemporary history.
The dangers of unconfirmed theory in life and
literature are even greater in history, which, in its
present-day form, is but life written
13. Theory down, human experiences given over
in History to all the accidents and conventional-
ities of lit. The warnings here from
Egyp and classical history and lit. are not to be dis-
regarded. Menes and other early kings of Egypt
were declared by critics to be mere mythological
characters; likewise Minos of Crete; and the
stories of Troy and her heroes were said to belong
to “cloudland.” But the spades of Petrie at Abydos
(Royal Tombs), of Evans at Knossos (Quarterly
Review, October, 1904, 374-95), and of Schliemann
at Troy (Ilios: City and Country of the Trojans),
have shown the ‘‘cloudland” as solid earth, and the
ghostly heroes to be substantial men of flesh and
blood. If we are to learn anything from experi-
ence, certainly no theory of either sacred or profane
history is to be accepted as final until tested and
attested by facts.
(ce) Only archaeology is bringing forth any new
facts on the questions raised by criticism. Criti-
cism produces only theories; it com-


14. Source bines facts, but produces none. Ex-
of the egetes and commentators rarely, if
Needed ever, now bring to light new facts any
Facts more than present-day philosophers


give the world new thoughts. A
flood of light is, indeed, pouring across the page of
the exegete and the commentator in these latter
days which makes their work inestimably more
helpful for interpretation, but the source of that
light is neither criticism nor exegesis, but archae-
ology. Archaeology it is which sets alongside the
Bible history the facts of contemporary life and thus
illustrates Biblical lit. and literary methods by
contemporary lit. and the methods of contemporary
literati, and which makes the purity, sanctity and
divinity of the things of revelation stand out in their
own glorious light by setting round about them the
shadows of contemporary ritual and morality and
superstition.
Hence no critical theory of the Bible is to be
finally accepted and made a part of our faith until
tested and attested by archaeological
15. Scope facts. Even Wellhausen, however far
of Function he departs from this principle in the
course of his criticism, seems to lay
it down as fundamental in the beginning of his
History of Israel, when he says: ‘‘From the place
where the conflagration was first kindled the fire-
men keep away; I mean the domain of religious
antiquities and dominant religious ideas—that
whole region as Vatke in his Biblical Theology has
marked it out. But only here, where the conflict
was kindled, can it be brought to a definite conclu-
sion” (Hist of Israel, 12). G. A. Smith quotes also
with approval these words from Napoleon (Cam-
pagnes d’Egypte et de Syrie dictées par Napoléon
lui-méme, I): “When camping upon the ruins of
the ancient cities, someone read the Bible aloud
every evening in the tent of the General-in-Chief.


229


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Archaeology


The verisimilitude and the truthfulness of the


descriptions were striking. They are still suited
to the land after all the ages and the vicissitudes.”
But Dr. Smith adds, ‘‘This is not more than true,
yet it ‘does not carry us very far... .. All that
geography can do is to show whether or not the
situations are possible at the time to which they are
assigned; even this is a task often beyond our re-
sources” (HGHL, 108). Thus critics, while here
and there acknowledging the proper function of
archaeology in criticism, have not heretofore al-
lowed it much scope in the exercise of that function.
Il. History.—The history of archaeology in
criticism to be set forth here has mainly to do with
. the testing of critical theories by


1. Limita- archaeological facts. The contribu-
tions of tions of archaeology to the furnishing
Discussion of the historical setting of the Biblical


narratives make up a large part of this -


and every dictionary of the Bible. The history of
the guidance of critical methods by archaeological
information is in the making. There can hardly as
yet be said to be any to record.

The field opened up for the testing of critical
theories by the results of archaeological research is

so varied and so extended that only
2. A Wide anoutline can begivenhere. Extrava-
Field gant claims concerning the outcome
of this testing have been made both
by some critics and by some of their opponents; as
when Dr. Driver says, after excepting the points
upon which the evidence of archaeology is neutral,
“On all other points the facts of archaeology, so
far as they are at present known, harmonize entirely
with the position generally adopted by the critics”
(Authority and Archaeology, 145); or as when the
astronomer, C. Piazzi Smyth, thought that the great
pyramid proved the “wisdom of the Egyptians’’ to
have included some of the abstruse problems of
higher mathematics; and Dr. Seiss, in his Miracle
in Stone, was confident that the same colossal
monument of Egypt definitely portrayed some of
the extreme positions of the premillennial theology.

Some of the instances of the testing of critical
theories concerning the Scriptures by the facts of
archaeology, for which unquestionable historical
proofs can be offered, are here presented.

1. Theories not affecting historicity or tntegrity—
Many critical theories, notably those not affecting
the historicity or the integrity of the Scriptures,
i.e. accordant with the face value of Scripture, have
been corroborated and others discredited.

(a) Theories corroborated: (1) The theory of
the geographical and topographical trustworthiness

of Scripture, ie. that the peoples,

3. Geog- _ places and events of Scripture are to
raphy and be found just where the Bible places
Topography them. Attempts to belittle the im-
portance of this geographical and
topographical corroboration of the trustworthiness
of the Scriptures have been made (Driver, Author-
ity and Archaeology, 148; also LOT, xi; Smith,
HGHL, 108), but such attempts are not satisfying.
The theory of the correctness of the Biblical state-
ments has been of well-nigh universal acceptance;
archaeologists have fitted out expensive expeditions
in accordance with it, exegesis has allowed it to
enter into its conclusions, discussion has proceeded
upon the assumption of its correctness, the whole
body of identifications which make up Biblical
eography and topography attest it, and the whole
fist of sacred geographies, uniform in every essential
particular, are in evidence in support of this theory,
even the works of those writers who have spoken dis-

aragingly of it.

y () ‘The theory of the ethnographical correctness
of Scripture. That the relation between peoples


as indicated in Scripture is correct, has been a
working theory for all general purposes and only de-
parted from for special ends. Kautzsch
4. Story of says (Die bleibende Bedeutung des Alt-
the Nations testaments, 17): “The so-called Table
of Nations remains, according to all
the results of monumental exploration, an ethno-
graphic original document of the first rank, which
nothing can replace.” The progress of archaeo-
logical research has confirmed this general working
theory and every year adds new confirmation with
regard to particular items which, for some special
end, have been represented as against the theory.
That the general theory of the correctness of the
tribal relationships in Scripture has been, and is
being, sustained, is indisputable (Hommel, Ancient
Heb Tradition; Gunkel, Israel und Babylonien, ch vi;
Sayce, Patriarchal Palestine, ch ii; Winckler, OLZ,
December 15, 1906; Budge, Hist of Egypt, 1; Orr,
POT, 400-401, 529-30). See Taste or Nations.
(8) The theory of the accuracy of Scripture in
both the originals and the copies. Every theory
of inspiration postulates this in greater
6. Accuracy or less degree, and the most prevalent
of analytical theory put forth by criti-
Scripture —_cism, with its lists of words indicating,
as it is asserted, authorship, demands,
for its very life, a degree of accuracy and invari-
ableness in the use of words in both the writing
of originals and the transmission of them by copy-
ists greater than that demanded by any the most
exacting theory of inspiration. Wherever it has
been possible to test the statements of Scripture
in its multitudinous historical notices and refer-
ences, archaeology has found it correct to a remark-
able degree, and that in its present form and even
in minute peculiarities of statement (Brugsch,
Broderick ed, Egypt under the Pharaohs, chs v—-vi;
Sayce, Patriarchal Palestine; Naville, Recueil de
Travaux, IV, N.S.; Petrie, Tahpanhes; Tompkins,
he ae of Abraham; Clay, Light on the OT from
Babel).
(4) The theory of the correctness of the imagery
of the Bible. This is another of the fundamental
and universal working theories of
6. Bihle criticism which is, however, sometimes
Imagery forgotten. Whatever the theory of
the authorship and the origin of the
various books of the Bible, there is always, with
only a few special exceptions, the underlying
assumption on the part of the critics of the correct-
ness of the imagery reflecting the topography, the
flora and the fauna, the seasons and the customs.
Indeed, upon the trustworthiness of the imagery,
as upon the exactness in the use of words, criticism
depends. And this underlying assumption of
criticism of every hue has been confirmed indis-
putably in its general features, and is being corrob-
orated year by year in its minutest details, and
even in those very special instances where it has
been disputed. To this end testify the whole com-
pany of oriental residents, intelligent travelers and
scientific investigators (Thomson; Van Lennap;
Robinson; Stanley; Palmer, Desert of the_Exodus;
Trumbull, Kadesh Barnea; Clermont-Ganneau,
Archaeological Researches; Van Dyke, Out of Doors
in the Holy Land).
Besides these theories of a general character,
some concerning particulars may be noticed:
(5) The theory of the location of the Garden of
Eden somewhere in the Euphrates Valley. ‘his
theory has been all but universally
7. Garden held and, while it is not yet definitely
of Eden substantiated, is receiving cumulative
corroboration along ethnological lines.
Wherever it is possible to trace back the lines of
emigration of the early nations mentioned in the


Archaeology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


230


Bible, it is always found that the ultimate direction
is toward a certain comparatively small area in
western Asia.
(6) The geological theory concerning the flood of
Noah as the last great change in land levels is being
most exactly confirmed, not only by in-
8. The vestigations into glacial history, but
Flood by examination of the records of the
cataclysm left upon the mountains and
valleys of central and western Asia (Wright, The
Ice Agein North America; and Scientific Conjirma-
tions of OT History, chs vii-xi). See Deven.
(7) The geological theory of the destruction of
the Cities of the Plain has been exactly confirmed
by the examination of the strata;


9. Sodom a bituminous region, a great stratum
an of rock-salt’ capped by sulphur-bear-
Gomorrah ing marls and conglomerates cemented


by bitumen, an explosion of pent-up
gases, which collect in such geological formations,
blowing the burning brimstone high in the air, and
the waters of the Jordan coming down to dissolve
the salt of the ruptured rock-salt stratum—all this
provides for exactly what the Bible describes and
for the conditions found there today; the pillar of
smoke rising up to heaven, the ram of fire and
brimstone falling back from the blowing-off crater,
the catching of Lot’s wife in the edge of the cata-
clysm and her incrustation with salt (Wright,
Scientific Confirmations of OT History, 144; Blan-
kenkorn, ZDPV, XIX, 1).
(8) It has long been thought that there might be
some relationship between the mysterious Hyksos
kings of Egypt and the Patriarchs to
10. Hyksos account for the favorable reception,
and Pa- even royal distinction, given the latter.
triarchs This theory of relationship has been
very fully established by the dis-
coveries of Petrie at Tell el-Yehudiyeh (Petrie,
Hyksos and Israelite Cities, 1-16). He has not
shown to what race the Hyksos belonged, but he has
shown their tribal character, that they were, as their
name indicates, ‘Bedouin princes,” leaders of
the nomadic or semi-nomadic tribes of Upper and
Lower Ruthen, ie. Syria and Pal, and northern
and western Arabia, as were the Patriarchs, so that
the latter were shown by the former the considera-
tion of one ‘‘Bedouin prince” for another.
(b) Theories discredited: (1) The interesting
picture which was wont to be drawn of Abraham
leaving all his friends and civilization
11. Uncivil- behind him to become a pioneer in a
ized Canaan barbarous land has become dim and
dimmer and at last faded out com-
pletely in the ever-increasing light of contemporary
history revealed by Bab and Palestinian discoveries
(Vincent, Canaan, chs i-ii).
(2) Concerning Melchizedek, “without father and
without mother’ (He 7 3), Am Tab, while not
wholly affording the needed informa-


12. Con- _ tion, have put to flight a host of im-
cerning aginings of old commentators, and
Melchize- pointed toward Melchizedek’s place
dek in a line of kings at Jerus of unique


title disclaiming any hereditary rights

in the crown. “It was not my father and it was
not my mother who established me in this position,
but it was the mighty arm of the king himself who
made me master of the lands and possessions of
my father.” This title, over the correct transla-
tion of which there has been much controversy,
occurs not once only, but seems to have been
required at every formal mention of the sovereignty
of the king (Budge, History of Egypt, IV, 231-35).
(3) The theory of the chronology of the early
portions of the OT, which made it to be so exactly
on the principle of the system of chronology in


vogue in our western world today, which, indeed,
assumed that there could be no other system of
chronology, and which was universally
13. Oriental held as a working hypothesis by all
Chronology classes of critics and commentators
until very recently, has been greatly
modified, if not utterly discredited, by both archae-
ological and ethnological research. Whatever may
have been the system and method of chronology
in use in early Biblical history, it certainly was not
the same as our epochal chronology based upon
exact astronomical time. The early chronologies
of the Orient were usually annalistic, ofttimes
synchronistic, but very seldom epochal. The first,
and usually the only, intent of present-day chronol-
ogy is to chronicle the flight of time; the ancient
systems of the East often introduced a moral ele-
ment; events, rather than time, were chronicled, and
the time in which nothing took place and the man
who accomplished nothing were apt to be passed
over in silence. Sometimes chronicles were arranged
symmetrically, and again the visional conception of
time found in all prophecy seems sometimes to have
prevailed in the writing of history. Certain it is that
ancient oriental thought regarded man’s relation to
life as of far greater importance than his relation to
time—a more deeply moral conception of chronology
than our own (Green, BS, April, 1890, 285-303).

2. Theories affecting the integrity or historicity of
Scripture —Many critical theories attacking the in-
tegrity or historicity of Scripture, i.e. reconstructive
theories, have been utterly discredited by archaeo-
logical evidence, and, in some cases, abandoned by
those who held them (cf Driver, Genesis, addenda,
7th ed, xx).

(a) The ignorance of the patriarchal age was once
a frontier fortress which threatened away all literary

pretensions beyond that limit. This
14, Igno- ignorance, though never held by all
rance of Pa- advocates of a reconstructing criticism,
triarchal was held by some. Von _ Bohlen
Age scoffed at the idea of the “undisci-

plined horde” possessing knowledge
of laws (Gen, 29-41; cf Reuss, Gesch des AT, 96;
Dillmann, Nu and Josh, 594). Dr. Driver says,
indeed, “It is not denied that the patriarchs pos-
sessed the art of writing,” but thinks the posses-
sion of a lit. by them a mere hypothesis, for the
truth of which no positive ground can be alleged
(Gen, xlii-xliii; also Orr, POT, 375). That this
theory is absolutely abandoned by everyone hardly
needs to be stated. The discovery of evidence of
a postal system in Canaan in the days of Naram
Sin (Sayce, Archaeology of the Cuneiform Inscriptions,
143; Heuzey, Revue d’Assyriologie, 1897, 1-12),
the strict conformity of many of the patriarchal
customs and events to written law, as revealed by
DeMorgan’s discovery of the CH, Dr. Murch’s
discovery of the Am Tab, revealing as they do
the wide diffusion of the art of writing about one
hundred and thirty years before the Exodus,
together with the gradual pushing back by epi-
Bapule evidence of the date of the origin of the
Hebrew script (Clay, Amurru, 30-82), and the
overwhelming evidence, from recent excavations,
of the general culture and refinement of patriarchal
Pal, while not yet making known fully the exact
state of the patriarchal civilization, has made any
theory of the ignorance of that age impossible.

(b) The theory of the nomadic, semi-barbarous
condition of Pal and of the impossibility of high

religious ideas among the patriarchs
15. Reli- before the Exodus (Kuenen, Rel of
gious Ideas Israel, I, 108-9), though most closely
in Canaan connected with the preceding, demands
separate notice. This theory is es-
sential to the current evolutionary view of Israel’s


231


history and has been definitely espoused by nearly
all holding that view (G. A. Smith, Expos, 1908,
254-72; cf POT, 60). This theory, though less
important to other schools of critics, has in fact
been held by nearly all commentators. But the
discovery of the earliest. wall- and cistern-work at
Taanach (Sellin), and the engineering feats on the
defences and the water-works at Gezer (Macalister
and Vincent, PEFS), and the 40-ft. city wall
ictured in Egyp illustration of Can war (Petrie,
eshasha, pl IV), as well as the list of richest booty
taken by Thothmes III (Sayce, Archaeology of the
Cuneiform Inscriptions, 156-57; Birch, RP, 1st ser,
II, 35-52; Lepsius, Denkmdler, Abth. III, bl. 32,
382A, 380A, 30B; Auswahl, III, L. 42-45), which
could scarcely be duplicated by all the museums of
the world today, testify equally to the luxurious
culture and refinement of the times. All this, in
addition to the mass of evidence against the igno-
rance of the patriarchal age (see [a] above), over-
whelmingly sustains the opinion of W. Max Miller
that “the civilization of Palin the patriarchal age

was fully equal to that of Egypt.”
(c) The theory of the evolution of Israel’s history
chiefly from a Palestinian origin and environment
(Budde, Hist of Israel before the Exile,


16. Evolu- esp. 77; Kuenen, Hist of Israel, 225;
tionary Wellhausen, Hist of Israel, 462). Pal-
History estinian discoveries show a contrast


between the unique religion of the He-
brews and the religion of the surrounding peoples of
Canaan as marked as it may well be. The evidence
is not at all of a purer religion growing up out of the
vile culture of Pal, but of a purer religion coming
down and overwhelming it (PE FS, 1902-9; G. A.
Smith, Mod. Crit. and the Preaching of the OT, ch iv,
esp. 142; PEFS, 1905, 287-88).
Descending now to a few of the great mass of
particulars, we may mention:
(d) The theory of the legendary character of the
four kings of Gen 14, and of the Hittites; and the
theory of the generally mythological


17. My- character of the early portions of the
thology and Bible. The four kings have been
the Bible called “petty sheiks of the desert,”


and their names “etymological in-

ventions.” The historical character of the account
of these kings has been utterly discredited by many.
Noéldeke in his Untersuchungen arrives at the result
that the history (Gen 14) is throughout a “free
creation,” and the person of Melchizedek a “poeti-
cal figure.” And Wellhausen thinks Néldeke gave
the “death-blow” to the historicity of the story
(Wellhausen, Comp. of the Hex, 311-12). Ed.
Meyer is of the same opinion as Néldeke, but ex-
presses himself in a still more unfavorable manner
(Gesch, 186). Hitzig, however, goes to the extreme
of depreciation when he sees in the expedition of
Chedorlaomer only an adumbration of the invasion
by Sennacherib (2 K 19 18). Delitasch gives a
very comprehensive review of those critics who have
regarded this narrative of the kings as legend of
small or no historical basis (Gen, I, 396-99; ef
Dillmann, Gen, II, 32-33). In addition, the
mythological character of the early portions of the
Bible generally has had ardent advocates (Stade,
Gesch, 129-80; Schultz, OT Theology, 1, 31; Well-
hausen, Gesch Israels, 317-20). : ;
But the four kings have appeared in archacologi-
cal discoveries. While there is still some dispute
about the identification of certain of

18. Chedor- them, the confederacy has appeared
laomer and in Babylonia and also the Bab suze-
Allies rainty ‘over Pal in the age called for
by the narrative, and, indeed, the

whole historical setting into which the narrative
fits with perfect naturalness (Jeremias, Das alte


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Archaeology


Testament im Lichte des alten Orients; Hommel,
Hebrew Tradition, ch v; Clay, Light on the OT
from Babel, ch vi). But myths do not receive
archaeological confirmation such as has not only
been given to the narrative of the confederacy of
the four kings, but which is rapidly bringing out
the features of the whole early OT history (Gunkel,

Gen, 268; Ladd, Doct of Sac Scrip, I, 737).
Then grave doubts in the past have been raised
concerning the Hittites. Occasionally it has been
boldly said that “no such people ever


19. The existed” (cf Newman, Heb Monarchy,
Hittites 184-85; Budge, Hist of Egypt, IV,
136). But in addition to the treaty


of Rameses II with the ‘“Kheta,” long generally
believed to have been the Hittites (RP, 2d ser,
IV, 25-32), and the references to the ‘‘Hatti” in
the Am Tab, also thought to be the same people,
we now have Winckler’s great discovery of the
Hittite capital at Boghaz-Kéi, and the Hittite
copy of the treaty with Rameses II in the cunei-
form script. The Hittites are seen to be a great
nation, a third with Egypt and Babylonia (OLZ,
December 15, 1906). See Hrrritss.

(e) The theory of anachronisms. Aside from
the general application of this theory by many
critics to the traditional view of Scripture and
the assertion of the systematic representation of
earlier events in the light of much later times
(Robertson, Early Religion, 30; Frip, Comp. of
Gen), many special instances of anachronisms have
been alleged. Edom has been said to be mentioned
too early in the narrative (De Wette, Ini, II, 71,
Parker’s note; also Gunkel, Gen, 61). But an
officer of Seti Meremptah II, about the time of the
Exodus, in an official report, mentions the people
of Edom as desiring to pasture their flocks in
Goshen. They had thus early found their way
clear across the Sinai peninsula (Miiller, Asien
und Europa, 135; cf Papyrus Anastasia). Then
Moab, long unidentified, has had doubt cast on
its existence at so early a time as its first mention;
but it also occurs im an inscription of Rameses II
near the time of the Exodus, and the land of Moab
is placed in “Ruthen,” the Egyp name for Syria
and Pal and northern and western Arabia (Kyle
“Geographical and Ethnic Lists of Rameses i,”
Recueil de Travaux, XXX).

3. Theories now challenged.—Several critical
theories are just now challenged in the name of
archaeological discovery; whether or not the
challenges will ultimately be sustained remains to
be determined. A few only are mentioned here,
but they are of such a character as, if ultimately
sustained, will have a far-reaching effect upon
criticism.

(a) The theory, long established and almost
universally held, of the Bab origin and westward

course of early Sem culture, esp. of
20. Semitic religious traditions (Barton, Semitic
Origins Origins, ch i; also “Tiamat,” JAOS,

XVI, 1-27; Paton, Early Hist of
Pal and Syria, chs iii-viii; Driver, Gen, 30-31;
Orr, POT, 397). This theory has been mildly
questioned for some time and is now boldly chal-
Ienged. A complete “right-about-face” is pro-
posed by reason of many archaeological considera-
tions, which, it is claimed, make Amurtu, Syria
and Pal, the home of the northern Semite, to be, if
not the original source of Sem culture, at least an
earlier source than Babylonia, and the course of
religious culture among Semites in that early age
to be not westward but eastward, as apparently
in Gen 11 2 RV (Clay, Amurru, the Home of the
Northern Semites).

(b) The theory of the gradual invasion of Pales-
tine instead of the conquest is now for the first time


Archaeology
Archippus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


232


challenged by evidence other than the record in


Joshua. Such Palestinian researches and the col-

lection of such evidence have but begun
21. Inva- within a few years, and from the very
sion of breadth of the question the process
Canaan is necessarily slow. So far, however,


as the excavations have gone, the

evidence is of a decided change in the culture even
at such towns as Gezer, without, however, the
Can culture coming fully under Israelite influence
and succumbing to it; exactly, in fact, as is repre-
sented in the Biblical narrative (PEFS, 1903, 49,
eae ib, 1908, Macalister, 17; Vincent,
(c) The post-Christian view of the Hermetic


Writings. These Egyp documents in the Gr

tongue have been thought to reflect
22. AD early Christian thought in Egypt,
Date of chiefly because of a certain “unholy
Hermetic resemblance” to gospel language found
Writings in them. A recent critical examina-


tion of these writings has established,
it is claimed, by archaeological evidence gathered
from the writings themselves, that the “unholy
resemblance”’ to gospel expressions arose not from
the reflection of Christian teaching, but from the
appropriation by the evangelists of current ex-
pressions of Alex Gr in use in pre-Christian theologi-
cal language. This view of the Hermetic Writings,
if finally established, cannot but have a far-reaching
effect upon NT study (Petrie, Personal Religion
in Egypt before Christianity).
4. Reconstructive criticism not confirmed.—Not a
single critical theory still maintained, either gen-
erally or by prominent, individual


23. The critics, which proposes to take Scrip-
Claims of ture at other than its face value, has
Some been sustained by archaeology. The
Critics assertion that it is otherwise, that ‘‘on


all other (controverted) points, the
facts of archaeology, so far as they are at present
known, harmonize entirely with the positions gen-
erally advocated by the critics” (Driver, Authority
and Archaeology, 145; LOT (1897), Pref, xviii;
Gen, addenda to 7th ed, XXXIV-XXXVI), means
either that such unsustained theories are not advo-
cated by the person making the assertion and not
by him regarded as generally advocated by critics,
or, more commonly, that the theories in question
have not been positively and definitely contradicted
by archaeological evidence. But it is not enough
that theories are not definitely contradicted ‘by
archaeological evidence; we have seen (cf above)
that they must be definitely corroborated before
being accepted and allowed to affect one’s faith.
An instance of the claims of criticism concerning the
harmony between its theories and the facts of archae-
ology, a claim whose importance merits presenta-
tion at length, is found in the Addenda to the 7th
ed of Driver’s Introduction to Gen, the latest and
most positive utterance of criticism on this subject.
Driver says (xxxiv):

It is stated by Professor Sayce expressly, and by Dr.
Orr and Professor A. T. Clay, ne implication, that
Ndéldeke's arguments against the historical character
of the narrative of Gen 14 have been refuted by archae-
ology. The statement supplies such an object-lesson
of the methods on which the opponents of criticism not
unfrequently rely, that it may ye worth while to explain
here the grounds upon which it rests. Here are Pro-
fessor Sayce’s words (Monumental Facets, 1904, 54; cf,
though without Ndéldeke's name, Monuments, 161 f):
“In 1869 the great Semitic scholar, Professor Néldeke,
published a treatlse on the Unhistorical Character of
Gen 14. He declared that ‘criticism’ had forever dis-
proved its claim to he historical. The political situa-
tion presupposed hy it was incredible and impossible;
at so distant a date Bab armies could not have marched
to Canaan, much less could Canaan have heen a subject


province of Babylonia. The whole story, in fact, was
a fiction based upon the Assyr conquest of Pal In later


days. The names of the princes commemorated in it
were etymological inventions: eminent Sem scholars
had already explained those of Chedorlaomer and his
allies from Sanskrit, and those of the Can princes were
derived from the events in which they were supposed
to have horne a part.'' And then he goes on to declare
triumphantly (55) how the progress of archaeology has
refuted all these statements... . .

It will probably surprise the reader to be told that,
of the series of arguments thus attributed to Professor
Ndldeke, while the one about the names is attributed
to him with partial correctness (though in so far as it is
stated correctly, it has not been refuted by archaeology),
the other arguments were never used by, at all
. . . + (xxxv). The one grain of truth in Professor
Sayce’s long indictment is that of the names of the five
Can kings, which are given, Bera and Birsha (suggesting
the idea of ‘‘evil’’ and ‘‘wickedness’'), and perhaps
Shinab and Shemeber as well, are formed artificially;
but this (NB) is not asserted of the name of any of the
four kings from the East. . . . . The fact is, Néldeke's
arguments on Gen 14 have not been refuted, or even
touched, hy archaeology. . . . . Professor Sayce has
simply not mentioned Néldeke's real arguments at all.
Nor are they mentioned by Dr. Orr or Professor Clay.
._. ... Archaeology has met the arguments which
Ndldeke did not use, it has not met the arguments which
he did use. Ndéldeke never questioned, as_ Professor
Sayce declares that he did, the general possibility at this
time of an expedition heing sent from the far East into
Palestine: his argument consisted in pointing out
various historical improbabilities attaching to the details
of a particular expedition: and archaeology can over-
throw this argument only by producing evidence that
this expedition, with the details as stated in Gen 14, actu-
ally took place. And this up to the present time (June,
1909) archaeology has not done.


Compare with these declarations of Driver, one
by one, though in somewhat different order, N6l-
deke’s own words. He says (Unter-


24. Nél- = suchungen, 157-60):
deke’s “The chapter begins with an imposing
Assertions ©2umeratlon of kings. in whose time the


narrated event is alleged to have occurred.
. . .. Of what use is the dating ac-
cording to kings, the time of whose reign is perfectly
unknown to us? .. . . so that the dating is wholly
superfluous and tells us nothing."’

Bera and Birsha are said to be
“quite decidedly unhistorical. ... . The alliteratlve
pairing also of these names speaks more for their fictl-
tious than for their historical origin. It is striking that
for the single historical city of Zoar, no name of the
king is given. . . . . Besides, we are hound to no
time, for the event recounted could quite as well have
taken place in_ the year 4000 as 2000; the artificial
chronology of Gen is for us no rule. . . . Whence
the narrator got the names of the hostile kings we cannot
say. They may really have been handed_down to him,
perhaps quite in another connection. However that
may he, the utmost we can admit is that he has employed
a few correct names intermingled with false or invented
ones, and the appearance of historicity thus produced
can as little permanently deceive us as the proper names
and dates in the book of Esther. . . . . Concede
provisionally the correctness of the names of the kings
and test the narrative further."

Here in a long paragraph, Néldeke follows the
reductio ad absurdum, arguing that, from a historical
standpoint, the provisional supposition is incredible
and impossible, and concludes (163), ‘Now this
whole expedition is historically improbable to the
same extent that it is adapted to the production of
a striking effect; the usual sign that it is fictitious.
. .. . Does not the manifest improbability of the
narrative lie precisely in the details which give it
the appearance of historicity?”

_Concerning the story of Abram’s pursuit of the
kings and the rescue of Lot, he says (165): “If
that is possible, then is nothing impossible. It
may be replied that the number of Abram’s serv-
ants was in reality much greater; but everything
depends upon it, and the number belongs again’
to the very things which spread over the narrative
the deceptive shimmer of historicity.”

Of Melchizedek and the Amorite allies of Abram,
he says (168): “So do the proofs pile up, that our
narrative has no historical worth. .... Even if
the rest of the chapter were historical we would
still hold Melchizedek a poetical figure.’ He
sums up the argument in the followimg words


233


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Archaeology
Archippus


(170-71): “In accordance with what has been said, | of any portion of the Bible, although sometimes


it is very improbable that the composer in the chief
matters rested upon a rea] tradition of the people,
but we must accept as a fact that it is a free creation
throughout.”

On the same subject, in reply to some of his crities
(Zeitschrift fir W. Theol, 1870, 218-19), he says:


“I sum up once more the general points: (1) Of the
names mentioned in Gen 14, several are unhistorical
(the name of Sodom and Gomorrah, the three Amorites,
Melchizedek; In my view, also, Abram and Lot, and
probably the four overwhelmed cities). (2) The expedi-
tion of the kings cannot have taken place as narrated
. . . . even through the very clearness of the narra-
tlve are we made to know that we have here to do with
a romantic expedition, the course of which is determined
by aim at sharper effect, and which has for itself no
historical probe ility. (3) The small number of the
host, in whose complete victory over the army of the
four kings the story at last comes to a climax, is con-
trary to sense, while yet it designates about the utmost
number which, as his own fighting men, a private citizen
could put in the fleld.

“Whoever now throughout all of this will hold to an
historical kernel may do so; he must then admit that
at some perfectly uncertain time in great antiquity a
king of Elam ruled over the Jordan land and made a
warlike expedition thither. But that would be the ut-
most concession I could make. Everything more pre-
cise, as numbers, names, etc, and also exactly that which
produces the appearance of careful tradition and trust-
worthiness is partly false, partly quite unreliable . . . .
more especially, beyond the conquest itself nothing
whatever could be known. | But to me it still seems much
more pearls. in view of the consistent, and for the
aim of the narrator, exceedingly well ordered, but still,
in reality, impossible course of the narrative, out from
which there cannot be separated any single things as
bare exaggeration of the tradition, that we have here a
conscious fiction in which only a few historical names
have been used."'


Now, recalling to mind the facts of archaeology
in this case (ef above) it becomes evident that they


are very far from “harmonizing
25. The entirely” with the opinion advanced
Facts of by Ndéldeke and reiterated by Driver,


Archaeology and the method of advocating such

“harmonizing” appears very clearly.
Moreover, what is true of this particular theory
of Néldeke and Driver is equally true of other
radical critical theories at present held. Of the
current reconstructive theories of criticism—the
patriarchs not individuals but personifications;
the rude, nomadic, semi-barbarous condition of
Pal in the patriarchal age; the desert; Egypt; the
comparative unimportance of Moses as a law-
giver; the gradual invasion of Pal; the naturalistic
origin of Israel’s religion from astral myths; and
the late authorship of the Pent—not one is being
sustained. In fact, however much archaeological
evidence there may be that is negative in character
or that is not definitely against the reconstructive
theories of criticism, no one can point to a single
definite particular of archaeological evidence where-
by any one of these theories is positively sustained
and corroborated.

5. The present state of the discussion.—The
present stage of progress of the testing of critical
theories by archaeological evidence may briefly be
stated. The Bible at its face value is being cor-
roborated wherever archaeology immediately and
definitely touches it. To illustrate this statement
fully would he to cite every definite piece of archae-
ological evidence in the Biblical field of scientific
research during the last one hundred years. ;

But views of Scripture must finally square with
the results of archaeology, ie. with contempora-
neous history, and, just as archaeological research
makes that contemporaneous history to appear,
critical theories at variance therewith are of neces-
sity giving way; so that, as far as the process has
been carried to the present time, archaeology is
bringing criticism into harmony with the face value
of Scripture, and is not definitely and unequivocally
encouraging attempts at literary reconstruction


asked to render such service.


Lirerature.—The bibliography of the discussion has
appeared in the references fully given throughout this
article. The bibliography on the subject of this art.,
“Archaeology and Criticism,’' is, as indicated above,
exceedingly meager, since the importance of the subject
has but recently come to the front and been generally
recognized. The following may be cited: Driver, in
Authority and Archaeology (Hogarth), ch i; Eerdmans,


Hibbert Journal, July, 1909; also Alttestamentliche
Studien; Orr, The Problem of the OT, ch xi; Bennett,
Contemporary Review, 1906, 518. M. G. Kyte


ARCHAEOLOGY OF ASIA MINOR. See Asta
Minor, ARCHAEOLOGY OF.


ARCHANGEL, Ark-an’jel. See ANGEL.


ARCHELAUS, dr-ké-la’vs (’ApxéAacs, Archélaos,
Mt 2 22): Son of Herod the Great by his wife
Malthacé. He succeeded on his father’s death to
the government of Judaea, Samaria and Idumaea,
but was deposed by the Romans for misgovernment
in6 AD. See Hrrop.


ARCHERY, ar’chér-i:

(1) The art of using the avcus, or bow and arrow
for hunting and in battle is of great antiquity. It
is mentioned in Gen 21 20, as well as in the Iliad
and the Odyssey, and depicted on Egyp monuments
and in Assyr sculptures. The Philis excelled in the
art, which led David to order that special training
in it be given to the Hebrews (2 5 1 18). It was
an important art throughout the world in Biblical
times (see Gen 27 3; Isa 22 6; 49 2; Ps 127 4).
The Benjamites among the Hebs were noted as
archers (Jgs 20), and archers constituted much of the
fighting strength, and played no mean part in the
victories, of the world-famed Gr and Rom armies.

(2) The bow was common io civil (Gen 21 20)
and military life (Zee 9 10), and vies with the
spear in importance and antiquity. It was usually
made of tough, elastic, seasoned wood, and often
mounted with bronze (see Ps 18 34 RV; cf Job
20 24). But horn, too, was used for bows by the
ancients, some with double curves being evidently
modeled after the horns of oxen. The bow-string
was commonly ox-gut and the arrows were of reed,
or light wood tipped with flint, bronze, or iron.

(3) The battle bows, such as are mentioned in
Zec 9 10; 10 4, must have been of great size,
since they required to be strung by pressing the
foot on the lower end, while the upper end was bent
down to receive the string into a notch; hence the
expression ‘‘to tread [=string] the bow,” and ‘‘bow-
treaders,” for archers (Jer 50 14.29 Heb). The
arrows, ‘the sons of his quiver’ (Lam 3 13m, RV
“shafts’’?), were ordinarily, of course, carried in the
quiver, which was either placed on the back or
slung on the left side, secured by a belt over the
right shoulder (HDB). The day of gunpowder and
firearms, of course, was not yet.

Gro. B. Eacer

ARCHEVITE, 4r’ke-vit (Kethibh, "1278, ’ar-
kawéy; Keré, STIDIS , ‘arkewdyé’): One of the tribes
which Osnappar transplanted to swell the mixed
multitudes in the cities of Samaria (Ezr 4 9).
The Archevites were the inhabitants of Erech, one
of the four cities originally founded by Nimrod in
Babylonia. (For its modern site cf Loftus, Travels
in Chaldea and Susiana, 162 ff). Marquardt td
64 ff) emends the text to read NMMNS OT, de


¥


huthaye’, “who are Cuthaeans” (2 K 17 24).
ARCHI, ar’ki.
ARCHIPPUS, ar-kip’us (Apxlarmos, Archtppos):


Addressed by Paul in his letter to Philem, as ‘our
fellow-soldier”; probably a member of Philem’s


See ARCHITES.


Architecture


family circle, holding some official position in the
church (Col 4 17; Philem 2). See Appuia. The
tradition that he was one of the seventy disciples,
became bishop of Laodicea and later became a
martyr, seems to have little historical foundation.


ARCHITECTURE, 4r’ki-tek-tir:
I. Genera. History
1. Plans, Estimates and Measuring
2. OT References

II. Temppty anv Pauacs or Sotomon
. Construction and Materials
. Style

. Facts
. Phoenician Designers
ONCLUSIONS FROM AcTUAL REMAINS
Defence Walls

Streets
. Absence of the ‘‘Grand Manner"
Solomonic Detail
Temple of Onias

Comparison with Maccabean Work
. Painted Tombs at Marissa
8. Characteristic Feature

IV. Hsropran Work

V. Synacoouss

VI. Finan

Literature

I. Historical.—The words “‘architect”’ and “archi-
tecture” do not occur in the OT or the NT.

As the greatness of a nation and its social ele-
vation are reflected in the course of architectural
development, so is a nation’s failure to rise to firm
establishment, after victory in war, reflected in the
absence of such development. The latter condition
was that of the Jews in Pal; they failed so to
establish themselves that their character and aims
could find true expression in architecture. The
country by reason of its geographical position and
its broken territorial character, which exaggerated
the tribal nature of its inhabitants, did not favor
political empire (see HGHL,10). The great diffi-
culty of the Jews was the preservation of their own
integrity. There could be no victorious expeditions
to foreign lauds to inspire monumental evidence of
achievement in arms, nor had they the inspiration
of various gods or saints, to whose glory great and
separate buildings might be raised. Their dwell-
ings were, by force of circumstances, unpretentious,
and their tombs were of the same character.


we


III.


NOUR OD Oi


he ae
[iit Teer
et jug JIT =H


Fic. 1.—Streets of a Jewish City.


Although in the smaller buildings there is very
little evidence of the builder having been governed
by a previously drawn plan, there


1. Plans, seems no doubt that in larger works
Estimates a plan was prepared. The Tabernacle
and was made according to a “pattern”
Measuring (Ex 25 9) and Solomon’s Temple


was also designed and submitted for
approval (1 Ch 28 11). Estimated cost was also
considered (Lk 14 28). The equivalents to a tape


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


234


line and foot rule can be identified (Ezk 40 3.5;
47 3: Rev 11 1; 21 15).

The Israelites arrived in tents, and the walled
cities, ‘‘great and walled up to heaven” (Dt 1 28
AV) which they took and occupied were well for-
tified, unlovely shelters, covering areas of anything’
from 12 acres, as at Taanach and Megiddo, to about
23 acres as at Gezer (Canaan d’aprés l’exploration
récente). The habitations within the walls were
poor structures of mud bricks or rude stone;
in many cases they were rock-cut caves. True,


Fis. 2.—Modern City of Es Salt.


the Jews attempted, at the outset of their full
possession, to build in beauty, and made efforts
toward greater substantiality, using the best avail-
able help; the attempt, however, was doomed to
failure. Their most important buildings were their
fortifications. The engineering skill displayed in the
construction of aqueducts and other water systems
was forced out of them by sheer necessity, and
proved the existence of a latent constructive power,
which they never had sustained opportunity to
apply to architecture. In striking contrast is the
architecture of the Crusaders. In a comparatively
short time of less than 200 years, during the half
of which practice in the arts of peace was well-
nigh impossible, they stamped their occupation by
the erection of an enormous number of great and
beautiful buildings, the ruins of which are among
the most imposing landmarks in the country.

The often-repeated references to building great-
ness in the OT, indicate a pride out of all scale

with actuality. They tell the story
2. OT of a long desert pilgrimage during
References which the Jews, as dwellers in tents,

were impressed with the walled cities
which, with extraordinary fortitude, they stormed
and occupied, and which, with pardonable enthu-
siasm, they consequently exaggerated, to the glory
of God. Although references to buildings in the
OT are frequent, they are seldom sufficiently de-
tailed to convey an idea of their character.

Cain built a city and named it Enoch (Gen 4 17);
his descendant Tubal Cain was “an instructor of
every artificer in brass and iron” (ver22 RVm). The
description of the plan of the ark (Gen 6 14 ff)
is the first detailed architectural description in the
OT. Asshur, a descendant of Ham, built Nineveh
and other cities (Gen 10 11). The tower of Babel
was built of “brick for stone and slime for mortar”
(Gen 11 3). In Ex 27 9-21 plan, dimensions and
construction of the Tabernacle are given.

II. Temple and Palace of Solomon.—The most
complete architectural reference is the description
of the Temple and Palace of Solomon (1 K 6, 7)
and (Ezk 40, 41). These buildings are fully dealt
with under Tempe, but a brief note is here
necessary, as they are by far the greatest buildings
of which there is mention in the OT. It is clear
that Solomon had ambition for architectural great-
ness, and, following the example of David (2 8 6 11)


Russian Church Bu


on Site of Latin Church Built over Spot Where Tomb of St. James Tomb of Zacharias, Father of
USSD UNUIEN DULL Ul S1Ve UL Aaah Ua ee arene Face Eee ve nee Suse eae ye Sele sae


Garden of Gethsemane Jesus Taught the Lord's Prayer John the Baptist


Absalom’s Pillar


ABSALOM'S PILLAR AND TOMBS OF ST. JAMES AND ZACHARIAS


235


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Architecture


he employed Phoen designers and craftsmen to
carry out the work.


YA


Fie. 3.—Doorway with Voluted Slabs at Lachish.


It is known that the buildings were of stone,
that the chambers surrounding the Temple were
three stories high, that the Temple


1. Con- was roofed (presumably flat) with
struction cedar. Fergusson’s restoration shows
and a sloping roof, following the precedent
Materials of the sloping roof of the Tabernacle


(Temples of the Jews, 26). The walls
and ceilings were lined with cedar, so that “there
was no stone seen” (1 K 6 18) within the
house. The interior was enriched with
carved foliage and cherubim, and
in the decorative scheme, gold
was freely applied. The
description of the
exterior is less


rospect”’ (1 K 7 5 ERY), i.e. square-headed. In
zk 40 21 ff EV arches are repeatedly mentioned
but this is an error of translation. See Arcu.
In the description, there is very little indication
of the style of architecture. The rich nature of the
pillars of brass and their ‘“chapiters’”’
2. Style (1 K 7 15 ff EV) point to some han-
kering after an ornate trabeated style.
There is no indication, however, of such a style in
constructive stone. No mention is made of a
crowning feature of a distinctive kind, not even
an eave, simply a “coping.” The use of a coping
suggests that the walls were topped by parapets,
“battlement” (Dt 22 8 EV), according to the law.
Fergusson’s restoration shows both cornice and
battlements (Temples of the Jews, Frontispiece).
One can only
vaguely conjecture
the sources of influ-
ence which guided
the builders. The
description clearly
shows that the great,
columnar architec-
ture of Egypt was
not taken as a
model, although
certain Egyp char-
acteristics in detail
are evident in con-
temporary work.
Probably Phoen in-
tercourse with the
Mediterranean,
generally, showed
its influence, in


JILSWD


ASCENT FROM TOWN


5


Fio. 4.—JEwisH Tempie or LEONTOFOLIS.


minutely detailed. Stones were large and, as in
the buildings of Egypt, were “sawed with saws”
“from foundation to coping” (1 K 7 9), ‘founda-
tion to the top of walls” (8 K 7 9, Douay VS).
The inference therefore is that the masonry was
smooth-faced: “no sign of any hammer” (Ant,
VIII, iii, 2). Windows were “narrow” (1 K 6 4
AV), repeatedly referred to (Ezk 40 16.26). Inthe
interior of the palace, cedar beams were carried on
rows of cedar columns, and there were three rows
of windows, one row to each story, directly opposite
each other. Doors and posts were ‘‘square in


which case a comparatively poor result might be
inferred.

There remain these facts, viz. that here is described
a group of buildings, of comparatively great scale;
internally, at least, richly detailed and
disposed in a way which shows con-
siderable appreciation of architectural
fitness, inspired by ambition for monumental great-
ness and dedicated, as was all that is great and
spontaneous in architecture, to the glory of God.
The one great flaw lay in the complete lack of a
national constructive ability to respond to the call.


3. Facts


Architecture


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


236


The Phoenicians who were employed seem to have
been indifferent builders. They took 18 years to
build Solomon’s house (1 K 7 1) and
4, Phoeni- 7} years to build the Temple (1 K 6 38),
cian De- _and they, in all probability, found such
signers a great work beyond their powers of
adequate conception, more especially
as the housement of a strange God was uninspiring.
“Shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in?”
(2 8 7 5 EV) was acommand which they were only
hired to fulfil.

Hf. Conclusions from Actual Remains.— There
are only a very few known examples from which a
knowledge of Jewish architecture can be obtained.
There are none now standing, and what the spade
has uncovered proves little more than a mere
building craft of an inferior order. Remains of
the period of the monarchy have been uncovered
on several sites, notably Jerus, Lachish, Tel es
Safi (Gath?), Gezer, Taanach, Tel es Mutesellim
(Megiddo), Jericho, and these give a general idea
of the building craft of the period, but give no
evidence of an architectural style. It may, with
good reason, be argued that there was no style,
but it is too much to conclude that the Jews had
no architectural instinct. Ideals were not lacking:


Fia. 5.—Painted Tombs of Marissa.


“Behold, I will set thy stones in fair colors, and lay
thy foundations with sapphires. And J will make
thy pinnacles of rubies, and thy gates of carbuncles,
and all thy border of precious stones” (Isa 54 11.
12). Had history been different, Solomon’s great
example might have laid a foundation from which a
national style would have been developed. The arts
of peace, however, did not even bud, and the bane
of internal and external conflict forced building en-
ergy to concentrate itself on fortifications.

Indeed in the great defence walls lies the build-
ing history of the Jews. They were hurriedly

built and frequently destroyed. De-
1. Defence struction and reparation alternated so
Walls consistently, that each successive city

within was little more than a tem-
porary housement, at all times subservient to the
more important work of defence. Under such
conditions nothing flourished, least of all architec-
oe Building art became a thing of bare temporary
utility.

Streets (Fig. 1) were laid out without method;
narrow, tortuous alleys broken into by projections,
founded at the will of each individual
builder, served as main thoroughfares
(Bible Sidelights, 95; Excavation of
Gezer, Vol I, p. 167 ff); cf similarity of conditions
with streets of Mediterranean city of Philakopi
(Journal RIBA, XI, 531). See Crry. Masonry was
usually of rough unhewn stones, unskilfully laid
without mortar, and buildings were rarely on the


2. Streets


square. Under these conditions the enthusiasm
displayed in the description of Solomon’s work can
be understood. ;


Fig. 6.—Lintel Stones.


In Jerus the Temple area was the center of
architectural grandeur, and it is possible that it may
have inspired building endeavor of

8. Absence another nature in other cities. Pal


of the has as yet yielded no such parallel.
“Grand Free areas, where they are found to
Manner” have existed, seem to have happened


so, and do not always coincide in
position in successive superincumhent cities. They
lay claim to no particular “lay out?’ and, in all
probability, they served as space for the dump
heaps of the town refuse or for the penning-up of
cattle and sheep (Isa 58 12, ‘‘waste places”). Fig.
2 shows the modern city of Es Salt, and gives a
fairly good idea of the general appearance of an
ancient Jewish city. The use of wooden shafts for
porticos and roofs of large covered areas appears
to have been prevalent, and these were frequently
set in stone sockets which served as bases. Stone
columns seem to have been sparingly used; in fact,
there is no evidence whatever that a stone columnar


Fig. 7.—Tomb of Zechariah.


style of architecture prevailed in the more impor-
tant buildings.


237


At Lachish (Lachish, 23 ff) a number of voluted
low-relief slabs were discovered which were original-
ly built into the left reveals of the

4. Solomon- doorways of a building of considerable
ic Detail importance. These slabs were found
in conjunction with a molded lintel

of Egyp character. The discovery disclosed the
only authentic examples of the architectural detail
of the Solomonic period, and is particularly inter-
esting as furnishing, perhaps, the earliest proto-
type of the Ionic volute. Fig. 3 is a sketch recon-
struction of the doorway after Petrie’s restoration.
At its best it is a shoddy unconstructive adapta-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Architecture


and to some extent confirming the inference drawn
from the description of Solomon’s Temple.
Fragments of contemporary architecture of the
Maccabean dynasty throughout Pal show a Greco-
Syrian style of considerable dignity
6. Macca- and interest, illustrating a readiness to
bean Work respond to the Hellenizing influence
_ in the arts, which at that time was
characterized, in architecture, by a decadent Gr
provincialism. The battlemented details, found at
Hyksos, seem to indicate the use of a style ante-
dating the Maccabean work, preserving, to some
extent, Bab traditions.


Fic. 8.—SynacacurE at Kerr Berio.


tion of exotic features, and if it is to be taken as a
key to the work of the period throughout Pal, there
can be nothing great to record. :
When Onias fled to Egypt from the persecution
of Antiochus Epiphanes, cir 154 BC, he gained per-
mission from Ptolemy and Cleopatra
to build a temple at, Leontopolis like
to that at Jerus (Ant, XIIL, iii, 3). The
temple was built in fulfilment of the
prophecy of Isa and modeled after the temple of
Zerubbabel, but “smaller and poorer’ and ‘“‘resem-
bled a tower.’ Petrie recovered this temple
(Hyksos, 19 ff) on an artificial mound resembling
the Temple hill at Jerus, raised alongside the Hyksos
camp, where an influential Jewish community had
established itself. It is the most complete plan
of a Jewish building of monumental character yet
discovered (Fig. 4). A sort of rude Corinthian
detail was used, and certain fragments point to a
battlemented treatment, suggestive of Bab origin,


5. Temple
of Onias


From the 3d cent. BC up to the Christian era
architecture shows a consistent Gr origin with
local character in detail (see Expl. in
7. Painted Pal, 18, 19) at Tel Sandahannah and
Tombs at Mareshah (Painted Tombs of Marissa).
Marissa These Marissa tombs show most in-
teresting decorated elevations, with
painted architectural detail (see Fig. 5). The work
is Phoen (93) and the date probably 194 to 119 BC
(79). Gr Ionic capitals are used, with wreath enrich-
ments painted on the architrave over the capital, and
a deep frieze of painted animals, surmounted by a
representation of a “battlement” “coping” (Dt 22
8; 1 K 7 9) remarkably like the details found by
Petrie at Hyksos. An interesting detail is the point-
ed head to the intercolumnar opening, a form which
seems to have suggested itself universally to the
primitive builder, where the handling of large lintel
stones presented a difficulty (see Fig. 6). They call
to mind the heads of Anglo-Saxon openings. .


Architecture
Ares :


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


238


A liking for mural decoration existed throughout
the whole Jewish period, as is seen from the small
fragments of painted plaster discovered in the
various excavated cities, but the decoration on the
Marissa tombs is the most complete example, and
resembles in many ways the mural decoration at
Knossos and Phylakopi.

The tomb of Zechariah in the Kedron valley
(Fig. 7) probably belongs to the same date as its

neighbor, the tomb of St. James,
8. A Char- which De Vogiié, from the inscription
acteristic upon it, ascribes to the time of Herod
Feature (Le Temple de Jérusalem, 46). The

detail of the crowning part of the
entablature is an often-recurring feature in Pal
architecture, appearing as early as the Solomonic
era at Lachish (see Fig. 3). It is characteristically
Egyp, and is also seen at Persepolis (Gwilt’s Enc,
22), and although neither might have been bor-
rowed from the other, they are not many removes
from the common parent. (A curious eastern
tradition mentioned [BD, “Cities,” 610] ascribes the
building of Persepolis to Solomon.) It was a fea-
ture commonly used by the Phoenicians (Raw-
linson, Hist. of Phoen, 142), and was probably
introduced by them from Egypt. Itseems to have
been in favor up to the time of Herod and was
abandoned after the wholesale introduction of the
classic entablature which in Hellenistic times was
only partially incorporated into the prevailing style.
The successive variations of the crowning feature of
their design is an important factor in tracing the
development of Jewish architecture.

IV. Herodian Work.—The Temple of Siah
(described by De Vogiié in Recovery of Jerus, 419 ff,
and Temples of the Jews, 140 ff) is an interesting
example of the work of the Herodian period and is
more Gr in character than one would expect. Here,
local character in carving is strongly marked,
foliage and figures being freely used with a certain
Assyr manner which, in spite of loose handling, be-
trays its origin. In fact this chord of architectural
enrichment can be traced through the work of In-
dia, Assyria, Persia and Syria on to the Byzantine

eriod, when the great cathedral church of St.
Saphas in Constantinople displayed it in the most
perfect harmony of all time.

The great building period of Herod need not be
detailed. Herod was an Edomite and _his archi-
tecture partook of the more robust Rom style
which dominated Jewish art at a time when the
opportunity of national incorporation had passed.

V. Synagogues.—This Rom influence, however,
remained in Pal as can be seen by the important
remains of synagogues in Galilee of the 3d cent.
AD (see Fig. 8 from Kefr Berim; Studies in Galilee,
ch vi; SWP, special papers, 294 ff). The many
remains investigated shed light upon the plan of
these post-exilic places of worship, of which there
is little or no mention in the OT. See Synacocug.
The plans vary considerably in proportion. The
example at Meiron measures 90 ft.x44 ft. 8in., while
that at Irbid measures 57 ft. 3 in.X53 ft. (SWP,
special papers, 299). In general arrangement the
plans vary very little, consisting usually of five
aisles with a triple entrance, most often facing
south. The details are richly carved and “a sur-
prising feature common to all is the use of animal
figures, especially lions, or lambs and eagles... . .
In some examples human figures, usually inten-
tionally mutilated, are found” (Studies in Galilee,
110).

VI. Final,—It is probable that future researches
may add to our knowledge of early Jewish archi-
tecture, but it is doubtful whether there is more
to discover than is constituted in the crude and
unskilled use of building materials, influenced by


limited knowledge of exotic features, which the Jews
had neither the time nor the knowledge properly
to apply. See Crry; Buitpine; Fortirications;
Hovust; TEemPie.

Literaturs.—Conder, Survey of Western Pal; Warren,
Recovery of Jerus; Bliss and Dickie, Excavations in Jerus,
1894-97; Fergusson, Temple of Jerus; Masterman, Studies
in Galilee; Bliss and Macalister, Hzcavations in Pal;
Macalister, Ercavations at Gezer; Petrie, Excavations at
Hyksos; Rawlinson, History of Phoen; Petrie, Lachish;
Sellin, Hxcavations at Taanach; Schumacher, Lxcavations
at Tell Mutesellim; Macalister, Bible Sidelights; Peters
and Thierch, Painted Tombs of Marissa.

ArcH. C. Dickiz

ARCHITES, ar’kits (DUNT, ha-'arki; AV Archi):
A clan mentioned in connection with the marking
of the southern boundary of Joseph (Josh 16 2).
The phrase MMW ANT DADA (gebhal ha-arkt
‘atdroth) offers difficulties, and it has been suggested
that the order of the last two words be changed to
read “the border of Ataroth-of-the-Archites.”’
See Aranota. G. A. Smith identifies Ataroth with
the present Atara on the high road from Jerus to
Bethel, three and one-half miles S. of Bethel and
six E. of the upper Beth-horon. Hushai, the “friend”’
of David, was an Archite (2 8 16 16).

H. J. Wour

ARCHIVES, 4r’kivs (the more correct RV ren-
dition of R7THO MMB, beth stphrayya’, in Ezr 6 1,
“house of the archives” instead of “house of rolls”
as In the AV): A part of the royal treasure-house
e 17), in which important state documents were

ept.


ARCTURUS, 4rk-ti’rus: The ‘Plough’ or
ee Wain” is intended. See Astronomy,
1, 138.


ARD, ard (I8, ‘ard, meaning unknown):
Either directly or more remotely a son of Benjamin.
Nu 26 38-40 mentions five sons of Benjamin,
together with Ard and Naaman, the sons of Bela,
Benjamin’s oldest son, counting all seven as ances-
tors of Benjamite families. In 1 Ch 8 1-3 Addar
and Naaman are mentioned, with others, as sons
of Bela, Addar and Ard being apparently the same
name with the consonants trausposed. In Gen 46
21 ten sons of Benjamin are counted, including at
ee the three grandsons, Ard and Naaman and

era.


ARDAT, drd’at (AV Ardath; Syr and Ethiopic
have Arphad): A certain field where Ezr communed
with God (2 Esd 9 26).


ARDITES, 4r’dits: Patronymic of Arp, which
see.


ARDON, 4r’don (F778, 'ardon, meaning un-
known): One of the three sons of Caleb and Azubah,
of the tribe of Judah (1 Ch 2 18).


ARELI, a-ré'li QOS, ’areélt, apparently the
gentilic form of a compound that would mean
“God’s lioness,” or ‘‘God’s hearth”): One of the
sons of Gad the son of Jacob (Gen 46 16; Nu 26
17). ‘‘Arelites” (q.v.) is exactly the same word.


ARELITES, a-ré’lits: In Nu 26 17. See ARELI.
AREOPAGITE, ar-é-op’a-jit.


AREOPAGUS, ar-é-op’a-gus ("Apetos mé&yos, Arei-
os pdgos; Acts 17-19.22. Mars’ Hill, 17 22 AV):
A sort of spur jutting out from the western
end of the Acropolis and separated from it by a
very short saddle. Traces of old steps cut in the


See Dionysius.


239


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Architecture
Ares


rock are still to be seen. Underneath are deep
Coes, once the home of the Eumenides (Furies).

m the flat surface of the summit are signs still
visible of a smoothing of the stone for seats. Di-
rectly below to the N. was the old Athenian agora,
or market-place. To the E., on the descent from
the Acropolis, could be seen in antiqnity a small
semicircular platform—the orchestra—from which
rose the precipitous rock of the citadel. Here the
booksellers kept their stalls; here the work of
Anaxagoras could be bought for a drachma; from
here his physical philosophy was disseminated, then,
through Euripides, the poetic associate of Socrates
and the sophists, leavened the drama, and finally
reached the people of Athens. Then came the
Stoics and Epicureans who taught philosophy and
religion as a system, not as a faith, and spent their
time in searching out some new thing in creed and
dogma and opinion. Five cents. earlier Socrates
was brought to this very Areopagus to face the
charges of his accusers. To this same spot the


Areopagus at Athens.


apostle Paul came almost five hundred years after
399 BC, when the Attic martyr was executed, with
the same earnestness, the same deep-rooted con-
victions, and with even greater ardor, to meet
the philosophers of fashion. The Athenian guides
will show you the exact place where the apostle
stood, and in what direction he faced when he
addressed his audience. No city has ever seen such
a forest of statues as studded the market-place,
the streets and the sides and summit of the Acropolis
of Athens. A large part of this wealth of art was in
full view of the speaker, and the apostle naturally
made this extraordinary display of votive statues
and offerings the starting-point of his address.
He finds the Athenians extremely religious. He had
found an altar to a god unknown. Then he de-
velops the theme of the great and only God, not
from the Heb, but from the Gr, the Stoic point of
view. His audiences consisted, on the one hand,
of the advocates of prudence as the means, and
pleasure as the end (the Epicureans); on the other,
of the advocates of duty, of living in harmony with
the intelligence which rules the world for good.
He frankly expresses his sympathy with the nobler
principles of the Stoic doctrine. But neither Stoic
nor Epicurean could believe the declarations of the


of Vitruvius.


apostle: the latter believed death to be the end of
all things, the former thought that the soul at


death was absorbed again into that from which it
sprang. Both understood Paul as proclaiming to
them in Jesus and Andstasis (‘‘resurrection’’) some
new deities. When they finally ascertained that
Jesus was ordained by God to judge the world, and
that Anastasis was merely the resurrection of the
dead, they were disappointed. Some scoffed, others
departed, doubtless with the feeling that they had
already given audience too long to such a fanatic.
The Areopagus, or Hill of Ares, was the ancient
seat of the court of the same name, the establish-
ment of which leads us far back into the mythical
period long before the dawn of history. This
court exercised the right of capital punishment.
In 594 BC the jurisdiction in criminal cases was
given to the archons who had discharged the duties
of their office well and honorably, consequently to
the noblest, richest and most distinguished citizens
of Athens. The Areopagus saw that the laws in
force were observed and executed by the properly
constituted authorities; it could bring officials to
trial for their acts while in office, even raise objec-
tions to all resolutions of the Council and of the
General Assembly, if the court perceived a danger
to the state, or subversion of the constitution. The


-Areopagus also protected the worship of the gods,


the sanctuaries and sacred festivals, and the olive
trees of Athens; and it supervised the religious
sentiments of the people, the moral conduct of the
citizens, as well as the education of the youth.
Without waiting for a formal accusation the Areop-
agus could summon any citizen to court, examine,
convict and punish him. Under unusual circum-
stances full powers could be granted by the people
to this body for the conduct of various affairs of
state; when the safety of the city was menaced,
the court acted even without waiting for full
power to be conferred upon it. The tenure of
office was for life, and the number of members
without restriction. The court sat at night at
the end of each month and for three nights in suc-
cession. The place of meeting was a simple house,
built of clay, which was still to be seen in the time
The Areopagus, hallowed by the
sacred traditions of the past, a dignified and august
body, was independent of and uninfluenced by the
wavering discordant multitude, and was not_af-
fected by the ever-changing public opinion. Con-
servative almost to a fault, it did the state good
service by holding in check the too rash and radical
younger spirits. When the democratic party came
te power, after Cimon’s banishment, one of its
first acts was to limit the powers of the Areopagus.
By the law of Ephialtes in 460 the court lost prac-
tically all jurisdiction. The supervision of the
government was transferred to the nomophulakes
(law-guardians). At the end of the Peloponnesian
war, however, in 403 its old rights were restored.
The court remained in existence down to the time
of theemperors. From Acts 17 19 and 22 we learn
that it existed in the time of Claudius. One of its
members was converted to the Christian faith (17 34).
It was probably abolished by Vespasian.

As to whether Paul was “forcibly apprehended
and formally tried,” see Conybeare and Howson,
The Life and Epistles of St. Paul, ch x, and Expos,
5th ser, II, 209 f, 261 f (Ramsay).


Lirerature.—P. W. Forchhammer, De Areopago (Kiel,
1828); Philippi, Der A. und die Epheten (Leipzig, 1874);
Lange, Die Epheten und der A. vor Solon (Leipzig, 1874).


J. E. Harry


AREOPOLIS, ar-é-op’o-lis. The Gr name of Ar


(q.v.).

ARES, @’rés, dr’es ("Apes, Ares=Arah [Ezr 2 5;
Neh 7 10}): 756 of the sons of A. returned to
Jerus with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 6 10).


Aretas
Aristobulus


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


240


_ ARETAS, ar’é-tas (Apéras, Aréias): The name
is a common one among Arabian princes and signifies

“virtuous or pleasing.” It is men-
1. 2 Macc tioned several times in Biblical lit. and
6:8 in Jos. Here it refers to an Arabian

king, who was a éontemporary of Anti-
ochus Epiphanes (cir 170 BC), before whom Jason
the high priest was accused.

Another Arabian prince of this name, surnamed
Obodas (Ant, XIII, xv, 2; xvi, 2; XVI, ix, 4) de-

feated Antiochus Dionysius and reigned
2. Obodas over Coele-Syria and Damascus. He

participated with Hyrcanus in the war
for the Jewish throne against his brother Aristobulus,
but the allies were completely defeated at Papyron,
by Aristobulus and Scaurus, the Rom general. The
latter carried the war into Arabia and foreed
Aretas to make an ignominious peace, at the price
of three hundred talents of silver. Of that event a
memorial denarius still exists, with a Rom chariot
in full charge on the one side and a camel! on the
other, by the side of which an Arab is kneeling,
who holds out a branch of frankincense.

The successor of Obodas was apparently surnamed
Aeneas and this is the Arabian king who figures
in the NT (@ Cor 11 32; ef Acts
9 24). The Aretas, here mentioned,
is the father-in-law of Herod Antipas,
who divorced his wife to marry Herodias, the wife
of his brother Philip (Mt 14 3; Mk 6 17; Lk 3
19). Jos (Ant, XVIII, v, 1.3) gives us a circum-
stantial narration of the events leading up to and
following the conduct of Antipas. Coupled with
a boundary dispute, it occasioned a bitter war
between the two princes, in which Antipas was
completely overwhelmed, who thereupon invoked
the aid of the Romans. Tiberius ordered Vitellius,
proconsul of Syria, to make war on Aretas and to
deliver him dead or alive into the hands of the
emperor. On the way, at Jerus, Vitellius received
intelligence of the death of Tiberius, March 16,
37 AD, and stopped all warlike proceedings (Ant,
XVIII, v, 1:3). According to2 Cor 11 32, Damas-
cus, which had formerly belonged to the Arabian
princes, was again in the hands of Aretas, when
Paul escaped from it, not immediately after his
conversion, but on a subsequent visit, after his
Arabian exile (Gal 1 16.17). It is inconceivable
that Aretas should have taken Damascus by force,
in the face of the almost omnipotent power of
Rome. The picture moreover, which Jos draws
of the Herodian events, points to a passive rather
than an active attitude on the part of Aretas.
The probability is that Cajus Caligula, the new
emperor, wishing to settle the affairs of Syria,
freely gave Damascus to Aretas, inasmuch as it had
formerly belonged to his territory. As Tiberius
died in 37 AD, and as the Arabian affair was com-
pletely settled in 39 AD, it is evident that the date
of Paul’s conversion must lie somewhere between
34 and 86 AD. This date is further fixed by a
Damascus coin, with the image of King Arctas and
the date 101. If that date points to the Pompeian
era, it equals 37 AD, making the date of Paul’s
conversion 34 AD (Mionnet, Descript. des médailles
antiques, V, 284-85). Hunry E. Doskrr


ARGOB, §&r’gob (29708, ‘argobh, “story”): A
locality or a person mentioned in the obscure
passage 2 K 15 25. The context deals with
Pekah’s conspiracy against Pekahiah; but it is not
clear, owing to the state of the text, whether Argob
and his associate Arieh (if these are the names of
men) were officers of Pekahiah who were slain with
him, or fellow-conspirators with Pekah. The
Vulg takes them as names of places; they may then
be considered glosses that have crept into the text.


3. Aeneas


Rashi holds that Argob was the royal palace.
Argob is more likely the name of a place than a
person. See Arizu. H. J. Wour


ARGOB, &r’gob (A39N7 or JAIN, ’argobh or
ha-argobh; “ApyéB, Argéb): A region E. of the
Jordan which in Dt 3 4.5 is equivalent to the king-
dom of Og in Bashan, and in ver 13 is referred to
as “all the region of Argob, even all Bashan.” Ver
14 is evidently corrupt. Havvoth-jair lay not in
Bashan but in Gilead (Jgs 10 4; Nu 32 40f;
J K 4 13). It contained threescore cities. ‘All
these were cities fortified with high walls, gates and
bars; besides the unwalled towns a great many.”
Dt 3 14 seems to say that it marched with Geshur
and Maacah; but we cannot lay stress on this.
We may take it that Argob lay in the land of Ba-
shan; beyond this, on available data, we cannot
certainly go.

The word hebhel, tr’ “‘region,’’ means primarily
a line or cord, then ‘‘a measuring line,’’ then ‘‘the
portion measured,” eg. “the part of the chil-
dren of Judah” (Josh 19 9), the “lot” or “portion”
of an inheritance (Dt 32 9; Josh 17 14, etc).
Hebhel precedes Argob in each of the four cases
where it is named. This has led many to think
that a district with very clearly marked borders
is intended. No region so well meets this condition
as el-Leja’, a voleanic tract lying about 20 miles 8.
of Damascus, and 30 miles E. of the Sea of Galilee.
It is roughly triangular in form, with the apex to
the N., and is about 25 miles long, with a base of
some 20 miles. The lava which has hardened into
this confused wilderness of black rock, rent and
torn by countless fissures, flowed from the craters
whose dark forms are seen on the E. It rises to
an average height of about 20 ft. above the plain,
on which it lies like an island on a sea of emerald,
the edges being sharply defined. At all points it
is difficult of entrance, and might be defended by
a few resolute men against an army. To this fact
doubtless it owes its name el-Lea’, “the refuge.”
There are many traces of considerable cities in the
interior. The present writer collected there the
names of no fewer than seventy-one ruined sites.
See further Tracuonitis. This identification is
supported by taking ’argabh as the Heb equivalent
of the Gr trachén, “stony.’’ This is possible only
if, as Gesenius assumes, the root rdghabh is cognate
with ragham, an extremely precarious assumption.
“Clod” is the tr of the word reghebh in Job 21 33;
88 38; probably therefore ’argabh should be ten-
dered “a region of clods,” i.e. “arable land.”
This practically rules out el-Leja’. We have seen
above that the term hebhel need have no reference
to the clearly marked rocky boundaries. As
regards the great cities, all Bashan is studded with
the ruins of such. The splendid remains that
everywhere meet the traveler’s eye were thought
by Porter (Giant Cities of Bashan) and others, to
be the wreck of the great cities that struck the
invading Israelites with wonder. It is now clear
that the ruins above ground are not older than the
beginning of our era. The Gr and Rom architecture
is easily recognized. Probably, however, excava-
tion will prove that in very many cases the sites
have been occupied from very ancient times. Cave
dwellings, chambers cut in the rock and covered
with stone vaults, and what may be described as
subterranean cities, have been found in different
parts, the antiquity of which it is impossible to
estimate. There is nothing which enables us to
identify the region of Argob. The whole country
of Bashan, with the exception of el-Leja’, is “arable
land.” The soil is very fertile, composed of lava
detritus. In almost every district might have been
found the threescore cities. Guthe suggests the


241


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Aretas
Aristobulus


western part of el-Hauran, stretching from Edrei
(Der‘ah) to Nawd. Buhl would locate it in the dis-
trict of es-Suweit, to the S.E. of the low range of ez-
Zumleh. This howeverseemstoofartotheS. The
_§.W. slopes of Jebel ed-Druze seem to meet the con-
ditions as well as any. They form quite a well-
marked district; they are very fertile, and the strong
cities in the region must have been numerous.
W. Ewine
ARGUE, Ar’gtt: Only in RV in Job 40 2. 122,
yakhah, which it translates, lit. means “to be
right,”’ and in the causative form “reason with,’
“answer back,” and is found in AV rendered
“reproach.”


ARIARATHES, 4-ri-a-ra’théz.


ARIDAI, ar’i-di, a-rid’a-1 (YPN, 'dridhay: a
son of Haman [Est 9 9]): The name may be related
to the Pers Hart-dayas, “delight of Hari’; the text
is very uncertain.


ARIDATHA, ar-i-da’tha, a-rid’a-tha (RH T WN,
‘dridhatha’): A son of Haman (Est 9 8). It may
be related to the Pers Hari-ddta, “‘given by Hari.’’
The LXX reads Pharaddtha.


ARIEH, @’ri-e: “‘(the) Lion.” See Araos.


ARIEL, 4’ri-el (NN or SN, 'dri’al, “lioness
‘ of God’): But the word occurs in Ezk 48 15.16,
and is there tr? in RV “ALTAR HEARTH.”

(1) According to RV a man of Moab whose two
sons were slain by David’s warrior Benaiah the son

_of Jehoiada (2 8 23 20; 1 Ch 11 22). Here AV
translates ‘‘two lionlike men of Moab.”

(2) A name applied to Jerus (Isa 29 1.2.7). The
many explanations of the name are interesting, but
mainly conjectural.

(3) One of the members of the delegation sent by
Ezra to the place Casiphia, to secure temple min-
isters for his expedition to Jerus (Ezr 8 16).

Wius J. Bercurr

ARIGHT, a-rit’: “In a right way,” “correctly,”
“going straight to the point,” without error or
deviation. “Set aright” (Job 11 13; Ps 78 8).
Its use in Ps 50 23 is without authority in the Heb
text; hence in italics.


ARIMATHAEA, ar-i-ma-thé’a (Apipabala, Ari-
mathaia): ‘‘A city of the Jews,” the home of Joseph
in whose sepulchre the body of Jesus was laid. Its
identity is the subject of much conjecture. The
Onomasticon of Eusebius and Jerome identifies it
with Ramathaim-Zophim in the hill-country of
Ephraim (1 § 1 1), which is Ramah the birth-
place and burial-place of Samuel (1 S 1 19; 25 1),
and places it near Timnah on the borders of Judah
and Dan. G. A. Smith thinks it may be the modern
Beit Rima, a village on an eminence 2 miles N. of
Timnah. Others incline to Ramallah, 8 miles N.
of Jérus and 3 miles from Bethel (Mt 27 57;
Mk 16 43; Lk 23 51; Jn 19 Gee


See ARaTHES.


A . F. Hunter

ARIOCH, ar’i-ok: (JIS, ’aryaokh):

(1) The name of the vassal king of Ellasar, under
Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Amraphel, king of
Shinar (Babylonia), who took part in the expedition
against Sodom, Gomorrah and other states (Gen 14
1.9). Assyriologists generally, and probably rightly,
identify A. with Eri-Aku (q.v.), king of Larsa, EI-
lasar being for Al-Larsa (now Singa@ra in central
Babylonia). a

For an account of the expedition see AMRAPHEL,
and for the Babylonian texts bearing upon the
reign, see Ent-Axu. In Gen 14 1.9, where the


names of the allied kings who marched against the
Cities of the Plain are given, that of Arioch follows
his more immediate suzerain, Amra-


Texts Re- phel, and not Chedorlaomer, who, how-
ferring to ever, appears to have been the real
the Reign overlord (ver 4), which agrees with the
of Arioch _indications of the Bab records. No de-


tails of the expedition are available
from Bab sources. Besides Larsa, Eri-Aku’s in-
scriptions inform us that Ur (Mugayyar, Mugheir)
was in the principality of which Larsa was the
capital.

(2) The Arioch of Dn] 2 14.25 was captain of the
bodyguard of King Nebuchadnezzar. Nothing else
is known about him except that it was he who was
commanded to slay the “wise men”’ who failed to
repeat to the king his dream and its interpretation;
and who communicated to his royal master that
Daniel had undertaken the task. T. G. Pincuss


ARISAI, ar’i-sai, a-ris’4-1 (PO™" SN, ’drisaz): Prob-
ably a Pers word of unknown meaning. One of
Haman’s sons, slain by the Jews (Est 9 9).


ARISTARCHUS, ar-is-tir‘kus (’Aplorapyxos,
Aristarchos, “best ruler’): He was one of those
faithful companions of the apostle Paul who shared
with him his labors and sufferings. He is suddenly
mentioned along with Gaius as having been seized
by the excited Ephesians during the riot stirred
np by the silversmiths (Acts 19 29). They are
designated “men of Macedonia, Paul’s com~
panions in travel.” We learn later that he was
a native of Thessalonica (20 4; 27 2). They were
probably seized to extract from them information
about their leader Paul, but when they could tell
nothing, and since they were Greeks, nothing
further was done to them.

When Aristarchus attached himself to Paul we
do not know, but he seems ever after the Ephesian
uproar to have remained in Paul’s company. He
was one of those who accompanicd Paul from Greece
via Macedonia (20 4). Having preceded Paul to
Troas, where they waited for him, they traveled
with him to Pal. He is next mentioned as accom-
panying Paul to Rome (27 2). There he attended
Paul and shared his imprisonment. He is men-
tioned in two of the letters of the Rom captivity,
in the Epistle to the church at Col (4 10), and in
the Epistle to Philem (ver 24), in both of which
he sends greetings. In the former Paul calls him
“my fellow-prisoner.’”’ According to tradition he
wag martyred during the persecution of Nero.

8S. F. Hcenter

ARISTOBULUS, ar-is-to-bi/lus (’ApurréBovdos,
Aristéboulos, ‘best counselor’):

(1) Son of the Maccabean, John Hyrcanus, who
assumed the power and also the title of king after
his father’s death (105 BC) and associated with
him, as co-regent, his brother: Antigonus (Ant,
XII, xi), though by the will of his father the
government was intrusted to his mother. Three
other brothers and his mother he cast into prison,
where they died of starvation. He murdered Antigo-
nus, and died conscience-stricken himself in 104 BC.
See MaccaBzEs.

(2) Aristobulus, nephew of the former, dethroned
his mother, Alexandra (69 BC), and forced his
brother Hyrcanus to renounce the crown and mitre
in his favor. In 64 Pompey came to Pal and sup-
ported the cause of Hyrcanus. See Hyrcanus.
Aristobulus was defeated and taken prisoner, and
Hyrcanus was appointed ethnarch in 63 BC.
Aristobulus and his two daughters were taken to
Rome, where he graced the triumph of Pompey.
The father escaped later (56 BC) and appeared in
Pal again as a claimant to the throne. Many


Arithmetic
Ark of Covenant


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


242


followers flocked to his standard, but he was finally
defeated, severely wounded and taken prisoner a
second time and with his son, Antigonus, again
taken to Rome. Julius Caesar not only restored
him to freedom (49 BC), but also gave him two
legions to recover Judaea, and to work in his inter-
est against Pompey. But Quintus Metellus Scipio,
who had just received Syria as a province, had Aris-
tobulus poisoned as he was on his way to Pal.

(3) Grandson of the preceding, and the last of
the Maccabean family. See ASMoNEANS.

(4) The Jewish teacher of Ptol. VII (2 Macc 1
10).
(5) An inhabitant of Rome, certain of whose
household are saluted by Paul (Rom 16 10). He
was probably a grandson of Herod and brother of
Herod Agrippa, a man of great wealth, and inti-
mate with the emperor Claudius. Lightfoot
(Philippians, 172) suggests that ‘‘the household of
A.’ were his slaves, and that upon his death they
had kept together and had become the property
of the emperor either by purchase or as a legacy,
in which event, however, they might. still retain the
name of their former master. Among these were
Christians to whom Paul sends greeting.

M. O. Evans

ARITHMETIC, a-rith’me-tik. See NUMBER.


ARIUS, a-ri‘us, 4’ri-us ("Apys, Arés): The read-
ing of the Vulg adopted in RV for the former read-
ing Areus and Areios of Jos. A king of Sparta
(309-265 BC) who wrote the letter to Onias, the
high priest, given in 1 Macc 12 7.20-23. There
were two Spartan kings named Arius, and three
high priests named Onias. Chronology requires the
letter mentioned to have been written by Arius I to
Onias I, most probably in the interval between 309
and 300 BC. See LaczparmMoniaANs.


ARK, Ark, OF BULRUSHES, bool’rush-iz (Man,
tébhah; Egyp tébt; LXX 6iPis, thibis, “a chest,”
“a vessel to float”): The Heb word
here tr? “ark” is used in the OT only
of the ark of Noah (Gen 6 14 ff) and
of the ark of bulrushes (Ex 2 3), and
always in the secondary meaning, a vessel to float.
The LXX translates it of Noah’s ark by «Pwrés,
kibotés, “a casket,” and of the ark of bulrushes by
thtbis, a little basket made of osiers or flags. For the
Ark of the Covenant, the Heb employed a different
word (798, ’drén, “a chest’). Bulrushes (SQA,
géme', “papyrus”): This species of reed was used
by the Egyptians for many different vessels, some
of which were intended to float or even to be used
as a skiff. Slime (VON, hemar, “bitumen’”),
pitch (MPT, zepheth, “pitch’) was probably the
sticky mud of the Nile with which to this day so
many things in Egypt are plastered. In this case
it was mixed with bitumen. Flags (S70, siph,
“sedge”’) were reeds of every kind and tall grass
growing in the shallow water at the cdge of the
river.

Thus the ark of bulrushes was a vessel made of
papyrus stalks and rendered fit to float by being

covered with a mixture of bitumen
2. History and mud. Into this floating vessel the

mother of Moses placed the boy when
he was three months old, and put the vessel in the
water among the sedge along the banks of the Nile
at the place where the ladies from the palace were
likely to come to bathe. The act was a pathctic
imitation of obedience to the king’s command to
throw boy babies into the river, a command which
she had for three months braved and which now she
so obeyed as probably to bring the cruelty of the
king to the notice of the royal ladies in such way as
to arouse a womanly sympathy.


1. Defini-
tions


A similar story is related of Sargon I of Baby-
lonia (Records of the Past, 1st ser., V, 1-4; Rogers,
Hist. Bab and Assyr, I, 362).

The one story in no wise discredits the other.
That method of abandoning children, either will-
ingly or by necessity, is as natural along the Nile
and the Euphrates, where the river is the great
artery of the land and where the floating basket
had been used from time immemorial, as is the
custom in our modern cities of placing abandoned
infants in the streets or on door-steps where they
are likely to be found, and such events probably
occurred then as often as now. M. G. KYLE


ARK OF THE COVENANT, kuv’e-nant (JS
mad, 'dran ha-berith):

L The Statements of the OT Concerning the Ark
of the Covenant.—In Ex 25 10 ff, Moses receives
the command to build an ark of
acacia wood. Within this ark were to
be placed the tables of the law which
God was about to give to Moses.
Upon the top of the ark, probably not as a id but
above the lid, the MB2, kappéreth, in the NT
7d ikacrhpiwr, 6 hilastérion (He 9 5), is to be
placed, which was a golden plate upon which two
cherubim, with raised wings and facing each other,
covered the ark. From the place between the two
cherubim God promises to speak to Moses, as often
as He shall give him commands in reference to the
Israelites.

The portion of the Pent in which this is recorded
is taken from the so-called Priest Codex (P). The
reports of the Elohist (E) and the Jahwist (J) on
this subject are wanting; but both of these sources
report concerning the important réle which the
ark played in the entrance of Israel into Canaan,
and these documents too must have contained the
information that the people had received this ark.
It can further with certainty be stated concerning
E, and with some probability concerning J, in what
part of these documents these accounts were to be
found. For E reports in Ex 33 6 that the Israel-
ites, in order to demonstrate their repentance on
account of the golden calf, had at God’s command
laid aside their ornaments. In vs 7-10 there fol-
lows a statement concerning the erection of the
sacred tent; but this is explained only by the fact
that between vs 6 and 7 a report concerning the
erection of the ark of the covenant must have been
found, which the R of the Pent (since before this
he had already made use of the much more exhaust-
ive account of the Priest Codex) was compelled
to omit. But that at this place E must have
reported not only concerning the erection of the
sacred tent but also of the construction of the ark
of the covenant, is in itself probable, and can too
be concluded from this, that according to D, the
composition of which is also conditioned upon that
of E and J, the ark was built on this occasion. We
further conclude that it was not so much the taber-
nacle which could serve as a consolation to the
people, something that at that time they needed,
but rather the ark, which was to symbolize to them
that God was on the march with them. In J we
do not indeed find at this place any statement
concerning this sacred structure, but we do find the
statement that the Israelites, out of sorrow because
of the bad news brought by Moses, discarded their
ornaments. For Ex 33 4 is taken from J, since
E contains the command to discard the ornaments
later on, and hence could not have written ver 4.
Now it is a justifiable surmise that J has also re-
ported what use was made of the ornaments that
had been discarded; and as this author, just as is
the case with E, must have at some place contained


1. Penta-
teuch


243


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Arithmetic
Ark of Covenant


a report concerning the construction of the ark,
he certainly must have given this just at this place.
The corresponding account in D is found in Dt 10
1-5. Accordingly, then, all the four Pent docu-
ments reported that Moses had built the ark at
Sinai. D, like P, says, that it was built of acacia
wood. In the Elohistic narrative the subject is
mentioned again in Nu 10 33 ff, where we read
that the ark had preceded the people as they broke
camp and marched from Sinai. At this place too
the words are found which Moses was accustomed
to speak when the ark began to move out and
when it arrived at a halting-place.
According to the narrative in Josh 3 the ark
coéperated at the crossing of the Jordan in such a
way that the waters of the river
2. Joshua ceased to continue flowing as soon as
the feet of the priests who were carry-
ing the ark entered the water, and that it stood
still above until these priests, after the people had
crossed over, again left the bed of the river with
the ark. In the account of the solemn march
around Jericho, which according to ch 6 caused the
walls of the city to fall, the carrying of the ark
around the city is regarded as an essential feature
in vs 4.7.11. In ch 7 it is narrated that Joshua
after the defeat of the army before Ai, lamented
and prayed before the ark. In ch 8 this is men-
tioned in connection with Mount Ebal.
At the time of Eli the ark stood in the sanctuary
at Shiloh (1 S 3 3). From this place it was taken
after Israel had been defeated by


3. Other the Philis at Ebenezer, in order to
Historical assure the help of Jch to the people;
Books but, instead of this, the ark fell into


the hands of the Philis (1 8S 4). But
the various misfortunes that now afflicted the
Philis induced these to regard the possession of the
ark as a calamity (1 S 6) and they sent it back to
Israel (1 S 6). It was brought first to Beth-
shemesh in the tribe of Judah, near the borders
of the Philis, and soon after to Kiriath-jearim,
about 7.5 miles N.W. of Jerus. There the ark
remained for years in the house of a man by the
name of Abinadab, whose son was its guardian
(1 8 7 1), until David brought it to Mount Zion,
after he had established his camp and court there.
He there placed it in a tent prepared for it (2S
6; 1 Ch 13, 16). In David’s time again the ark
was taken along into battle (2 S 11 41). When
David fled from the presence of Absalom, the
riests wanted to accompany him with the ark,
ae he sent it back (2 S 16 24f). David had also
intended to build a temple, in which the ark was to
find its place, since before this it had always found
its resting-place in a tent. But God forbade this
through Nathan, because He was willing to build
a house for David, but was not willing that David
should build one for Him (2 8 7). Solomon then
built the temple and placed the ark of the covenant
in the Holy of Holies of this temple, where it was
placed under the wings of two mighty cherubim
images (1 K 8; 2 Ch 5).
Jeremiah in the passage 3 16, which certainly was
written after the destruction of Jerus, states that in
the future new Jerus nobody will any
4, Propheti- more concern himself about the ark


eal and of the covenant of Jeh, and no one will
Poetical again build such a one. In the post-
Books exilic Ps 132 (ver 8), Jeh is petitioned


to occupy together with the ark, the
symbol of His omnipotent presence, also the
sanctuary that has been erected for Him, the poet
describing himself and those who sing
6. The NT this psalm as participants in the home-
bringing of the ark by David. No
further mention is made of the ark of the covenant


in the Psalter or the prophetical books. In the NT
the ark of the covenant is mentioned only in He
9 4 in the description of the Solomonic temple.

il. The Form of the Ark of the Covenant.—
According to the statements in P, the ark of the cove-
nant was a chest made out of acacia wood, 23 cubits
(about equal to 4 ft.) long, 1} cubits wide and
13 high. That it was made out of acacia wood is
also stated by D in 10 3. According to P it was
covered with gold within and without, and was
ornamented with a moulding of gold running all
aroundit. Atits four feet rings were added, through
which the gold-covered carrying-staves were put.
These staves are also mentioned in 1 K 8 7.8;
2 Ch 6 8.9, and mention is often made of those
who carried the ark (286138; 16 24). The
correctness of these statements cannot be proved,
but yet there is no reason to doubt them. Rather
we might have reason to hesitate in clinging to the
view that on the old ark there was really a golden
kapporeth, but only because in olden times the
possession of such valuables and their use for such
a purpose would be doubtful. But on the basis of
such reasons we could at most doubt whether the
lid with its cherubim consisted of solid gold. That
the cherubim were attached to or above the ark
is not at all improbable. That Solomon placed the
ark in the Holy of Holies between two massive
cherubim figures (1 K 6 19.23 ff; 8 6) does not
prove that there were no cherubim figures on the
ark itself, or even that those cherubim figures,
which according to Ex 26 19 were found on the
ark, were nothing else than those of Solomon’s
days in imagination transferred back to an earlier
period (Vatke, Biblische Theologie, 1835, 333;
Popper, Der biblische Bericht tiber die Stiftshiitte,
1862). In recent times the view has been main-
tained that the ark in reality was no ark at all but
an empty throne. It was Reichel, in his work
Vorhellenische Gétterkulte, who first expressed this
view, and then Meinhold, Die Lade Jahwes, Tiibin-
gen, 1910, and Theologische Studien und Kritiken,
1901, 593-617, who developed this view in the
following manner. It is claimed that in the days
of Moses a throne-like rock at Mount Sinai was
regarded as the seat of Jeh, and when the Israel-
ites departed from Sinai they made for themselves
a portable throne, and Jeh was regarded as sitting
visibly enthroned upon this and accompanying
His people. In the main the same view was main-
tained by Martin Dibellius (Die Lade Jahwes,
Géttingen, 1906; Hermann Gunkel, Die Lade
Jahwes ein Thronsiiz, reprinted from the Zeit-
schrift fur Missionskunde und Religionswissen-
schaft, Heidelberg, 1906). The occasion for this
view was given by the fact that among the Persians
and other people there were empty thrones of the
gods, which were carried or hauled around in pro-
cessions. The reasons for finding in the ark of the
covenant such an empty throne are found chiefly
in this, that the passages in the OT, in which it
seems that the presence of God is made conditional
on the presence of the ark (cf Nu 14 42-44), can
be explained if the ark is regarded as a throne of
Jeh. However, empty thrones of the gods are
found only among the Aryan people, and all of the
passages of the OT which refer to the ark can be
easily explained without such a supposition. This
view is to be rejected particularly for this reason,
that in the OT the ark is always described as an
ark, and never as a throne or a seat; and because
it is absolutely impossible to see what reason would
have existed at a later period to state that it was
an ark if it had originally been a throne. Dibe-
lius and Gunkel appeal also particularly to this,
that in several passages, of which 18 44; 28
6 2 are the oldest, Jeh is declared to be enthroned


Ark of Covenant THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


244


on the cherubim. But this proves nothing, because
He is not called ‘Tie who is enthroned on the ark,”
and the cherubim and the ark are two different
things, even if there were cherubim on the lid of the
ark. Cf the refutation of Meinhold and Dibelius by
Budde (ZATW, 1901, 193-200, and Theol. Studien
und Kritiken, 1906, 489-507).

IH. The Contents of the Ark of the Covenant.—
According to the PC the two tables of the law con-
stituted the contents of the ark. In Ex 265 16;
40 20, as also Dt 10 5, and, too, in 1 K 8 9, we
have the same testimony. The majority of the
modern critics regard this as an unhistorical state-
ment first concocted by the so-called ‘‘Deuterono-
mistic school.” Their reasons for this are the
following: (1) The critics deny that the existence
of the Mosaic tables of the law is a historical fact;
(2) The critics declare that if these tables had
really been in possession of the Israelites, they
would not have Been so foolish as to put them into
a box which it was forbidden to open; (3) The
critics declare that the views entertained in olden
times on the importance of the ark cannot be recon-
ciled with the presence of the tables in the ark.
But we reply: (1) that the actual existence of the
two tables of the law is denied without sufficient
reasons; that the ten principal formulas of the
Decalogue, as these are given in Ex 20 and Dt 6,
come from Moses, must be insisted upon, and that
according to Ex 34 other ten commandments had
been written on these tables is incorrect. The
laws in Ex 34 17-26 are not at all declared there
to be the ten words which God intended to write
upon the tables. But if Moses had prepared the
tables for the commandments, then it is (2) only
probable that he caused to be made a suitable
chest for their preservation and their transporta-
tion through the desert. Now it might be thought
that the view that the ark was so holy that it dared
not be opened had originated only after the time
of Moses. However, it is just as easily possible,
that that importance had already been assigned
by Moses to the tables in the ark which the sealed
and carefully preserved copy of a business agree-
ment would have and which is to be opened only
in case of necessity (Jer 32 11-14). Such a case
of necessity never afterward materialized, because
the Israelites were never in doubt as to what was
written on these tables. On a verbatim reading no
stress was laid in olden times. (3) With regard
to the importance of the ark according to the esti-
mate placed upon it in the earlier period of Israel,
we shall see later that the traditions in reference
to the tables harmonize fully with this importance.

Of the modern critics who have rejected this
tradition, some have thought that the ark was
empty, and that the Israelites thought that Jeh
dwelt in it (Guthe, Geschichte des Volkes Israel,
39), or that the empty chest was a kind of fetish
(Schwally, Semitische Kriegsalterttimer, 1901, I,
10). As arule they believe that a stone image
of Jeh or two stones had been placed in the ark,
these being possibly meteor stones, in which it was
thought that some divine power was dwelling
(Stade, Geschichte Israels, I, 458); or possibly
stones that in some battle or other had been hurled
and through which a victory had been won (Couard,
ZATW, XII, 76); or possibly they were the
stones which at the alliance of the tribes that
dwelt about Mount Sinai were first set up as tes-
timonials of this covenant (Kraetzschmar, Die
Bundesvorstellung im Alten Testament, 216). Of
these views only the one which declares that the
ark contained meteor stones deserves any notice,
because it could indeed be thought possible that
Israel would have taken with them on their journey
through the desert such stones which they could


have regarded as pledges of the Divine Presence
fallen from heaven and could have preserved these
in a sacred ark. But it is impossible to show that
this view is probable, not to speak of proving it
to be correct. The only extant tradition says that
the ark contained the tables of the law, and this
is the only view that is in harmony with what we
must think of the whole work of Moses. Finally
we must again remember that it is probable that
E and J, who speak both of the ark and also of the
tables of the law, in the portions of these documents
which have not been preserved, reported also that
the tables were placed in the ark.

IV. The Names of the Ark of the Covenant.—
The name “ark of the covenant of Jeh” was not
originally found everywhere where it now stands,
but in many places the words “of the covenant’’
were added later. However, the expression “ark
of the covenant” is found in the oldest source of
the Book of S (2 8 15 24), and in 1 K 3 15 in
the old source for the history of Solomon, of which
the Deuteronomistic author of the Book of Kings
made use; in 1 K 8 1, a very old account of the
building of the temple; and the genuineness of the
expression “ark of the covenant”’ in these passages
is not with any good reasons to be called into ques-
tion. Further the expression is found in the books
of Numbers and Joshua, in a number of passages
(Nu 10 33; 14 44; Josh 3 3.6.8; 4 9.18; 6 6.8),
which in all probability belong to the document
E. It appears that E designates the ark as the
“ark of the covenant of God,” or more briefly,
as the “ark of the covenant,” unless in a connected
narrative he writes only “the ark,” while in J the
principal appellation was “ark of Jeh, the Lord
of the whole earth” (cf Lotz, Die Bundeslade, 1901,
30-36). From this we must conclude that the
appellation “ark of the covenant of Jeh’”’ must
go back to very ancient times, and we must reject
the view that this term took the place of the term
“ark of Jeh” in consequence of a change of views
with reference to the ark, brought about through
Deuteronomy. Indeed, since the name “ark of
the covenant,” as is proved by E, was nowhere
more in use than in Ephraim, where they did not
possess the ark and accordingly would have had
the least occasion to introduce a new name for it,
it can be accepted that the name originated in the
oldest times, namely those of Moses. The other
expression “ark of Jeh” may be just as old and
need not be an abbreviation of the other. It was
pose to designate the ark as “ark of Jeh”

ecause it was a sanctuary belonging to Jeh; and
it was possible to call it also “the ark of the cove-
nant of Jeh,” because it was a monument and evi-
dence of the covenant which Jeh had made with
Israel. It is for this reason not correct to translate
the expression ’arén berith Yahweh by “the ark of
the law of Jeh,” as equivalent to “the ark which
served as a place for preserving the law of the
covenant.” For b*rith does not signify “Jaw,”
even if it was possible under certain circumstances
to call a covenant “law” figuratively and synec-
dochically the “covenant”; and when 1 K 8 21
speaks of ‘‘the ark wherein is the covenant of Jeh,”’
the next words, ‘which he made with our fathers,”
show that covenant does not here mean ‘‘law,” but
rather the covenant relationship which in a certain
sense is embodied in the tables.

In P the ark is also called ‘the ark of the testi-
” and this too does not signify “ark of the

For not already in P but only in later
documents did the word ‘édhith receive the mean-
ing of “law” (Lotz, Die Bundeslade, 40). P means
by “testimony” the Ten Words, through the
proclamation of which the true God has given
evidence of His real essence. But where this tes-


245


timony is found engraved in the handwriting of God
on the tables of stone, just there also is the place
where He too is to be regarded as locally present.

V. The History of the Ark of the Covenont.—
According to the tradition contained in the Pent
the sacred ark was built at Mount Sinai and was
taken by the Israelites pone them to Canaan.
This must be accepted as absolutely correct. The
supposition is groundless, that it was a shrine that
the Israelites had taken over from the Canaanites.
This view is refuted by the high estimate in which
in Ehi’s time the ark was held by all Israel (1 S 1 ff;
2 22); and especially by the fact that the ark was
at that time regarded as the property of that God
who had brought Israel out of Egypt, and accord-
ingly had through this ark caused the Canaanites
to be conquered (1548; 66; 2876; 1K
12 28). The opinion also that the ark was an
ancient palladium of the tribe of Ephraim or of the
descendants of Joseph and was only at a later
period recognized by all Israel (Stade, Geschichte
des Volkes Israel, I, 458) is not tenable, for we hear
nothing to the effect that the descendants of
Joseph concerned themselves more for the ark than
the other tribes did. In the time of Eli the ark
stood in the sanctuary at Shiloh. When Israel had
been conquered by the Philis, the ark was taken
from Shiloh in order that Jeh should aid His people.
But notwithstanding this the Philis yet conquered
and captured the ark (1S 5). But the many
misfortunes that overtook them made them think
that the possession of the ark was destructive to
them and they sent it back (1 8 6). The ark first
came to Bethshemesh, in the tribe of Judah, and
then to Kiriath-jearim (or Baale-judah, 2 S 6 2),
about 7.5 miles N.W. of Jerus. There the ark re-
mained for many years until David, after he had
taken possession of Mount Zion, took it there (2 8
6) and deposited it in a tent. Solomon brought it
into the Holy of Holies in the temple (1 K 8 3-8),
where in all probability it remained until the de-
struction of Jerus by Nebuchadnezzar; for Jer 3 16
proves that the Israelites felt that they were in pos-
session of the ark up to this time.

VI. The Significance of the Ark.—According
to many investigators the ark was originally a’ war
sanctuary. In favor of this it can be urged that
Israel took it into their camp, in order that they
might receive the help of Jeh in the battle with
the Philis (1 S 4); and further that also in the
time of David the ark was again taken along into
battle (2S 11 11; cf Ps 24); note also the word
of Moses, which he spoke when the ark was taken
up to be carried: “Rise up, O Jeh, and let thine
enemies be scattered” (Nu 10 35). However,
nothing of what we know or presuppose concerning
the form and the contents of the ark points to an
original military purpose of the same; and in the
other statements that are found elsewhere con-
cerning the ark, a much more general significance
is assigned to it. The significance which the ark
had for the Israelites in connection with their wars
is only the outcome of its siguification as the symbol
of the presence of Jeh, who was not at all a God of
war, but when His people were compelled to fight
was their helper in the struggle.

That the ark was designed to be a symbol of the
presence of God in the midst of His people is the

common teaching of the OT. Accord-


A Symbol ing to E the ark was made to serve as
of the a comfort to the people for this, that
Divine they were to leave the mountain where
Presence God had caused them to realize His


presence (Ex 30 6). According to
P, God purposed to speak with Moses from the
place between the cherubim upon the ark. Accord-
ing to Jgs 2 1 ff, the angel of Jeh spoke in Bethel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Ark of Covenant


(Bochim) in reproof and exhortation to the people,
after the ark of the covenant had been brought
to that place; for the comparison of Nu 10 33 ff
and Ex 23 20 ff shows that Jgs 2 1 is to be under-
stood as speaking of the transfer of the ark to
Bethel. When Israel in the time of Eli was over-
powered by the Philis, the Israelites sent for the
ark, in order that Jeh should come into the camp of
Israel, and this was also believed to be the case
by the Philis (1 8 43ff). After the ark had
come to Bethshemesh and a pestilence had broken
out there, the people did not want to keep the ark,
because no one could live in the presence of Jeh,
this holy God (18 6 20); and Jeremiah says
(3 16.17) that an ark of the covenant would not
be again made after the restoration of Israel, but
then Jerus would be called the “throne of Jeh,”
i-e. it would so manifestly be the city of God that
it would guarantee the presence of God at least
just as much as the ark formerly did.

In olden times these things appeared more real-
istic to the people than they do to us; and when the
ark was considered the visible representation of
the presence of Jeh, and as guaranteeing His
presence, a close material connection was thought
to exist between the ark and Jeh, by virtue of
which Divine powers were also thought to be pres-
ent in the ark. The people at Bethshemesh were
not willing to keep the ark any longer in their
midst, because they could not live in its near
presence. David’s dancing before the ark is re-
garded by him and by the narrator of the event as
a dancing before the Lord (2S 6 5.14.21), and in
28 7 5ff God says, through Nathan, that He had
wandered around in a tent since He had led the
Israelites out of Egypt.

But the view advocated by some of the modern
critics, that the Israelites had thought that the
ark was the dwelling-place or the throne-seat of
Jehovah, is nevertheless not correct. This opinion
cannot be harmonized with this fact, that in the
sources, dating from the same olden times, mention
is made of His dwelling in many places in Canaan
and outside of Canaan, so that the idea that His
presence or even He Himself is confined to the ark
isimpossible. The statement of Moses, ‘“‘Rise up,
O Jeh, and let thine enemies be scattered” (Nu 10
35), is not the command addressed to those who
earry the ark to lift it up and thereby to lift Jeh
up for the journey, but is a demand made upon
Jeh, in accordance with His promise, to go ahead
of Israel as the ark does. According to 1 8 4 3
the Israelites did not say ‘“We want to go and get
Jeh,” but ‘We want to go and get the ark of Jeh,
so that He may come into our midst.” They
accordingly only wanted to induce Him to come by
getting the ark. This, too, the priests and the
soothsayers of the Philis say: “Do not permit the
ark of the God of the Israelites to depart without
sending a gift along,” but they do not speak thus
of Jeh. That Samuel, who slept near the ark, when
he was addressed by Jeh, did not at all at first
think that Jeh was addressing him, proves that at
that time the view did not prevail that He was in
the ark or had His seat upon it. Ancient Israel
was accordingly evidently of the conviction that
the ark was closely connected with Jeh, that some-
thing of His power was inherent in the ark; con-
sequently the feeling prevailed that when near
the ark they were in a special way in the presence
of and near to the Lord. But this is something
altogether different from the opinion that the ark
was the seat or the dwelling-place of Jeh. Even
if the old Israclites, on account of the crudeness of
antique methods of thought, were not conscious
of the greatness of this difference, the fact that this
difference was felt is not a matter of doubt. That


Ark of Noah
Armenia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


246


the ark was built to embody the presence of God
among His people is just as clear from the state-
ments of E, and probably also of J, as it is from those
of P; and if these have accordingly regarded the
tables of the law as constituting the contents of
the ark, then this is in perfect harmony with their
views of this purpose, and we too must cling to these
same views. For what would have been better
adapted to make the instrument which represents
the presence of God more suitable for this than the
stone tables with the Ten Words, through which
Jeh had made known to His people His ethical
character? For this very purpose it had to be an
ark. The words on these tables were a kind of a
spiritual portrait of the God of Israel, who could
not be pictured in a bodily form. In this shape no-
body in ancient Israel has formulated this thought,
but that this thought was present is certain.
Wituetm Lotz

ARK, 4rk, OF NOAH, no’a: A structure built
by Noah at the command of God to preserve from
the Flood a remnant of the human race and of the
animals associated with man. It was constructed
of “gopher wood” (Gen 6 14)—very likely the
cypress used extensively by the Phoenicians for
ship-building. It was divided into rooms or nests,
and was three stories high, pitched within and
without with bitumen or “asphalt,” of which there
are extensive deposits at Hit, in the Euphrates
valley, a little above Babylon. It was 300 cubits
long, 50 cubits broad, 30 cubits high, which ac-
cording to Petrie’s estimate of a cubit as 22.5
inches would make it to be 562} ft. long, 93? ft.
wide, 563 ft. deep, which are natural proportions
of a ship of that size. The dimensions of the
“Great Eastern,” built in 1858, were 692 ft. long,
83 ft. broad, 58 ft. deep; those of the ‘‘Celtic”
built in 1901 are 700 ft. long, 75 ft. wide, 493 ft.
deep. It is extremely improbable that such reason-
able dimensions should have been assigned to the
Ark except they were based on fact. Unrestrained
tradition would have been sure to distort the pro-
portions, as is shown by what actually occurred in
other accounts of the Ark. The cuneiform tablets
represent it as six stories high, with the length,
width, and depth, each as 140 cubits (262 ft.), and
having a mast on top of all, and a pilot to guide the
impossible craft (see Deluge Tablet, ll. 22, 23, 38-41).
Berosus, the Gr historian, represents it to have been
five stadia (3,000 ft.) long and two stadia (1,200 ft.)
broad, while Origen, in order to confound Celsus
(Against Celsus 4.41) gave the figures an interpre-
tation which made the Ark 25 miles long and 2 of a
mile wide.

It is needless to speculate upon the capacity of the
Ark for holding absolutely all the species of animals
found in the world, together with the food necessary
for them, since we are only required to provide for
such animals as were native to the area to which the
remnants of the human race living at that time were
limited, and which (see DrLuGE) may not have been
large. But calculations show that the structure de-
seribed contained a space of about 3,500,000 cubic
feet, and that after storing food enough to support
several thousand pairs of animals, of the average size,
on an ocean voyage of a year, there would remain
more than 50 cubic feet of space for each pair.

No mention is made in the Bible of a pilot for the
Ark, but it seems to have been left to float as a
derelict upon the waters. For that purpose its
form and dimensions were perfect, as was long
ago demonstrated by the celebrated navigator, Sir
Walter Raleigh, who notes it had ‘‘a flat bottom,
and was not raised in form of a ship, with a sharp-
ness forward, to cut the waves for the better speed”
—a, eonstruction which secured the maximum of
storage capacity and made a vessel which would


ride steadily upon the water. Numerous vessels
after the pattern of the Ark, but of smaller dimen-
sions, have been made in Holland and Denmark and
proved admirably adapted’ for freightage where
speed was not of the first importance. They would
hold one-third more lading than other vessels, and
would require no more hands to work them. The
gradual rise and subsidence of the water, each con-
tinuing for six months, and their movement inland,
render the survival of such a structure by no means
unreasonable. According to Gen 6 3; 1 Pet 3 20;
2 Pet 2 5, warning of the Flood was given 120 years
beforehand, and during that time Noah, while pre-
paring the Ark, became a preacher of righteousness.
For evidence that there was a gradual destruction of
the race previous to the Flood, see DELUGE.
Grorce FREDERICK WRIGHT

ARK OF TESTIMONY, test’i-mo-ni.

or CovENANT.


ARKITE, ark’tt CPW, ‘arkt): An inhabitant of
the town of Arka, situated some ten or twelve miles
N.E. of Tripolis, Syria, and about four miles from
the shore of the sea. The Arkites are mentioned
in Gen 10 17 and 1 Ch 1 15 as being the descend-
ants of Canaan, and they were undoubtedly of
Phoen stock. The place was not of much impor-
tance, but it is mentioned in the Assyr inscriptions,
under the name Irkatah and taken by Tiglath-
pileser III in 738 BC. Not being on the sea its
trade was small and it probably belonged to Tripoli
or Botrys originally. 1t was the birthplace of Alex-
ander Severus, hence its Rom name, Caesarea Libani.
Its site is marked by a high mound near the foot-
hills of Lebanon. H. Porter

ARM, arm (PUT, era, DIR, ezrd', TVW,
dra‘; Bpaxtov, brachién; JRM, hdcen, AND, ka-
théph): The usual form is z’ré*‘ from the root zara‘,
“to spread.”’ The arm may be “stretched out.”
’Ezro* is this form with prosthetic ’aléphk (Job 31
22; Jer 32 21), and d*rd‘isthe Aram. form. Hécén
is really ‘‘bosom,’”’? thus RV (Isa 49 22); and kd-
théph is “shoulder,” thus RV (Job 31 22). Cf xelp,
cheir, also, in Acts 11 21.

Figurative: The arm denotes influence, power,
means of support or conquest. Thearmsof Moab
(Jer 48 25) and of Pharaoh (Ezk 30 21 ff) are
broken. The arm of Eliand the arm of his father’s
house are to be eut off (1 S 2 31). Because the
arm wielded the sword it signified ‘‘oppression”
(Job 35 9). The arms are the means of support,
therefore to refuse to aid the fatherless is to break
their arms (Job 22 9).

Applied anthropomorphically to God the arm
denotes also His power, power to deliver, support,
conquer. His “outstretched arm’’ delivered Israel
from Egypt (Ex 66; Dt 4 34, etc). They
puppere “Underneath are the everlasting arms”
(Dt 33 27). His arm protects (Isa 40 11). Jeh
is sometimes likened to a warrior and smites with
His arm (Ps 89 10; Isa 63 5; Jer 215). The
arm of Jeh is holy (Ps 98 1; Isa 52 10). Many
other passages of Scripture might be quoted show-
ing how the power of God to redeem, judge, protect,
punish is expressed by the idea of “the armof Jeh.”

8S. F. Hunter

ARMAGEDDON, 4r-ma-ged’on (’AppayedSdv,
oe Rev 16 16; RV “HAR-MAGEDON”)
q-v.).


ARMENIA, ir-mé‘ni-a:
Il. Grocrapny
II. History (Ancrent)
1. Turanian Armenians
Their Religion
2. Aryan Armenians: History to 114 AD
Literature


See ARK


247


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ark of Noah
Armenia


I. Geography.—i0}N, "drarat (Sumerian Ar,
“region,” --bar “high,” +fu, “mountain,” =“high
mountainous region”): in Assyr, Urtu, Urartu, Ur-
astu: in Augyp, Ermenen (=‘‘Region of the Minni’’)
OP, Armina, Armaniya (‘Apyevla, Armenia): in
Hecatezus of Miletus, cir 520 BC, the people are
"Apuévioe (Gen 8 4; 2 K 19 37; Isa 37 88; Jer
51 27). Throughout the Bible, this is a country,
not a mountain. Armenia Major was bounded on
the N. by the River Cyrus (Kour), Iberia, Colchis,
and the Moschici Mts.; on the W. by Asia Minor
and the Euphrates; on the 8. by Mesopotamia
and Assyria; on the E. by the Caspian and Media.
(Armenia Minor lay between the Euphrates and
the Halys.) Ararat was originally the name of the
central district. Most of Armenia is between


and cattle, abundant crops of cereals, olives and
fruit. It is rich in minerals, and is probably the
home of the rose and the vine.
Lirerature.—Minas Gaphamatzean; Garagashean;
Palasanean; Entir Hatouadsner, I; Rawlinson, Seven
Anc. Monarchies; Strabo; Xenophon; Petermann, M:t-
thetlungen for 1871; Bryce, Transcaucasia and Ararat.
_Hf. Ancient History.—The country is first men-
tioned in Gen 8 4 as the land upon (some one of)
the mountains of which Noah’s Ark
1, Tura- rested. (According to Jewish_ tradi-
nian tion this was one of the Kurdish
Armenians mountains.) It is next spoken of by
_ Sargon I of Agadé, cir 3800 BC, as
among his conquests. In early Babylonian legends
Armenia figures as an almost unknown land far


ARARAT,


8,000 and 3,000 feet above sea-level, and slopes
toward Euphrates, Cyrus, and the Caspian. Mt.
Massis (generally called Greater Ararat) is 16,969
ft. and Lesser Ararat, 12,840 ft. Both are of
igneous origin, as is Aragds (A‘la Giz), 13,436 ft.
Sulphur springs and earthquakes still attest voleanic
activity. The largest rivers are the Euphrates,
Tigris and Araxes. The latter, swift and famed for
violent floods, joins the Cyrus, which falls into the
Caspian. The lakes Van, Urmi and Sevan are
veritable inland seas. The many mountain chains,
impassable torrents and large streams divide the
country into districts far less accessible from one
another than from foreign lands. Hence invasions
are easy and national union difficult. This has
sadly affected the history of Armenia. Xenophon
(Anab. iv.5) describes the people as living in houses
partly underground, snch as are still found. Each
village was ruled by its chief according to ancient
customary laws. He well describes the severity of
the winters. In summer the climate in some places
is like that of Italy or Spain. Much of Armenia is
extremely fertile, producing large herds of horses


to the N., full of high mountains and dense forests,
containing the entrance to the Lower World
(Mad Na-ga, “Land of No Return”). On its
borders stood Mt. Nisir where the gods dwelt and
Sit-napistim’s “ship” stopped. This ‘Mountain
of the World’? was the present Jabal Jidi, 8. of
Lake Van. Next came Egyp influence. Thothmes
III, in his twenty-third year (cir 1458 BC), after
a great victory over the Rutennu or Ludennu
(Mesopotamians and Lydians), received the sub-
mission of the “chiefs of Ermenen” and others.
Tt is remarkable that the name by which the land
is still known to foreigners (Armenians call it
Haidstan) should occur so early. In his thirty-
third year, Thothmes III mentions the people of
Ermenen as paying tribute when he held his court
at Nineveh, and says that in their land “heaven
rests upon its four pillars.” In Seti I’s Hall of
Columns at Karnak we see the people of Ermenen
felling trees in order to open a way through their
forests for that king’s armies. Rameses II in his
twenty-first year, in war with Kheta-sira, king of
the Hittites, probably subdued Armenia (cf Taci-


Armenia
Armenian VSS


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


248


tus Ann. ii.60). Many places conquered by
Rameses III, and mentioned in the Medinet Habi
lists, were probably in Armenia. The Assyr king
Uras-Pal-agur (cir 1190-1170 BC) made a raid into
Armenia, and mentions the central district (Urartu
proper, near Lake Van), the land of the Manna
(Minni, Jer 51 27), Nahri (‘‘the Rivers’), Ash-
guza (Ashkenaz, ib), ete. Another invader was
Tiglath-pileser I (cir 1110-1090 BC). Asshur-
nasir-pal in 883 BC advanced to Urartu. A
little later he mentions as articles of Armenian
tribute chariots, horses, mules, silver, gold, plates
of copper, oxen, sheep, wine, variegated cloths,
linen garments. Again and again he carried fire
and sword through the country, but it constantly
revolted. Under Shalmaneser II (860-825 BC)
and afterward for centuries wars continued. By
uniting and forming powerful kingdoms (of which
the principal was Biainash around Lake Van) the
Armenians resisted. Finally in 606 BC they took
part in the destruction of Nineveh, and in that of
Babylon later. Shalmaneser II tells of the wicker-
work coracles on Lake Van. The Balawat bronzes
depict Armenians dressed like the Hittites (to
whom they were sometimes subject) in tunics and
snow-shoes with turned-up and pointed ends,
wearing helmets, swords, spears and small round
shields. Sayce compares their faces in form to’ the
Negro type. Possibly they were Mongolians.

The founder of the kingdom of Biainash was
Sardurish I, about 840 BC, who built as his capital
Tushpash, now Van. He ruled most of Armenia,
defending it against the Assyrians, and apparently,
inflicting a check on Shalmaneser I] in 833 BC.
He introduced the cuneiform characters, and his
inscriptions are in Assyr. His son Tshpuinish
adapted the Assyr syllabary to his own tongue,
which bears a slight resemblance to Georgian in
some points. The next king, Menuash, has left
inscriptions almost all over Armenia, telling of his
victories over the Hittites, etc. The kingdom of
Biainash reached its acme under the great monarch
Argishtish I, who succeeded in defending his
country against Shalmaneser III (783-772 BC).
But in his son’s reign Tiglath-pileser IV (748-727
BC: Pul) crushed the Armenians to the dust in a
great battle near Commagene in 743. Pul failed
to capture Van in 737, but he ravaged the country
far and wide. Rusasb I, at the head of an Ar-
menian confederacy, began a great struggle in
716 with Sargon (722-705), who in 714 captured
Van with Rusash’s family. After 5 months’
wandering Rusash committed suicide. His brother
Argishtish II to some degree recovered independ-
ence. His successor Erimenash gave an asylum
to Adrammelech and Sharezer (ASsSur-Sar-usur)
in 680 (2 K 19 37; Isa 37 38) after the murder
of their father Sennacherib. Invading Assyria in
the same year, they were defeated by Esar-haddon I.
Armenia from the Cyrus River to the 8. of Lake
Van was ravaged by the Kimmerians (679-677).
Rusash II (cir 660-645) and his son Sandurish
III (the latter cir 640 or soon after) submitted
to Asshur-bani-pal (668-626). Nebuchadnezzar
(604-561) boasts of reaching Van in his conquests,
though the Armenians had probably their share
in the destruction of Nineveh in 606. Jer (51 27)
mentioned the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni and
Ashkenaz about 595, and said they would help in
the overthrow of Babylon (in 538). Cyrus had
therefore probably subdued or won them over
after capturing Ekbatana (549). After this the
Turanians gradually gave place in Armenia to the
Aryan Armenians of later times.

(a) Their religion —The supreme god of the
Turanian Armenians was MHaldish, who was
father of allthe rest. They were styled “children of


mighty Haldish.” He, with Teishbash, god of the
atmosphere, and Ardinish, the Sun-god, formed
“the company of the mighty gods.” Auish, god
of water; Ayash, god of the earth; Shelardish, the
Moon-god; Sardish, the Year-god; and 42 other
gods are mentioned. Sari was a goddess, probably
corresponding to Ishtar. Adoration was offered to
the spirits of the dead also. Somewhat strangely,
some of the divine names we have mentioned re-
mind one of certain Aryan (Gr and Old Pers) words,
however this may be accounted for.
LireraTuRE.—Valdemar Schmidt, Assyriens og Aigyp-
tens Gamle Historie; Masp; Rawlinson, West. Asiat. Insers;
KB; Airarat, 1883; Saycein JRAS, new ser., XIV; RP;
Hastings, Enc of Religion and Ethics, I.
The ancestors of the present Armenians (who call
themselves Haik’h, i.e. Pati-s, ‘‘Lords’’) may have
is settled in the country in the 8th
2. Aryan cent. BC, when Sargon mentions a
Armenians king of part of Armenia who bore the
Aryan name Bagadatti (=Theodore).
They came from Phrygia (Herod. vii.73), used the
Phrygian dress and armor (Dion. of Halicarnassus;
Eudoxius; Herod.) and spoke the same language
(Herod. i.171). In the Bible they are called the
“House of Togarmah’ (Gen 10 3; 1Ch 16;
Ezk 27 14; 386) and “Ashkenaz”’ (Gen 10 8;
1Ch16; Jer 61 27; the Assyr Ashguza), as
by their own writers of later times. Xenophon
in the Cyropaedia mentions a Median conquest
of Armenia, Strabo their Median attire; yet
Armenian girls could not understand Xenophon’s
Pers interpreter (Anab. iv.5). Three of the four
Armenians mentioned by Darius have Aryan names.
The Armenians joined the Median noble Fravartish
in his revolt against Darius I (519 BC). Much
of the consequent fighting took place in Armenia,
which was with difficulty subdued (517). It formed
part of Darius’ thirteenth Nome, and afterward
two satrapies (apparently Armenia Major and
Minor). The government (of Armenia Major)
was made hereditary in the family of Vidarna
(Hydarnés) for helping to put down Fravartish.
Xenophon’s interesting description of the country
and people and the severity of its winters is well
known. Herodotus tells of Armenians in skin and
wicker-work coracles bringing wine, etc, to Babylon.
Xenophon says they and the Chaldaeans traded
with India. Strabo mentions their caravan trade
across central Asia. The satrap of Armenia had
to present 20,000 young horses annually to the
king of Persia at the great annual festival of Mith-
ra. A large body of Armenian soldiers served
in Xerxes’ invasion of Greece. At the battle of
Arbela (831 BC), 40,000 of their infantry and 7,000
cavalry took part. Armenia then became a portion
of Alexander’s empire, and later of that of Seleucus
(801 BC), under a native satrap, Artavasdés.
Armenia revolted after Antiochus’ defeat at Mag-
nesia (190 BC), and the Romans encouraged the
two satraps to declare themselves kings. Artaxias,
king of Armenia Major, used Hannibal’s aid in
fortifying his capital Artaxata (189 BC). Artaxias
was overthrown by Antiochus Epiphanes in 165,
but was restored on swearing allegiance. Civil con-
fusion ensued. The nobles called in the Parthians
under Mithridates I (150 BC), who became
master of the whole Pers empire. He made his
brother Valarsacés king of Armenia. Thus the
Arsacide dynasty was established in that country
and lasted till the fall of the Parthian empire
(226 AD), the Armenian kings very generally
recognizing the Parthian monarchs as their suze-
rains. The greatest Armenian king was Tigranes I
(96-55 BC), a warrior who raised Armenia for a
time to the foremost position in Asia. He humbled
the Parthians, joined Mithridates VI in war with


249


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Armenia
Armenian VSS


Rome, ruled Syria for over 14 years, built near
Mardin as his capital Tigranocerta, and assumed
the Assyrio-Persian title of “King of Kings.”
Lucullus defeated Tigranes and destroyed Tigrano-
certain 69 BC. Tigranes surrendered to Pompey
near Artaxata (66 BC), paid 6,000 talents, and
retained only Armenia. Under him Gr art and lit.
flourished in.the country. Armenia as a subject-
ally of Rome became a “buffer state” between the
Rom and Parthian empires. Tigranes’ son and
successor Artevasdés joined in the Parthian inva-
sion of Syria after Crassus’ overthrow at Simnaca
538 BC. He treacherously caused great loss to
Antony’s army in 36 BC. Antony carried him
in chains to Egypt, where Cleopatra put him to
death in 32 BC. After this, Armenia long remained
subject to the Romans whenever not strong enough
to join the Parthians, suffering much from intrigues
and the jealousy of both powers. There is no
proof of the later Armenian story that Armenia
was subject to Abgarus, king of Edessa, in Our
Lord’s time, and that the gospel was preached
there by Thaddaeus, though the latter point is
possible. In 66 AD, Tiridates, elder brother of
the Parthian king Vologésés, having defeated the
Romans under Paetus and established himself on
the throne of Armenia, went by land to Rome and
received investiture from Nero. Peace between
Rome and Parthia ensued, and Armenia remained
closely united to Parthia till Trajan’s expedition
in 114 AD.

Literature.—Spiegel, Altpers. Keilinschriften; He-
rodotus; Xenophon; ian; Tacitus; Velleius Patro-
culus; Livy; Polybius; Ammianus Marcellinus.

W. Sr. Cram TispaLu

ARMENIAN, 4r-mé‘ni-an (ARYAN, ar’i-an, ar‘i-
an) RELIGION. This greatly resembled that of
Persia, though Zoroastrianism and its dualistic system
were not professed. We are thus enabled to judge
how far the religion of the Avesta is due to
Zoroaster’sreformation. Aramazd (Ahura Mazda),
creator of heaven and earth, was father of all the
chief deities. His spouse was probably Spandara-
met (Spefita Armaiti), goddess of the earth, who
was later held to preside over the underworld (cf
Persephone; Hel). Among her assistants as genii
of fertility were Horot and Morot (Haurvatat and
Ameretat), tutelary deities of Mt. Massis (now
styled Ararat), Aramazd’s worship seems to have
fallen very much into the background in favor of
that of inferior deities, among the chief of whom
was his daughter Anahit (Anabita), who had temples
in many places. Her statues were often of the
precious metals, and among her many names were
“Golden Mother” and ‘Goddess of the Golden
Image.” Hence to the present day the word
“Golden” enters into many Armenian names.
White heifers and green boughs were offered her as
goddess of fruitfulness, nor was religious prostitu-
tion in her honor uncommon. Next in popularity
came her sister Astghik (‘‘the little star’), i.e. the
planet Venus, goddess of beauty, wife of the deified
hero Vahagn (Verethraghna). He sprang from
heaven, earth, and sea, and overthrew dragons and
other evil beings. Another of Anahit’s sisters was
Nané (cf Assyr Nand, Nannaea), afterward identi-
fied with Athéné. Her brother Mihr (Mithra) had
the sun as his symbol in the sky and the sacred fire
on earth, both being objects of worship. In his
temples a sacred fire was rekindled once a year.
Aramazd’s messenger and scribe was Tiur or Tir,
who entered men’s deeds in the ‘Book of Life.”
He led men after death to Aramazd for judgment.
Before birth he wrote men’s fates on their fore-
heads. The place of punishment was Dzhokhk’h
(=Pers Dizakh). To the sun and moon sacrifices
were offered on the mountain-tops. Rivers and


sacred springs and other natural objects were also
adored. Prayer was offered facing eastward. Omens
were taken from the rustling of the leaves of the
sacred S6nean forest. Aymavir was the religious
capital.

Among inferior spiritual existences were the Ar-
lezk’h, who licked the wounds of those slain in
battle and restored them to life. The Parikk’h
were evidently the Pairakas (Peris) of Persia. The
Armenian mythology told of huge dragons which
sometimes appeared as men, sometimes as worms,
or basilisks, elves, sea-bulls, dragon-lions, etc. As
in Persia, the demons made darts out of the parings
of aman’s nails to injure him with. Therefore these
parings, together with teeth and trimmings of hair,
must be hidden in some sacred place.


Liveraturse.—Eznik Goghbatzi; Agathangelos; Moses
of Khoréné; Eghishé; Palasanean; Faustus Byzantinus;
Chhamchheaniz; Plutarch; Strabo; Tacitus. See my
“*Conversion of Armenia,” 2.7.S.; Expos T, II, 202 ff.

W. Sr. Cram Tispaun

ARMENIAN VERSIONS, dr-mé’ni-an vir’shuns,
OF THE BIBLE, bi’b’l.

I. Ancient (CuassicaL) ARMENIAN

1. Circumstances under Which Made

2. The Translators

Apocrypha Omitted

3. Revision

4, Results of Circulation

5. Printed Editions
II. Mopvrern ARMENIAN VERSIONS

1. Ararat-Armenian

2, Constantinopolitan-Armenian
III, Armenian LancuaGe
LitERATURE

I, Ancient Armenian.—Armenia was in large

measure Christianized by Gregory Lousavorich (‘the

Illuminator’: consecrated 302 AD;
1. Circum- died 332), but, as Armenian had
stances not been reduced to writing, the Scrip-

tures used to be read in some places
in Gr, in others in Syr, and tr‘ orally to the
people. A knowledge of these tongues and the
training of teachers were kept up by the schools
which Gregory and King Tiridates had established
at the capital Vagharshapat and elsewhere. As far
as there was any Christianity in Armenia before
Gregory’s time, it had been almost exclusively under
Syrian influence, from Edessa and Samosata. Gregory
introduced Gr influence and culture, though main-
taining bonds of union with Syria also. When
King Sapor of Persia became master of Armenia
(878 AD), he not only persecuted the Christians
most cruelly, but also, for political reasons, endeav-
ored to prevent Armenia from all contact with the
Byzantine world. Hence his viceroy, the renegade
Armenian Merouzhan, closed the schools, proscribed
Gr learning, and burnt all Gr books, especially the
Scriptures. Syr books were spared, just as in
Persia itself; but in many cases the clergy were
unable to interpret. them to their people. Perse-
cution had not crushed out Christianity, but there
was danger lest it should perish through want of the
Word of God. Hence several attempts were made
to translate the Bible into Armenian. It is said
that Chrysostom, during his exile at Cucusus
(404-7 AD),invented an Armenian alphabet and
tr? the Psalter, but this is doubtful. But when
Arcadius ceded almost all Armenia to Sapor about
396 AD, something had to be done. Hence in 397
the celebrated Mesrob Mashtots and Isaac (Sahak)
the Catholicos resolved to translate the Bible.
Mesrob had been a court secretary, and as such was
well acquainted with Pahlavi, Syr and Gr, in which
three languages the royal edicts were then published.
Isaac had been born at Constantinople and educated
there and at Caesarea. Hence he too was a good
Gr scholar, besides being versed in Syr and Pahlavi,
which latter was then the court language in Ar-
menia. But none of these three alphabets was


Armenian VS.
Armor


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


250


suited to express tle sounds of the Armenian tongue,
and hence an alphabet had to be devised for it.
A council of the nobility, bishops and leading
clergy was held at Vagharshapat in 402, King
Vramshapouh being present, and this
2. The council requested Isaac to translate
Translators the Scriptures into the vernacular.
y 406, Mesrob had succeeded in
inventing an alphabet—practically the one still in
use—principally by modifying the Gr and the
Pahlavi characters, though some think the Palmy-
rene alphabet had influence. He and two of his
pupils at Samosata began by translating the Book
of Prov, and then the NT, from the Gr. Mean-
while, being unable to find a single Gr MS in the
country, Isaac tr? the church lessons from the Pesh
Syr, and published this VS in 411. He sent two
of his pupils to Constantinople for copies of the Gr
Bible. These men were present at the Council of
Ephesus, 431 AD. Probably Theodoret (De Cura
Graec. Affect., I, 5) learned from them what he says
about the existence of the Bible in Armenian.
Isaac’s messengers brought him copies of the Gr
Bible from the Imperial Library at Constantinople
—doubtless some of those prepared by Eusebius
at Constantine’s command. Mesrob Mashtots
and Isaac, with their assistants, finished and pub-
lished the Armenian (ancient) VS of the whole
Bible in 436. La Croze is justified in styling it
Queen of VSS. Unfortunately the OT was ren-
dered (as we have said) from the LXX, not from
the Heb. But the Apoc was not tr’, only “the
22 Books” of the OT, as Moses of Khorene informs
us. This was due to the influence of the Pesh OT.
(a) Apocrypha omitted.— Not till the 8th cent.
was the Apoc rendered into Armenian: it was
not read in Armenian churches until the 12th.
Theodotion’s VS of Dnl was tr‘, instead of the very
inaccurate LXX. The Alexandrine text was gener-
ally followed but not always.
In the 6th cent. the Armenian VS is said to
have been revised so as to agree with the Pesh.
Hence probably in Mt 28 18 AV, the
3. Revision passage, “As my Father hath sent
me, even so send I you,’’ is inserted
as in the Pesh, though it occurs also in its proper
place (Jn 20 21). It reads “Jesus Barabbas”’
in Mt 27 16.17—a reading which Origen found
‘Gn very ancient MSS.” It contains Lk 22 43.44.
As is well known, in the Etschmiadzin MS of 986
AD, over Mk 16 9-20, are inserted the words, ‘‘of
Ariston the presbyter”; but Nestle (Tezt. Criticism
of the Gr NT, Plate LX, etc) and others omit to
notice that these words are by a different and a
later hand, and are merely an unauthorized remark
of no great value.
Mesrob’s VS was soon widely circulated and
became the one great national book. Lazarus
Pharpetsi, a contemporary Armenian
4. Results historian, says he is justified in de-
of Circula-_ scribing the spiritual results by quoting
tion Isaiah and saying that the whole land
of Armenia was thereby “filled with
the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the
sea.” But for it, both church and nation would
have perished in the terrible persecutions which
have now lasted, with intervals, for more than a
millennium and a half.
This VS was first printed somewhat late: the
Psalter at Rome in 1565, the Bible by Bishop
Oskan of Erivan at Amsterdam in
5. Printed 1666, from a very defective MS; other
Editions edd at Constantinople in 1705, Venice
in 1733. Dr. Zohrab’s ed of the NT
in 1789 was far better. A critical ed was printed
at Venice in 1805, another at Serampore in 1817.


The OT (with the readings of the Heb text at the
foot of the page) appeared at Constantinople in
1892 ff.

Il. Modern Armenian Versions.—There are two
great literary dialects of modern Armenian, in
which it was necessary to publish the Bible, since
the ancient Armenian (called Grapar, or “‘written’’)
is no longer generally understood. The American
missionaries have taken the lead in translating
Holy Scripture into both.

The first VS of the NT into Ararat Armenian, by
Dittrich, was published by the British and Foreign

Bible Society at Moscow in 1835; the
1. Ararat- Psalter in 1844; the rest of the OT
Armenian much later. There is an excellent ed,

published at Constantinople in 1896.

A VS of the NT into Constantinopolitan Ar-

menian, by Dr. Zohrab, was published at Paris in

1825 by the British and Foreign Bible
2. Constan- Society. This VS was made from the
tinopolitan- Ancient Armenian. A revised ed, by
Armenian Adger, appeared at Smyrna in 1842.

In 1846 the American missionaries
there published a VS of the OT. The American
Bible Society have since published revised edd of
this version.

IH, Armenian Language.—The Armenian lan-
guage is now recognized by philologists to be, not a
dialect or subdivision of ancient Persian or Iranian,
but a distinct branch of the Aryan or Indo-European
family, standing almost midway between the Iranian
and the European groups. In some respects, es-
pecially in weakening and ultimately dropping ¢ and
d between vowels, it resembles the Keltic tongues
(cf Gaelic A (th)air, Arm. Hair= Pater, Father). As
early as the 5th cent. it had lost gender in nouns,
though retaining inflections (cf Brugmann, Elements
of Comp. Gr. of Indo-Ger. Languages).

LireratuRe.— Koriun; Agathangelos; Lazarus Phar-

etsi; Moses Khorenatsi (=of Chorene); Faustus

yzantinus; Chhamchheants; Haikakan Hin Dprou-
thian Patm; aikakan Thargmanouthi ‘h Nak’'h-
neants; The Bible of Every Land; Tisdall, Conversion of
Armenia; Nestle, Textual Criticism of the Gr NT; HDB;
N.Y. Cyclopaedia of Bib. and Theol. Lit.; Hauck, Real-
encyklopddie fiir protest. Theol. und Kirche.

W. Sr. Cram Tispaun

ARMHOLE, 4rm’hil: The Heb word 8X,
’agcil, is used in Jer 38 12 in the sense of armpits.
When the prophet was pulled up out of the pit
by ropes, the armpits were protected with rags
and old garments. The meaning in Ezk 13 18
AV (RV “elbows,” RVm “joints of the hands’’) is
far from clear. The phrase is used, without doubt,
of some ornament or article of dress worn by the
false prophetesses and priestesses of Ashtaroth in
order to allure the unwary and tempt the simple.
The “pillows” were probably “amulets” supposed
to have magical virtues, and worn on the arms or
wrists. W. W. Davies


_ ARMLET, 4rm‘let: The word tr? “bracelet”
in 28 1 10 AV, probably denotes an ‘armlet,”
or “arm-band,” worn on the upper arm. But it is
the same word which with a different context is
rendered ‘‘ankle-chains” (in Nu 31 50 RV). The
“bracelet” of Sir 21 21 AV, worn upon the right
arm, was an “armlet,” as is seen ‘from the list
given of Judith’s ornaments: who ‘decked herself
bravely with her armlets [RV ‘chains’] and her
bracelets, and her rings, and her ear-rings, and all
her ornaments” (Jth 10 4). The nature of the
ornaments given in RV as “armlets,” Ex 36 22;
Nu 31 50, and in the AV as “tablets,” is uncertain.
For full and distinguishing descriptions of “arm-
lets,” ‘‘anklets,’”’ “bracelets,” etc, found in ancient
graves, see PHFS, 1905, 318 ff. See also Or-
NAMENTS, Gro. B. Eacsr


251


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Atmenian VSS


Armor


ARMONI, ar-mé’ni (JON, 'armdni, “belong-
ing to the palace’): One of the two sons of Saul
by Rizpah, the daughter of Aish (2 8 21 8).
David delivered them over to the blood vengeance
of the Gibeonites.


ARMOR, ARMS, ir’mér, arms.
I, Armor IN GENERAL-—OT
Il. In tHe NT; Pouysivs
Tif. Orrensive WEAPONS
1. Rod


2. Sling

3. Bow and Arrows

4, Spear—Javelin

5. Sword
IV. Derensive WEAPONS

1. Shield

2. Helmet

3. Coat of Mail

4, Greaves

5. Girdle
LivERATURE

I. Armor in General—OT.—(O12,. maddim;

18 17 38; 1S 14 1 RV APPAREL; pW3, néshek,
1K 10 25; Job 89 21; D(>D, kelun; +a Swde,
té hépla): Under this head it may be convenient to
notice the weapons of attack and defence in use
among the Hebrews, mentioned in Scripture. There
are no such descriptions given by the sacred writers
as are to be found in Homer, who sets forth in detail
the various pieces of armor worn by an Achilles or
a Patroclus, and the order of putting them on.
There is an account of the armor offensive and
defensive of the Phili Gohath (1 § 17 5-7); and
from a much later time we read of shields and
spears and helmets and habergeons, or coats of
mail, and bows and slings with which Uzziah pro-
vided his soldiers (2 Ch 26 14). In Jeremiah’s
ode of triumph over the defeat of Pharaoh-neco,
there is mention of the arms of the Egyptians:
“Prepare ye the buckler and shield, and draw near
to battle. Harness the horses, and get up, ye
horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets;
furbish the spears, put on the coats of mail” (Jer
46 3.4). Of the arms of Assyr, Chaldean, Egyp
and Hittite soldiery there have come down to us
sculptured representations from their ancient
monuments, which throw light upon the battle-
pieces of the Heb annalists and prophets.


Group of Ancient Arms.


IL. In the NT; Polybius.—In the NT, St. Paul
describes the panoply of the Christian soldier,
naming the essential pieces of the Rom soldier’s
armor—the girdle, the breastplate, the footgear,
the shield, the helmet, the sword—although it is
to be noticed that his most characteristic weapon,

‘ the pilum or spear, is omitted (Eph 6 10-17). In
a similar context the same apostle speaks of ‘“‘the
armor” of light (Rom 13 12), “of righteousness on
the right hand and on the left” (2 Cor 67). Of
the equipment of the Rom soldier in detail, the most


useful illustration is the account given by Poly-
bius (vi.23): “The Roman panoply consists in
the first place of a shield [thureds]..... Along
with the shield is a sword [mdchaira]. ....


Heavy-armed Greek Soldier.


come two javelins [hussot] and a helmet {peri-
kephalaia], and a greave [knémis]..... Now
the majority, when they have further put on a
bronze plate, measuring a span every way, which
they wear on their breasts and call a heart-guard
[kardiophilaz], are completely armed, but those
citizens who are assessed at more than 10,000
drachmae wear instead, together with the other
arms, cuirasses made of chain mail [halusidatous
thérakas].”
II. Offensive Weapons—The commonest weapon
in the hands of the shepherd youth of Pal today
is the rod (shébhet; péBd0s, rhdbdos),
1. Rod a stick loaded at one end, which he
carries in his hand, or wears attached
to his wrist by a loop of string, ready for use. It is
of considerable weight and is a formidable weapon
whether used in self-defence or in attacking a foe.
With such a weapon David may well have over-
come the lion and the bear that invaded the fold.
This shepherd’s rod, while used for guidance, or
comfort, or for numbering the flock (Ps 23 4;
Lev 27 32), was also a weapon with which to strike
and punish (Ps 2 9; Isa 10 5.15). In this sense
it has for a synonym matieh (Isa 9 4; Ezk 7 11),
and both came to have the derived meaning of
spearheads (shébhel, 28 18 14; matleh, 18 14
27). They may have been the original of the maul
or hammer (méphic, Prov 2618; Jer 51 20,
where Cyrus, as God’s battle-axe, is to shatter
Babylon and its inhabitants for the wrongs they
have done to His people Israel).
Scarcely less common and equally homely is the
sling (kela‘; cgevdbvn, sphendéné) (1 8 17 40). It
consists of plaited thongs, or of one
2. Sling strip of leather, made broad at the
middle to form a hollow or pocket for
the stone or other contents, the ends being held
firmly in the hand as it is whirled loaded round the


Armor


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


252


head, and one of them being at length let go, so
that the stone may take its flight. Itis used by the
shepherd still to turn the straying
sheep, and it can also be used with
deadly effect as a weapon of war.
The slingers (ha-kalla‘tm, 2 K 3 25)
belonged to the light infantry, like
the archers. The Benjamites were
specially skilled in the use of the
sling, which they could use as well
with their left -hand as the right
(Jgs 20 16). The sling was a
weapon in use in the armies of
Egypt and Babylonia, and Jeremi-
ah in a powerful figure makes the
) —s- Lord ne to Jon in ns ane et
i : impending calamity: ‘Behold,
Beyptlan Slinger. ill sling out the inhabitants’ of
the land at this time” (Jer 10 18; cf 1 S 26 29).
A very important offensive weapon in the wars
of Israel was the bow (kesheth) and arrows (hig¢gim),
and the archers whether mounted or
3. Bow and on foot formed a powerful element
Arrows of the fighting forces of the Philis,
Egyptians and Assyrians (s.v. ARCHER;
Bow anp Arrows).
The spear has various words to represent it.
(1) The adnith had a wooden staff or shaft of vary-
ing size and length with a head, or
4, Spear— blade, of bronze, or, at a later time, of
Javelin iron (1 8 17 7). In AV it is some-
times tr? “javelin,” but in RV “spear”
(see 1 S 18 22; 18 11). Saul’s spear, stuck in the
ground, betokened the abode of the king for the time,
just as today the spear in front of his tent marks
the halting-place of the Bedouin Sheikh (1 § 22 6;
26 7). Nahum, describing the arms of the Assyrians,
joins together the flashing sword and the glittering
spear (Nah 3 3). The bearers of the hdnith be-
longed to the heavy-armed troops. (2) The rémah,
also tr?in AV “javelin,” was of the character of a
lance. It does not appear to have differed much
from the hdnith—they appear as synonyms in
Joel 3 10, where rémah is used, and in Isa 2 4
where hdnith is used, of spears beaten into pruning
hooks. It describes the Egyp spear in Jer 46 4.


]


The bearers of the rmah also belonged to the heavy-
armed troops. (3) The kidhén was lighter than
either of the preceding and more of the nature of a
javelin (gaison in LXX, Josh 8 18 and Polybius


Bows, Arrows and Quiver.


vi.39, 3; Job 41 29; Jer 6 23). (4) In the NT
the word “spear” occurs only once and is repre-
sented by the Gr ldégché, the equivalent no doubt
of hdnith as above (Jn 19 34).


Battle-Axes and Spears.


The sword (herebh) is by far the most frequently
mentioned weapon in Scripture, whether offensive
or defensive. The blade was of iron
5. Sword (16 13 19; Joel 3.10). It was hung
from the girdle on the left side, and
was used both to cut and to thrust. Ehud’s sword
(Jgs 3 16) was double-edged and a cubit in length,
and, as he was left-handed, was worn on his right
thigh under his elothes. The sword was kept in a
sheath (1 8 17 51); to draw the sword was the
signal for war (Ezk 21 3). Soldiers are “men who
draw the sword.” It is the flashing sword (Nah
3 8); the oppressing sword (Jer 46 16); the devour-
ing sword (2 8 18 8; Jer 12 12); the sword which
drinks its fill of blood (Isa 34 5.6). The sword of
the Lord executes God’s judgments (Jer 47 6; Ezk
21 9.10 ff).

Figurative: In the highly metaphorical language
of the prophets it stands for war and its attendant
calamities (Jer 50 35-87; Ezk 21 28).

In the NT ma-
chaira is employed ————
for sword in its =
natural meaning (Mt
26 47.51; Acts 12 2;
He 11 84.87). St.
Paul calls the Word
of God the sword of
the Spirit (Eph 6 17); and in the Epistle to He
the Word of God is said to be sharper than
any two-edged sword (He 4 12). As a synonym
the word rhomphaia is used in the Apoc alone of
the NT books, save for Lk 2 35. It was the Thra-
cian sword with large blade, and is classed by the
ancients rather as a spear. The word is used fre-
quently in the LXX like machaira to translate
herebh. In Rev 1 16 the sharp two-edged sword of
judgment, rhomphata is seen in vision proceeding
out of the mouth of the glorified Lord (cf Rev 19
15). Xtphos is still another word for sword, but
it is found only in the LXX, and not in the NT.

IV. Defensive Weapons.—The most ancient and
universal weapon of defence is the shield. The two

: chief varieties are (1) the ginnah,
1. Shield Lat seutum, the large shield, worn by
heavy-armed infantry, adapted to
the form of the human body, being made oval or in
the shape of a door; hence its Gr name, thureos,
from thtira, a door; and (2) the maghén, Lat
clypeus, the light, round hand-buckler, to which


Egyptian Swords.


253


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Armor


pélté is the Gr equivalent. The two are often
mentioned together (Ezk 23 24; 38 4; Ps 365 2).


Shield, Sword and Girdle.


The ginn@h was the shield of the heavy-armed
(1 Ch 12 24); and of Goliath we read that his
shield was borne by a man who went before him
(18 17 7.41) The mdaghén could be borne by
bowmen, for we read of men of Benjamin in Asa’s
army that bare shields and drew bows (2 Ch 14 8).
The ordinary material of which shields were made
was wood, or wicker-work overlaid with leather.
The wood-work of the shields and other weapons
of Gog’s army were to serve Israel for fuel for seven
years (Ezk 39 9). The anointing of the shield
(2 8 1 21; Isa 21 5) was either to protect it from
the weather, or, more probably, was part of the
consecration of the warrior and his weapons for the


campaign. Solomon in his pride of wealth had 200
shields (¢innéth) of beaten gold, and 300 targets
(méghinnim) of beaten gold made for himself, and
hung in the house of the forest of Lebanon (1 kK 10


16.17). They were only for show, and when Shi-
shak of Egypt came up against Rehoboam and
carried them off, Rehoboam replaced them with
others of bronze (1 K 14 27). On the march, the
shield was strapped over the shoulder and kept ina
cover, which was removed before the battle (Isa
22 6). Both words are used of the mechanical
device known to the Romans as the testudo employed
by the besiegers of a eity against the darts and
stones and blazing torches thrown out by the
besieged (Isa 37 33; Ezk 26 8).

Figurative: Jeh is spoken of as the shield and
protector of His people—of Abraham (Gen 16 1);
of Israel (Dt 33 29); of the Psalmist (Ps 18 30;
35 2,and many other passages). In his deseription
of the panoply of the Christian soldier, St. Paul in-
troduces faith as the thureos, the large Gr-Rom shield,
a defence by which he may quench all the fiery darts
of the evil one.


Breastplate.


The helmet, kdbha‘ or kdbha‘, seems to have been
originally in the form of a skull-cap, and it is thus
figured in representations of Hittites
2. Helmet on the walls of Karnak in Egypt. In
the earliest times it is found worn only
by outstanding personages like kings and ecom-
manders. When King Saul armed David with his
own armor he put a helmet of brass upon his head
(1 § 17 38). Uzziah at a later time provided his
soldiers with helmets, as part of their equipment
(2 Ch 26 14). The men of Pharach-neco’s army
also wore helmets (Jer 46 4), and the mercenaries
in the armies of Tyre had both shield and helmet
to hang up within her (Ezk 27 10). The materials
of the helmet were at first of wood, linen, felt, or
even of rushes; leather was in use until the Seleucid
period when it was supplanted by bronze (1 Mace
6 35); the Gr and Rom helmets both of leather
and brass were well known in the Herodian period.
Figurative: St. Paul has the helmet, perikepha-
lata, for his Christian soldier (Eph 6 17; 1 Thess
5 8). In the LXX perikephalaia occurs eleven
times as the equivalent of the Heb term.
Body armor for the protection of the person in
battle is mentioned in the OT and is well known
in representations of Egyp, Pers and
3. Coat of Parthian warriors. The shiryon, tr4
Mail “habergeon” in AV, rendered in RV
“coat of mail,” is part of the armor of
Nehemiah’s workers (Nch 4 16), and one of the


Armor-Bearer
Army


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


254


pieces of armor supplied by King Uzziah to his
soldiers (2 Ch 26 14). Gohath was armed with
a shiryon, and when Saul clad David in his own
armor to meet the Phili champion he put on him a
coat of mail, his shiryon (1 S 17 5.38). Such a
piece of body armor Ahab wore in the fatal battle
of Ramoth-gilead (1 K 22 34). In the battle of
Bethsura in the Maccabean struggle the Syrian
war-elephants were protected with breastplates, the
word for which, éhdrazx, represents the shiryon in the
LXX (1 Macc 6 43).

Figurative: Isaiah in a striking figure describes
Jeh as putting on righteousness for a coat of mail
and salvation as a helmet, where thorax and peri-
kephalaia are the Gr words of the LX X to render
shiryon and kébha‘. It is from this passage (Isa 59
17) that St. Paul obtains his “breastplate of right-
eousness” (Eph 6 14).


Greaves and Sandals.


Greaves (michah; xvnuldes, knémides) are men-

tioned once in Scripture as part of the armor

of Goliath (1 S 17 6). They were of

4. Greaves brass or leather, fastened by thongs
round the leg and above the ankles.

The girdle (hdghdrah; Gr zéné) was of leather

studded with nails, and was used for


5. Girdle supporting the sword (18 18 4; 25
208). See Grrpie.
Figurative: For fig. uses see under the separate
weapons.


Litrerature.—Nowack, Hebrdische I,
359-67; Benzinger, Herzog, RH, art. ‘‘ Kriegswesen bei
den Hebraern"’; McCurdy, HPM, I, II; Woods and
Powell, The Heb Prophets for Eng. Readers, I, Il; G. M.
Mackie, Bible Manners and Customs; Browne, Heb Antiq-
uities, 40-46; corresponding arts. in Kitto, Hastings, and
other Bible dictionaries.

T. Nrcou


ARMOR-BEARER, ir’mér-b4r’ér or) NWI, ndsa’
ket; Gr uses a phrase, 6 alpwv ra oxetn, ho airdn td
skewé, lit. “the one carrying the armor’): One who
carried the large shield and perhaps other weapons
for a king (1 § 31 4), commander-in-chief (2 8 23
37), captain (1 § 14 7) or champion (1 S 17 7).
All warriors of distinction had such an attendant.
Rather than perish by the hand of a woman, Abim-
elech_ called upon his armor-bearer to give him
the finishing stroke (Jgs 9 54), and when King
Saul’s armor-bearer refused to do this office for him
that he might not become the prisoner of the Philis,
he took a sword himself and fell upon it (1 S 31 4).
David became Saul’s armor-bearer for a time, and


Archaeologie,


 rets.”


$2 90 ND SP GO bo


Jonathan’s armor-bearer was a man of resource and
courage (1 8 14 7). The shield-bearer was a figure
well known in the chariots of Egypt and Assyria
and the Hittites, his business being to protect his
fighting companion during the engagement.
f T. NicoL

ARMORY, ar’mér-i: (1) (EIN, ’d¢dr; Snoavpés,
thésaurés): A storehouse (1 K 7 51; Neh 10 38),
but employed fig. of the stored-up anger of Jeh
which breaks forth in judgments (Jer 50 25).
(2) (pW2, néshek): Identical with Solomon’s
“house of the forest of Lebanon,” the arsenal close
to the temple (1 K 10 17; Neh 3 19; Isa 22 8),
in which were stored the shields and targets of
beaten gold. (8) (nPpbon, talpiyoth): A puz-
zling word rendered “armory’”’ in our VSS (Cant
4 4)—“the tower of David builded for an armory,
whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields
of mighty men.” RVm renders “builded with tur-
T. Nicou


ARMY, ar’mi (on, hayil, “army,” SAX, ca&bha’,
“host,” 7912, ma‘drakhah, “army in battle
array,’’ 7572, g¢dhidh, ‘“‘troop’’):

The First Campaign of History
In the Wilderness
The Times after the Conquest
In the Early Monarchy
From the Time of Solomon Onward
Organization of the Hebrew Army
The Army in the Field
The Supplies of the Army
. In the NT

The Israelites were not a distinctively warlike
people and their glory has been won on other fields
than those of war. But Canaan, between the Medi-
terranean and the desert, was the highway of the
East and the battle-ground of nations. The Israel-
ites were, by the necessity of their geographical
position, often involved in wars not of their own
seeking, and their bravery and endurance even when
worsted in their conflicts won for them the admira-
tion and respect of their conquerors.

The first conflict of armed forces recorded in
Holy Scripture is that in Gen 14. The kings of the

Jordan valley had rebelled against
1. The First Chedorlaomer, king of Elam—not the
Campaign first of the kings of the East to reach
of History the Mediterranean with his armies—

and joined battle with him and other
kings in the Vale of Siddim. In this campaign
Abraham distinguished himself by the rescue of his
nephew Lot, who had fallen with all that he
possessed into the hands of the Elamite king. The
force with which Abraham effected the defeat of

Chedorlaomer and the kings that were with him
was his own retainers, 318 in number, whom he
had armed and led forth in person in his successful
pursuit.

When we first make the acquaintance of the Israel-
ites as a nation, they area horde of fugitives who have

escaped from the bitter oppression and
2. Inthe hard bondage of Pharaoh. Although
Wilderness there could have been but little of the

; martial spirit in a people so long and
grievously oppressed, their journeyings through the
wilderness toward Canaau are from the first de-
scribed as the marching of a great host. It was
according to their “armies” (‘“‘hosts” RV) that
Aaron and Moses were to bring the Children of
Israel from the land of Egypt (Ex 6 26). When
they had entered upon the wilderness they went up
“harnessed” (“‘armed”’ RV) for the journeyings that
lay before them—where “harnessed” or “armed”?
may point not to the weapons they bore but to the
order and arrangements of a body of troops marching
five deep (hdmushshim) or divided into five army


255


corps (Ex 13 18). On the way through the wilder-
ness they encamped (Ex 13 20; and passim) at
their successive halting-places, and the whole army
of 600,000 was, after Sinai, marked off into divisions
or army corps, each with its own camp and the
ensigns of their fathers’ houses (Nu 2 2). ‘From
twenty years old and upward, all that are able to go
forth to war in Israel,” the males of the tribes were
numbered and assigned to their place in the camp
(Nu 13). Naturally, in the wilderness they are
footmen (Nu 11 21), and it was not till the period
of the monarchy that other arms were added. Bow
and sling and spear and sword for attack, and shield
and helmet for defence, would be the full equip-
ment of the men called upon to fight in the desert.
Although we hear little of gradations of military
rank, we do read of captains of thousands and cap-
tains of hundreds in the wilderness (Nu 31 14), and
Joshua commands the fighting men in the battle
against the Amalekites at Rephidim (Ex 17 9 ff).
That the Israelites acquired in their journeyings
in the wilderness the discipline and martial spirit
which would make them a warlike people, may be
gathered from their successes against the Midian-
ites, against Og, king of Bashan, toward the close
of the forty years, and from the military organiza-
tion with which they proceeded to the conquest of
Canaan.

In more than one campaign the Israelites under


Joshua’s leadership established themselves in
Canaan. But it was largely through
3. The the enterprise of the several tribes


Times after that the conquest was achieved.
the Con- The progress of the invaders was
quest stubbornly contested, but Joshua
encouraged his kinsmen of Ephraim
and Manasseh to press on the conquest even against
the invincible war-chariots of the Canaanites—
“for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though
they have iron chariots, and though they are strong”
. (Josh 17 18). As it was in the early history of
Rome, where the defence of the state was an obli-
gation resting upon every individual according to
his stake in the public welfare, so it was at first
in Israel. Tribal jealousies, however, impaired
the sentiment of nationality and hindered united
action when once the people had been settled in
Canaan. The tribes had to defend their own, and
it was only a great emergency that united them
in common action. The first notable approach to
national unity was seen in the army which Barak
assembled to meet the host of Jabin, king of Hazor,
under the command of Sisera (Jgs 4 5). In
Deborah’s war-song in commemoration of the
notable victory achieved by Barak and herself, the
men of the northern tribes, Zebulun, Naphtali,
Issachar, along with warriors of Manasseh, Ephraim
and Benjamin, are praised for the valor with which
they withstood and routed the host—foot, horse and
chariots—of Sisera. Once again the tribes of Israel
assembled in force from ‘‘Dan even to Beersheba,
with the land of Gilead” (Jgs 20 1) to punish the
tribe of Benjamin for condoning a gross outrage.
The single tribe was defeated in the battle that en-
sued, but they were able to put into the field “26,000
men that drew sword,” and they had also ‘‘700
chosen men left-handed; every one could sling stones
at a hair-breadth, and not miss” (Jgs 20 15.16).
Up to this time the fighting forces of the Israel-
ites were more of the character of a militia. The
men of the tribes more immediately
4. Inthe harassed by enemies were summoned
Early for action by the leader raised up by
Monarehy God, and disbanded when the emer-
gency was past. The monarchy
brought changes in military affairs. It was the
plea of the leaders of Israel, when they desired to


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA renamed


have a king, that he would go out before them and
fight their battles (1 S 8 20). Samuel had warned
them that with a monarchy a professional soldiery
would be required. ‘He will take your sons, and
appoint them unto him, for his chariots, and to be
his horsemen; and they shall run before his chariots;
and he will appoint them unto him for captains of
thousands, and captains of fifties; and he will set
some to plow his ground, and reap his harvest, and
to make his instruments of war, and the instruments
of his chariots” (1 S 8 11.12). That this was the
course which military reform took in the period
following the establishment of the monarchy may
well be. It fell to Saul when he ascended the throne
to withstand the invading Philis and to relieve his
people from the yoke which they had already laid
heavily upon some parts of the country. The
Philis were a military people, well disciplined and
armed, with 30,000 chariots and 6,000 horsemen
at their service when they came up to Michmash
(18 13 5). What chance had raw levies of vine-
dressers and herdsmen from Judah and Benjamin
against such a foe? No wonder that the Israelites
hid themselves in caves and thickets, and in rocks,
and in holes, and in pits (1 8 13 6). And it is
quoted by the historian as the lowest depth of
national degradation that the Israelites had to go
down to the Philis ‘‘to sharpen every man his share,
and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock” (1 8
13 20) because the Philis had carried off their smiths
to prevent them from making swords or spears.

It was in this desperate condition that King
Saul was called to begin the struggle for freedom
and national unity in Israel. The victories at
Michmash and Elah and the hotly contested but
unsuccessful and fatal struggle at Gilboa evince
the growth of the martial spirit and advance alike
in discipline and in strategy. After the relief of
Jabesh-gilead, instead of disbanding the whole of
his levies, Saul retained 3,000 men under arms, and
this in all probability became the nucleus of the
standing army of Israel (1 8 13 2). From this
time onward ‘when Saul saw any mighty man, or
any valiant man, he took him unto him” (1 8 14
52). Of the valiant men whom Saul kept round
his person, the most notable were Jonathan and
David. Jonathan had command of one division
of 1,000 men at Gibeah (1 8 13 2), and David
was captain of the king’s bodyguard (1 § 18 5;
cf 18 18). When David fell under Saul’s jealousy
and betook himself to an outlaw life in the mountain
fastnesses of Judah, he gathered round him in the
cave of Adullam 400 men (1 S 22 1.2) who were
ere long increased to 600 (1 5S 23 13). From the
story of Nabal (1 S 25) we learn how a band like
that of David could be maintained in service, and
we gather that landholders who benefited by the
presence of an armed force were expected to provide
the necessary supplies. On David’s accession to
the throne this band of warriors remained attached
to his person and became the backbone of his army.
We can identify them with the gibbarim—the mighty
men of whom Benaiah at a later time became cap-
tain (2 S 23 22.28; I K 1 8) and who are also
known by the name of Cherethites and Pelethites
(2 8 8 18). These may have received their name
from their foreign origin, the former, in Heb kerath?
being originally from Crete but akin to the Philis;
and the latter, in Heb p*léh? being Philis by birth.
That there were foreign soldiers in David’s service .
we know from the examples of Uriah the Hittite
and Ittai of Gath. David’s gibbérim have been
compared to the Praetorian Cohort of the Rom
emperors, the Janissaries of the sultans, and the
Swiss Guards of the French kings. Of David’s
army Joab was the commander-in-chief, and to the
mnilitary genius of this rough and unscrupulous


Army
Army, Roman


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


256


warrior, the king’s near kinsman, the dynasty of
David was deeply indebted.
In the reign of Solomon, although peace was its
prevailing characteristic, there can have been no
diminution of the armed forces of the
5. From kingdom, for we read of military ex-
the Time _ peditions against Edom and Syria and
of Solomon Hamath, and also of fortresses built
Onward in every part of the land, which would
require troops to garrison them.
Hazor, the old Can capital, at the foot of Lebanon;
Megiddo commanding the rich plain of Jezreel;
Gezer overlooking the Phili plain; the Bethhorons
(Upper and Nether); and Tadmor im the wilder-
ness; not to speak of Jerus with Millo and the for-
tified wall, were fortresses requiring strong garri-
sons (1 K 9 15). It is probable that “the levy,”
which was such a burden upon the people at large,
included forced military service as well as forced
labor, and helped to create the dissatisfaction which
culminated in the revolt of Jeroboam, and eventu-
ally in the disruption of the kingdom. Although
David had reserved from the spoils of war in his
victorious campaign against Hadadezer, king of
Zobah, horses for 100 chariots (2 S 8 4), cavalry
and chariots were not an effective branch of the
service in his reign. Solomon, however, disre-
garding the scruples of the stricter Israelites, and
the ordinances of the ancient law (Dt 17 16),
added horses and chariots on a large scale to the
military equipment of the nation (1 K 10 26-29).
It is believed that it was from Musri, a country of
northern Syria occupied by the Hittites, and Kue
in Cilicia, that Solomon obtained horses for his
cavalry and chariotry (1 K 10 29; 2 Ch 1 16,
where the best text gives Mugri, and not the Heb
word for Egypt). This branch of the service was
not only looked upon with distrust by the stricter
Israelites, but was expressly denounced in later times
by the prophets (Isa 2 7; Hos 17; Mic 6 10).
In the prophets, too, more than in the historical
books, we are made acquainted with the cavalry
and chariotry of Assyria and Babylon which in the
days of Sargon, Sennacherib, and Nebuchadnezzar
had become so formidable. Their lancers and
mounted archers, together with their chariots, gave
them a sure ascendancy in the field of war (Nah 3
2.3; Hab 1 8; Jer 46 4). In comparison with
these, the cavalry of the kings of Israel and Judah
was insignificant, and to this Rabshakeh contempt-
uously referred (2 K 18 23) when he promised to
the chiefs of Judah from the king of Assyria
2,000 horses if Hezekiah could put riders upon
them.
As we have seen, every male in Israel at the age
of twenty, according to the ancient law, became
liable for military service (Nu 1 3; 26
6. Organi- 2; 2 Ch 26 5), just as at a later time
zation of | every male of that age became liable
the Hebrew for the half-shekel of Temple dues.
y Jos is our authority for believing that
no one was called upon to serve after
the age of fifty (Ant, ITI, xii, 4). From military
service the Levites were exempt (Nu 2 33). In
Deuteronomic law exemption was allowed to per-
sons betrothed but not married, to persons who
had built a house but had not dedicated it, or who
had planted a vineyard but had not eaten of the
fruit of it, and to persons faint-hearted and fearful
whose timidity might spread throughout the ranks
(Dt 20 1-9). These exemptions no doubt reach
back to a high antiquity and in the Maccabean
period they still held good (1 Macc 3 56). The
army was divided into bodies of 1,000, 100, 50, and
in Maccabean times, 10, each under its own captain
(Sar) (Nu 31 14; 1 8 8 12; 2 K 1 9; 2 Ch 25 5;
1 Mace 3 55). In the army of Uzziah we read of


“heads of fathers’ houses,’ mighty men of valor
who numbered 2,600 and had under their hand
a trained army of 307,500 men (2 Ch 26 12.13),
where, however, the figures have an appearance of
exaggeration.

Over the whole host of Israel, according to the
fundamental principle of the theocracy, was Jeh
Himself, the Supreme Leader of her armies (1 S
8 7 ff); it was “the Captain of the Lord’s host,’’
to whom Joshua and all serving under him owned
allegiance, that appeared before the walls of Jericho
to help the gallant leader in his enterprise. In the
times of the Judges the chiefs themselves, Barak,
Gideon, Jephthah, led their forces in person to
battle. Under the monarchy the captain of the
host was an office distinct from that of the king,
and we have Joab, Abner, Benaiah, named as
commanders-in-chief. An armor-bearer attended
the captain of the host as well as the king (1 S 14
6; 31 4.5; 2 8 23 37). Mention is made of officers
who had to do the numbering of the people, the
sophér, scribe, attached to the captain of the host
(2 K 26 19; cf 2 8 24 2; 1 Macc 6 42), and the
shdtér, muster-master, who kept the register of those
who were in military service and knew the men who
had received authorized leave of absence (Dt 20 5,
Driver’s n.).

Before the army set forth, religious services were
held (Joel 3 9), and sacrifices were offered at the

opening of a campaign to consecrate


7. The the war (Mic 3 5; Jer 6 4; 22 7).
Army in Recourse was had in earlier times to
the Fiela the oracle (Jgs 11; 20 27; 18 14


37; 23 2; 28 6; 30 8), in later times
to a prophet (1 K 22 5ff; 2K 313; 19 2;
Jer 38 14). Cases are mentioned in which the
Ark accompanied the army to the field (1 S 4 4;
14 18), and before the engagement sacrifices also
were. offered (1S 7 9; 18 9), ordinarily necessi-
tating the presence of a priest (Dt 20 2). Coun-
cils of war were held to settle questions of policy .
in the course of siege or a campaign (Jer 38 7;
39 3). The signal for the charge or retreat was
given by sound of a trumpet (Nu 10 9; 28 2
28; 18 16; 1 Mace 16 8). The order of battle
was simple, the heavy-armed spearmen forming the
van, slingers and archers bringing up the rear, sup-
ported by horses and chariots, which moved to the
front as need required (1 S 31 3; 1 K 22 31; 2 Ch
14 9). Strategy was called into play according to
the disposition of the opposing forces or the nature
ofthe ground (Josh 8 3; 11 7; Jgs 7 16; 1S 16 5;
28 6 23; 2K 8 11ff).

Although David had in his service foreign
soldiers like Uriah the Hittite and Ittai of Gath,
and although later kings hired aliens for their cam-
paigns, it was not till the Maccabean struggle for
independence that mercenaries came to be largely
employed in the Jewish army. Mercenaries are
spoken of in the prophets as a source of weakness
to the nation that employs them (to Egypt, Jer
46 16.21; to Babylon, Jer 60 16). From the
Maccabean time onward the princes of the Has-
monaean family employed them, sometimes to hold
the troublesome Jews in check, and sometimes to
support the arms of Rome. Herod the Great had
in his army mercenaries of various nations. When
Jewish soldiers, however, took service with Rome,
they were prohibited by their law from performing
duty on the Sabbath. Early in the Maccabean
fight for freedom, a band of Hasidaeans or Jewish
Puritans, allowed themselves to be cut down to the
last man rather than take up the sword on the
Sabbath (1 Macc 2 34 ff). Cases are even on
record where their gentile adversaries took advan-
tage of their scruples to inflict upon them loss and
defeat (Ant, XII, xii, 4; XIV, iv, 2).


257


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Army
Army, Roman


Before the army had become a profession in
Israel, and while the levies were still volunteers
like the sons of Jesse, the soldiers
8. Supplies not only received no pay, but had to
provide their own supplies, or depend
upon rich landholders like Nabal and Barzillai (1 8
26; 2S 19 31). In that period and still later, the
chief reward of the soldier was his share of the booty
gotten in war (Jigs 6 30f; 18 30 22 ff). By the
Maccabean period we learn that an army like that of
Simon, consisting of professional soldiers, could only
be maintained at great expense (1 Mace 14 32).

Although the first soldiers that we read of in the

NT were Jewish and not Rom (Lk 3 14; Mk 6 27),

and although we read that Herod with
9. In his “men of war” joined in mocking
the NT Jesus (Lk 23 11), it is for the most part
the Rom army that comes before us.
The Rom legion, consisting roughly of 6,000 men, was
familiar to the Jewish people, and the word had
become a term to express a large number (Mt 26
58; Mk 5 9). Centurions figure most honorably
alike in the Gospels and the Acts (kenturion,
Mk 15 39; hekatonidrchés, -os, Mt 8 5; Lk 28
47; Acts 10 1; 22 25.27). “The Praetorium” is
the residence of the Rom procurator at Jerus, and
in Caesarea (Mt 27 27; Acts 23 35), or the
praetorian guard at Rome (Phil 1 13). The
Augustan band and the Italian band (Acts 10 1;
Acts 27 1) are cohorts of Rom soldiers engaged on
military duty at Caesarea. In Jerus there was one
cohort stationed in the time of St. Paul under
the command of a chiliarchos, or military tribune
(Acts 22 24). It was out of this regiment that the
dexioldboi (Acts 28 23) were sclected, who formed
a guard for St. Paul to Caesarea, spearmen, or
rather javelin-throwers.

Figurative: Among the military metaphors em-
ployed by St. Paul, who spent so much of his time
in the later years of his life among Rom soldiers,
some are taken from the weapons of the Rom soldier
(see Arms), and some also from the discipline and
the marching and fighting of an army. Thus,
“campaigning” is referred to (2 Tim 2 3.4; 2 Cor
10 3-6); the “order and solid formation of soldiers”
drawn up in battle array or on the march (Col 2 5);
the “triumphal procession” to the capitol with its
train of captives and the smoke of incense (2 Cor
214-16); and “the sounding of the trumpet,”
when the faithful Christian warriors shall take their
place every man in his own order or “division” of
the resurrection army of the Lord of Hosts (1 Cor
16 52.53). (See Dean Howson, Metaphors of St.
Paul—“Roman Soldiers.’’)

The armies which are in heaven (Rev 19 14.19)
are the angelic hosts who were at the service of their
Incarnate Lord in the days of His flesh and in His
exaltation follow Him upon white horses clothed
in fine linen white and pure (see Swete’s n.). See
further AnMor, ARMs. T. Nicon


ARMY, dr’mi, ROMAN, ré’man; The treat-
ment of this subject will be confined to (I) a brief
description of the organization of the army, and
(II) @ consideration of the allusions to the Rom
military establishment in the NT. xa

I. Organization.— There were originally no
standing forces, but the citizens performed military
service like any other civic duty when summoned
by the magistrates. The gradual development of
a military profession and standing army culminated
in the admission of the poorest class to the ranks by
Marius (about 107 BC). Henceforth the Rom
army was made up of a body of men whose char-
acter was essentially that of mercenaries, and whose
term: of continuous service varied in different di-
visions from 16 to 26 years.


The forces which composed the Rom army under
the Empire may be divided into the following five
groups: (1) the imperial guard and garrison of the
capital, (2) the legions, (3) the auxilia, (4) the
numert, (5) the fleet. We shall discuss their or- -
ganization in the order mentioned.

The imperial guard consisted of the cohortes
practoriae, which together with the cohortes ur-

banae and vigiles made up the garrison


1. The of Rome. In the military system as
Imperial established by Augustus there were
Guard nine cohorts of the praetorian guard,


three of the urban troops, and seven
of the vigiles. Each cohort numbered 1,000 men,
and was commanded by a tribune of equestrian
rank. The praetorian prefects (praefecti praetorit),
of whom there were usually two, were commanders
of the entire garrison of the capital, and stood at the
highest point of distinction and authority in the
equestrian career.

There were 25 legions in 23 AD (Tacitus Annals
4, 5), which had been increased to 30 at the time of

the reign of Marcus Aurelius, 160-180
2. The AD (CIL, VI, 3492 a-b) and to 33
Legions under Septimius Severus (Dio Cassius,
iv. 23-24). Each legion was made up,
ordinarily, of 6,000 men, who were divided into 10
cohorts, each cohort containing 3 maziples, and
each maniple in turn 2 centuries.

The legatus Augustus pro praeiore, or governor of
each imperial province, was chief commander of all
the troops within the province. An officer of
senatorial rank known as legatus Augusti legionis
was intrusted with the command of each legion,
together with the bodies of auzilia which were
associated with it. Besides, there were six tribunt
militum, officers of equestrian rank (usually sons of
senators who had not yet held the quaestorship)
in each legion. The centurions who commanded
the centuries belonged to the plebeian class. Be-
tween the rank of common soldier and centurion
there were a large number of subalterns, called
principales, who correspond roughly to the non-
commissioned officers and men detailed from the
ranks for special duties in modern armies.

The auxilia were organized as infantry in cohortes,
as cavalry in alae, or as mixed bodies, cohortes equt-

tatae. Some of these divisions contained
3. The approximately 1,000 men (cohories or
‘‘Auxilia” alae miliariae), but the greater number
about 500 (cohortes or alae quingenariae).
They were commanded by iribunt and praefecti of
equestrian rank. The importance of the auzilia con-
sisted originally in the diversity of their equipment
and manner of fighting, since each group adhered to
the customs of the nation in whose midst it had been
recruited. But with the gradual Romanization of the
Empire they were assimilated more and more to the
character of the legionaries.

The numeri developed out of the provincial
militia and began to appear in the 2d cent. AD.

They maintained their local manner
4. The of warfare. Some were bodies of in-
‘sNumeri” fantry, others of cavalry, and they
varied in strength from 300 to 90
(Mommsen, Hermes, XIX, 219f, and XXII, 547 f).
Their commanders were praepostii, praefecti or tri-
buni, all men of equestrian rank.

The fleet was under the command of prefects
(praefecti classis), who took rank among the highest
officials of the equestrian class. The
principal naval stations were at Mise-
num and Ravenna.

Augustus established the northern
boundary of the Empire at the Rhine and at the
Danube, throughout the greater part of its course,
and bequeathed to his successors the advice that


6. The
Fleet


Army, Roman THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Arrive


258


they should not extend their sovereignty beyond
the limits which he had set (Tacitus Annals i.11;

Agricola 13); and although this policy
6. Defen- was departed from in many instances,
sive Ar- such as the annexation of Thrace,
rangements Cappadocia, Mauretania, Britain, and

Dacia, not to mention the more ephem-
eral acquisitions of Trajan, yet the military system
of the Empire was arranged primarily with the
view of providing for the defence of the provinces
and not for carrying on aggressive warfare on a
large scale. Nearly all the forces, with the excep-
tion of the imperial guard, were distributed among
the provinces on the border of the Empire, and the
essential feature of the disposition of the troops in
these provinces was the permanent fortress in which
each unit was stationed. The combination of
large camps for the legions with a series of smaller
forts for the alae, cohorts, and numeri is the char-
acteristic arrangement on all the frontiers. The
immediate protection of the frontier was regularly
instrusted to the auxiliary troops, while the legions
were usually stationed some distance to the rear
of the actual boundary. Thus the army as a whole
was so scattered that it was a difficult undertaking
to assemble sufficient forces for carrying out any
considerable project of foreign conquest, or even to
cope at once with a serious invasion, yet the system
was generally satisfactory in view of the conditions
which prevailed, and secured for the millions of
subjects of the Rom Empire the longest period of
undisturbed tranquillity known to European history.

In accordance with the arrangements of Augustus,
the cohortes praetoriae and cohortes urbanae were

recruited from Latium, Etruria, Um-
7. Recruit- bria, and the older Rom _ colonies
ing System (Tacitus Annals 4, 5), the legions

from the remaining portions of Italy,
and the auzilia from the subject communities of
the Empire (Seeck, Rheinisches Museum, XLVIITI,
616).

But in course of time the natives of Italy disap-
peared, first from the legions, and later from the
garrison of the capital. Antoninus Pius established
the rule that each body of troops should draw its
recruits from the district where it was stationed.
Henceforth the previous possession of Rom citizen-
ship was no longer required for enlistment in the
legions. The legionary was granted the privilege
of citizenship upon entering the service, the auxil-
iary soldier upon being discharged (Seeck, Unter-
gang der antiken Welt, I, 250).

If. Allusions in the NT to the Rom Military
Establishment.—Such references relate chiefly to
the bodies of troops which were stationed in Judaea.
Agrippa I left a military establishment of one ala
and five cohorts at his death in 44 AD (Jos, Ant,
XIX, ix, 2; BJ, IU, iv, 2), which he had doubtless
received from the earlier Rom administration.
These divisions were composed of local recruits,
chiefly Samaritans (Hirschfeld, Verwaltungsbeamte,
395; Mommsen, Hermes, XTX, 217, n. 1).

The Ala I gemina Sebastenorum was stationed at
Caesarea (Jos, Ant, XX, 122; BJ, II, xii, 5; CIL,
VIII, 9359).

Julius, the centurion to whom Paul and other
prisoners were delivered to be escorted to Rome

(Acts 27 1), belonged to one of the
1. Augustan five cohorts which was stationed at
Band or near Caesarea. This Speira Se-

basté (WH), “‘Augustus’ Band” (RV
“Augustan band’; RVm “cohort’’), was probably
the same body of troops which is mentioned in
inscriptions as Cohors I Augusta (CIE, Supp, 6687)
and Speira Augousté (Lebas-Waddington 2112).
Its official title may have been Cohors Augusta
Sebastenorum (GVN). It will be observed that


all divisions of the Rom army were divided into
companies of about 100 men, each of which, in the
infantry, was commanded by a centurion, in the
eavalry, by a decurion.

There was another cohort in Caesarea, the
“Ttalian band” (Cohors Italica, Vulg) of which
Cornelius was centurion (Acts 10 1:
ek speirés tés kalouménés Italikés).
The cohortes [talicae (civium Romano-
rum) were made up of Rom citizens
(Marquardt, Rémische Staatsverwaltung, I, 467).

One of the five cohorts was stationed in Jerus
(Mt 27 27; Mk 16 16), the “chief captain” of

: which was Claudius Lysias. His title,
3. Praeto- chiliarchos in the Gr (Acts 23 10.15.
rian Guard 17.19.22.26; 24 7 AV), meaning “leader

of a thousand men” (fribunus, Vulg),
indicates that this body of soldiers was a cohors
miliaria. Claudius Lysias sent Paul to Felix at
Caesarea under escort of 200 soldiers, 70 horsemen,
and 200 spearmen (Acts 23 23). The latter
(dexiolaboi, WH) are thought to have been a party
of provincial militia. Several centurions of the
cohort at Jerus appear during the riot and subse-
quent rescue and arrest of Paul (Acts 21 32; 22
25.26; 23 17.23). The cohortes miliariae (of 1,000
men) contained ten centurions. A centurion, doubt-
less of the same cohort, was in charge of the execu-
tion of the Saviour (Mt 27 54; Mk 15 39.44.45;
Lk 23 47). It was customary for centurions to be
intrusted with the execution of capital penalties
(Tacitus Ann. i.6; xvi.9; xvi.15; Hist. 11.85).

The AV contains the passage in Acts 2816: ‘‘The
centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of
the guard” (stratopeddrchés), which the RV omits.
It has commonly been held that the expression
stratopedarchés was equivalent to praetorian pre-
fect (praefectus praetorius), and that the employ-
ment of the word in the singular was proof that
Paul arrived in Rome within the period 51-62
AD when Sex. Afranius Burrus was sole praetorian
prefect. Mommsen (Sttzungsberichte der Berliner
Akademie [1895], 491-503) believes that the sen-
tence in question embodies an ancient tradition,
but that the term sétratopedarchés could not mean
praefectus praetortus, which is never rendered in this
way in Gr. He suggests that it stands for prin-
ceps castrorum peregrinorum, who was a centurion
in command of the frumentarit at Rome. These
were detachments of legionary soldiers who took rank
as principales. ‘They served as military couriers
between the capital and provinces, political spies,
and an imperial police. It was probably customary,
at least when the tradition under discussion arose,
for the frumentartt to take charge of persons who
were sent to Rome for trial (Marquardt, Rémische
Staatsverwaltung, II, 491-94).

LirERATURE.—Comprehensive discussions of the Rom
military system will be found in Marquardt, Rémische


Staatsverwaltung, II, 319-612, and in Pauly-Wissowa,
Realencyclopddie, art. ‘‘ Exercitus.”’


Grorce H.. ALLEN
ARNA, dr’na (Lat Arna): One of the ancestors
of Ezra given in 2 Esd 1 2, evidently identical
with Zerahiah of Ezr 7 4 and Zaraias of 1 Esd 8 2.


2. Italian
Band


ARNAN, 4r’nan (72, ‘arnan, “joyous’”):
A descendant of David and founder of a family
(1 Ch 3 21). The LXX has Orna.


ARNI, ar’ni (Apvel, Arnet, found only in Lk 3
33 RV, following WH): The name of an ancestor of
Jesus Christ. But in AV, following TR, and in
the genealogical list of Mt 1 3.4 the same person
is called Aram (Gr ’Apéu, Ardm) in both AV and
RVm. In Mt RV, however, the form is Ram, which
is nearest to the OT name Ram (04, ram, “high’’).


259


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Army, Roman
Arrive


Ram was great-grandson of Judah and aneestor
of David (Ruth 4 19; 1 Ch 2 9.10).


ARNON, Ar’non (JIN, ’arndn; ’Apvav, Arnén):
Is first mentioned in Nu 21 24 as the border be-
tween Moab and the Amorites. ‘The valleys of
Arnon” in the next ver undoubtedly indieate the
numerous wadies eontributary to the main stream.
It formed the southern boundary of the land as-
signed to Reuben (Dt 3 12). The eity of Aroer
stood on the northern edge of the valley (Dt 2 36;
Jgs 12 2, etc). Arnon was claimed by the Am-
monites as having marked the southern limit of
their territory when Israel invaded the land (Jgs
11 13). They, however, had already been driven
out by the Amorites, and the region north of Arnon
was held by Sihon. From the inscription of Mesha
on the Moabite Stone we gather that Moab had
established herself on the north of the Arnon
before the time of Omri. Under Omri and Ahab
she was eonfined to the south of the river. A
rebellion under Mesha was put down by Jehoram
son of Ahab (2 K 3), and the expedition of Hazael
against Israel reached the valley of the Arnon
(2 K 10 33). But aceording to Mesha he regained
for Moab the lost land; and this agrees with Isa 15,
16, where eities north of Arnon are located in Moab,
e.g. Heshbon.

The modern name of Arnon is Wédy el-Majib,
which enters the Dead Sea from the E. about 11
miles N. of el-Lisan. Some 13 miles E. of the
Dead Sea two streams, Seil es-Sa‘ideh from the 8.,
and Wddy Enkeiich from the E., unite their waters
and flow westward in the bottom of an enormons
trench. The waters of Wady Weleh come in from
the N.E. A wide stretch of country thus drains
into the valley by means of a great network of
smaller wadies—the ‘‘valleysof Arnon.” The “fords
of the Arnon” (Isa 16 2) were doubtless erossed
by Mesha’s highway which he claims to have built
in Arnon; and may be marked by the traces of the
old Rom road and bridge immediately to the W. of
where, on the northern edge of the Wddy, stands
‘Ara‘ir, the aneient Aroer. W. Ewine


AROD, 4'rod, ar’od (TN, ’drddh): The sixth
son of Gad (Nu 26 17). His descendants are
ealled Arodi or Arodites (Gen 46 16; Nu 26 17).


ARODI, Ar’o-di. See Aron.


ARODITES, a’rod-its. See Anoop.


AROER, a-r0’@& (TIINY, ‘Grader; "Apotp, Aroér):

(1) A eity of the Amorites whieh stood on the
northern edge of the Arnon (Dt 2 36, ete). Taken
by Israel, it shared the vicissitudes of the eountry
north of the river, and when last named (Jer 48 19)
is again in the hands of Moab. It is one of the
eities whieh Mesha claims to have built, i.e. forti-
fied. It was within the territory allotted to Reu-
ben, yet its building (fortification) is attributed _to
Gad (Nu 32 34). Thus far came the Syrian, Ha-
zael, in his raid upon Israel (2 K 10 33). The
Rom road across the valley lay about an hour to
the W. of Khirbet ‘Ara‘ir.

(2) A city in Gilead deseribed_as “‘before Rab-
bah,” on the boundary between Gad and the Am-
monites (Josh 13 25). No name resembling this
has yet been reeovered in the district. indicated.

(3) A city in the territory of Judah named only
in 1S 30 28. Probably however in Josh 16 22
we should read ‘ar‘drah instead of ‘adh‘ddhah, whieh
may be the same eity, and may be identieal with
‘Ar‘ara, a site with cisterns and some remains of
ancient buildings about 14 miles S.E. of Beersheba.

W. Ewine


AROERITE, a-rd/@r-it (PAN, ha-ard'ert):
A native of Aroer. The Aroerite was Hotham,
father of two of David’s heroes (1 Ch 11 44).


AROM, arom (’Apép, Arém): The sons of A.
returned to Jerns with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 6 16).
Omitted in Ezr and Neh. Hashum is found in place
of A. in Ear 2 19.


ARPACHSHAD, Ar-pak’shad. See ARPHAXAD.


ARPAD, 4r’pad; ARPHAD, 4r’fad (TE,
’arpadh, “support’’): A city of Syria, captured
frequently by the Assyrians, and finally subjugated
by Tiglath-pileser III in 740 BC, after a siege of two
years. Itis now the ruin Tell Erfad, 13 miles N.W.
of Aleppo. Arpad is one of the eonquered cities
mentioned by Rabshakeh, the officer of Sennaeh-
erib, in his boast before Jerus (2 K 18 34; 19 13;
Isa 86 19; 87 13; AV Arphad). Isaiah puts a
boast about its eapture in the mouth of the Assyr
king (Isa 10 9), and Jeremiah mentions it as “eon-
founded” beeause of evil tidings, in the oraele eon-
eerning Damascus (Jer 49 23). On every oecasion
Arpad is mentioned with Hamath.

S. F. Hunrer

ARPHAXAD, ar-fak’sad: (1) AV form (Gen 10
22.24, 11 12.13; 1 Ch 117) of RV “ARPACH-
SHAD,” which see. See also TaBLe or Nations.
(2) In Apoc (Jth 1) a king of the Medes, who reigned
in Ecbatana. He was defeated and slain by Nebu-
ehadrezzar.


ARRAY, a-ri’ ([1] W232, Iabhesh, MOD, ‘alah;
meptBdAdw, peribdlls, evddopar, endiomat, ipatiopés,
himatismés. [2] JIT, ‘arakh, NNW, shith): “Array,”
eomposed of prefix ar and rat, “order,” is used in
two senses, (1) in reference to clothing and (2) in
reference to the disposition of an army.

(1) (a) Labhésh is the most common Heb word
meaning “‘to clothe,’’ and is used in all eases but
one in the OT for “array” (ef Gen 41 42: Pharaoh
“arrayed him [Joseph] in vestures of fine linen’’;
see also 2 Ch 28 15; Est 6 9.11; Job 40 10;
2 Ch 5 12). (b) ‘Aigh, meaning “‘to veil,’ “to
cover,’ is once used. Nebuchadrezzar ‘‘shall array
himself with the land of Egypt’? (Jer 43 12).
(ce) Periballé, ‘to throw around,”’ is used 6 times in
the NT. It is the word used of Herod’s “arraying”’
Jesus “in gorgeous apparel” (Lk 23 11; the other
references are Mt 6 29; Lk 12 27; Rev 7 13; 17 4;
19 8). (d) Enduomai, mid. or pass. of endia, “to
enter,” means, therefore, ‘‘to be entered into”
elothing. Once it is used in reference to Herod
(Acts 12 21). (e) Himatismos, “clothing,” is tr
once ‘‘array’ =raiment (from same root). This is
the only occurrence of “array” in this sense (1 Tim
29). e

(2) (a) ‘Arakh is the common word in the OT, used
in referenee to the disposition of an army, and is
tr? “to put in array,’’ “to set in array,’’ the object
being “the battle” or the army. The root meaning
is that of orderly arrangement,.and the verb is used
in other senses than the military, e.g. arranging
the table of shewbread. In 1 Ch 12 33 RV has
“order the battle array” for AV “keep rank,” tr
of Heb ‘ddhar. (b) Shith, ‘to set, to plaee,” used
once for battle array: “and the horsemen set them-
selves in array at the gate’ (Isa 22 7).

S. F. Hunter

ARREST, a-rest’, AND TRIAL OF JESUS. Sec
Jesus Carist, ARREST AND TRIAL OF.


ARRIVE, a-riv’: Originally a nautieal term (Lat
ad ripam) for reaching shore, is used in lit. sense in
Lk 8 26, and, fig. for Gr phthdnd, instead of “attain
to,’ RV in Rom 9 31.


Arrogancy
Asa


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


260


ARROGANCY, aar’o-gan-si: Excessive _ pride,
leading to boastfulness and insolence (1 S 2 3;
Prov 8 13; Isa 18 11; Jer 48 29).


ARROW, ar’d. See AncuERy; ARMOR.
ARROWS, DIVINATION BY. See Avcury,


ye


ARROWSNAKE, Ar’o-snik: In Isa 34 15 the
Heb word MEP, kippdz, which in AV is rendered
“great owl,” is in ERV rendered “arrowsnake,”’
and in ARV “dart-snake.” Gesenius, who trans-
lates ‘‘arrowsnake,” says, ‘‘so called from the spring
with which it propels itself.” Others, from the
mention of ‘“‘make her nest, lay, and hatch,” think
some kind of birdis meant. See OwL; SERPENT.


ARSACES, 4r-sa’séz, dr’sa-séz (Apoduns, Ar-
sdkés): The common name assumed by all the
Parthian kings, is mentioned in 1 Macc 14 1-3,
and in 15 22 in connection with the history of De-
metrius, one of the Gr, or Seleucid, kings of Syria,
and successor to Antiochus Epiphanes, the op-
pressor of the Jews, who caused the uprising
against the Syrian domination under the leadership
of the Maccabees. This particular Arsaces was the
sixth of the line of independent Parthian rulers
which had been founded in 250 BC by Arsaces I,
who revolted from Antiochus Theos, killed the
Syrian satraps, and with his successor Tiridates I
firmly established the independence of the Parthian
kingdom. About 243 BC, Tiridates added Hyr-
cania to his dominions; but it was not till the reign
of Arsaces VI, whose pre-regnal name was Mith-
ridates, that Parthia through the conquest of
Bactria, Media, Persia, Armenia, Elymais and
Babylonia, threatened the very existence of the
kingdom of the Seleucids and became a dangerous
competitor of Rome itself. It was this king who
about 141 BC was attacked by Demetrius Nicator,
king of Syria. According to the account preserved
in 1 Macc 14 1-3, Arsaces sent one of his captains,
who went and smote the host of Demetrius, and
took him alive, and brought him to Arsaces, by
whom he was put in ward. At first, the captive
king was treated with great severity, being carried
in triumph from city to city and exhibited to his
enemies. Later, however, Arsaces gave him his
daughter in marriage and assigned him a residence
in Hyrcania. Some time after the death of Ar-
saces, Demetrius was sent back to Syria by Phraates,
the son of Mithridates, and reigned from 128 to 125
BC. Arsaces VI is mentioned, also, in 1 Macc 15
22, as one of the kings whom the Romans forbade
to make war on their Jewish allies.

LITeERATURE.—See 1 Macc 14 1-3, and 15 22; Ant,
XIII, v, 11; XIV, viii, 5; Appian, Syria, 67; Strabo, XI,
515; XV, 702; Justin, XLI, 5, 6; XXXVI, 1; Orosius,
V, 4; Rawlinson's Parthia, in the Story of the Nations


ser. and Die Herrschaft der Parther in Justi's Geschichte
des alten Persiens in Oncken's Allgemeine Geschichte, I, 4.


R. Dick Witson
ARSARETH, 4r’sa-reth. See ArzarETH.


ARSIPHOURITH, Ar-si-fi’rith (Apowpoupl, Ar-
siphourtth; AV Azephurith): 112 of the sons of A.
returned to Jerus with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 5 16).
The name is omitted in Ezra and Nehemiah, but the
number corresponds to those mentioned with Jorah
(Ezr 2 18) and Hariph (Neh 7 24).


ARTAXERKXES, dr-taks-iirk’séz (Apratéptns, Ar-
taxérzés): Is the Gr and Lat form of one, and per-
haps of two or three kings of Persia mentioned in
the OT.

(1) All are agreed that the Artaxerxes at whose
court Ezra and Nehemiah were officials is Artaxerxes


I, the son of Xerxes, commonly called Longimanus,
who reigned from 465 to 424 BC. This Artaxerxes
was the third son of Xerxes and was raised to the
throne by Artabanus, the murderer of Xerxes.
Shortly after his accession, Artaxerxes put his older
brother Darius to death; and a little later, Arta-
banus, who perhaps aimed to make himself king, was
killed. Hystaspes, the second brother, who seems
to have been satrap of Bactria at the time of his
father’s death, rebelled, and after two battles was
deprived of his power and probably of his life. The
reign of Artaxerxes was further disturbed by the
revolt of Egypt in 460 BC, and by that of Syria
about 448 BC. The Egyptians were assisted hy
the Athenians, and their rebellion, led by Inarus
and Amyrtaeus, was suppressed only after five
years of strenuous exertions on the part of the Per-
sians under the command of the great general
Megabyzus. After the re-conquest of Egypt,
Artaxerxes, fearing that the Athenians would make
a permanent subjugation of Cyprus, concluded with
them the peace of Callias, by which he retained the
island of Cyprus; but agreed to grant freedom to
all Gr cities of Asia Minor. Shortly after this
Megabyzus led a revolt in Syria and compelled his
sovereign to make peace with him on his own terms,
and afterward lived and died in high favor with his
humiliated king. Zopyrus, the son of Megabyzus,
at a later time, while satrap of Lycia and Caria, led
a rebellion in which he was assisted by the Greeks.
It is thought by some that the destruction of Jerus
which is lamented by Nehemiah occurred during
the rebellion of Syria under Megabyzus. Artaxer-
xes I died in 424 BC, and was succeeded by his
son Xerxes JI, and later by two other sons, Sog-
dianus and Ochus, the last of whom assumed the
regnal name of Darius, whom the Greeks surnamed
Nothus.

(2) Ewald and others have thought that the
Artaxerxes of Ezr 47 was the pseudo-Smerdis.
The principal objection against this view is that
we have no evidence that either the pseudo-Smer-
dis, or the real Smerdis, was ever called Artaxerxes.
The real Smerdis is said to have been called Tany-
oxares, or according to others Oropastes. Ewald
would change the latter to Ortosastes, which closely
resembles Artaxerxes, and it must be admitted
that many of the Pers kings had two or more names.
It seems more probable, however, that Artaxerxes
I is the king referred to; and there is little doubt
that the identification of the Artaxerxes of Ezr 4 7
with the pseudo-Smerdis would never have been
thought of had it not been for the difficulty of
explaining the reference to him in this place.

(8) The Gr tr of the LXX renders the Ahasuerus
of the Book of Est by Artaxerxes, and is followed
in this rendering by Jos. There is no doubt that
by this Artaxerxes Jos meant the first of that name;
for in the Antiquities, XI, vi, 1 he says that “after
the death of Xerxes, the kingdom came to be trans-
ferred to his son Cyrus, whom the Greeks called
Artaxerxes.” He then proceeds to show how he
married a Jewish wife, who was herself of the royal
family and who is related to have saved the nation
of the Jews. In a long chapter, he then gives his
account of the story of Vashti, Esther and Mor-
decai. In spite of this rendering of the LXX and
Jos, there is no doubt that the Heb dhashwérdsh
is the same as the Gr Xerxes; and there is no evi-
dence that Artaxerxes I was ever called Xerxes
by any of his contemporaries. The reason of the
confusion of the names by the LXX and Jos will
probably remain forever a mystery.

R. Dick Witson

ARTEMAS, 4r’té-mas (Aptepas, Artemds): One
of the seventy disciples and bishop of Lystra,
according to Dorotheus (Bibl. Maxima [Lugd.


261


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Arrogancy
Asa


1677], III, 429). He is mentioned in Titus 3 12
as one of the faithful companions of Paul. The
name is probably Gr, a masc. form of Artemis, or,
as has been suggested, a short form of Artemidorus,
a common name in Asia Minor. These contracted
forms were by no means rare in the Gr world. The
Athenian orator, Lysias, was doubtless named after
his grandfather, Lysanias, and at first may even have
been called Lysanias himself.


ARTEMIS, ar’te-mis. See Diana.
ARTIFICER, ar-tif'i-sér. See Crarts.


ARTILLERY, r-til’ér-i (23, kel): In 1 S 20
40 (AV) of Jonathan’s bow and arrows, replaced
in RV by WEAPONS; and in 1 Macc 6 51 (AV)
where the Gr words are triin RV “instruments for
casting fire and stones.”


ARTISAN, 4r’ti-zan.
ARTS. See Crarts.


ARUBBOTH, a-rub’oth, ARUBOTH, ar’ti-both
(MDIN , ha-’drubboth; AV Aruboth): One of the
12 districts from which victuals for Solomon’s
household were obtained (1 K 4 10). With Arub-
both are mentioned “‘Socoh, and all the land of
Hepher,” and as Socoh lay in the Shephelah (Josh
16 35), Arubboth probably lay in the southern part
of the Shephelah.


ARUMAH, a-ro0’ma (MAN, ’dramah, “lofty’’):
The town in which Abimelech, the son of Jerub-
baal (Gideon), dwelt when driven from Shechem
(Jgs 9 41). The ruins El-Ormeh, 6 miles 8.E. of
Shechem, may be on the site, though its position is
not known with certainty.


ARVAD, ar’vad, ARVADITES, ar’vad-its (GS,
’arwadh; “Apades, Arados; mod. Ruad): An island
city off the coast of Syria some 30 miles N. of
Tripolis, and the race inhabiting it. It wasa barren
rock covered with fortifications and houses several
stories in height. The island was about 800 ft.
long by 500 wide, surrounded by a massive wall,
and an artificial harbor was constructed on the
E. toward the main land. It developed into a
trading city in early times, as did most of the
Phoen cities on this coast. It had a powerful navy,
and its ships are mentioned in the monuments of
Egypt and Assyria. It seems to have had a sort
of hegemony over the northern Phoen cities, from
Mt. Cassius to the northern limits of Lebanon,
something like that of Sidon in the 8. It had its
own ined dynasty and coinage, and some of the
names of its kings have been recovered. Its
inhabitants are mentioned in the early lists of
Gen (10 18), and Ezk (27 8.11) refers to its seamen
and soldiers in the service of Tyre. It. brought
under its authority some of the neighboring cities
on the main land, such as Marathus and Simyra,
the former nearly opposite the island and the latter
some miles to the S. Thothmes III, of Egypt, took
it in his campaign in north Syria (1472 BC) and it
is noticed in the campaigns of Rameses IT in the
early part of the 13th cent. BC (Breasted, Ancient
Records). It is also mentioned in the Am Tab
as being in league with the Amorites in their attacks
upon the Egyp possessions in Syria (44 and 28,
B.M. Am Tab). About the year 1200, or later,
it was sacked by invaders from Asia Minor or the
islands, as were most of the cities on the coast
(Paton, Syria and Pal, 145) but it recovered when
they were driven back. Its maritime importance
is indicated by the inscriptions of the Assyr kings.


See Crarts.


Tiglath-pileser I (cir 1020) boasts that he sailed
in the ships of Arvad. Asshur-nazir-pal (cir 876)
made it tributary, but it revolted and we find 200
men of Arvad mentioned among the allies of Ben-
hadad, of Damascus, at the great battle of Quarqar,
when all Syria seems to have been in league
against Shalmaneser II (cir 854). At this time
the king of Arvad was Mattan Baal. It was
afterward tributary to Tiglath-pileser III and
Sennacherib, the king who paid it to the latter
being Abd-ilihit (cir 701). Asshur-bani-pal (cir 664)
compelled its king Yakinlu to submit and send one
of his daughters to become a member of the royal
harem (Rawlinson, Phoenicia, 456-57). Under the
Persians Arvad was allowed to unite in a confedera-
tion with Sidon and Tyre, with a common council at
Tripolis (ib 484). When Alexander the Great in-
vaded Syria in 332 BC Arvad submitted without a
struggle under her king Strato, who sent his navy to
aid Alexander in the reduction of Tyre. It seems to
have received the favor of the Seleucid kings of Syria
and enjoyed theright of asylum for political refugees.
It is mentioned in arescript from Rome about 138 BC,
in connection with other cities and rulers of the
East, to show favor to the Jews. It was after Rome
had begun to interfere in the affairs of Judaea and
Syria, and indicates that A. was of considerable
importance at that, time (see 1 Macc 16 16-23).
The townis not mentioned in the NT, and in modern
times has sunk to a small village, chiefly inhabited
by fishermen. See Arapvus. H. PortTer


ARZA, dr’za (SEN, ’area’): A steward of King
Elah, in whose house at Tirzah Zimri murdered the
king at a drinking debauch. The text is not quite


clear, and Arza might have been a servant of Zimri
(1 K 16 9).


ARZARETH, 4r’za-reth (AV Arsareth, 4r’sa-
reth): This is the land to which the ten_ tribes
were deported (2 Esd 13 45). It is described as
“another land” lying a year and a half’s journey
beyond the river, i.e. the Euphrates. It probably
answers to the Heb TIGR PUN, ’eree ’ahereth (Dt
29 28). In Jos’ time the people were still believed
to be there in countless numbers (Ant, XI, v, 2).


AS, az: Conj. and adv. (usually Gr os, hds, Somep,
hésper, Ka0es, kathds), designating: (1) Likeness:
(a) between nouns (Gen 3 5; Jgs 6 5; Phil 2 8;
He 11 27.29); (b) between verbs (Lk 6 36; Jn 6
80; 1 Cor 10 7); (c) between adjectives (1 Cor 15
48). (2) Limitation (with respect to a particular
aspect or relation) (1 Pet 4 15.16). (3) Time (Lk
8 5; 15 25; Acts 8 36). (4) Cause (1 Cor 4 1).
(5) Concession (Jn 7 10; 2 Cor 11 21). (6) Illus-
tration, in numerous passages, beginning ‘‘as it is
written,” “as it is said,” ete.


ASA, 3’sa (NON, ’asa’, “healer”; ‘Ad, Asd):

(1) A king of Judah, the third one after the
separation of Judah and Israel. He was the son
of Abijah and grandson of Rehoboam. Maacah,
his mother, or rather grandmother, was daughter
of Abishalom (Absalom) (1 K 16 1ff). The first
ten years of his reign were prosperous and peace-
ful (2 Ch 14 1). He introduced many reforms,
such as putting away the sodomites or male pros-
titutes, removing idols from holy places, breaking
down altars, pillars and Asherim. He even deposed
the “queen mother’ because of her idolatrous
practices, and of the image which she had made
for Asherah (1 K 16 12 ff; 2 Ch 14 3). Though
the king himself, in the main, was a zealous
reformer, his subjects did not always keep pace
with him (16 17). With an army of 580,000 he
repelled au attack of Zerah, the Ethiopian, and


Asadias
Ascension


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


262


routed him completely at Mareshah in the low-
lands of Judah (14 6 ff). Directed and encouraged
by Azariah the prophet, he carried on a great
revival. Having restored the great altar of burnt
offering in the temple, he assembled the people
for a renewal of their covenant with Jeh. On
this occasion 700 oxen and 7,000 sheep were offered
in sacrifice. For the next twenty years there was
apparently great prosperity and peace throughout
his kingdom, but in the thirty-sixth year of his
reign, Judah was attacked by Baasha, king of
Israel, at all times hostile to Judah (1 K 165 32).
Baasha continued to encroach and finally fortified
Ramah as a, frontier fortress. Asa, faint-hearted,
instead of putting his entire trust in Jeh, made an
alliance with Ben-hadad, of Damascus. The Syrian
king, in consideration of a large sum of money
and much treasure from the temple at Jerus, con-
sented to attack the northern portion of Baasha’s
territory. It was at this favorable moment that
Asa captured Ramah, and with the vast building
material collected there by Baasha, he built Geba
of Benjamin and Mizpah (1 K 15 16-22). This
lack of faith in Jeh was severely criticized by
Hanani the prophet. Asa, instead of listening pa-
tiently to this prophet of God, was greatly offended
and enraged and Hanani was put in prison (2 Ch
16 1-10). Three years later, Asa was attacked by
gout or some disease of the feet. Here again he
is accused of lack of faith, for ‘the sought not to
Jeh, but to the physicians” (2 Ch 16 12). Having
ruled forty-one years, he died and was buried with
great pomp in a tomb erected by himself in the
city of David, i.e. Jerus. On the whole his reign
was very successful, but it is sad to chronicle that
as the years rolled on he became less and less faith-
ful to Jeh and His law.

(2) A son of Elkanah, a Levite, who dwelt in one
of the villages of the Netophathites (1 Ch 9 16).

. W. W. Davis

ASADIAS, as-a-di‘as (AcaSias, Asadias): An

ancestor of Baruch (Bar 1 1).


ASAEL, 4’sa-el, as’a-el.


ASAHEL, as’‘a-hel ORME, ‘dsah’él, “God hath
made’’; ’Acand, Asaél):

(1) The brother of Joab and Abishai. The three
were sons of Zeruiah, one of David’s sisters (1 Ch
215.16; 28 218, etc). The three brothers
seem to have been from the beginning members
of David’s troop of strangely respectable brigands.
Asahel was distinguished for his swift running, and
this fact brought misfortune upon him and upon
Israel. When Abner and the forces of Ish-bosheth
were defeated near Gibeon, Asahel pursued Abner.
Abner knew that he could outfight Asahel, though
he could not outrun him. He also knew that the
time had come for making David king, and that
a blood feud among the leaders would be a calamity.
He expostulated with Asahel, but in vain. It
came to a fight, and Abner slew Asahel (2 8S 2, 3).
Asa result the coming of David to the throne of
all Israel was delayed; and when at last Abner
brought it about, he himself was treacherously killed
by Joab in alleged blood revenge for Asahel. Asa-
hel is mentioned as sixth in the list of David’s
“mighty men” (2 8 28 24; 1 Ch 11 26). The
earlier of the names in this list are evidently ar-
ranged in the order of seniority. If it be assumed
that the list was not made till after the death
of Asahel, still there is no difficulty in the idea that
some of the names in the list were placed there
posthumously. Asahel is also mentioned as the
fourth of David’s month-by-month captains (1 Ch
27 7). Superficial criticism describes this position
as that of “commander of a division of David’s


See Aste (Apoc).


army,” and regards the statement, “and Zebadiah
his son after him,” as a note added to explain the
otherwise incredible assertion of the text. This
criticism is correct in its implication that the
fourth captain was, as the text stands, the dead
Asahel, in the person of his son Zebadiah. Coming
from an annotator, the criticism regards this
meaning as intelligible; is it any the less so if we
regard it as coming from the author? In fact,
the statement is both intelligible and credible.
The second of David’s month-by-month captains
is Dodai, the father of the second of David’s
“mighty men”; and the fourth is Asahel, with his
son Zebadiah. With these two variations the
twelve month-by-month captains are twelve out of
the nineteen seniors in the list of mighty men, and
are mentioned in practically the same order of
seniority. The 24,000 men each month were not
a fighting army mobilized for war. The position
of general for a month, whatever else it may have
involved, was an honor held by a distinguished
veteran. There is no absurdity in the idea that the
honor may in some cases have been posthumous,
the deceased being represented by his father or his
son or by someone else.

(2) A Levite member of the commission of cap-
tains and Levites and priests which Jehoshaphat,
in his third year, sent among the cities of Judah,
with the book of the law, to spread information
among the people (2 Ch 17 7-9).

(8) One of the keepers of the storechambers in
the temple in the time of Hezekiah (2 Ch 31 18).

(4) The father of Jonathan who was one of the
two men who “stood upon this,” at the time when
Ezra and the people appointed a court to consider
the cases of those who had married foreign wives
(Ezr 10 15). The text of RV translates ‘stood up
against this,’ while the margin has “‘were appointed
over this.” Witus J. BEECHER


ASAHIAH, as-a-hi’a (WY, ‘dsdyah, “Jeh hath
made”; AV form; RV ASAIAH): ‘The king’s
servant” sent by Josiah with Hilkiah, the priest,
and others to inquire of Jeh concerning the words of
the book found in the temple (2 K 22 12.14;
2 Ch 34 20).


ASAIAH, a-sa’ya (MY, ‘dsdyah, “Jehovah has
ye written Asahiah twice in AV [2 K 22 12.

(1) A Levite of the family of Merari, and one
of those who helped bring the ark from the house
of Obed-edom to Jerus (1 Ch 6 30; 15 6.11).

(2) A leading man of the tribe of Simeon. He
was in the incursion which attacked and dispos-
sessed the Meuntm (q.v.), or the shepherd people,
in the valley of Gedor (1 Ch 4 36).

(3) An officer of Josiah sent to Huldah the
prophetess for advice regarding the law book
found by Hilkiah (2 K 22 12.14; see AsAHIAH).

(4) A Shilonite resident of Jerus (1 Ch 9 5).
He is called Maaseiah in Neh 11 5.

W. W. Daviss

ASANA, as’a-na (Acavd, Asand, Assand)=
Asnah (Ezr 2 50); omitted in Neh. The sons of
A. (temple-servants) returned with Zerubbabel to
Jerus (1 Esd 5 31).


ASAPH, Aa’saf (ON, ‘asdph): Is the name of
three men in the OT, of whom one is the reputed
author of Pss 50 and 73-83. He was one of
David’s three chief musicians, the other two being
Heman, and Ethan or Jeduthun, and we first hear
of him when the ark was taken to Jerus (1 Ch 16
16-19). He conducted with cymbals the music
performed in the tent where the ark was housed
(1 Ch 16 4.5.7.37), while his two coadjutors dis-


263


charged the same office at Gibeon (16 41.42). In
1 Ch 26 1 ff we are told that four of his sons were
appointed to conduct under him detachments of
the great chorus, the families of Heman and Jedu-
thun also furnishing leaders, and all took part at the
dedication of the temple (2 Ch 6 12). A., H., and
J. were called the king’s seers (1 Ch 25; 2 Ch 36
15), no doubt an official title of rank or dignity. The
“Sons of Asaph” are mentionedinlatertimes. They
formed a guild, and played a prominent part at each
revival of the national religion. See Music; Psaus.
James Minnar

ASARA, as’a-ra (Acapd, Asard; AV Azara):
The sons of A. (temple-servants) returned to Jerus
with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 6 31). Omitted in Ezr
and Neh.


ASARAMEL, a-sar’a-mel (Acapapéd, Asaramél
or Saramél): A name of uncertain origin occur-
ring in 1 Mace 14 28, in the inscription set up
in memory of Simon and the Maceabean family.
“On the eighteenth day of Elul, in the hundred
and seventy and second year, and this is the third
year of Simon the high priest, in Asaramel, in a
great congregation of priests and people and princes
of the nation, and of the elders of the country,”
etc. The phrase “in Asaramel’” has been taken
as referring to a place, and as the name of a title
of Simon. Ewald and others take it to be the
equivalent of SR DY SMS, ba-hdcar ‘am ’él, “in
the court of the people of God.” Another read-
ing is “in Saramel.’’ The majority prefer to take
the phrase as a title of Simon;, the original phrase
is then taken to have been SX DY “W" , w*sar
‘am ’el, “and prince of the people of God,” i.e.
ethnarch. If the translator mistook 1 (w) for 2
(bh) and read ’en, he might have left the phrase
untr? because he supposed it to be the name of a
place. Schiirer disposes of the év by taking it as
a corruption of ceyer, segen=3I0, seghen, which
is equivalent to the Gr orparyyés, siratégés (GVI,
I, 197, n. 17). H. J. Wour


ASAREEL, a-si’ré-el, a-siir’é-el. See ASAREL.


ASAREL, as’ar-el GRY , dsar’él, “God is ruler”;
AV Asareel): A descendant of Judah and a son of
Jehallelel (1 Ch 4 16).


ASARELAH, as-a-ré’la.


ASBACAPHATH, §as-bak’a-fath.
SARETH.


ASBASARETH, as-bas’a-reth (LXX ’AcBaxapds,


See ASHARELAH.


See AsBa-


Ashakaphdth, or *AcBarapé, Asbasaréth): The Gr | 2


rendering of the Assyr Asshur-ah-~iddina (“‘Hsar-
haddon’ (1 Esd 5 69; cf also Ezr 4 2.10). See
OSNAPPAR.


ASCALON, as’ka-lon (‘AcxdAov, Askdlon): In
Apoc, both AV and RV (Jth 2 28; 1 Mace 10 86;
11 60; 12 33). See ASHKELON.


ASCEND, a-send’: By derivation the Eng. word
implies motion from a lower place to (not merely
toward) a higher one; and usage tends to restrict
it to cases where the beholder is in the lower, not
the higher, position. AV uses it 39 times in all:
(1) of the going up of vapor (Ps 135 7), flame
(Jgs 20 40), or smoke (Rev 8 4); (2) of travel
from one place to another (Acts 26 1) or of the
course of a boundary (Josh 15 3); (3) of coming
up from the underworld (1 8 28 13; Rev 11 7;
17 8); and (4) of the going up (of men, angels, Our
Lord) from earth to the skies or to heaven (Gen 28
12; Jn 3 13). RV uses the appropriate form of
“to go up” in all cases falling under (2) and (3);


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Asadias
Ascension


in those under (4) it retains “‘ascend”’ with an occa-
sional change in tense; under (1) it retains “ascend”
everywhere in OT (Ex 19 18; Josh 8 20.21; Ps
135 7 || Jer 10 13 || 61 16) except Jgs 20 40, but
substitutes ‘‘went up,” “goeth up,” in NT (Rev
8 4; 14 11). The like change in the OT passages
would make the usage of RV uniform.
F. K. Farr

ASCENSION, a-sen’shun: Most modern Lives
of Christ commence at Bethlehem and end with the
Ascension, but Christ’s life began earlier and con-
tinued later. The Ascension is not only a great
fact of the NT, but a great factor in the life of
Christ and Christians, and no complete view of
Jesus Christ is possible unless the Ascension and its
consequences are included. It is the consum-
mation of His redemptive work. The Christ of
the Gospels is the Christ of history, the Christ of
the past, but the full NT picture of Christ is that
of a living Christ, the Christ of heaven, the Christ
of experience, the Christ of the present and the
future. The NT passages referring to the Ascen-
sion need elose study and their teaching careful
observation.

I. In the Gospels.—The Ascension is alluded to
in several passages in the Gospels in the course of
Our Lord’s earthly ministry (Lk 9
31.51; Jn 662; 733; 1232; 14
12.28; 16 5.10.17.28; 20 17). These
passages show that the event was con-
stantly in view, and anticipated by Our Lord. The
Ascension is also clearly implied in the allusions to
His coming to earth on clouds of heaven (Mt 24 30;
26 64).

If with most modern scholars we regard Mark’s
Gospel as ending with ver 8 of the last ch, it will be

seen to stop short at the resurrection,
2. Records though the present ending speaks of

Christ being received up into heaven,
of His sitting at the right hand of God, and of His
working with the disciples as they went preaching
the word (Mk 16 19.20). In any case this is a
bare summary only. The close of the Third Gospel
includes an evident reference to the fact of the
Ascension (Lk 24 28-53), even if the last six
words of ver 51, “and was carried up into heaven”
are not authentic. No difficulty need be felt at
the omission of the Fourth Gospel to refer to the
fact of the Ascension, though it was universally
accepted at the time the apostle wrote (Jn 20 17).
As Dr. Hort has pointed out, ‘“‘The Ascension did
not lie within the proper scope of the Gospels
... . its true place was at the head of the Acts of
the Apostles” (quoted, Swete, The Ascended Christ,


1. Antici-
pations


‘Mn In the Acts.—The story in 1 6-12 is clear.
Jesus Christ was on the Mount of Olives. There
had been conversation between Him
1. Record and His disciples, and in the course
of it He was taken up; anda cloud
received Him out of their sight (ver 9). His body
was uplifted till it disappeared, and while they con-
tinued to gaze up they saw two men who assured
them that He would come back exactly as He had
gone up. The three Gr words rendered “‘taken
up” (értp0n, epérthe) (ver 9); ‘went’? (mopevopevou,
poreuoménou) (ver 10); “received up’’ (avadryupéels,
analemphtheis) (ver 11); deserve careful notice.
This account must either be attributed to invention,
or to the testimony of an eye-witness. But Luke’s
historicity now seems abundantly proved.
The Ascension is mentioned or im-


2. Refer- plied in several passages in Acts (2
ences 33 ff; 3 21; 7 55f; 9 3-5; 22 6-8;
26 13-15). All these passages assert


the present life and activity of Jesus Christ in
heaven. :


Ascension


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


264.


HIT, In the Pauline Epistles.—In 8 34 the apostle

states four facts connected with Christ Jesus:

His death; His resurrection; His

1. Romans session at God’s right hand; His inter-

cession. The last two are clearly the
culminating points of a series of redemptive acts.

While for its purpose Rom necessarily lays stress
on the Resurrection, Eph has as part of its special

aim an emphasis on the Ascension.
2. Ephe- In 1 20 God’s work wrought in Christ
sians is shown to have gone much farther
than the Resurrection, and to have
“made him to sit at his right hand in the heavenly
places,” thereby constituting Him the supreme
authority over all things, and especially Head of the
church (1 20-23). This idea concerning Christ is
followed in 2 6 by the association of believers with
Christ ‘in the heavenly places,” and the teaching
finds its completest expression in 4 8-11, where the
Ascension is connected with the gift of the heavenly
Christ as the crowning feature of His work. Nothing
is more striking than the complementary teaching
of Rom and Eph respectively in their emphasis on
the Resurrection and Ascension.

In 2 6-11 the exaltation of Christ is shown to
follow His deep humiliation. He who. humbled

Himself is exalted to the place of
3. Philip- supreme authority. In 3 20 Chris-
pians tians are taught that their common-
wealth is in heaven, ‘whence also we
wait for a Saviour.”

The emphasis placed on the second advent of
Christ in 1 Thess is an assumption of the fact of

the Ascension. Christians are wait-
4, Thessa- ing for God’s Son from heaven (1 10)
lonians who is to “descend from heaven, with

a shout, with the voice of the arch-
angel, and with the trump of God” (4 16).

The only allusion to the Ascension in the Pas-

toral Epistles is found in the closing statement of
what seems to be an early Christian
6. Timothy song in 1 Tim 3 16. He who was
“manifested in the flesh . . . . received
up in glory.”

IV. In Hebrews.—In this epistle there is more
recorded about the Ascension and its consequences
than in any other part of the NT. The facts of
the Ascension and Session are first of all stated
(1 3) with all that this implies of definite position
and authority (1 4-13). Christians are regarded
as contemplating Jesus as the Divine Man in
heaven (2 9), though the meaning of the phrase,
“crowned with glory and honor” is variously inter-
preted, some thinking that it refers to the result
and outcome of His death, others thinking that He
was “crowned for death” in the event of the
Transfiguration (Matheson in Bruce, Hebrews, 83).
Jesus Christ is described as “a great High Priest,
who hath passed through the heavens” (4 14), as a
Forerunner who is entered within the veil for us,
and as a High Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedek (6 20). As such He “‘abideth for ever,”
and “ever liveth to make intercession” (7 24.25).
The chief point of the epistle itself is said to be
“such a high priest, who sat down on the right hand
of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens” (8 1),
and His position there implies that He has obtained
eternal redemption for His people and is appearing
before God on their behalf (9 12.24). This session
at God’s right hand is also said to be with a view
to His return to earth when His enemies will have
become His footstool (10 12.13), and one of the last
exhortations bids believers to look unto Jesus as the
Author and Perfecter of faith who has “sat down at
the right hand of the throne of God” (12 2).

V. In the Petrine Epistles.—The only reference
to the Ascension is in 1 Pet 3 22, where Christ’s


exaltation after His sufferings is set forth as the
pattern and guarantee of Christian glorification after
endurance of persecution. ater
VI. In the Johannine Writings.—Nothing is re-
corded of the actual Ascension, but 1 Jn 2 1 says
that “we have an Advocate with the
1. Epistles Father.” The word ‘‘Advocate” is the
sameas‘‘Comforter”’ in Jn 14 16, where
it is used of the Holy Spirit. Christ is the Com-
forter ‘in relation to the Father,” and the Holy
Spirit is the Comforter dwelling in the
2. Apoca- soul.
lypse All the references in the Apocalypse
either teach or imply the living Christ
who is in heaven, as active in His church and as
coming again (Rev 1 7.13; 5 5-13; 6 9-17; 14 1-5).
VI. Summary of NT Teaching.—The NT calls
attention to the fact of Ascension and the fact
of the Session at God’s right hand.
1. The Fact Three words are used in the Gr in
connection with the Ascension: ana-
bainein (ascendere), “to go up”; analambdnesthat
(adsumi), “to be taken up’; poretesihai, “to go.”
The Session is connected with Ps 110, and this
OT passage finds frequent reference or allusion in
all parts of the NT. But it is used especially
in He in connection with Christ’s priesthood, and
with His position of authority and honor at God’s
right hand (Swete, The Ascended Christ, 10-15).
But the NT emphasizes the fact of Christ’s exalta-
tion rather than the mode, the latter being quite
secondary. Yet the acceptance of the fact must
be carefully noticed, for it is impossible to ques-
tion that this is the belief of all the NT wniters.
They base their teaching on the fact and do not
rest content with the moral or theological aspects
of the Ascension apart from the historic reality.
The Ascension is regarded as the point of contact
between the Christ of the gospels and of the epistles.
The gift of the Spirit is said to have come from the
ascended Christ. The Ascension is the culminating
point of Christ’s glorification after His Resurrection,
and is regarded as necessary for His heavenly
exaltation. The Ascension was proved and de-
manded by the Resurrection, though there was
no need to preach it as part of the evangelistic
message. Like the Virgin birth, the Ascension
involves doctrine for Christians rather than non-
Christians. It is the culmination of the Incarna-
tion, the reward of Christ’s redemptive work, and
the entrance upon a wider sphere of work in His
glorified condition, as the Lord and Priest of His
church (Jn 7 39; 16 7).
We may summarize what the NT tells us of Our
Lord’s present life in heaven by observing care-
fully what is recorded in the various
2. The passages of the NT. He ascended into
Message heaven (Mk 16 19; Lk 24 51; Acts
1 9); He is seated on the right hand
of God (Col 31; He 13; 81; 10 12); He
bestowed the gift of the Holy Spirit on the Day
of Pentecost (Acts 4 9.33); He added disciples to
the church (Acts 2 47); He worked with the
disciples as they went forth preaching the gospel
(Mk 16 20); He healed the impotent man (Acts 3
16); He stood to receive the first martyr (Acts
7 56); He appeared to Saul of Tarsus (Acts 9 5);
He makes intercession for His people (Rom 8 26;
He 7 25); He is able to succor the tempted
(He 2 18); He is able to sympathize (He 4 15);
He is able to save to the uttermost (He 7 25);
He lives forever (He 7 24; Rev 118); He is
our Great High Priest (He 7 26; 8 1; 10 21); He
possesses an intransmissible or inviolable priest-
hood (He 7 24); He appears in the presence of
God for us (He 9 24); He is our Advocate with the
Father (1 Jn 2 1); He is waiting until all oppo-


265 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Ascension
———-.-______—_—_
sition to Him is overcome (He 10 13). This in- The Ascension and Session are regarded as the


cludes all the teaching of the NT concerning our
Lord’s present life in heaven.

VUI. Problems.—There are two questions usually
associated with the Ascension which need our atten-
tion.

There is no greater difficulty in connection with
the Ascension than with the Resurrection, or the

Incarnation. Of Our Lord’s resurrec-
1. Relation tion body we know nothing. All we
to the Laws can say is that it was different from


of Nature the body laid in the tomb and yet
essentially the same; the same and yet |
essentially different. The Ascension was the natural


close of Our Lord’s earthly life, and as such, is in-
separable from the Resurrection. Whatever, there-
fore, may be said of the Resurrection in regard to
the laws of nature applies equally to the Ascension.

The record in Acts is sometimes objected to
because it seems to imply the localization of heaven

above the earth. But is not this
2. Localiza- taking the narrative in too absolutely
tion of the bald and literal a sense? Heaven is
Spiritual at once a place and a state, and as
World personality necessarily implies locality,

some place for Our Lord’s Divine,
yet human person is essential. To speak of heaven
as “above”? may be only symbolical, but the ideas
of fact and locality must be carefully adhered to.
And yet it is not merely local, and “we have to
think less of a transition from one locality than of
a transition from one condition to another.....
the real meaning of the ascension is that ....
Our Lord withdrew from a world of limitations’ to
that higher existence where God is (Milligan,- As-
cension and Heavenly Priesthood, 26). It matters
not that our conception today of the physical
universe is different from that of NT times. We
still speak of the sun setting and rising, though
strictly these are not true. The details of the
Ascension are really unimportant. Christ disap-
peared from view, and no question need be raised
either of distance or direction. We accept the
fact without any scientific explanation. It was a
change of conditions and mode of existence; the
essential fact is that, He departed and disappeared.
Even Keim admits that “the ascension of Jesus
follows from all the facts of His career’? (quoted,
Milligan, 13), and Weiss is equally clear that the
Ascension is as certain as the Resurrection, and
stands and falls therewith (Milligan, 14).

IX. Its Relation to Christ Himself.—The As-
cension was the exaltation and glory of Jesus Christ
after His work was accomplished (Phil 2 9). He
had a threefold glory: (1) as the Son of God before
the Incarnation (Jn 17 5); (2) as God manifest
in the flesh (Jn 1 14); (3) as the exalted Son of
God after the Resurrection and Ascension (Lk 24
26; 1 Pet 121). The Ascension meant very
much to Christ Himself, and no study of the sub-
ject must overlook this aspect of NT teaching.
His exaltation to the right hand of God meant (1)
the proof of victory (Eph 4 8); (2) the position
of honor (Ps 110 1); (3) the place of power (Acts
233); (4) the place of happiness (Ps 26 11);
(5) the place of rest (“seated”); (6) the place of
permanence (‘‘for ever’’). anit

X. Its Teaching for Christians.—The importance
of the Ascension for Christians lies mainly in the
fact that it was the introduction to Our Lord’s
present life in heaven which means so much in the
believer’s life. The spiritual value of the Ascen-
sion lies, not in Christ’s physical remoteness, but
in His spiritual nearness. He is free from earthly
limitations, and His life above is the promise and
guarantee of ours. ‘Because I live ye shall live
also.”


culminating point of Christ’s redemptive work
(He 8 1), and at the same time the
1. Redemp- demonstration of the sufficiency of
tion Ac- His righteousness on man’s behalf.
complished For.sinful humanity to reach heaven
two essential features were necessary:
(g) the removal of sin (negative); and (6) the
presence of righteousness (positive). The Resur-
rection demonstrated the sufficiency of the atone-
ment for the former, and the Ascension demon-
strated the sufficiency of righteousness for the
latter. The Spirit of God was to convict the world
of “righteousness” “because I go to the Father”
(Jn 16 10). In accord with this we find that
in the Epistle to the He every reference to Our
Lord’s atonement is in the past, implying complete-
ness and perfection, ‘“‘once for all.”
This is the PSE and special message of He.
Priesthood finds its essential features in the repre-
sentation of man to God, involving
2. High access into the Divine presence (He
Priesthood 6 1). It means drawing near and
dwelling near to God. In He, Aaron
is used as typical of the work, and Melchizedek as
typical of the person of the priest; and the two acts
mainly emphasized are the offering in death and
the entrance into heaven. Christ is both priest
and priestly victim. He offered propitiation and
then entered into heaven, not “with,” but “through”
His own blood (He 9 12), and as High Priest, at
once human and Divine, He is able to sympathize
(He 4 15); able to succor (He 2 18); and able to
save (He 7 25). See Curist as Prizst.
The Ascension constituted Christ as Head of the
ehurch (Eph 1 22; 410.15; Col 2 19). This
Headship teaches that He is the Lord
3. Lordship and Life of the church. He is never
spoken of as King in relation to His
Body, the Church, only as Head and Lord. The
fact that He is at the right hand of God suggests in
the symbolical statement that He is not yet properly
King on His own throne, as He will be hereafter
as ‘King of the Jews,” and ‘King of Kings.”
In several NT passages this is regarded as the
crowning point of Our Lord’s work in heaven (Rom


8 33.34). He is the perfect Mediator
4. Inter- between God and man (1 Tim 2 5;
cession He 8 6); our Advocate with the


Father (1 Jn 2 1). His very presence
at God’s right hand pleads on behalf of His people.
There is no presentation, or representation, or
pleading, of Himself, for His intercession is never
associated with any such relation to the sacrifice
of Calvary. Nor is there any hint in the NT of a
relation between the Eucharist and His life and work
in heaven. This view popularized by the late Dr.
William Milligan. (The Ascension, etc, 266), and in-
dorsed from other standpoints in certain aspects
of Anglican teaching (Swete, The Ascended Christ,
46), does not find any support in the NT. As
Westcott says, “The modern conception of Christ
pleading in heaven His passion, ‘offering His blood,’
on behalf of man, has no foundation in this epistle”
(Hebrews, 230). And Hort similarly remarks, ‘The
words, ‘Still... . His prevailing death He pleads’
have no apostolic warrant, and cannot even berecon-
ciled with apostolic doctrine” (Life and Letters, II,
213). Our Lord’s intercession is not so much in what
He says asin what He is. He pleads by His pres-
ence on His Father’s throne, and he is able to save
to the uttermost through His intercession, because
of His perpetual life and His inviolable, undelegated,
intransmissible priesthood (He 7 24.25).

There is an intimate and essential connection
between the Ascension of Christ and the descent of
the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit was given to Christ


Ascension
Ashdodites


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


266


as the acknowledgment and reward of His work
done, and having received this ‘Promise of the
Father’? He bestowed Him upon His
5. The Gift people (Acts 2 33). By means of the
of the Spirit the twofold work 1s done, of con-
Spirit vincing sinners (Jn 16 9), and of edify-
ing believers (Jn 14 12; see alsoJn 14

25.26; 16 14.15).
It is in connection with the Ascension and Our
Lord’s life in heaven that we understand the force
of such a passage as “‘Lo, I am with
6. Presence you always” (Mt 28 20). ‘He ever
liveth” is the supreme inspiration of
the individual Christian and of the whole church.
All through the NT from the time of the Ascension


onward, the one assurance is that Christ is living;


and in His life we live, hold fellowship with God,
receive grace for daily living and rejoice in victory
over sin, sorrow and death.

Our Lord’s life in heaven looks forward to a con-


summation. He is “expecting till his enemies be

made his footstool” (He 10 13 AV).
7. Expec- He is described as our Forerunner
tation (He 6 18 ff), and His presence above


_ .,.3s the assurance that His people will
share His life hereafter. But His Ascension is also
associated with His coming again (Phil 3 20.21;
1 Thess 4 16; He 9 28). At this coming there
will be the resurrection of dead saints, and the
transformation of living ones (1 Thess 4 16.17),
to be followed by the Divine tribunal with Christ
as Judge (Rom 2 16; 2 Tim 4 1.8). To His own
people this coming will bring joy, satisfaction and
glory (Acts 3 21; Rom 8 19); to His enemies defeat
and condemnation (1 Cor 16 25; He 2 8; 10 13).

Reviewing all the teaching of Our Lord’s present
life in heaven, appearing on our behalf, interceding
by His presence, bestowing the Holy Spirit, govern-
ing and guiding the church, sympathizing, helping
and saving His people, we are called upon to ‘“‘lift
up our hearts,” for it is in occupation with the
living Christ that we find the secret of peace, the
assurance of access, and the guaranty of our per-
manent relation to God. Indeed, we are clearly
taught in He that it is in fellowship with the
present life of Christ in heaven that Christians
realize the difference between spiritual immaturity
and maturity (He 6 1; 10 1), and it is the pur-
pose of this epistle to emphasize this truth above
all others. Christianity is “the religion of free
access to God,” and in proportion as we realize,
in union with Christ in heaven, this privilege of
drawing near and keeping near, we shall find in the
attitude of “lift up your hearts’’ the essential features
of a strong, vigorous, growing, joyous Christian life.

Lireraturs.—Milligan, Ascension and Heavenly Priest-
hood of Our Lord; Swete, The Appearances of the Risen
Lord; The Ascended Christ; Lacey, The Historic Christ;
Lives of Christ, by Neander, B. Weiss, Edersheim, Farrar,
Geikie, Gilbert; Fairbairn, Studies in the Life of Christ;
Knowling, Witness of the Epistles; Bernard in Expos T,
1900-1901, 152-55; Brucein Expos. Gr Test, I; Swete,
Apostles’ Creed; Westcott, Historic Faith, ch vi; Revela-
tion of the Risen Lord, chs x, xi; Ep.to He; art. ‘* Ascen-
sion’’in HDB; Paget, Studies in the Christian Character,
sermons xxi, xxii; Findlay, Things Above; art. ‘‘Priest’’
in HDB (in NT), ‘‘Hebrews"’: Davidson, Hebrews, special
note on “ Priesthood of Christ"; Dimock, Our One Priest
on High; The Christian Doctrine_of Sacerdotium; Pe-
rowne, Our High Priest in Heaven; Rotherham, Studies in
He; Soames, The Priesthood of the New Covenant; Hubert
Brooke, The Great High Priest; H. W. Williams, The
Priesthood of Christ; J. 8. Candlish, The Christian Salva-
tion (1899), 6; G. Milligan, The Theol. of Ep.to He (1899),
111; R. C. Moberly, Ministerial Priesthood (1897); A. 8.
Peake, ‘‘Hebrews’’ in Cent. Bible; Beyschlag, NT Theol.,
II, 315; art. ‘“Ascension’’ in DCG; art. “ Assumption
and Ascension’ in HDRE; art. “ Ascension’’ In JE;
Charles, The Book of En; The Slavonic Secrets of En; The
Book of Jub; The Apocalypse of Bar; The Ascension of
Isaiah; Assumption of Moses; M. R. James, ‘‘ Testament
of Abraham”' 7'S, II, 2, 1892; Martensen, Christian Dog-
matics.

W. 4H. Grirrita THoMas


ASCENSION OF ISAIAH. See ApocaLyptic
LITERATURE.


ASCENT, a-sent’:

(1) The rendering in AV twice, RV 14 times cor-
rectly, of Heb ma‘dleh, “ascent,” ‘‘pass,” as a geo-
graphical term (AV Nu 34 4; 28 15 30; RV
Josh 10 10; Jgs 8 13, etc).

(2) The rendering in AV and RV of ‘olah in
1 K 10 5, “his ascent by which he went up unto
the house of Jeh’’; but ‘alah everywhere else
means ‘“burnt-offering,” and all ancient VSS sup-
port RVm, “his burnt-offering which he offered”
(caused to go up), ete.

(3) In 2Ch 94 (|1K 10 5) a very slight
textual correction (supported by LXX) gives us
the same words as in 1 K instead of the difficult
‘dliyah, “upper chamber,”’ not “ascent” as AV and
RV render it against all usage elsewhere.

(4) In RV Ezk 40 31.34.37; Neh 12 37, of a
flight of steps, stairs.

(5) In RV (Heb ‘dltyah), Neh 3 31.32, m “upper
chamber’”’ is to be preferred to text “ascent.”


F, K. Farr
ASCHENAZ, ash’é-naz.


See ASHKENAZ.
ASEAS, a-sé’as (’Acalas, Asatas=Isshijah [Ezr
10 31]): Ason of Annas, who put away his “strange
wife’ (1 Esd 9 32).


ASEBEBIAS, a-seb-é-bi/as ((AceBnBlas, Asebéebi-
as; AV Asebebia, a-seb-e-bi’a): A., his sons and
brethren returned with Ezra to perform the functions
of priesthood in Jerus (1 Esd 8 47). Cf Sherebiah
(Ezr 8 18).


ASEBIAS, as-é-bi’as (’AceBlas, Asebias; AV
Asebia, as-é-bi’a): A. returned with Ezra to per-
form the function of a priest in Jerus (1 Esd 8 48).
Cf Hashabiah (Ezr 8 19).


ASENATH, as’é-nath (Acevé, Asenéth): The
wife of Joseph, daughter of Poti-phera, mother of
Manasseh and Ephraim (Gen 41 45.50; 46 20).
She was evidently an Egyp woman and bore an
Egyp name. M308, pointed by the Massoretes as
20%, ’ds*nath, appears in the LXX as dseneth or
asenneth. The last two consonants appear to rep-
resent the name of the Egyp goddess Neith. The
first part of the name will then represent either
ns=“belonging to’ (so Brugsch and generally),
or ’ws-n (note the doubled n in the LXX tran-
scription) = ‘‘she belongs to”’ (so Spiegelberg). It is
possible that these four letters represent the Egyp
name Sv-t (so Lieblein and others), though the &
must then be explained as ’aléph prostheticum and
the ™ would be less regular than a “to stand for
the Egyp feminine t. J. Oscar Born


ASER, 4’sér (’Actp, Asér): AV: Gr form of
Asher (thus RV) (Lk 2 36; Rev 7 6).


ASERER, as’é-rér. See Szrar.


ASH, ash (TIX, ’dren; RV FIR TREE; RVm
: A maker of idols “planteth a fir-tree [m,
“ash”], and the rain doth nourish it” (Isa 44 14).
It is a suggestion as old as Luther that the final
letter 4, 1, was originally a 7, z, and that the word
should be ’erez, ‘“‘cedar’’; the chief objection is that
cedar occurs just before in the same ver. The word
’6ren seems to be connected with the Assyr irin,
meaning fir or cedar or allied tree. ‘Fir’ has sup-
port from the LXX and from the rabbis. Post
(HDB) suggests as probable the stone pine, Pinus
pinea, which has been extensively planted round
Beir(t and unlike most planted trees flourishes with-
out artificial watering—‘‘the rain doth nourish it.”
The tr ‘‘ash” was probably suggested by the


267 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ascension
Ashdodites


fanciful resemblance of the Heb ’éren and the Lat
ornus, the manna ash of Europe. Three varieties
of ash flourish in Syria, Fraxinus ornus, F. excelsior
and F. oxycarpa. The last mentioned, which is
common in parts of N. Pal, being a large tree some
30 to 40 ft. high, might suit the context were there
anything philological to support the idea.
E. W. G. MastrermMan
ASH (Bear). See Astronomy.


ASHAMED, a-shimd’: Almost exclusively moral
in significance; confusion or abashment through
consciousness of guilt or of its exposure. Often
including also a sense of terror or fear because of
the disgrace connected with the performance of
some action. Capacity for shame indicates that
moral sense (conscience) is not extinct. ‘Ashamed”
occurs 96 out of 118 times in the OT. Heb WA,
bésh, “‘to feel shame” (Lat pudere), with derivatives
occurs 80 times; pb>, kalam, “to shame,” includ-
ing the thought of “disgrace,” “reproach”; “27,
haphér, ‘‘to blush’: hence shame because of frus-
trated plans (uniformly in RV “confounded”); Gr
aicxbvouat, aischinomai, “suffused with shame,”
passive only and its compounds. Uses: (1) A few
times, of actual embarrassment, as of Hazael before
the steadfast look of Elisha (2 K 8 11; see also
28105; 2K 217; Ear 8 22). (2) Innocence
not capable of shame: ‘“‘both naked....and....
not a.” (Gen 2 25; see SHame); the redeemed no
occasion for (Ps 34 5 AV; 1 Jn 2 28); Christ not
of “brethren” (He 2 11); nor Christian of gospel
(Rom 1 16); nor God of men of faith (He 11 16);
nor they who trust in God (Isa 60 7; 54 4; Joel
2 26). (3) Sense of guilt: “Iama..... for our
iniquities” (Ezr 9 6); “of thy lewd way” (Ezk 16
27.61); ascribed to idolaters chagrined at worth-
lessness of idols (Isa 1 29; 44 9.11; 45 16; Jer 2
26); to enemies (Ps 6 10); to wicked (Ps 31 17);
to all who forsake God (Jer 17 13); to those who
trust in human help, as Israel of Egypt and Assyria,
and Moab of Chemosh (Jer 2 36; 48 13); to a
mother of wicked children (Jer 50 12). (4) Re-
pentance causes shame for sin (Jer 31 19; Rom 6
21). (5) Calamities also, and judgments (Jer 14
3.4; 165 9; 20 11). (6) Capacity for shame may
be lost through long-continued sin (Jer 6 15; 8 12;
ef 3 3), exceptionally striking passages on the dead-
ening power of immorality, suggestive of 1 Tim 4
2; Titus 115. (7) The grace of Christ delivers
from the shame of moral timidity (Rom 1 16; 2 Tim
1 8.12.16; 1 Pet 4 16). (8) At Christ’s second
coming His followers will ‘not be a. before him”
(1 Jn 2 28); at the final judgment He will be a.
of all who have been a. of Him (Mk 8 38; Lk 9
26; cf Mt 10 33; He 11 16). (9) The word lends
itself to rich poetic use, e.g. Lebanon, with faded
and falling foliage, “is a.” (RV ‘“‘confounded’’) at
the desolations of the land under Sennacherib (Isa
33 9); so great is God’s glory in the new Jerus that
“the sun [is] a.” in His presence (Isa 24 23), ex-
plaining the glorious fig. in Rev 21 23; 22 5. (The
references in this art. are from AV; RV frequently
replaces ‘ashamed’ by ‘put to shame.’) See SHAME.

‘ Dwicut M. Prarr

ASHAN, a’shan (702, ‘ashan): An unknown site
in the domain of Judah (Josh 15 42), possessed by
Simeon (Josh 19 7), and mentioned among the
priests’ cities in 1 Ch 6 59, (44)=Josh 21 16
(FY, ‘ayin, is a corruption of FUP, ‘éshan). Chor-
ashan (or Borashan), which was probably the site
of some reservoir in the S.W. part of Judah (1 8
30 30), is the same as Ashan,


ASHARELAH, ash-a-ré’la, ASARELAH (MON TWN
‘dsar’alah): One of the Asaphites appointed by


David to the temple service (1 Ch 25 2); in ver
14 he is called Jesharelah. The latter element
in both forms may be (él) ‘‘God,’’ but the meaning
of the former part in the first form is doubtful.


‘ Thes. compares (ON, “dsar, “to bind,” “whom God


has bound [by a vow].”


ASHBEA, ash’bé-a, ash-bé’a (YAWN, ‘ashbé*):
“The house of Ashbea,” a family of linen-workers
mentioned in 1 Ch 4 21. We might render béth
’ashbé"' as their dwelling-place; nothing is known of
such a place nor is this house of weavers referred to
in any other place.


ASHBEL, ash’bel, ASHBELITE, ash’bel-it OSW¥ ,
’ashbél): The gentilic name ‘‘Ashbelite’’ is found
in Nu 26 38, second son of Benjamin (Gen 46 21).
In 1 Ch 7 6-11 (6) “Jediael” (“known to God’’)
is substituted for the heathen-sounding ‘‘Ashbel”
(“Ishbaal,” “man of Baal’). The chronicler,
in this case, conforms literally to the principle laid |
down in Hos 2 17; the title ‘Baal’ (“lord”) was
applied in early days (e.g. in the days of Saul) to
the national God of Israel, but in later days the
prophets objected to it because it was freely applied
to heathen gods (cf IsHposHerH). In 1 Ch 8 1
the three names Bela, Ashbel, Aharah (=Ahiram)
are taken from Nu 26 38, however, without change.

na H. J. Wor

ASHDOD, ash’dod (TUN, ’ashdadh; ’Atorés,
Azéiés; mod. Esdud): One of the five chief cities of
the Philis. ‘The name means stronghold or fortress,
and its strength may be inferred by the fact that
Psammetik I, of Egypt, besieged it for many years
(Herodotus says 29). Some of the Anakim were
found there in the days of Joshua (Josh 11 22),
and the inhabitants were too strong for the Israelites
at that time. It was among the towns assigned to
Judah, but was not occupied by her ( Josh 13 3;
16 46.47). It was still independent in the days of
Samuel, when, after the defeat of the Israclites, the
ark was taken to the house of Dagon in Ashdod (1 S
6 1.2). Wehave no account of its being occupied
even by David, although he defeated the Philis
many times, and we have no definite knowledge of
its coming into the hands of Judah until the time of
Uaziah (2 Ch 26 6). Ashdod, like the other
Phili towns, came under the authority of the
Assyr monarchs, and we have mention of it in their
records. It revolted against Sargon in 711 BC,
and deposed the Assyr governor, Akhimiti, who had
been appointed by him in 720. Sargon at once
dispatched a force to subdue the rebels and the
city was severely punished. This is referred to by
Isaiah (Isa 20 1). Amos had prophesied such a
calamity some years before (1 8), and Jeremiah
refers to “the remnant of Ashdod” as though it
had continued weak until his day (Jer 25 20).
Zephaniah (Zeph 2 4) refers to the desolation of
Ashdod and Zechariah to its degraded condition
(Zec 9 6). It continued to be inhabited, however,
for we find the Jews intermarried with them after
the return from Babylon (Neh 13 23.24). In the
Maccabean period we are told that Judas and Jona-
than both took it and purified it of idolatry (1 Macc
6 68; 10 84). In these passages it is called Azotus,
as it is also in the NT (Acts 8 40). In the 4th
cent. AD it became the seat of a bishopric. It had
been restored in the time of Herod, by the Rom
general Gabinius, and was presented to Salome, the
sister of Herod, by the emperor Augustus. It is
now a small village about 18 miles N.E. of Gaza.

H. Porrsr

ASHDODITES, ash’dod-its: Inhabitants of
Asupop (q.v.) (Josh 13 3; AV Ashdothites, ash’-
doth-its; Neh 4 7).


Ashdoth Pis
Ashkenaz


ASHDOTH PISGAH, ash’doth piz’ga (NITUN
MOR, ’ashddth ha-pisgah): Thus AV for RV
“The slopes [RVm springs] of Pisgah.” The spurs
and ravines, or the “‘shoulders” of Pisgah are meant.
’Ashédah is ‘‘a pouring out,’ and ’dshedath are the
slopes of a mountain from which springs gush forth.
In Josh 10 40; 12 8, ’Ashédoth, tr4 “springs” in
AV, is ‘slopes’ in RV (Dt 3 17; Josh 12 3; 13 20).
See Pisecau.

ASHER, ash’ér (WWS, ’dshér; ’Aotp, Asér): Ac-
cording to the Bib. account Asher was the eighth of

Jacob’s sons, the second borne to
1. Biblical him by Zilpah the handmaid of Leah.
Account His uterine brother was Gad (Gen 35

26). With four sons and one daughter
he went down into Egypt (Gen 46 17). At his
birth Leah exclaimed, ‘Happy am I! for the
daughters will call me happy: and she called his
name Asher,” i.e. Happy (Gen 30 13). This fore-
shadowing of good fortune for him is repeated in
the blessing of Jacob: ‘“‘Hisbread shall be fat, and
he shall yield royal dainties” (Gen 49 20); and
again in that of Moses: “Blessed be Asher with
children; let him be acceptable unto his brethren,
and let him dip his foot in oil” (Dt 33 24). His
family prospered in Egypt, and at the Exodus the
tribe of Asher is numbered at 41,500 adult males
(Nu 1 41). At the second census the number is
given 53,400 (Nu 26 47). The place of Asher in
the desert march was with the stana rd of the camp
of Dan, on the north of the tabernacle, along with
Dan and Naphtali; the prince of the tribe being
Pagiel the son of Ochran (Nu 2 27 ff). Among
the spies Asher was represented by Sethur (Nu 13
13). The tribe seems to have taken no important
part in the subsequent history. It raised no hero,
and gave no deliverer to the nation. In the time
of David it was of so little consequence that the
name is not found in the list of chief rulers (1 Ch
27 16 ff). The rich land assigned to Asher sloped
to the Phoen seaboard, and brought him into touch
with the Phoenicians who were already world-
famous in trade and commerce. He probably soon
became a partner in their profitable enterprises, and
lost any desire he may ever have had to eject them
from their cities (Jgs 1 31). He cared not who
ruled over him if he were free to pursue the ends
of commerce. Zebulun might jeopard their lives
unto the death, and Naphtali upon the high places
of the field, to break the power of the foreign op-
pressor, but Asher ‘‘sat still at the haven of the
sea, and abode by his creeks” (Jgs 5 17 ff). He
was probably soon largely absorbed by the people
with whose interests his were so closely identified:
nevertheless ‘‘divers of Asher,” moved by the appeal
of Hezekiah, “humbled themselves, and came to
Jerus”’ (2 Ch 30 11 AV). To this tribe belonged
the prophetess Anna (Lk 2 36 ff).

According to a modern theory, the mention of the
slave girl Zilpah as the mother of Asher is meant

to indicate that the tribe-was of mixed
2. Modern blood, and arose through the mingling
Theory of Israelites with the Canaanites. It

is suggested that the name may have
been taken from that of the Can. clan found in the
Am Tab, Mari abd-Ashirti, “sons of the servant
of Asherah.” A similar name occurs in the in-
scriptions of the Egyp Seti I (14th cent. BC),
‘Aseru, a state in western Galilee (W. Max Miiller,
As. und Eur., 236-39). This people it is thought
may have associated themselves with the invaders
from the wilderness. But while the speculations
are interesting, it is impossible to establish any
relationship between these ancient tribes and Asher.

The boundaries of the territory are given in con-
siderable detailin Josh 19 25 ff (cf Jgs 1 311; Josh


gah THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


268


17 10f). Only a few of the places named can
be identified with certainty. Dor, the modern Tan-
tarah, although occupied by Manasseh
3. Territory belonged to Asher. Wady ez-Zerqa,
of Asher possibly identical with Shihor-libnath,
which enters the sea to the 8. of
Dor, would form the southern boundary. The
lot of Asher formed a strip of land from 8 to 10 miles
wide running northward along the shore to the
neighborhood of Sidon, touching Issachar, Zebulun
and Naphtalion the HE. Asher seems to have taken
possession of the territory by a process of peaceful
penetration, not by conquest, and as we have seen,
he never drove out the Phoenicians from their
cities. The rich plain of Acre, and the fertile
flats between the mountain and the sea near Tyre
and Sidon therefore remained in Phoen hands. But
the valleys breaking down westward and opening on
the plains have always yielded fine crops of grain.
Remains of an ancient oak forest still stand to the
N. of Carmel. The vine, the fig, the lemon and the
orange flourish. Olive trees abound, and the supplies
of olive oil which to this day are exported from the
district recall the word of the old-time blessing, “Let
him dip his foot in oil.” W. Ewine


ASHER, ash’ér (WR, ’ashér):

(1) See preceding article.

(2) A town on the southern border of Manasseh
(Josh 17 7). The site is unknown.

(8) A place of this name is mentioned in Apoc
(Tob 1 2), identified with Hazor, in Naphtali. See
Hazor.


ASHERAH, a-shé’ra (TVDN, ‘dshérah; &dcos,
dlsos, mistranslated “grove” in the AV, after the
LXX and Vulg):


1. References to the Goddess

2. Assyrian Origin of the Goddess
3. Her Symbol

4, The Attributes of the Goddess


Was the name of a goddess whose worship was
widely spread throughout Syria and Canaan; plur.
Asherim, ash’er-im.

Her “image” is mentioned in the OT (1 K 15


138; 2K 217; 2 Ch 16 16), as well as her
“prophets” (1 K 18 19) and the ves-
1. Refer- sels used in her service (2 K 23 4).


ences to the In Assyria the name appears under
Goddess _ the two forms of Asratu and Asirtu;
it was to Asratu that a monument
found near Diarbekir was dedicated on behalf of
Khammu-rabi (Amraphel )‘‘king of the Amorites,”
and the Amorite king of whom we hear so much in
Am Tab bears the name indifferently of Ebed-
Asrati and Ebed-Asirti.
Like so much else m Can. religion, the name and
worship of Asherah were borrowed from Assyria.
She was the wife of the war-god Asir
2. Assyrian whose name was identified with that


Origin of | of the city of Assur with the result
the God- that he became the national god of
dess Assyria. Since Asirtu was merely the


feminine form of Asir, “the superin-
tendent” or ‘‘leader,” it is probable that it was
originally an epithet of Istar (Ashtoreth) of Nine-
veh. In the W., however, Asherah and Ashtoreth
came to be distinguished from one another, Asherah
being exclusively the goddess of fertility, whereas
Ashtoreth passed into a moon-goddess.
In Assyr asirtu, which appears also under the
forms asrdatu, esrétt (plur.) and asru, had the further
signification of “sanctuary.”  Origi-
3. Her nally Asirtu, the wife of Asir, and
Symbol asirtu, “sanctuary,” seem to have had
no connection with one another, but
the identity in the pronunciation of the two words
caused them to be identified in signification, and as


269


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 4shdoth Pisgah


Ashkenaz


the tree-trunk or cone of stone which symbolized
Asherah was regarded as a Beth-el or “house of the
deity,’ wherein the goddess was immanent, the word
Asirtu, Asherah, came to denote the symbol of the
goddess. The trunk of the tree was often provided
with branches, and assumed the form of the tree of
life. It was as a trunk, however, that it was
forbidden to be erected by the side of “the altar
of Jehovah” (Dt 16 21; see Jgs 6 25.28.30; 2 K
23 6). Accordingly the symbol made for Asherah
by his mother was “‘cut down” by Asa (1 K 16 18).
So, too, we hear of Asherim or symbols of the god-
dess being set up on the high places under the shade
of a green tree (Jer 17 2; see 2 K 17 10). Ma-
nasseh introduced one into the temple at Jerus
(2 K 21 3.7).
Asherah was the goddess of fertility, and thus
represented the Bab Istar in her character as god-
dess of love and not of war. In one
4. The At- of the cuneiform tablets found at
tributes of Taanach by Dr. Sellin, and written
the God- by one Can. sheikh to another shortly
dess before the Israelitish invasion of Pal,
reference is made to ‘the finger of
Asherah” from which oracles were derived. The
‘finger seems to signify the symbol of the goddess;
at any rate it revealed the future by means of a
“sion and oracle.” The practice is probably al-
luded to in Hos 4 12. The existence of numerous
symbols in each of which the goddess was believed
to be immanent led to the creation of numerous
forms of the goddess herself, which, after the analogy
of the Ashtaroth, were described collectively as the
Asherim. A. H. Saycer


ASHERITES, ash’ér-its (TNT, ha-’ashert):
The descendants of Asher, Jacob’s eighth son (Jgs
1 32).


ASHES, ash’iz: Among the ancient Hebrews
and other Orientals, to sprinkle with or sit in ashes
was a mark or token of grief, humiliation, or peni-
tence. Ashes on the head was one of the ordinary
signs of mourning for the dead, as when “Tamar
put ashes on her head .. . . and went on crying”
(28 18 19 AV), and of national humiliation, as
when the children of Israel were assembled under
Nehemiah “with fasting, and with sackcloth, and
earth [ashes] upon them’ (Neh 9 1), and when the
people of Nineveh repented in sackcloth and ashes
at the preaching of Jonah (Jon 3 5.6; ef 1 Macc 3
47). The afflicted or penitent often sat in ashes
(ef Job 2 8; 42 6: “I abhor mysclf, and repent in
dust and ashes’’), or even wallowed in ashes, as
Jeremiah exhorted sinning Israel to do: “O daughter
of my people . . . . wallow thyself in ashes” (Jer
6 26), or as Ezekiel in his lamentation for Tyre
pictures her mariners as doing, crying bitterly and
‘casting up dust upon their heads’ and ‘wallow-
ing themselves in the ashes’ (in their weeping for
her whose head was lifted up and become corrupted
because of her beauty), “in bitterness of soul with
bitter mourning” (Ezk 27 30.31).

However, these and various other modes of
expressing grief, repentance, and humiliation among
the Hebrews, such as rending the garments, tearing
the hair and the like, were not of Divine appoint-
ment, but were simply the natural outbursts of the
impassioned oriental temperament, and are still
customary among eastern peoples. _

Figurative: The term “ashes” is often used to
signify worthlessness, insignificance or evanescence
(Gen 18 27; Job 30 19). ‘‘Proverbs of ashes,” for
instance, in Job 13 12, is Job’s equivalent, says
one writer, for our modern “rot.” For the ritual
use of the ashes of the Red Heifer by the priests,
see Rep HEIFER. Gzo. B. Eager


ASHHOUR, ash’ur (WN, ashhar, AV Ashur):
The “father of Tekoa” (1 Ch 2 24; 4 5), prob-
ably the founder of the village. The original mean-
ing of the name is the “man of Horus,” Ashurites
(TVW, hd-ashdrt). This name occurs in the list
of Ish-bosheth’s subjects (2 8 2 9). TheSyr, Arab.
and Vulg versions read “WWAN, ha-g'shir?, “the
Geshurites,” designating the small kingdom to the
S. or 8.E. of Damascus. This reading, though
adopted by Ewald, Thenius and Wellhausen, is un-
tenable, for during the reign of Ish-bosheth Geshur
was ruled by its own king Talmai, whose daughter
was married to David (28 3 3; 13 37). Further-
more Geshur was too far away from the rest of Ish-
bosheth’s territory. A more consistent reading is
MUR, hd-’dshéri, as given in the Tg of Jonathan
and accepted by Kéhler, Klost, Kirkpatrick and
Budde, “‘those of the house of Asher’ (cf Jgs 1 32).
The term would, then, denote the country to the
W. of Jordan above Jezreel. SAMUEL CoHON


ASHIMA, a-shi’ma, ash’i-ma (R’2"WN , dshtma’;
*Aoipdd, Asimdth): A deity worshipped at Hamath
(2 K 17 30) of whom nothing further is known.
It has been suggested that the name is the same
as that of the goddess Simi, the daughter of the
supreme god Hadad, who was worshipped at Mem-
bij, but there is nothing to support the suggestion.


ASHKELON, ash’ke-lon (AV Eshkalon, esh’-
ka-lon [Eshkalonites; Josh 13 3]; Askelon, as’-
ké-lon [Jgs 118; 18 6 17; 28 1 20]; opty,
’ashkelon; mod. Askelan): A maritime town between
Jaffa and Gaza, one of the five chief cities of the
Philis. The Ashkelonites are mentioned by Joshua
(Josh 13 3), and the city was taken by the tribe of
Judah (Jgs 1 18). One of the golden tumors (AV
“emerods’’) sent back with the ark by the Philis
was from A. (1 8 6 17). David couples A. with
Gath in his lament over Saul and Jonathan (2 8
1 20) indicating its importance, and it is joined with
Gaza, Ashdod and Ekron in the denunciations of
Amos (1 7.8). It is referred to in a similar way
by Jeremiah (Jcr 26 20; 47 5.7). Zephaniah
(2 4.7) speaks of the desolation of A. and Zechariah
announces the fear of A. on the destruction of Tyre
(9 5). The city is mentioned in the Am Tab,
and a certain Yitia is referred to as king. It re-
volted against Rameses I] and was subdued, and
we have mention of it as being under the rule of
Assyria. Tiglath-pileser III names it among his
tributaries, and its king, Mitinti, is said to have
lost his reason when he heard of the fall of Damascus
in 732 BC. It revolted in the reign of Sennacherib
and was punished, and remained tributary to
Assyria until the decay of that power. In Macea-
bean times we learn of its capture by Jonathan (1
Mace 10 86; 11 60, RV “Ascalon”). Herod the
Great was born there (BJ, III, ii, 1 ff). In the
4th cent. AD it was the seat of a bishopric.
It became subject to the Moslems in the 7th
cent. and was taken by the Crusaders. It was
taken in 1187 by Saladin, who dismantled it in
1191 to make it useless to Richard of England, into
whose hands it was expected to fall. Richard
restored it the next year but it was again destroyed
by Saladin. It was an important fortress because
of its vicinity to the trade route between Syria and
Egypt. Hl. Porter


ASHKELONITES, ash’ke-lon-its (Josh 13 3):
The people of Ashkelon, who were Philistines.


ASHKENAZ, ash’ké-naz (T2908, ’ashkenaz):


The name occurs in Gen 10 3; 1 Ch 1 6, in the list
of the sons of Japheth as a son of Gomer. See


Ashnah
Ashurbanipal


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


270


Tape or Nations. It occurs also in Jer 51 27
(AV ‘‘Ashchenaz”’) in connection with the kingdoms
of Ararat and Minni, which suggests a location
about Armenia.


ASHNAH, ash’na (T]WN, ’ashnah): Two sites,
(1) Josh 15 33, a site in the lowlands of Judah,
probably near Estaol and Zorah. The small ruin
Aslin between those two places may retain an echo
of the old name; (2) Josh 16 43, an unknown site
farther south.


ASHPENAZ, ash’pé-naz (T2BUN, ‘ashp*naz):
The master of the eunuchs of Nebuchadnezzar was
an officer into whose hands the king intrusted those
of the children of Israel, and of the princes, and of
the seed of the king of Judah, whom he had carried
captive to Babylon, that they might be taught the
learning and tongne of the Chaldaeans in order to
serve in the king’s palace. He is mentioned by
namein Dn] 1 3only. It used to be supposed that
the name was Pers; but it now seems more probable
that itis Bab. We would suggest Ashipn-Anu-Izzu,
“the Aship-priest of Anu is mighty,” as a possible
form of the original. R. Dick Wruson


ASHRIEL, ash’ré-el.


ASHTAROTH, ash’ta-roth (NMIMNWY , ‘ashtarath;
AV Astaroth, as’ta-roth; "Agrapa0, Astardth, the city
of Og, king of Bashan [Dt 1 4, etc]; ASHTEROTH-
KARNAIM LDP MMM, ‘ashterath karnayim),
the scene of the defeat of the Rephaim by Chedor-
laomer [Gen 14 5]; BEESHTERAH [MINW23, be-
‘eshttrah] a Levitical city in Manasseh E. of the
Jordan [Josh 21 27]): The name probably means
“house” or “temple of Ashtoreth.” It is identical
with Ashtaroth of 1 Ch 671. Ashtaroth is the
plur. of AsHToRETH (q.v.). The name denotes a
place associated with the worship of this goddess.
Ashteroth-karnaim is mentioned only once in canon-
ical Scripture unless we accept Gratz’s restoration,
when Karnaim appears as a city taken by Israel:
“Have we not taken to us horns [karnayim) by our
own strength?” (Am 6 13). It is identical with
Carnion or Carnaim of 1 and 2 Mace, a city of
Gilead with a temple of Atar-gatis. The name Ash-
taroth has been identified with Astertu in the lists of
Tahutmes III of the XVIIIth Egyp Dynasty; and
with Ashiarti of the Am Tab. Its claim to antiquity
is therefore well established.

As far as the Bib. record is concerned, the names
at the head of this art. might stand for one and the
same city, Ashtaroth being a contraction from
Ashteroth-karnaim. But in the days of Eusebius
and Jerome, we learn from the Onom, there were
two forts of this name 9 miles apart, lying between
Adara (Der‘ah) and Abila (Abi), while Ashtaroth,
the ancient city of Og, king of Bashan, lay 6 miles
from Adara. Carnaim Ashtaroth, which is evi-
dently identical with Ashteroth-karnaim, they
describe as a large village in the angle of Bashan
where tradition places the home of Job. This
seems to point to Tell ‘Ashtard, a hill which rises
about 80 ft. above the plain, 2 miles 8. of el-Merkez,
the seat of the governor of the Hauraén. Three-
quarters of a mile N. of el-Merkez, at the south
end of a ridge on which the village of Sheikh Sa‘ad
is built, stands the weley of the stone of Job,
Weley Sakhret’’Ayyib. By the large stone under
the dome Job was said to have sat to receive his
friends during his affliction. An Egyp inscription,
found by Schumacher, proves the stone to be a
monument of the time of Rameses II. At the
foot of the hill is pointed out the bath of Job. In
el-Merkez the building known as Deir 'Ayyitb,


See ASRIEL.


“Monastery of Job,” is now part_of the barracks.
There is also shown the tomb of Job. The stream
which flows southward past Tell ‘Ashtara, is called
Moyet en-Neby ’Ayyib, “stream of the prophet
Job,” and is said to have risen where the patriarch
stamped his foot on his recovery. It is to be noted
also that the district lying in the angle formed by
Nahr er-Rakkad and the Yarmik is called to this
day ez-Zawiyet esh-sharktych, “the eastern angle”
(ie. of the Jaulan). The term may in Jerome’s
time have covered the land east of the ‘Allan,
although this is now part of the Haurdn. At Tell
‘Ashtard there are remains pointing to a high antiq-
uity. The site was also occupied during the Middle
Ages. Perhaps here we should locate Carnaim
Ashtaroth of the Onom. It does not, however,
agree with the description of Carnaim in 1 and 2
Macc. The Ashtaroth of the Onom may have
been at el-Muzértb, on the great pilgrimage road,
about 6 Rom miles from Der‘ah—the distance
indicated by Eusebius. The old fortress here was
situated on an island in the middle of the lake,
Baheiret el-Bajjeh. A full description of the place
is given in Schumacher’s Across the Jordan, 137 ff.
It must have been a position of great strength in
antiquity; but the ancient name has not been
recovered.

Some would place Ashteroth-karnaim, the Car-
naim of the Maccabees, at Tell ’Ash‘ari, a site
10 Rom miles N. of Der‘ah, and 44 Rom miles §.
of Tell ‘Ashtaraé. This clearly was ‘a place hard
to besiege, and difficult of access by reason of the
narrowness of the approaches on all sides (2 Mace
12 21). It crowns a promontory which stands
out between the deep gorge of the Yarmiuk and a
great chasm, at the head of which is a waterfall. It
could be approached only by the neck connecting
it with the mainland; and here it was guarded by a
triple wall, the ruins of which are seen today. The
remains of a temple close by the bridge over the
Yarmuk may mark the scene of the slaughter by
Judas.

The whole question however is obscure. Eusebius
is clearly guilty of confusion, with his two Ashtaroth-
karnaims and his Carnaim Ashtaroth. All the places
we have named lie considerably N. of a line drawn
from Tell Abil to Der‘ah. For light upon the prob-
lem of identification we must wait the results of


excavation. W. Ewine
ASHTAROTH, plur. of Ashtoreth. See AsHTo-
RETH.


ASHTERATHITE, ash’té-rath-it, ash-ter’ath-it
CMUMwIN , hd-‘ashieratht): A native of Ashtaroth:
Uazzia, one of David’s heroes (1 Ch 11 44).


ASHTEROTH-KARNAIM, ash’té-roth kar-ni’-
im: Le. “Ashteroth of the two horns,’’? mentioned
in Gen 14 5 as the place of Chedorlaomer’s defeat
of the Rephaim. See AsHTarotu. A Carnaim or
Carnion in Gilead, with a temple of Atar-gatis
attached, was captured by Judas Maccabaeus (1
Macc & 43.44; 2 Macc 12 26).


ASHTORETH, ash’to-reth, ash-t6 reth (nny ‘
‘ashtoreth; plur. MIVENDY , ‘ashtardth; 'Aorapra, As-
tarté) :

1. Name and Origin

2, Attributes of the Goddess

3. Ashtoreth as a Moon-goddess

4. The Local Ashtaroth

The name of the supreme goddess of Canaan and
the female counterpart of Baal.

The name and cult of the goddess were derived
from Babylonia, where Istar represented the even-
| ing and morning stars and was accordingly an-


271


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ashnah
Ashurbanipal


drogynous in origin. Under Sem influence, however,
she became solely female, but retained a memory of
her primitive character by standing,
1, Name alone among the Assyro-Bab goddesses,
and Origin on a footing of equality with the male
divinities. From Babylonia the wor-
ship of the goddess was carried to the Semites of
the West, and in most instances the feminine suffix
was attached to her name; where this was not the
case the deity was regarded as a male. On the
Moabite Stone, for example, ‘Ashtar is identified
with Chemosh, and in the inscriptions of southern
Arabia ‘Athtar is a god. On the other hand, in
Atar-gatis or Derketo (2 Macc 12 26), Atar, with-
out the feminine suffix, 1s identified with the goddess
‘Athah or ‘Athi (Gr Gatis). The cult of the Gr
Aphrodité in Cyprus was borrowed from that of
Ashtoreth; whether the Gr name also is a modi-
fication of Ashtoreth, as has often been maintained,
is doubtful.
In Babylonia and Assyria Istar was the goddess
of love and war. An old Bab legend related how
the descent of Istar into Hades in
2. Attri- search of her dead husband, Tammuz,
butes of the was followed by the cessation of mar-
Goddess riage and birth in both earth and
heaven, while the temples of the goddess
at Nineveh and Arbela, around which the two cities
afterward grew up, were dedicated to her as the
goddess of war. As
such she appeared to
one of Assur-bani-pal’s
seers and encouraged
the Assyr king to march
against Elam. The
other goddesses of
Babylonia, who were
little more than reflec-
tions of the god, tended
to merge into Istar who
thus became a type of
the female divinity, a
personification of the
productive principle in
nature, and more es-
pecially the mother and
ereatress of mankind.
The chief seat of
the worship of Istar in
Babylonia was Erecch,
where prostitution was
practised in her name,
and she was served
with immoral rites by ;
bands of men and women. In Assyria, where the
warlike side of the goddess was predominant, no
such rites seem to have been practised, and, instead,
prophetesses were attached to her temples to whom
she delivered oracles.
In Canaan, Ashtoreth, as distinguished from the
male ‘Ashtar, dropped her warlike attributes, but in
contradistinction to Ashérah, whose


Ashtoreth.


8. Ashto- name and cult had also been imported
reth as a from Assyria, became, on the one
Moon- hand, the colorless consort of Baal,
Goddess and on the other hand, a moon-


goddess. In Babylonia the moon was
a god, but after the rise of the solar theology, when
the larger number of the Bab gods were resolved
into forms of the sun-god, their wives also became
solar, Istar, ‘the daughter of Sin” the moon-god,
remaining identified with the evening-star. In
Canaan, however, when the solar theology had
absorbed the older beliefs, Baal, passing into a
sun-god and the goddess who stood at his side be-
coming a representative of the moon—the pale
reflection, as it were, of the sun—Ashtoreth came


to be regarded as the consort of Baal and took the

place of the solar goddesses of Babylonia.
Hence there were as “many Ashtoreths”’ or
Ashtaroth as Baals. They represented the various
forms under which the goddess was


4, The worshipped in different localities (Jgs
Local 10 6; 18 7 4; 12 10, etc). Some
Ashtaroth times she was addressed as Naamah,


“the delightful one,” Gr Astro-noé, the
mother of Eshmun and the Cabeiri. The Philis
seem to have adopted her under her warlike form
(1S 31 10 AV reading “Ashtoreth,” as LXX), but
she was more usually the moon-goddess (Lucian, De
Dea Syr., 4; Herodian, v.6, 10), and was accord-
ingly symbolized by the horns of a cow. See
AsnTaRoTH-KARNAIM. At Ashkelon, where Herodo-
tus (1.105) places her most ancient temple, she
was worshipped under the name of Atar-gatis, as a
woman with the tail of a fish, and fish were accord-
ingly sacred to her. Elsewhere the dove was her
sacred symbol. The immoral rites with, which the
worship of Istar in Babylonia was accompanied
were transferred to Canaan (Dt 23 18) and formed
part of the idolatrous practices which the Israelites
were called upon to extirpate. A. H. Sayce


ASHOUR, ash’ur. See AsHuur.


ASHURBANIPAL, 4-shdor-bi’né-pal (A shur-bani-
apal, ‘“‘Ashur creates a son”): Before setting ont
on his last campaign to Egypt, Esarhaddon king of
Assyria doubtless having had some premonition
that his days were numbered, caused his son Ashur-
banipal to be acknowledged the crown prince of
Assyria (668 BC). At the same time he proclaimed
his son Shamash-shum-ukin as the crown prince
of Babylonia. At the father’s death the latter,
however, was only permitted to become viceroy of
Babylonia.

Ashurbanipal is generally believed to be the great
and noble Osnappar (Ezr 4 10). See Osnaprar.
If this identification should not prove correct, the
king is not mentioned by name in the OT. In the
annals of Ashurbanipal there is a list of twenty
tributary kings in which Manasseh (written Minsé)
of the land of Judah is mentioned. With a few
exceptions the list is the same as that given by
Esarhaddon, his father. In 2 Ch $8 11 ff we learn
that the captains of the host of the king of Assyria
took Manasseh with hooks and bound him with
fetters, and carried him to Babylon. The king
to whom reference is made in this passage was either
Esarhaddon or Ashurbanipal. If the latter, his
restoration of Manasseh was paralleled in the in-
stance of Necho, the vassal king of Memphis and
Sais, who also had revolted from Assyria; for he
was accorded similar treatment, being sent back
to Egypt with special marks of favor, and rein-
stated upon his throne.

Another reference in the OT, at least to one of the
acts of Ashurbanipal, is the prophecy of Nahum,
who in predicting the downfall of Nineveh, said,
“Art thou (Nineveh] better than No-amon?” This
passage is illustrated by the annals of the king, in
which he recounts the destruction of the city. No
(meaning “‘city’) is the name of Thebes, while
Amon (or Amen) was the chief deity of that city.

Esarhaddon died on his way to Egypt, which
he had previously conquered, an insurrection having
taken place. Tirhakah, whom Esarhaddon had
vanquished, and who had fled to Ethiopia, had re-
turned, and had advanced against the rulers ap-
pointed by Assyria. He formed a coalition with
Necho and others. Not long after _Ashurbanipal
came to the throne, he set out for Egypt and de-
feated the forces. The leaders of the insurrecticn
were carried to Nineveh in fetters. Necho, like


Ashurites
Asia Minor


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


272


Manasseh, as mentioned above, was restored to
his rule at Sais. Tirhakah died shortly after. His
sister’s son Tanut-Amon (Tandami) then took up
the cause, and after the departure of the Assyr
army he advanced against the Assyr vassal govern-
ors. The Assyr army returned and relieved the
besieged. Tanut-Amon returned to Thebes, which
was conquered and which was spoiled by the ra-
pacious Assyrians, 663 BC. This is what the
prophet Nahum referred to (3 8). A few years
later Psammetik, the son of Necho, who had re-
mained faithful after his restoration, declared his
independence. As the Assyr army was required
elsewhere, Egypt was henceforth free from the yoke
of the Assyrian.

Ba‘al of Tyre, after a long siege, finally submitted.
Yakinlu, king of Arvad, paid tribute and sent hos-
tages. Other rebellious subjects, who had become
emboldened by the attitude of Tirhakah, were
brought, into submission. Under Urlaki, the old
enemy Elam, which had been at peace with Assyria
since the preceding reign, now became aggressive
and made inroads into Babylonia. Ashurbanipal
marched through the Zagros mountains, and sud-
denly appeared before Susa. This move brought
Teumman, who had in the meanwhile succeeded Ur-
laki, back to his capital. Elam was humiliated.

In 652 BC the insurrection of Shamash-shum-
ukin, the king’s brother, who had been made viceroy
of Babylon, broke out. He desired to establish his
independence from Assyria. After Ashurbanipal had
overcome Babylon, Shamash-shum-ukin took refuge
in a palace, set it on fire, and destroyed himself in
the flames.

There is much obscurity about the last years of
Ashurbanipal’s reign. The decadence of Assyria
had begun, which resulted not only in the loss to
the title of the surrounding countries, but also in
its complete annihilation before the cent. was over.
-Nineveh was finally razed to the ground by the
Umman-Manda hordes, and was never rebuilt.

Ashurbanipal is also distinguished for his building
operations, which show remarkable architectural
ingenuity. In many of the cities of Assyria and
Babylonia he restored, enlarged or embellished the
temples or shrines. In Nineveh he reared a beauti-
ful palace, which excelled all other Assyr structures
in the richness of its ornamentations.

During his reign the study of art was greatly
encouraged. Some of his exquisite sculptures repre-
sent not only the height of Assyr art, but also belong
to the most important aesthetic treasures of the
ancient world. The themes of many of the chief
sculptures depict the hunt, in which the king took
special delight.

Above all else Ashurbanipal is famous for the
library he created, because of which he is perhaps
to be considered the greatest known patron of litera-
ture in the pre-Christian centuries.

A. T. Chay


For Bibliography see Assyria.

ASHURITES, ash’ur-its (WNT, ha-’dshir7):
According to the MT of 2 S 2 9, atribe included in
the short-lived kingdom of Ish-hosheth, Saul’s son.
A slight textual correction gives ‘‘Asherites,’’ that
is, the tribe of Asher; with this the Tg of Jonathan
agrees. The tribe of Asher lay where it would
naturally fall to Ish-bosheth’s kingdom. The read-
ing ‘Geshurites” (Vulg and Syr) is excluded by
the known independence of Geshur at this time
(28 33; 18 37). For similar reasons we cannot
think of Assyria (Heb Asshur) nor of the Arab.
Asshurim of Gen 265 3.


ASHVATH, ash’vath (MWY, ‘ashwath): A man
of Asher, of the house of Japhlet (1 Ch 7 33).


ASIA, a’shi-a (Acta, Asia): A Rom_ province
embracing the greater part of western Asia Minor,
including the older countries of Mysia, Lydia,
Caria, and a part of Phrygia, also several of the
independent coast. cities, the Troad, and apparently
the islands of Lesbos, Samos, Patmos, Cos and
others near the Asia Minor coast (Acts 16 6; 19 10.
27). It is exceedingly difficult to determine the
exact boundaries of the several countries which
later constituted the Rom province, for they seem
to have been somewhat vague to the ancients them-
selves, and were constantly shifting; it is therefore
impossible to trace the exact: borders of the province
of Asia. Its history previous to 133 BC coincides
with that of Asia Minor of which it was a part.
However, in that year, Attalus III (Philometer),
king of Pergamos, bequeathed his kingdom to the
Rom Empire. It was not until 129 BC that the
province of Asia was really formed by Rome. Its
first capital was Pergamos, the old capital of Mysia,
but in the time of Augustus, when Asia had become
the most wealthy province of the Empire, the seat
of the government, was transferred to Ephesus.
Smyrma was also an important rival of Ephesus.
The governor of Asia was a pro-consul, chosen by
lot by the Rom senate from among the former
consuls who had been out of office for at least five
years, and he seldom continued in office for more
than a single year. The diet of the province, com-
posed of representatives from its various districts,
met each year in the different cities. Over it
presided the asiarch, whose duty it was, among other
things, to offer sacrifices for the welfare of the emper-
or and his family.

In 285 AD the province was reduced in size, as
Caria, Lydia, Mysia and Phrygia were separated
from it, and apart from the cities of the coast little
remained. The history of Asia consists almost en-
tirely of the history of its important cities, which
were .Adramyttium, Assos, Cnidus, Ephesus,
Laodicea, Miletus, Pergamos, Philadelphia, Sardis,
Smyrna, Thyatira, Troas, etc. . Banks


ASIA MINOR, 4’shi-a mi/nér:
Introductory
I. Tue Country
1. Position and Boundaries
2. General Description
3. Mountains
4. Rivers, Lakes and Plains
5. Roads
6. Climate and Products
II. Hrsrory
1. The Hittites
2. Phrygian and Bithynian Immigrations
3. Lydians, Greeks and Persians
4, Alexander and His Successors
5. The Galatians
6. The Romans
Ill. A.M. in tHe lst Cent, AD
. The Population
. The Native Social System
. Emperor Worship
. The Hellenistic System
. Roman coloniae
IV. Curistianity 1n A.M. (Asia Minor)
Christian Inscriptions, ete
LIvERATURE


Technically,it is only on sufferance that an account
of “Asia Minor”’ can find a place in a Biblical ency-
clopaedia, for the country to which
this name applies in modern times was
never so called in OT or NT times.
The term first appears in Orosius, a
writer of the 5th cent. AD, and it is now applied
in most European languages to the peninsula form-
ing the western part of Asiatic Turkey.

The justification for the inclusion in this work of
a summary account of A.M. as a whole, its geog-
raphy, history, and the social and political condition
of its people in NT times, is to be found in the
following sentence of Gibbon: ‘‘The rich provinces


oP Wwe


Introduc-
tory


273


that extend from the Euphrates to the Ionian Sea
were the principal theatre on which the Apostle
to the Gentiles displayed his zeal and piety”; and
no region outside the city of Rome has preserved
to modern times so many records of the growth and
character of its primitive Christianity.
I. The Country.—Asia Minor (as the country
was called to distinguish it from the continent of
Asia), or Anatolia, is the name given
1. Position to the peninsula which reaches out
and Bound- between the Black Sea (Pontus Euxi-
aries nus) on the N. and the Mediterranean
on the 8., forming an elevated land-
bridge between central Asia and southeastern
Europe. On the N.W. corner, the peninsula is
separated from Europe by the Bosporus, the Sea
of Marmora and the Hellespont. On the W. the
peninsula borders on the Aegean Sea, whose nu-
merous islands tempted the timid mariner of ancient
times on toward Greece. The W. coast, with its
alternation of mountain and river-valley, is deeply
indented: there is a total coast line of four times the
length of a line drawn from N.toS. The numerous
land-locked bays and harbors of this coast have
made it the happy hunting-ground of Mediter-
ranean traders in all ages. On the E. it is usual
to delimit A.M. by a line drawn from Alexandretta
to Samsun, but for the purposes of NT history it
must be remembered that part of Cilicia, Cappa-
docia and Pontus (Galatia) lie to the E. of this line
(Long. 26° to 36° E.; lat. 36° to 42° N.).
There are two distinct countries, implying distinct
historical development, in the Anatolian peninsula,
the country of the coast, and the
2. General country of the central plateau. The
Description latter takes its shape from that of the
great mountain ranges which bound it
on the W., E. and N. The high central tableland
is tilted down toward the N. and W.; the mountain
ranges on these sides are not so lofty as the Taurus
chain on the 8. and S.E. This chain, except at its
8.E. corner, rises sharply from the 8. coast, whose
undulations it determines. On the N., the moun-
tains of Pontus (no distinctive name), a continua-
tion of the Armenian range, give the coast-line a
similar character. On the inhospitable N. coast,
there is only one good harbor, that of Sinope, and
no plain of any extent. The S. coast can boast of
the plains of Pamphylia and Cilicia, both highly
fertile, the harbors of Makri and Marmariki, and
the sheltered bays of Adalia and Alexandretta. On
the W., the ascent from the littoral to the plateau
is more gradual. A distance of over 100 miles
separates the Phrygian mountains, where the orien-
tal plateau begins, from the W. seaboard with its
inlets and trading cities. These hundred miles
are composed of river valleys, divided off by moun-
tain ranges, and forming the channels of communi-
cation between the interior and the coast. While
these two regions form part of a single country it
is obvious that—in all that gives individuality to
a country, their flora, fauna, climate, conditions of
life and history—the one region is sharply marked
off from the other. For the plateau naturally con-
nects itself with the E. In its vegetation and
climate, its contrasts of temperature, its dry soil
and air, it forms part of the region extending east-
ward to central Asia. The coast land recalls the
scenery and general character of the Gr mainland
and islands. It naturally looked to, it influenced
and was influenced by, the populations on the other
side of the Aegean Sea. At Smyrna, the traveler in
all ages recognizes the bright, active life of southern
Europe; at Iconium he feels the immobile and
lethargic calm of the East. A.M. in its geographical
structure as well as in its population, has been
throughout history the meeting-place, whether for


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ashurites
Asia Minor


peaceful intermixture or for the clash in war, of the
eternally contrasted systems of East and West.

The Armenian mountains reach westward, and
fork, close to the line we have chosen as the E.
boundary of A.M., into two ranges
the Taurus Mountains on the §., an
the mountains of Pontus on the N.
Mount Argaeus (over 12,000 ft.)
stands in the angle formed by these ranges, nearer
to Taurus than to the northern system. Taurus
is pierced on the northern side of the Cilician plain
by the pass, easy to traverse and still more easy to
defend, of the Cilician Gates, while another natural
route leads from central Cappadocia to Amisus on
the Black Sea. These mountain ranges (average
height of Taurus 7,000 to 10,000 ft.; the N. range
is much lower) enfold the central Galatian and
Lycaonian plains, which are bounded on the W.
by the Sultan Dagh and the Phrygian mountains.
From the latter to the west coast extend three
mountain ranges, delimiting the valleys of the
Caicus, Hermus and Maeander. These valleys
lie E. and W., naturally conducting traffic in those
directions.

The great plains of the interior, covering parts of
Galatia, Lycaonia and Cappadocia, lie at an altitude

of from 3,000 to 4,000 ft. Rivers enter


3. Moun-
tains


4. Rivers, them from the adjoining mountains,
Lakes and to be swallowed up in modern times
Plains in salt lakes and swamps. In ancient

times much of this water was used for
irrigation. Regions which now support only a few


wretched villages were covered in the Rom period
by numerous large cities, implying a high degree of
cultivation of the naturally fertile soil. ‘The remain-
ing rivers cut their way through rocky gorges in
the fringe of mountains around the plateau; on the
W. side of the peninsula their courses open into
broad valleys, among which those of the Caicus,
Hermus and Maeander are among the most fertile
in the world. Down those western valleys, and
that of the Sangarius on the N.W., ran the great
highways from the interior to the seaboard. In
those valleys sprang up the greatest and most
prosperous of the Hellenistic and Gr-Rom cities,
from which Gr education and Christianity radiated
over the whole country. The longest river in A.M.
is the Halys, which rises in Pontus, and after an
enormous bend south-westward flows into the Black
Sea. This, and the Iris, E. of Amisus, are the only
rivers of note on the N. coast. The rivers on the
S. coast, with the exception of the Sarus and the
Pyramus which rise in Cappadocia and water the
Cilician plain, are mere mountain torrents, flowing
immediately into the sea. A remarkable feature
of A.M. is its duden, rivers disappearing under-
ground in the limestone rock, to reappear as springs
and heads of riversmany miles away. Mineral and
thermal springs abound all over the country, and
are especially numerous in the Maeander valley.
There are several salt lakes, the largest being Lake
Tatta in Lycaonia. Fresh-water lakes, such as
Karalis and the Limuae, abound in the mountains
in the S.W.

The road-system of A.M. is marked out by
Nature, and traffic has followed the same lines
since the dawn of history. The
traveler from the Euphrates or from
Syria enters by way of Melitenc and
Caesarea, or by the Cilician Gates. From Cacsarea
he can reach the Black Sea by Zela and Amisus.
If he continues westward, he must enter the Aegean
area by one of the routes marked out, as indicated
above, by the valleys of the Maeander, Hermus or
Caicus. If his destination is the Bosporus, he
travels down the valley of the Sangarius. Other
roads lead from the bay of Adalia to Antioch in


6. Roads


Asia Minor


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


274


Pisidia or to Apameia, or to Laodicea on the
Lycus and thence down the Maeander to Ephesus.
The position of the Hittite capital at Pteria fixed
the route N. of the central plain in general usage
for travelers from E. to W., and this was the route
followed by the Pers Royal Road. Later, traffic
from the E. took the route passing along the S.
side of the Axylon, N. of Iconium, and Pisidian
Antioch to the Lycus, Maeander and Ephesus. This
route coincides with that from the Cilician Gates,
from a point N.E. of Iconium. The need to control
the Pisidian tribes in the reign of Augustus led to
the building of a series of roads in Pisidia, radiating
from Antioch; one of these roads led from Antioch
to Lystra, and it was the one traversed by Paul on
his journey from Antioch to Iconium (Acts 13 51).

The winter on the central plateau is long and

severe, the summer is short and hot: but a cool

breeze from the N. (the inbat) tempers
6. Climate the hot afternoons. The south coast
and Prod- in summer is hot and malarious; in
ucts winter its climate is mild. Much

snow falls in the regions adjacent to
the Black Sea. The climate of the west coast
resembles that of southern Europe. The country
contains vast mineral wealth; many of the mines
were worked by the ancients. There are forests of
pine, oak and fir in the mountains of the N. and S.
The central plateau has always been famous for its
vast flocks of sheep. King Amyntas of Galatia
owned enormous flocks which pastured on the
Lycaonian plain. Carpets and rugs and other
textile products have always been characteristic
of A.M. The wealth of the cities in the province
of Asia depended largely on textile and dyeing
industries (Rev 1-3).

dl. History.—It follows from what has been
said above that the clue to the history of A.M. more
almost than in the case of any other country, lies
in its geographical position and structure. ‘‘Plant-
ed like a bridge between Asia and Europe,” it has
heen throughout human history the meeting-place
and the battle ground of the peoples of the East
aud those of the West. From the earliest period to
which our records reach, we find it inhabited by an
amalgam of races, religions and social systems,
none of which has ever quite died out. And through-
out history new races, religions and social systems,
alike imperishable in many of their features, have
poured into the peninsula to find a home there.

At the dawn of history, A.M. was ruled by a non-
Aryan people, the Hatti or Hittites about which

knowledge is at present accumulating
1. The so fast that no final account of them
Hittites can be given. See Hittrres. A.M.
is now recognized to have been the
center of their civilization, as against the older view
that they were a Mesopotamian people. Sculptures
and hieroglyphs belonging to this people have long
been known over the whole country from Smyrna
to the Euphrates, and it is almost unanimously
assumed that their capital was at Boghaz Keui
(across the Halys from Ancyra). This site has
been identified with much probability with the
Pieria of Herodotus, which Croesus captured when
he marched against the Persians, the inference
being that the portion of the Hittite land which
lay E. of the Halys was at that time a satrapy of
the Pers Empire. Excavations in the extensive
ancient city at Boghaz Keui have recently been
carried out by Winckler and Puchstein, who have
discovered remains of the royal archives. These
records are written on clay tablets in cuneiform
script; they are couched partly in Bab, partly (pre-
sumably) in the still undeciphered native language.
The documents in the Bab tongue prove that close
political relations existed between the Hatti and the


eastern monarchy. In the 14th cent. BC the Hit-
tites appear to have conquered a large part of Syria,
and to have established themselves at Carchemish.
Thenceforth, they were in close touch with Meso-
potamia. From about the beginning of the first
millennium, the Hittites ‘‘were in constant relations,
hostile or neutral, with the Ninevites, and thence-
forward their art shows such marked Assyr char-
acteristics that it hardly retains its individuality.”
The date of the Phrygian and Bithynian immi-
grations from southeastern Europe cannot be fixed
with certainty, but they had taken
2. Phrygian place by the beginning of the’ first
and Bithyn- millennium BC. These immigrations
ian Immi- coincide in time with the decline of the
grations Hittite power. After many wander-
ings, the Phrygians found ahome at the
western side of the plateau, and no power exercised
such an influence on the early development of A.M.
as the Phrygian, principally in the sphere of religion.
The kings of Phrygia “bulked more impressively
in the Gr mind than any other non-Gr monarchy;
their language was the original language and the
speech of the goddess herself; their country was
the land of great fortified cities, and their kings were
the associates of the gods themselves.” The
material remains of the “Phrygian country’’—the
tomb of Midas with the fortified acropolis above it,
and the many other rock-tombs around—are the
most impressive in A.M. Inscriptions in a script
like the early Ionian are cut on some of the tombs.
The Phrygian language, an Indo-Germanic speech
with resemblauces to both Gr and the Italian lan-
guages, is proved by some seventy inscriptions (a
score of them still unpublished) to have been in
common use well into the Christian period. Two
recently found inscriptions show that 1t was spoken
even in Iconium, ‘the furthermost city of Phrygia,”
on the Lycaonian side, until the 3d cent. of our
era. Those inscriptions mention the names of Ma
(Cybele) and Attis, whose cult exercised a pro-
found influence on the religions of Greece and Rome.
The next monarchy to rise in A.M. is that of
Lydia, whose origin is obscure. The Phrygian
empire had fallen before an invasion
3. Lydians, of the Cimmerii in the 9th or 8th cent.
Greeks and BC; Alyattes of Lydia, which lay be-
Persians tween Phrygia and the Aegean, repelled
a second invasion of the Cimmerii in
617 BC. Croesus, king of Lydia (both names after-
ward proverbial for wealth), was lord of all the
country to the Halys, as well as of the Gr colonies
on the coast. Those colonies—founded from Hellas
—had reached their zenith by the 8th cent., and
studded all three coasts of A.M. Their inability
to combine in a common cause placed them at the
mercy of Croesus, and later of his conquerors, the
Persians (546 BC). The Persians divided A.M. into
satrapies, but the Gr towns were placed under Gr
dynasts, who owned the suzerainty of Persia, and
several of the inland races continued under the rule
of their native princes. The defeat of Xerxes by
Hellas set the Gr cities in A.M. free, and they con-
tinued free during the period of Athenian greatness.
In 386 BC they were restored to the king of Persia
by the selfish diplomacy of Sparta.
When Alexander the Great crossed the Helles-
pont in 334 BC, a new era opened for the Asiatic


Greeks. Hitherto the Gr cities in
4, Alex- A.M., apart from spasmodic efforts at
ander and combination, had been mere trading
His Suc- communities, independent of each
cessors other, in competition with each other,


_ and anxious for reasons of self-inter-
est to bring each other to ruin. These colonies
had moreover been confined to the coast, and to the
open river valleys of the west. The idea of a Gr


275


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Asia Minor


empire in A.M. was originated by Alexander, and
materialized by his successors. Henceforward the
city rivalries certainly lasted on, and at a later
period excited the scorn of the stolid Romans; but
henceforward the Gr cities were members of a Gr
empire, and were conscious of an imperial mission.
It is to this period that the Hellenization or, as
Mommeen would tr the term, the civilization of the
interior of A.M. belongs. The foundations of
Alexander’s successors, the Attalids and Seleucids,
covered the peninsula; their object was to con-
solidate the Gr rule over the native races, and,
most important of all, to raise those races to the
Gr level of civilization and education. The ex-
periment succeeded only partially and tempora-
rily; but such success as it and the later Rom
effort in the same direction had, exercised a pro-
found influence on the early growth of Christianity
in the country (see below).
In their manner of entering and settling in the
country, in the way in which they both came under
the influence of the Asiatic environ-
5. The ment, and impressed the stamp of
Galatians their vigorous individuality on the
culture and the history of the land,
the Galatae, a Celtic nation who crossed from
Europe in 278-277 BC, to establish themselves
ultimately on the E. of ancient Phrygia and on
both sides of the Halys, recall the essential features
of the Phrygian immigration of a thousand years
earlier. ‘The region of Galatia, at a remote period
the chief seat of the oriental rule over anterior
Asia, and preserving in the famed rock-sculptures
of the modern Boghaz Keui, formerly the royal
town of Pteria, reminiscences of an almost for-
gotten glory, had in the course of cents. become in
language and manners a Celtic island amidst the
waves of eastern peoples, and remained so in
internal organization even under the [Rom] empire.”
But these Gauls came under strong oriental in-
fluence; they modified to some extent the organiza-
tion of the local religion, which they adopted; but
they adopted it so completely that only one deity
with a Celtic name has so far appeared on the
numerous cult-inscriptions of Galatia (Anderson in
Jour. of Hell. Studies, 1910, 163 ff). Nor has a
single inscription in the Galatian language been
found in the country, although we know that that
language was spoken by the lower classes at least
as late as the 4th cent. AD. The Galatian ap-
pears to have superseded the Phrygian tongue in
the part of Galatia which was formerly Phrygian; no
Phrygian inscriptions have been found in Galatia,
although they are common in the district bordering
on its southern and western boundaries. But
Galatian was unable to compete with Gr as the
language of the educated classes, and even such
among the humbler orders as could write, wrote in
Gr, and Gr-Rom city-organization replaced the
Celtic tribal system much earlier and much more
completely in Galatia than Rom municipal organ-
ization did in Gaul. Still, the Galatians stood out
in strong contrast both to the Greeks and to the
Orientals. Rom diplomacy recognized and en-
couraged this sense of isolation, and in her struggle
against the Orientals and the Greeks under Mith-
ridates, Rome found trusty allies in the Galatians.
In the Imperial period, the Galatians were con-
sidered the best soldiers in A.M. Sce Ga.atta.
The Romans exercised an effective control over
the affairs of A.M. after their defeat of Antiochus
the Great in 189 BC, but it was only


6. The in 133 BC, when Attalus of Pergamus
Romans bequeathed his kingdom of “Asia”
in A.M. to the Rom state, that the Rom occu-


pation began. This kingdorn formed
the province Asia; a second inheritance which fell


to Rome at the death of Nicomedes III in 74 BC
became the province Bithynia, to which Pontus
was afterward added. Cilicia, the province which
gave St. Paul to the empire and the church, was an-
nexed in 100 BC, and reorganized by Pompey in
66 BC. These provinces had already been organ-
ized; in other words the Rom form of government
had been definitely established in them at the
foundation of the empire, and, in accordance with
the principle that all territory which had been
thoroughly “pacified’’ should remain under the
administration of the senate, while the emperor
directly governed regions in which soldiers in
numbers were still required, the above-mentioned
provinces, with the exception of Cilicia, fell to the
senate. But all territory subsequently annexed
in A.M. remained in the emperor’s hands. Several
territories over which Rome had exercised a pro-
tectorate were now organized into provinces, under
direct imperial rule. Such were: Galatia, to which
under its last king Amyntas, part of Phrygia,
Lycaonia, Pisidia and Pamphylia had been added,
and which was made a Rom province at his death
in 25 BC (the extension of Galatia under Amyntas
to include Antioch, Iconium, Lystra and Derbe and
the consequent incorporation of these cities in the
province Galatia, forms the ultimate historical basis
of the “South Galatian Theory”); Paphlagonia,
annexed in 7 BC; Cappadocia, in 17 AD; Lycia,
in 43 AD, and in 63 AD the part of Pontus lying
between the Iris and Armenia. This formed the
Roman A.M. of Paul’s time. See Asis; Brruynza,


etc.
I. A.M, in the First Century AD.—The parti-
tion of A.M. into Rom provinces did not correspond
to its ethnological divisions, and even
1. The those divisions were not always clearly
Population marked. As is clear from the brief
historical sketch given above, the
population of A.M. was composed of many over-
lying strata of races, which tended in part to lose
their individuality and sink into the original Ana-
tolian type. Answering roughly to the above-
mentioned separation of A.M. into two countries,
and to its characterization as the meeting-place
of East and West, we can detach from among a
medley of races and institutions two main coex-
istent social systems, which we may call the native
system, and the Hellenistic system. These systems
(esp. as the result of Rom government) overlap
and blend with each other, but they correspond
in a general way to the distinction (observed in the
country by Strabo) between city-organization and
life on the village system. A deep gulf separated
these forms of society.
Under the Rom Empire, there was a continuous
tendency to raise and absorb the Anatolian natives
into Gr cities and Rom citizenship.
2. The But in the Apostolic Age, this process
Native So- had not gone far in the interior of the
cial System country, and the native social system
was still that under which a large sec-
tion of the population lived. It combined the
theocratic form of government with institutions
derived from a preéxistent matriarchal society.
The center of the native community was the temple
of the god, with its great corporation of priests
living on the temple revenues, and its people, who
were the servants of the god (hierodouloi; cf St.
Paul’s expression, ‘servant of God’), and worked
on the temple estates. The villages in which these
workers lived were an inseparable adjunct of the
temple, and the priests (or a single priest-dynast)
were the absolute rulers of the people. A special
class called hieroi performed special functions
(probably for a period only) in the temple service.
This included, in the case of women, sometimes a


Asia Minor


A.M., Arch. of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


276


service of chastity, sometimes one of ceremonial
prostitution.. A woman of Lydia, of good social
position (as implied in her Rom name) boasts in
an inscription that she comes of ancestors who had
served before the god in this manner, and that
she has done so herself. Such women afterward
married in their own rank, and incurred no dis-
grace. Many inscriptions prove that the god
(through his priests) exercised a close supervision
over the whole moral life and over the whole daily
routine of his people; he was their Ruler, Judge,
Helper and Healer.
Theocratic government received a new direction
and a new meaning from the institution of emperor-
worship; obedience to the god now
3. Emperor coincided with loyalty to the emperor.
Worship The Seleucid kings and later the Rom
emperors, according to a highly
probable view, became heirs to the property of the
dispossessed priests (a case is attested at Pisidian
Antioch); and it was out of the territory originally
belonging to the temples that grants of land to the
new Seleucid and Kom foundations were made.
On those portions of an estate not gifted to a polis
or colonia, the theocratic government lasted on;
but alongside of the Anatolian god there now ap-
peared the figure of the god-emperor. In many
places the cult of the emperor was established
in the most important shrine of the neighborhood;
the god-emperor succeeded to or shared the sanctity
of the older god, grecized as Zeus, Apollo, etc; in-
scriptions record dedications made to the god and
to the emperor jointly. Elsewhere, and esp. in
the cities, new temples were founded for the wor-
ship of the emperor. A.M. was the home of em-
peror-worship, and nowhere did the new institu-
tion fit so well into the existing religious system.
Inscriptions have recently thrown much light on a
society of Xenoit Tekmoreioi (‘‘Guest-Friends of the
Secret Sign’) who lived on an estate which had
belonged to Men Askaenos beside Antioch of
Pisidia, and was now in the hands of the Rom
emperor. A procurator (who was probably the
chief priest of the local temple) managed the estate
as the emperor’s representative.
typical of many others whose existence in inner
A.M. has come to light in recent years; it was those
societies which fostered the cult of the emperor
on its local as distinct from its provincial side (see
AstarcH), and it was chiefly those societies that
set the machinery of the Rom law in operation
against the Christians in the great persecutions.
In the course of time the people on the imperial
estates tended to pass into a condition of serfdom;
but occasionally an emperor raised the whole or part
of an estate to the rank of a city.
Much of inner A.M. must originally have been
governed on the theocratic system, but the Gr city-
state gradually encroached on the


4, The territory and privileges of the ancient
Hellenistic temple. Several of these cities were
System “founded” by the Seleucids and At-


talids; this sometimes meant a new
foundation, more often the establishment of Gr
city-government in an older city, with an addition
of new inhabitants. These inhabitants were often
Jews whom the Seleucids found trusty colonists: the
Jews of Antioch in Pisidia (Acts 13 14 ff) probably
belong to this class. The conscious aim of those
foundations was the Hellenization of the country,
and their example influenced the neighboring
cities. With the oriental absolutism of the native
system, the organization of the Gr and Rom cities
was in sharp contrast. In the earlier cents. of the
Rom Empire these cities enjoyed a liberal measure
of self-government. Magistracies were elective;
rich men in the same city vied with each other,


This society is |


and city vied with city, in erecting magnificent
public buildings, in founding schools and promoting
education, in furthering all that western nations
mean by civilization. With the Gr cities came the
Gr Pantheon, but the gods of Hellas did little more
than add their names to those of the gods of the
country. Wherever we have any detailed infor-
mation concerning a cult in inner Anatolia, we
recognize under a Gr (or Rom) disguise the essen-
tial features of the old Anatolian god.

The Greeks had always despised the excesses of
the Asiatic religion, and the more advanced educa-
tion of the Anatolian Greeks could not reconcile
itself to a degraded cult, which sought to per-
petuate the social institutions under which it had
arisen, only under their ugliest and most degraded
aspects. “In the country generally a higher type
of society was maintained; whereas at the great
temples the primitive social system was kept up
as a religious duty incumbent on the class called
Hieroi during their regular periods of service at the
temple. .... The chasm that divided the religion
from the educated life of the country became
steadily wider and deeper. In this state of things
St. Paul entered the country; and wherever edu-
cation had already been diffused, he found converts
ready and eager.” This accounts for “the mar-
vellous and electrical effect that is attributed in
Acts to the preaching of the Apostle in Galatia”
(Ramsay, Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia, 96).

Under the Rom Empire, we can trace a gradual
evolution in the organization of the Gr cities toward

the Rom municipal type. One of
5. Roman’ the main factors in this process was
"“Coloniae” the foundation over inner A.M. of

Rom colonies, which were “bits of
Rome” set down in the provinces. These coloniae
were organized entirely on the Rom model, and
were usually garrisons of veterans, who kept unruly
parts of the country in order. Such in NT time
were Antioch and Lystra (Iconium, which used to be
regarded as a colonia of Claudius, is now recog-
nized to have been raised to that rank by Hadrian).
In the 1st cent. Lat was the official language in the
coloniae; it never ousted Gr in general usage, and
Gr soon replaced it in official documents. Educa-
tion was at its highest level in the Gr towns and
in the Rom colonies, and it was to those exclu-
sively that St. Paul addressed the gospel.

IV. Christianity in A.M.—Already in St. Paul’s
lifetime, Christianity had established itself firmly
in many of the greater centers of Gr-Rom culture
in Asia and Galatia. The evangelization of
Ephesus, the capital of the province Asia, and the
terminus of one of the great routes leading along
the peninsula, contributed largely to the spread of
Christianity in the inland parts of the province,
and esp. in Phrygia. Christianity, in accordance
with the program of St. Paul, first took root in the
aes from which it spread over the country dis-
ricts.

The Christian inscriptions begin earliest in
Phrygia, where we find many documents dating

from the end of the 2d and begin-
Christian ning of the 3d cents. AD. The
Inscriptions, main characteristic of those early
ete inscriptions — a feature which makes

them difficult to recognize —is their
suppression as a rule of anything that looked
overtly Christian, with the object of avoiding the
notice of persons who might induce the Rom offi-
cials to take measures against their dedicators.
The Lycaonian inscriptions begin almost a cent.
later, not, we must suppose, because Christianity
spread less rapidly from Iconium, Lystra, etc, than
it did from the Asian cities, but because Gr educa~
tion took longer to permeate the sparsely populated


277


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Asia Minor
A.M., Arch. of


plains of the central plateau than the rich town-
ships of Asia. The new religion is proved b
Pliny’s correspondence with Trajan (111-13 AD)
to have been firmly established in Bithynia early
in the 2d cent. Farther east, where the great
temples still had much influence, the expansion of
Christianity was slower, but in the 4th cent.
Cappadocia produced such men as Basil and the
Gregories. The great persecutions, as is proved
by literary evidence and by many inscriptions,
raged with especial severity in A.M. The influence
of the church on A.M. in the early cents. of the
Empire may be judged from the fact that scarcely
a trace of the Mithraic religion, the principal com-
petitor of Christianity, has been found in the
whole country. From the date of the Nicene
Council (325 AD) the history of Christianity in
A.M. was that of the Byzantine Empire. Ruins of
churches belonging to the Byzantine period are
found all over the peninsula; they are especially
numerous in the central and eastern districts. A
detailed study of a Byzantine Christian town of
Lycaonia, containing an exceptionally large number
of churches, has been published by Sir W. M.
Ramsay and Miss G. L. Bell: The Thousand and
One Churches. Gr-speaking Christian villages in
many parts of A.M. continue an unbroken connec-
tion with the Rom Empire till the present day.

LrreRaTuRE.—Ramsay's numerous works on A.M.,
especially St. Paul the Traveller, etc, The Church in the
Rom Empire, The Cities of St. Paul, The Letters to the
Seven Churches, and Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia
have been freely drawn upon in this account. For a
fuller bibliography, see #B (11th ed), art. ‘‘Asia Minor"
(Hogarth and Wilson).

W. M. Carper


ASIA MINOR, 4a’shi-a mi’nér, THE ARCHAE-
OLOGY OF, dr’ké-ol’o-ji ov: At the present stage
of our information it is difficult to write with accept-
ance on the archaeology of Asia Minor. Views
unquestioned only a few years ago are already
passing out of date, while the modern archaeologist,
enthusiastically excavating old sites, laboriously
deciphering worn inscriptions, and patiently col-
lating documentary evidence, has by no means
completed his task. But it is now clear that an
archaeological field, worthy to be compared with
those in the valleys of the Euphrates and the

- Nile, invites development in Asia Minor.

In the Contemporary Review for August, 1907,

Professor Sayce reminded his readers that the Gr

geographers called Cappadox the son
1. Earliest of Ninyas, thereby tracing the origin
Influences of Cappadocian culture to Ninevch,
from Meso- and similarly they derived the Merm-
potamia nad Dynasty of Lydia from Ninos

the son of Belos, or from Babylonia
through Assyria. Actual history is probably at
the back of these legends, and the Table of Nations
supports this (Gen 10 22), when it calls Lud, or
Lydia, a son of Shem and brother of Asshur. This
is not to assert, however, that any great number
of Sem people ever made A.M. their home. But
Professor Winckler and others have shown us that
the language, script, ideas and institutions char-
acteristic of the Bab civilization were widespread


among the nations of western Asia, and from very .


early times A.M. came within their sphere of in-
fluence. Strabo records the tradition that Zile,
as well as Tyana, was founded upon “the mound
of Semiramis,” thus connecting these ancient sites
with the Mesopotamian culture. Dr. David Rob-
inson in his Ancient Sinope (145 ff), argues that
“the early foundations of Sinope are probably
Assyr,”’ though established history cannot describe
in detail what lay back of the Milesian settlement
of this the northern point and the best harbor of
the peninsula. Neither could Strabo go back of


the Milesian colonists for the foundation of Sam-
soun, the ancient Amisus, an important commercial
city east_of Sinope, but the accompanying illus-
tration (Fig. 1) seems clearly to show the influence


Fig. 1.—Head from Old Samsoun (Showing Assyrian
Influence).


of Assyria. The original is a terra cotta figure of
gray clay found recently in Old Samsoun. Meso-
potamian religious and cultural influences thus
appear to have tinged A.M., at least at certain
points, as far as the coast of the Black Sea, and
indeed the great peninsula has been what its shape
suggests, a friendly hand stretching out from the
continent of Asia toward the continent of Europe.


Fio. 2.—Excavating for uneuon Tablets at Boghaz-
euy.


Professor Sayce’s article referred to above was
based upon the evidence furnished by cuneiform
tablets from Kara Eyuk, the “Black

2. Third Mound,” an ancient site just within
Millennium the ox-bows of the Halys River near
BC Caesarea Mazaca. These tablets, as
deciphered by himself and Professor

Pinches, were of the period of Abraham, or of


A.M., Arch. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


278


Hammurabi, about 2250 BC, and were written in
a dialect of Assyrian. The settlers were soldier
colonists from the Assyr section of the Bab empire,
engaged in mining and in trade. Silver, copper


n Ce er
pee ef —_— =


Fia. 3.—Hittite Lion, Boghaz-keuy; at the ‘Lion
Gate.”’


and perhaps irou were the metals sought. ‘Time
was reckoned as in Assyria by means of officials
called limmi, who gave their name to the year.”
The colonists had a temple with its priests, where
financial transactions were carried on under the
sanctity of religion. There were roads, mail car-
riers whose pouches were filled with cuneiform
bricks, and commercial travelers who. made a
speciality of fine clothing. This makes quite
natural the finding of a goodly Bab mantle by Achan
at the pillage of Ai (Josh 7 21). Slavery is a
recognized institution; a boy is sent to a barber
for circumcision; a house, wife and children are
pledged ‘as security for a debt. An oath is taken
“on the top of a staff,” an interesting fact that
sheds its light on the vs describing the oath and
blessing of dying Jacob (Gen 47 31; He 11 21).
‘Early A.M. is thus lighted up at various points by
the culture of Mesopotamia, and transmits some of
the scattered rays to the Gr world.
The earliest native inhabitants to be distinguished
in A.M. are the Hittites (see Hirrires). Ever
since 1872, when Dr. Wright suggested
3. Second that the strange hieroglyphics on four
Millennium black basalt stones which he had dis-
BC covered at Hamath were perhaps the
work of Hittite art, there has been an
ever-growing volume of material for scholars to
work upon. There are sculptures of the same
general style, representing figures of men, women,
gods, lions and other animals, cagles with double
heads, sphinxes, musical instruments, winged
discs and other symbols, all of which can be under-
stood only in part. These are accompanied by
hieroglyphic writing, undeciphered as yet, and
the inscriptions read “boustrophedon,” that is
from right to left and back again, as the oxen go in
plowing an oriental field. There have also been
discovered great castles with connecting walls


and ramparts, gates, tunnels, moats, palaces,
temples and other sanctuaries and buildings.
More than this, occasional fragments of cuneiform
tablets picked up on the surface of the ground led
to the belief that written documents of value
might be found buried in the soil. Malatia, Marash,
Sinjirli, Sakje Geuzi, Gurun, Boghaz-keuy, Eyuk,
Karabel, not to mention perhaps a hundred other
sites, have offered important Hittite remains.
Carchemish and Kedesh on the Orontes were capi-
tal cities in northern Syria. The Hittites of the
Holy Land, whether in the days of Abraham or in
those of David and Solomon, were an offshoot from
the main stem of the nation. A.M. was the true
home of the’ Hittites. :

Boghaz-keuy has become within the last decade
the best known Hittite site in A.M., and may
be described as typical. It lies in northern Cappa-
docia, fifty muleteer hours 8. of Sinope. Yaasili-
kaya, the ‘written’ or “sculptured” rocks, is a
suburb, and Eyuk with its sphinx-guarded temple
is but 15 miles to the N. It was the good fortune
of Professor Hugo Winckler of the University of
Berlin to secure the funds, obtain permission from
the Turkish government, and, in the summer of
1906 to unearth over 3,000 more or less fragmentary
tablets written in the cuneiform character and the
Hittite language. This is the first considerable
store of the yet undeciphered Hittite literature
for scholars to work upon. These tablets are of
clay, written on both sides, and baked hard and
red. Often the writing is in ruled columns. The
cuneiform character, like the Lat alphabet in
modern times, was used far from its original home,
and that for thousands of years. The language
of a few Boghaz-keuy tablets is Bab, notably a
copy of the treaty between Rameses II of Egypt
and Khita-sar, king of the Hittites in central A.M.
The scribes adopted not only the Bab characters
but certain ideographs, and it is these ideographs
which have furnished the key to provisional vo-
cabularies of several hundred words which have


been published by Professors Pinches and Sayce.
When Professor Winckler and his German col-
laborators publish the tablets they have deposited
in the Constantinople museum, we may listen to


279


the voiee of some Hittite Homer speaking from
amid the dusty bricks written in the period of Moses.
Beside Boghaz-keuy the beetling towers of lofty
Troy sink to the proportions of a fortified hamlet.

Hittite sculptures show a very marked type of
men, with squat figures, slant eyes, prominent
noses and Mongoloid features. We suppose they
were of Turanian or Mongolian blood; certainly
not Sem and probably not Aryan. As they occu-
pied various important inland centers in A.M. before,
during and after the whole of the second millen-
nium BC, it is probable that they occupied much or
most of the intervening territory (see Records of
the Past for December, 1908). A great capital
like Boghaz-keuy, with its heavy fortifications,
would require extensive provinces to support it,
and would extend its sway so as to leave no enemy
within striking distanee. The ‘‘Amazons” are now
generally regarded as the armed Hittite priestesses
of a goddess whose cult spread throughout A.M.
The “Amazon Mountains,” still known locally by
the old name, run parallel with the coast of the
Black Sea near the Iris River, and tradition current
there now holds that the women are stronger than
the men, work harder, live longer and are better
at a quarrel! A comparative study of the dec-
orated pottery, so abundant on the old sites of
the country, makes it more than possible that the
artificial mounds, which are so common a feature
of the Anatolian landscape, and the many rock-
hewn tombs, of which the most famous are prob-
ably those at Amasia, were the work of Hittite
hands.

The Hittite sculptures are strikingly suggestive
of religious rather than political or military themes.
The people were pagans with many gods and
goddesses, of whom one, or one couple, received
recognition as at the head of the pantheon. Such
titles as Sutekh of Carchemish, Sutekh of Kadesh,
Sutekh of the land of the Hittites, show that the


wr =" 5 ae ay - <’,


Fie. 5.—Hittite Sculptures, Yasili-kaya.


chief god was localized in various places, perhaps
with varying attributes. A companion goddess
was named Antarata. She was the great Mother
Goddess of A.M., who came to outrank her male


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA — A.M., Arch. of


counterpart. She is represented in the sculptures
with a youthful male figure, as a consort, probably
illustrating the legend of Tammuz for whom the
erring Heb women wept (Ezk 8 14). He was called


Fic. 6.—Hittite Sculptures, Yasili-kaya.


Attys in later days. He stands for life after death,
spring after winter, one generation after another.
The chief god worshipped at Boghaz-keuy was Te-
shub. Another was named Khiba, and the same
name appears in the Tell el-Amarna correspondence
from Jerus. This affords a remarkable illustration
of the prophet’s address to Jerus, ‘‘Your mother
was a Hittite’ (Ezk 16 45).

The worship of the Hittites of the era of the
Exodus is still seen pictured on the rocks at Yasili-
kaya. This spot was the sanctuary of the metropo-
lis. There are two hypacthral rock galleries, the
larger of which has a double procession of about
80 figures carved on the natural rock walls, which
have been smoothed for the purpose, and meeting
at the inmost recess of the gallery. The figures
nearest the entrance are about half life-size. As
the processions advance the height of the figures
increases, until the two persons at the head, the
chief priest. and priestess or the king and queen,
are quite above life-size. These persons advance
curious symbols toward each other, each is followed
by a retinue of his or her own sex, and each is sup-
ported—the priest-king upon the heads of two
subjeets or captives, and the priestess-queen upon
a leopard. The latter figure is followed by her
consort son.

The ruins at Eyuk are compact, and consist of
a small temple, its sphinx-guarded door, and a
double procession of approaching worshippers to the
number of about 40. The main room of the
sanctuary is only 7 yds. by 8 in measurement.
This may be compared with the Holy Place in the
tabernacle of the Israelites, which was approxi-
mately eontemporary. Neither eould eontain a
worshipping congregation, but only the ministering
priests. The solemn sphinxes at the door suggest
the cherubim that adorned the Israelite temple,
and winged eagles with double heads decorate the
inner walls of the doorway. Amid the sculptured


A.M., Arch. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


280


processions moving on the basalt rocks toward the
sanctuary is an altar before which stands a bull
on a pedestal, and behind which is a priest. who
wears a large earring. Close behind the priest a
flock of three sheep and a goat approach the sac-
rificial altar. Compare the description in Ex 32.
The Israelites said to Aaron, ‘Up, make us gods”;
he required their golden earrings, made a calf,
“and built an altar before it”; they offered burnt
offerings and brought peace offerings; they sat
down to eat and drink and rose up to play. Israel-
ite worship was in certain forms similar to the
worship oi the Hittites, but its spiritual content
was wholly different. For musical instruments
the Eyuk procession exhibits a lituus, a (silver?)
trumpet and a shapely guitar. The animal king-
dom is represented by another bull with a chest or
ark on its back, a well-executed lion and two hares
held in the two talons of an eagle. A spring close
by furnished all the water required by the wor-
shippers and for ritual purposes.

Professor Garstang in The Land of the Hittites
shows that the power which had been waning after
about 1200 BC enjoyed a period of recrudescence
in the 10th and 9th cents. He ascribes to this
period the monuments of Sakje Geuzi, which the
professor himself excavated, together with other
Hittite remains in A.M. The Vannic power known
as Urartu, akin to the Hittites but separate, arose
in the N.E.; the Phrygians began to dominate in
the W.; the Assyrians pressed upon the 8.E. The
overthrow of the Hittites was completed by the
bursting in of the desolating Cimmerian hordes,
and after 717, when Carchemish was taken by the
Assyrians, the Hittites fade from the archaeological
records of their home land. See Asia Minor, II, 1.

Before the Hittites disappeared from the interior
of A.M., sundry Aryan peoples, more or less closely

related to the Greeks, were estab-
4. First lished at various points around the
Millennium coast. Schliemann, of Trojan fame,
B was the pioneer archaeologist in this

field, and his boundless enthusiasm,
optimism and resourcefulness recovered the treas-
ures of Priam’s city, and made real again the story
of days when the world was young. Among the
most. valuable collections in the wonderful Con-
stantinople Museum is that from Troy, which con-
tains bronze axes and lance heads, implements in
copper, talents of silver, diadems, earrings and
bracelets of gold, bone bodkins and needles, spindle
whorls done in baked clay, numbers of idols or
votive offerings, and other objects found in the
Troad, at the modern Hissarlik. Phrygian, Thracian


Fig. 7.—Artificial Mound, Marsovan Plain; Possibly
Hittite.


and subsequently Galatian immigrants from the
N.W. had been filtering across the Hellespont,
and wedging themselves in among the earlier in-
habitants. There were some points in common
between the Cretan or Aegean civilization and that
of A.M., but Professor Hogarth in his Jonia and
the East urges that these resemblances were few.
It was otherwise with the Greeks proper. Herodo-


tus gave the names of twelve Aeolian, twelve
Ionian and six Dorian cities on the west coast,
founded by colonists who came across the Aegean
Sea, and who leavened, led and intermarried with
the native population they found settled there.
One of these Asiatic Gr colonies, Miletus, was
sufficiently populous and vigorous to send out
from 60 to 80 colonies of its own, the successive


Fia. 8.—Modern Traffic on the Halys River.


swarms of adventurers moving N. and E., up the
coast of the Aegean, through the Bosphorus and
along the south shore of the Black Sea. In due
season Xenophon and the Ten Thousand, and then
Alexander with his Macedonians, scattered yet
more widely the seeds of Hellenic culture upon a
soil already prepared for its reception. The in-
scriptions, sculptures, temples, tombs, palaces,
castles, theaters, jewelry, figurines in bronze or
terra cotta, coins of silver or copper and other ob-
jects remaining from this period exhibit a style of
art, culture and religion which may best be named
Anatohan, but which are akin to those of Greece
proper. The excavations at Ephesus, Pergamus,
Sardis and other important sites show the same
grafting of Gr scions upon the local stock.

One marked feature survived as a legacy from
Hittite days in the worship of a great Mother
Goddess. Whether known as Ma, or Cybele, or
Anaitis, or Diana, or designated by some other
title, it was the female not the male that headed
the pantheon of gods. With the Gr culture came
also the city-state organization of government.
The ruder and earlier native communities were
organized on the village plan. Usually each village
had its shrine, in charge of priests or perhaps more
often priestesses; the land belonged to the god, or
goddess; it paid tithes to the shrine; sacrifices
and gifts were offered at the sacred center; this
was often on a high hill, under a sacred tree, and
beside a holy fountain; there was little of educa-
tion, law or government except as guiding oracles
were proclaimed from the temple.

In the early part of this millennium the Phry-
gians became a power of commanding importance
in the western part of the peninsula, and Professor


281


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA = A.M,, Arch. of


Hogarth says of the region of the Midas Tomb,
“There is no region of ancient monuments which
would be better worth examination’ by excava-
tors. Then came Lydia, whose capital, Sardis,
is now in process of excavation by Professor Butler
and his American associates. Sardis was taken and
Croesus dethroned by the Persians about 546 BC,
and for two cents., until Alexander, Pers authority
overshadowed A.M., but permanent influences were

scanty.
By about the year 200 BC the Romans began
to become entangled in the politics of the four
principal kingdoms that then occupied


5. The A.M., namely Bithynia, Pergamus,
Romans Pontus and Cappadocia. By slow
in A.M. degrees their influence and their arms


advanced under such leaders civil
and military as Sulla, Lucullus, Pompey, Cicero
and Julius Caesar, while Attalus of Pergamus and
Prusias of Bithynia bequeathed their uneasy do-


ig ]
2 ———— al

. 9.—Cuneiform Tablet from Boghaz-keuy, Con-
ie taining the Name of Rblbu.


mains to the steady power arising from the W.
In 133 BC the Romans proceeded to organize the
province of Asia, taking the name from a Lydian
district included in the province. Step by step
the Rom frontiers were pushed farther to the E.
Mithridates VI, king of Pontus, was called “the
most formidable enemy the republic ever had to
contend with,” but he went down before the con-
quering arms of Rome. See Pontus. Caesar
chastised the unfortunate Pharnaces at Zile in
central A.M., and coolly announced his success in
the memorable message of three words, “‘veni,
vidi, vici.” Ultimately all of this fair peninsula
passed under the iron sway, and the Rom rule
lasted more than 500 years, until in 895 AD Theo-
dosius divided the empire between his sons, giving
the E. to Arcadius and the W. to Honorius, and the
m Empire was cleft in twain.
Rome ie their customs elsewhere the Romans
built roads well paved with stone between the chief
cities of their eastern provinces. The archaeologist
or common traveler often comes upon sections of
these roads, sometimes in the thickest forests, as


sound and as rough as when Rom chariots rumbled
over them. Milestones were erected to mark the
distances, usually inscribed in both Lat and Gr,
and the decipherment of these milestone records


Fre, 10.—Coin of Licinius, Roman Emperor in the
East, 313 AD.


contributes to the recovery of the lost history.
Bridges over the important streams have been
rebuilt and repaired by successive generations of
men, but in certain cases the Rom character of the
original stands clearly forth. The Romans were a
building people, and government houses, aque-
ducts, baths, theaters, temples and other structures
confront the archaeologist or await the labor of
the spade. Epigraphical studies such as those of
Professor Sterrett indicate what a wealth of in-
poipsgue is yet to be recovered, in Lat as well as
in Gr.

It was during the Rom period that Christianity
made its advent in the peninsula. Christian dis-
ciples as well as Rom legions and governors used
the roads, bridges and public buildings. Old
church buildings and other religious foundations
have their stories to tell. It is very interesting to
read on Gr tombstones of the Ist or 2d cent. AD
such inscriptions as, ‘Here lies the servant of God,
Daniel,” “Here lies the handmaid of God, Maria.”
Our great authority for this period is Sir William M.
Ramsay, whose Historical Geography of A.M. and
other works must be read by anyone who would
familiarize himself with this rich field.

By almost imperceptible degrees the Rom era
was merged into the Byzantine. We are passing

so rapidly now from the sphere of


6. The archaeology ta that of history proper
Byzantine that we must be brief. For a thou-
Period sand years after the fall of Rome the


Eastern Empire lived on, a Gr body

pervaded with lingering Rom influences and with
onstantinople as the pulsating heart. The
character of the times was nothing if not religious,
yet the prevailing Christianity was a syncretistic
compound including much from the nature worship
of earlier Anatolia. The first great councils of the
Christian church convened upon the soil of A.M.,


Fia. 11.—Roman Bridge over the Halys.


the fourth being held at Ephesus in 431, and at
this council the phrase ‘Mother of God” was
adopted. We have seen that for fifty generations
ox more the people of A.M. had worshipped a great


Asiarch
Asmoneans


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


282


mother goddess, often with her consort son. It
was at Ephesus, the center of the worship of Diana,
that ecclesiastics, many of whom had but a slight
training in Christianity, adopted this article into
their statement of religious faith.

Again the government of the country, the domi-
nant race, the religion, language and culture, all

are changed—this time with the
7. The ivasions of the Seljukian Turks.
Seljukian This tribe was the precursor of the
Turks Ottoman Turks and later became

absorbed among them. These Sel-
jukians entered A.M., coming up out of the recesses
of central Asia, about the time that the Normans
were settling along the coasts of western Europe.
Their place in history is measurably clear, but
they deserve mention in archaeology by reason
of their remarkable architecture. Theirs was a
branch of the Saracenic or Moorish architecture,
and many examples remain in A.M. Mosques,
schools, government buildings, khans, fortifications,
fountains and other structures remain in great
numbers and in a state of more or less satisfactory
preservation, and they are buildings remarkably
massive, yet ornate in delicacy and variety of
tracery.

The Ottoman Turks, cousins of the Seljukians,
came up out of the central Asian hive later, and
took Constantinople by a memorable siege in 1453.
With this event the archaeology of A.M. may be
said to close, and history to cover the field instead.

Grorce E. WHITE

ASIARCH, 4’shi-irk (Acvépxys, Asidrchés;
ERV “the chief officers of Asia,” AV “the chief of
Asia”): The title given to certain men of high
honorary rank in the Rom province of Asia. What
their exact functions were is not altogether clear.
They derived their appellation from the name of
the province over which they presided (cf Brruy-
NIARCH; CARIARCH; SYRIARCH). Brandis has shown
that they were not “high priests of Asia,” as
some have thought, but delegates of individual
cities to the provincial Council (Commune Asie;
see Asta Mrnor) which regulated the worship of
Rome and of the emperor. They were probably
assembled at. Ephesus, among other places, to pre-
side over the public games and the religious rites
at the festival, in honor of the gods and the em-
peror, when they sent word to Paul and gave him
a bit of friendly advice, not to present himself at
the theater (mé dotinai heautén ets t6 théatron, Acts
19 31). The title could be held along with any
civil office and with the high-priesthood of a par-
ticular city. They served for one year, but re-
election was possible (the teuure of office, according
to Ramsay, was four years). The municipalities
must have shown the Asiarchs high honor, as we
find the names of many perpetuated on coins and
inscriptions. The office could only be held by
men of wealth, as the expenses of the provincial
games were for the greater part defrayed by the
Asiarchs.

Litnrature.—CI, 2511, 2912; CIL, 296, 297; Brandis,
Pauly-Wissowa's Real-Encyclopaedia, arts. ‘Archiereus’’
and ‘‘Asiarches’'; Strabo, XIV, 649; Eusebius, HE,IV,
15; Hicks, Ancient Gr Inscrs in the British Museum;
Ramsay, Classical Review, III, 174%; Cities and Bishop-
rics of Phrygia, I, 55-58, and II, ch xi; Guiraud, Les
assemblées provinciales de l’'Empire Romain; Lightfoot,
St. Ignatius and, St. Polycarp, II, 987 ff.

M. O. Evans

ASIBIAS, as-i-bi’as VActBlas, Asibias and Asébi-
as): A. put away his “strange wife’ (1 Esd 9 26).
Cf Malchijah (Ezr 10 25).


ASIDE, a-sid’: ‘Distinct from others,’ ‘“pri-
vately,’’ such is the sense of the word in 2 K 4 4;
Mk 7 33. Also “to withdraw” (Lk 9 10 AV; Acts
23 19: troxwpéw, hupochdréd, also anachoréd). One


is said to have turned aside when he departs from
the path of rectitude (Ps 14 3; Sir 2 7; 1 Tim 1 6).
In a fig. sensc it is used to express the thought of
putting aside, to renounce, every hindrance or im-
pediment to a consecrated earnest Christian life
(He 12 1: dwori@nus, apotithémi).


ASIEL, 4’si-el, as‘i-el (?AowfA, Asiél; AV Asael
[Tob 1 1)): . :

(1) Grandfather of Jehu, one of the Simeonite
“princes” mentioned in 1 Ch 4 35 as sharing
Judah’s inheritance (see Josh 19 9).

(2) A swift writer engaged by Ezra to transcribe
the law (2 Esd 14 24). ;

(3) An ancestor of Tobit (Tob 1 1). Cf Jahzeel
or Jahziel (Gen 46 24).


ASIPHA, as’i-fa (A, "Awewpa, Aseiphd; B, Tasei-
phdé)=Hasupha (Ezr 2 43; Neh 7 46). The sons
of A. (temple-servants) returned with Zerubbabel
to Jerus (1 Esd 5 29).


ASK, ask Ow, sha’al “to inquire,” “to seek
for counsel,” “to demand’’): It is the word com-
monly used in the OT and is equivalent to émepwrdu,
eperaidé, “to request,” used in the NT. It does
not imply any inferiority on the part of the person
asking (Ps 28). It is the Son who is bidden to
ask, and therefore the word expresses the request
of an equal. It has also the meaning ‘‘to inquire”’: |
“Wherefore .... ask after my name?” (Gen 32
29) signifying, ‘‘Surely you must know who IJ am.”
“Ye shall ask me no question” (Jn 16 23), i.e.
“about the true meaning of My words, for all will
then be clear to you” (Dummelow). airéw, aitéd,
is the word commonly used with reference to prayer.
It means “‘to ask,” “to implore,” and presents the
petitioner as an inferior asking from a superior
(Mt 6 8; 77.8; Mk 10 35; Jn 14 13, and in
many other places). It is not, however, asking
in the sense of the word beg, but rather that of a
child making request of its father. The petitioner
asks both because of his need and of the assurance
that he is welcome. He is assured before he asks
that the petition will be granted, if he asks in
accordance with God’s will (1 Jn 3 22; 6 15).
Moreover the Spirit leads us to such asking in that
He reveals our need and the goodness of God to us.
See Amiss; PRAYER. JAcoB W. Kapp


ASKELON, as’ke-lon: AV form in Jgs 1 18;
18 617; 28 1 20, for AsHKELon (q.v.).


ASLEEP, a-slép’ (jW?, ydshén, “sleeping,”
O74, radham, “deep sleep’; «abetSw, katheudé,
“to fall asleep,” abvrvée, aphupndd, ‘to fall
asleep’): A state of repose m sleep, Nature’s
release from weariness of body and mind, as of
Jonah on shipboard (Jon 1 5); of Christ in the
tempest-tossed boat (Mt 8 24); of the exhausted
disciples in Gethsemane (Mt 26 43 AV). Used
with beautiful and comforting significance of death
(koindouat, kotmdomat, “to put to sleep’). Sleep
implies a subsequent waking, and as a symbol
of death implies continued and conscious life
beyond the grave. In the presence of death no
truth has been so sustaining to Christian faith as
this. It is the distinct product of Christ’s resur-
rection. Paul speaks of departed believers as
having ‘fallen asleep in Christ”? (1 Cor 16 6.18);
as proof of the soul’s immortality he terms the
risen Christ “the first-fruits of them that are asleep.”
Lazarus and Stephen, at death, are said to have
“fallen asleep’ (Jn 11 11; Acts 7 60); so of
David and the ancient patriarchs (Acts 13 36;
2 Pet 3 4). The most beautiful description of
death in human language and lit. is Paul’s charac-
terization of the dead as ‘‘them also which sleep


283


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Asiarch
Asmoneans


in Jesus’ (1 Thess 4 14 AV). This blessed hope
has wrought itself permanently into the life and
creed and hymnology of the Christian church, as
in the hymn often used with such comforting
effect. at the burial service of believers: “Asleep in
Jesus! blessed sleep!”’ Dwicut M. Pratr


ASMODAEUS, az-mo-dé'us (“TAWE , ’ashmdhai;
"Acpobatos, Asmodatos): An evil spirit first men-
tioned in Tob 3 8. Older etymologists derived
the name from the Heb verb shdmadh, ‘“destroy’’;
but it is now generally held to be associated with
Zoroastrianism, with which the Jews became ac-
quainted during the exile, and by which later Jewish
views on the spirit-world were greatly influenced.
It is now held to be the equivalent of the Pers
Aeshma-Deva, the spirit of concupiscence. The
spirit is at times reckoned as the equal in power
of “Abaddon” (Job 31 12) and of ‘‘Apollyon”
(Rev 9 11), and in Tobit is represented as loving
Sara, only daughter of Raguel of Ecbatana, and
as causing the death on the bridal night of seven
husbands who had in succession married her. His
power was broken by the young Tobias acting on
the advice of the angel Raphael (Tob 6 15). He
burnt on the “‘ashes of incense’ the heart and liver
of a fish which he caught in the Tigris. ‘But when
the devil smelled the smell, he fled into the upper-
most parts of Egypt, and the angel bound him”
(Tob 8 3). Milton refers to the incident in Para-
dise Lost, 4, 168-71, founding on Jewish demonology
and the “loves of the angels” (Gen 6 2).

J. Hutcuison

ASMONEANS, as-mo-né’ans: A remarkable

riestly family of Modin, in Judaea, also called
Fiaumonneans or Maccabees. They belonged to
that portion of the Jewish nation which under all
trials and temptations remained loyal to Jeh, even
when the national life and religion seemed at their
lowest ebb, and they succeeded, for a while at
least, in restoring the name and fame of Israel. All
in all they were an extremely warlike family. But
the entire Asmonean history affords abundant
proof of the bitter partisanships which, even more
than the persecutions of their enemies, sapped the
national strength and divided the nation into
bitterly hostile factions. The Asmoneans never,
in all their history, or at any given period in it,
had a united people behind their backs. They had
to fight disloyalty at home, as well as deadly
enmity abroad. A considerable portion of the
people was unable to withstand the paganizing
influence of the Macedonian and Syrian periods,
and in this direction the thousands of Heb soldiers,
who fought under the Gr banners, must have
exerted an inestimable influence. The Asmonean
struggle is therefore, in all its phases, a three-sided
one, and it makes the ascendancy of the family
all the more remarkable. The sources of our
knowledge of this period are mainly found in the
Books of the Macc, in the Ant and BJ of Jos, and
in occasional references of Strabo, Livy and other
classic historians. The contents of Ant plainly
prove that Jos used the Books of the Macc as far
as possible, but that besides he was possessed of
sources of information now wholly lost. The name
“Asmonean” is derived from the Heb Hashman,
“wealthy.” Hashman was a priest of the family
Joarib (Ant, XII, vi, 1; 1 Mace 2 1; 1 Ch 24 7).
The name “Maccabee,” from the surname of Judas,
the son of Mattathias, may be derived from the
Heb makkabhah, “a hammer”; makhbi, ‘‘an_ex-
tinguisher’; or from the first letters of the Heb
sentence, Mi Khamékhah Ba-'élim YHWH? “Who
among the gods, O Lord, can be likened unto thee,”
inscribed on the Maccabaean banner in the word
MaKHBiyY.


Antiochus Epiphanes returned in 169 BC from
the Egyp wars, the fruits of which had been wrested
from him by the Rom power, which a


1. The year later, in his fourth war, in the
Asmonean person of Pompilius Laenas, was to
Revolt order him peremptorily to leave


: Egypt once and for all time. Thus
his four campaigns against his hereditary foe were
made utterly barren. Grave suspicions had been
aroused in the king’s heart against the Jews, and
when their wrangling about the high-priesthood
afforded him an opportunity, he resolved forever
to crush the power of Judaism and to wipe out its
detested religion. Thus Apollonius (Jos tells us,


. the king himself, BJ, V, ix, 4) in 168 BC appeared


before Jerus, devastated the city, defiled the temple
by the sacrifice of swine on the altar of burnt
offering, destroyed all the holy writings that could
be obtained, sold numberless Jews and their
families into slavery, forbade circumcision on pain
of death and inaugurated the dark period spoken
of by Dnl (9 27; 11 31). Thus Antiochus marked
his name in blood and tears on the pages of Jewish
history. Against this cruel tyranny and this
attempt to root out the religion of Israel and their
ancient faith, the Maccabaean family revolted and
thus became the leaders in a desperate struggle
for Jewish independence. How far they succeeded
in these efforts the following sketch will show.
Mattathias was a priest of the house of Joarib,
at the time of the breaking out of the revolt most
likely a refugee from Jerus, living at
2. Matta- Modin, W. of the city, in the high-
thias lands of Judaea, where he may have
owned an estate. When compulsion
was tried by the Syrians to make him saerifice to
idols, he not only refused to obey, but slew a Jew,
who came forward to the altar, as well as Apelles,
the Syrian commander and a portion of his guard
(Ant, XII, vi, 2). Overthrowing heathen altars
as he went, he was followed into the wilderness by
large bands of loyal Jews. And when the refusal
to fight on the Sabbath day had led to the slaughter
of a thousand of his followers, he gave liberty to the
Jews to give battle on that day. In 167 BC, soon
after the beginning of the conflict, he sank under
the unequal task, leaving the completion of the
work to his five sons, John (Gaddis), Simon (Mat-
thes), Judas (Maccabaeus), Eleazar (Auran) and
Jonathan (Apphes). On his deathbed he ap-
pointed Simon as the counselor and Judas as the
military leader of the movement (Ant, XII, vi, 1).
These two with Jonathan were to carry the work
to completion.
Judas proved himself full worthy of his father’s
foresight and trust. His military talent was
marvelous, his cunning baffling, his
3. Judas courage leonine, his swiftness that of
Macca-~ the eagle. He reminds one strongly
baeus, 166- of Joshua, the ancient military genius
160 BC of Israel. Nearly all his battles were
fought against impossible odds and his
victories inspired the Syrians with awe. In sudden
night attacks he surprised the Syrian generals, Apol-
lonius and Seron (1 Macc 3 10.13), and seattered
their armies. Antiochus, ready to chastise the
countries eastward, who appeared on the point of
rebellion, intrusted the conduct of the Judaean
war to Lysias, his kinsman and favorite, who was
charged to wipe Israel and its hated religion off
the face of the earth. The latter intrusted the
actual conduct of hostilities to a great and well-
equipped army, under Ptolemaeus, Nicanor and
Gorgias. This army was encamped at Emmaus,
S. of Modin, while Judas lay with his small force a
little to the 8.E. When Gorgias attempted to
gurprise him by night, Judas himself fell like an


Asmoneans


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


284


avalanche on the rest of the Syrian army and crushed
it, then met and defeated the returning Gorgias
and gained an immense booty. Equally successful
in the campaign of 165 BC Judas captured Jerus
and purified and rededicated the temple, just five
years after its defilement. Thus the Jewish ‘‘Festi-
val of Lights” came into existence. The next
year was spent in the reduction of Idumaea, the
Jordan territory, the Ammonites, and several im-
portant strongholds of the enemy, whilst Simon
marched northward and brought back the Jewish
captives from Galilee and the sources of the Jordan.

Meanwhile Antiochus had died in the eastern
campaign and his death inaugurated the collapse of
the Syrian empire. Philip was appointed guardian
of the infant king, while his uncle Demetrius sought
to dethrone him by the aid of the Romans. The
siege of the stronghold of Jerus, still in the hands
of the Syrians, by the Maccabees, led Philip to
make a heroic effort to crush Judas and his growing


Jerus. Judas gave them battle at Elasa, in April,
161 BC. With only 3,000 men he engaged the
Syrian forces, He succeeded in defeating the left
wing of the Syrians under Bacchides, but was in
turn surrounded and defeated by the right wing.
All bope of escape being cut off, Judas surrounded
himself with his best warriors and fell at last sur-
rounded by heaps of slain foes. Strange to say
the Syrians surrendered his body to Simon and
Jonathan his brother, who buried him by his
father’s side at Modin.
The death of Judas for the moment paralyzed
the revolutionary movement, while it increased
the determination of the Syrians. All
4. Jonathan, previous privileges were revoked, and
160-143 the Maccabaean sympathizers were
BC rigorously persecuted. But all this
served only to bind the party closer
together, and the chief command was conferred on
Jonathan, the youngest brother, as daring as, and


THE ASMONEAN FAMILY-TREEB


Alexandra,
John Judas cs oo Hrnganus a wife of
Alexander
Asamonaeus Sinow Joun Hyrr- ;
es yiesty | 143-135 ¢ aoa Antigonus
Pies
Jobn
Marrararas
JUDAS ALEXANDER
(MaccaBaEus) Mattathias JANNAEUS
166-160 104-78
{I
gq Mariamne,
S wife of Herod
ALEXANDRA Alexander
e A
RISTOBULUS " Aristobulus
Eleazar 69-63
apauehter, ANION
Jonathan | Wile of F tole- 40-3
maeus, gover- Two sons
160-143 nor of Jericho
( lq Macc 16 11) l


ower, and he swiftly marched upon Judaea with a
lovee and well-equipped army. The odds were too
strong for Judas, his band was frightened by the
Syrian war-elephants and in the battle of Beth-
zacharias the Maccabees were defeated and Eleazar,
the youngest brother, was killed. Jerus was taken
by the Syrians, the temple wall broken down and
only the threatening danger of an attack from the
king’s southern foes saved the Maccabaean cause.
Lysias retreated but left a strong garrison in Jerus.
All seemed lost. Alcimus, leader of the disloyal
Jews and a mortal enemy of Judas, was made high
priest and he prayed Demetrius, who had captured
the Syrian throne, to come to his aid against the
Maccabees in 162 BC. Bacchides was sent with a
strong force and sought in vain to obtain possession
of the person of Judas by treachery. He made
havoc of the Jews, by killing friend and foe alike,
and returned to the East to be succeeded by Ni-
canor, who also failed to dispose of Judas by treach-
ery. In the ensuing battle at Capharsalama he
was defeated and compelled to fall back on Jerus
and thence on Beth-horon, where Judas attacked,
again defeated and killed him. In this hour of
hope and fear Judas was led to seek a Rom alliance
whose consummation he never saw. From that day
his fortune changed. A new Syrian army under
Bacchides and the false priest Alcimus approached


perhaps more crafty than, Judas. He plunged into
the wilderness, relieved himself of the burden of
the women and children, and when the latter under
the care of John, his brother, were exterminated
by the Amri, he took bloody vengeance on them.
Surprised by Bacchides, the Syrian general, he in-
flicted great losses on the latter and escaped across
the Jordan. The death of the traitor Alcimus, in
160 BC, for a while relieved the situation and the
strength of the Maccabaeans rapidly grew. A
second campaign of Bacchides proved fruitless
against the daring and cunning of Jonathan and
Simon, and they succeeded in making peace with
the Syrians (Ant, XIII, i, 5, 6), but the citadel of
Jerus and other strongholds remained in the hands
of the enemy. The events of the year 153 BC
however changed the entire aspect of affairs.
Demetrius saw his throne menaced by Alexander
Balas, a Rom favorite. Trying to secure the aid
of the Maccabees, he greatly extended the former
concessions, and when Balas outstripped him in
generosity and appointed Jonathan high priest
with practically royal powers, the Maccabees
craftily played out the one agaiust the other. Since
the death of Alcimus the high-priesthood had now
been vacant for seven years (Ant, XIII, ii, 3); for
which reason the appointment was exceedingly
gratifymg to the Jews. In his extremity, Deme-


285


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Asmoneans


trius offered the practical equivalent of inde-
pendence, but the Maccabees had learned the
value of these promises by bitter experience. The
shrewdness of Jonathan led him to turn a cold
shoulder to all the fine promises of Demetrius and
to intrust his fortunes to Balas, and not in vain,
for the former died in battle with the latter (Ani,
XIII, ii, 4). Jonathan excelled all his brothers in
craft and ever embraced the most promising side,
as is evident from his relations with Ptolemy Philo-
meter, Balas and Demetrius. When the latter’s
cause was embraced in 148 BC by Apollonius, gov-
ernor of Syria, Jonathan revealed the true Macca-
baean military genius, by gaining a signal victory
over him. Balas now gave the long-coveted per-
mission to break down the old Syrian tower at
Jerus, which for so long had been a thorn in the sides
of the Maccabaeans. -Alas, during the siege both
Balas and Philometer died and Demetrius breathed
vengeance against Jonathan. But the latter dex-
terously won over the king by large presents (Ant,
XIII, iv, 9) and accepted the restricted liberties
offered. Profiting however by the endless cabals
of the Syrian court, he soon sided with Tryphon,
the new claimant, and with the aid of his brother
Simon extended the Maccabaean power over nearly
all Pal. In the next Syrian war he gained an almost
miraculous victory over the enemy (Ané, XIII, v,
7; 1 Macc 11 67 ff). Tuired of the endless struggle
and longing for a strong arm to lean on, like Judas,
he sought a renewal of the Rom alliance, but never
saw its realization. Tryphon, who feared him,
treacherously made him prisoner at Ptolemais; all
his followers were immediately killed and he him-
self subsequently executed at Basca in Coele-Syria

(Ant, XIII, vi, 2, 6).
Thus again the Maccabees faced a great crisis.
But Simon, the sole survivor of the sons of Matta-
thias, now stepped in the breach,


6. Simon, foiled all the treacherous plans of
143-135 Tryphon, met strategy with strategy,
BC renewed the alliance with Demetrius


and obtained from him the _ high-


priesthood. All the old privileges were renewed, ,


the alliance with Tryphon was condoned by the
king, and the Maccabees resolved to count this era
as the beginning of their true freedom (1 Macc 18
41). The hated stronghold of Gazara fell and last
of all the citadel of Jerus was reduced, and even
the hill, on which it had stood, was completely
leveled in the following three years (Ant, XIII, vi,
7). Simon, favored by the decadence of the Syrian
power, brought the rule of the Maccabaeans to the
zenith of its glory. The only considerable archi-
tectural work undertaken in the whole period was
the magnificent tomb of the Asmoneans at Modin,
built by Simon, which was visible even from the
Mediterranean. He was the first of the Macca-
bees to strike his own coinage, maintained himself,
with the aid of his sons, John and Judas, against
the new Syrian pretender, Antiochus Sidetes, 139
BC, but fell at last a victim to the treachery of his
own son-in-law, Ptolemaeus (Ptolemy, 1 Macc 16
11) at a banquet prepared for him (135 BC). His
wife and sons, Mattathias and Judas, were made
captives at the same time (Ani, XIII, vii, 4; BJ,
I, ii, 3). :
John succeeded his father both as prince and
high priest, and his long reign displayed all the
characteristics of the true Maccabees.


6. John The older sources here are lost sight
Hyrcanus, of, and nearly all we know is derived
135-105 from Jos. The reign of John Hyr-
BC canus started amid great difficulties.


Hardly was Ptolemaeus disposed of
before Antiochus appeared before Jerus with a
strong army and closely invested it. In a truce


with the king, Hyrcanus obtained as favorable
conditions as possible, paid a ransom and had to
permit the razing of the city wall. To obtain
money he opened and spoiled the tomb of David
(Ant, XIII, viii, 4) and thus obtained a standing
army for the defence of the country. With this
army he accompanied the king to the Parthian war,
in which Antiochus was killed. Hyrcanus now
threw off the Syrian yoke and began a war of con-
quest. In a quick campaign he conquered the
trans-Jordanic territory, destroyed Samaria and its
temple and devastated the land of Idumaea, whose
people were now embodied in the Jewish common-
wealth by an enforced circumcision (Ant, XII,
ix, 1). By an embassy, the third in the Asmonean
history, he made an alliance with Rome. Mean-
while a strong partisan spirit had been aroused
against him at home, on account of his leaving the
party of the Pharisees, to affiliate himself with that
of the Sadducees, their bitter enemies. Thus the
men who had been the very core of the Macca-
baean revolt from the beginning now raised a
sedition against him. The hagiocratic view of
Jewish life, from the start, had been the essence of
the Asmonean movement and, as the years rolled
on, the chasm hetween the two great parties in
Israel grew ever wider. The break with the
Pharisees seemed like a break with all Asmonean
antecedents. The core of the trouble lay in the
double power of Hyrcanus, who, against the
Pharisaic doctrine, combined in one person both
the royal and priestly dignities. And as the Phari-
sees grew in strength they also grew in reverence
for the traditions of the fathers, whilst the Sad-
ducees paid attention only to the written testimony,
and besides were very liberal in their views in gen-
eral. Only the immense popularity of Hyrcanus
enabled him to weather this storm. After a reign
of nearly three decades he died in peace, envied for
three things—the possession of the supreme power
in Israel, the possession of the high-priesthood and
the gift of prophecy (Ant, XIII, x, 7).
With John Hyrcanus the glory of the Macca-
baean house passed away. What remains is only
the sad tale of outward and inward
7. A Dying decay. The period covered is only
House, six or seven decades. Knowing his
105-37 BC family, Hyrcanus had nominated his
: wife to the supreme power, while
Aristobulus, his oldest son, was to take the high-
priesthood. But the latter was no sooner installed
in this office than he threw off the mask, assumed
the royal title, imprisoned and starved to death his
mother and incarcerated his three youngest broth-
ers, leaving at liberty only Antigonus, whom he
soon after caused to be murdered in a frenzy of
jealousy of power (Ant, XIII, xi, 1,2,3). Shortly
after this he died of an intestinal disease, little
lamented by his people. His childless widow ele-
vated the oldest of the surviving sons of Hyrcanus,
Jannaeus Alexander, to the throne and married
him. This man began his reign with the murder
of one of his remaining brothers and, following the
example of his father, affiliated himself with the
party of the Sadducees. Involved in bitter wars,
which arose on every hand, he proved that the old
military genius of the Maccabees had not wholly
perished. When the Pharisees aroused a wide-
spread sedition against him, he crushed the move-
ment in a torrent of blood (Ant, XIII, xiv, 2).
In the internecine war that followed, he killed some
50,000 of his own people and was practically an
exile from his own city and government. Ruling
only by brute force, he made the last years of his
reign dark and gloomy. Jos touches but lightly
on the bitter events of this sedition, on both sides
marked with great barbarity (Ané, XIII, xiv, 2).


Asmoneans
Ass


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


286


Though suffering from an incurable form of quar-
tan fever, he waged war to the last and died during
the siege of Ragaba. On his deathbed he advised
his queen to cast herself upon the mercy of the
Pharisees: a wise counsel as the event proved, for
she was permitted to retain the crown and to place
her son Hyrcanus in the high-priestly office.
Thus she ruled for nine years (78-69 BC). On her
death; her son Aristobulus, whom she had kept
from public affairs and who espoused the cause of
the Sadducees, aspired to the crown. Another
internecine war resulted, in which Aristobulus was
victorious. Hyrcanus agreed, for a large financial
consideration, to leave public affairs entirely alone.
The Herodian family, which owed everything to the
Maccabees (Ant, XIV, i, 3), now appears on the
scene. Antipater, a friend of Hyrcanus, induced
him to escape to Aretas, king of Arabia, at Petra,
with whom he made an alliance. In the.ensuing
war, Aristobulus was conquered, shut up in Jerus
and compelled to invoke the aid of the Romans,
with whose assistance the Arahs were repelled
(Ant, XIV, ii, 3). In this same year Pompey came
to Damascus, where he found himself between
three fires, for not only the two brothers, but a
large hagiocratic party of Pharisees as well clamored
for a hearing. This last party refused both Aris-
tobulus and Hyrcanus as rulers. Through the
machinations of Antipater, Pompey sided with
Hyrcanus, upon which Aristobulus prepared for
war. Pompey promptly marched on Jerus and the
irresolute Aristobulus met him with promises of
subjection and presents. When his followers
however refused to carry out these promises,
Aristobulus was imprisoned and Pompey at once
invested Jerns, which was taken by assault on the
passover of 63 BC, after a siege of three months.
Pompey entered the holiest place of the temple,
thus forever estranging the Pharisaic party from
Rome. But he did not spoil the temple, and ap-
pointed Hyrcanus high priest. This event marks
the collapse of the Maccabaean power. What
follows are only the throes of death. Aristobulus,
and his two sons, Alexander and Antigonus, were
taken to Rome as prisoners. On the way Alex-
ander escaped and renewed the fruitless struggle
in Judaea, only to be at once crushed by the Rom
general Gabinius. A little later both Aristobulus
and Antigonus also escaped. Returning to tle
homeland, the former, like his son, fought a brief
and valiant but fruitless campaign and was re-
turned captive to Rome, where he died by poison,
on the eve of beginning service under the Rom
standards, 49 BC. Alexander was executed at
Antioch by Pompey. Of all the Maccabaean
princes thus only Antigonus and Hyrcanus re-
mained. The Idumaean power was now about to
supplant the Maccabaean. Herod the son_ of
Antipater sided, as his father had done, with Hyr-
canus against Antigonus. The factional disturb-
ances at Rome and throughout the empire per-
mitted of the enactment of the last stage of the
Asmonean drama, in the final contest of Hyr-
canus and Antigonus. Herod was in Judaea with
Hyrcanus, when Antigonus with the Parthian hordes
overran the country, caused Herod precipitately to
evacuate Pal, and after capturing Jerus in 40 BC,
sent his uncle Hyrcanus as a captive to the East,
after having cropped off his ears, to incapacitate
him forever for the high-priestly office (Ant, XIV,
xiii, 10). Herod now obtained the aid of the
Romans and permission to reconquer Judaea. Ina
furious campaign, marked by the most shocking bar-
barities, he occupied the greater part of the country,
and finally in 37 BC succeeded in taking Jerus.
Antigonus surrendered but was executed at Antioch
by Antony, at the instigation of Herod (Ant, XIV,


xvi, 4). The fate of the remnants of the Macca-
baean stem, at the hands of Herod, may be found
by consulting the article under MAcCABEES.
Henry E. Dosker
ASNAH, as’na (TON, ‘asnah, “thornbush”):
One of the Nethinim, who returned with Zerub-
babel from the exile (Ezr 2 50).


ASNAPPER, as-nap’ér.


ASOCHIS, a-sd’/kis, PLAIN OF. See Cana or
GALILEE.


ASOM, a’som (’'Acép, H, Asém)=Hashum (Ezr
10 33): The sons of A. put away their “strange
wives” (1 Esd 9 33).


ASP (jDB; pethen [Dt 32 33; Job 20 14.16;
Isa 11 8]; domls, aspis [Rom 3 13]): Any poison-
ous snake, or Ee ;
even poison-
ous snakes
in general,
would satisfy
the context in
all the pas-
sages cited.
Pethen is also
tr@ k:
(q.v.) in Ps o§
68 4; 91 13. Jas
Most authors &
havesupposed
the Egyp co-
bra (Nata
haje, L.) to be
the snake
meant, but while this is widely distributed through-
out Africa, its occurrence in Southern Pal seems to
rest solely on the authority of Canon Tristram, who
did not collect it. There are other poisonous snakes
in Pal, any one of which would satisfy the re-
quirements of these passages. SeeSrrpent. While


See OSNAPPAR.


ADDER


the aspis of classical Gr lit. may well have been the


Egyp cobra, it is to be noted that Vipera aspis,
L., is confined to central and western Europe.
ALFRED Evy Day

ASPALATHUS, as-pal’a-thus (domédafos, as-
pdlathos): An aromatic plant mentioned in Ecclus
24 15 AV, where “wisdom” says, “I gave a sweet
smell like cinnamon and aspalathus,” etc. It would
appear, from a reference in Pliny, to have been a
prickly shrub, the wood of which was scented, but
nothing certain is known about it.


ASPATHA, as-pa’'tha (RDO, ‘aspatha’): One
of the ten sons of Haman (Est 9 7) (Pers aspadéta,
“given by a sacred horse,” acc. to Thesaurus, Add.
71, after Pott and Benfey).

ASPHALT, as’falt. See Sime.

ASPHAR, as’fir, THE POOL (Adxkos ’Aoddp,
ldkkos Asphdér): When Jonathan and Simon fled
from Bacchides they encamped by this pool in the
wilderness of Tekoa (1 Macc 9 33; Ant, XIII,
i, 2). It is probably identical with Ez-Za‘feraneh,
a ruined site with an ancient cistern, to the S. of
Tekoa, and E. of Halhal. Bir Selhub about 6 miles
S.W. of ‘Ain Jidy is favored by some (EB, s.v.),
the hills around it being known as Sajfrd, in which
there may be a survival of the old name.


ASPHARASUS, as-far’a-sus (Aoddpacos, As-
phérasos = Mispar [Ezr 2 2; Mispereth, Neh 7 7]):
A leader of the captives, who returned with Zerub-
babel to Jerus (1 Esd 6 8).


287


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Asmoneans
Ass


ASRIEL, as‘ri-el CRWE , tasrvél, “Vow of
God”’?): A man of Manasseh (Nu 26 31; Josh
17 2). The form Asrielites, ie. family of Asriel,
occurs in Nu 26 31. According to 1 Ch 7 14,


Asriel was born to Manasseh by an Aramitess con-
cubine. AV has ‘“Ashnel.”’


ASS, as (VV20 or AM, hdmér, cf Arab. hamar,
apparently connected with Arab. root ’ahmar, “red,”
but referred by some to root hamal,
“to carry’; also, but less commonly,
: both in Heb and in Arab., JINN,
’athon, Arab. ’atan, used in Arab. only of the females;
9, pereh, or BIB, pere’, and TY, ‘dradh, or TIT
‘arodh, Arab. ‘ard, ‘“‘wild ass,” and also "Y, ‘ayir,
Arab. ‘air, “a young” or “wild ass”): The name
‘arddh (Job 39 5) is rare; 8vos, énos (Mt 21 2).

(1) Hémér is derived from the root which means,
in all probability, ‘to carry a burden” (see First,

Handwérterbuch, VAT ii), or “heap
2. Meaning up.” While no analogies are con-
tained in the OT this root occurs in
New Heb. The Aram. QD, hamér, means “to
make a ruin-heap” (from which the noun hdmor,
“a, heap,” used in Jgs 15 16 in a play of words:


1. Names


Asses at a Mill.


“With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps,
with the Jawbone of an ass have I smitten a thou-
sand men’”’).: The root may also mean “‘to be red.”
In this case the nominal form hdémér may have been
derived from the ‘reddish-brown skin of a certain
type of the ass.

(2) ’Athon, Assyr ‘aidénu and Aram. NIPN,
’atan@’, is derived from NN, ’atha’,“to come,” “go,”
etc (First suggests that it may be derived from
JOR, ’dthan, Aram. TITY, ‘adhan, “to be slender,”
“docile,” etc); mining MIN , "dthondth ¢horath,
‘Sed-white asses” (Jgs 5 10) designates a better
breed.

(3) ‘Ayir, Arab. ‘airu (“male ass’’) used of the
young and vigorous animal, is derived from the
root “"Y, “to go away,” “escape through swift-
ness” (Hommel, Namen der Sdéugethiere, 121-23).
This name is used as a parallel to I21NN "3A, beni
’dthond (Gen 49 11) and as a compound of VV
ND, ‘ayir pere’ (Job 11 12), “a wild ass’s colt.”

(4) Pere’, ‘‘wild ass,” is derived from the root
which means “to run,” suggestive of the animal’s
swiftness. ;

(5) ‘Aradh, is, in all probability, an Aram.
loan-word for the Heb pere’. The Tg uses RTM,
‘drodha’ and N19, ‘drddha’.


wa?


From the references to these various names in the
OT it is clear that (1) hdémér was used for riding
purposes: (a) by men (2 8 16 2; 17
3. Uses 23; 19 26; 1 IKK 2 40; 13 13.23.24.27);
(b) by women (Ex 4 20; Josh 15 18;
Jgs 114; 1 8 26 20.23.42; cf 2 Ch 28 15). TAY
DMA, cemedh hdmorim, “a pair of asses’ was used
for riding as well as for burdens (Jgs 19 3.10.19.21,
etc). (2) It was also used in tillage (Isa 32 20). In
this connection the law prohibits the use of an ass
in plowing with an ox (Dt 22 10). The she-ass
(athén) wasused as a beast of burden (Gen 46 23)
and for riding (Jgs 6 10; Nu 22 21.22; 2 K 4 24).
The ‘ayir is also referred to as used in riding (Jgs
10 4), carrying (Isa 30 6) and tilling (ver 24).
Besides the use of the ass in agriculture and rid-


ing it was employed in the caravans of commerce,
and sent even upon long expeditions


4. Asa through the desert. The ass is and
Domestic always has been'one of the most com-
Animal mon domestic animals. It is a much


more important animal in Bible lands
than in England and America. The humblest peas-
ant owned his own ass. It is associated through-
out the Bible with peaceful pursuits (Gen 42 26f;
22 3;18 16 20; 2 S 19 26; Neh 13 15), whereas the
horse is referred to in connection with war and
armies. Reference is also made to the use of the
flesh of the ass in time of famine (2 K 6 25).
The origin of the ass like that of most domestic
animals is lost in antiquity and it cannot be con-
fidently stated from what species of wild ass it was
derived. There are three races of wild asses in
Asia, one of which is found in Syria, but they may
all be referred to one species, Equus hemionus.
The African species is #. asinus, and good authori-
ties consider our domestic asses to have descended
from this, and to have been introduced at an early
period into the entire Orient. The Sulaib Arabs of
the Syrian desert, who have no horses, have a famous
breed of swift and hardy grey asses which they
assert they cross at intervals with the wild asses
of the desert. It is not unlikely that domestic
asses like dogs are the result of crosses with more
than one wild species.

As a domestic animal it preceded the horse, which
was first introduced into Egypt by the Hyksos about
1800 BC. See Horses.

(1) DV War, hdémor garem, “an ass of strong
bones,” is used metaphorically of Issachar (Gen

49 14); WOM "WB, besar hdmor, “the
5. Figura- genital organ of an ass,” is used in con-
tive Uses in tempt (Hzk 23 20); “Wan mDAp,
the OT k*bhtrath hdmor, ‘the burial of an ass,’’

is applied to ignominious treatment of a
corpse (Jer 22 19); hdmor is used as a symbol of
peace and humility (2 819 26). Zechariah speaks
of the future Messiah as “lowly, and riding upon
an ass, even upon a colt the foal of an ass” (Zec
99; cf Mt 21 5.7).

(2) Pere is used as a symbol of wildness (Hos
8 9), and DIN NB, pere’ 'ddham, ‘a wild ass of a
man’ (Gen 16 12), referring to Ishmael, desig-
nates a free nomad. In Job the name pere’ is ap-
plied to the desert dwellers (Job 24 5). Jeremiah
employs this name as a symbol of lust. He com-
pares Israel’s love of idolatry to the lust of the wild
ass (Jer 2 24).

The ass (‘athdn) figures prominently in the Ba-
laam story (Nu 22; 2 Pet 2 16. See Gray, ICC,

“Numbers,” ad loc.). _ It is interesting
6. Wider to note that Apion charged the Jews
Use in Liter- that they ‘placed an ass’shead in their
ature holy place,” affirming that “this was
discovered when Antiochus Epiphanes
spoiled our temple, and found that ass’s head there


Assalimoth
Assos


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


288


made of gold, and worth a great deal of money.” Jos,
refuting this absurdity, states that the Rom con-
querors of Judaea found nothing in the temple “but
what was agreeable to the strictest piety.” He
goes on to say: ‘‘Apion ought to have had a regard
to these facts... .. As for us Jews, we ascribe
no honor or power to asses, as do the Egyptians
to crocodiles and asps..... Asses are the same
with us which they are with other wise men; viz.
creatures that bear the burdens that we lay upon
them” (C'Ag, II, 7).

Literature.—G. A. Smith, Jerusalem, 1, 307 ff;


Gesenius' and Fiirst’s Lexicons to the OT; arts. in EB
and HDB.


ASSALIMOTH,
(Apoc).


ASSAMIAS, a-sa-mi’as (B, ’Acoaptas, Assamias;
A, ’Acaplas, Asamios; AV Assanias; cf Hashabiah
[Ezr 8 24]): A. (chief priest) returned with Ezra
to Jerus. He was one of twelve who had charge
of a silver, gold and the temple-vessels (1 Esd
8 54).


ASSAPHIOTH, a-sa’fi-oth (A, ’Acabdiw8, Asaph-
phidth; B, ’Acradelw0, Assapheidth; AV Azaphion):
The head of a family, which returned with Zernb-
babel from captivity, called also the servants of
Solomon (1 Esd 5 33). Probably the same as Has-
sophereth of Ezr 2 55 and Sophereth of Neh 7 57.


ASSARION, as-4’ri-on.


: SamuEL CoHoNn
a-sal‘i-moth. See SarmmorH


Sce Fartuina.


ASSASSINATION, a-sas-i-na’shun: The lan-
guage of Scripture distinguishes less clearly than
the modern juridical between assas-
1. Meaning sination and murder. ‘Murderer’ =
of the Term O25, rocéh (Nu 36 16-19.21.30.31;
2 K 6 32; Job 24 14); 39, Aaregh,
from 310, héragh=“‘to slay,” “kill,” AV tr ‘“mur-
derer” in Hos 9 13; but “slayer” in Ezk 21 11.
Where the RV renders “slayers,” we find MZ,
racah, in Nu 36 11.25-28; Dt 4 42; 19 3.4.6;
Josh 20 3.5.6; 21 13.21.27.32.38, irrespective of
whether wilful, deliberate killing is spoken of, or
hasty or merely accidental; and 132, nakhah=“‘to
strike,” ‘‘wound,” “kill,” “slay,” in Nu 36 24.
The prohibition against killing is all-inclusive, even
to suicide, placing the ban not only on deliberate,
purposeful slaying (Ex 21 12.14.18), but on all
endangering of life through negligence (Dt 22 8)
or recklessness (Lev 19 14) or hatred, anger and
revengefulness (Lev 19 17 ff).
The Mosaic law presupposes the punishment of
all killing of human beings on the ground of Gen
96, and repeatedly reiterates it
2. Punish- (Ex 21 12.14ff; Lev 24 17.21; Nu
ment of 35 33; Dt 19 11 ff), the reason as-
the Act signed being that man is made in the
image of God; hence to slay a man is
paramount to lifting the hand against the Creator.
And while the degrees of guilt are not indicated by
the language, they are closely distinguished by the
punishments prescribed. Not only notorious en-
mity against the slain and deliberate lying-in-wait
on the part of the murderer (Ex 21 13; Nu 35
20 ff; Dt 19 4.11), but also the nature of the in-
strument was taken into account to determine the
nature of the crime (Nu 36 16 ff). See Crimes.
Frank E. Hrrscw
ASSASSINS, a-sas’inz (otkdpio, sicdrioi; AV
murderers): Jos (BJ, II, xiii, 3, xvii) relates that
“there sprang up in Jerus a class of robbers called
Sicarii, who slew men in the daytime, and in the
midst of the city. This they did chiefly when they
mingled with the populace at the festivals, and,


hiding short daggers in their garments, stabbed
with them those that were their enemies. The
first to be assassinated by them was Jonathan the
high priest, and after him many were slain daily”’
(see also Ani, XX, viii, 6, ix). The name is de-
rived from Lat stca, “a dagger.” The sicarioi
were implacable in their hatred to Rome and to
those Jews who were suspected of leaning toward
Rome. They took a leading part in the Jewish
rebellion and in the disturbance previous to it,
and also in the faction quarrels during the war.
After the war they continued their nefarious prac-
tices in Egypt and Cyrene whither they had fled.
Lysias mistook Paul for ‘the Egyptian who
. . .. led out into the wilderness the 4,000 men of
the sicarioi’ (Acts 21 38). 8S. F. Hunter


ASSAULT, a-sdélt’ ("1X, car; spp, hormé): The
Heb verbal form is used of pressing forward a siege
(see SrecE), but also of a hostile attack upon a
person then tr‘ “‘assanlt’? (Est 8 11). The Gr
word hormé used of an attack upon persons in Acts
14 5 (AV) is rendered “onset” in RV. The word
“assault” remains in Acts 17 5, of attacking the
house of Jason in Thessalonica, where the verb is
ephisténai, ‘‘to come suddenly upon.”


ASSAY, a-sa’ (D8, yd’ol; TO}, nasah; werpatev,
peirdzein; wapacOa, peirdsthai; wetpav AapPavew,
peiron lambdnein): The Heb and Gr words which
are rendered in AV ‘‘assay’’ are so rendered in RV,
and the use of it is extended in RV in two addi-
tional cases. The Heb word yd’al (1 8 17 39) is
used of David clad in Saul’s armor, who “assayed,”
that is, “tried unsuccessfully,” to go and attack
Goliath in it, for “he had not proved it,’ where
ndséh is the vb. In Dt 4 34 and Job 4 2 nasah
is rendered “assay,” in the sense of “attempt,”
“venture.” In Acts 16 7 St. Paul is said to have
“assayed,” that is, “attempted” (but was hindered),
to go into Bithynia, and now in Acts 24 6 St. Paul
is charged with having “assayed,” that is, “having
had the audacity,” to profane the temple, where
petrazein is the vb. used in both cases. In Acts 9
26, and now in RV Acts 26 21, “assay,” renders
the vb. peirasthai, “‘to attempt,” in both cases un-
successfully. In He 11 29 it translates two Gr
words peiran lambanein “to make an attempt un-
successfully.” T. Nicou


ASSEMBLIES, a-sem’bliz, MASTERS OF ("592
MIBON, ba'dlé ’dsuppoth, Eccl 12 11): ARVm
“collectors of sentences,” thus Kimhi, Grotius and
others. This has been variously interpreted. Tyler
translates ‘editors of collections.’? Kleinert renders
“protectors of the treasure-chambers,” ’désuppéth
being considered equivalent to the ‘dsuppim of
1 Ch 26 15.17; Neh 12 25 (see Asuprm). The
proverbs are like nails guarding the sacred store-
house, the book closing with this warning against
touching the collection (cf Rev 22 18.19). De-
litzsch translates “like fastened nails which are
put together in collections.” ‘As ba'dlé berith
(Gen 14 13) signifies ‘the confederates,’ ba‘dlé
shebhi‘ah (Neh 6 18) ‘the sworn,’ and the fre-
quently occurring ba‘dlé hd-‘ir ‘the citizens’: so
ba'dlé ’dsuppoth means, the possessors of assemblies
and of the assembled themselves, or the possessors
of collections and of things collected. Thus ba'dlé
‘dsuppoth will be a designation of the ‘words of
the wise’ (as in shaltshim, “choice men” = choice
proverbs, Prov 22 20, in a certain measure per-
sonified), as of those which form or constitute col-
lections and which stand together in order and
rank” (“Keel,” ET, 434).

The Jerus Talm takes ’dsuppéth as the Sanhedrin.


239


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Assalimoth
Assos


On the whole it is better to interpret the phrase
“persons skilled in collections” of wise sayings,
grouped in a compact whole (cf Wright, Eccl, 102).
8S. F. Hunter

ASSEMBLY, a-sem’bli (OP, ahdl; éxxAnola,
ekklésia): The common term for a meeting of the
people called together by acrier. It has reference
therefore to any gathering of the people called for
any purpose whatsoever (Ex 12 6; Ps 22 16 AV;
89 7 AV; Acts 19 32.41). The solemn assemblies
of the Jews were their feasts or religious gatherings
of any kind (Isa 1 13). The word panéguris, “a
general festal assembly” (Heb 12 23), is transferred
from the congregation of the people of Israel to
the Christian church of which the congregation
of Israel was a figure. In the same passage,
ekklésia has the sense of calling, summoning. In
classical Gr ekklésia was the name for the body of
free citizens summoned by a herald. In this sense
the church calls all the world to become identified
with it. It denotes the whole body of believers, all
who are called. Or it may refer to a particular con-
gregation or local church (sunagdgé, “synagogue”


Jas 2 2 RVm). See Cauitep; Caurcu; ConcGRE-
GATION. Jacos W. Kapp

ASSEMBLY, SOLEMN. See ConcrecamTion;
Fuasts.


ASSENT, a-sent’: Twice used in AV as equiva-
lent to “voice,” and to ‘‘consent,” and displaced
in both instances in the RV by the lit. rendering of
the Heb peh, “mouth” (2 Ch 18 12); and the
a ee, “apree to,” i.e. “affirm” (Acts

9).


ASSESSOR, a-ses’ér: Lit. one who sits by an-
other, an assistant; among the ancients esp. an
assistant to the king (cf ‘The assessor of his throne,”
Dryden, Milton’s P.£., Bk vi), or to the judge (see
Dryden, Virgil’s Aeneid, vi.583). Later it came to
mean one who assesses people or property for pur-
poses of taxation.

(1) Royal officials in Israel have the general title
sdrim, “princes,” and this general title included
the officer who was ‘‘over the tribute,” who seems
to have had charge of the assessment, as well as
the collection of taxes. In the days of the later
monarchy “the governor of the royal household,”
“the royal steward and high chamberlain,” seems
to have held some such important position (Isa
22 15; 36 3.22).

(2) The early kings do not seem to have sub-
jected the people to heavy taxes, but we find much
in the prophets about the injustice and extortion
practised by these officials on the poor of the land
(cf Am 26.7; Isa 5 8; Jer 5 28; Mic 3 11).
Special taxes seem to have been imposed to meet
emergencies (cf 2 K 23 35), but it is not clear that
anything of the nature of a regular land tax, or
property tax, existed in early times; though some-
thing of the kind may be referred to in the reward
promised by Saul to the slayer of Goliath (18
17 25) and the tenth mentioned in 1 S 8 15-17.
The kings of Judah, it would seem, made free use
of the temple treasures.

(3) Later the Rom government “farmed out”
the taxes of the provinces. The publicans, or tax-
gatherers of the Gospels, seem to have been agents
of theimperial procurator of Judaea, instead of direct
agents of the great Rom financial companies, who
ordinarily let out the business of the collection of
the taxes to officers of their own. ,

During the Empire there was ample imperial
machinery provided for the regular collection of
the taxes, and the emperor appointed a procurator
in each province whose business it was to supervise


the collection of revenue. Some Jews found the
business profitable, but these were objects of de-
testation to their countrymen. See Pusiican.
Gro. B. Eacrer
ASSHOUR, ash’oor, ASSUR, as’d0r. See As-
SYRIA.


ASSHURIM, a-shéd’rim (DEN, ’ashsharim):
Mentioned among the sons of Dedan, son of Jok-
shan, son of Abraham by Keturah (Gen 26 3).


ASSIDAEANS, | as-i-dé’ans.
(Apoe).


ASSIDUOUS, a-sid’ii-us: Occurs only in Wisd
8 18 RV, “In assiduous communing with her is
understanding,’’i.e. “in continued exercise of fellow-
ship.” The idea expressed in the adj. is contained
in the prepositional prefix, san of the original sug-
gumnasia, giving the vb. intensive force.


ASSIGN, a-sin’ (JO), ndthan, “to give,” or
“grant,’”’ i.e. apportion): Used (Josh 20 8) of Moses
setting apart Bezer as one of the three cities of
refuge on the E. of the Jordan (ef Dt 4 41-43);
also of Joab’s stationing Uriah in a place of mortal
peril in battle (2 5 11 16).


ASSIR, as’ér (1"ON,, ‘assir, “‘captive’’):

(1) A Levite of the family of Korah (Ex 6 24;
1 Ch 6 22). :

(2) A son of Ebiasaph and grandson of Assir.
Samuel was descended from him (1 Ch 6 23).

(8) A son of Jeconiah, king of Judah, according
to AV and RVm and ARVm.’ It is a question
whether the Assir of this passage (1 Ch 3 17) is
not a common adj. modifying Jeconiah. The ARV
and RV render it ‘the captive.” Itis to be noticed,
however, that there is no definite art. in the Heb.


ASSOCIATE, a-sd’shi-at: Only in Isa 8 9 AV,
where the Heb 19°, 7d‘, is variously interpreted,
according to differences of opinion as to the vb.
whence it comes. RV “make an uproar’; RVm
“break”; Vulg “Congregamini”’; LXX yvare, gnéte
(“know ye’’); Luther: seid boese (“be wicked’).


See Hasipanans


ASSOS, as’os ("Acoos, Assos): An ancient city
of Mysia in the Rom province of Asia, at which,
according to Acts 20 13, Paul and Luke rested while
on their way from Troas to Mitylene. Standing
upon a conical-shaped rock on the southern coast of
the Troad, it occupied one of the finest sites in
Asia. The rock is about 700 ft. high; its sides are
covered with terraces, both natural and artificial,
and so steep is it that Stratoricus wrote of it:
“If you wish to hasten your death, try and climb
Assos.”’ The view from the summit is extensive and
magnificent.

The city, which is very ancient, is said to have
been founded by the Aeolians, and to have always
been singularly Gr. As early as the 5th cent. BC
it struck its own coins, and its coinage system con-
tinued until 235 AD. One of its early rulers or
tyrants was Hermeas, a eunuch, once a slave, who
gave his niece in marriage to Aristotle. There the
great Gr philosopher lived three years, from 348 to
345 BC. During the time of the kings of Pergamus,
the city bore the name of Apollonia. To the By-
gantines it was known as Machramion, and at
present the town, which has dwindled in impor-
tance under Turkish rule, is called Bekhram, a
Turkish corruption of the Byzantine name.

The ruins of Assos are among the most imposing
in Asia Minor, and yet they have long served as a
quarry; from its public buildings the stones for
the Constantinople docks were taken. The Turk-


Assuage
Assyria


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


290


ish sultan Murad II presented the many beautiful
bas-reliefs of the Doric temple of Athene to the
French government, which are now preserved in the
Louvre. The ruins were carefully explored and
partially excavated in 1882-83 by Mr. Clarke for
the Archaeological Institute of America, and thé
entire plan of the ancient city is clear. Upon
the very summit of the hill stood the temple of
Athene which is said to have been erected about
470 BC. Among its ruins Clarke found eight
other bas-reliefs which are now in the Boston
Museum and which possess a special interest
because of their connection between the art of the
Orient and of Greece. Upon the several natural
terraces of the hill which have been enlarged by
artificial means, stood the many public buildings,
as the gymnasium, the public treasury, the baths,
the market place and the theater, of which but little
now remains. The city was surrounded by a
double wall which in places is still well preserved.
The inner wall of dressed stones laid without
mortar, and filled with loose stones, is 8 ft. thick,
and the larger outer wall was protected with towers
at intervals of 60 ft. The ancient road leading to
Troas was well paved. The harbor from which
Paul sailed has now been filled up and is covered
with gardens, but at its side is the modern harbor
protected by an artificial mole, about which are
clustered the few houses bearing the name of
Bekhram. Upon the summit of the hill, by the ruins
of the temple, are cisterns, a Turkish fortress and
a Byzantine church which has been converted into
a mosque. Without the city walls is a necropolis.
Its many sarcophagi of all ages and sizes and shapes
are made of the native trachyte stone which, so the
ancients believed, possessed the quality of con-
suming the bodies buried in it. The stone is the
famous ‘‘Lapis Assius,’”’ or the flesh-eating, hence
the word sarcophagus. In former times wheat
was raised extensively in the fields about Assos,
but now valonia, or acorn cups, form the chief
article for export. E. J. Bangs


ASSUAGE, a-swaj’ (AV Asswage): Lit. “sweeten,”
“soften down”; then, “mitigate,” “abate’; used
of “flood,” Gen 8 1 (“subside”); of grief, Job 16
5.6 (“restrain”); also applied to any strong emotion;
not used in the NT.


ASSUMPTION, a-sump’shun, OF MOSES. See
ApocatyptTic LitzRATURE.


ASSUR, as’ur. See Asur.


ASSURANCE, a-shoor’ans: A term exceptionally
rich in spiritual meaning. It signifies the joyous,
unwavering confidence of an intelligent faith;
the security of a fearless trust. The original words
have to do with the heart of vital religion. M2,
batah, “trust”; TO%, ’aman, “to prop,” ‘to sup-
port,” hence to confide in, to trust. Jesus repeat-
edly used this word ‘“‘amen’’ to express the trust-
worthiness and abiding certainty of his sayings.
wloris, pistis, ‘faith’; wAnpodopla, plérophoria,
“full assurance.” The confidence of faith is
based, not on “works of righteousness which we
have done” (cf Titus 3 4.5 AV) but on the high-
priesthood and atoning sacrifice of Christ (He
10 21.22; cf ver 19, ‘‘boldness to enter .... by
the blood of Jesus,” AV). Assurance is the soul’s
apprehension of its complete emancipation from
the power of evil and from consequent judgment,
through the atoning grace of Christ. It is the
exact opposite of self-confidence, being a joyous
appropriation and experience of the fulness of
Christ—a glad sense of security, freedom and
eternal life in Him. This doctrine is of immeas-


urable importance to the life of the church and of
the individual believer, as a life of spiritual doubt
and uncertainty contradicts the ideal of liberty
in Christ Jesus which is the natural and necessary
fruitage of “the washing of regeneration and re-
newing of the Holy Spirit... .shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Saviour.”
Paul unhesitatingly said, “I know” (2 Tim 1 12)
—a word which, oft-repeated in 1 Jn, furnishes the
groundwork of glad assurance that runs through
the entire epistle. For the classic passage on
“full assurance” see Co] 2 1-10.


Dwicut M. Pratr
ASSURBANIPAL, as-ur-bi’ni-pal. See AsH-
UR-BANI-PAL.


ASSYRIA, a-sir’i-a:
I. GocraPHy
II. Earuy History
III. Cuimate anp PropuctTions
IV. Popu.ation


Vv. Traps anp Law
VI. Arr
VU. Mecuanics
VIII. Furniture, Porrery anp EMBROIDERY


IX. Lanevace, LirerRatuRE AND SCIENCE
. GoveRNMENT AND ARMY
XI. Revicion


XII. Excavations
XIII. CHronotocy
XIV. History


1. Early Period

2. The Older Empire

3. The Second Empire

4, Last Period and Fall of Empire
Literature .

Assyria, a Gr name formed from Asshur (WR,
‘ashshar; ’Agootp, Assovir; Assyr Assur): The
primitive capital of the country.

I. Geography.—The origin of the city (now
Kala’at Shergat), which was built on the western
bank of the Tigris between the Upper and Lower
Zab, went back to pre-Sem times, and the mean-
ing of the name was forgotten (see Gen 2 14,
where the Hiddekel or Tigris is said to flow on the
eastern side of Asshur). ‘To the N. of the junction
of the Tigris and Upper Zab, and opposite the mod-
ern Mossul, was a shrine of the goddess Istar,
around which grew up the town of Nina, Ninua
or Nineveh (now Kouyunjik and Nebt Yunus).
Another early sanctuary of Istar was at Urbillu,


Ayrbailu or Arbela, E. of the Upper Zab. N. of


Nineveh was Dur-Sargina (now Khorsabad) where
Sargon built his palace (720 BC). All this district
was embraced in the kingdom of Assyria which
extended from Babylonia northward to the Kurdish
mountains and at times included the country west-
ward to the Euphrates and the Khabur.

if. Early History.— The whole region was
known to the early Babylonians as Subartu. Its
possession was disputed between Sem Amurré@ or
Amoritss (q.v.) and a non-Sem people from the N.
called Mitannians. The earlier high priests of
Assur known to us bear Mitannian names. About
2500 BC the country was occupied by Bab Semites,
who brought with them the religion, law, customs,
script and Sem language of Babylonia (Gen 10
11.12, where we should read “He went forth to
Asshur’’; see Mic 6 6). The foundation of Nine-
veh, Rehoboth-‘Ir (Assyr Rebit-Ali, “‘the suburbs of
the city’), Calah and Resen (Assyr Res-eni, ‘head
of the spring’) is ascribed to them. The triangle
formed by the Tigris and Zab, which inclosed these
cities, was in later times included within the forti-
fications of the “great city” (Gen 10 12; Jon 3 3).
Assyria is always distinguished from Babylonia in
the OT, and not confounded with it as by Herodo-
tus and other classical writers.

IH, Climate and Productions.—Assyria, speak-
ing generally, was a limestone plateau with a tem-
perate climate, cold and wet in winter, but warm


291


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Assuage
Assyria


during the summer months. On the banks of the
rivers there was abundant cultivation, besides
pasture-land. The apple of the North grew by
the side of the palm-tree of the South. Figs
olives, pomegranates, ‘almonds, mulberries an

vines were also cultivated as well as all kinds of
grain. Cotton is mentioned by Sennacherib (King,
PSBA, December, 1909). The forests were tenant-
ed by lions, and the plains by wild bulls (rimi,
Heb r°’émim), wild asses, wild goats and gazelles,
Horses were imported from Cappadocia; ducks
were kept, and mastifis were employed in hunting.

IV. Population.—The dominant type was Sem,
with full lips, somewhat hooked nose, high forehead,
black hair and eyes, fresh complexion and abundance
of beard. In character the Assyrians were cruel
and ferocious in war, keen traders, stern discipling-
rians, and where religion was concerned, intense
and intolerant. Like the Ottoman Turks they
formed a military state, at the head of which was the
king, who was both leader in war and chief priest,
and which offered a striking contrast to the theocrat-
ic state of the Babylonians. It seems probable that
every male was hable to conscription, and under
the Second Empire, if not earlier, there was a large
standing army, part of which consisted of mer-
cenaries and recruits from the subject races. One
result of this was the necessity for constant war in
order to occupy the soldiery and satisfy their
demands with captured booty; and the result, as
in the Northern Kingdom of Israel, was military
revolution, with the seizure of the throne by the
successful general. As might be expected, educa-
tion was confined to the upper classes, more espe-
cially to the priests and scribes. ;

V. Trade and Law.—<As far back as the age
of Abraham, when Assyria was still a dependency
of Babylonia, trade was carried on with Cappadocia
and an Assyr colony of merchants settled at Kara
Eyuk near Kaisariyeh. Down the Euphrates came
the silver, copper and bronze of Asia Minor, to-
gether with horses. Cedar wood was brought from
Mount Amanus, and there was already trade,
through Syria, with the Mediterranean. Nineveh
itself was probably founded in the interests of the
trade with the North. In later days commercial
reasons had much to do with the efforts of the
Assyr kings to conquer eastern Asia Minor and the
Mediterranean coast of Syria and Pal: under the


fF


Bronze Panel from Palace Gate at Balawat.


Second Empire no pains were spared to obtain pos-
session of the Phoen cities and divert their com-
merce into Assyr hands. Hence the importance
of the capture of the Hittite stronghold, Carche-
mish, by Sargon in 717 BC, as it commanded the
road to Syria and the passage across the Euphrates.
Nineveh had at that time already become a great
resort of merchants, among whom the Sem Ara-
maeans were the most numerous.  Aram., accord-
ingly, became the language of trade, and then of


diplomacy (cf 2 K 18 26), and commercial docu-
ments written in cuneiform were provided with
Aram. dockets. As in Babylonia, land and houses
were leased and sold, moncy was lent at interest,
and the leading firms employed numerous damgari
or commercial agents.

Assyr law was, in general, derived from Babylonia
and nouch of it was connected with trade. The code
of Khammu-rabi (CH) or AMRAPHEL (q.v.) under-
lay it, and the same system of judicial procedure,
with pleading before judges, the hearing of witnesses,
and an appeal to the king, prevailed in both countries.


VI. Art.—Unlike Babylonia, Assyria abounded
in stone; the brick buildings of Babylonia, accord-
ingly, were replaced by stone, and the painted or
tiled walls by sculptured slabs. In the bas-reliefs
discovered at Nineveh three periods of artistic
progress may be traced. Under Assur-nazir-pal


_the sculpture is bold and vigorous, but the work is


immature and the perspective faulty. From the
beginning of the Second Empire to the reign of
Esar-haddon the bas-reliefs often remind us of
embroidery in stone. Attempts are made to imi-
tate the rich detail and delicate finish of the ivory
carvings; the background is filled in with a pro-
fusion of subjects, and there is a marked realism
in the delineation of them. The third period is
that of Assur-bani-pal, when the overcrowding
is avoided by once more leaving the background
bare, while the animal and vegetable forms are
distinguished by a certain softness, if not effeminacy
of tone. Sculpture in the round, however, lagged
far behind that in relief, and the statuary of Assyria
is very inferior to that of Babylonia. It is only the
human-headed bulls and winged lions that can be
called successful: they were set on either side of a
gate to prevent the entrance of evil spirits, and their
majestic proportions were calculated to strike the
observer with awe (cf the description of the four
cherubim in Ezk 1).

In bronze work the Assyrians excelled, much of the
work being cast. But in general it was hammered,
and the scenes hammered in relief on the bronze
gates discovered by Mr. Rassam at Balawdt near
Nineveh are among the best examples of ancient
oriental metallurgy at present known. Gold and
silver were also worked into artistic forms; iron
was reserved for more utilitarian purposes. The
beautiful ivory carvings found at_ Nineveh were
probably the work of foreign artificers, but gems
and seal cylinders were engraved by native artists
in imitation of those of Babylonia, and the Bab
art of painting and glazing tiles was also practised.
The terra-cotta figures which can be assigned to
the Assyr period are poor. Glass was also manu-
factured. ; :

VII. Mechanics.—The Assyrians were skilled
in the transport of large blocks of stone, whether
sculptured or otherwise. They understood the use
of the lever, the pulley and the roller, and they
had invented various engines of war for demolish-
ing or undermining the walls of a city or for pro-'


Assyria


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


292


tecting the assailants. A crystal lens, turned on the
lathe, has been found at Kouyunjik: it must have
been useful to the scribes, the cuneiform characters
inscribed on the tablets being frequently very minute.
Water was raised from the river by means of a
shaduf.

VU. Furniture, Pottery and Embroidery.—
The furniture even of the palace was scanty, con-
sisting mainly of couches, chairs, stools, tables,
rugs and curtains. The chairs and couches were
frequently of an artistic shape, and were provided
with feet in the form of the legs of an ox. All
kinds of vases, bowls and dishes were made of
earthenware, but they were rarely decorated.
Clothes, curtains and rugs, on the other hand, were
richly dyed and embroidered, and were manufac-
tured from wool and flax, and (in the age of the
Second Empire) from cotton. The rug, of which
the Pers rng is the modern representative, was a
Bab invention.

IX. Language, Literature and Science.—The
Assyr language was Sem, and differed only dialec-
tically from Sem Bab. In course of time, however,
differences grew up between the spoken langnage and
the language of Lt.,
which had tncorpo-
rated many Sumer-
jan words, and re-
tained grammatical
terminations that
the vernacular had
lost, though these
differences were
never very great.
Assyr lit., moreover,
was mainly derived
from Babylonia.
Assur-bani-pal em-
ployed agents to
ransack thelibraries
of Babylonia and
send their contents
to Nineveh, where
his library was filled
with scribes who
busied themselves
in copying and edit-
ing ancient texts.
Commentaries were
often written upon
these, and gram-
mars, vocabularies
and interlinear translations were compiled to enable
the student to understand the extinct Sumerian,
which had long been the Lat of Sem Babylonia.
The writing material was clay, upon which the
cuneiform characters were impressed with a stylus
while it was still moist: the tablet. was afterward
baked in the sun or (in Assyria) in a kiln. The
contents of the library of Nineveh were very various;
religion, mythology, law, history, geography, zo-
ology, philology, mathematics, astronomy, astrology
and the pseudo-science of omens were all represented
in it, as well as poetry and legendary romance. See
Nineved, LIBRary oF.

X. Government and Army.— Assyria was a
military kingdom which, like the Northern Kingdom
of Israel, had established itself by a successful re-
volt from Babylonia. In contradistinction to
Babylonia, which was a theocratic state, the king
being subordinate to the priest, the Assyr king was
supreme. Whereas in Babylonia the temple
was the chief public building, in Assyria the royal
palace dominated everything, the temple being
merely a royal chapel attached to the palace. The
king, in fact, was the commander of an army, and
this army was the Assyr people. How far the whole


a


Assyrian King in His Chariot.


male population wag liable to conscription is still
uncertain; but the fact that the wars of Assur-
bani-pal so exhausted the fighting strength of the
nation as to render it unable to resist the invaders
from the North shows that the majority of the
males must have been soldiers. Hence the con-
stant wars partly to occupy the army and prevent
revolts, partly for the sake of booty with which
to pay it. Hence too, the military revolutions,
which, as in the kingdom of Israel, resulted in
changes of dynasty and the seizure of the throne by
successful generals. The turtannu or commander-
in-chief, who took the place of the king when the
latter was unable or unwilling to lead his forces,
ranked next to the sovereign. From the reign of
Tiglath-pileser IV onward, however, the autocracy
was tempered by a centralized bureaucracy, and
in the provinces a civil governor was appointed
by the side of the military commander. Among the
high officials at court were the rab-saki or ‘‘vizier,”
and the rab-sa-risi or “controller,” the rabhsaris
(Ras-saRis [q.v-]) of the OT.

The army consisted of cavalry, infantry, bowmen
and slingers, as well as of a corps of charioteers.
After the rise of the Second
Empire the cavalry were in-
creased at the expense of the
chariotry, and were provided with
saddles and boots,
while the unarmed
groom who had run
by the side of the
horse became a
mounted archer.
Sennacherib further
clothed the horse-
man in a coat of
S§ mail. Theinfantry
wereabouttentimes
f as numerous as the
cavalry, and under
Sargon were divided
into bowmen and
spearmen, the bow-
men again being
subdivided into
heavy-armed and
light-armed, the
latter being ap-
parently of foreign
origin. Sennacherib
introduced a corps
of slingers, clad in helmet and cuirass, leather drawers
and boots. He also deprived the heavy-armed bow-
men of the long robes they used to wear, and estab-
lished a body of pioneers with double-headed axes,
helmets and buskins. Shields were also worn by all
classes of soldiers, and the army carried with it
standards, tents, battering-rams and baggage-carts.
The royal sleeping-tent was accompanied by tents
for cooking and dining. No pains, in fact, were
spared to make the army both in equipment and
discipline an irresistible engine of war. The terror
it excited in western Asia is therefore easily intelli-
gible (Isa 10 5-14; Nah 2 11-13; 8 1-4).

XI. Religion.—The state religion of Assyria was
derived from BaByzonta (q.v.) and in its main out-
lines is Bab. But it differed from the religion of
Babylonia in two important respects:, (1) the
king, and not the high priest, was supreme, and (2)
at the head of it was the national god Asur or Assur,
whose high priest and representative was the king.
Asur was originally Asir, “the leader” in war, who
is accordingly depicted as a warrior-god armed with
a bow and who in the age when solar worship
became general in Babylonia was identified with the
sun-god. But the similarity of the name caused


293


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Assyria


him to be also identified with the city of Asur, where
he was worshipped, at a time when the cities of
northern Babylonia came to be deified, probably
under Hittite influence. Later still, the scribes
explained his name as a corruption of that of the
primeval cosmogonic deity An-sar, the upper
firmament, which in the neo-Bab age was pro-
nounced Assdr. The combination of the attri-
butes of the warrior-god, who was the peculiar
god of the commander of the army, with the deified
city to which the army belonged, caused Assur to
become the national deity of a military nation in a
way of which no Bab divinity was capable. The
army were ‘‘the troops of Assur,” the enemies
were “the enemies of Assur” who required that they
should acknowledge his supremacy or be destroyed.
Assur was not only supreme over the other gods,
he was also, in fact, unlike them, without father or
wife. Originally, itis true, hisfeminine counterpart,
Asirtu, the AsHeraH (q.v.) of the OT, had stood
at his side, and later literary pedants endeavored
to find a wife for him in Belit, “the Lady,” or
Istar, or some other Bab goddess, but the attempts
remained purely hterary. When Nineveh took the
place of Assur as the capital of the kingdom, Istar,
around whose sanctuary Nineveh had grown up,
began to share with him some of the honor of
worship, though her position continued to be sec-
ondary to the end. This was also the case with the
war-god Nin-ip, called Mas in Assyria, whose cult
was specially patronized by the Assyr kings. See
BaBYLONIA AND ASSYRIA, RELIGION OF.

XII, Excavations.—Rich, who had first visited
Mossul in 1811, examined the mounds opposite
in 1820 and concluded that they represented the
site of Nineveh. The few antiquities he discovered
were contained in a single case in the British Mu-
seum, but the results of his researches were not
published until 1836. In 1843-45 the Frenchman
Botta disinterred the palace of Sargon at Khorsa-
bad, 15 miles N. of Nineveh, while at Nimrud
(Calah) and Kouyunjik (Nineveh) Layard (1845-
51) brought to light the ruins of the great Assyr
palaces and the library of Assur-bani-pal. His
work was continued by Rassam (1851-54). Noth-
ing more was done until 1873-75 when George
Smith resumed excavations on the site of Assur-
bani-pal’s library; this was followed in 1877-79
by the excavations of Rassam, who discovered
among other things the bronze gates of Balawat.
At present a German expedition under Andrae is
working at Kala’at Shergat (Assur) where the Eng-
lish excavators had already found the cylinder-
inscription of Tiglath-pileser I (see SHercar).

XII. Chronology.—The Assyrians reckoned time
by means of limmi, certain officials appointed
every New Year’s day, after whom their year of
office was named. ‘The lists of limmi or ‘““Eponyms”
which have come down to us form the basis of
Assyr chronology. Portions of a “synchronous”
history of Assyria and Babylonia have also been
discovered, as well as fragments of two “Babylonian
Chronicles” written from a Bab point of view. The
‘ponym” lists carry back an exact dating of time
to the beginning of the 10th cent. BC. Before
that period Sennacherib states that Tiglath-pileser
I reigned 418 years before himself. Tiglath-pileser,
moreover, tells us that Samas-Ramman son of Isme-
Dagon had built a temple at Assur 641 years earlier,
while Shalmaneser I places Samas-Ramman 580 years
before hisown reignaud Erisu 159 years beforeSamas-
Ramman, though Esar-haddon gives the dates differ-
ently. Apart from the native documents, the only
trustworthy sources for the chrouology (as for the
history) of Assyria are the OT records. In return
the “Eponym” lists have enabled us to correct the
chronology of the Books or Kines (q.v.).


XIV. History.— Assyrian history begins with
the high priests (patesis) of Assur. The earliest
known to us are Auspia and Kikia,

1. Early who bear Mitannian names. The
Period early Sem rulers, however, were sub-
ject to Babylonia, and under Khammu-
rabi (AMRAPHEL) Assyria was still a Bab province.
According to Esar-haddon the kingdom was founded
by Bel-bani son of Adasi, who first made himself
independent; Hadad-nirari, however, ascribes its
foundation to Zulili. Assyr merchants and soldiers
had already made their way as far as Cappadocia,
from whence copper and silver were brought to
Assyria, and an Assyr colony was established at
Kara Hyuk near Kaisariyeh, where the Assyr
mode of reckoning time by means of limmi was in
use. In the age of Am Tab (1400 BC) Assur-
uballid was king of Assyria. He corresponded with
the Egyp Pharaoh and married his daughter to the
Bab king, thereby providing for himself a pretext
for interfering in the affairs of Babylonia. The
result was that his son-in-law was murdered, and
Assur-uballid sent troops to Babylonia who put
the murderers to death and placed the grandson of
the Assyr king on the Bab throne. Babylonia had
fallen into decay and been forced to protect herself
from the rising power of Assyria by forming an
alliance with Mitanni (Mesapoimnia) and Egypt,
and subsequently, when Mitanni had been absorbed
by the Hittites, by practically becoming dependent
on the Hittite king. Shalmaneser I (1300 BC),
accordingly, devoted himself ‘to crippling the Hittite
power and cutting it off from communication with
Babylonia. Campaign after campaign was under-
taken against the Syrian and more eastern provinces


.of the Hittite empire, Malatiyeh was destroyed,


and Carchemish threatened. Shalmaneser’s son
and successor Tukulti-Mas entered into the fruits
of his father’s labors. The Hittites had been
rendered powerless by an invasion of the northern
barbarians, and the Assyr king was thus left free
to crush Babylonia. Babylon was taken by storm,
and for seven years Tukulti-Mas was master of all
the lands watered by the Tigris and Euphrates.
The image of Merodach was carried to Assur as a
sign that the scepter had passed from Babylon to
the parvenu Assyria. A successful revolt, however,
finally drove the Assyr conqueror back to his own
country, and when he was murdered soon after-
ward by his own son, the Babylonians saw in the
deed a punishment inflicted by the god of Babylon.
A few years later the Assyr king Bel-kudur-uzur
lost his life in battle against the Babylonians, and a
new dynasty appears to have mounted


2. The the Assyr throne. About 1120 BC
Older the Assyr king was Tiglath-pileser I,
Empire whose successful wars extended the

Assyr empire as far westward as
Cappadocia. In one of his campaigns he made his


way to the Mediterranean, and received presents
from the king of Egypt, which included a crocodile.
At Assur he planted a botanical garden stocked
with trees from the conquered provinces. After
his death the Assyr power declined; Pitru (Pethor,
Nu 22 5) fell into the hands of the Aramaeans and
the road to the Mediterranean was blocked. A
revival came under Assur-nazir-pal III (884-860
BC) who rebuilt Cana (q.v.) and established the
seat of the government at Nineveh, where he erected
a palace. Various campaigns were carried on in
the direction of Armenia and Comagene, the
brutalities executed upon the enemy being de-
scribed in detail by thcir conqueror. He then
turned westward, and after recciviug homage from
the Hittite king of Carchemish, laid the Phoenicians
under tribute. The road to the West was thus
again secured for the merchants of Assyria. Assur-


Assyria
Astrology


nazir-pal was succeeded by his son Shalmaneser II
(859-825 BC), who, instead of contenting himself,
like his father, with mere raids for the sake of booty,
endeavored to organize and administer the coun-
tries which his armies had subdued. The famous
bronze gates of Balawdt were erected by him in
commemoration of his victories. In his reign the
Israelites and Syrians of Damascus first came into
direct relation with the Assyrians. In 854 BC


he attacked Hamath and at Qarqar defeated an
army which included 1,200 chariots, 1,200 cavalry
and 20,000 infantry from Ben-hadad of Damascus,
2,000 chariots, and 10,000 infantry from “Ahab
of Israel,’’ besides considerable contingents from
Ammon, Arvad, Arabia and elsewhere. In 842
BC Shalmaneser penetrated to Damascus where
Hazael, the successor of Ben-hadad, who had already
been defeated in the open field, was closely besieged.
The surrounding country was ravaged, and “Jehu
son of Omri” hastened to offer tribute to the con-
queror. The scene is represented on the Black
Obelisk found at Nimrud and now in the British
Musenm. Shalmaneser’s campaigns were not con-
fined to the West. He overran Armenia, where the
kingdom of Van had just been established, made


his way to Tarsus in Cilicia, took possession of the.


mines of silver, salt and alabaster in the Taurus
mountains among the Tabal or Tubal, and obliged
the Bab king to acknowledge his supremacy. In his
later days, when too old to take the field himself,
his armies were led by the turtannu or commander-
in-chief, and a rebellion, headed by his son Assur-
danin-pal (Sardanapalus) broke out at home, where
Nineveh and Assur were jealous of the preference
shown for Calah. Nineveh, however, was captured
and the revolt suppressed after two years’ duration
hy another son, Samas-Ramman IV, who shortly
afterward, on his father’s death, succeeded to the
throne (824-812 BC). His chief campaigns were
directed against Media. His son Hadad-nirari III
(811-783 BC) was the next king, whose mother was
Sammu-ramat (Semiramis). He claims to have re-
duced to subjection the whole of Syria, including
Phoenicia, Edom and Philistia, and to have taken
Mari’a, king of Damascus, prisoner in his capital
city. After this, however, Assyria once more tell
into a state of decay, from which it was delivered
by the successful revolt of a military officer Pulu
(Pul), who put an end to the old line of kings and
took the name of Tiglath-pileser IV (745-727 BC).

Tiglath-pileser founded the second Assyr empire,
and made Assyria the dominant power in western


Asia. The army was reorganized and
3. The made irresistible, and a new adminis-
Second trative system was introduced, the
Empire empire being centralized at Nineveh


and governed by a bureaucracy at
the head of which was the king. Tiglath-pileser’s
policy was twofold: to weld western Asia into a
single empire, held together by military force and
fiscal laws, and to secure the trade of the world
for the merchants of Nineveh. These objects were
steadily kept in view throughout the reigns of
Tiglath-pileser and his successors. For the history
of his reign, see TrcLaTH-PILEsER. In 738 BC
Tiglath-pileser put an end to the independent
existence of the kingdom of Hamath, Menahem of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


294


Samaria becoming his tributary, and in 733 BC
he commenced a campaign against Rezin of Damas-
cus which ended in the fall of Damascus, the city
being placed under an Assyr governor. At the
same time the land of Naphtali was annexed to
Assyria, and Yahu-khazi (Ahaz) of Judah became
an Assyr vassal, while in 731 BC, after the murder
of Pekah, Hoshea was appointed king of Israel (cf
2 KX 15-17). In 728 BC Tiglath-pileser was solemn-
ly crowned at Babylon and the following year he
died. His successor was another military adven-
turer, Shalmaneser IV (727-722 BC), whose original
name was Ulula. While engaged in the siege of
Samaria Shalmaneser died or was murdered, and
the throne was seized by another general who took
the name of Sargon (722-705 BC). Sargon, for
whose’ history see Sarcon, captured Samaria in
722 BC, carrying 27,290 of its inhabitants into
captivity. A large part of his reign was spent in
combating a great confederation of the northern
nations (Armenia, Mannd, etc) against Assyria.
Carchemish, the Hittite capital, was captured in
717 BC, a revolt of the states in southern Pal was
suppressed in 711 BC and Merodach-Baladan, the
Chaldaean, who had possessed himself of Babylonia
in 722 BC, was driven back to the marshlands at the
head of the Pers Gulf. In 705 BC Sargon was
murdered, and succeeded by his son SENNACHERIB
(q.v.). Sennacherib (705-681 BC) had ncither the
military skill nor the administrative abilities of his
father. His campaign against Hezekiah of Judah
in 701 BC was a failure; so, also, was his policy
in Babylonia which was in a constant state of revolt
against his rule, and which ended in his razing the
sacred city of Babylon to the ground in 689 BC.
Nine years previously his troops had been called
upon to suppress a revolt in Cilicia, where a battle
was fought with the Greeks.
His son Esar-haddon, who succeeded him (681-
669 BC) after his murder by two other sons on the
20th Tebet (cf 2 K 19 37), was as
4, Last distinguished a general and adminis-
Period trator as his father had been the re-
and Fall of verse. For his history see Esar-
the Empire nappon. Under him the Second Em-
pire reached the acme of its power and
prosperity. Babylon was rebuilt and made the
second capital of the empire, Pal became an obedi-
ent province, and Egypt was conquered (674 and


Assur-bani-pal’s Account of His Restoration of
the Stage-Tower at Nippur.


671 BC), while an invasion of the Cimmerians
(Gomer) was repelled, and campaigns were made
into the heart of both Media and Arabia. Esar-
haddon died while on his way to repress a revolt
in Egypt, and his son Assur-bani-pal succeeded
him in the empire (669-626 BC), while another
son Samas-sum-ukin was appointed viceroy of
Babylonia. Assur-bani-pal was a munificent patron
of learning, and the library of Nineveh owed most
of its treasures to him, but extravagant luxury


295


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Assyria
Astrology


had now invaded the court, and the king conducted
his wars through his generals, while he himself
remained at home. The great palace at Kouyunjik
(Nineveh) was built by him. Egypt demanded his
first. attention. Tirhakah the Ethiopian who had
headed its revolt was driven back to his own coun-
try, and for a time there was peace. Then under
Tandamane, Tirhakah’s successor, Egypt revolted
again. This time the Assyr punishment was merci-
less. Thebes—‘‘No-amon” (Nah 3 8)—was des-
troyed, its booty carried away and two obelisks
transported to Nineveh as trophies of victory.
Meanwhile Tyre, which had rebelled, was forced to
sue for peace, and ambassadors arrived from Gyges
of Lydia asking for help against the Cimmerians.
Elam still remained\ independent and endeavored
to stir up disaffection in Babylonia. Against his
will, therefore, Assur-bani-pal was obliged to
interfere in the internal affairs of that country, with
the result that the Elamites were finally overthrown
in a battle on the Eulaeus beneath the walls of Susa,
and the conquered land divided between two
vassal kings. Then suddenly a revolt broke out
throughout the greater part of the Assyr empire,
headed by Assur-bani-pal’s brother, the viceroy
of Babylonia. For a time the issue was doubtful.
Egypt recovered its independence under Psamme-
tichus, the founder of the XXVIth Dynasty (660
BC) who had received help from Lydia, but Baby-
lonia was reconquered and Babylon after a long
siege was starved out, Samas-sum-uvkin burning
himself in the ruins of his palace. Elam remained
to be dealt with, and an Assyr army made its way
to Susa, which was leveled to the ground, the shrines
of its gods profaned and the bones of its ancient
kings torn from their graves. Then came the
turn of northern Arabia, where the rebel sheikhs
were compelled to submit. But the struggle had
exhausted Assyria; its exchequer was empty, and
its fighting population killed. -When the Cimme-
rians descended upon the empire shortly afterward,
it was no longer in a condition to resist them.
Under Assur-etil-ilani, the son and successor of
Assur-bani-pal, Calah was taken and sacked, and
two reigns later, Sin-sar-iskun, the last king of As-
syria, fell fighting against the Scythians (606 BC).
Nineveh was utterly destroyed, never again to be
inhabited, and northern Babylonia passed into the
hands of Nabopolassar, the viceroy of Babylon, who
bad joined the northern invaders. Assur, the old
capital of the country, was still standing in the age
of Cyrus, but it had become a small provincial town;
as for Nineveh and Calah, their very sites were for-
gotten.


Lirerature.—See G. Rawlinson, Five Great Monar-
chies of the Eastern World, 1862-67; Perrot and Chipiez,
Histoire de l'art dans Vantiquité, II, 1884; Maspero,
Struggle of the Nations, and Passing of the Empires,
3 vols, 1894-1900; Rogers, A History of Babylonia and
Assyria, 1900; Johns, Assyr Deeds and Documents, 1898;
Schrader, KAT, English tr by Whitehouse, 1885; Pin-
ches, The OT in the LAOH ee the Historical Records of

% ia, 1 dl
Aasyria and Babylonia, 19 A. H. Sayce


ASSYRIA AND BABYLONIA, RELIGION OF.
See BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA, RELIGION OF.


ASSYRIAN AND BABYLONIAN LIBRARIES.
See Nineveu, Liprary oF.


ASSYRIANS, a-sir'i-ans (WWW, ’ashshar): The
inhabitants of Assyria. In Heb the name of the
people is the same as that of the country. See
ASSYRIA.


ASTAD, as'tad: The reading of the Eng. ver-
sions of 1 Esd 6 13 for the name which appears as
Azgad in Ezr 2 12 and Neh 7 17. In the different
Gr copies of 1 Esd the name varies: See Azcap;
AsTaTH.


- “Thon


ASTAROTH, as’ta-roth. See AsHTAROTH.


ASTARTE,
TAROTH.


as-téir’té, ASTORETH. Sce AsH-


_ASTATH, as’tath (Acrd0, Asidth): The form
given in 1 Esd 8 38 to the name which in Ear 8 12
appears as Azgad. See Azcap.


ASTONISHED, as-ton’isht, ASTONIED, as-
ton’id (DQW , shamém, “astonished,” the root idea
being “silent,” i.e. struck dumb with amazement;
ektrqrropar, ekpléssomai, “to be struck with as-
tonishment,” as if by a blow or a shock; é€lornpe,
existémi, “to amaze,” “to throw into wonder-
ment”; SapBéopar, thambéomai, “to astonish” to
the point of fright): The state of being surprised,
startled, stunned by some exceptional wonder,
some overwhelming event or miracle, as e.g. Nebu-
chadnezzar’s amazement at the miracle in the
burning ficry furnace (Dnl 3 24) (IIT, tewah,
“astonished’’); of the passer-by at the desolation
of Babylon (Jer 50 13). The personality, teaching
and works of Jesus were so wonderful, Divine,
supernatural, as to awaken emotions of surprise
and awe never before known in the presence of
man. The people “were astonished out of measure”
at His doctrine (Mk 10 26 AV); “astonished with
a great astonishment”’ at Elis raising the dead (Mk 5
42 AV). The gift of the Holy Ghost to the Gentiles
was in like manner a source of astonishment to
those Jews who believed through the power of Peter’s
preaching (Acts 10 45 AV). The miracle of re-
generation today, which renews and transforms
debased and fallen men into saints, makes the same
impression on an observing world.

Dwicut M. Prarr

ASTONISHMENT, as-ton’ish-ment: Amaze-
ment; mental surprise, excitement, wonder; often
the cause of the startled emotion, as in Dt 28 37:
shalt become an astonishment.” The
chosen people, visited with calamities for idolatry
would become a source of amazement to all nations
(Jer 25 9.11.18); Solomon’s lofty and beautiful
temple would be “an astonishment” (2 Ch 7 21
AV). Fororiginal terms and fuller study see ASTON-
ISHED.


ASTRAY, a-stra’ ("2T, ta‘ah, ‘to wander,” “to
err’; mAavdopat, plandomai, “to go astray,” each
carrying the idea of being lost): With one exception
(Ex 23 4 “his ass going astray”) used metaphori-
cally of moral wandering, going astray in paths of
error and sin, like “sheep going astray” (1 Pet 2 25
AV; Isa 63 6; Ps 119 176). This wandering may
be due (1) to inherent evil (Ps 58 3); (2) to false
shepherds (Jer 50 6); contrast the beautiful and
classic passage,Mt 18 12.13, the Son of man (ver 12)
seeketh that which is gone astray. No word more
vividly portrays sin as a straying, a separation from
God. To be morally “astray” is to be “‘lost.”

Dwicut M. Pratt

ASTROLOGY, as-trol’o-ji:

J. Tue Desire To Forecast THE Fururs

1. Methods of Soothsaying

Divination f

Looking in the Liver

The Astrologers, or Dividers of the Heavens

. The Stargazers, or Seers of the Constellations

The Monthly Prognosticators, or Men Who

Knew the Omens of the New Moon

Ul. Tue Worsuir or ros Heaventy Bopiss tue Form
or Ipotatry To Wuicu THE IsranLites Were
Most Prone

. Chiun, Certainly the Planet Saturn

2. Saturn or Moloch Worship _

3. Mazzaloth, or Planet Worship

4

5


SapeN


-


. Gadh and Meni or Star Worship
. Lucifer, the Shining Star


Astrology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


296


Ill. Sysrnms or AsTROLOGY
1. Names of the Week-Days, Due to an Astrological
System
2. Origin of Modern Astrology
3. ‘‘Curious Arts" of Ephesus
LitsRaTuRs

I. The Desire to Forecast the Fature.—The desire
to penetrate the future and influence its events has
shown itself in all lands and ages. But it is clear
that a knowledge of the future does not lie within
the scope of man’s natural powers; ‘‘divination’”’
therefore has always been an attempt to gain the
help of beings possessing knowledge and power
transcending those of man. The answer of the
Chaldaeans to King Nebuchadnezzar when he de-
manded that they should tell his dream was a
reasonable one: “There is not a man upon the
earth that can show the king’s matter: . .. . there
is no other that can show it before the king,
except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh”’
(Dn{ 2 10.11). “Divination,” therefore, in all its
forms is but an aspect of polytheism.

It was for the twofold reason that the arts of
divination were abominable in themselves, and
gave to their votaries no knowledge of the will of
God, that: such arts were forbidden in the Law
(Dt 18 9-15). Israel was to be perfect with God
and He would reveal to them His will perfectly
through that prophet like unto Moses whom He
would send. Keil and Delitzsch in commenting
on this passage well remark: ‘Moses groups to-
gether all the words which the language contained
for the different modes of exploring the future and
discovering the will of God, for the purpose of
forbidding every description of soothsaying, and
places the prohibition of Moloch-worship at the head,
to show the inward connection between soothsaying
and idolatry, possibly because februation, or passing
children through the fire in the worship of Moloch,
was more intimately connected with soothsaying and
magic than any other description of idolatry” (Com-
mentary on the Pentateuch, III, 393).

The forms of soothsaying mentioned in this
catalogue are as follows: “One that practiseth

augury’”’ (m*‘dnén) is of uncertain ety-
1. Methods mology, but the rabbins connect it
of Sooth- with ‘ayin, ‘‘an eye’; literally there-
saying fore one who ogles, or who bewitches

with the evil eye. ‘‘An enchanter”
(menahésh), sometimes supposed to be a snake-
charmer, is probably one who fascinates like a
snake; in other words a mesmerist or hypnotist.
The word occurs in connection with Joseph’s divin-
ing-cup, and such cups were employed both in
Babylon and Egypt, and their use was akin to the
more modern crystal-gazing, the hypnotic state
being induced by prolonged staring, as in the fasci-
nation ascribed to serpents. Onthis account, snakes
were sometimes figured upon such cups. Thus in
Talm we read: “If one finds vessels with delinea-
tions of the sun, the moon, or of a serpent upon
them, let him cast them into the salt sea” (‘Abha-
dhah-Zarah, fol 42, col. 2). ‘A sorcerer’’ (m*khash-
shéph) is one who mutters incantations or speaks
in ventriloquial whispers, as if under the influence
of the spirits of the dead. ‘‘A charmer’ (habhér
hebher), is one who inflicts a spell by weaving ma-
gical knots. ‘A consulter with a familiar spirit”
(dbh), denotes one who is possessed of a python
or soothsaying demon. Such were the woman of
Endor whom Saul consulted on the eve of the
battle of Gilboa (1 S 28) and the pythoness of
Philippi out of whom St. Paul cast the spirit
(Acts 16 16-18). The word (’6bh) means ‘‘bottle”’
and either indicates that the medium was the
receptacle of the spirit or is a relic of the old tra-
dition that genii (jinns) might be enslaved and im-
prisoned in bottles by means of magical incantations.


“A wizard” (yidh‘dn7) means a wise man, “a knowing
one.” The word in OT is always used in connection
with ’6bh, and denotes a man who could interpret
the ravings of the medium. ‘A necromancer”
(dorésh ‘el ha-méthim) is one who calls up the spirits
of the dead and has intercourse with them. “Con-
sulting the teraphim”’ (Ezk 21 21) may have been
a form of consulting the dead, if, as is probable, the
teraphim were ancestral images, raised by super-
stition to the rank of household gods. The man-
ner of consultation we do not know; but as an illus-
tration of the use of the image of a dead person, we
may remember that a modern medium will often ask
for a portrait of a deceased relative for the alleged
purpose of entering into communication with the
departed spirit.

It will be seen that these forms of soothsaying
are allied to the arts which in modern times bear
the names of hypnotism and mediumship. They
are more briefly referred to in Isa 8 19, ‘“‘When
they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have
familiar spirits and unto the wizards, that chirp and
that mutter: should not a people seek unto their
God? on behalf of the living should they seek unto
the dead?” Here again mediumship and spiritism
are connected with the ventriloquial whispers and
mutterings, which are supposed to be characteristic
‘of the utterances of the dead.

But the first term in the catalogue, “one that
useth divination” (kesem) is of wider application.
It signifies a ‘‘divider’’ and refers to the
practice which men have followed in
an infinite variety of ways for trying
to get light upon the future by re-
sorting to what seems to them the arbitrament of
chance. The results of a battle and of the fall of
dice are alike unknown beforehand. But the sec-
ond can be tested, and men assume that the result
of the first will correspond to the second. Any
chance will serve; the shuffling of a pack of cards;
the flight of birds; the arrangement of dregs in a
cup; nothing is too trivial for the purpose. The
allotment of a particular interpretation to a par-
ticular sign was of course purely arbitrary, but the
method could be applied in an infinite number of
ways, every one of which could be worked out to
an extent only limited by the limits of-the mis-
directed ingenuity of man. Two such forms of
“divination,” that is of “dividing,” are mentioned
by Ezekiel in his description of the king of Baby-
lon: “The king of Babylon stood at the parting
of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use
divination [kesem]: he shook the arrows to and fro,
he consulted the teraphim, he looked in the liver’
(Ezk 21 21). The arrows were either marked to
represent certain courses of action, and one was
drawn out or shaken out, or else they were thrown
promiscuously up into the air, and the augury was
deduced from the way in which they fell.

“Looking in the liver” is one of the most venerable
forms of divination. Here again it was a question

of “division.” Each of the various


2. Divina-
tion


3. “Look- parts of the liver, its lobes, the gall
ingin the _ bladder, the ducts and so forth, had a
Liver” special significance allotted to it, the


theory, apparently, being that the god
to whom the animal was sacrificed revealed his
will by the way in which he molded the organ
as was supposed to be the seat of the victim’s
ife.

It will be noted that no explicit mention is made
of astrology in this catalogue of the modes of sooth-
saying. But astrology was, as will be shown,
closely connected with Moloch-worship, and was
most directly a form of ‘‘divination,” that is of
division. Morris Jastrow the Younger indeed con-
siders that astrology rose from hepatoscopy, and


297


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Astrology


points out that the common designation for “‘planet’’
amongst the Babylonians is a compound ideograph,
the two elements of which signify “sheep” and
“dead.”” He considers that the sacrificial sheep
was offered to the deity specially for the purpose of
securing an omen. Hence when the planets were
used as omens, this name of “slain sheep” was
naturally applied to them, even as “augury,”
divination by the flight of birds, came to represent
amongst the Romans all kinds of divination. ‘On
the famous bronze model of a liver found near
Piacenza and which dating from about the 3d cent.
BC was used as an object-lesson for instruction in
hepatoscopy, precisely as the clay model of a liver
dating from the Hammurabi period was used in a
Bab temple school, we find the edge of the liver
divided into sixteen regions with names of the
deities inhabiting them corresponding to divisions
of the heavens in which the gods have their seats,
while on the reverse side there is a line dividing
the liver into ‘day’ and ‘night.’ Professor Korte,
in a study of this remarkable object, summing up
the results of many years of research, explains this
by showing that the liver was regarded as a micro-
cosm reflecting the macrocosm, or, in other words,
the liver of the sacrificial animal from being origi-
nally a reflection of the soul or mind of the god to
whom the animal was offered, was brought into
connection with the observation of the heavenly
bodies revealing the intention of the gods acting
in concert”? (Morris Jastrow, Jr., ‘“Hepatoscopy
and Astrology in Babylonia and Assyria,” in Proc.
Amer. Phil. Soc., 665-66).

Three well-marked classes of astrology, that is to
say of divination by the heavenly bodies, are men-
tioned in Isa 47 13, as being practised in Babylon.
“Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, the
monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee.”

The astrologers are the ‘‘dividers of the heavens’’
(hobh‘ré shamayim); that is to say the significance
of any stellar conjunction was made to
depend upon the division of the heav-
ens in which it occurred. The earliest
of such divisions appears to have been
into the four quarters, N., 8., E., W., and astrologi-
cal tablets of this character have been discovered
in considerable numbers. Thus tablet W.A.Z. IT],
56, 1, gives a table of eclipses for each day of the
month Tammuz up to the middle of the month,
and the significance of the eclipse is connected with
the quarter in which it was seen. On the first day
the eclipse is associated with the S., on the second
with the N., on the third with the E., and on
the fourth with the W. (Sayce, Astronomy and
Astrology of the Babylonians, 222). Tablets of this
description are very instructive sinee they prove
that those who drew up such lists of omens had
not even a rudimentary knowledge of astronomy.
For the Bab months were intended to be natural
months, yet at this time it was not realized that an
eclipse of the sun could only take place when the
moon was invisible, that is to say about the 28th
or 29th day of the month, if the calendar was cor-
rect. Further, it was not realized that neither
sun nor moon can ever be in the N. in the latitude
of Babylon. Such tables of omens then were not
derived, as has sometimes been supposed, from a
striking event having occurred near the time of
an. observed eclipse, but they must have been drawn
up on an entirely arbitrary plan. _ ;

The same principle of “division” was applied
to the moon itself for the purpose of drawing omens
from its eclipses. Thus in R. C. Thompson’s
Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers of Nineveh
and Babylon we read in No. 268, “The omens of
all lands. The right of the moon is Akkad, the
left Elam, the top Aharru, the bottom Subartu.”


4. Astrolo-
gers


The constellations of the zodiac also had omens


‘allotted to them in a similar manner.


The astrologers mentioned in the Book of Dnl
(ashshéphim) were not “dividers of the heavens,”
but mutterers of incantations. The


6. Star- star-gazers or seers of the stars or con-
gazers stellations (hdzim ba-kdkhabhim) may

be illustrated from two of Thompson’s
Reports. No. 216, “Saturn has appeared in Leo.


When Leo is obscured, for three years lions and
jackals . . . . and kill men”; and No. 239, ‘““When
Mars (apin) approaches Scorpio the prince will die
by a scorpion’s sting and his son after him will take
the throne.” It may be remarked that as the planct
Saturn takes three years to pass through the con-
stellation Leo, the ravages of lions are predicted to
last for that time.

At a later date we find a complete system of
astrology based upon the constellations of the zodiac
which happen to be rising at the moment when the
stars were consulted. Examples of this form of
divination are found in the works of Zeuchros of
Babylon, who flourished about the beginning of our
era. By his day the system had received a con-
siderable development. Twelve signs did not
give much scope for prediction, so each sign had
been divided into three equal portions or ‘‘decans”’;
each decan therefore corresponding nearly to the
part of the ecliptic which the sun would pass through
in a decade or “‘week’’ of 10 days of the Egyptians.
A yet further complexity was brought about by
associating each one of the 36 decans with one of the
36 extra-zodiacal constellations, and a further
variety was obtained by associating each zodiacal
constellation with its sunanatéllon, or constellation
rising with it; that is, at the same time; or with
its paranatéllon, or constellation rising beside it;
that is, a constellation on the same meridian. At
what time these particular forms of augury by the
constellations came into use we do not know, but
the division into the decans is distinctly alluded
to in the 5th tablet of the Bab Creation Epic: ‘4.
For the twelve months he [Marduk] fixed three
stars.

The monthly prognosticators were the men who
knew the omens of the new moon (médhi'tm le-hddh-

adshim). At one time the error of the
6. Monthly calendar was made the basis of pre-
Prognosti- diction. This is seen in the great astro-
cators logical work based on the omens drawn

up for Sargon of Agadé, and entitled
from its opening phrase Enuma anu Bel, ‘When
the heaven god Bel’’ (the ‘Illumination of Bel’),
as, for instance, ‘“‘The moon as on the Ist day is
seen in its appearance on the 27th day; evil is fixed
for the land of Elam’’; and ‘‘The moon as on the
1st day is seen on the 28th day: evil is fixed for the
land of the Ahurru.” Other omens were drawn
from the position of the horns of the new moon
when first seen; the right horn being assigned to
the king and the left to his enemies, as in Thomp-
son’s Reports, No. 25: “When at the moon’s ap-
pearance its right horn is high [lit. “long’’] and its
left horn is low [lit. “short’’] the king’s hand will
conquer land other than this.” The ‘monthly
prognosticators” had not learned that the right-
hand horn is always the higher and that the amount
of its elevation depends on the time of the year, or
they kept the knowledge to themselves.

II. Worship of the Heavenly Bodies.— As we
should naturally expect, the earliest astrological
tablets relate chiefly to omens dependent upon
the two great lights, the sun and moon. There is
no evidence at present available to fix the date
when the planets were first recognized as distinct
from the fixed stars. Probably this discovery was
intimately connected with the formation of the con-


Astrology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


298


stellations; it cannot have been long delayed after,


it. Certainly planet-worship, and as connected with
it, planetary divination, prevailed in the Euphrates
valley at a very early period.

One planet is certainly mentioned in OT, and
we may safely infer that the other four were known,
since this particular planet is the
least conspicuous both in brightness
and in motion, and was therefore
probably the last to be discovered. The reference
to Saturn occurs in Am 5 25.26: “Did ye bring
unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness
forty years, O house of Israel? Yea, ye have borne
the tabernacle of your king [AV Moloch] and the
shrine of [AV Chiun] your images, the star of your
god, which ye made to yourselves.” This passage
was quoted from LXX by St. Stephen in his de-
fence, “And they made a calf in those days, and
brought a sacrifice unto the idol, and rejoiced in the
works of their hands. But God turned, and gave
them up to serve the host of heaven; as it is written
in the book of the prophets,

“Did ye offer unto me slain beasts and sacrifices

Forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?

And ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch;

And the star of the god Rephan,

The figures which ye made to worship them"

(Acts 7 41-43).

The difference between the names Chiun and
Rephan, is due either to Rephan being a local
Egyp name for the planet Saturn, and therefore
used by the LXX as its equivalent, or to an actual
error of transcription in the text from which they
were translating: the initial of the word being
taken as résh when it should have been kaph, r
instead of k. The word should therefore be trans-
literated Kaivan, which was the name of the planet
Saturn amongst the ancient Arabs and Syrians,
while kaimanu, “constant” or “regular,’”’ was its
name with the Assyrians. The ERV in Am 5 26
adopts the reading of the AVm, “Siccuth your
king,” Moloch meaning king; but the authority
of the LXX and the parallelism of the text and its
general line of thought support the reading given by
some of the ancient versions and followed by the AV.

The difficulty of the passage is that both Amos
and St. Stephen appear to represent the worship of

the golden calf as identical with the
2. Saturn worship of Moloch and of the planet
or Moloch Saturn; yet though Kaivan is only
Worship mentioned here, the nature of the

reference would imply that this deity
was one familiar both to speaker and hearers. The
difficulty vanishes at once, if the plain statement of
St. Stephen be accepted, that when God permitted
Israel to “go after the stubbornness of their heart,
that they might walk in their own counsels” (Ps 81
12) He “gave them up to serve the host of heaven.”
The worship of the golden calf was star worship; it
was the solar bull, the constellation Taurus, in which
the sun was at the time of the spring equinox, that
was thusrepresented. The golden calf was therefore
analogous to the familiar symbol of the Mithraic
cult, the bull slain by Mithra, Sol Invicius, if indeed
the latter did not take its origin from this apostasy
of Israel. Sec Car, GOLDEN.

And Moloch the king, the idol of the Ammonites
and Phoenicians, was intimately connected both
with the solar bull and the planet Saturn. Accord-
ing to the rabbins, his statue was of brass, with a
human body but the head of an ox. On the Cartha-
ginian worship of Moloch or Saturn, Diodorus
(book xx, ch i) writes: “(Among the Carthaginians
there was a brazen statue of Saturn putting forth
the palms of his hands bending in such a manner
toward the earth, as that the boy who was laid upon
them, in order to be sacrificed, should slip off, and so
fall down headlong into a deep fiery furnace. Hence


1. Chiun


e
it is probable that Euripides took what he fabulously
relates concerning the sacrifice in Taurus, where he
introduces Iphigenia asking Orestes this question:
‘But what sepulchre will me dead receive, shall the
gulf of sacred fire me have?’ The ancient fable
likewise that is common among all the Grecians,
that Saturn devoured his own children, seems to be
confirmed by this law among the Carthaginians.”
The parallelism of the text thereforeis very complete.
The Israelites professed to be carrying the taber-
nacle of Jeh upon which rested the Shekinah glory;
but in spirit they were carrying the tabernacle of the
cruelest and most malignant of all the deities of
the heathen, and the light in which they were re-
joicing was the star of the planet assigned to that .
deity. :

Moloch then was the sun as king, and especially
the sun as he entered upon what might be con-
sidered his peculiar kingdom, the zodiac from Taurus
to Serpens and Scorpio, the period of the six summer
months. The connection of the sun with Saturn
may seem to us somewhat forced, but we have the
most direct testimony that such a connection was
believed in by the Babylonians. In Thompson’s
Reports, obv. of No. 176 reads: ‘‘When the sun
stands in the place of the moon, the king of the land
will be secure on his throne. When the sun stands
above or below the moon, the foundation of the
throne will be secure.”’ The “sun” in this inscrip-
tion clearly cannot be the actual sun, and it is
explained on the reverse as being “‘the star of the
sun,” the planet Saturn. No. 176 rev. reads:
“Last night Saturn drew near tothe moon. Saturn
is the star of the sun. This is the interpretation:
it is lucky for the king. The sun is the king’s star.”
The connection between the sun and Saturn prob-
ably arose from both being taken as symbols of
Time. The return of the sun to the beginning
of the zodiac marked the completion of the year.
Saturn, the slowest moving of all the heavenly
bodies, accomplished its revolution through the
signs of the zodiac in about 30 years, a complete
generation of men. Saturn therefore was in a
peculiar sense the symbol of Time, and because of
Time, of Destiny.

The connection between the worship of the
golden calves, of the heavenly host and of Moloch,
and of these with divination and en-
chantments, is brought out very
clearly in the judgment which the
writer of the Book of K pronounces
upon the apostate ten tribes: ‘They forsook all the
commandments of Jehovah their God, and made
them molten images, even two calves, and made an
Asherah, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and
served Baal. And they caused their sons and their
daughters to pass through the fire, and used divina-
tion and enchantments”’ (2 K 17 16.17). The
sin of apostate Judah was akin to the sin of apostate
Israel. In the reformation of Josiah, he put down
the idolatrous priests that “burned incense unto
Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets
(mazz@lath], and to all the host of heaven” (2 K 23
5). He also destroyed the ‘dsh@rah and he “defiled
Topheth .... that no man might make his son
or his daughter to pass through the fire to Molech”
(ver 10). “Moreover them that had familiar
spirits, and the wizards, and the teraphim, and the
idols, and all the abominations that were seen in the
land of Judah and in Jerus, did Josiah put away”
(ver 24). The idolatries to which the Israelites of
both kingdoms were especially prone were those of
the heavenly bodies, and inextricably woven with
them was the passion for employing those heavenly
bodies as omens, and in consequence for every
kind of divination and witchcraft.

The word tr? “planets” in 2 K 28 5 is mazzalath,


3. Mazza-
loth


299


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Astrology


closely akin to the mazzarith of Job 38 32. This
rendering pebauly reproduces correctly the mean-
ing of the original. IR. C. Thompson in his intro-
duction to the Reports writes (xxvii): ‘The places
where the gods stood in the zodiac were called
manzalti, a word which means literally ‘stations,’
and we are probably right in assuming that it is
the equivalent of the mazzaléth mentioned in 2 K
23 5. The use of the word in late Heb is, however,
somewhat more vague, for mazzal, though literally
meaning a constellation of the zodiac, is also applied
to any or every star, and in the Beré’shith Rabbd’,
cx, it is said ‘One mazzal completeth its circuit in
thirty days, another completeth it in thirty years.’”’
The two bodies referred to are evidently the moon
with its lunation of about 30 days, and Saturn with
its revolution of about 30 years; these being the two


railway, which means literally the ‘permanent
way,” when we really mean the trains that travel
upon it.


Saturn are not so clear.

are apparently referred to: “Ye that
4. Gadh forsake Jehovah, that forget my holy
and Meni mountain, that prepare a table for

Fortune [Gad], and that fill up mingled
wine unto Destiny [Meni]; I will destine you to the
sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter.”
It is clear that Gad and Meni are the titles of two
closely associated deities, and Gesenius identifies
them with Jupiter and Venus, the Greater and
Lesser Good Fortunes of the astrologers. But as I
have suggested in the Astronomy of the Bible (133,
217), if any of the heavenly bodies are here intended
(which cannot as yet be considered certain), it is
more probable that they are the two beautiful star-
clusters that stand on the head and the shoulder
of the Bull at the old commencement of the zodiac,
as if they marked the gateway of the year—the
Hyades and Pleiades. Both groups were considered
traditionally as composed of seven stars; and the
two names Gadh (the Hyades) and M*ni (the
Pleiades) taken together give the meaning of the
“Fortunate Number,’’ i.e. seven. The lectisternia—
the spreading the table and mingling the wine to Gadh
and Meni—at the beginning of the year to secure
good fortune throughout its course, were therefore
held about the time of the Passover, as if in parody,
if indeed they were not a desecration of it: heathen
rites added to one of the most solemn services of
Jeh.

The planet Venus is more distinctly referred to
in Isa 14 12: “How art thou fallen from heaven, O
Lucifer, son of the morning!”’ (AV).
The word here rendered Lucifer, that
is, “light-bearer,” is the word hélé
corresponding to the Assyr mustelil, “the shining
star,” an epithet to which the planet Venus has a
preéminent claim. ie

Mars and Mercury, the two remaining planets,
are not mentionéd as such in OT, but the deities
connected with them, Nergal=Mars (2 K 17 30)
and Nebo= Mercury (Isa 46 1), both occur.

II, Systems of Astrology.—In astrology the
planets were regarded as being 7 in number, but

the idea that the number 7 derived
1. Names its sacredness from this fact is an in-
of the version of the true state of the case.
Week-Days It was that 7 being regarded as a

gacred number, the number of the
planets was artificially made to correspond by in-
cluding in the same class as the five wandering


65. Venus


stars, bodies that differed so widely from them in
appearance as the sun and moon. So artificial a
classification cannot have been primitive, and it is
significant that in Gen 1 14 the sun and moou are
presented as being (as indeed they appear to be)
of an altogether different order from the rest of the
heavenly bodies. Yet there is one feature that they ©
have in common with the five planets: all move
among the stars within the band of the zodiac;
each of the seven makes the circuit of the mazzdlath.
We owe the names of the days of the week to this
astrological conception of the planets as being 7 in
number, and some writers (e.g. R. A. Proctor in his
Myths and Marvels of Astronomy, 43-47) have sup-
posed that the week of 7 days owed its origin to this
astrological conception and that the 7th day—
Saturn’s Day—became the Sabbath, the Day of
Rest, because Saturn was the planet of ill-omen and
it was then unlucky to undertake any work. The
way in which the allotment of the planets to the
days of the week was arrived at was the following.
The Gr astronomers and mathematicians concluded
that the planet Saturn was the most distant from
the earth and that the others followed in the descend-
ing order of Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury,
Moon. In the progress of astrology there came a
time when it was found necessary to assign a planet
to every hour so as to increase the number of omens
it could afford. Starting then with Saturn as pre-
siding over the first hour of the first day, each
planet was used three times over on that day, and
three planets were used a fourth time. The sun,
the fourth planet, took therefore the first hour of the
second day, and gave it its name, so that Sunday
followed Saturday. In like manner the third day
became the moon’s day, and so on with the other
planets which followed in the order Mars, Mer-
cury, Jupiter, Venus, and again Saturn. This
idea of the relative distances of the planets was that
arrived at by the astronomers of Alexandria, and
was necessarily snbsequent to the reduction of the
planetary motions to a mathematical system by
Eudoxus and his successors. The division of the
day implied was one of 24 hours, not of 12; the
Egyp division, not the Bab. But the Egyp week
was one of 10 days, the 7-day week was Sem, and
the week implied in the system is the free week,
running on continuously, the Jewish week, not the
Bab. For the Babylonians, though they paid some
attention to the 7th day, began their reckoning
afresh at the beginning of each month. This
particular astrological system therefore owed its
origin to four distinct nationalities. The concep-
tion of the influence of the planets was Bab; the
mathematical working out of the order of the planets
was exclusively Gr; the division of the day into 24
hours was Egyp; the free continuous 7-day week
was particularly Jewish. These four influences were
brought together in Alexandria not very long before
the Christian era. Here therefore and at this time,
this particular system of astrology took its origin.
This form of astrology was readily adopted by
the Jews in their degenerate days, as we find from
references in Talm. Thus Rabbi Chanena said to
his disciples, ‘“Go and tell Ben Laive, the planetary
influence does not depend upon days but hours.
He that is born under the influence of the sun (no
matter on what day) will have a beaming face’’;
and so the rabbi went through the whole list of the
planets (Shabbath, fol 156, col. 1). The above was
spoken as a criticism of Rabbi Shimon Ben Laive
who had written, ‘‘Whoever is born on the first day
of the week will be either a thoroughly good or a
thoroughly bad man; because light and darkness
was created on that day’; and the rabbi spoke
similarly for the other days. We get a relic of this
superstition in our nursery rhyme, ‘‘Monday’s


Astrology
Astronomy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


300


child is full of grace; Tuesday’s child is fair of face,”
etc; and some present-day astrologers still use the
system for their forecasts. It will of course be
noted that the system takes no account of the actual
positions of the heavenly bodies; the moon does not
shine more or less on Monday than on any other day.

It was from Alexandrian astrology that modern
astrology immediately derived its form; but the

original source of all astrology in the
2. Origin of ancient world lay in the system of
Modern planetary idolatry prevalent in the
Astrology Euphrates valley, and in the fact that

this idolatry was practised chiefly for
the purpose of divination. At one time it was
supposed that a real astronomy was cultivated at
an early time in Babylonia, but Jastrow, Kugler and
others have shown that this idea is without basis.
The former writes, ‘“The fact however is significant
that, with perhaps some exceptions, we have in the
library of Ashurbanipal representing to a large ex-
tent copies from older originals, no text that can
properly be called astronomical. .... It is cer-
tainly significant that the astronomical tablets so
far found belong to the latest period, and in fact to
the age following on the fall of the Bab empire.
According to Kugler the oldest dated genuinely
astronomical tablet belongs to the 7th year of Cam-
byses, ie. 522 BC” (‘““Hepatoscopy and Astrology in
Babylonia and Assyria,” in Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc.,
667).

The conquests of Alexander the Great brought
into close connection with each other the Bab
and Gr systems of thought, and Bab astrology was
introduced to the Greeks by Berosus the Chaldaean
priest. In Gr hands, astrology was changed from
its character of an oriental rehgion into the appear-
ance of ascience. In Babylonia the stars had been
consulted for the benefit of the king as representing
the state; amongst the Greeks, with their strong
individualistic tendency, the fortunes of the individ-
ual became the most frequent subject of inquiry,
and the idea was originated of determining the
character and fortune of a man from the position
of the stars at his birth—genethlialogy—a phase of
astrology which never existed in the Euphrates
valley. This extension rendered it necessary to
increase greatly the complexities of the omens, and
the progress which the Greeks had made in mathe-
matics supplied them with the means of doing so.
Thus came into existence that complex and sym-
metrical system of divination of which we have
the earliest complete exposition in the writings of
Claudius Ptolemy about 130 AD; a system which,
though modified in details, is in effect that in use
today.

Since this mathematical astrology did not come
into existence until about the commencement of

the Christian era, it is clear that there
3. Curious could not be any reference to its
Arts particular form in the OT. We may

probably see one reference in the NT
(Acts 19 19). Of the converts at Ephesus it is
written, “Not a few of them that practised magical
arts brought their books together and burned them
in the sight of all; and they counted the price of
them, and found it 50,000 pieces of silver.” Books
of magical incantations and prescriptions were
certainly included, but it is also likely that the
almanacs, tables and formulae, essential to the
astrologer for the exercise of his art, were also in
the number. It was of course impossible then, as
now, for the convert to Christianity to consult
astrologers or to practise astrological divination.
Partly because it was an absurdity, for the divisions
of the heavens upon which the predictions are based,
are purely imaginary; the “signs” of the zodiac,
and the “houses” have nothing whatsoever corre-


sponding to them in Nature; such division is exactly
that denounced by the prophets of old as kesem,
“divination.” Next, and of more importance, it
ascribes to mere creatures, the planets or the spirits
supposed to preside over them, the powers that
belong to God alone; it was and is essentially
idolatrous. As one of the chief living astrologers
puts it, “The TRUE astrologer believes that the
sun is the body of the Logos of this solar system,
‘in Him we live and move and have our being.’
The planets are his angels, being modifications in the
consciousness of the Logos” (Knowledge, XXIII,
228). Astrology is indeed referred to in the OT,
with other forms of divination, and the idolatry
inherent in them, but they are only mentioned in
terms of the most utter reprobation. The Jews
alone of all the nations of antiquity were taught by
their religion neither to resort to such arts nor to
be afraid of the omens deduced from them. Isaiah
knew the Lord to be He that ‘frustrateth the signs
of the liars, and maketh diviners mad” (Isa 44 25),
and Jeremiah declared, “Thus saith Jehovah,
Learn not the way of the nations, and be not dis-
mayed at the signs of heaven; for the nations are
dismayed at them” (Jer 10 2). And what held
good for the Jews of old holds good for us today.
Above all, astrology is an attempt to ascertain the
will of God by other means than those which He has
appointed—His Son, who is the Way and the Truth
and the Life, and His Holy Scriptures in which we
learn of Him, and which are able to make us ‘‘wise
unto salvation through faith which is in Christ
Jesus” (2 Tim 3 15).


Litsraturs.—Franz Boll, Sphaera: Neue griechische
Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der Sternbilder,
1903; Kugler, Kulturhistorische Bedeutung der babyloni-
schen Astronomie, 1907; Sternkunde und Sterndienst in
Babel; E. W. Maunder, Astronomy of the Bible, 1908; The
Bibleand Astronomy, Annual Address before the Victoria
Institute, 1908; E. W. Maunder and A. 8. D. Maunder,
‘‘ Note on the Date of the Passage of the Vernal Equinox
from Taurus into Aries," in Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, LXIV, 488-507; also three papers
on ‘The Oldest Astronomy"’ in Journal of the British
Astronomical Association, VIII, 373; IX, 317; XIV,
241; R. A. Proctor, Myths and Marvels of Astronomy;
R. C. Thompson, Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers
of Nineveh and Babylon; G. V. Schiaparelli, Astronomy
in the OT; also two papers, ‘I Primordi'’’ and ‘'I Pro-
gressi dell’ Astronomia presso i Babilonesi,”' in Rivisia
dt Sctenzia, 1908; C. Virolleaud, L'astrologie chaldéenne.
Le livre intitulé ‘' Enuma Anu Bel,’’ 1908, 1909.


E. W. Maunper
ASTRONOMY, as-tron’o-mi:


I. Tae Heaven.y Bopres
1, The Ordinances of Heaven
2. The Sun
(1) The Names for the Sun
(2) The "City of the Sun”
(3) The Greater Light-Giver
(4) The Purpose of the Sun
(5) The Sun as a Type
3. The Moon
(1) The Names for the Moon
(2) The Lesser Light-Giver
Se Phases of the Moon


. Signs
(1) Solar and Lunar Eclipses
(2) The Wings of the Morning
5. Seasons
(1) The Meaning of the Word
(3) Natural Seasons for Worship
(3) The Hallowing of the Seventh
(4) The Jubilee a Luni-solar Cycle
(5) The 19-Year Luni-solar Cycle
(6) The Jewish Ritual Preéxilic
(7) The Luni-solar Cycles of Daniel
6. The Stars
(1) Their Number
‘33 Their Distance
(3) Their Brightness
7. Morning Stars
The Stars as a Dial
8. rigate Stars
(1) Meteorites
(2) The Star ‘‘' Wormwood"
9. Wandering Stars
(1) Comets as a Spiritual Type
(2) Comets Referred to in Scripture ?


301


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Astrology
Astronomy


II. Tae Constevuations
. N&hash, the ‘Crooked Serpent"
. Leviathan
The Seed of the Woman
. The Bow Set in the Cloud
. The Dragon of Eclipse
. Joseph's Dream
. The Standards of the Trihes
. The Cherubim
. Balaam’s Prophecy
10. Pleiades
11. Orion _
12. Mazzaroth, the Constellations of the Zodiac
13. ‘'Arcturus’’
(1) The “Scatterers,” or the North
(2) The Ordinances of Heaven Established on
the Earth
14. The Date of the Book of Job
HII. Puystograruy
1. The Circle of the Earth
(1) The Earth a Sphere
(2) The North Stretched out over Empty Space
(3) The Corners of the Earth
. The Pillars of the Earth
. The Firmament
(2 The Hebrew Conception
(2) The Alexandrian Conception
. ae Windows of Heaven
. Rain


CONOMPOde


wn


NOC


D

(1) Meaning of the Word
(2) The Babylonian Dragon of Chaos
LIveratTure

The keynote of the Heb writers respecting the
heavenly bodies is sounded in Ps 8:
“When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers,
The moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;
What is man, that thou art mindful of him?
And the son of man, that thou visitest him?
For thou hast made him but little lower than God,
And crownest him with glory and honor.
Thou makest him to have dominion over the works of

thy hands; A is
Thou hast put all things under his feet’’ (Ps 8 3-6).


The heavenly bodies were inexpressibly glorious,
and they were all the handiwork of Jeh—without
power or vitality of their own—and man, not by
apy inherent virtue, but by the will and grace of
God, was superior to them in importance. Thus
there was a great gulf fixed between the super-
stitions of the heathen who worshipped the sun,
moon and stars as gods, and the faith of the pious
Hebrew who regarded them as things made and
moved by the will of one only God. And it followed
from this difference that the Hebrew, beyond all
nations of like antiquity, was filled with a keen
delight in natural objects and phenomena, and was
attentively observant of them.

I, The Heavenly Bodies.—To the sacred writers,
the ordinances of heaven taught the lesson of

OQrder—great, magnificent and immu-
1. The table. Day by day, the sun rose in
Ordinances the east, “as a bridegroom coming out
of Heaven of his chamber’ (Ps 19 5), and pur-

sued unswervingly his appointed path
across the sky, to his going down. Night by night,
the stars, the “host of heaven,” moved in their
“highways” or “eourses’” (m*sillah), and the words
of Joel (2 7) respecting the Assyr army might be
applied to them. ‘They march every one on his
ways, and they break not their ranks. Neither
doth one thrust another; they march every one in
his path.’ Some wheeled in northern circuits that
were wholly seen; some swept in long courses from
their rising in the E. to their setting in the W.;
some scarcely lifted themselves above the southern
horizon. Little wonder that this celestial army on
the march, ‘‘the host of heaven,” suggested to the
Hebrews a comparison with the “‘angels,’’ the unseen
messengers of God who in their ‘‘thousands of thou-
sands ministered unto him’ (Dnl 7 10). ;

But, as the year revolved, the dial of stars in the
N. shifted round; whilst of the other stars, those in
the W. disappeared into the light of the setting sun,
and new stars seemed to spring out of the dawning


light. There was thus a yearly procession of the
stars as well as a nightly one.

And to this “ordinance of the heaven” the He-
brews noted that there was an answer from the
earth, for in unfailing correspondence came the
succession of seasons, the revival of vegetation,
the ripening of harvest and of fruits, the return of
winter’s cold. Of them God asked the question:
“Knowest thou the ordinances of the heavens?
Canst thou establish the dominion thereof in the
earth?” (Job 38 33), and they recognized that to
this question no answer could be given, for these
ordinances of heaven were the sign and evidence of
Almighty wisdom, power and unchangeableness.
“Thus saith Jehovah, who giveth the sun for a
light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and
of the stars for a light by night . . . . Jehovah of
hosts is his name” (Jer 31 35).

We have no writings of the early Hebrews other
than the books of the OT, and in them there is no
record of any research into the mechanical explana-
tion of the movements of the heavenly bodies.
Nor should we expect to find in them a record of
the research if such were made, since the purpose
of Holy Scripture was, not to work out the relation
of thing to thing—the inquiry to which modern
science is devoted—but to reveal God to man.
Therefore the lesson which is drawn from the
observed ordinances of heaven is, not that the
earth rotates on its axis or revolves round the sun,
but that God is faithful to His purpose for man-
kind. “Thus saith Jehovah: If my covenant of
day and night stand not, if I have not appointed
the ordinances of heaven and earth; then will I
also cast away the seed of Jacob, and of David my
servant” (Jer 33 25.26). And ‘‘the glory of God”
which “the heavens declare” is not only His al-
mighty power, but the image which the order and
perfection of the heavenly movements supply of
the law which He has revealed unto man. “The
“speech” that they ‘utter,’ the “knowledge” that
they “show” is: “The law of Jehovah is perfect,
restoring the soul” (Ps 19 7).

(1) The names for the sun—Four words are tr4
“sun” in the OT:

(a) ’Or simply means “light” and is usually
rendered thus, but in one instance (Job 31 26),

being in antithesis to “moon,” it is
2. The Sun given as “sun,” the great light-giver.
(b) Hammah means “heat” and is used
for the sun when this is in association with l’bhanah
or “snow-white” for the moon, as in Isa 24 23,
‘Then the snow-white [moon] shall be confounded,
and the heat [sun] ashamed,’ the antithesis being
drawn between the cold light of the silver moon
and the fiery radiance of the glowing sun.

(c) Shemesh, the SamaS of the Babylonians, ig
a primitive word, probably with the root meaning
of ‘“ministrant.” Thisis the word most frequently
used for the sun, and we find it used topographi-
cally as, for instance, in Beth-shemesh, ‘the house
of the sun.” Four places of this name are men-
tioned in the OT: one in Judah, a Levitical city,
to which the two milch kine bearing the ark took
their straight way from the country of the Philis;
one on the border of Issachar; one in Naphtali,
a fenced city; and one in Egypt, supposed to be
the same as Heliopolis or On, the city of Asenath,
wife of Joseph.

(d) Heres means “blister” or “burning heat,”
from a root “‘to scratch” or “be rough,” and is an
unusual term for the sun, and its precise rendering
is sometimes in doubt. Once it is tré as “itch,”
when it occurs amongst the evils threatened in
the “‘cursings’” that the six tribes uttered from
Mount Ebal (Dt 28 27). Once it is certainly used
of the sun itself when Job (9 7) said of God, He


Astronomy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


302


“commandeth the sun [heres or heres], and it riseth
not.”’ Once it is certainly the name of a hill, for
Mount Heres was near Aijalon, on the borders of
Judah and Dan. In another passage, authorities
differ in their rendering, for when Gideon over-
came Zebah and Zalmunna (Jgs 8 13), he “returned
from the battle,” according to AV, “before the sun
was up,” but according to RV, “from the ascent of
Heres.” In yet another passage (Jgs 14 18), when
the Phils answered Samson’s riddle, both AV and
RV tr heres as sun—‘‘before the sun went down.”
We moreover get slight variants of the same word,
joined with fir (‘“‘wall” or “fortress”’), in Kir-
Hareseth (2 K 3 25; Isa 16 7) and Kir-Heres (Isa
16 11; Jer 48 31.36). These are probably to be
identified with the modern Kerak of Moab.

(2) City of the sun.—But the most interesting
reference is found in Isa 19 18: “In that day
there shall be five cities in the land of Egypt that
speak the language of Canaan, and swear to Je-
hovah of hosts; one shall be called The city of de-
struction.”? The word here rendered ‘‘destruction”
is in Heb heres, which has that meaning, but Gese-
nius and other authorities would substitute for the
initial letter, he, the letter, Aeth, which it so closely
resembles, and so read it “The city of the sun.”
With this reading it was identified with On, that is,
Heliopolis (the city of the sun), and on this belief
Onias, the son of Onias the high priest, persuaded
Ptolemy Philometor to allow him to build a temple
to Jeh in that prefecture, 149 BC (Ant, XIII, iii, 1).

(83) The greater light-giver—(e) Yet a fifth ex-
pression is used to denote the sun, and in one
respect it is the most important and significant of
all. In the creation narrative it is called the
greater light or rather light-giver (md@’dr): ‘And
God made the two great light-givers; the greater
light-giver to rule the day, and the lesser light-
giver to rule the night: He made the stars also’
(Gen 1 16). The extreme simplicity of this pas-
sage is most significant. In marked contrast to
the Bab creation poem, which by its more com-
plex astronomy reveals its later origin (see post,
sec. II, 12, Mazzardth), the sun and moon have no
distinctive names assigned to them; there is no
recognition of the grouping of the stars into con-
stellations, none of any of the planets. The celes-
tial bodies could not be referred to in a more simple
manner. And this simplicity is marred by no
myth; there is not the faintest trace of the deifica-
tion of sun or moon or stars; there is no anthro-
pomorphic treatment, no suggestion that they
formed the vehicles for spirits. ‘They are described
as they were observed when they were first no-
ticed by men, simply as “light-givers’’ of different
brightness. It is the expression of man’s earliest
observation of the heavenly bodies, but it is real
observation, free from any taint of savage phan-
tasies; it marks the very first step in astronomy.
No record, oral or written, has been preserved to us
of a character more markedly primitive than this.

(4) Purpose of the sun—Two purposes for the
great heavenly bodies are indicated in Gen 1 14.
15. The sun and moon are appointed to give light
and to measure time. These, from the human and
practical point of view, are the two main services
which they render to us.

Their purpose for measuring time by their
movements will be taken up under another head-
ing; but here it may be pointed out that when it
is stated in the Book of Wisd (7 18) that King
Solomon knew “the alternations of the solstices
and the changes of seasons,” the reference is to
the whole cycle of changes from winter through
summer back to winter again. From winter on-
ward the places of sunrise and sunset move north-
ward along the horizon until midsummer when for


some days they show no change—the “solstice”
is reached; then from midsummer onward the
movement “turns” southward until midwinter,
when again a “solstice” is reached, after which the
places of sunrise and sunset again move north-
ward. This changing place of sunrise is also
referred to when God asked Job (38 12-14):
Hast thou “‘caused the dayspring to know its place,”
and the passage goes on, “It [the earth] is changed
as clay under the seal; and all things stand forth as
agarment.” As the shapeless clay takes form under
the pressure of the seal, as the garment, shapeless
while folded up, takes form when the wearer puts
it on, so the earth, shapeless during the darkness,
takes form and relief and color with the impress
upon it of the dawning light. In the NT when St.
James (1 17) speaks of “the Father of lights, with
whom can be no variation [parallagé], neither shadow
that is cast by turning [fropé]’’ he is using astronom-
ical technical terms for these same apparent move-
ments of the sun.

(5) The sun as a type—But the apparent un-
changeability of the sun makes it, as it were, a just
measure of eternal duration (Ps 72 5.17). The
penetration of its rays renders “under the sun”
(Eccl 1 9) a fit expression for universality of place,
and on the other hand the fierceness of its heat
as experienced in Pal makes it equally suitable as
a type of oppression and disaster, so the sun is
said, in Scripture, to “smite’’ those oppressed by its
heat (Ps 121 6).

But it was in its light-giving and ministering
power that the Heb writers used the sun as a type
to set forth the power and beneficence of God.
Words are the symbols of ideas and it was only by
this double symbolism that it was possible to
express in intelligible human speech, and to make
men partly apprehend som-> of the attributes of
God. So we find in the Ps of pilgrimage (Ps 84 11)
“Jehovah God is a sun and a shield”; Malachi (4 2)
foretells that “the sun of righteousness shall arise
with healing in its wings.” But the old Heb
writers were very guarded and eareful in the
symbolism they used, whether of word or illus-
tration. Men in those days terribly perverted the
benefits which they received through the sun, and
made them the occasion and excuse for plunging
into all kinds of nature worship and of abominable
idolatries. It was not only clear thinking on the
part of the sacred writers that made them refer all
the benefits that came to them in the natural world
direct to the action of God; it was a necessity for
clean living. There is no bottom to the abyss in
which men plunged when they “worshipped and
served the creature rather than the Creator, who
is blessed for ever” (Rom 1 25).

In NT times, though men were no less prone to
evil, the fashion of that evil was changing. “The
pillars of Beth-shemesh” were broken down (Jer 43
18), idolatry was beginning to fallinto disrepute and
men were led away rather by ‘the knowledge [gné-
sts] which is falsely so called” (1 Tim 6 20). ‘The
apostles could therefore use symbolism from the
natural world more frecly, and so we find St. John
speaking of Our Lord as ‘“There was the true light,
even the light which lighteth every man, coming into
the world” (Jn 1 9), and again, “God is light, and
in him is no darkness at all’”” (1 Jn 1 5); and again,
that the glory of the New Jerus shall be that “the
city hath no need of the sun, neither of the moon,
to shine upon it: for the glory of God did lighten it,
and the lamp thereof is the Lamb” (Rev 21 23);
while the great modern discovery that nearly every
form of terrestrial energy is derived ultimately from
the energy of the sun’s rays, gives a most striking
appropriateness to the imagery of St. James that.
‘Every good gift and perfect boon is from above,


303


coming down from the Father of lights, with whom
can be no variation, neither shadow that is cast by
turning’ (Jas 1 17 ERV).

(1) The names for the moon—Three words are
tr? “moon” in the OT, not including cases where

“month” has been rendered “moon”
3. The for the sake of a more flowing sentence:
Moon (a) Lebhanah, “white’’; a poetic ex-
pression, used in connection with ham-
mah, “heat,’’ for the sun.

(b) Hédhesh, “new moon,” meaning “new,”
‘fresh.’ As the Hebrews reckoned their months
from the actual first appearance of the young
crescent, hédhesh is most frequently tr’ ‘month.’
Thus ‘In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life,
in the second month, on the seventeenth day of
the month” (Gen 7 11), and in the great, majority
of cases, the word for month is hédhesh, ‘new moon.”
In Isa 66 23, “from one new moon to another,”
should be lit. “from new moon to new moon.”
Once it is rendered “monthly” (Isa 47 13), when
it is used to denote the astrologers who fixed the
omens of the opening month. Hdédhesh, therefore,
when tr? “new moon” is not a designation of the
actual heavenly body, but denotes the first day of
the month. It is a term directly or indirectly con-
nected with the calendar.

(ce) Yaré*h, probably ‘‘wandering,” a very ap-
propriate primitive term for the moon, since her
motion among the stars from night to night is
sufficiently rapid to have caught the attention of
very early ohservers. Its use therefore as the proper
name for the “lesser light” indicates that the sys-
tematic observation of the heavenly bodies had
commenced, and that the motion of the moon,
relative to the stars, had been recognized.

Yerah, ‘‘month,” is twice tr’ “moon” (Dt 33 14;
Isa 60 20), but without any great reason for the
variation in either case.

(2) The lesser light-giver-—The direct references
in Scripture to the moon as a light-giver are not
numerous, but those that occur are significant
of the great importance of moonlight in ancient
times, when artificial lights were few, expensive and
dim, and the lighting of streets and roads was un-
thought of. To shepherds, the moon was of especial
assistance, and many of the people of Israel main-
tained the habits of their forefathers and led the
shepherd’s life long after the settlement of the
nation in Pal. The return of the moonlit portion
of the month was therefore an occasion for rejoicing
and for solemn thanks to God, and the “new moon”
as well as the Sabbath was a day of special offer-
ings. On the other hand one of the judgments
threatened against the enemies of God was that
the light of the moon should be withheld. The
threat made against Pharaoh is “I will cover
the sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not give
its light?’ (Ezk 32 7); and in the day of the Lord
denounced against Babylon, ‘‘The sun shall be
darkened in its going forth, and the moon shall not
cause its light to shine’ (Isa 13 10). But among
the glories of the restoration of Israel it is promised
that “the light of the moon [l*bhandh] shall be as
the light of the sun [hammah]” (Isa 30 26).

(3) Phases of the moon.—There is no direct men-
tion of the phases of the moon in Scripture; a
remarkable fact, and one that illustrates the fool-
ishness of attempting to prove the ignorance of the
sacred writers by the argument from silence, since
it is not conceivable that men at any time were
ignorant of the fact that the moon changes her
apparent shape and size. So far from the Hebrews
being plunged in such a depth of more than savage
ignorance, they based their whole calendar on the
actual observation of the first appearance of the
young crescent. In two passages in RV we find


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Astronomy


the expression ‘‘at the full moon,’’ keseh (Ps 81 3;
Prov 7 20), but though this is what is intended,
the literal meaning of the word is doubtful, and
may be that given in AV, ‘at the day appointed.”
In another passage already quoted, there is a refer-
ence to the dark part of the month. “Thy sun
shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon
[yerah, ‘“month”] withdraw itself’—the ‘“with-
drawn” part of the month being the time near new
moon when the moon is nearly in conjunction with
the sun and therefore invisible.

The periodical changes of the moon are its or-
dinances (Jer 31 35). It was also appointed for
“seasons” (Ps 104 19), that is, for religious assem-
blies or feasts (méd‘ddhim). Two of these were held
at the full of the moon, the Passover and the
Feast of Tabernacies; one at the new moon, the
Feast of Trumpets; but the ordinary new moon
did not rank among the great “appointed feasts”
(mé‘édhim). As light-giver, assisting men in their
labors with the flock and in the field and helping
them on their journeys; as time-measurer, indi-
cating the progress of the months and the seasons
for the great religious festivals, the moon was to the
pious Hebrew an evidence of the goodness and
wisdom of God.

The “round tires like the moon,” worn by the
daughters of Zion (Isa 3 18 AV), and those on the
camels of Zeba and Zalmunna (Jgs 8 21 AVm), were
designated by the same Heb word, sahdrénim, tr4
in the Vulg as lunulae, and were little round orna-
ments, probably round like crescents, not discs like
the full moon.

Jericho possibly means “the city of the moon,”
and Jerah, “‘moon,” was the name of one of the sons
of Joktan.

(1) Solar and lunar eclipses ——The sun and moon
were not only given “for days and years” (Gen 1
14), but also ‘for signs,’”’ and in no
way do they better fulfil what was in
the old time understood by this word
than in their eclipses. Nothing in Nature is more
impressive than a total eclipse of the sun; the
mysterious darkness, the sudden cold, the shining
forth of the weird corona, seen at no other time,


4. Signs


Corona of Minimum Type.


affect. even those who know its cause, and strike
unspeakable terror in those who cannot foresee
or understand it. In bygone ages an eclipse of the
sun was counted an omen of disaster, indeed as
itself the worst of disasters, by all nations except
that one to whom the word of the prophet came:
“Learn not the way of the nations, and be not dis-
mayed at the signs of heaven; for the nations are
dismayed at them” (Jer 10 2). To the Heb
prophets, eclipses were “‘signs’’ of the power and
authority of God who forbade them to be alarmed
at portents which distressed the heathen.

The phenomena of hoth solar and lunar eclipses
are briefly but unmistakably described by several
of the prophets. Joel refers to them twice (2 10
and 31), the second time very definitely: ‘The sun


Astronomy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


304


shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into
blood,” and this was quoted by St. Peter on the
Day of Pentecost (Acts 2 19.20). St. John also
says that when the sixth seal was opened ‘“‘the sun
became black as sackcloth of hair, and the whole
moon became as blood” (Rev 6 12).
new moon in its revolution or turning comes exactly
between the earth and the sun, and its shadow—
the “‘shadow that is cast by turning” of Jas 1 17—
falls on the earth, the sun is completely hidden and
its glowing disc is replaced by the dark body of the
moon; “the sun is turned into darkness.’”?’ When
the shadow of the earth falls upon the full moon,
and the only rays from the sun that reach it have
passed through an immense thickness of our atmos-
phere and are therefore of a dull copper-red color
like clotted blood, ‘the moon is turned into blood.”

(2) The wings of the morning —But a solar eclipse
is not solely darkness and terror. Scarcely has the
dark moon hidden the last thread of sunlight than a
beautiful pearly halo, the corona, is seen surround-
ing the blackness. ‘This corona changes its shape
from one eclipse to another, but the simplest form
is that of a bright ring with outstretched wings,


and is characteristic of times when the sun has
but few spots upon it. This form appears to
have been the origin of the sacred symbol of the
ring or disc with wings, so frequently figured on
Egyp, Bab and Pers monuments. It is possible
that these coronal ‘‘wings of the sun” may have
been in the mind of the prophet Malachi when he
wrote, “Unto you that fear my name shall the sun
of righteousness arise with healing in its wings”
(Mal 4 2). The metaphor “wings of the morning”
of Ps 139 9 is however more probably due to the
long streamers, the crepuscular rays, seen at dawn
when the sun rises behind a low bank of clouds.
Total eclipses of the moon must frequently bave
been visible in Pal as in other countries, but only
two or three total eclipses of the sun were visible
there during OT history; that of 831 BC, August
15, was total in Judaea, and that of 824 BC,
April 2, very nearly total. It has been suggested
that two eclipses of the sun were predicted in the
OT—that of Nineveh, 763 BC, June 14, in Am 8 9,
and that of Thales, 585 BC, May 28, in Isa 13 10,
but the suggestion has little to support it.
(1) The meaning of the word—The sun and moon
were appointed “to give light upon the earth,” and
“for signs,” and “for days and years.”
6. Seasons They were also appointed “for sea-
sons” (m6‘ddhim), i.e. “appointed as-
sembles.” These seasons were not primarily
such seasons as the progress of the year brings
forth in the form of changes of weather or of the
condition of vegetation; they were seasons for
worship. The word mé‘édh occurs some 219 times;
in 149, it is tr’ “congregation,” and in about 50
other instances by “solemn assembly’ or some


When the.


equivalent expression. Thus before ever man was
created, God had provided for him times to worship
and had appointed two great lights of heaven to
serve as signals to call to it.

The appointed sacred seasons of the Jews form a
most complete and symmetrical series, developing
from times indicated by the sun alone to times
indicated by the sun and moon together, and com-
pleted in times indicated by luni-solar cycles.

(2) Natural seasons for worship—The sun alone
indicated the hours for daily worship; at sunrise,
when the day began, there was the morning sac-
rifice; at sunset, when the day closed, there was the
evening sacrifice.

The moon indicated the time for monthly worship;
when. the slender crescent of the new moon was
first seen in the western sky, special sacrifices were
ordained with the blowing of trumpets over them.

The sun and moon together marked the times
for the two great religious festivals of the year.
At the beginning of the bright part of the year,
when the moon was full in the first month of
spring, the Passover, followed by the Feast of
Unleavened Bread, was held. At the end of the
bright part of the year, when the moon was full
in the first month of autumn, the Feast of Taber-
nacles was held. These may all be termed natural
seasons for worship, obviously marked out as ap-
propriate. The beginning and close of the bright
part of the day, and of the bright part of the year,
and the beginning of the bright part of the month,
have been observed by many nations.

(3) Hallowing of the seventh—But that which was
distinctive in the system of the Jewish festivals
was the hallowing of the seventh: the seventh day,
the seventh week, the seventh month, the seventh
year were all specially marked out. Thesun alone
indicated the Sabbath by the application of the
sacred number seven to the unit of time given by
the day. For the period of seven days, the week
was not dependent upon any phase of the moon’s
relation to the sun; it was not a quarter month,
but a free week, running on independently of the
month. The Jewish Sabbath therefore differed
from the Bab, which was tied to the lunar month.
The same principle was applied also to the year;
every seventh year was set apart as a period of
rest, the Sabbatic year.

Every seventh day, every seventh year, was thus
observed. But for the week and month, the prin-
ciple of hallowing the seventh came into operation
only once in each year. The Feast of Pentecost,
or as it was also called, the Feast of Weeks, was held
at the close of the seventh week from the morrow
after the Sabbath of Unleavened Bread; and the
new moon of the seventh month was held as a
special feast, the Feast of Trumpets, ‘‘a holy con-
vocation. Ye shall do no servile work” (Lev 23
24.25). The other new moons of the year were not
thus distinguished.

The weekly Sabbath, the Passover, Pentecost,
and the Feasts of Trumpets and of Tabernacles,
with one other day of solemnity, were in an especial
sense, the mé‘édhtm of the Lord.

The seventh day was especially the day of wor-
ship, and to correspond, the seventh month was
especially the month of worship; and this, not only
because it was ushered in with peculiar solemnity,
and included one of the chief great feasts cf the
year, but because it furnished the culminating
ceremony of the entire Jewish system, the great
Day of Atonement, held on the tenth day of the
month, and therefore on a day not marked directly
by any phase of the moon. The Day of Atone-
ment purged away the offences of the past year, and
restored Israel to the full enjoyment of the Divine

avor.


305


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Astronomy


(4) The Jubilee a tunt-solar cycle—The Jewish
month was a natural month, based upon the actual
observation of the young crescent. The Jewish
year was a natural year, that is, a solar tropical
year, based upon actual observation of the ripen-
ing of the grain. But there is not an exact num-
ber of days in a lunar month, nor is there an exact
number of months in a solar year; twelve lunar
months falling short of the year, by eleven days;
so that in three years the error would amount to
more than a complete month, and to restore the
balance a thirteenth month would have to be inter-
calated. As the months were determined from
actual observation, and as observation would be
interrupted from time to time by unfavorable
weather, it was necessary to have some means for
determining when intercalation would take place,
irrespective of it. And this was provided by
carrying the principle of hallowing the seventh,
one stage farther. Not only was the seventh of the
day, week, month and year distinguished, but the
seventh week of years was marked by the blowing
of the trumpet of Jubilee on the Day of Atonement.
The Day of Atonement meant the restitution of
Israel to the Divine favor; the blowing of the
trumpet of Jubilee every forty-ninth year meant
“the restitution of all things’; every Hebrew in
servitude returned to freedom, all land, mortgaged
or sold, returned to its original owner.

And this period of 49 solar years was astronomi-
cally a period of restitution, for the sun and moon
returned nearly to their original positions relative
to each other, since 49 solar years are 606 lunar
months with an error of only 32 hours. So that
though the Jubilee period is not a perfect lunar
cycle, it was quite exact enough to guide the Jewish
priests in drawing up their calendar in cases where
the failure of observation had given rise to some
doubt.

The beginning of each month was marked by the
blowing of the two silver trumpets (hdgd¢°rah:
Nu 10 2.10). The beginning of the civil, that is
to say, of the agricultural year, was marked by a
special blowing of trumpets (éré‘ah), giving the
name “Feast of Trumpets” to that new moon
(Lev 23 24; Nu 29 1). And the beginning of a
new cycle of 49 years was marked by the Jubilee,
the loud trumpet (shéphar: Lev 25 9). Thus the
cycle of the Jubilee made symmetrical, completed,
and welded together all the mé‘ddhim of the Lord
—the two great lights were set ‘for seasons.”

(5) The 19-year luni-solar cycle--The cycle of
the Jubilee was sufficient for the purposes of the
religions calendar so long as the nation inhabited
its own land, since from its small extent there
would be no conflict of time reckoning and it would
be easy to notify the appearance of the new moon
from one end of the country to the other. But
after the captivities, when the people were scat-
tered from Gozan of the Medes to Syene on the
Nile, it was necessary to devise some method by
which the Jews, however far they had been dis-
persed, would be able to reckon for themselves as
to when the moon was new for Jerus. We have
lately learned from the discovery of a number of
Aram. papyri at Syene that there was a colony of
Jews there who used a calendar constructed, not
from observation, but from calculation based upon
a very exact luni-solar cycle (E. B. Knobel, “An-
cient Jewish Calendar Dates in Aramaic Papyri,”
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society,
LXVIII, 334). This cycle, known to us by the
name of its supposed discoverer, Meton, is one of
19 years, which is only two hours short of 235 com-
plete months. As this Jewish colony appears to
have been founded after Nebuchadnezzar’s de-
struction of Jerus by some of the refugees who fled


into Egypt with Johanan the son of Kareah (Jer
40-44), this acquaintance with the Metonic cycle
cannot have been due to Bab influence. Nor can
it have been due to Egyp, since the Egyptians did
not use or require any such cycle, their year being
a solar one of 365 days. Indeed no other nation
appears to have been aware of it until, a generation
later, Meton, the Athenian, won immortal fame
by announcing it. The evidence of these Syene
papyri renders it probable that Meton did not him-
self discover the cycle but learned it from Jewish
sources. Many of the Sem nations used, like the
Jews, a natural month in conjunction with the
natural year, but the Jews were the most likely to
have discovered this cycle, since they alone had their
worship centralized at a single shrine which became,
in consequence, their standard observatory for their
observation of thenew moon. These observations,
therefore, would all be comparable, and during the
400 years that the Temple stood, it must have been
quite clear to them that the 19-year cycle not only
gave them seven, the sacred number, of intercalated
months, but brought the setting places of the new
moons to the same points of the western horizon
and in the same order.

It is clear from the evidence of these Syene papyri
that the Jews, there, used the 19-year cycle both for
fixing the day of the new moon, and in order to
determine when a thirteenth month had to be in-
tercalated, an illustration of the futility of ‘the
argument from silence,” for so far from there being
any notice in Scripture of the use of a cycle for
determining intercalation, there is no mention of
intercalation at all.

(6) The Jewish ritual preéxilic—Ever since this
date of the Captivity, the 19-year cycle has been
used by the Jews, and it gives to us the “Golden
Number’ which is employed in fixing the date of
Easter in our own ecclesiastical calendar. Since
the 19-year cycle has been in use ever since the
Captivity, the 49-year cycle, the Jubilee, cannot
have been an exilic or post-exilic innovation. In
this fact we find the decision of the controversy
which has so long divided critics as to whether the
ritual legislation of the Jews dated from before or
from after their captivity. We may take Kuenen
as representing the more recent school: “Even the
later prophets and historians, but more especially
and emphatically those that lived before the
Exile, were unacquainted with any ritual legislation,
and specifically with that which has come down to
us” (The Heaxateuch, 273-74). “In determining
its antiquity we must begin by considering its
relation to Deuteronomy, to which it is evidently
subsequent. .... This comes out most clearly
in the legislation concerning the feasts. Other
indications though less unequivocal, plead for the
same relationship. In the next place the legisla-
tion itself gives evidence of the date of its origin,
and those data which justify a positive inference
point to the Babylonian captivity... .. It would
follow that the ‘legislation of sanctity’ arose in the
second half of the Bab captivity, presumably
shortly before its close; and there is not a single
valid objection to this date” (ib, 276). Kuenen
was evidently unaware of the astronomical relations
concerned in the ritual legislation, and was unable
to anticipate the striking discoveries made from the
Syene papyri. More recent knowledge has reversed
the verdict which he pronounced so confidently.
The traditional view, that the Heb ritual preceded
the Captivity, was correct. For the Jubilee, with
which the Day of Atonement was bound up, was
both the culmination and the completion of the
entire ritual, and, since the period of the Jubilee,
as a luni-solar cycle, was preéxilic, the ritual, as a
system, must have been preéxilic likewise.


Astronomy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


306


(7) The lunt-solar cycles of Daniel.—The seasons
for which the sun and moon were appointed are
mentioned in yet another connection. In the last
vision given to Daniel the question was asked,
“How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?”
and it was answered, “It shall be for a time, times
[dual], and a half; and when they have made an
end of breaking in pieces the power of the holy
people, all these things shall be finished” (Dnl 12
6.7). From the parallel passage in Dnl 7 25,
where it is said of the fourth beast, ‘‘He shall think
to change the times and the law; and they shall be
given into his hand until a time [‘idda@n] and times
{dual} and half a time,’ it is inferred that mé‘édh
in the first instance stands, like ‘iddan in the second,
for a year; or the period is equivalent to half a week


nomical significance is clear: 840,057 days are pre-
cisely 2,300 solar years, or 28,447 lunar months, or
30,487 anogmalistic months, the anomalistic month
being the period in which the moon travels from
perigee to perigee. It is the most perfect luni-
solar cycle known, and restores the two great
lights exactly to their former relationship. This
fullest ‘‘season”’ indicated by the sun and moon is
given as that for the cleansing of the sanctuary, for
the bringing in, as it were, of the full and perfect
Jubilee.

It is not possible at present to decide as to
whether the Jews had learnt of this cycle and its
significance from their astronomical observations.
If so, they must have been far in advance in mathe-
matical science of all other nations of antiquity.


West


South


A Corner or roe Miugy Way (Region of Theta Ophiuchi).
(Photograph by Prof. E. E. Barnard, taken June 5, 1905.)


of years. The parallel passages in Rev 11 2.3; 12
6.14; 13 5 have caused these years to be taken as
conventional years of 360 days, each year being
made up of 12 conventional months of 30 days, and
on the year-day principle of interpretation, the
entire period indicated would be one of 1,260 tropical
years. This again is a luni-solar cycle, since 1,260
years contain 15,584 months correct to the nearest
day. To the same prophet Daniel a further
chronological vision was given, and a yet more per-
fect cycle indicated. In answer to the question,
“How long shall be the vision concerning the con-
tinual burnt-offering, and the transgression that
maketh desolate, to give both the sanctuary and the
host to be trodden under foot?” the answer was
returned, “Unto two thousand and three hundred
evenings and mornings; then shall the sanctuary
be cleansed” (Dnl 8 13.14). Whatever may be
the prophetic significance of the passage its astro-


If not, then it must have been given to them by
Divine revelation, and its astronomical significance
has been left for modern science to reveal.

As with the sun and moon, the stars are regarded
under the two aspects of light-givers and time-


measurers; or, in other words, as
6. The marking the seasons.
Stars (1) Their number—But two other


ideag are also strongly dwelt upon;
the stars and the heaven of which they form the
“host” are used to express the superlatives of num-
ber and of height. ‘Look now toward heaven, and
number the stars, if thon be able to number them”
(Gen 15 5); “As the host of heaven cannot be
numbered”’ (Jer 33 22) are a few of the passages in
which the stars are used for limitless number.
Those separately visible to the naked eye at any
one time do not exceed 2,000 in number, but it was
just as evident to the Hebrews of old, as it was to


307


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Astronomy


Ptolemy, the astronomer of Alexandria, that beside
the stars separately visible, there is a background,
a patterned curtain of light, which indicates by its
granular and mottled appearance that it is made up
of countless myriads of stars, too faint to be indi-
vidually detected, too close to be individually de-
fined. The most striking feature of this curtain
is the grand stellar stream that we call the Milky
Way, but the mind casily recognizes that the
minute points of light, composing its pattern, are
as really stars as the great leaders of the constel-
lations. Later astronomy has confirmed the testi-
mony of the prophets that the stars are without
number. The earliest star catalogue, that of Hip-
parchus, contained a little over one thousand stars;
the great International Photographic Chart will


miles; the brighter stars are on the average quite
ten times as far; whilst of the distances of the untold
millions of stars beyond, we have no gauge. For
us, as for King Solomon, the “heaven” of the stars
is “for height’ (Prov 25 3), for a height that is
beyond measure, giving us therefore the only fitting
image for the immensity of God. So Zophar the
Naamathite asked, ‘(Canst thou find out the Al-
mighty unto perfection? It is high as heaven;
what canst thou do?” And Eliphaz the Temanite
reiterated the same thought, ‘‘Is not God in the
height of heaven? And behold the height of the
stars, how high they are!’ (Job 11 7.8; 22 12).
And the height of the heaven, that is to say, the
distance of the stars, stands as a symbol, not only
of God’s infinitude, but of His faithfulness and of


West


East
Smavy Star CLoup 1n Sagittarius.
(Photograph by Prof. E, E. Barnard, taken July 31, 1905.)


Srar Swarms.


show the images of more than fifty millions, and
there are photographs which show more than a
hundred thousand stars on a single plate. The
limit that has been reached is due only to the
limited power of our telescopes or the limited time
of exposure of the photographs, not to any limita-
tion in the number of stars. To us today, as to
the Psalmist of old, it is a token of the infinite power
and knowledge of God that ‘‘He telleth the number
of the stars; He giveth them all their names”
Ps 147 4 AV). hi

(2) Their distance.—As regards the height, that
is to say, the distance of the stars, this is immeas-
wrable except in a very few cases. By using as a
base line the enormous diameter of the earth’s
orbit—186,000,000 miles—astronomers have been
able to get a hint as to the distance of some 40 or
50 stars. Of these the nearest, Alpha Centauri,
is distant about twenty-five millions of millions of


His mercy: “Thus saith Jehovah: If heaven above
can be measured, and the foundations of the earth
searched out beneath, then will I also cast off all
the seed of Israel for all that they have done, saith
Jehovah” (Jer 31 37). And the Psalmist sings,
“For as the heaven is high above the earth, so
great is his mercy toward them that fear him” (Ps
103 11 AV).

(3) Their brighiness~The stars are not all of
equal brightness; a fact alluded to by St. Paul
when he wrote that “one star differcth from another
star in glory” (1 Cor 15 41). The ancient Gr
astronomers divided the stars according to their
brightness into six classes or magnitudes, to use
the modern technical term, the average star in any
particular magnitude giving about two and a half
times as much light as the average star of the next
magnitude.

Just as the number of the stars and their ordered


Astronomy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


308


movement led them to be considered as a mighty
army, “‘the host of heaven,’’ and as a type of that
other celestial host, the holy angels, so the indi-
vidual stars are taken as fitly setting forth, by their
brightness and exalted position, spiritual powers
and intelligences, whether these are the angels of
God, as in Job 38 7, or rulers of churches, as in
Rev 1 20. The same image is naturally applied
in a yet higher sense to Christ Himself, who is the
“star out. of Jacob” (Nu 24 17), and “the bright,
the morning star’ (Rev 22 16; 2 Pet 1 19).
In ancient times there were two methods by
which the progress of the year could be learned from
observation of the heavens. The sun
7. Morning was “for seasons,” and the change in
Stars its place of rising or of setting supplied
the first method. The second method
was supplied by the stars. For as the Heb shep-
herds, such as Jacob, Moses, David and Amos,
kept watch over their flocks by night, they saw the
silent procession of the stars through the hours of
darkness, and knew without clock or timepiece
how they were progressing. They noticed what
stars were rising in the E., what stars were cul-
minating in the S., what were setting in the W.,
and how the northern stars, always visible, like a
great dial, were turning. But as the eastern hori-
zon began to brighten toward the dawn, they would
specially note what stars were the last to rise before
their shining was drowned in the growing light of
day. These, the last stars to appear in the E.
before sunrise, were the “morning stars,” the
heralds of the sun. As morning followed morning,
these morning stars would be seen earlier and earlier,
and therefore for a longer time before they disap-
peared in the dawn, until some morning, other stars,
unseen before, would shine out for a few moments,
and thus supplant the stars seen earlier as the actual
heraldsof thesun. Such a first appearance of a star
was termed by the Gr astronomers its “‘heliacal”’
rising, and the mention in Scripture of “morning
stars,” or “stars of the twilight’? (Job 38 7; 3 9),
shows that the Hebrews like the Greeks were familiar
with this feature of the ordinances of heaven, and
noted the progress of the year by observation of the
apparent changes of the celestial host. One star
would herald the beginning of spring, another the
coming of winter; the time to plow, the time to
sow, the time of the rains would all be indicated by
successive ‘‘morning stars” as they appeared.
(1) Meteorites—Meteors are not stars at all in
the popular sense of the word, but are quite small
bodies drawn into our atmosphere,
8. Falling and rendered luminous for a few mo-
Stars ments by the friction of their rush
through it. But as they have been
shown not to be mere distempers of the air, as they
were considered at one time, but bodies of a truly
planetary nature, traveling round the sun in orbits
as defined as that of the earth itself, the epithet is
quite appropriate to them. They are astronomical
and not merely terrestrial bodies. Meteors are
most striking either when they are seen as solitary
aerolites or when they fall in some great shower.
The most celebrated shower which seemed to
radiate from the constellation Leo—and hence
called the Leonid—gave for centuries a magnificent
spectacle every thirty-three years; the last great
occasion having been on November 14, 1866.
Those who saw that shower could appreciate the
vivid description given by St. John when he wrote,
“The stars of the heaven fell unto the earth, as a
fig tree casteth her unripe figs when she is shaken
of a great wind” (Rev 6 13), for the meteors fell
like autumn leaves, driven by a great storm, ag
numerous and as fast. The prophet Isaiah also
used a very similar figure (Isa 34 4).


(2) The star “Wormwood.’’—Such great meteoric
showers are most impressive spectacles, but soli-
tary meteors are sometimes hardly less striking.
Bolides or aerolites, as such great solitary meteors
are termed, are apparently of great size, and are
sometimes so brilhant as to light up the sky even
in broad daylight. Such a phenomenon is referred
to by St. John in his description of the star Worm-
wood: ‘There fell from heaven a great star, burning
as a torch” (Rev 8 10). Such aerolites are not
entirely consumed in their passage through our
atmosphere, but portions of them reach the ground,
and in some cases large masses have been found
intact. These are generally of a stony nature, but
others are either almost pure iron or contain much
of that metal. Such a meteoric stone was used
as the pedestal of the image of the goddess Diana
at Ephesus, arid the ‘‘townclerk”’ of the city referred
to this circumstance when he reminded the Ephe-
sians that their city was “temple-keeper of the
great Diana, and of the image which fell down from
Jupiter” (Acts 19 35).

It has already been noted that the moon may
perhaps have received its Heb name from the fact

of its being a ‘‘wanderer’” among the
9. Wander- stars, but there is no direct and ex-
ing Stars plicit. reference in Scripture to other

celestial ‘‘wanderers’” except in Jude
ver 13: “Wandering stars, for whom the blackness
of darkness hath been reserved for ever.” These
astéres planéiat are not our “planets,” but either
meteors or comets, more probably the latter, as
meteors are more appropriately described as “falling
stars.

(1) Comets as a spiritual type—But as comets
and meteors are intimately connected with each
other—meteors being in many cases the débris of
comets—the simile applies to either. False pro-
fessors of religion, unstable or apostate teachers,
are utterly unlike the stars which shine forth in
heaven for ever, but are fitly represented by comets,
which are seen only for a few weeks or days, and
then are entirely lost to sight, or by meteors, which
flash out for a few moments, and are then totally
extinguished.

All the great comets, all the comets that have
been conspicuous to the naked eye, with the single
exception of that named after Halley: have appeared
but once within the period of human records and
Halley’s Comet only takes 80 days to traverse that
part of its orbit which lies within the orbit of the
earth; the rest of its period of revolution—76
years—is passed outside that boundary, and for
38 years at a time it remains outside the orbit of
Neptune, more than 2,800,000,000 miles from the
sun. The other great comets have only visited our
neighborhood once within our experience.

(2) Comets referred io in Scripture?—The ques-
tion has been raised whether the appearance of
comets is ever referred to in Scripture. Jos, speak-
ing of the signs which preceded the destruction of
Jerus by Titus, says, ‘Thus there was a star resem-
bling a sword which stood over the city, and a comet
that continued a whole year” (BJ, VI, v, 3). The
“star resembling a sword” was doubtless the return
of Halley’s Comet in 66 AD, and the phrase used
by Jos has suggested that it was a stellar phenom-
enon that is referred to in 1 Ch 21 16: ‘The
angel of Jehovah . . . . between earth and heaven,
having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out
over Jerus.”’ But this, and the corresponding
suggestion as to the nature of the flaming sword
that kept the way of the tree of life (Gen 3 24), are
unsupported conjectures not worthy of attention.
The astronomer Pingré thought that the first vision
of Jeremiah of the “rod of an almond tree’ and of
a “boiling caldron” (Jer 1 11.18) had its physical


309.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Astronomy


basis in a return of Halley’s Comet, and other
commentators have thought that cometary appear-
ances were described in the “pillars of smoke’ of
Joel 2 80; but none of these suggestions appear
to have plausibility.

Hl. The Constellations.—The principal achieve-
ment of the science of astronomy in the cents.
during which the books of the OT were written
was the arrangement and naming of the constella-
tions, and there can be no reasonable doubt that the
same system was known to the Hebrews as that
which has been handed down to us through the Gr
astronomers. St. Paul certainly knew the Gr
constellations, for in his sermon on Mars’ Hill
(Acts 17 28) he quoted from that poetical descrip-
tion of them which Aratus the great poet of Cilicia
had written about 270 BC. But these constella-
tions have a much greater antiquity than this, and
it is probable that they were well known to Abra-
ham before he left Ur of the Chaldees. It has
been frequently shown (The Astronomy of the
Bible, 158; Astronomy without a Telescope, 5) that
these constellations themselves supply evidence that
they were designed about 2700 BC. They thus
antedated the time of Abraham by some cents., and
since some of their most characteristic forms are
found upon old Bab ‘boundary stones,’ it is clear
that they were known in the country from whence
he came out.

The direct references to these old constellation-
forms in Scripture are not numerous. One of

the clearest is in Job 26 13, where
1, Nahash, “formed the crooked serpent” (AV)
the is used as the correlative of ‘garnished
“Crooked the heavens’; the great constella-
Serpent” _tion of the writhing Dragon, placed at

the crown of the heavens, being used,
metaphorically, as an expression for all the con-
stellations of the sky. For by its folds it encircles
both the poles, that of the equator and that of the
ecliptic.

The term bdri*h, rendered ‘‘crooked” but better
asin RVm as “fleeing,”’ is applied by Isaiah to ‘“Levi-
athan” (liwydthan: Isa 27 1), properly
a “wreathed” or writhing animal,
twisted in folds, and hence also called
by the prophet ‘ékallathén, “crooked,”
“twisted,” or ‘‘winding”’; a very appropriate desig-
nation for Draco, the great polar Dragon. But the
latter was not the only “‘crooked serpent’’ in the
constellations; there were three others, two of which
were placed with an astronomical significance not
less precise than the coiling of Draco round the
poles. Hydra, the Watersnake, marked out the
original celestial equator for about one-third of its
circumference, and Serpens, the Adder, lay partly
along the celestial equator and then was twisted up
the autumnal colure, and reached the zenith with its
head.

The arrangement of the twelve signs of the zodiac
to mark out the apparent yearly path of the sun,
and of these three serpent-forms to hold their
respective and significant positions in the heavens,
shows that a real progress in astronomy had been
made before the constellations were designed, and
that their places were allotted to these figures on a
definite astronomical plan. ;

A further purpose is shown by the relation of the
three serpents to the neighboring figures, and it is

clear that the history preserved in
3. The Gen 3 was known to the designers
Seed of the of the constellations, and that they
Woman wished to perpetuate its memory by

means of the stellar frescoes. For
the constellations, Scorpio, Ophiuchus and Ser-
pens, show us a man strangling a snake and stand-
ing on a scorpion; the head of the latter he crushes


2. Levia-
than


with one foot, but his other foot is wounded by
its reverted sting. When these three constella-
tions were due 8., that is to say, at midnight in
spring-time, Hercules and Draco were due north,
and presented the picture of a man kneeling on one
knee, and pressing down with his other foot the
head of the great northern serpent or dragon.
During the winter midnight the zodiacal constella-
tion on the meridian was the Virgin, figured as a
woman holding an ear of corn in her hand, while


"Hercules and Draco.


beneath her the immense length of Hydra was
stretched out upon its belly in the attitude of a
snake when fleeing at full speed. These figures
are evidently meant to set forth in picture that
which is expressed in word in Gen 3 14.15, “And
Jehovah God said unto the serpent, Because thou
hast done this, cursed art thou above all cattle,
and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly
shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days
of thy life: and I will put enmity between thee and
the woman, and between thy seed and her seed:
he ae bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his
heel.
Nor is this the only narrative in Genesis which
finds a parallel in the constellations. Among the
southern groups we find a ship Argo
4, The Bow that has grounded on a rock; and
Setin the close to it stands a figure, Centaurus,
Cloud who is apparently slaying an animal,
Lupus, beside an Altar. The cloud
of smoke arising from the Altar is represented by
the Milky Way, and in the midst of the cloud there
is set the Bow of the Archer, Sagitiarius. Here
there seems to be pictured the covenant made with
Noah after he offered his sacrifice when he left the
ark: “I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall
be for a token of a covenant between me and the
earth” (Gen 9 13). Thus the constellations, de-
signed several cents. before the time of Abraham,


Astronomy


TUE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


310


clearly express a knowledge, and appear designed
to preserve a remembrance of the two first promises
made by God to mankind as recorded in the early
chapters of Gen.


There is no need to assume, as some writers have
done, that all the 48 primitive constellations were
of Divine origin, or even that any of them were.
If some of the early astronomers possessed in one
form or another the histories that we have in Gen 3,
8 and 9, it would not be unnatural for them to
attempt to preserve a memorial of them in the
heavens by associating these figures with the stars.

Tt does not follow that all the old constellations
have an analogous significance, or that if they have,
we should now be able to detect it, and a great deal
of ingenuity has been wasted in the attempt to
convert the old 48 constellations into a sort of
gospel in hieroglyphic. Interpretations of this
order were current quite early in Christian times,
for they are denounced at considerable length and
in detail by St. Hippolytus in his Refutation of
All the Heresies, cir 210 AD. Their revival in
recent years is chiefly due to MazzGrath, a series of
papers by the late Miss Frances Rolleston in which
fanciful etymologies were given to the Arab. names
by which the principal stars are known. These
names, for the most part, simply indicate the
places which the stars were severally supposed to
hold in the figures to which they were assigned, and
Miss Rolleston’s derivations for them are quite mis-
leading and unfounded. Nevertheless her results
have been blindly accepted by a number of writers.


ARN Ge a:
a CERRY ’
arene ee


Ophivehils and the Neighboring Constellations

The peculiar arrangement of the serpent forms in
the constellations, and especially the position
allotted to Hydra, extended along the


6. The equator with its head near the spring
Dragon of equinox and its tail near that of
Eclipse autumn, appears to have given rise


to the terms ‘Dragon’s Head” Q,
and ‘‘Dragon’s Tail” 8, for the nodes or points of
intersection of the ecliptic (the apparent path of the
sun) with the celestial equator, and hence for nodes


in general. As eclipses of the sun and moon can
only occur when those bodies are near the nodes
of the moon’s orbit, that is, near the Dragon’s
Head or Tail, the myth seems to have arisen that
such eclipses were due to one or other of the two
great lights being swallowed by a dragon, and a
reference to this myth is found in Job 3 8: “Let
them curse it that curse the day, who are ready
[RVm skilful] to rouse up leviathan.” The persons
referred to are the magicians who pretended to be
able by their incantations to cause an eclipse of the
sun by bringing up the mythical dragon that was
supposed to devour it. Astronomical nomencla-
ture still retains a trace of these old expressions,
for the time taken by the moon to pass from one
node to the same node again is still called a ‘“dra-
conic month,” a ‘month of the dragon.”
If we realize that the Hebrews were quite
familiar with the same constellation figures that
we have inherited through the Greeks,
6. Joseph’s several indirect allusions to them gain
Dream an added meaning. Thus Joseph
dreamed that ‘the sun and the moon
and eleven stars made obeisance”’ to him (Gen 37
9). The twelve constellations of the zodiac are
the twelve among which the sun ‘and moon move,
and thus constitute, as it were, their family. Eleven
of them therefore represented eleven sons of Jacob,
Joseph himself being of course the twelfth. There is
some evidence that the time came when the sug-
gestion of this dream was acted upon to the ex-
tent that some of the tribes adopted certain of
the constellation figures by way of crest or armorial
bearing. In Nu 2 it is stated that each of the
four camps into which the host of Israel was di-
vided had its own standard: “Neither the Mosaic
law nor the OT generally gives us any intimation
as to the form or character of the


7. The standard (deghel). According to rab-
Standards binical tradition, the standard of
of the Judah bore the figure of a lion, that.
Tribes of Reuben the likeness of a man, or of


a man’s head, that of Ephraim the
figure of an ox, and that of Dan the figure of an
eagle; so that the four living creatures united in
the cherubic forms described by Ezekiel were
represented upon these four standards” (Keil and
Delitzsch, Commentary on the Pentateuch, II, 17).
A variant of this tradition gives as the standard
of Reuben, “unstable as water” (Gen 49 4 AV),
a Man and a River, and of Dan, ‘Dan shall
be a serpent in the way” (Gen 49 17), an Eagle
and a Serpent. These four forms are also found
in the constellations in the four quarters of the
heavens. Aquarius, the man with a stream of
water, and Leo were the original zodiacal constel-
lations of the two solstices, Taurus was that of the
spring equinox, and. Aquila and Serpens were close
to the autumnal equinox, the latter being actually
upon the colure.

This distribution of the four cherubic forms in the
four quarters of heaven gives a special significance
to the invocation used by Hezekiah

8. The and the Psalmist, ‘Thou that dwellest
Cherubim between thecherubims” (Isa 37 16 AV;

Ps 80 1 AV). The Shekinah glory
rested indeed between the golden cherubim over
the ark in the Holy of Holies, but “the Most High
dwelleth not in houses made with hands’ (Acts 7
48), and the same cherubic forms were pictured on
the curtains of the heavens. ‘Behold, heaven and
the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee’ (1 K
8 27); ‘Thou dwellest between the cherubim,’ fill-
ing the infinite expanse of the stellar universe.

When Balaam saw “Israel dwelling according to
their tribes; and the Spirit of God came upon him”
(Nu 24 2), it was not unnatural that he should


311


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


allude in his prophecy to the great standards which
he would see floating above the camps, and three

of the four appear to be indicated:
9. Balaam’s the bull of Joseph—He hath as it were
Prophecy the strength we the wild-ox”’; the lion

of Judah—He lay down as a lion and
as a great lion,” AV; and Aquarius, the man
pouring out a stream of water from a pitcher, the
cognizance of Reuben—“Water shall flow from his
buckets” (Nu 24 7.8.9).

In a similar way when the prophets refer to the
enemies of Israel under the figure of dragons or
reptiles, there seems occasionally an indirect refer-
ence to the serpents that represent the powers of
evil in the pictures that have been associated with


East


+ pee ee


North


Astronomy


that the renderings given in RV are substantially
correct.
The word Kimah occurs in three passages, in each
case In conjunction with K*sil (Am 6 8; Job 9 9;
, 38 31). It apparently means a “heap”
10. Plei- or “cluster,” and is hence especially
ades applicable to the beautiful little group
of the Pleiades, the most conspic-
uous star cluster visible to the naked eye. There
is the less uncertainty about this identification since
“kima” is the term generally used in Syr lit. to de-
note the Pleiades.
_ Six stars can now easily be seen by any good
sight, but very keen-sighted persons can detect
more; thus Maestlin, the tutor of Kepler, mapped


West


F South ie


Tuan PLEIADES.


the star groups. Thus in Isa 27 1, ERV, it is
prophesied that the Lord “shall punish leviathan
the swift serpent, and leviathan the crooked serpent;
and He shall slay the dragon that is in the sea’;
the first allusion being appropriate to the attitude
of Hydra, the second to Draco, the third to Cetus.
Whilst the group of constellations, Andromeda,
Cetus and Hridanus, the woman persecuted by a
dragon that casts a river out of its mouth, a river
which flowing down below the horizon appears to
be swallowed up by the earth, would seem to have
furnished St. John with some of the material for the
imagery of Rev 12 in his great vision.

Besides references direct or indirect to the familiar
constellation figures, four special astronomical
terms occur in the Heb of the OT which have given
rise to much discussion. These are Kimah, K°sil,
Mazzarath and ‘Ayish. The tradition of their
significance had been lost before the LXX tr.was
made, but it may be taken as practically certain


11 before the invention of the telescope, and in
recent times Carrington and Denning have counted
14 with the naked eye. Still, 6 is the number
visible to most persons, though there is a curiously
widespread and uniform tradition that they once
“were seven who now are six,” and seven is the
number almost always assigned to them in literature.
Hesiod calls them “the seven sisters, the Virgin
stars,’ and Milton, ‘the seven Atlantic sisters,”
as representing the daughters of Atlas. Many of the
Gr poets, however, regarded them as Peleiddes,
“rock pigeons,” doves, flying from the hunter Orion;
but whether they have been considered as repre-
senting doves or maidens, seven has still been their
traditional number. Possibly one of the group has
declined in brightness in the course of the cents.;
Aleyone would seem to have increased in brightness,
for though now the brightest, it is not one of the
four that figure in Ptolemy’s Catalogue, and if one
has increased in brightness, others may have di-


Astronomy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


312


minished. In the telescope many hundreds of stars
are visible. The photographic plate has registered
thousands and shows the principal stars as envel-
oped and threaded together by delicate streams of
nebulous matter, the stars shining on these fila-
mentous lines of light like pearls upon a string.
This, the appearance of the Pleiades on the best
modern photographs, would be strikingly appro-
priate to the rendering of Job 38 31, which has
been adopted in the RV, ‘“Canst thou bind the
cluster [m “chain”] of the Pleiades?’ and the
question put to Job would be equivalent to asking
him if it were his power that had brought together
the Pleiades and bound them in so compact a
cluster. This rendering which involves the read-
ing “ma‘dnaddoth” is supported by the LXX, and
all the early versions, and hence by nearly all
Orientalists. The reading in MT, ‘“mna'ddhan-
noth,” that is to say, ‘“dainties” or ‘“‘delights,”’ and
adopted in AV, where the word is paraphrased as
“sweet influences,” is however correct, as will be
shown below.

The designation of the group as that of the seven
stars gives a special significance to one of the de-
tails of the vision of St. John: ‘‘I saw seven golden
candlesticks; and in the midst of the candlesticks
one like unto a son of man, .... And He had in
The seven stars
are the angels of the seven churches: and the seven
candlesticks are seven churches” (Rev 1 12.13.16.20).
The seven stars in a single compact cluster shining
as one, furnish an image of the church in its many
diversities and its essential unity.

It may be well to correct here a certain widely
diffused error. When it was discovered that the
sun itself with all its attendant planets was travel-
ing rapidly through space, the German astronomer
Madler hazarded the suggestion that the center
of the sun’s motion, the attracting hody that gov-
erned it, might lie in the group of the Pleiades,
and this suggestion has been quoted in many
popular writings as if it were a demonstrated fact.
It soon became evident that there was no sufficient
ground for the suggestion, and the idea has been
entirely abandoned by astronomers.

The word K*sti as denominating a constella-
tion occurs in the singular number in three passages,
and in each it is placed in antithesis
to Kimah. In a fourth passage (Isa
13 10) it occurs by itself and is in the
plural. There is no doubt as to the significance
of the word in its common use. In 70 cases it is
tr? either ‘fool’ or ‘foolish.’ It does not signify a
weak-minded person, so much as a violent, impious,
self-confident one. As a star name, it is probably
rightly considered to refer to the glorious con-
stellation of Orion. According to an old tradition,
the name of Nimrod, mentioned in Gen 10 10,
as the founder of Babel, Erech, Accad and Calneh,
was given by his courtiers to this most brilliant of
all the constellations, one that by its form some-
what suggests a gigantic warrior armed for the
fight. Until recently it was not found possible to
identify the Nimrod of Scripture with any Bab
monarch until Dr. T. G. Pinches suggested that
“Nimrod” was a deliberate Heb transmutation of
“Marduk,” the name of the great Bab national
hero, and chief deity of their pantheon. ‘The
change was brought about by making the root
triliteral, and the ending uk (ak) in Merodach-
Baladan disappearing first, Marduk appeared as
Marad. This was connected with the root maradh,
‘to be rebellious,’ and the word was still further
mutilated, or rather deformed, by having a ni
attached, assimilating it to a certain extent to
the niph‘al forms of the Heb vbs., and making a
change altogether in conformity with the genius of


11. Orion


the Heb language” (The Old Testament in the Light
of the Historical Records of Assyria and Baby-
lonia, 129-30). In the very brief reference to Nim-
rod in Gen 10 8.9, he is three times overemphati-
cally termed gibbér, ‘‘a mighty (one)” and this has
been the name of this constellation among Syrians,
Arabs and Jews for many centuries. Indeed the
brightest star of the constellation, the one in the
left knee, now generally known as Rigel, is still
occasionally called Algebar, a corruption of Al
Jabbar, though now one of the fainter stars near
it more generally bears that name. The word
Kesil as applied to this constellation would parallel
closely the etymology suggested for the name
“Merodach,” by its transformation into “Nimrod”
as if it were derived from mdradh, ‘‘to rebel.” He
who was to the Babylonians a deified hero, was to
the Hebrews a rebel Titan, bound in chains among
the stars that all might behold his punishment,
and in this aspect the question, ‘“(Canst thou... .
loose the bands of Orion?” (Job 38 31) would be
equivalent to asking ‘‘Canst thou bring down out
of their places the stars that make up this figure
and so, as it were, set the Titan free?”

In Isa 18 10, ks?! occurs in the plur. k*silim,
“for the stars of heaven and the constellations
thereof shall not give their light’; k*stltm being
tr? as “constellations” under the impression that
Orion, the brightest of all the constellations, is here
put for the constellations in general. This is no
doubt correct, but the context shows that the mean-
ing goes farther than this, and that the kestltm
who were to be darkened were the proud and arro-
gant tyrants like Nimrod or Merodach who would,
if possible, climb up into heaven itself, even as
Orion is represented in our star atlases as if trying
to climb up into the zodiac—the home of the sun.

A further astronomical term which occurs in
Job 38 32 is left untr? in both AV and the RV,


viz. the word Mazzaréth. It occurs
12. Maz- only once in the OT, but the similar
zaroth word mazzaloth, tr? “planets” in AV


and RV, occurs in 2 K 23 5. For the
latter see AstroLtocy. In the fifth tablet of the
Bab Epic of Creation, we read:


1. He [Marduk] made the station for the great gods;

2. The stars, their images, as the stars of the zodiac
he fixed.

8. He ordained the year, and into sections [mizrata]
he divided it.

4. For the twelve months he fixed three stars.


Here in the third line, mizrata, cognate with the
Heb mazzGréth, means the sections or divisions of
the year, corresponding to the signs of the zodiac
mentioned in the second line.

Yet again when Job 9 9 is compared with Job
38 31.32, it is seen that the place of the word maz-
za@réth in the latter passage is held by the expression
“the chambers of the south” (hadhré thémdn) in
the earlier. Mazzaroth therefore is equivalent to
“the chambers of the south,’ and clearly signifies
the twelve constellations of the zodiac through
which the sun appears to pass in the course of the
year, poetically likened to the ‘‘inns,’”’ the ‘‘cham-
bers” or ‘“‘tabernacles’”’ in which the sun succes-
sively rests during the several monthly stages of
his annual journey. The same idea was employed
by the Arabs in their “mansions of the moon,” its
“lodging-houses”’ (menazil), which are 28 in number,
since the moon takes 28 days to make the circuit
of the heavens, just as the sun takes 12 months.

The word Mazzaréth therefore represents the
twelve “signs” or, to speak more correctly, the
twelve “constellations” of the zodiac. These two
terms are often used indiscriminately, but there is
a real difference between their significations. The
constellations of the zodiac are the actual groupings


318


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Astronomy


of the stars, lying along the ecliptic, and are quite
irregular in form and length. The signs have no
connection with the actual stars but are imaginary
divisions of the ecliptic, all exactly equal in length,
and they are reckoned from that point in the
heavens where the sun is at the moment that it is
crossing the celestial equator in its northward
motion in springtime. As this point, known to as-
tronomers as ‘‘the first point of Aries,” moves slowly
amongst the stars, taking 25,800 years to complete
a revolution of the heavens, the signs of the zodiac
also move among the stars, and hence, though at
one time each sign bore a rough and general corre-
spondence to the constellation of the same name,
the signs have gradually drawn away from them.
The constellations of the zodiac were designed
about 2700 BC, but the signs—the equal divisions
of the zodiac named from them—cannot have been
adopted earlier than 700 BC, and were probably
even later. For since Aries is the first of the
signs, it is clear that it was the first of the con-
stellations at the time when the equal division of the
zodiac was effected, and 700 BC is the very earliest
date that the constellation Aries can have been so
regarded. Incidentally it may be remarked that
the mention in the Bab story of creation of the
allotment of three stars to each of the sections
(Mizrata) of the year, shows that not only had the
division of the zodiac into 12 equal signs been
effected, but that a further step had been taken,
namely, the division of each sign into 3 equal
parts, later known amongst the Greeks as its
“decans,””
of the Egyp calendar. Whatever, therefore, may
have been the antiquity of the traditions embodied
in it, the actual Bab poem quoted above, so far
from being an early document, as it was at one time
supposed to be, is probably almost as late as the
destruction of Jerus by Nebuchadnezzar.

There are three constellations, natural groupings
of the stars, the Pleiades and Orion and “Charles’s

Wain,” which have always attracted
13. “‘Arc- men’s attention, and we accordingly
turus” find them referred to in the earliest
poems extant. Thus they are the
three groups of the stars most frequently men-
tioned by Homer and Hesiod. The two first
groups, the Pleiades and Orion, are, as we have
seen, indicated by Kimah and K¢sil. We should
therefore naturally expect that the third constella-
tion which we find associated with these in the
Book of Job should be none other than the seven
bright stars in the N., the principal part of the
Great Bear. The Heb name for this third con-
stellation appears in two slightly different forms.
It is ‘ash in Job 9 9, and ‘ayish in Job 38 32, and
in the latter case it is connected with its “sons.”
The last star of Charles’s Wain or the Plough, as the
group is often called among ourselves, still bears
the name Benetnasch, derived from the Arab. name
Benet Na'‘sh, ‘the daughters of the Bier,” by which
the Arabs designated the three stars in the Plough-
handle, while they called the four stars in the body
of the Plough, Na‘sh, “the bier’’ or “litter.” Na‘sh
and its daughters so closely correspond to ‘“ayish
and its sons,” that there can be no reasonable doubt
that the same seven bright stars are intended; so
that the rendering of RV, “Canst thou guide the
Bear with her train?” correctly reproduces the orig-
inal meaning. The Arcturus of the AV is derived
froma Vulg, where it is probably a mistake for Arctos,
that is to say, Ursa Major, the Great Bear.

The antithesis which is presented in Job 38 32
now reveals itself. The Mazzaroth are the twelve
constellations of the zodiac, and of these each one
rules the night for about a month in its turn;
they are each ‘led forth” in its “season.” Each,


corresponding roughly to the 36 decades '


in its turn, is the “chamber,” “tabernacle” or
“resting-place’ of the sun, and they are appro-
priately called ‘chambers of the south,” since it is
especially in the southern sky that each is seen.
In contrast to these are the northern constellations,
those round the pole, of which the Great Bear or
Charles’s Wain is the brightest and best known
At the time of the origin of the constellations, this
group was much nearer the pole of the heavens than
at present, but now as then these stars are not “led
forth,” for they are visible at all hours and during
every night; but they are “guided”; they move
round the pole of the heavens in an unending circle,
as if the wain or chariot were being guided by a
skilful driver.

(1) The ‘‘Scatierers.’’—There is some probability
that in Job 37 9 the same two regions of the
heavens are alluded to: ‘“‘Out of the chamber of
the south cometh the storm, and cold out of the
north.” It will be observed that the complete
expression, “chamber of the south,” is not in the
original, the translators having supplied “‘of the
south” from analogy with Job 9 9. The sirocco
comes then from the region held by the mazzdl,
the “chamber,” or constellation of the zodiac, then
on the meridian. But the cold, the blizzard, comes


Stars of the Plough, as the Winnowing Fan.


from ‘‘the scatterers” (M¢zarim). Who or what
are the scatterers, and why do they represent the
north? The late Professor Schiaparelli suggested
that by a slight difference in the pointing, the word
might be read as mizrayim, “the two winnowing
fans,’ and that this may well have been a native
term for the stars which we now know as the two
Bears, Ursa Major and Minor, emphatically the
northern constellations; the names being given
them from the natural grouping of their chief stars,
just as they are known as the two “‘Dippers” in the
United States, or the two “Ladles’ in China
(Astronomy in the Old Testament,” 67-72).

(2) The ordinances of heaven —The astronomical
antithesis between Mazzaroth, the constellations of
the zodiac (“led forth” each ‘in its season”), and
‘Ayish, “the Bear with her train” (“guided” in its
unceasing revolution round the pole), 1s so complete
and astronomically appropriate, that there is reason
to expect an antithesis as clear and as astronomi-
cally significant between the two clauses of the
preceding verse. But the rendering of RV does
not afford anything of the kind: ‘‘Canst thou bind
the cluster of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of
Orion?” is simply equivalent to the question as to
whether Job could fix these stars in their places in
the sky; and for an inquiry so perfectly general, one
constellation would be no more appropriate than
another. The true rendering must certainly bring
out some difference or at least distinction between
the two constellations or the use that was made
of them. ’ ;

And in the third passage in which Kimah and
Kesil_ are See together an important dis-
tinction is hinted at. The order in Am 6 8 sug-
gests that the Pleiades corresponded in some way
to daybreak, Orion to nightfall: “That maketh
the Pleiades and Orion, and turneth the shadow
of death into the morning, and maketh the day
dark with night.” Sunrise turns ‘‘the shadow of


Astronomy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


314


death into the morning,” and in the progress of
the seasons the analogous change on the higher
scale is effected when Nature revives from the
death of winter in the morning of the year, that is to
say, at the return of spring. And at the time of the
origin of the constellations the Pleiades were the
harbingers of this change at their “cosmical”’ rising,
that is to say, when they rose with the sun at day-
break they brought back the ‘‘delights” of spring-
time.

Similarly sunset makes “the day dark with
night,” and in the progress of the seasons the
analogous change on the higher scale is effected
when the long nights and short days of winter set
in the evening of the year, and all nature is hound
as by iron bands, in cold and frost. And at the
time of the origin of the constellations, the ‘‘acrony~
chal’ rising of Orion, i.e. its rising at nightfall, was
the harbinger of this change; the rigor of winter
formed ‘the bands of Orion.”

These regular changes in the appearings and
positions of the constellations constitute the or-
dinances of the heavens, ordinances which Job
could neither alter for the worse by holding hack
the delights of springtime, or for the better hy
breaking the bonds of winter cold. But these
ordinances were not confined in their effects to
the heavens; their dominion was established on the
earth, which answered by the revival of vegeta-
tion when the Pleiades, then nearly in conjunction
with the sun, appeared for a short time before
sunrise; and by the return of the constraints of
cold and frost when Orion, in opposition to the sun,
rode the sky the whole night long.

The completeness and beauty of the imagery will
now be apparent.

The Pleiades stood for the East, since by their
rising just. before daybreak, they heralded the morn-
ing of the year and the ‘‘delights” of springtime.

Orion stood for the West, since his appearing
just after nightfall heralded the evening of the year,
and the bands of winter cold.

Mazzarath, the twelve constellations of the zodiac,
the ‘‘chambers of the south,” each “led forth” from
the underworld in its own ‘“‘season,” stood for the
South.

And the “Bear with her train,’ ‘“‘gnided”’ in their
unceasing course round the pole, stood for the cir-
cumpolar constellations in the North.

And the movements of them all in a perfect
obedience to the law of God were the ordinances of
heaven; whilst the dominion of them was seen to
he established upon the earth in the constant suc-
cession of the seasons there in unfailing answer to
the changes in the stars above.

These three verses give us a vivid picture of the
work of primitive astronomy. The science was
then in an early stage of development, but it was
a real science, a science of observation, thoroughly
sound so far as it had progressed, and showing
high intelligence on the part of those who pursued
it. We now know that the movement of “the
Bear with her train,” that is, the apparent rotation
of the heavens round the pole, is due to the real
rotation of the earth upon its axis; that the bring-
ing out of “the Mazzardth in their season,” appar-
ently due to the revolution of the sun round the
earth, is due to the real revolution of the earth
round the sun. But this knowledge which has
enabled us to see where the actual movements lie
has not brought us any nearer penetrating the
mystery of those movements. What is the ulti-
mate cause of the rotation of this vast globe, we
know no more than the ancients knew what caused
the heavens to rotate; what causes it to fly through
space 18 miles in every second of time, we know no
more than the ancients knew why the sun appeared


to move among the stars. To us, as to them, it is
the power of God, and the will of God.

It has been supposed by some scholars that the
Book of Job was written during the Captivity in

Babylon, but this supposition is un-
14. The tenable in view of the statement in
Date of the Joh’s Apology that the worship of the
Book of Job heavenly bodies was ‘“‘an iniquity to be

punished by the judges” (Joh 31 26—
28). This could not have been written by Jews in
exile amongst the worshippers of Samas and Sin.
But neither can this hook have been written after
the Return. The meaning of the three terms,
‘Ayish, Kimah and Kesil, had been lost before the
LXX made the rendering of the Heb Scriptures
into Gr, for in Am 6 8 they left Kimah and K°sil
untr?, and they rendered ‘Ayish and K°sil differ-
ently in Job 9 9, and 38 31.32. Before the Cap-
tivity, Kimah and K*sil were plainly in common use,
since Amos uses them as if they were familiar to
his hearers, and as he himself points out, he was not
a man of learning but a simple herdsman. The
obvious and sufficient explanation of the later
ignorance respecting these three terms lies in the
catastrophes of the Assyr and Bab conquests.
Not less significant of their complete loss of the
old Heb astronomy is the alteration which the LXX
made in the Heh text. The ‘‘delights of the Pleia-
des” had evidently no more meaning for them than
they have had for the majority of modern Oriental-
ists, and no douht it seemed a plausible and legiti-
mate emendation to write ma‘dnaddoth, ‘chains,”
instead of ma‘dédhannoth, “delights,”’ so as to bring
about a fancied parallelism with mdsh°khoth, the
“bands” of Orion. But the alteration transforms
a complete, beautiful and symmetrical figure, an
epitome of the astronomical observation of the
time, into a bald tautology. Those critics are there-
fore right who assign the Book of Job and the Isa
13 to the period before the Captivities, and the
three names come to us as indications, not of a
Bab science of astronomy, learned by the Jews dur-
ing their exile, but of a Heb astronomy destroyed
by the unspeakable disaster of the conquest.

Il, Physiography.—It has generally been as-
sumed that the Hebrews considered the earth to be
a vast circular plain, arched over by a solid vault—
“the firmament’’—above which were stored, as if
in cisterns, the “treasuries” (Job 38 22) of the
rain, snow and hail, and some writers have even
attempted to express this supposed conception in
diagrammatic form. One of the best of these
attempts, reproduced below, is given by Schia-
parelli, in his Astronomy in the OT.

But this assumption is in reality based more upon
the ideas prevalent in Europe during the Dark

Ages than upon any actual statements


1. The intheOT. Thesame word (high) used
Circle of in the OT to express the roundness of
the Earth the heavens (Job 22 14) is also used


when the circle of the earth is spoken
of (Isa 40 22), and it is likewise applied to the
deep (Prov 8 27). Now it is obvious that the
heavens are spherical in appearance, and to an
attentive observer it is clear that the surface of the
sea is also rounded. There is therefore no sufficient
warrant for the assumption that the Hebrews must
have regarded the earth as flat.

(1) The earth a sphere—Certain astronomical
relations were recognized very early. The stars
appear as if attached to a globe rotating round the
earth once in 24 hours, and this appearance was
clearly familiar to the author of the Book of Job,
and indeed long before the time of Abraham, since
the formation of the constellations could not have
been effected without such recognition. But the
spherical form of the heavens almost involves a


315


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Astronomy


similar form for the earth, and their apparent
diurnal rotation certainly means that they are not
rigidly connected with the earth, but surround it
on all sides at some distance from it. The earth
therefore must be freely suspended in space, and
so the Book of Job describes it: ‘He stretcheth out
the north over empty space, and hangeth the earth
upon nothing” (Job 26 7).


SCHIAPARELLI'S HEBREW WORLD


The author's cut representing the Hebrew
universe, with his accompanying explanations,
is here reproduced.


B


HEAVEN, THE EARTH, AND THE ABYGSES
According to the writers of the Old Tcstament.- i


Explanatory Key:

ABC = the upper beaven; ADC = the curve of the abyss; AEC = the
plane of the carth and seas; SRS — various parts of the sea, EEE =
various parta of the earth; GUG = the profile of the firmament or
lower heaven; KK = the storehouses of the winds; LL = the store-
houses of the upper waters, of snow, and of hail, M ~ the epace occupled
hy the air, within which the clouds move; NN = the waters of the
great abyss; xxx —~ the fountains of the great abyss; PP = Sheol or
limbo; Q = the lower part of the same, the inferno properly ao called.

From “The Earliest Costoologies." By W. F. Warren.


(2) The north stretched over empty space.— Here
the “north” signifies the northern cirecumpolar con-
stellations and the writer recognized that they
stretch out beyond the utmost confines of the
earth; so that he was not under any impression
that the heavens rested upon the earth, or were
borne up by mountains. The celestial sphere sur-
rounded the earth entirely, but at a distance from
it; between the two there was ‘empty space.”
Some commentators have indeed claimed that
Job 26 10, ‘He hath described a boundary upon
the face of the waters, unto the confines of light and
darkness,’’ is equivalent to a statement that the
circumference of the terrestrial plain extended to
the place where sea and sky met. But no man
of intelligence can, at any time, have supposed that
the sea horizon marked the dividing line between
day and night, and the meaning of the passage is
correctly given in AV, ‘until the day and night come
to an end”; in other words, the waters of the sea
will be confined to their appointed place never again
to overflow the earth so long as the succession of
day and night shall continue (cf Gen 8 22; 9 15).

(8) The corners of the earth—See Harta, CornERS
OF.
erec, “the earth,” is in general the surface of the
earth, the dry land inhabited by man and beast.


Hence “the pillars’ of the earth
2. The (Job 9 6) are the rocks that bear up
Pillars of | that surface, for as has been shown, it
the Earth was quite clear to the author of the


Book of Job, and to the primitive
astronomers, that our world was unsupported in
space. For “Vault of the Earth” see Earru,
VAULT OF. :

(1) The Hebrew conception.—Above the spherical
earth was stretched out the “firmament” (raki)
made on the second day of creation to ‘divide the


waters from the waters’ (Gen 16). To the He-
brews the “firmament” was the apparent void

above, in which clouds float and the
3. The lights of heaven pursue their appointed
Firmament paths. The word réki*', by its etymol-

ogy, suggests an cxpanse, something
stretched, spread or beaten out, as when Isaiah
(40 22) says that the Lord “stretcheth out the
heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a
tent to dwell in.” But the Gr word sterésma, by
which the LXX rendered raz‘, gives the meaning
of a firm and solid structure, and our translators
have carried out this same idea in their Eng. render-
ing of “firmament.”

(2) The Alexandrian conception—In this how-
ever the LXX simply expressed the astronomical
science of their day as accepted in Alexandria,
where the doctrine of a succession of solid crystal-
line spheres, each carrying a planet, held currency.
But in order to express the Heb idea, raki* should
berendered “expanse’’ or “space”; it, corresponds to
the ‘empty space” of Job 26 7. This “expanse”
was appointed to divide “the waters which were
under the expanse, from the waters which were
above the expanse”; and it has been argued from
this that the upper waters must have been re-
garded as being inclosed in a watertight reservoir,
furnished with sluices or floodgates, which could
be opened to allow the rain to fall.

Thus-in the account of the Flood, ‘the windows
of heaven’’ are said ‘to have been opened. But,

*drubbah, “window,” means a network,


4. The or lattice, a form which can never have
Windows been ascribed to a literal floodgate;
of Heaven and in the other passages where “‘the


windows of heaven” are mentioned

the expression is obviously metaphorical (2 K 7
2.19; Isa 24 18; Mal 3 10).

Further the numerous other references to rain

connect it with the clouds, as “I will also command

the clouds that they rain no rain”


6. Rain (Isa 5 6), or in the Song of Deborah,
“The clouds dropped water” (Jgs
5 4; see also Ps 77 17; 147 8; Prov 16 15;


Eccl 12 2). The fantastic idea of solidly built
cisterns in the sky furnished with sluices has no
warrant in Scripture. So far from any such crude
conception, there is a very clear and complete
account of the atmospheric circulation. Elihu
describes the process of evaporation, ‘For he
draweth up the drops of water, which distil in rain
from his vapor, which the skies pour down and

drop upon man abundantly” (Job 36 27.28).
Jeremiah and the Psalmist repeat the descrip-
tion, ‘‘He causeth the vapors to ascend from the
ends of the earth; he maketh ightnings


6. Clouds for the rain, and bringeth forth the
wind out of his treasurics’ (Jer 10
13). By the foreshortening that clouds undergo


in the distance they inevitably appear to form
chiefly on the horizon, ‘‘at the ends of the earth,”
whence they move upward toward the zenith.
Thus God “calleth for the waters of the sea, and
poureth them out upon the face of the earth”
(Am 9 6); and thus ‘‘All the rivers run into the
sea, yet the sea is not full; unto the place whither
the rivers go, thither they go again” (Eccl 1 7).
Other references to the clouds in the Book of Job
reveal not merely observation but acute reflection.
“Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds,
the wondrous works of him who is perfect in
knowledge?” (Job 37 16) indicates a perception
that the clouds float, each in its own place, at its
own level, each perfectly balanced in the thin air.

(1) Meaning of the word—T*hom, “the deep,”
means moving water, and hence the ocean, which is
represented as being essentially one, exactly as we


Astyages
Athaliah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


316


now know it to he by actual exploration—‘“‘Let the
waters under the heavens be gathered together unto
one place’ (Gen 1 9). And the earth
is stretched out “above the waters”
(Ps 136 6; Ps 24 2). That is to
say that the water surface lies lower
than the land surface; and not only so, but, within
the substance of the earth itself, there are sub-
terranean waters which form a kind of ocean under-
ground. Thisalso is called in Ezk 31 4 the ‘‘deep,”
thim; “The waters nourished it, the deep made
it to grow.”’ But in general t*hdm denotes the sea,
as when Pharaoh’s chosen captains were drowned
in the Red Sea, ‘‘The deeps cover them” (Ex 16 5).
Indeed the word appears to be onomatopoetic de-
rived from the ‘‘moaning”’ or “humming” of the sea;
whilst ’ere¢, the “‘earth,” seems intended to represent
the “rattle” of shingle, ‘‘the scream of a madden’d
heach dragged down by the wave.”

(2) The Bab dragon of Chaos—In Gen 1,
t¢hom denotes the primeval waters, and the resem-
blance of the word to Tiamat, the name of the Bah
she-dragon of Chaos, has led some commentators
to ascribe a Bab origin to this ch. It need hardly
he pointed out that if this resemblance proves any
connection between the Heb and Bab accounts of
creation, it proves the Heb to he the original. The
natural object, (¢hdm, the sea, must have preceded
the mythological personification of it.


LireraTturE.—Maunder, Astronomy of the Bible;
Astronomy without a Telescope; Schiaparelli, Astronomy in
the OT; Warren, The Earliest Cosmologies, 1909.


E. W. Maunprr

ASTYAGES, as-ti’a-jés (Aorudyys, Astudgés; or
Astyigas [in Ktesias], or Istuvign, son of Cyaxares I,
king of the Medes 585-550 BC, and predecessor of
Cyrus [Bel ver 1]): His wife was the daughter of
Alyattes, king of Lydia. The daughter of Astyages
(Mandane) married a Persian, Cambyses, and a
son was horn to them who later became Cyrus the
Great. Astyages had given orders to expose the
babe; but Harpagus, on whom the task had been
imposed, gave the child to a herdsman, with in-
structions to kill him. When the boy, who had
been hrought up as his own by the herdsman, ar-
rived at the age of twelve, Astyages discovered that
he was the son of Mandane. The king in wrath
then had the son of Harpagus killed and served to
his father as food. The latter concealed his feelings
of hatred and resentment, and bided his time; and
when the young Cyrus had grown to manhood, he
stirred up the grandson in insurrection against
Astyages, who was defeated and taken prisoner
(Herodotus i.127-30). When Astyages marched
against the Persians, the Medes, under the command
of Harpagus, deserted their king, and sided with
the disappointed Persians; and Cyrus was crowned
king. This account of Herodotus is confirmed by
the Annalistic Tablet of Cyrns (RP, ser. ii, 159).
The dethroned monarch was treated with kindness
by his conqueror. According to Ktesias, a home
was provided for him by Cyrus in Hyrcania.

Astyages was the last of the kings of the Manda
(Media). An exceedingly shrewd man, Deioces hy
name, had founded the kingdom 150 years hefore
(699-646). _Phraortes was the second in line (646—
624), and Cyaxares the third (624-584).

J. E. Harry

ASUNDER, a-sun’dér: This word occurs 22
times in AV, 13 in OT and 9 in the NT. It is
found in combination with break (twice), burst,
cleave (twice), depart, cut (six times), divide (three
times), drive, part, pluck, put (twice), rend, saw.
These are the tr of 9 Heb, and 4 Gr words.

Break asunder (1) (BE 8, parpar): Job, in
reply to Eliphaz, complains about God, “I was at
ease, and he brake me asunder” (Job 16 12). (2)


7. The
Deep


(pI}, nitték): In Ps 2 the kings and rulers, medi-
tating rebellion against Jeh and His anointed, say,
“Let us break their bonds asunder,’ (Ps 2 3).

Burst asunder (Adokw, ldskd): This was the fate
of Judas (Acts 1 18).

Cleave asunder (1) (/P2, nibhka‘): The same
root as of bik‘ah, “a valley.” ‘The ground clave
asunder” and swallowed up Dathan and Abiram
with their households (Nu 16 31). (2) (7B,
pillah): Job complains of God, “He cleaveth my
reins asunder” (Job 16 13).

Cut asunder (1) (YEP, kicgé¢): The Lord “cut
asunder the cords of the wicked” (Ps 129 4). The
Heh word is used of cutting into wires or strips
(Ex 39 3). (2) (973, gadha‘): “to cut off a
branch or cut down a tree.” ‘How is the hammer
of the whole earth [Babylon] cut asunder!” (Jer
50 23). Zechariah ‘cut asunder’ the staff “Beauty,”
signifying the breach of the covenant between
Jeh and His people, and also the staff ‘Bands,”
signifying the breach of the brotherhood between
Judah and Israel (Zee 11 10.14). (3) (8xoropéw,
dichotoméod): The fate of the Unfaithful Steward, lit.
“cut in two’; RVm “severely scourge him” (Mt
24 51; Lk 12 46). See Punisaments.

Depart asunder (adwoxwpl{opat, apochdrizomat):
Paul and Barnabas “departed asunder from one
another” (Acts 15 39 AV); RV “parted asunder.”

Divide asunder (1) (2°12, hibhdil): Usually to
separate, to make a division between. Here the
reference is to the offering of pigeons or turtle-
doves (Lev 117; 6 8). (2) (peptopds, merisméds):
From merizé, ‘to divide.” The noun is abstract,
“the act of dividing.’’ The word of God pierces
“even to the dividing of soul and spirit”’ (He 4 12).

Drive asunder (WE, hiittr): Lit. ‘to cause to
tremble,” then “to loosen.”’ God “drove asunder
the nations” (Hab 8 6).

Part asunder (DT, hipkridh): With prep.
bén, “‘between,’”’ “to separate.’ The chariot and
horses of fire ‘parted asunder’ Elijah and Elisha
(2K 2 11).

Pluck asunder (:arwdw, diaspdd): To bear
asunder, to part forcibly. ‘Chains had been
plucked asunder” hy the demoniac of the Gerasenes
(Mk 5 4 AV); RV “rent asunder.”

Put asunder (xepl{, chérizd): To sever one
from another. See the words of Jesus on divorce
(Mt 19 6; Mk 10 9).

Rend asunder (PA), nibhka‘): The same Heb
word as “cleave asunder.” (1) ‘And No shall be
rent asunder” (Ezk 30 16 AV): RV “broken up.”
(2) RV for AV “plucked asunder’ (Mk 5 4).

Saw asunder (mpl{w, prizd or wplw, prid): The
fate of some on the roll of faith, ‘“They were sawn
asunder’ (He 11 37). See also PunIsHMENTS.

8. F. Hunrer

ASUPPIM, a-sup’im, HOUSE OF ASUPPIM
(D°BONT MD, beth ha-’dsuppim): AVm “gather-
ings’; RV “the storehouses.” In Neh 12 25, AV
renders the same word thresholds (AVm “‘treasuries,
assemblies”). A storehonse most probably at the
oo gate of the temple (1 Ch 26 15.17; Neh


ASUR, as’ur (Acotp, Asotir): RV for Assur in
1 Esd 6 31. Same as Harhur of Ezr 2 51.


ASYLUM, a-si’lum: The custom of fleeing to
specially sacred places to obtain the protection of a
deity is found all over the world (Post, Grundriss,
II, 252 ff). In ancient Israel we meet with it in
two forms—the asylum of the altar and the asylum
of the cities of refuge. The altar at the House of


317


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Astyages
Athaliah


God was a place to which persons in danger fled
for protection (1 IK 1 50; 2 28). It had horns
and must not be confused with the altars of earth
or stone that were used for lay sacrifices. See
Aurar; Sanctuary. Ex 21 14 provides that a
murderer is to be taken from the altar to be put
to death. The law of the cities of refuge proceeds
upon a somewhat different principle. Its objects
are (1) to shield a homicide from the avenger of
blood until trial, and (2) to provide a refuge for
the manslayer who has not been guilty of murder.
There is one reference to the institution in the his-
tory of the kingdom (2 S 14 14). For the legal and
geographical information, see Cities or Rerucs;
Homicipe. Haroup M. WIENER


ASYNCRITUS, a-sin’kri-tus ?Acbvxptros, Astin-
kritos, “incomparable’”’): An unknown Christian at
Rome to whom St. Paul sent an affectionate saluta-
tion (Rom 16 14).


ATAD, 4a'tad (TON, ‘diddh, “a thorn’).
ABEL-MIZRAIM.


See


ATAR, at’ar (Ardp, Aidr; AV Jatal=Ater (Ezr
2 42; Neh 7 45]): Thesons of A. (porters) returned
with Zerubbabel to Jerus (1 Esd 5 28).


ATARAH, at’a-ri, a-ti’ra (VOY, ‘dlarah,
“erown”): One of Jerahmeel’s wives and mother
of Onam (1 Ch 2 26).


ATARGATIS, a-tar’ga-tis (Atapydaris, Atargd-
tis; RV wrongly ATERGATIS): Is stated in 2
Macc 12 26 to have been worshipped at Karnion,
the Ashtaroth-Karnaim of the OT (cf Ant, XII, viii,
4). The name is found on coins of Membij as
MMI ANY , ‘atar-‘atah, where ‘Atar (i.e. Ashtoreth)
is identified with the goddess ‘Atah, whose name is
sometimes written "MY, ‘Ati. ‘Atah or ‘Ati was
also worshipped at Palmyra, and (according to
Melito) in Adiabene. The compound Atargatis,
often corrupted by the Greeks into Derketo, had
her chief temples at Membij (Hierapolis) and Ash-
kelon where she was represented with the body
of a woman and the tail of a fish, fish being sacred to
her. Herodotus made her the Aphrodité Urania
of the Greeks. ‘Ati may have been originally a
Hittite goddess with whom the Assyr Istar (‘Atar)
came afterward to be identified. A. H. Sayce


ATAROTH, at’a-roth, a-ta’roth (INDY , ‘dtaroth,
“crowns,” or “wreaths”; ’Arapé8, Atardth):

(1) A city E. of the Jordan, apparently in the
territory given to Reuben, but built, or fortified,
by the children of Gad (Nu 32 3.34). It is named
along with Dibon, which is identified with Dhibdn.
Eight miles N.E. by N. of Dibon, on the S. of Wady
Zerka Ma‘in, stands Jebel ‘Attdris, in which the
ancient name is preserved. The city is doubtless
represented by Khirbet ‘Aitdris, about 4 miles W.
of the mountain.

(2) A place on the boundary between Ephraim
and Benjamin, toward the W. (Josh 16 2). It
seems to be the same as Ataroth-addar of ver 5
and 18 13. It is probably to be identified with the
modern ed-Ddariyeh S. of nether Bethhoron, and
about 124 miles W. of Jerus. ;

(3) A place on the eastern frontier of Ephraim
(Josh 16 7). This town has not been identified.
Conder thinks it may be identified with et-Triineh
in the Jordan valley, or with Khirbet eee

WING


ATAROTH-ADDAR, at’a-roth-ad’ér (MOY
“IN, ‘atroth ’addar, “crowns of Addar’’). See Ara-
RoTH (2).


ATER, a'tér (WON, 'atér, “bound” [?]): (1) The
ancestor of a family of 98 persons who returned from
Bab captivity with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 16; Neh 7
21). AV has “Ater of Hezekiah”; RV of 1 Esd
6 15 has “Ater of Ezekias,” m, ‘‘Ater of Hezekiah.”
AV has ‘“‘Aterezias.”’

(2) The head of a family of porters who returned
from Babylon to Jerus (Ezr 2 42; Neh 7 45).


ATEREZAIAS, a-tér-é-zi’as (Athp 16 ‘Etenlg,
Atér t6 Hezekiq): Usually found in the abbreviated
form Ater. Head of a Jewish family, which re-
turned with Zerubbabel, under the decree of Cyrus.
Mentioned (Ezr 2 16) as sprung from Hezekiah.
Their number is given as 98. Mentioned again
as found in the register of the genealogies of the
first returned exiles by Nehemiah (7 21). Again
among those who sealed “the sure covenant”
(Neh 10 17). Also found in 1 Esd 5 15, where
the name is given variously as Ater or Aterezaias.
The number of the family, given by Esdras, is 92.


ATERGATIS, a-tér’ga-tis. See ATARGATIS.


ATETA, a-té’ta (AV Teta; A, ’Arnrd, Aiéd, B,
om.): Head of a family of Levites; gate keepers
who returned from the captivity with Zerubbabel
(1 Esd 6 28); called Hatita in Ezr 2 42; Neh 7
45.


ATHACH, a'thak (THY, ‘dthakh, “lodging-place”):
One of the cities of Judah to which David sent
from Ziklag the spoil of the Amalekites (1 S 30 30).
Its site is unknown. Driver, Budde, and Well-
hausen identify it with Ether (Josh 15 42).


ATHAIAH, a-tha’ya (NY, ‘dthdyah=“Jeh is
helper’; ’AGed, Athed, or A®eal, Atheat): He is
designated (Neh 11 4) as a descendant of Judah and
the son of Uzziah. After the return from Babylon,
he dwelt in Jerus. In1 Ch 9 4 his name is given
as Uthai.


ATHALIAH, ath-a-li’a (MSM, ‘dthalyah; mean-
ing uncertain, perhaps, “whom Jeh has afflicted”;
2 K 8 26; 11; 2 Ch 22, 23):

(1) Daughter of Ahab and Jezebel, grand-
daughter of Omri, 6th king of Israel. In her

childhood the political relations of the
1. Relation- two kingdoms of Judah and Israel had,
ship after many years of strife, become
friendly, and she was married to
Jehoram, eldest son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah
(2 K 8 18). .The marriage was one of political
expediency, and is a blot on the memory of Jehosha~
hat.
When Jehoram was 32 years of age, he succeeded
to the throne, and Athaliah became queen of Judah.
She inherited her mother’s strength
2. Athaliah of will, and like her developed a
as Queen fanatical devotion to the cultus of the
Zidonian Baal. FElijah’s blow at the
worship of Baal in Samaria shortly before her ac-
cession to power did nothing to mitigate her zeal.
It probably intensified it. The first recorded act
of Jehoram’s reign is the murder of his six younger
brothers; some princes of the realm, who wer:
known to be favorable to the ancient faith of the
nation, were also destroyed (2 Ch 21 4). There
can be little doubt that these deeds of blood were
supported, and perhaps instigated, by Athaliah, who
was a much stronger character than her husband.

After eight years of royal life, Athaliah became a
widow, and her son, Ahaziah, then 22 years of age
(2 K 8 26; not 42 as in 2 Ch 22 2), ascended his
father’s throne. As queen-mother, Athaliah was
now supreme in the councils of the nation, as well


Athanasian
Athens


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


318


as in the royal palace.’ Within a single year, the
young, king fell (see JEHu), and the only persons
who stood between Athaliah and the


3. Murder throne were her grandchildren. It is


of Her in such moments that ambition, fired
Grand- by fanaticism, sees its opportunity, and
children the massacre of the royal seed was


determined on. This was carried out:
but one of them, Jehoash, a babe, escaped by the
intervention of his aunt, Jehosheba (1 K 11 2;
2 Ch 22 11).
The palace being cleared of its royal occupants,
Athaliah had herself proclaimed sovereign. No
other woman, before or since, sat
4. Her upon the throne of David, and it is a
Usurpation proof of her energy and ability that,
in spite of her sex, she was able to keep
it for six years. From 2 Ch 24 7 we gather that
a portion of the temple of Jeh was pulled down, and
Ee pear used in the structure of a temple of
Baal. :
The high priest at this time was Jehoiada, who
had married the daughter of Athaliah, Jehosheba


(2 Ch 22 11). His promotion to the
5. The primacy led to the undoing of the
Counter- —_—usurper, as Jehoiada proved staunchly,
Revolution if secretly, true to the religion of Jeh.


For six years he and his wife concealed
in their apartments, near the temple, the young
child of Ahaziah. In the seventh year a counter-
revolution was planned. The details are given with
unusual fulness in K and Ch, the writings of which
supplement one another. Thus, when the Chroni-
cler wrote, it had become safe to give the names of
five captains who led the military rising (2 Ch 23 1).
With the Book of K before him, it was not necessary
to do more than extract from the ancient records
such particulars as had not hitherto appeared.
This it is which has chiefly given rise to the charge
of variations in the two narratives. See JEHOASH.

Atthe time of her deposition, Athaliah was resident
in theroyal palace. When roused to a sense of danger
by the acclamations which greeted the
coronation ceremony, she made an at-
tempt to stay the revolt by rushing into
the temple court, alone; her guards,
according to Jos, having been prevented from follow-
ing her (Ant, IX, vii, 3). <A glance sufficed. It
showed her the lad standing on a raised platform
before the temple, holding the Book of the Law
in his hand, and with the crown upon his brow.
Rending her robe and shouting, “Treason! Trea-
son!” she fled. Some were for cutting her down as
she did so, but this was objected to as defiling the
temple with human blood. She was, therefore,
allowed to reach the door of the palace in flight.
Here she fell, smitten by the avenging guards.

Athaliah’s usurpation lasted for six years (2 K
141 3; 121; 2 Ch 22 12). Her Ist year syn-
chronizes with the 1st of Jehu in Israel, and may
be placed 846 BC (some put later). See CHro-
NoLocy oF OT. The statement of 2 K 12 1 is here
understood in the sense that Jehoash began his
public reign in the 7th year of Jehu, and that he
reigned 40 years counting from the time of his
father’s death. A modern parallel is the dating
of all official records and legal documents of the
time of Charles II of England from the death of
Charles I.

The only other reference to Athaliah is that
above alluded to in 2 Ch 24 7, where she is spoken
of as ‘that wicked woman.”
sae A Benjamite who dwelt in Jerus (1 Ch 8


6. Her
Death


(3) Father of Jeshaiah, who returned with Ezra
(8 7); called Gotholias in Apoc (1 Esd 8 33).
W. SuHaw CaLpEcorr


ATHANASIAN, ath-a-na’/zhan, CREED. See


CREED.
ATHARIAS, ath-a-ri‘as. See ATTHARIAS.


ATHARIM, ath’a-rim (O°W9N, ‘dtharim): RV
“The way of Atharim”; AV ‘The way of the spies.”
RV regards Atharim as a place (so LXX). AV
follows Syr and Tg, rendering Atharim asif Tarim=
spies. Dillmann translates ‘‘the caravan path,”
connecting it with Arab. athar, ‘‘a track or foot-


print.”” Here the king of Arad fought against
Israel, taking some captives (Nu 211). See
Horan.


ATHEISM, 4’thé-iz’m (&eos, diheos, ‘without
God” [Eph 2 12]): Ordinarily this word is inter-
preted to mean a denial of the existence of God,
a disbelief in God, the opposite of theism. But
it seems better that we should consider it under
four heads, in order to obtain a clear idea of the
different. meanings in which it has been used.

(1) The classical —In this sense it does not mean
a denial of the existence of a Divine Being, but the
denial of the existence or reality of the god of a
particular nation. Thus the Christians were re-
peatedly charged with atheism, because of their
disbelief in the gods of heathenism. It was not
charged that they did not believe in any god, but
that they denied the existence and reality of the
gods worshipped, and before whom the nation hith-
erto had bowed. This was considered so great a
crime, so dangerous a thing to the nation, that it
was felt to be a just cause for most cruel and deter-
mined persecutions. Socrates’ teaching cast a
shadow on the reality of the existence of the gods,
and this charge was brought against him by his
contemporaries. Cicero also uses the word in this
sense in his charge against Diagoras of Athens.
Indeed, such use of it is common in all classical
literature.

(2) Philosophic.—It is not meant that the
various philosophic systems to which this term is
applied actually deny the existence of a Divine
Being or of a First Cause, but that they are atheistic
in their teaching, and tend to unsettle the faith of
mankind in the existence of God. There is indeed
a belief in a first cause, in force, in motion, in a
certain aggregation of materials producing life,
but the Divine Being as taught by theism is ab-
solutely denied. This is true of the Idealism of
Fichte, of the Ideal Pantheism of Spinoza, the
Natural Pantheism of Schelling, and similar forms
of thought. In applying the word atheism to the
teaching here given, theism does not intend to
assail them as wholly without a belief in a Divine
Being; but it affirms that God is a person, a self-
conscious Being, not merely a first cause or force.
To deny this fundamental affirmation of theism is
to make the teaching atheistic, a denial of that which
is essential to theism (He 11 3).

(3) Dogmatic. —It absolutely denies the existence
of God. It has often been held that this is, in fact,
impossible. Consin has said, “It is impossible,
because the existence of God is implied in every
assertion.” It is true, however, that in all ages there
have been persons who declared themselves ab-
solute atheists. Esp. is this true of the 18thcent—
a period of widespread skepticism—when not a few,
particularly in France, professed themselves atheists.
In many cases, however, it resulted from a loose
use of the word, careless definition, and some-
times from the spirit of boastfulness.

(4) Practical atheism.—It has nothing at all to
do with belief. Indeed it accepts the affirmations
of theism. It has reference wholly to the mode of
life. It is to live as though there was no God.


319


It takes the form often of complete indifference to
the claims of the Divine Being or again of outbro-
ken and defiant wickedness (Ps 14.1). That this
form of atheism is widely prevalent is well known.
It is accompanied in many cases with some form of
unbelief or prejudice or false opinion of the church
or Christianity. Dogmatic atheism is no longer a
menace or even a hindrance to the progress of
Christianity, but practical atheism is widespread
in its influence and a dangerous element in our
modern life (cf Isa 311; Jer 2 13.17.18; 18
13-15). Whatever the form, whether it be that of
religious agnosticism, denying that we can know
that God exists, or critical atheism, denying that
the evidence to prove His existence is sufficient, or
dogmatic, or practical atheism, it is always a sys-
tem of negation and as such tears down and de-
stroys. It destroys the faith upon which all human
relations are built. Since there is no God there is
no right nor wrong, and human action is neither
good nor bad, but convenient or inconvenient. It


leaves human society without a basis for order and
human government without foundation (Rom 1
10-32). All is hopeless, all is wretchedness, all is
tending to the grave and the grave ends all. :

Arguments against atheism may be summarized
as follows: (1) It is contrary to reason. History
has shown again and again how impossible it is to
bring the mind to rest In this doctrine. Although
Buddhism is atheistic in its teaching, idolatry 1s
widespread in the lands where it prevails. While
the Positive Philosophy of Auguste Comte was
based on a denial of the existence of God, his attempt
to found the new religion of humanity with rites
and ceremonies of worship reveals how the longing
for worship cannot be suppressed. It is a revela-
tion of the fact so often seen in the history of hu-
man thought, that the mind cannot rest in the
tenets of atheism. :

(2) It is contrary to human experience. All
history testifies that there are deep religious in-
stincts within the human breast. To regard these
as deceptive and unreasonable would itself be utterly
unreasonable and unscientific. But the fact of
such, spiritual longing implies also that there is a


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Athanasian
Athens


Being who is responsive to and can satisfy the cry
of the heart (He 11 6). In his Bampton Lectures
Reville has said on this subject: “1t would be irra-
tional in the last degree to lay down the existence
of such a need and such a tendency, and yet believe
that the need corresponds to nothing, that the
tendency has no goal.’

(3) It fails to account for the evidence of design
in the universe. See CosmMouoey.

(4) It fails to account for the existence of man
and the world in general. Here is the universe:
how did it come to be? Here is man: how is he to
be accounted for? To these and like questions,
atheism and atheistic philosophy have no adequate
answer to give. See also CosmoLocy; Creation;
Gop. Jacon W. Kapp


ATHENIANS, a-thé‘ni-ans (?A@nvator, Athénaioi):
Inhabitants of Athens. Luke has a remark on their
curiosity and their delight in novelty (Acts 17 21).
See ATHENS.


ACROPOLIS AND AREOPAGUS, ATHENS.


ATHENOBIUS, ath-e-no’bi-us (AbyvéBtos, Athe-
nébios): A “friend’’ of Antiochus VII (Sidetes),
who was sent to Jerus by the king to protest against
the occupation of Joppa and Gazara, and the citadel
Jerus. A demand was made on Simon Maccabaeus
to give up all the places he had taken or pay 1,000
talents in silver. Birch declined to pay more than
100 talents, and Athenobius returned to Antiochus
from his fruitless mission (1 Mace 15 28-36).


ATHENS, ath’enz (AOfvar, Athénat): In an-
tiquity the celebrated metropolis of Attica, now
the capital of Greece. Two long walls, 250 ft.
apart, connected the city with the harbor (Peiraeus).
In Acts 17 we are told what Paul did during his
single sojourn in this famous city. He came up
from the sea by the new road (N. of the ancient)
along which were altars of unknown gods, entered
the city from the W., and passed by the Ceramicus
(burial-ground), which can be seen to this day, the
“Theseum,” the best preserved of all Gr temples,
and on to the Agora (Market-Place), just N. of the
Acropolis, a steep hill, 200 ft. high, in the center
of the city. Cimon began and Pericles completed


Athlai
Atonement


the work of transforming this citadel into a sanctu-
ary for the patron goddess of the city. The mag-
nificent gateway (Propylaea), of which the Athenians
were justly proud, was built by Mnesicles (437-
432 BC). A monumental bronze statue by Phidias
stood on the left, as one emerged on the plateau,
and the mighty Parthenon a little farther on, to the
right. Inthis temple was the famous gold and ivory
statue of Athena. The eastern pediment contained
sculptures representing the birth of the goddess
(Elgin Marbles, now in the British Museum),
the western depicting her contest with Poseidon
for supremacy over Attica. This, the most cele-
brated edifice, architecturally, in all history, was
partially destroyed by the Venetiansin 1687. Other
temples on the Acropolis are the Erechtheum and
the “‘Wingless Victory.” In the city the streets
were exceedingly narrow and crooked. The wider


Temple of J ‘upiter at Athens.


avenues were called plateiai (wdareiat), whence
Eng. “place,” Spanish ‘‘plaza.”’ The roofs of the
houses were flat. In and around the Agora were
many porticoes (stoai). In the Stoa Poecile
(“Painted Portico’), whose walls were covered with
historical paintings, Paul met with the successors
of Zeno, the Stoics, with whom he disputed daily.
In this vicinity also was the Senate Chamber for
the Council of Five Hundred, and the Court of the
Areopagus, whither Socrates came in 399 BC to
face his accusers, and where Paul, five cents. later,
preached to the Athenians the unknown God. In
this neighborhood also were the Tower of the Winds
and the water-clock, which must have attracted
Paul’s attention, as they attract our attention today.

The apostle disputed in the synagogue with the
Jews (Acts 17 17), and a slab found at the foot of
Mount Hymettus (a range to the E. of the city,
3,000 ft. high), with the inscription airy % rt\y
Tod Kuplov, Sixaior eloededoovrar év dutq (Ps 118 20),
was once thought to indicate the site, but is now
believed to date from the 3d or 4th cent. Slabs
bearing Jewish inscriptions have been found in the
city itself.

The population of Athens was at least a quarter
of a million. The oldest inhabitants were Pelasgi-
ans. Cecrops, the first traditional king, came from
Egypt in 1556 BC, and by marrying the daughter
of Actaeon, obtained the sovereignty. The first
king was Erechtheus. Theseus united the twelve


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


320


communities of Attica and made Athens the capital.
After the death of Codrus in 1068 BC, the governing
power was intrusted to an archon who held office
for life. In 753 the term of office was limited to
ten years. In 683 nine archons were chosen for a
term of one year. Draco’s laws, “written in blood,”
were made in 620. Solon was chosen archon in
594 and gave the state a constitution. The tyrant
Pisistratus was in control permanently from 541
to 527; his son Hipparchus was assassinated in
514. Clisthenes changed the constitution and in-
troduced the practice of ostracism. In 490 the
Athenians defeated the Persians at Marathon,
and again in 480 at Salamis. In 476 Aristides
organized the great Athenian Confederacy. After
his death Conon became the leader of the conserva-
tive party; and when the general Cimon was killed,
Pericles became the Jeader of the people. In 431
the Peloponnesian War broke out and continued
till 404, when Athens succumbed to Sparta. An
oligarchical government was set up with Critias
and Theramenes at the head. War broke out
again but peace was restored by the pact of Antal-
cidas (887 BC). In the Sacred War (357-855)
Athens exhausted her strength. When Philip of
Macedon began to interfere in Gr affairs, Athens
could neither resolve on war measures (to which
the oratory of Demosthenes incited her), nor make
terms with Philip. Finally, she joined Thebes
in making armed resistance, but in spite of her
heroic efforts at Chaeronea, she suffered defeat
(388). Philip was murdered in 336, and Alexander
the Great became master. After the subjugation
of Greece by the Romans, Athens was placed under
the supervision of the governor of Macedonia,
but was granted local independence in recognition
of her great history. As the seat of Gr art and
science, Athens played an important réle even
under Rom sway—she became the university city
of the Rom world, and from her radiated spiritual
light and intellectual energy to Tarsus, Antioch
and Alexandria. Philo, the Jew, declares that
the Athenians were ‘EA\jvwy étviepxéoraro: Sidvoway
(‘keenest in intellect’) and adds that Athens was
to Greece what the pupil is to the eye, or reason
to the soul. Although the city had lost her real
independence, the people retained their old _char-
acteristics: they were still interested in art, litera-
ture and philosophy. Paul may possibly have
attended the theater of Dionysus (under the S.E.
cliff of the Acropolis) and witnessed a play of the
Gr poets, such as Euripides or Menander. Many
gifts were received from foreign monarchs by
Athens. Attalus I of Pergamum endowed the
Academy, Eumenes added a splendid Stoa to the
theater and Antiochus Epiphanes began the Olym-
peium (15 columns of which are still standing),
the massive sub-basement of which had been con-
structed by Pisistratus. Athens became a favorite
residence for foreign writers who cultivated his-
tory, geography and literature. Horace, Brutus
and Cassius sojourned in the city for some time.
Jos declares that the Athenians were the most
god-fearing of the Greeks (edoeBeordrous rv ‘EXA}-
pov), Cf Livy xlv.27.

Literaturse.—See Wordsworth, Athens and Attica;
Butler, Story of Athens; Ernest Gardner, Ancient Athens;
Tucker, Life in Ancient Athens; A. Mommsen, Athenae
Christianae; Conyheare and Howson, Life and Epistles
of St. Paul, ch x; Gregorovius, Stadt Athenim Mittelalter;
Leake, Grote, Thirlwall, Curtius, Wachsmuth, Holm,
and Pausanias’ Attica, recently edited by Carroll (Ginn
& Co.), or in the large work of Frazer.

J. E. Harry

ATHLAI, ath’la-i Cony , ‘athlay, “afflicted” [?]):
A Jew, the son of Bebai, who was influenced by
Ezra to put away his wife (Ezr 10 28).


ATIPHA, at’i-fa. See HatipHa.


321


AT ONE (els elpqvny, eis eirénén, ‘at one,’’ “at
peace’’): “Set them at one again” (Acts 7 26), the
reconciliation of persons at variance. From thisadv.
we have the words “atone” and “atonement.”


ATONEMENT, a-ton’ment: Translates "2?,
kaphar; NOT), hata’; OX, rdcah, the last employed
only of human relations (1 S 29 4); translates the
following Gr stems hilas-, simple and compounded
with various preps.; allag- in composition only,
but with numerous preps. and even two at a time,
e.g. Mt 6 24; lip- rarely (Dnl 9 24).

I. Terms Employed.—The root meanings of the
Heb words, taking them in the order cited above,

are, to ‘“‘cover,’ hence expiate, con-
1. Heb and done, cancel, placate; to “offer,” or
Gr Words “receive a sin offering,” hence make

atonement, appease, propitiate; ‘‘ef-
fect reconciliation,” i.e. by some conduct, or course
of action. Of the Gr words the meanings, in order,
are “to be,” or “cause to be, friendly”; “to render
other,’”’ hence to restore; ‘‘to leave” and with prep.
to leave off, i.e. enmity, or evil, etc; “to render
holy,” “to set apart for’; hence of the Deity, to
appropriate or accept for Himself.

It is obvious that the Eng. word, Atonement,
does not correspond etymologically with any Heb

or Gr word which it translates. Fur-
2. The Eng. thermore, the Gr words in both LXX
Word and NT do not correspond exactly to

the Heb words; especially is it true that
the root idea of the most frequently employed Heb
word, “cover,” is not found in any of the Gr words
employed. These remarks apply to both vbs. and
substs. The Eng. word is derived from the phrase
“at one,’ and signifies, etymologically, harmony
of relationship or unity of life, etc. It is a rare
instance of an AS theological term; and like all
purely Eng. terms employed in theology, takes its
meaning, not from its origin, but from the theologi-
cal content of the thinking of the Continental and
Lat-speaking Schoolmen who employed such Eng.
terms as seemed most nearly to convey to the
hearers and readers their ideas. Not only was no
effort made to convey the original Heb and Gr
meanings by means of Eng. words, but no effort
was made toward uniformity in tr of Heb and Gr
words by their Eng. equivalents.

It is at once clear that no mere word-study can
determine the Bible teaching concerning atonement.

Even when first employed for express-


3. Notto ing Heb and Christian thought, these
Be Settled terms, like all other religious terms,
by Lexicon already had a content that had grown
Merely up with their use, and it is by no


means easy to tell how far heathen
conceptions might be imported into our theology
by a rigidly etymological study of terms employed.
In any case such a study could only yield a dic-
tionary of terms, whereas what we seek is a body
of teaching, a circle of ideas, whatever words and
phrases, or combinations of words and phrases,

have been employed to express the teaching.
There is even greater danger of making the study
of the Atonement a study in dogmatic theology.
The frequent employment of the


4, Not expression ‘the Atonement” shows
Chieflya this tendency. The work of Christ in
Study in reconciling the world to God has occu-
Theology pied so central a place in Christian


dogmatics that the very term atone-
ment has come to have a theological rather than a
practical atmosphere, and it is by no means easy
for the student, or even for the seeker after the
saving relation with God, to pass beyond the
accumulated interpretation of the Atonement and
learn of atonement.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Athlai
Atonement


The history of the explanation of the Atonement
and the terms of preaching atonement cannot, of


course, be ignored. Nor can the
5. Notes _ original meaning of the terms employed
on Use of and the manner of their use be neg-
Terms lected. There are significant features


in the use of terms, and we have to
take account of the history of interpretation. Only
we must not bind ourselves nor the word of God in
such forms.

(1) The most frequently employed Heb word,
kaphar, is found in the Prophets only in the priestly
section (Ezk 45 15.20; Dnl 9 24) where EV has
“make reconciliation,” m, ‘purge away.” Further-
more it is not found in Dt, which is the prophetic
book of the Pent (Hex). This indicates that it is
an essentially priestly conception. The same term
is frequently tr¢ by “reconcile,” construed as equiva-
lent to “make atonement” (Lev 6 30; 8 15; 16 20;
18 29 4; Ezk 46 15.20; Dnl 9 24). In this latter
sense it connects itself with hata’. In2 Ch 29 24
both words are used: the priests make a sin offering
(hata’) to effect an atonement (kaphar). But the
first word is frequently used by metonymy to in-
clude, at least suggestively, the end in view, the
reconciliation; and, on the other hand, the latter
word is so used as to involve, also, doing that by
which atonement is realized.

(2) Of the Gr words employed hildskesthai
means ‘‘to make propitious” (He 2 17; Lev 6 30;
16 20; Ezk 465 20); alldttein, used however only
in composition with preps., means ‘‘to render
other,” “to restore’ to another (former?) condition
of harmony (cf Mt 6 24=‘“‘to be reconciled” to a
fellow-man as a condition of making an acceptable
sacrifice to God).

(3) In the Eng. NT the word “atonement” is
found only at Rom 6 11 and the ARV changes this
to “reconciliation.” While in strict etymology
this word need signify only the active or conscious
exercise of unity of life or harmony of relations, the
causative idea probably belongs to the original use
of the term, as it certainly is present in all current
Christian use of the term. As employed in Chris-
tian theology, both practical and technical, the
term includes with more or less distinctness: (a)
the fact of union with God, and this always looked
upon as (b) a broken union to be restored or an
ideal union to be realized, (c) the procuring cause
of atonement, variously defined, (d) the crucial
act wherein the union is effected, the work of God
and the response of the soul in which the union
becomes actual. Inasmuch as the reconciliation
between man and God is always conceived of as
effected through Jesus Christ (2 Cor 6 18-21)
the expression, “the Atonement of Christ,” is one
of the most frequent in Christian theology. Ques-
tions and controversies have turned mainly on the
procuring cause of atonement, (c) above, and at
this point have arisen the various ‘theories of the
Atonement.”

HI. Bible Teaching concerning Atonement in
General.—The Atonement of Christ must be inter-
preted in connection with the conception of atone-
ment in general in the Scriptures. This idea of
atonement is, moreover, part of the general circle
of fundamental ideas of the religion of Jeh and
Jesus. Theories of the Atonement root them-
selves in conceptions of the nature and character
of God, His holiness, love, grace, mercy, ete; of
man, his nature, disposition and capacities; of sin
and guilt.

The basal conception for the Bible doctrine of
atonement is the assumption that God and man
are ideally one in life and interests, so far as man’s
true life and interest may be conceived as cor-
responding with those of God. Hence it is every-


Atonement


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


322


where assumed that God and man should be in
all respects in harmonious relations, at-one. Such

is the ideal picture of Adam and Eve
1. Primary in Eden. Such is the assumption in
Assumption the parable of the Prodigal Son; man
of Unity of ought to be at home with God, at
God and tare in the Father’s house (Lk 15).
Man uch also is the ideal of Jesus as

seen esp. in Jn 14-17; cf particularly
17 21 ff; cf also Eph 2 11-22; 1 Cor 15 28.
This is quite possibly the underlying idea of all
those offermgs in which the priests—God’s repre-
sentatives—and the people joined in eating at a
common meal parts of what had been presented to
God. The prohibition of the use of blood in food
or drink is grounded on the statement that the life
is in the blood (Lev 17 10f) or is the blood (Gen
94; Dt 12 23). Blood was used in the con-
secration of tabernacle, temple, vessels, altars,
priests; all things and persons set apart for Jeh.
Then blood was required in offerings made to atone
for sin and uncleanness. The reason for all this
is not easy to see; but if we seek an explanation
that will account for all the facts on a single prin-
ciple, shall we not find it in the idea that in the life-
principle of the blood God’s own life was present?
Through this life from God all living beings shared
God’s life. The blood passing out of any living
being must therefore return to God and not be
consumed. In sprinkling blood, the life-element,
or certainly the life-ssymbol, over persons and
things set apart for God they were, so to say, visibly
taken up into the life of God, and His life extend-
ing over them made them essentially of His own
person. Finally the blood of sacrifices was the
returning to God of the life of the man for whom
the beasts stood. And this blood was not burned
with the dead sacrifice but poured out beside the
holy altar. The now dead sin offering was burned,
but the blood, the life, returned to God. In peace-
offerings of various sorts there was the common
meal in which the common life was typified.

In the claim of the first-fruits of all crops, of
all flocks and of all increase, God emphasized the
common life in production; asserted His claim to
the total life of His people and their products. God
claimed the lives of all as belonging essentially to
Himself and a man must recognize this by paying
a ransom price (Ex 30 12). This did not purchase
for the man a right to his own life in separation
from God, for it was in no sense an equivalent in
value to the man’s time. It the rather committed
the man to living the common life with God, without
which recognition the man was not fit to live at all.
And the use of this recognition-money by the priests
in the temple was regarded as placing the man who
paid his money in a sort of continuous worshipful
ce in the tabernacle (or temple) itself (Ex 30
11-16).

In both OT and NT the assumption of unity
between God and man stands over against the con-

trasted fact that there is a radical
2. The breach in this unity. This breach is
Breachin recognized in all God’s relations to
the Unity men; and even when healed it is

always subject to new failures which
must be provided for, by the daily oblations in the
OT, by the continuous intercession of the Christ
(He 7 25; 9 24) in the NT. Even when there is
no conscious breach, man is taught to recognize
that it may exist and he must avail himself of the
appointed means for its healing, e.g. daily sacrifices.
This breach is universally attributed to some
behavior on man’s part. This may be moral or
ceremonial uncleanness on man’s part. He may
have broken with God fundamentally in character or


conduct and so by committing sin have incurred
ad


guilt; or he may have neglected the fitting recog-
nition that his life is in common with God and so
by his disregard have incurred uncleanness. After
the first breach between God and man it is always
necessary that, man shall approach God on the
assumption that this breach needs healing, and so
always come with an offering. In human nature
the sin breach is rooted and universal (Rom 3 9-19;
6 12-14).

N eae and various means were employed for

expressing this essential unity of life, for restoring
jt since it was broken off in sin, and
3. Means for maintaining it. These means
for Express- were primarily spiritual and ethical
ing, Restor- but made extensive use of material
ing and substances, physical acts and sym-
Maintaining bolical ceremontals; and these tended
always to obscure and supplant the
spiritual and ethical qualities which it was their
function to exhibit. The prophet came to the
rescue of the spiritual and ethical and reached his
highest insight and function in the doctrine of the
Suffering Servant of Jeh through whom God was
to be united with a redeemed race (cf among many
passages, Isa 49 1-7; 66 18 ff; Ps 22 27 ff).

Atonement is conceived in both OT and NT as
partly personal and partly social, extending to the
universal conception. The acts and attitudes by
which it is procured, restored and maintained are
partly those of the individual alone (Ps 51),
partly those in which the individual secures the
assistance of the priest or the priestly body, and
partly such as the priest performs for the whole
people on his own account. This involves the dis-
tinction that in Israel atonement was both personal
and social, as also were both sin and uncleanness.
Atonement was made for the group by the priest
without specific participation by the people al-
though they were, originally at least, to take cog-
nizance of the fact and at the time. At all the
great feasts, especially upon the Day or ATONE-
MENT (q.v.) the whole group was receptively to take
ee part in the work of atonement (Nu 29

—11),

The various sacrifices and offerings by means of
which atonement was effected in the life and wor-
ship of Israel will be found to be discussed under
the proper words and are to be spoken of here only:
summarily. The series of offerings, guilt-, burnt-,
sin-, peace-offerings, reveal a sense of the breach
with God, a conviction of the sin making the
breach and an ethical appreciation of the holiness
of God entirely unique among religions of ancient
or modern times, and this fact must never be over-
looked in interpreting the NT Christian doctrine
of the Atonement. In the OT there are sins and
sinful circumstances for which no atonement is
possible. Many passages, indeed, almost seem to
provide against atonement for any voluntary
wrongdoing (e.g. Lev 4 2.13.22.27; 6 14 ff). This
is, no doubt, an extreme interpretation, out of har-
mony with the general spirit of the OT, but it does
show how seriously sin ought to be taken under
the OT régime. Wo atonement for murder could
make possible the residence of the murderer again
in that section of the land where the murder was
done (Nu 365 33), although the land was not by
the murder rendered unfit for occupation by others.
When Israel sinned in making the golden calf, God
refused to accept any atonement (Ex 32 20 ff)
until there had been a great loss of life from among
the sinners. No repentance could find atonement
for the refusal to follow Jeh’s lead at Kadesh-
barnea (Nu 14 20-25), and complete atonement was
effected only when al! the unbelieving generation
had died in the wilderness (Nu 26 65; 32 10 ff);
le. ho atonement was possible, but the people died


323


in that sin, outside the Land of Promise, although
the sin was not allowed to cut off finally from Jeh
(Nu 14 29f).

Permanent uncleanness or confirmed disease of
an unclean sort caused permanent separation from
the temple and the people of Jeh (e.g. Lev 7 20f),
and every uncleanness must be properly removed
(Lev 5 26; 17 15; 22 2-8; Dt 23 10f). A house
in which an unclean disease was found must be
cleansed—have atonement made for it (Lev 14
53), and in extreme cases must be utterly destroyed
(Lev 14 48 ff).

After childbirth (Lev 12 7 f) and in all cases of
hemorrhage (cf Lev 15 30) atonement must be
effected by prescribed offerings, a loss, diminution,
or pollution of blood, wherein is the life, having
been suffered. All this elaborate application of the
principle of atonement shows the comprehensive-
ness with which it was sought by the religious
teachers to impress the people with the unity of all
life in the perfectly holy and majestic God whom they
were called upon toserve. Not only must the priests
be clean who bear the vessels of the Lord (Isa 52 11),
but all the people must be clean also from all defile-
ment of flesh and spirit, seeking perfect holiness in
the fear of their God (cf 2 Cor 7 1).

HI. The Atonement of Jesus Christ.—All the
symbols, doctrine and examples of atonement in

the OT among the Hebrews find their
1. Prepara- counterpart, fulfilment and complete
tion for NT explanation in the new covenant in
Doctrine the blood of Jesus Christ (Mt 26 28;

He 12 24). By interpreting the inner
spirit of the sacrificial system, by insisting on the
unity and holiness of God, by passionate pleas for
purity in the people, and especially by teaching the
principle of vicarious suffering for sin, the Prophets
laid the foundation in thought-forms and in religious
atmosphere for such a doctrine of atonement as is
presented in the life and teaching of Jesus and as
is unfolded in the teaching of His apostles.

The personal, parabolic sufferings of Hosea, the
remarkable elaboration of the redemption of a
spiritual Israel through a Suffering Servant of
Jeh and the extension of that redemption to all
mankind as presented in Isa 40-66, and the same
element in such psalms as Ps 22, constitute a key
to the understanding of the work of the Christ
that unifies the entire revelation of God’s righteous-
ness in passing over human sins (Rom 3 24f).
Yet it is remarkable that such a conception of the
way of atonement was as far as possihle from the
general and average Jewish mind when Jesus came.
In no sense can the NT doctrine of the Atonement
be said to be the product of the thought and spirit
of the times. :

However much theologians may disagree as to
the rationale of the Atonement, there is, as there

can be, no question that Jesus and all
2. The One His interpreters in the NT represent
Clear Fact the Atonement between God and

men as somehow accomplished through
Jesus Christ. It is also an agreed fact in exegesis
that Jesus and His apostles understood His death
to be radically connected with this Atonement.

(1) Jesus Himself teaches that He has come to
reveal the Father (Jn 14 9), to recover the lost
(Lk 19 10), to give life to men (Jn 6 33; 10 10),
to disclose and establish the kingdom of heaven (or
of God), gathering a few faithful followers through
whom His work will be perpetuated (Jn 17 2 ff;
Mt 16 13 ff); that salvation, personal and social,
is dependent upon His person (Jn 6 53 ff; 14 6).
He cannot give full teaching concerning His death
but He does clearly connect His sufferings with the
salvation He seeks to give. He shows in Lk 4
16 and 22 37 that He understands Isa 52-53


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Atonement


as realized in Himself; He is giving Himself (and
His blood) a ransom for men (Mt 20 28; 26 26 ff;
ef 1 Cor 11 28 ff). He was not a mere martyr
but gave Himself up willingly, and voluntarily
(Jn 10 17f; Gal 2 20), in accordance with the
purpose of God (Acts 2 23), as the Redeemer of the
world, and expected that by His lifting up all men
would be drawn to Him (Jn 12 31-33). It is
ossible to explain the attention which the Evange-
ists give to the death of Jesus only by supposing
that they are reflecting the importance which they
recall Jesus Himself to have attached to His death.

(2) All the NT writers agree in making Jesus the
center of their idea of the way of salvation and that
His death is an essential element in His saving
power. This they do by combining OT teaching
with the facts of the life and death of the Lord,
confirming their conclusion by appeal to the Resur-
rection. Paul represents himself as holding the
common doctrine of Christianity at the time, and
from the beginning, when in 1 Cor 15 3f he sums
up his teaching that salvation is secured through the
death and resurrection of Jesus according to the
Scriptures. Elsewhere (Eph 2 16.18; 1 Tim 2 5;
ef Acts 4 12) in all his writings he emphasizes his
belief that Jesus Christ is the one Mediator between
God and man, by the blood of His cross (Col 1 20;
1 Cor 2 2), removing the sin barrier between God
and men. Peter, during the life of Jesus so full of
the current Jewish notion that God accepted the Jews
de facto, in his later ministry makes Jesus in His
death the one way to God (Acts 4 12; 1 Pet 1
2.18.19; 2 21.24; 3 18).

John has this element so prominent in his Gospel
that radical critical opinion questions its author-
ship partly on that account, while the epistles of
Jn and the Revelation are, on the same ground,
attributed to later Gr thought (cf 1 Jn 1 7;
22; 35; 410; Rev 15; 5 9). The Epistle to
the He finds in Jesus the fulfilment and extension of
all the sacrificial system of Judaism and holds that
the shedding of blood seems essential to the very
idea of remission of sins (9 22; cf217; 7 261;
9 24-28).

When we come to systematize the teaching con-
cerning the Atonement we find, as in all doctrine,

that definite system is not offered us
3. How in the NT, but all system, if it is to
Shall We have any value for Christianity, must
Understand find its materials and principles in the
the NT. Proceeding in this way some
Atonement? features may be stated positively and

finally, while others must be presented
INerOeeayely recognizing that interpretations may

er.

(1) An initial consideration is that the Atonement
originates with God who ‘was in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself”? (2 Cor 5 19), and whose
love gave Jesus to redeem sinful men (Jn 3 16;
Rom 6 8, etc). In all atonement in OT and NT
the initiative is of God who not only devises and
reveals the way to reconciliation, but by means of
angels, prophets, priests and ultimately His only
begotten Son applies the means of atonement and

ersuades men to accept the proffered reconciliation.
Nothing in the speculation concerning the Atone-
ment can be more false to its true nature than making
a breach between God and His Christ in their
attitude toward sinful men.

(2) It follows that atonement is fundamental in
the nature of God in His relations to men, and that
redemption is in the heart of God’s dealing in his-
tory. The “Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world” (Rev 18 8 AV and ERV; cf 5 5-7) is the
interpreter of the seven-sealed book of God’s provi-
dence in history. In Jesus we behold the Lamb of.
God taking away the sin of the world (Jn 1 29).


Atonement
Atonement, D. o


¢ THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


324


(3) The question will arise in the analysis of the
doctrine: How does the death of Christ save us?
No specific answer has ever been generally satis-
factory. We have numerous theories of the Atone-
ment. We have already intimated that the answer
to this question will depend upon our idea of the
nature of God, the nature of sin, the content of
salvation, the nature of man, and our idea of Satan
and evil spirits. We ought at once to dismiss all
merely quantitative and commercial conceptions
of exchange of merit. There is no longer any
question that the doctrines of imputation, both of
Adam’s sin and of Christ’s righteousness, were
overwrought and applied by the early theologians
with a fatal exclusiveness, without warrant in the
Word of God. On the other hand no theory can hold
much weight that presupposes that sin is a thing of
light consequence in the nature of man and in the
economy of God. Unless one is prepared to resist
unto blood striving against sin (He 12 2-4), he cannot
know the meaning of the Christ. Again, it may be
said that the notion that the death of Christ is to be
considered apart from His life, eternal and incarnate
life, as the atoning work, is far too narrow to express
the teaching of the Bible and far too shallow to meet
the demands of an ethical conscience.

It would serve clearness if we reminded ourselves
that the question of how in the Atonement may
involve various elements. We may inquire: (a)
for the ground on which God may righteously
receive the sinner; (6) for the means by which God
places the restoration within the reach of the sinner;
(c) for the influence by which the sinner is persuaded
to accept the reconciliation; (d) for the attitnde or
exercise of the sinner toward God in Christ wherein
he actually enters the state of restored union with
God. The various theories have seemed to be ex-
clusive, or at least mutually antagonistic, largely
because they have taken partial views of the whole
subject and have emphasized some one feature of
the whole content. All serions theories partly ex-
press the truth and all together are inadequate fully
to declare how the Daystar from on high doth guide
our feet into the way of peace (Lk 1 79).

(4) Another question over which the theologians
have sorely vexed themselves and each other con-
cerns the extent of the Atonement, whether it is
available for all men or only for certain particular,
elect ones. That controversy may now be passed
by. It is no longer possible to read the Bible
and suppose that God relates himself sympatheti-
cally with only a part of the race. All segregated
passages of Scripture formerly employed in support
of such a view have now taken their place in the
progressive self-interpretation of God to men through
Christ who is the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world (1 Jn 2 2). No man cometh unto the
Father but by Him (Jn 14 6): but whosoever does
thus call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved
(Joel 2 32; Acts 2 21). See also AronEMENT, Day
oF; PropitiATion; RECONCILIATION; SACRIFICE.

LitEerature.—In the vast literature on this subject
the following is suggested: Articles by Orr in HDB;
by Mackenzie in Standard BD; in Cath. Enc; in Jew-
ish Enc; by Simpson in DCG; J. McLeod Campbell,
The Nature of the Atonement; John Champion, The
Living Atonement; W. M. Clow, The Cross in Christian
Experience; T. J. Crawford, The Doctrine
Scripture Respecting the Atonement; R. W.
Atonement; J. Denney, The Death of Christ: Its Place
and Interpretation in the NT, and The Atonement and the
Modern Mind; . P. DuBose, The Soteriology of the
NT; P. T. Forsyth, The Cruciality of the Cross; J. Scott
Lidgett, The Spiritual Principle of the Atonement; Oxen-
ham, The Catholic Doctrine of the Atonement; A. Ritschl,
The Christian Doctrine of Justification and Reconciliation,
I, II; Riviére, Le dogme de la rédemption; D. W. Simon,
Reconciliation by Incarnation; W. L. Walker, The Cross
and the Kingdom; various writers, The Atonement and
Modern Religious Thought.


WituiamM Owen Carver


ATONEMENT, a-ton’ment, DAY OF:


I. Tas Leoar EnactMents
1. Named
2. Lev 16 oe
(1) Contents, Supuceure and Position
1-1


(d) Vs 29-34
Use of Number Four
Place in Lev
(2) Modern Attempts to Disprove Unity of
Chapter
tl. Tue SIGNIFICANCE OF THE Day or ATONEMENT
1. The Significance for Israc!
2. The Significance from a Christian Standpoint
III. On tue History or THE Day or ATONEMENT
1. The Long Silence of History

(1) The Facts and the False Conclusions

(2) The Historicity of the Day of Atonement
2. Further Development
The Legal Enactments.—In addition to the

passage, Lev 16, which is treated under a
separate head, we have the following:

In Ex 30 10 it is mentioned in the
directions that are given for the con-
struction of the altar of incense that Aaron, once
a year, is to make an atonement on the horns of the
altar, with the blood of the sin offering, which is
used for the purpose of an atonement for sin.

In Lev 23 26-32 mention is made in the list of
festivals of the Day of Atonement, on the 10th
day of the 7th month. It is ordered that for this
day there shall be a holy convocation at the sanc-
tuary, a fast, an offering by fire, and rest from labor
from the 9th day of the 7th month in the evening.

According to Lev 25 9 the year of jubilee begins
with the Day of Atonement.

Nu 18 speaks of the duties and the rights of the
priests and the Levites. In contrast with the
latter, according to ver 7, Aaron and his sons are
to perform the duties of the priesthood in all
matters pertaining to the altar and of the service
within the veil and shall render this service. We
have here doubtless a comprehensive law for the
entire priestly order, so that from this alone it
cannot be determined that the service within the
veil, by which reference is made to the ceremony
of the Day of Atonement, has been reserved for the
high priest alone, just as in Dt 10 8; 33 8ff,
everything that pertains to the whole tribe of Levi
is found combined, without thereby the division
into high priest, priests and Levites, being regarded
as excluded (cf Ezmxrat, IT, 2, (1), c).

Nu 29 7-11 contains in connection with the
laws treating of sacrifices also the enactment, that
on the 10th day of the 7th month there shall take
place a holy convocation at the sanctuary, fasting
and rest from labor. In addition to the sin offering,
which is brought for the purpose of atonement for
sin, and in addition to the regular burnt offerings
and the accompanying meal offerings and drink
offerings, burnt offerings also are to be brought, viz.
one young bullock, one young ram, seven lambs of
the first year (all without blemish); then meal offer-
ings, viz. three-tenths (cf 28 12-14) of fine flour
mingled with oil for each bullock; two-tenths for
each ram; one-tenth for each lamb; then a sin offer-
ing, viz. one he-goat.

_ Ezekiel in his vision of the new temple, of the holy
city and the holy country (chs 40-48), in 45 18 ff,
gives a series of enactments for the festivals and the
sacrifices. According to these, on the Ist day of the
1st month and on the 7th day of the Ist month
(on the Ist day of the 7th month according to the

), the sanctuary is to be cleansed through a
young bullock without blemish, the priest taking
some of the blood of the sin offering and putting it
on the posts of the temple, on the four corners of the
altar and on the posts of the gate of the inner court:
and this is to be done for the sake of those who per-


L
chief
1. Named


325


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Atonement


Atonement, D. of


haps have sinned through error or ignorance.
Further, that sacrifice which is to be brought on the
Passover by the princes for themselves and all the
people of the land (cf 45 22) appears to present
a clear analogy to Lev 16. As for the rest, Ezk
40-48 cannot without further consideration be put
on the same level with the other legal enactments,
but are to be regarded as an ideal scheme, the reali-
zation of which is conditioned on the entrance of the
wondertul future (cf EzEK1E1L).

(1) Contents, structure and position.—Lev 16 1-28
contains instructions given by Jeh to Moses for his
brother Aaron (vs 1.2). (a) Vs 1-10
contain presuppositions, preparations
and summary statements of the cere-
monies on the Day of Atonement. Ac-
cording to vs 1.2 Aaron is not allowed to enter the
holy place at any time whatever, lest he may die as
did his sons with their unseemly fire offering (cf
Lev 10 1 ff); vs 3-5 tell what is necessary for the
ceremony: For himself four things: a young bullock
as asin offering (ef vs 6.11.14.15.27); aram for burnt
offering (ef ver 24); sacred garments, viz. a linen
coat, linen breeches, linen girdle, linen mitre (cf vs
23.32); abath. For the congregation: two he-goats
as a sin offering (cf vs 7 ff.15—22.25.27.28.32.33),
aram asa burnt offering (cf ver 24). The passages
in parentheses show how closely the succeeding
parts of this account are connected with this intro-
ductory part, vs 1-10. In other parts of Lev also
it is often found that the materials used for the
sacrifices are mentioned first, before anything is
said in detail of what is to be done with this ma-
terial. Cf 8 1.2 with vs 6.7 ff.10.14.18.22.26 and
9 2-4 with vs 7.8 ff.12 ff.15-18. In ver 6 Aaron’s
sin-offering bullock is to be used as an atonement
for himself; vs 7-10 refer to the two goats: they are
to be placed at the door of the tent of meeting (ver
7); lots are to be cast upon them for Jeh and Azazel
(ver 8); the first to be prepared as a sin offering for
Jeh (ver 9); the second, in accordance with the law,
to be sent into the desert (ver 10).

(b) Vs 11-24 describe the ceremony itself and
give fuller directions as to how the different sacri-
ficial materials mentioned under (a) are to be used
by Aaron: vs 11-14 speak of the atonement for
Aaron and his house; ver 11, of his sin-offering
bullock to be killed; ver 12, of burning coal from
the altar and two handfuls of sweet incense beaten
small to be placed behind the veil; ver 13, of the
cloud of incense to be made in the Holy of Holies,
so that the top covering is hidden and Aaron is
protected from the danger of death; ver 14, of
some of the blood to be sprinkled once on the front
of the top covering and seven times in front of it.
Vs 15-19 prescribe the ceremony with the first
sin-offering goat for the congregation: in vs 15.16a,
the ceremony described in ver 14 is directed also
to be carried out with the goat, as an atonement
for the inner sanctuary, cleansing it from blemishes;
in ver 16b the same thing is directed to be done in
regard to the tabernacle of revelation, i.e. the holy
place; in ver 17, no one is permitted to be present
even in the holy place when these ceremonies take
place; in vs 18.19, the altar too is directed to be
cleansed by an atonement, some of the blood of
both sin-offering animals being smeared on the
horns and sprinkled seven times on the ground.
Vs 20-22 prescribe the ceremony with the second
sin-offering goat for the congregation: ver 20
directs it to be brought there; in ver 21 there takes
place the transfer of guilt; Aaron shall lay both his
hands upon the goat; shall confess all guilt over
him; shall lay them upon the head of the goat;
shall through a man send him into the desert, in ver
22a, the goat carries the guilt into an uninhabited
land; in ver 22b, he is not to be let go until he is in


2. Lev
Ch 16


the desert. Vs 23.24, the concluding act: in ver
23a, Aaron takes off his linen garments in the tent
of meeting, and in ver 23b puts them down there;
in ver 24a, he bathes in the holy place and again
puts on his usual clothing; in ver 245 he brings
the burnt offering for himself and his people.
(The statement ‘for himself and his people’ at this
place concludes the ritual as such.)

_ (c) Va 25-28 are explanatory, with three addi-
tional directions. In ver 25, the fat of the sin
offering is directed to be consumed into smoke on
the altar; ver 26, he who has taken away the second
goat must wash his clothes and bathe himself, and
only then is he permitted to enter the camp; ver
27, the fat, flesh and dung of the sin-offering animal,
and then the blood that was brought into the (inner)
sanctuary, are to be burned outside of the camp; ver
28, he who has burned these must wash his clothes,
and must bathe, and only after this can he enter the
camp. (In this case vs 25 and 27 correspond, and
also vs 26 and 28; and in addition vs 26, 27 and 28
are united by their reference to the camp.)

(d) Vs 29-34: Over against these sections (a)—
(c) (vs 1-28), which contain the instructions for
the high priest, we have a fourth (vs 29-34), which
already through the address in the second person
plur. and also by its contents is intended for the
congregation. In vs 29-31, the demand is made
of the congregation. As in Lev 23 26 ff; Nu 29
7 ff, a fast and absolute rest are prescribed for the
10th day of the 7th month as the Day of Atone-
ment; in vs 32-34, a number of directions are given
in a summary to the congregation on the basis of
16 1 ff, viz. ver 32, how the atonement is to take
place: the priest who is anointed; he shall be con-
secrated; that he perform the service in his father’s
place; in his linen garments; ver 33 prescribes
when and for whom the atonement is to take place:
for the holy of holies; for the holy place; for the
altar; for the order of priests and all the people;
in ver 34, the one Day of Atonement in the year
for all sins is declared to be an everlasting statute.
The statement that Aaron (ver 2), according to
Jeh’s command, did as Moses directed aptly closes
the whole chapter.

The number four appears to occupy a_pre-
dominating place in this chapter, as the bird’s-
eye view above already shows, and as this can be
traced still further in the details of the accounts.
But even if this significance of the number four
in the division of the chapter is accidental, although
this number appears almost as a matter of course,
and in Ex 36 4--40 38, in Gen 12-26, in the story
of Abraham, Lev 11-15, and Dt 12-26 naturally
fall into four pericopes with four subdivisions, yet
this chapter is, as far as contents are concerned, so
closely connected, and so well organized as a whole,
that all attempts to ascribe it to different sources,
concerning which we shall speak immediately, must
come to naught in view of this fact.

At this point we first of all draw attention to the
fact that ch 16 has its well-established place in the
whole of the Book of Lev (cf Leviticus). The
whole book has as its purpose to regulate the deal-
ings of the Israelites with their God, and it does
this in such a way that the first part (chs 1-17)
removes the hindrances that have been caused by
sin. In this the ordinances with reference to the
Day of Atonement (Lev 16), and with reference
to the significance of the blood (Lev 17), constitute
a natural acme and excellent conclusion, while
this prepares for the positive sanctification, which
is discussed in chs 18 ff. In 15 31 we find in addi-
tion a clear transition to the thoughts of Lev 16,
for in this passage mention is made of the unclean-
ness of the Israelites, which contaminates the
dwelling-place of Jeh that is in their midst.


Atonement, D. of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


326


(2) Modern attempts to disprove unity of chapter.
—A large number of attempts have been made to
destroy the unity of this chapter, which has been
demonstrated in division (1) above. Thus Stade
separates vs 3-10 as the original kernel from the
explanatory and changing details that were added
in vs 11-28. But we have already seen that
vs 3-10 are the preparation for all that follows, so
that these verses demand vs 11 ff as a necessary
complement. Again Oort separates vs 1-4, 11b-
14.16.18a.19.23.24a.254.29a from the rest, by using
the purification of the sanctuary and the atone-
ment of the people as the measure for this
separation; but above all it is proved by Ezk 45
18-20 that just these two thoughts are inseparably
united. 1n recent times it has become the custom,
following the leadership of Benzinger, to divide
the text into three parts. Baentsch divides as
follows: (a) 16 1-4.6.12 1.346 contain a single peri-
cope, which on the basis of the fate of the sons of
Aaron, described in ch 10, determines under what
circumstances Aaron alone is permitted to enter
the Holy of Holies; (6) vs 29-34@ contain “an
older, relatively simpler law in reference to the
yearly day of penitence and atonement”; (c) vs
5.7-10.11.14-28 are a ‘later enlargement of this
ritual, with a more complicated blood rite,” and
above all with ‘‘the rite of the sin goat.” Of these
three pieces only (a) is thought to belong to the
original Priest Codex, as proved esp. by its refer-
ence back to ch 10; (6) is regarded as belonging
to the secondary parts, because the day of repent-
ance is not yet mentioned in Neh 8 ff; cf III, 1; at
any rate the anointing of all the priests is there not
yet presupposed (cf Leviticus); (c), however, is de-
clared to be very late and its separate parts are re-
garded as having originated only after the others
(thus recently also Bertholet). It is impossible here
to enter into all the minor parts eliminated by the
exegetes; and in the same way we do not intend
in our examination to enter into all the incorrect
views found in these criticisms. We confine our-
selves to the chief matter. The very foundation
of the criticism is wrong. What Aaron’s sons
experienced according to Lev 10 could very easily
have furnished a connecting link for that ritual
which is introduced in vs 2 ff, but could never have
furnished the occasion for the composition of the
pericope described above (a); for Nadab and Abihu
had not entered into the Holy of Holies at all.
Just as little justifiable is the conclusion drawn
from ch 10, that ch 16 originally followed imme-
diately on ch 10. For who could possibly have
conceived the thought of inserting chs 11-15 in
an altogether unsuitable place between chs 10 and
16 and thus have split asunder a connection so
transparent? In general, the different attempts
to break the unity of this chapter show how sub-
jective and arbitrary these attempts are. They are
a characteristic example of the manner in which the
Priest Codex is now being further divided (cf Lavrri-
cus). In general, sufficient material for the positive
refutation of such attempts has been given above.

Il, The Significance of the Day of Atonement.
—The significance of the day is expressed in the

name “Day of Atonement” (Yom
1, The ha-kippurim: Lev 23 27f; 259) in
Significance the same manner as it is in the fast
for Israel which was enjoined on the congre-

gation as a sign of sorrow for their
sins (this fasting being the only one enjoined by the
law: Lev 16 29.31; 23 26ff; Nu 29 7 ff), as also
finally and chiefly in the entire ritual (Ex 30 10;
Lev 23 28; Nu 29 11; Lev 16; cf also Ezk 45
18-20.22). Then, too, the atonement takes place
for the sanctuary which has been defiled by the
contamination of the Israelites (Ex 30 10; Lev


16 16-20.33; cf also Ezk 45 18-20). In particular,
mention is made of the Holy of Holies (Lev 16 33,
called Mikdash ha-kodhesh; otherwise in Lev
regularly ha-kédhesh), then of the holy place (16
16b.20.33), and then of the altar (16 18.20.33).
In the last-mentioned case it is a matter of dis-
cussion whether the altar of incense is meant, as
is claimed by Jewish tradition, on the basis of Ex
30 10, or the altar of burnt offerings, for which
reference could be made to the additional state-
ments in Lev 16 18, to those of ver 16, and to the
conclusion in ver 17. The altar of incense (Ex
30 10) would then be included in the atonement
of the tent of meeting. The somewhat remarkable
position of ver 17b would then at the same time
find its motive in this, that, while vs 6 and 116
mention an atonement only for Aaron and his
house, the atonement of the Holy of Holies and
of the holy place in ver 17 is for Aaron, his house,
and the whole congregation, while the atonement
of the burnt-offering altar in the forecourt (vs 18)
would be intended only for the sins of the congre-
gation. The atonement, however, takes place for
all the transgressions of the congregation since the
last Day of Atonement (cf vs 21 £.30.34). In ref-
erence to the significance of what is done with the
second goat of sin offering, cf vs 8 ff.20ff, and
AzazeL, II, 1. In this way Delitzsch has correctly
called the Day of Atonement “the Good Friday
of the Old Testament.”’ How deeply the con-
sciousness of sin must have been awakened, if the
many otherwise commanded private and congrega-
tional sacrifices did not make such an institution
superfluous, and if even the high priest himself
stood before God as a sinner (vs'6.11 ff). On this
day, with the exception of the mitre, he does not
wear the insignia of his high-priestly office, but
wears white garments, which in their simplicity
correspond to the earnestness of the situation.
The repetition of the bath, both in his case and in
that of the other persons engaged in the ceremony
(vs 4.24.26.28), was necessary, because the mere
washing of the hands and feet (Ex 30 19f) would
not suffice on this occasion (cf Nu 19 7 ff.19.21).
The flesh of the sin-offering animals was not per-
mitted to be eaten but had to be burned (ver 27)
because it was sacrificed also for Aaron’s sin, and
its blood was carried not only into the holy place
but also into the Holy of Holies (cf 16 27 with Lev
6 23; 4111.21; Ex 29 14; Lev 817; 9 11; 10
19). And in comparison with the consciousness
of sin that had been aroused, how great must on
the other hand God’s grace appear, when once in
each year a general remission of all the sins that
had been forgiven was guaranteed.
“The Day of Atonement, the good Friday of the
Old Testament’’—these words express not only the
highest significance of the day but
2. Signifi- also its limitations. As the taberna-
cance from cle, the sacrificial system, the entire
a Christian law, thus too the Day of Atonement
Standpoint in particular contained only the shadow
; of future good things, but not these
things themselves (He 10 1), and is “like in pat-
tern to the true” (He 9 24). Christ Himself entered
into the holy place, which was not made with
hands, namely, into heaven itself, and has now
appeared before God, by once for all giving Himself
as a sacrifice for the removal of sin (He 9 23 ff).
By this act the purpose of the OT sacrificial cultus
and its highest development, viz. the Day of
Atonement, understood in its typical significance,
has been fulfilled, and at the same time surpassed
and thereby abrogated (cf Leviticus). Accord-
ingly, our hope, too, like an anchor (He 6 19),
porta to the inner part of the veil in the
igher sense of the term, i.e. to heaven,


327


IH, On the History of the Day of Atonement.—
(1) The facts and the false conclusions-—The Day of
Atonement is stated to have been insti-


1. The tuted in the times of Moses (Lev 16 1);
Long Si- the ceremony takes place in the taber-
lence of nacle (tent of meeting); the people are
History presupposed to be in the camp (vs


26 ff); Aaron is still the high priest.
Very remarkably there is but little evidence of the
observance of this prominent day in the later history
of Israel. Down to the time of the Exile there is
found a deep silence on this subject. The days
of atonement iu Ezk 45 18 ff (cf under I, 1) differ
in number and observance from that in Lev 16.
According to Zec 3 9, God in the Messianic future
will take away the guilt of the land in a single day;
but this too presents no more than an analogy
to the results of the Day of Atonement. On the
other hand, there is no reference made to the day
where we could expect it. Not only 2 Ch 7 7-9
in connection with the consecration of Solomon’s
temple, and Ezr 3 1-6, in the account of the
reintroduction of the sacrificial services after the
return from the Exile, are silent on the subject,
which fact could possibly be explained in an easy
manner; but also Neh 8f. According to 8 2f,
Ezra begins on the Ist day of the 7th month in the
year 444 BC to read from the law; on the 2d day
of the 7th month remembrance is made of the
ordinance treating of the feast of tabernacles, and
on the 22d day of the 7th month (8 13 ff), this
festival is observed; on the 24th day of the 7th
month a day of penance is observed (9 1); but of
the Day of Atonement coming in between ch 8 1
and ch 9 1, viz. on the 10th day of the 7th month,
which would seem to make the day of penance
superfluous, nothing is said. From these facts the
Wellhausen school has drawn the conclusion, in
accordance with its principles elsewhere observed,
that all those legal enactments that have not in the


history a sufficient evidence of having been ob-—


served, did not exist until the time when they have
such historical evidence; that therefore the Day of
Atonement did not originate until after the year
444 BC. It is claimed that the day originated in
the two days of atonement mentioned in Ezk 45
18-20 (cf under I, 1); in the four national fast
days of Zec 7 5,and8 19, and in the day of penance
of 444 BC, just mentioned, on the 24th day of the
7th month, which is said to have been repeated
on the following New Year’s day, the 10th day of
the 7th month; and that by the sacred character
of its observance it soon crowded the New Year
day upon the 1st day of the 7th month (cf Lev 23
23 ff; Nu 29 1ff; contrary to Lev 26 9 and Ezk
40 1). In this way it is thought that Lev 16 29 ff
first originated, and that at a still later time the
complicated blood ritual had been added (cf under
I, 1,2). But it is to be observed that in still later
times there is found no more frequent mention of
the Day of Atonement than in the earlier, although
it is the custom of modern criticism to place a
much larger bulk of Biblical lit. into this later
period. It is only when we come to Jesus Sirach
(Ecclus 50 5 ff) that the high priest Simon is
praised, when he came forth from behind the veil;
and this is certainly a reference to the Day of
Atonement, although no further mention is made
at this place of the ceremony as such. Then there
is a further silence on the subject down to Philo
and the Epistle to the He (6 19; 9 7.13 ff; 10 1 ff;
ef under II, 2). It is probable too that the fasting
mentioned in Acts 27 9 is based on the Day of
Atonement. We have in this manner a charac-
teristic example to show how carefully we must
handle the argument from silence, if we do not
want to arrive at uncomfortable results.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Atonement, D. of


_(2) The historicity of the Day of Atonement.—
Since Lev 16 constitutes only one part of the
Levitical legislation, the question as to the original
and historical character of the day cannot be fully
discussed at this place (see Leviticus). At so
late a period, naturally all the data that would
lead to an explanation of the origin of such a funda-
mental institution as the Day of Atonement are
lacking. It is all the more impossible to separate
Lev 16 from the other priestly ordinances, becanse
the name of the lid of the ark of covenant (ha-
kapporeth: Ex 25 17ff; 26 34) stands in the
clearest relation to the ceremony that takes place
with this ark on the Day of Atonement. The im-
possibility of splitting up Lev 16 as is the manner of
critics, or even as much as separating it from Lev
11-15, has been sufficiently demonstrated above
(ef under I). Against the view which forces the
Priest Codex down at least to the Exile and to
claim the tabernacle as the product of imagination
and as a copy of the temple of Solomon (see Exo-
pus), we have still the following to add: If the
ark of the covenant was no longer in existence
after the Exile and if, according to Jer 3 16, the
Israelites no longer expected its restoration, then
it would have been absolutely impossible in the
ritual of the Day of Atonement to connect the most,
important ceremony of this ritual with this ark.
and on this to base the atonement. In the second
temple, as is well known, the incense pan was placed
on the “foundation stone” in the Holy of Holies,
because there was no tabernacle. Against these
facts the counter-arguments mentioned above
cannot stand. Even those who deny the existence
of the Day of Atonement do not lay much stress on
2 Ch 7 1-9 and Ezr 3 1-6; but Neh 8ff also
does not deserve mention, since in this place the
emphasis lies on the purpose of showing how the
congregation was to declare its adherence to the
law, and how the Day of Repentance, which had
been observed since the beginning of the history
of Israel, was instituted to be observed on the 24th
day of the 7th month for all sins (9 1 ff), and was
not made superfluous by the celebration of the Day
of Atonement on the 10th day of the 7th month,
on which day only the sins of the last year were
taken into consideration. But Ezekiel changed or
ignored also other preéxilic arrangements (cf Ezx-
KIEL), so that he is no authority in deciding the
question as to the earlier existence of the Day of
Atonement. Finally, attention must be drawn to
the fact that the Passover festival is mentioned in
prophetic literature, in addition to the mere refer-
ence in Isa 30 29, only in Ezk 46 21; the ark of
the covenant only in Jer 3 16; the Feast of Taber-
nacles only in Hos 12 9; Ezk 46 25; and that
in its historical connection the Feast of Weeks is
mentioned incidentally only in 2 Ch 8 13, and
possibly in 1 K 9 25, and is not at all found in
Ezk (cf 46 18 ff), although the existence of these
institutions has for a very long time been called into
question.

The Day of Atonement, in accordance with its
purpose in later times, came more and more into the
foreground and was called “the great

2. Further fast” or “the great day,” or merely
Develop- “the day.” Its ritual was further
‘ment enlarged and the special parts men-
tioned in the law were fully explained

fixed and specialized. Cf esp. the tract “Yoma’
in the Mish; and for the further elaborations and
stories in poetry and prose on the basis of the Talm,
see, e.g. Delitzsch’s translation from Maim, Ha-yadh
ha-hdzdkah, in the supplement to his Commentary
on the Epistle to the Hebrews, 1857. According to
these accounts, e.g. the high priest had to be a mar-
ried man. Already seven days before the beginning


1
,


Atroth-beth-joab
Attitudes


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


328


of the Day of Atonement he was ordered to leave
his house and had to submit to a series of purifica-
tions and had to practise for the performance of
the different purification ceremonies, some of which
were difficult. The last night he was not allowed
to sleep and had to spend his time in studying the
sacred writings. On the Day of Atonement he
took five baths and ten washings. Four times he
enters the Holy of Holies (with the incense), with
the blood of both sin offerings, and when he brings
out the utensils used with the incense he makes
three confessions of sins (for himself, for himself
and his house, for Israel); 10 times in all he utters
the name of Jeh; 43 times he sprinkles; in addition
he must read certain sections of the Scriptures or
repeat them from memory (cf also AzazEL). When
he returns home he celebrates a festival of rejoicing,
because he has without harm been able to leave
the sanctuary. In addition, he had performed
severe physical work, and especially difficult was
the manipulation of the incense. The modern
estimate put on the Day of Atonement appears from
the following citation of Wellhausen: ‘‘The rite
and the sacrifice through the unfavorable circum-
stances of the times have disappeared; but it has
retained the same sacred character. He who has
not yet entirely broken with Judaism observes this
day, no matter how indifferent he may be otherwise
to old customs and festivals.”
WILHELM MOLLER

ATROTH-BETH-JOAB, at-roth-beth-ji’/ab
(ANT MD MINO!, ‘atréth beth yo’ abh, ‘crowns of
the house of Joab”): AV ‘“Ataroth,” the house of
Joab. Probably a family in Judah (1 Ch 2 54).


ATROTH-SHOPHAN, at’roth-shi/‘fan (M102
JEW, ‘afroth shdphén; LXX yfiv cwdav, gén
séphdn): A town built or fortified by the children
of Gad E. of the Jordan (Nu 32 35), named next
to Aroer. If it had been at Ahirbet ‘Attaéris or
Jebel ‘Attarais (HDB and EB s.v.) Aroer would
hardly have been named between them. AV reads
Atroth, Shophan, understanding that two places
are named. No identification is yet possible.


ATTAI, atta, atl OMY, ‘atiay, “timely” [?]):

(1) A son of Jarha, the Egyptian, by a daughter
of Sheshan (1 Ch 2 35f).

(2) A Gadite soldier who joined David’s army
at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 11).

(3) Ason of Rehoboam and grandson of Solomon
(2 Ch 11 20).


ATTAIN, a-tan’: The rendering of MP , kanadh=
“buy,” “get”? (Prov 1 5); 1W?, nasagh= “reach,” “a
meal-offering .... according as he is able’ (Ezk
46 7m), “not attained unto the days” (Gen 47 9);
bb. or SID) yakhél=‘be able,” “overcome,”
“attain to innocency” (Hos 8 5); N13, b6’= “come,”
“follow” (2 8 23 19.23; 1 Ch 11 21.25); karav-
raw, katanidd=“‘arrive at’? (Acts 27 12 AV; Phil
3 11); karadapBdvw, katalambdné=“‘take eagerly,”’
“seize,” “apprehend,” “attained to righteousness”’
(Rom 9 30); ¢0dvw, phihdnd=“have arrived at”
(Rom 9 31 AV; Phil 3 16); AauBdvw, lambénd=
“take,” “get a hold of,” “catch,” RV “already ob-
tained” (Phil 3 12); swapaxodoviéw, parakolouthés =
“follow,” “trace out,” ‘conform to” (1 Tim 4 6).
Here RV corrects AV. Frank E. Hrrsca


ATTALIA, at-a-li’a (Arradla, Aitalia): A city
on the southern coast of Asia Minor in ancient
Pamphylia which, according to Acts 14 25, was
visited by Paul and Barnabas on the way to An-
tioch during their first missionary journey. The
city was founded by Attalus II Philadelphus


(159-1388 BC), hence its name Attalia, which dur-
ing the Middle Ages was corrupted to Satalia;
its modern name is Adalia. Attalia stood on a
flat terrace of limestone, about 120 ft. high, near the
point where the Catarrhactes River flowed into the
sea. The river now, however, has practically dis-
appeared, for the greater part of its water is turned
into the fields for irrigation purposes. The early
city did not enjoy the ecclesiastical importance of
the neighboring city of Perga; but in 1084 when
Perga declined, Attalia became a metropolis.- In
1148 the troops of Louis IV sailed from there to
Syria; in 1214 the Seljuks restored the city walls,
and erected several public buildings. The city
continued to be the chief port for ships from Syria
and Egypt, and the point of entry to the interior
until modern times, when the harbor at Mersine
was reopened; it has now become a place of little
importance.

The town possesses considerable which is of
archaeological interest. The outer harbor was
protected by ancient walls and towers now in ruins;
its entrance was closed with a chain. The inner
harbor was but a recess in the cliff. The city was
surrounded by two walls which were constructed
at various times from material taken from the
ruins of the ancient city; the outer wall was pro-
tected by a moat. The modern town, lying partly
within and partly without the walls is thus divided
into quarters. In the southern quarter live the
Christians; in the northern the Moslems. Among
other objects of archaeological interest still to be
seen may be mentioned the inscribed arched gate-
way of Hadrian and the aqueduct. Rich gardens
now surround the town; the chief exports are grain,
cotton, licorice root and valonia or acorn-cups.

E. J. Banks

ATTALUS, at’a-lus: King of Pergamum, men-
tioned in 1 Macc 16 22 among the kings to whom
was sent an edict (Anf, XIV, viii, 5) from Rome
forbidding the persecution of the Jews. See
ATTALIA.


ATTEND, a-tend’, ATTENDANCE, a-tend’ans:
(1) “To incline,” “listen,” “regard” (AUP , kdshabh;
Ps 17 1 etc); then, in AV, “observe,” but in RV,
more frequently, ‘give heed” (mposdxer vodv,
proséchein notin), as in 1 Tim 413. (2) “To
be with,” “take care of,” ‘wait upon” (Est 4 5;
He 7 18; Rom 13 6); lit. “give unremitting care
to,” as in 1 Cor 7 35 (Luther: “serve the Lord
constantly and without hindrance’’).


ATTENT, a-tent’ (archaic; 2 Ch 6 40), AT-
TENTIVE, a-tent’iv: Expresses the direction of
thought and interest toward some one point.
Same Heb word as “attend,” and is used particu-
larly in prayers (Ps 180 2; Neh 1 6). ‘Very
attentive’ (Lk 19 48) is a paraphrase for what is
lit. rendered in RV, “‘the people all hung upon him,
listening” (éfexpéuero, exekrémeto).


ATTHARATES, a-thar’a-téz: A title assigned
to Nehemiah, probably by a later editor (Neh 8 9).
The LXX omits the title; the Vulg gives ‘‘Ather-
satha’’; AV reads ‘Nehemiah, which is the Tir-
shatha.”’ Tirshatha is the Pers title for a local or
provincial governor (Nch 8 9=1 Esd 9 49). See
TIRSHATHA.


ATTHARIAS, a-tha-ri’as, ATHARIAS:
6 40=Ezr 2 63. See TrrsHaTaa.


ATTIRE, a-tir’, DYED ATTIRE: “Can a virgin
forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire?” asks
the prophet Jeremiah in hot remonstrance against
Israel’s unfaithfulness. “Yet,” saith Jeh, ‘my people


1 Esd


329


have forgotten me’’ (2 32). ‘And I saw that she
was defiled,” cries Ezekiel against Jerus; ‘‘she saw
men... girded with girdles upon their loins, with
flowing turbans [AV exceeding in dyed attire] upon
their heads, .. . . after the likeness of the Babylon-
jans in Chaldea, ....and....shedoted upon them
.. +.” (Ezk 23 13-16). ‘And, behold, there met
him,” says the author of Prov (7 10) in his descrip-
tion of the “strange woman,” that “lieth in wait
at every street corner,” ‘a woman with the attire
of a harlot, and wily of heart,” whose “house is the
way to Sheol” (ver 27). These passages show how
diversely and elastically the term “attire” was
used among the Hebrews. The numerous syno-
nyms for “dress,” “attire,” “apparel,” “clothes,”
“raiment,” “garment,” ete, found in EVV, reflect
a similar wealth of nomenclature in the original
Heb and Gr; but the lack of exactness and con-
sistency in the renderings of translators makes the
identification of the various articles of dress referred
to very difficult, sometimes impossible. See Dress.
Gro. B. Eacrr
_ ATTITUDES, at’i-tiids: Customs change slowly
in Biblelands. This becomes clear by a comparison
of the many references found in the Bible and other
literatures of the Orient with existing circumstances
and conditions. The same fact is attested by the
pictures illustrating daily life upon the monuments
of Assyria, Babylonia and Egypt in the countries
between the Nile and the Tigris. Many of these,
dating back to the second or third millennium before
our era, prove conclusively that the same practices
and usages as are now common among the inhabitants
of those lands were in vogue in the days of Ham-
murabi and the early rulers of Egypt. This is esp.
true of matters pertaining to the worship of the gods,
and of the attitudes or positions assumed in homage
and respect to monarchs and those in authority.
The many references found in the Bible to these
same usages prove that the Hebrews too had much
in common with the nations around them, not only
in creed, but also in the mode of worship, as well
as in general everyday etiquette. This is not
strange, at least among the Sem peoples, for there
is more or less agreement, even among all nations,
ancient and modern, in the attitude of the wor-
shipper in temple and high place.


Kissing the Hand.


The outward tokens of respect and honor shown
by Orientals to their superiors, above all to mon-
archs, may seem exaggerated. But when we con-
sider that the king was God’s vicegerent upon the
earth or over a certain country, and in some sense
Divine, worthy even of adoration, it is not strange
that almost equal homage should be paid him as the
gods themselves. The higher the person was in


power, the greater the honor and respect shown him.


Tt is natural, therefore, that God, the Lord of Lords,
and the King of Kings should be the recipient of the
highest reverence and adoration.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Atroth-beth-joab


Attitudes


There are several Heb words used to describe
the various attitudes assumed by those who wor-
shipped Jeh and heathen gods; these same words
are constantly employed in speaking of the homage
or respect paid to rulers and persons in authority.
The most common terms are those rendered ‘to
stand,” “to bow,” “to kneel” and “prostrate one-
self” or “fall on the face.”” It is not always easy
to differentiate between them, for often one passes
imperceptibly into the other. No doubt several
attitudes were assumed by the worshipper or sup-
pliant while offering a prayer or petition. The


iving a Blessing.


intensity, the ardor or earnestness with which such
a petition or prayer was presented would naturally
have much to do with the words and posture of the
petitioner, though the same expression might be
employed to designate his posture or attitude.
Thus “‘to fall on the face” might be done in many
different ways. The Moslems observe a regular
course of nine or more different postures in their
worship. These are more or less faithfully ob-
served by the faithful everywhere. It is almost
certain that the Hebrews in common with other
Orientals observed and went through almost every
one of these attitudes as they presented themselves
in prayer to Jeh. We shall call attention to just
four postures: (1) standing, (2) bowing, (3) kneel-
ing, and (4) falling on the face or prostration.
This was one of the very common postures in
prayer to God, esp. in public worship. It is still
. customary to stand either erect or
1. Standing with slightly bowed head while offer-
ing the public prayers in the syna-
gogue. This is likewise the common practice of
a large number of Christians in this and other
lands, and no doubt such a posture is sanctioned
by the example of the early church and primitive
Christians, who, in turn, adopted the usages of
the Jewish church. The same practice was in
vogue among the Persians, Egyptians and Baby-
lonians and other ancient people as is evidenced by
their sculptures and paintings. The famous stela
of Hammurabi shows this great king in a standing
position as he receives the famous Code from the
sun-god. There are numerous Bab and Assyr seals
on which are pictured a priest in a standing position
before the throne of Sin or Shamash. In this
attitude with uplifted hands, he is sometimes ac-
companied by the person in whose behalf prayers
are made. A beautiful rock sculpture at Ibriz,
S.E. of Eregli in Lycaonia, shows us a king or satrap
in a standing position, worshipping a local Baal.
Rev. E. J. Davies, the discoverer of this Hittite
monument, in describing it, makes this remark,
which we cannot refrain from inserting, inasmuch
as it gives another proof of the unchangeable East.
He says: “He [the god] wears boots turned up in
front, and bound round the leg above the ankle by
thongs and a piece of leather reaching half-way
up the shin, exactly as it is worn to this day by the
easanis of the plain of Cilicia round Adana.”
tne Solomon, during at least a portion of his
prayer at the dedication of the temple, stood before
the altar with his hands stretched out toward


Attitudes .
Augury


heaven (1 K 8 22). Numerous allusions to prayer
in the NT prove that standing was the common
posture (Mt 6 5; Mk 11 25; Lk 18 11).

What has been said about standing while pray-
ing to God is true also of the attitude of the peti-
tioner when paying homage or making an entreaty
to man. The Assyr and Bab monuments are full
of evidence on this point; we shall give only one
illustration: One of the sculptures describing the
siege of Lachish by Sennacherib represents the
monarch as seated upon his throne while the con-
quered stand or kneel before him. Joseph stood
before Pharach (Gen 41 46). Solomon’s advisers
stood before him (2 Ch 10 6) and so did those of
Rehoboam (ver 8). The same attitude was as-
sumed by suppliants in the Pers court (Est 5 2;
8 Be The same is true of Babylonia (Dnl 1 19;
2 2).

Though standing seems to have been the usual


attitude, it is quite certain that kneeling was


common at all times.
2. Kneeling The monuments afford
abundant proof for this
statement; so too the many refer-
encesin the Bible. Solomon not only
stood before the altar on the occasion
of dedicating his famous temple, but
he also knelt (1 K 8 54; 2 Ch 6 13).
Jos, describing this ceremony, says
that the king at the conclusion of
his prayer prostrated himself on the
ground and in this posture continued worshipping
for a long time. Ezra fell upon his knees as he
addressed Jeh in prayer (Ezr 9 5). Daniel, too,
knelt upon his knees and prayed three times a day
(Dnl 6 10). The same practice was observed by
the apostles and the early church; for we read that
Stephen (Acts 7 60), Peter (9 40), Paul (20 36) and
others (21 5) assumed this posture as they prayed.
As already stated, it is not always easy to de-
terreine the exact posture of those described as
kneeling or bowing, for this varied
3. Bowing with the temperament of the sup-
plant and the intensity of his prayer
or supplication. Eleazer when sent to select a
wife for his master, Isaac, bowed before Jeh (Gen
24 26). The Hebrews on leaving Egypt were com-
manded to bow to Jeh (Ex 11 8; 12 27.28). The
injunction of the Psalmist shows the prevalence of
this posture in prayer: “‘O come, let us worship and
bow down” (Ps 95 6). Isaiah refers to the same
when he says: “Every knee shall bow’ to God


Touching the Forehead, Touching the Breast; Folding the Arms;
Placing Hands on Knees.


(Isa 45 23). St. Paul too bowed his knees to the
Father (Eph 3 14). The same practice obtained
among the heathen nations as they worshipped
their gods or idols. Naaman bowed before Rim-
mon, his god. The numerous prohibitions in the
Heb Scriptures against bowing down at the shrines
of the nations around Israel prove the prevalence
of this method of adoration. Indeed, one of the
ten commandments is directed explicitly against
bowing to or worshipping idols (Ex 20 5). The
same prohibition was often repeated, as by Joshua
(23 7) and the author of 2 K (17 35). Unfortu-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


330


nately Israel did transgress in this very thing, for
while still in the Wilderness they bowed down to
the gods of Moab (Nu 26 2) and again after their
settlement in Canaan (Jgs 2 12). Amaziah bowed
down to the gods of Edom (2 Ch 25 14).

Like deference was also shown to angels or
supernatural beings. Thus Abraham bows to the
three angels as they appear to him at Mamre


(Gen 18 2). And so did Lot at Sodom (19 1).
Joshua fell on his face before the prince of the
host of Jeh (Josh 6 14). This attitude was a
common one to Ezekiel as he saw his wonderful
visions (Ezk 1 28; 3 28, and often). Daniel when
he saw Gabriel in a vision was affrighted and fell
upon his face (Dnl 8 17). The three disciples had
the same experience on the Mount of Transfiguration
(Mt 17 6).

Monarchs and persons of superior rank were the
recipients of like honors and marks of respect.
Joseph’s brothers bowed as they came into his
presence, thinking that he was an Egyptian of high
rank (Gen 43 28). Bathsheba bowed to King
David when she entered his presence in the interest
of their son Solomon (1 K 1 16.31). But such
deference was not shown +o monarchs only, for
Jacob and his household bowed down seven times
to the irate Esau (Gen 33 3 ff). Abigail fell on
her face before David as he was marching to avenge
himself upon Nabal, her husband (1 8 26 23).
David too when he went to meet Jonathan fell on
his face to the ground and bowed himself three times
(1 § 20 41). The Shunammite woman, asshe came
to entreat Elisha for the life of her boy, bowed be-
fore the prophet (2 IX 4 37). The same custom
prevailed not only among the Persians, as is evident
from the Book of Esther and the monuments at
Persepolis, but also in Babylonia, Assyria and other
countries.

This was but an intenser way of showing one’s
regard or of emphasizing a petition. It was the

token of abject subjection or the
4. Prostra- deepest reverence. Abraham, when
tion Jeh appeared to him and promised

him a son, with profoundest gratitude
and greatest joy fell prostrate on his face (Gen 17
83). Moses and Aaron were often found in this
posture (Nu 14 5; 16 4.45; 20 6). Elijah, eccen-
tric in many ways, cast himself upon the earth and
placed his face between his knees (cf 1 K 18 42).
Job fell on the ground and worshipped Jeh (Job 1
20). Such homage was often shown to our Saviour
(Mk 5 22; Jn 11 32), not because men realized
that He was God in the flesh, but simply as a mark
of respect for a great teacher and miracle-worker.
It is to be noticed that our Saviour never refused
such homage, but accepted it as pertinent and
proper. Did He not realize that honor and wor-
ship Divine belonged to Him, He would have refused
them just as Peter did when Cornelius fell down at
his feet and worshipped him (Acts 10 25) or as the
angel in Rev 19 10, who said to John, prostrate
at his feet, “See thou do it not: I am a fellow serv-
ant,” etc. See Aporation, III. W. W. Daviss


331


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Attitudes
Augury


ATTUS, at’us (1 Esd 8 29=Ezr 8 2). See Hat-
TUSH.


AUDIENCE, 6’di-ens: Tr? from the Heb ]I8,
’ozen, ‘ear.’ In Gen 23 10f “in the audience of”
is equal to “in the presence of,” or ‘while they
listened.” Cf Ex 24 7; 18 25 24 (RV “in thine
cars’); 1 Ch 28 8; Neh 13 1. In the NT the
expression “‘to give audience” (Acts 22 22; 13 16,
RV “hearken”’; 15 12, RV “they hearkened’’) is
trd from the Gr dxodw, akovd, “to hear” or deriva-
tives, and means “‘to listen,” “to pay attention.”
In AV Lk 7 1 (RV “in the ears of’’) and AV 20 45
(RV ‘in the hearing of”) the usage is similar to
that of the OT.


AUGIA, 6’ji-a (Atyla, Augia): The wife of Jaddus,
whose sons were removed from priesthood because
their names were not found in the register, their an-
cestors having “usurped the office of the priesthood”’
(1 Esd 5 38). Omitted in Ezr 2 and Neh 7.


AUGURS’ OAK, 6’gurs’ ok: If we tr the Heb
vb. ‘dnén, ‘‘to practise augury” (see AuGURY) we
should in Jgs 9 37 for “the oak of Meonenim”’
render ‘the augurs’ oak” as in RVn, for the last
word is simply the part. of the same vb. and means
“one who practises augury,’”’ though there is some
doubt as to the exact connotation ot the word. See
under Divination. Both the EVV make this
noun the name of a place; but no such place is
known and the derivation ana form of the word are
clear and certain. We have a similar phrase simi-
larly misunderstood by our translators in Gen 12 6
where the “oak of Moreh” should be “the oak”
(or “terebinth’’[?]) “of the diviner” or “augur,”
for méreh is also a part.=“‘one who teaches” or
“directs.”’ Probably the same tree is meant,
since in each case the neighborhood is that of She-
chem. The worship of trees, or rather the deity
supposed to make them his home, has prevailed
very widely. See W. R. Smith, Rel. Sem.?, 195;
ef Jgs 45; 28 5 24 and “the oak of Zeus at
Dodona.” In Jgs 9 6 we read of a “maccebhah,
oak tree’: the tree with an altar on which sacri-
fices were offered. The oak trees of Gen 12 6 and
of Jgs 9 387, if two distinct trees are meant, would
be trees which the Canaanites had been in the habit
of consulting: hence the name.

T. Wrrron Daviss

AUGURY, 6’gti-ri, 6’gur-i: This word occurs in
the RV in Lev 19 26; Dt 18 10.14; 2 K 21 6,
and the || 2 Ch 33 6. In all these cases the vb.
“practise augury” is in the AV “to observe times.”
The vb. thus trdis J217, ‘dnén, which means prob-
ably to utter a low croaking sound as was done in
divining. See DivinaTion.

L. Definition.—The derivation of “augur” is
doubtful, but that it means strictly to divine from
the flight of birds is suggested by its likeliest ety-
mology (avis, gur) and esp. from the fact that in
early Lat the augur was called auspex (=avi spex).
But both words came to be applied to all forms of
divining from omens.

IL Augury among the Romans.—The Rom
augur was a government official, paid to guide the
councils of the nation in times of peace and of war.
The principal signs from which these augurs de-
duced their omens were these: (1) celestial signs,
chiefly lightning and thunder, the direction of the
former (right to left a good sign, and vice versa);
(2) signs from the flight, cries an feeding of birds;
(3) signs from the movements and audible sounds
of animals, including serpents; (4) signs from the
examination of the entrails of animals; (5) belo-
mancy, or divination by arrows; (6) sortilege, or


divination by lot. Among the Romans as among
other nations (Babylonians, etc), a sacrifice was
offered before omens were taken, so as to propitiate
the gods.

I, Augury among the Greeks.—Almost the
only kind of divination practised or even known
among the Romans was that by signs or omens
though Cicero (de Div. i.1f) notices another kin
which may be called divining by direct inspiration
from the gods. It is this higher and more spiritual
mode of divining that obtained most largely amon
the Greeks, whose chief word for diviner (mdntis)
implies this. Yet the lower kind of divination
known as augury was to some extent practised
among the Greeks.

IV. Augury among the Hebrews.—In general
it may be said that the religion of Israel set itself
steadfastly and consistently against augury; a
very remarkable fact when one remembers how
rife it was among the surrounding peoples—Arabs,
Assyrians, Babylonians, Egyptians, etc. Surely
there is in this evidence of special Divine guidance,
for those ancient Hebrews are not fit to be compared
with the Babylonians or Egyptians or Romans for
achievements in art and general secular literature.
For the attitude of the OT toward augury see the
passages enumerated in the opening of this article.
Several kinds of augury are mentioned in the OT,
and in some cases without explicit condemnation.

Belomancy was a method of divination by ar-
rows, a number of which were marked in certain


ways, then mixed and drawn at
1. Belo- random. We have a reference to
mancy this in Hos 412: ‘My people ask


counsel from their wood [lit. ‘‘tree’’]
and their staff [i.e. “arrow’] tells them [their
oracles]’; and also in Ezk 21 21: ‘For the king
of Babylon... . used divination, shaking the
arrows to and fro.’ The first’ passage shows that
belomancy was practised by Israelites though the
prophet condemned it. The second is interest-
ing as showing how the Babylonian used his arrows.
It is to be noticed that the prophet Ezekiel records
the incident without making any comment on it,
favorable or otherwise. He would, however, had
he spoken, almost certainly have condemned it.
Mohammed forbade. this use of arrows as ‘an
abomination of Satan’s work”’ (Koran, Sur. 6 92).
Hydromancy, or divination by water, was prac-
tised by Joseph (Gen 44 3-5) without any censure
on the part of the writer. There were
2. Hydro- among the Romans and other ancient
mancy nations, aS among modern Arabs,
etc, many modes of divining by means
of water. Generally a piece of silver or gold or a
precious stone was thrown into a vessel containing
water: the resulting movements of the water and
the figures formed were interpreted according to
certain fixed signs. See August., de Ctv. Dei, vii.31;
Strabo xvi.11.39; Iamblichus, de Myst., iii.4.
Of sortilege, or divination by lot, we haveinstances
in Lev 16 8; Mt 27 35; 1 Ch 25 8; Jon 1 2ff;
Acts 1 26,etc. The Urim and Thum-
3. Sortilege mim was simply a case of sortilege,
though in this case, as in the cases
enumerated above, God was supposed to control
the result. A proper tr of 1 S 14 41f, based on a
text corrected according to the LXX of Lucian,
is the following: ‘‘And Saul said, O Lord the God
of Israel, why hast thou not answered thy servant
this day? If the iniquity be in me or in Jonathan
my son, give Urim; and if thou sayest thus, The
iniquity is in the people, give Thummim.” It
seems almost certain that these words refer to two
balls put into the high priest’s ephod and drawn
by him at random, the one divining one answer,
and the other the contrary.


Augustan
Authority


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


332


We meet with several other signs. The prophet
Elisha directs King Joash to throw two arrows
through the window in order to find
4. Other out whether the king will be victorious
Methods or not (2 K 13 14-19). If Gideon’s
fleece were wet and the ground dry this
was to be a sign of coming victory over the Midi-
anites. There is nothing in the narrative disapprov-
ing of the course taken (Jgs 6 36-40). In 18
14 8 ff Jonathan is represented as deciding whether
or not he is to attack the Philis by the words he
will hear them speak. See further Gen 24 12-19;
2 K 20 9.
Dreams are very commonly mentioned in the
Bible as a means of forecasting the future. See
Gen 20 3.6f (Abimelech); 31 10-13
5. Dreams (Jacob); 37 5; 40 3 ff (Joseph), and
also Jgs 7 18; 1 K 3 5f; Mt 1 20;
2 12 ff; 27 19, etc. The part of the Pent ascribed
by Wellhausen, etc, to E abounds with accounts of
such significant dreams.

That omens were taken from the heavenly bodies
by the Babylonians, and other ancient nations is

matter of definite knowledge, but it is
6. Astrology never countenaneed in the OT. In-

deed the only explicit reference to it
in the Heb Scriptures occurs in Isa 47 13 where the
Exilie author mockingly urges Babylon to turn to
her astrologers that they may save her from her
threatened doom.

Several cuneiform inscriptions give lists of celes-
tial omens by which Bab augurs prognosticated
the future. In Mt 2 the wise men received their
first intimation of the birth of the child Jesus from a
bright star which they saw in the East.

V. Higher Character of Heb Prophecy.—Though
OT prophecy in its lowest forms has features in
common with heathen divination, it stands on an
infinitely higher level. The prophet speaks under
a strong impulse and from a sense of duty. The
heathen diviner plied his calling for money. The
Gr mdntis worked himself into a state of frenzy,
thought to imply inspiration, by music and certain
drugs. The prophet believed himself directly guided
by God. See Astrotoey, 1; Drvinarion.

Lireraturs.—T. Witton Davies, Magic, Divination
and Demonology among the Hebrews, 1898, 72 ff; arts. ou
“Divination’’ in HDB (Jevons); EB (T. Witton Davies),


and on ‘Augury”’ in Jew Enc (Blau), valuable as giving
the rabbinical side as well.


T. Witton Davies
AUGUSTAN, 6-gus’tan (AUGUSTUS’) BAND.
See Army, Roman.


AUGUSTUS, 6-gus’tus (Atyoveros, Atigoustos):

(1) The first Rom emperor, and noteworthy in
Bible history as the emperor in whose reign the In-
carnation took place (Lk 2 1). His original name
was Caius Octavius Caepias and he was born in 63
BC, the year of Cicero’s consulship. He was the
grand-nephew of Julius Caesar, his mother Atia
having been the daughter of Julia, Caesar’s younger
sister. He was only 19 years of age when Caesar
was murdered in the Senate house (44 BC), but
with a true instinct of statesmanship he steered his
course through the intrigues and dangers of the
closing years of the republic, and after the battle of
Actium was left without a rival. Some difficulty
was experienced in finding a name that would exactly
define the position of the new ruler of the state. He
himself declined the names of rex and dictator, and
in 27 BC he was by the deeree of the Senate styled
Augustus. The epithet implied respect and venera-
tion beyond what is bestowed on human things:

“Sancta vocant augusta patres: augusta vocantur


Templa sacerdotum rite dicata mauu.”’
—Ovid Fasti i. 609; cf Dion Cass., 5316


The Greeks rendered the word by 2efaerés,
Sebastés, lit. “reverend” (Acts 26 21.25). The
name was connected by the Romans with augur—
“one consecrated by religion’—and also with the
vb. augere. In this way it came to form one of the
German imperial titles ‘“Mehrer des Reichs’ (ex-
tender of the empire). The length of the reign
of A., extending as it did over 44 years from the
battle of Actium (81 BC) to his death (14 AD),
doubtless contributed much to the settlement and
consolidation of the new régime after the troublous
times of the civil wars.


Coin of Augustus.


It is chiefly through the connection of Judaea and
Palestine with the Rom Empire that Augustus
comes in contact with early Christianity, or rather
with the political and religious life of the Jewish
people at the time of the birth of Christ: ‘Now it
came to pass in those days, there went out a decree
from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should
be enrolled” (Lk 2 1). During the reign of Herod
the Great the government of Palestine was conducted
practically without interference from Rome except,
of course, as regarded the exaetion of the tribute;
but on the death of that astute and capable ruler
(4 BC) none of his three sons among whom his
kingdom was divided showed the capacity of their
father. In the year 6 AD the intervention of
Augustus was invited by the Jews themselves to
provide a remedy for the incapaeity of their ruler,
Archelaus, who was deposed by the emperor from
the rule of Judaea; at the same time, while Caesarea
was still the center of the Rom administration, a
small Rom garrison was stationed permanently in
Jerus. The city, however, was left to the control
of the Jewish Sanhedrin’ with complete judicial
and executive authority except that the death
sentence required confirmation by the Rom proc-
urator. There is no reason to believe that Augus-
tus entertained any specially favorable appreciation
of Judaism, but from policy he showed himself
favorable to the Jews in Pal and did everything to
keep them from feeling the pressure of the Rom
yoke. To the Jews of the eastern Diaspora he
allowed great privileges. It has even been held
that his aim was to render them pro-Rom, as a
eounterpoise in some degree to the pronounced
Hellenism of the East; but in the West autonomous
bodies of Jews were never allowed (see Mommsen,
Provinces of the Rom Empire, ch 11).

(2) For Augustus in Acts 25 21.25 AV, see
Emrrror. J. HutcHison


AUL, él. See Awt.


AUNT, ant ah, dodhah, “loving’’): A father’s
sister (Ex 6 20); an uncle’s wife (Lev 18 14;
20 20). See Reiationsuies, Famizy.


( eee 6-ran-i'tis: Used by Jos for Hauran
g.V.).


AUSTERE, és-tér’ (atorypds, austérds, “harsh,”
“rough”’): Twice used by Christ in the parable of
the Pounds (Lk 19 21.22), and of special signifi-


333


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Augusta
Authority


cance as illustrating the false conception of God

cherished by the sinful and disobedient. The fear,
resident in a guilty conscience sees only sternness .
and severity in God’s perfect righteousness. The

word may be made an eminent study in the psy-

chology of an evil heart. Wrongdoing eclipses the

soul’s vision of God’s love and pictures His righteous-

ness as harsh, unfeeling, partial, unjust, forbidding.

The awfulness of sin may thus be seen in its power

so to pervert the soul as to make goodness seem evil,

justice unjust, and even love unlovely. Cf “hard”

(oxdnpés, sklérés, “dried up,” “harsh’’) in the parable

of the Talents (Mt 25 24). Dwicutr M. Prarr


AUTHOR, 6’thér: This word is used to translate
two Gr words: (1) afrwus, aitios, lit. “cause,’’ hence
“author.” He 5 9, He “became the author of eternal
salvation.” (2) dpxyyés, archégés = lit. “chief leader,”
“prince,” “captain”; then author, originator. It is
rendered “author” in the following passages: (a) He
12 2, “looking unto Jesus, the author [AV, RV] and
finisher [RV ‘“‘perfecter’’] of our faith.” But here it
seems better to take archégos in its primary ‘sense,
“leader” (RVm “‘captain”), rather than in its second-
ary sense ‘‘author.”’ The meaning is, not that He is
the originator of faith in us, but that He Himself is
the pioneer in the life of faith. He is first in the
company of the faithful (cf references to His ‘faith-
fulness,” 2 17; 3 2.5.6), far surpassing in His fidel-
ity even the OT saints mentioned in ch 11; and
therefore we are to look to Him as our perfect pat-
tern of faith. Faith has not only Christ for its
object, but Christ for its supreme example. So
Bengel, Bleek, B. Weiss, Alford, A. B. Davidson,
Grimm-Thayer. Others, however, take the word
in the sense of “author.” (b) He 2 10, “to make
the author [AV “‘captain”’] of their salvation perfect
through sufferings.” Here the idea of Christ as
originator or author of our salvation is present (cf
the passage He 5 9, where however a different word
is used; see above). But here again the original
meaning of “leader” is not to be lost sight of. He,
being the first possessor of salvation, becomes the
author of itfor others. ‘“The idea that the Son goes
before the saved in the same path ought perhaps to
be retained” (Davidson). Cf He 6 20, where Jesus
is said to be our “forerunner.”’ (c) Acts 3 15, AVm
and RVm have “author,’’ where text has “prince.”
Here again it is possible that the two ideas are
present. D. Mratt Epwarps

AUTHORITY, 6-thor’i-ti (IN GENERAL). See
AutHority (in Retiaton), I.


AUTHORITY, 6-thor’i-ti (IN RELIGION) (73),
rabhah, Spi, tokeph; e€ovria, exousta, éEovordtw,
exousidzd, xateEovorato, katerousidzd, émvrayh, epi-
iagé, bwepoxh, huperoché, atOevréw, authentéd, dv-
véorys, dundstés) :

J. GeneraL Ipgea

1. Of Two Kinds

(1) External

(2) Internal .
. Universal Need of Authority |
Necessity for Infallible Criterion of Truth
. Ultimate Nature of Authority
It Is God " A
Different Ideas of God and Different Views of
Authority w,

. A Problem of Knowledge for Christians
HE BrpiicaL REFERENCES


-InNT A :

. Common Elements in their Meaning
IBLICAL TEACHING

. OT Teaching n

(1) Earliest Form Patriarchal _

(2) Tribal and Personal Authority

(3) Seers and Priests a3

(4) Kings and Established Religion

(5) The Great Prophets. poe
(6) The Canon and Rabbinical Tradition


SI @oUp ONO


II.


tor


ITI.


aes)


2. NT Teaching
(1) Jesus Christ's Authority
(a) His Teaching
i) He ores Rear
¢ orgiving and Judging
(d) Life and Salvation
vi Derived from His Sonship
In His Ascended State
(g) Christ and the Paraclete
(2) The Disciples’ Authority
{a} Derived from Christ
(b) Paul’s Authorit
(ce) Authority of Ali Believers
‘@ Authority over the Nations
3 Church's Authority Moral and Personal
4) Authority of the Bible
Ovtuine History or EcciesiasticaL Doctrine
or AUTHORITY
¢ ope to Reason as Logos
Orthodox Dogma
Scholasticism
. Ecclesiastical Absolutism
. Reformation Principles
New Scholasticism
The Inner Light
. Back to Experience
. 9. Distrust of Reason
10. Christian Skepticism
V. CuassiFICATION OF THEORIES


1. External
ee Incipient_Catholicism
a General Councils
3) Romanism
i Papal Infallihility
(5) Inerrancy of Scripture
(6) Anglican Appeal to Pee aNahd
(7) Limitations of External Authority
(a) Not Infallible
(0) Rests on Personal Authority
(c) No Apostolical Tradition Extant
(d) No Consensus of Fathers
{e) Bible Needs Interpretation
(f) Authority Necessarily Spiritual
2. Internal Authority
Literature
I, General Idea.— The term is of manifold and
ambiguous meaning. The various ideas of authority
fall into two main classes: as external
1. Of Two or public tribunal or standard, which
Kinds therefore in the nature of the case can
only apply to the outward expressions
of religion; and as immanent principle which governs
the most secret, movements of the soul’s life.

(1) Ezternal.—A characteristic instance of the
former idea of authority is found in A. J. Balfour’s
Foundations of Belief: “Authority as I have been
using the term is in all cases contrasted with reason,
and stands for that group of non-rational causes,
moral, social and educational, which produces its
results by psychic processes other than reasoning”
(p. 232, 8th ed). The bulk of men’s important
beliefs are produced and authorized by “custom,
education, public opinion, the contagious convic-
tions of countrymen, family, party or church’’ (p.
226). Authority and reason are “rival claimants”
(p. 243). “Authority as such is, from the nature of
the case, dumb in the presence of argument” (p. 234).
Newman makes a kindred distinction between
authority in revealed religion and conscience in
natural religion, although he does not assign as wide
a sphere to authority, and he allows to conscience a
kind of authority. ‘‘The supremacy of conscience
is the essence of natural religion, the supremacy of
apostle or pope or church or bishop is the essence
of revealed; and when such external authority is
taken away, the mind falls back again of necessity
upon that inward guide which it possessed even
before revelation was vouchsafed” (Development of
Doctrine, 86, ed 1878). From a very different
standpoint the same antithesis appears in the very
title of Sabatier’s book, The Religions of Authority
and the Religion of the Spirit. He knows both kinds
of authority. ‘The authority of material force,
of custom, tradition, the code, more and more
yields place to the inward authority of conscience
and reason, and in the same measure becomes
transformed for the subject into a true autonomy”
(p. xxxili, ET).


OWNS EB Gano


Authority


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


334


(2) Internal.—Martineau distinguishes the two
types of authority to reject the former and accept
the latter. ‘The mere resort to testimony for in-
formation beyond our province does not fill the
meaning of ‘authority’; which we never acknowledge
till that which speaks to us from another and a higher
strikes home and wakes the echoes in ourselves, and
is thereby instantly transferred from external attes-
tation to self-evidence. And this response it is which
makes the moral intuitions, started by outward ap-
peal, reflected back by inward veneration, more than
egoistic phenomena, and turning them into corres-
pondency between the universal and the individual
mind, invests them with true authority” (Seat of
Authority, Preface, ed 1890).

Confusion would disappear if the fact were recog-
nized that for different persons, and even for the
same persons at different times, authority means
different things. For a child his father’s or his
teacher’s word is a decree of absolute authority.
He accepts its truth and recognizes his obligation
to allow it to determine his conduct. But when
reason awakes in him, he may doubt their knowl-
edge or wisdom, and he will seek other guides or
authorities. So it is in religious development.
Some repudiate authorities that others acknowledge.
But no one has a monopoly of the term or concept,
and no one may justly say to Dr. Martineau or any-
body else that “he has no right to speak of ‘authority’
at all.

All religion involves a certain attitude of thought
and will toward God and the Universe. The

feeling element is also present, but that
2. Univer- is ignored in the theories of external
sal Need of authority. All religion then involves
Authority certain ideas or beliefs about God,

and conduct corresponding to them,
but ideas may be true or false, and conduct right or
wrong. Men need to know what is true, that they
may do that which is right. They need some test
or standard or court of appeal which distinguishes
and enforces the truth; forbids the wrong and
commands the right. As in all government there
is a legislative and an executive function, the one
issuing out of the other, so in every kind of religious
authority recognized as such, men require that it
should tell them what ideas they ought to believe
and what deeds to perform.

In this general sense authority is recognized in
every realm of life, even beyond that which is usual-
ly called religious life. Science builds up its sys-
tem in conformity with natural phenomena. Art
has its ideals of beauty. Politics seeks to realize
some idea of the state. Metaphysics reconstructs
the universe in conformity with some principle of
truth or reality.

“Tf we are... . to attach any definite intelli-
gible meaning to the distinction between things as

they really are, and things as they
3. There merely appear to be, we must clearly
Must Be | have some universal criterion or test
an Infallible by which the distinction may be made.
Criterion of This criterion must be in the first
Truth place infallible; that is, must be such

that we cannot doubt its validity with-
out falling into a contradiction in our thought. ....
Freedom from contradiction is a characteristic
that belongs to everything that is real... . and
we may therefore use it as a test or criterion of
reality (Taylor, Elements of Metaphysics, 18-19).
Amore skeptical philosopher writes: “That the truth
itself is one and whole and complete, and that all
thinking and all experience moves within its recog-
nition, and subject to its manifest authority, this
I have never doubted” (Joachim, The Nature of
Truth, 178). It is only a thoroughgoing skeptic
that could dispense with authority, a ‘“Pyrrho,”


who holds suspense of judgment to be the only
right attitude of mind, and he, to be logical, must
also suspend all action and cease to be. There can
be no question, therefore, except in total nescience,
as to the fact of authority in general; and the prob-
lem to decideis, ‘“‘Whatis the authority in religion ?”
It is a problem involved in the difficulties of all
ultimate problems, and all argument about it is
apt tomoveinacircle. For the ultimate must bear
witness of its own ultimacy, the ab-
4. Ultimate solute of its own absoluteness, and
Nature of authority of its own sovereignty. If
Authority there were a court of appeal or a stand-
ard of reference to which anything
called ultimate, absolute and supreme, could apply
for its credentials, it would therefore become relative
and subordinate to that other criterion. There isa
sense in which Mr. Balfour’s saying is true, ‘‘that
authority is dumb in the presence of argument.”
No process of mediate reasoning can establish it, for
no premise can be found from which it issues as a
conclusion. It judges all things, but is judged of
none. It is its own witness and judge. All that
reason can say about it is the dictum of Parmenides:
“St is.”
In this sense, there can be no question again
among religious people, that the authority is God.
The one idea involves the other. He
5. It Is God alone is self-existent and supreme,
who is what He is of His own right.
If God exists, He is the ultimate criterion and power
of truth and reality. All truth inheres in Him
and issues from Him. The problem of authority
thus becomes one with the proof and definition of
God. These questions lie beyond the purpose of the
present article (see art. Gop). Their solution is
assumed in this discussion of authority, although
different theories of authority no doubt involve
different ideas of God. External the-
6. Different ories generally involve what is called a


Ideas of deistic conception of God. Spiritual-
God istic theories of authority correspond
Involve to theistic views of God. If He is
Different immanent as well as transcendent,
Views of He speaks directly to men, and has
Authority no need of intermediaries. Panthe-


ism results in a naturalistic theory of
truth. The mind of God is the law of Nature.
But pantheism in practice tends to become poly-
theism, and then to issue in a crude anarchy which
is the denial of all authority and truth. But
within Christendom the problem of authority lies
between those who agree in believing in one God,
who is personal, transcendent and to some extent
immanent. The differences on these points are
really consequences of differences of views as to
His mode of self-communication. It is, therefore,

a problem of epistemology rather than


7. For of ontology. The question is, in
Christians what way does God make known
a Problem Himself, His mind and His authority
of Knowl- to men generally? The purpose of
“edge this article is the exposition of the


Biblical teaching of authority, with
some attempt to place it in its true position in the
life of the church.


H. The Biblical References——Only for (1)
rabhah (Prov 29 2): “to be great” or “many.”
“When the righteous are in authority,

1. Inthe ‘the people rejoice.” So AV and RVm,
OT but RV “When the righteous are
increased” (so BDB). Toy in loc.

remarks, ‘The Heb has: ‘When the righteous


increase,’ the suggestion being that they then have
control of affairs; the change of a letter gives the
reading ‘rule’ which is required by the ‘govern’
of the second line.” (2) tokeph (Est 9 29): ‘Es-


335


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Authority


ther the queen... . wrote with all authority
to confirm this second letter of Purim’ (RVm
“strength” [so BDB]).

(1) Most frequently for ezousia, exousiazd and

katerousiaz6: (a) of God’s authority (Acts 1 7): as

the potter’s over clay (Rom 9 21, ‘a
2. Inthe right’; Jude ver 25, ‘power’; Rev 16
NT 9, “power’”’); (b) of Enrist’s teaching

and works (Mt 7 29; 21 23.24.27=Mk
1 22.27; Mk 11 28.29.33=Lk 4 36; 20 2.8; Jn 5
27, authority to execute judgment. The same Gr
word, tr4 “power” in AV but generally “authority”
in RV or RVm, appears also in Mt 9 6.8, to forgive
sins; 28 18; Mk 2 10; Lk 4 32; 5 24; Jn 10
18; 172; Rev 12 10); (c) of the disciples, as
Christ’s representatives and witnesses (Lk 9 1,
the twelve; 2 Cor 10 8, Paul); also of their rights
and privileges; (the same Gr word in Mt 10 1;
Mk 3 15; 67; Lk 10 19=RV “authority”; Jn
112; Acts 819; 2 Cor 1310; 2 Thess 3 9;
He 13 10; Rev 2 26; 22 14=RV ‘Tight”); (@) of
subordinate heavenly authorities or powers (1 Cor
15 24; 1 Pet 3 22; and the same Gr word in
Eph 1 21; 3 10; 6 12; Col 1 16; 2 10.15; Rev
11 6; 14 18; 181); (e) of civil authority, as of
king, magistrate or steward (Lk 7 8=Mt 8 9
[centurion]; Mk 13 34; Lk 19 17; 20 20; 22 25
=Mt 20 25=Mk 10 42; and Acts 9 14; 26 10.
12 [of Saul]; and the same Gr word in Lk 12 11;
23 7; Jn 19 10.11; Acts 6 4; Rom 13 1.2.3; Tit
3.1; Rev 17 12.13); (f) of the powers of evil (Rev
13 2, “the beast that came out of the sea”; and
the same Gr word in Lk 4 6; 12 5; 22 53; Acts
26 18; Eph 2 2; Col 1 13; Rev 6 8; 9 3.10.19;
13 4.5.7.12; 20 6). (g) of man’s inward power of
self-control (the same Gr word in 1 Cor 7 37; 8 9,
ee 6 12; 7 4; 9 4.5.6.12.18, RV ‘“nght”;
11 10).

(2) For epitagé: commandment, authority to
exhort and reprove the church (Tit 2 15).

(3) For huperoché: ‘for kings and all that are
in high place’ (RV 1 Tim 2 2).

(4) For authented: “I permit not a woman
.... to have dominion over a man” (RV 1 Tim
2 12).

(5) For dunastés: ‘‘A eunuch of great author-
ity” (Acts 8 27).

Of the words tr? “authority,” exousia alone ex-
presses the idea of religious authority, whether of

God, of Christ or of man. The other
8. Common uses of this word are here instructive
Elements in as bringing out the common element
Their in secular and religious authority.
Meaning The control of the state over its sub-

jects, whether as supreme in the person
of emperor or king, or as delegated to and exercised
by proconsul, magistrate or soldier, and the con-
trol of a householder over his family and servants
and property, exercised directly or indirectly
through stewards, have some characteristics which
also pertain to religious authority; and the differ-
ences, essential though they are, must be derived
from the context and the circumstances of the case.
In one passage indeed the civil type of authority
is mentioned to be repudiated as something that
should not obtain within the religious community
(Mt 20 25-27=Mk 10 42-44=Lk 22 25.26). But
although its principle and power are so entirely
different in different realms, the fact of authority
as determining religious thought, conduct and rela-
tions permeates the whole Bible, and is expressed by
many terms and phrases besides those tr? “au-
thority.”

Ill. Biblical Teaching.— A_ summary of the
Biblical account of authority is given in He 1 1;
“God, having of old time spoken unto the fathers in
the prophets by divers portions and in divers man-


ners, hath at the end of these days spoken unto us in
aSon [RVm].” Behind all persons and institutions
stands God, who reveals His mind and exercises
His sovereignty in many ways, through many per-
sons and institutions, piecemeal and progressively
until His final revelation of His mind and will
culminates in Jesus Christ.

(1) The earliest form of authority is patriarchal.
The father of the family is at once its prophet,

priest and king. The consciousness of
1. OT individuality was as yet weak. The
Teaching unit of life was the family, and the
father sums up the family in himself
before God and stands to it as God. Such is the
earliest picture of religious life found in the Bible.
For whatever view may be taken of the historicity
of Gen, there can be little doubt that the stories
of the patriarchs represent an early stage of religious
life, before the national or even the tribal conscious-
ness had developed.

(2) When the tribal consciousness emerges, it is
clad in a network of customs and traditions which
had grown with it, and which governed the greater

art of the life of the tribe. The father had now

ecome the elder and judge who exercised authority
over the larger family, the tribe. But also, men
of commanding personality and influence appear,
who change and refashion the tribal customs. They
may be men of practical wisdom like Jethro, great
warriors like Joshua, or emergency men like the
judges. Moses stands apart, a prophet and reform-
er who knew that he bore a message from God to
reform his people’s religion, and gave Israel a
knowledge of God and a covenant with God which
set them forever apart from all other peoples.
Other tribes might have a Jethro, a Joshua and a
Jephtha, but Israel alone had its Moses. His au-
thority has remained a large factor in the life of
Israel to the present day and should hereafter be
assumed as existing side by side with other author-
ities mentioned.

(3) In our earliest glimpses of Heb life in Canaan
we find bands of seers or prophets associated with
religion in Israel, as well as a disorganized priest-
hood which conducted the public worship of Jeh.
These features were probably common to Israel and
neighboring Sem tribes. Here again the individual
person emerges who rises above custom and _tra-
dition, and exercises an individual authority direct
from God over the lives of the people. Samuel, too,
was a prophet, priest and king, but he regarded his
function as so entirely ministerial, that God might
be said to govern His people directly and personally,
though He made known His will through the prophet.

(4) In the period of the kingship, religious au-
thority became more organized, institutional and
external. The occasional coéperation of the tribes
developed into nationality, and the sporadic leader-
ship of emergency chieftains gave way to the per-
manent rule of the king. Priests and prophets
became organized and recognized guilds which
acted together under the protection and influence of
the king, along the lines of traditional morality and
religion. The Heb church in its middle ages was
an established church and thoroughly ‘“Hrastian.”
We know very little of the details of its organization,
but it is clear that the religious orders as a rule
offered little resistance to the corrupting influences
of the court and of the surrounding heathenism.

(5) Opposition to corruption and advance to
higher levels of religious life invariably_ originated
outside the recognized religious authorities. God
raised for Himself prophets such as Elijah, Amos,
Isaiah and Jeremiah, who spoke out of the con-
sciousness of an immediate vision or message or
command from God. In turn they influenced the
established religious authorities, as may be seen


Authority


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


‘


336


in the reformations of Hezekiah and Josiah. All
that is distinctive in the religion of Israel, all reve-
lation of God in the OT, proceeded from the inner
experiences of the irregular prophets.

(6) In the Judaism of the post-exilic period, the
disappearance of the kingship, and the cessation of
prophecy produced new conditions which demanded
areadaptation of religious authorities. The relative
position of the priesthood was greatly enhanced.
{ts chiefs became princes of Jerus, and exercised all
the powers of the theocracy that remained under
foreign rule. And new developments emerged. The
formation of the canon of the OT set up a body of
writings which stood as a permanent and external
standard of doctrine and worship. But the ne-
cessity was felt to interpret the Scriptures and to
apply them to existing conditions. The place of
the old prophetic guilds was taken by the new order
of rabbis and scribes. Gradually they secured a
share with the priests in the administration of the
law. “In the last two pre-Christian cents. and
throughout the Talmudic times, the scribes (séphe-
rim), also called the wise (hdkhamim), who claimed
to have received the true interpretation of the Law
as ‘the tradition of the Elders and Fathers’ in direct
line from Moses, the prophets, and the men of the
great synagogue, ... . included people from all
classes. They formed the court of justice in every
town as well as the high court of justice, the San-
hedrin in Jerus” (K6hler in Jew Ene, II, 337).
In the time of Christ, these courts were the recog-
nized authorities in all matters of religion.

(1) Of Jesus Christ—When He began to teach in
Pal, all knowledge of God, and all exercise of His

authority were mediated through the
2. NT priests and scribes, who however
Teaching claimed the OT as their source.
Christ was neither the destroyer nor
the creator of institutions. He never discussed the
abstract right or capacity of the Jewish orders to
he religious teachers. He enjoined obedience to
their teaching (Mt 23 2.3). Still less did He
question the authority of the OT. He came not
to destroy, but to fulfil the Jaw and the prophets
(Mt 6 17). But He did two things which involved
the assertion of a new and superior authority in
Himself. He repudiated the scribes’ interpretation
of the law (Mt 23 13-16), and He declared that
certain of the provisions of the Mosaic law itself
were temporary and tentative, and to be replaced
or supplemented by His own more adequate teach-
ing (Mt 5 32.34.39.44; 19 8.9). In doing this,
He was really fulfilling a line of thought which per-
meates the entire OT. All its writers disclaim
finality and look forward to a fuller revelation
of the mind of God in a day of Jeh or a new
covenant or a Messiah. Jesus Christ regarded these
expectations as being realized in Himself, and
claimed to complete and fulfil the development
which had run through the OT. As such, He claims
finality in His teaching of the will of God, and
absolute authority in the realm of religion and
morals. (a) His teaching is with authority. His
hearers contrast it with that of the scribes, who,
with all the prestige of tradition and establishment,
in comparison with Him, entirely lacked authority
(Mt 7 29; Mk 1 22; Lk 4 32; Jn 7 46). (6)
His authority as a teacher is closely associated with
His works, especially as these revealed His author-
ity over that world of evil spirits whose influence was
felt in the mental disorders that afflicted people
(Mk 1 27; Lk 4 36). (c) In His claim to forgive
sins, sanctioned by works of healing, He seemed to
exercise a Divine prerogative (Mt 96.8; Mk 2
10; Lk 6 24). It implied an infallible moral judg-
ment, a power to dispense with the recognized laws
of retribution and to remove guilt, which could


only inhere in God. All these powers are asserted in
another form in the statement that He is the final
judge (Jn 5 27). (d) He therefore possesses author-
ity over life and salvation. The Father gave Him
authority over all flesh, ‘‘that whatsoever thou hast
given him, to them he should give eternal life’ (Jn 17
2ARVm). This authority begins in His power over
His own life to give it in sacrifice for men (Jn 10 18).
By faith in Him and obedience to Him, men obtain
salvation (Mt 10 32; 11 28-30). Their relation to
Him determines their relation to God and to the
kingdom of heaven (Mt 10 40; Lk 12 8). (e) When
challenged by the chief priests and elders, the estab-
lished religious authorities, to state by what authority
He taught, He gives no categorical reply, but tells
them the parable of the Vineyard. All the prophets
and teachers that had come from God before Him
were servants, hut He is the Son (Mt 21 23-27.37;
Mk 11 28-33; 12 6; Lk 20 2.8.13). The Fourth
Gospel definitely founds His authority upon His
sonship (5 19-27). Paul deduces it from His
self-sacrifice (Phil 2 5-11). (f) In His_ ascended
state, all authority in heaven and on earth is given
unto Him (Mt 28 18). It is not only authority
in the church, and in the moral kingdom, but in the
universe. God has set Him “far above all rule,
and authority, and power, and dominion, and every
name that is named, not only in this world, but also
in that which is to come” (Eph 1 21; ef Col 2 10;
1 Pet 3 22; 1 Cor 15 24; Rev 12 10). (g) His
authority in the church as revealer of truth and
Lord of spirits is not limited or completed within
His earthly life. By His resurrection and exaltation
He lives on in the church. “Where two or three are
gathered ....in my name, there am I in the midst
of them” (Mt 18 20). ‘Lo, Iam with you always,
even unto the end of the world” (Mt 28 20).
Greater works than He did in the flesh will be done
in the church, because of His exaltation: (Jn 14 12);
and hy His sending the Paraclete, ‘Comforter’
(ARV) (Jn 14 16). The Paraclete, which is the
Holy Spirit, will teach the disciples all things, and
bring to their remembrance all that He said unto
them (14 26). He has many things to tell them
which in the days of His flesh they cannot receive, but
the Spirit of trnth shall guide them into all truth
(16 12.13). And the Paraclete is neither separated
nor distinct from Him in His exalted and permanent
life (14 18.28). Herein is the authority of Christ
made complete and permanent. His teaching, works
and character, as facts outside of men, even while
He lived, and still more when He was dead, could
only partially and imperfectly rule their spirits.
“Have I been so long time with you, and dost thou
not know me, Philip?’ In the day of the Spirit’s
revelation ‘‘yé shall know that I am in my Father”
(Jn 14 9.20). Nor, again, did or could He define
the truth as it applied to every contingency through-
out all time, while He lived under the limitations
of time and place. Such a revelation, if it could
have been given, would have been quite useless,
for men can only apprehend the truth progressively
and in relation to the position they occupy in time
and place. But by. His permanent spiritual pres-
ence in the church, He enters into, inhabits and
governs its whole life and determines for it what is
trne and right at every stage of its development.
(See Forrest, Authority of Christ, 202-3.) To
ask whence Christ. derives or how He possesses the
authority above described, is to raise the whole
question of His metaphysical existence. Empirical-
ly, we see it issuing from two facts, which are essen- .
tially one—His filial consciousness and His moral
perfection. These chiefly are the empirical facts
which the church has sought to interpret and ex-
press in the metaphysical doctrine of the Incarna-
tion. (See Forrest, op. cit.)


337


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Authority


(2) Of the disciples.-—The first disciples acknowl-
edged Christ in-all things as their Lord and Master;
not the teaching they had heard, nor the example
they had witnessed, but Christ in His permanent,
living presence. They pray to Him to fill Judas’


place among the Twelve (Acts 1 24.25). He gave
the Spirit at Pentecost (2 33). In His name they
BerorD their miracles (3 6; 9 34). With Him


aul meets on the way to Damascus (9 5; Gal 1
12). From Him they receive the teaching and
commands which they deliver to the churches
(1 Cor 11 23).

But they too exercised an authority which is
derivative, secondary, and dependent. upon Him.
(a) While Jesus Christ yet lived He gave the Twelve,
and again the Seventy, authority to cast out un-
clean spirits and to heal all manner of diseases,
while they went about preaching (Mt 101; Mk
3815; 67; Lk 91; 10 19). After His resurrec-
tion He gave them commission to bear witness for
Him, to baptize and to teach all nations (Mt 28
18-20; Lk 24 48.49). Paul also traced his au-
thority to preach directly to Jesus Christ (Gal 1 1.
12). From Him they received their endowment
with the Holy Spirit for the work (Acts 1 5; 2
33). (b) Paul claimed for himself, and by infer-
ence, for the other apostles, authority to exercise
discipline in the churches, “which the Lord gave
for building you up” (2 Cor 10 8; 13 10). All
the church’s ministers exercise oversight and ad-
monition over the churches (1 Thess 5 12; 2 Tim
4 2; 22). (c) The authority of sonship, and of
participation in the tree of life belongs to all be-
lievers (Jn 1 12; Rev 22 14). (d) And in virtue
of their faith they have authority over the nations
(Rev 2 26; 20 4). Christ makes them to be kings
(RV a kingdom) and priests (Rev 1 6), a royal
priesthood (1 Pet 2 9).

In all this we are to see the authority of faith,
of character, of men who are messengers of Christ
because they are in living union with Him. It per-
tains to no office or institution, and exists only where
Christ reigns in men, and therefore, through them.

(3) Of the church.—It is moral and personal and
more concerned with life than with doctrine. Paul
was the greatest teacher of the early church, but
he claims no infallibility, promulgates no dogma,
imposes no standard of orthodoxy beyond faith in
Christ. He reasons, argues and persuades men to
accept the gospel he had received of the Lord, but
he knows no other authority than the truth as it
is a living fact in Jesus Christ.

In the Pastoral Epistles we certainly read of a
“sound doctrine’ which should be taught and be-
lieved, but it has not crystallized into a creed, and
the only condition of salvation laid down is living
faith in Jesus Christ. See Doctrine. ;

The authority of the apostolic church, then, is
in the first place that of individual men in whom
Jesus Christ lives, a direct personal and individual
authority. It is true that the individual can only
live the Christian life, and therefore know the
Christian truth, in a society, but that does not
impair the individual and personal character of his
witness. Yet as the church lives a collective life,
there is a sense in which it may be said to bear a col-
lective witness. Men are naturally more readily
impressed by an idea held by the many. That is
right in so far as the propane of the truth of a
doctrine increases with the number of minds which
approve it. That is the element of truth in the
Catholie dictum quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab
omnibus creditum est (‘what is believed every-
where, always, and by all”). But the assent of the
many does not constitute the truth of an idea or
fact, nor enhance its authority. And there are
levels of truth to which only few minds can attain,


so that the assent of the many may be a presump-
tion against the truth of an idea. And in the last
resort, men do not accept ideas with mind and heart,
because many believe them, but because of their
inherent truth, their power to govern their minds.
And the essential truth of a doctrine is no greater,
whether one ora million accept it.

The apostolic church recognized this principle,
for it never claimed for itself greater authority than
that of a tutor to bring men to Christ, the one Lord.
Peter, Paul, John, each knew Christ in a degree,
and each spoke of Him as well as he could, but
none of them claims to say all, or demands that his
own teaching should absolutely rule men’s minds;
and the collective authority of the church can never
rise higher than that of its best spirits.

(4) Of the Bible——And the authority of the Bible
as a whole is of the same nature as that of the
church. It is a record of the experiences of men
who knew God in various ways and degrees, but
among them all there is only one Master. ‘No
one knows the Father save the Son, and he to whom-
soever the Son willeth to reveal Him.’ In varying
degrees obedience should be rendered to many men
in the church and outside of it, as they satisfy the
demands of reason and conscience, but in the last
resort every soul by itself must find, choose and
obey its own King. For Christians Christ alone is
King, as He revealed Himself in His human per-
sonality, in the experience and history of the church,
and ultimately in the personal experience of every
believer. (For a different view see J. H. Leckie,
Authority in Religion.)

IV. Oatline History of Ecclesiastical Doctrine
of Authority.— Different ideas, drawn from many

sources, soon replaced NT principles


1. Appeal of authority in the life and thought
to Reason of the church. The Gr apologists
as Logos and Fathers were generally dominated


by the Platonic doctrine of the Logos,

and thought of God as dwelling in man and com-
municating His mind to him by giving him a share
of His own mind and reason. While they accepted
the Scriptures and the traditions of the church as
Divine teaching, they did not regard them as exter-
nal and sovereign authorities, but rather as copies
of the Divine reason which dwelt in every man, but
in complete and perfect manner only in Jesus Christ.
Neo-Platonism followed, and it underlies much of
the ‘church teaching from Origen to Augustine.
God as pure being could not make known His
essence to men, and His Logos in all the forms of
its manifestation tended to become a spoken word
which God had sent forth from Himself, rather than
the living indwelling of God with men. When the
Logos ceased to be living, it tended to become
external and stereotyped, and upon this basis grew
up Gr orthodoxy. Men who knew but little of the
living personal Word felt the need of defining and
establishing the central truths of Christianity in
fixed and permanent forms which should become
the standard of all thinking. The


2. Devel- inward witness of the Logos disappears,
opedinto and the external authority of tradition
Orthodox and dogma as defined by the councils
Dogma took its place. The bishops pre-


served the tradition and constituted

the councils and thus became the organs of author-

ity. The Scriptures were still venerated in words,
but in fact subordinated to the episcopacy.

Aristotle’s philosophy dominated the Middle

Ages, or rather the pale ghost of Aristotle’s system,

the formal logic only. The forms of

8. Scholas- thought were mistaken for its essence.

tic System Truth consisted in logical consistency

and systematic coherence. The dog-

mas of earlier ages were assumed as premises from


Authority


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


338


which to deduce, by syllogistic inference, the whole
structure of the church and its organs and sacra-
ments, as the infallible representatives of God on
earth.

Nominalism emptied the forms of thought of
all reality and reared the ecclesiastical system upon


negation. All the more necessary
4. Ecclesi- was it to affirm the absolute and un-
astical Ab- questioned authority of the church,
solutism since it rested upon no reason or reality


to which appeal could be made to
justify its position and teaching. Thus the growth
of absolutism in the church went pari passu with
the disappearance of idealism, of any contact of the
mind with reality, truth and God. Another way
of saying this truth is that the doctrine of the Holy
Spirit and of the living Christ suffered a total eclipse
during the Middle Ages, while the authority of the
church as the organ of revelation became absolute.
The Reformation was not consciously based upon
any philosophic principles. It was the product
of practical necessities. Men’s spirit-


5. Refor- _ual needs drove them back to God, and
mation they found Him in two sources, in
Principles the Bible, which was the record of


His self-revelation through prophet,
psalmist, apostle and preéminently through Jesus
Christ, and in the accordant testimony of the
Holy Spirit in their own hearts. But the under-
lying principles of this teaching were not articulated
in a philosophy of knowledge and revelation for
two centuries.

Therefore the second and third generations of
Reformers, no longer possessed by the visions and
convictions of Luther and Calvin,


6. New were thrown back upon the old scholas-
Scholasti- tic philosophy which recognized no
cism kinship of mind between God and man,


and knew no direct communication
between them. Hence it was necessary to find a
new external authority, and this they discovered
in the Bible which they made into a law of truth,
as defined anew by ecclesiastical councils.

But the mystical side of the Reformers’ teaching
was not altogether lost, and a few obscure bodies

of Christians continued to hold the
7. Inner doctrine of the inner light. Yet as
Light the scholastic Protestants took only
half—the objective half of the Reform-
ers’ teaching—the mystics only took the subjective
half, and every man’s imagination tended to become
a law unto himself.

Kant did for philosophy what Luther had done
for religion. He rejected its dogmas and external
authorities in order to come back to
its realities. He was the first philos-
opher of the Protestant principle. He
sought to discover a direct relation
between man’s mind and reality. He did not
fully succeed. The old dogma of the nowmenon
as something that lay completely beyond man’s
ken clung to him, and vitiated his system. But
through man’s moral nature, he found a way to the
heart of reality and to God. His idealistic principles
were developed by his successors into the modern
idealism, upon which it has been possible to erect
a theory of knowledge that brings man’s mind into
direct contact with God, and therefore, a theory
of authority which represents God as directly the
sovereign of the soul.

But the other side of Kant’s philosophy, too,
was developed into a theory of rcligious skepticism

and external authority. Man’s reason,
9. Distrust he had taught, could not come into
of Reason contact with reality, with the thing-
in-itself, and therefore it could know
nothing of God. This distrust of reason was made |


8. Back to
Experience


the basis of two different systems of external au-
thority by Dean Mansel and Cardinal Newman.
The skeptical element really descended from Locke
and Hume, but men who would have disdained to
learn their theology from Hume accepted Hume’s
principles from Kant, and built upon them, as a
house upon sand, one, the authority of Anglicanism,
and the other, the authority of Romanism.

Kant’s skepticism also allied itself with elements
of Luther’s teaching and traveled a middle course

in the school of Ritschl. While
10. Chris- holding that man may have knowl-
tian edge and experience of Divine things
Skepticism in Jesus Christ, who is of the practical

value of God for religious experience,
the Ritschlians scruple to affirm that it is a direct
and actual knowledge of God as He is essentially.
This they will neither deny nor affirm, but the
refusal to affirm has for many minds the effect of
denial, and it leads to a subjectivism which is not
far removed from skepticism and the denial of all
authority.

V. Classification of Theories.—The various the-
ories of authority may be now classed as follows:

(1) Incipient Catholicism in the 2d and 8d cen-
turtes—All ideas of a living and present revelation

were suppressed as in the case of Mon-
1. External tanism. Three more or less codrdinate
Theories authorities were set up which deter-

mined for individual Christians what
was Christian truth and conduct. The canon of the
NT was gradually formed to define what writings,
in addition to the OT taken over from the Jewish
church, were inspired by the Holy Spirit and of
Divine authority. The outline of a common creed
or rule of faith grew up as the standard interpreta-
tion of Scripture. Above all was the episcopacy,
which was supposed to preserve in unbroken tra-
dition the unwritten teaching of the apostles. As
the only living factor in this system of authority
the last easily secured the predominant place.
(See Harnack, History of Dogma, II, ch ii, ET.)

(2) General councils.—The authority of the
episcopacy was organized into a permanent and
general form in the councils, to whose decision
obedience was demanded on pain of execommunica-
tion. The councils professed and believed that they
were only defining the teaching that had always
obtained in the church, and therefore invested
themselves and their decisions with the authority
of Christ.

(3) Romanism.—During the Middle Ages, the
church of Rome concentrated in itself, that is, in
its episcopacy, all the authority of tradition, bishops,
councils and whatever else had held sway over the
mind of the church. Scripture was ignored and the
Bishop of Rome exercised the plenary authority of
God over men’s minds and lives. ‘Boniface VIII
accepted in the Bull Unam sanctam (ecelesiam) of
November 18, 1302, the Thomist doctrine of the
papacy: ‘We declare, say, define and pronounce
that it is essential to salvation that every human
creature should subject himself to the Roman
Pontiff” (Loofs, Dogmengeschichte, 307).

_ (4) Papal infallibility—This theory culminated
in 1870 in the formal declaration of the infallibility
of the pope. ‘The Roman Pontiff, when he speaks
ex cathedra . . . . has that infallibility, with which
the Divine Redeemer endowed His church, in de-
fining a doctrine of faith or morals” (Vatican Coun-
cil, 1870, Session 4, cap. 4). This authority of the
pope extends over all questions of knowledge and
conduct, of discipline and government in the whole
church. The theory is based upon the doctrine of
tradition, as laid down in the Council of Chaleedon.
“The doctrine of Catholic teaching is, that the body
of publicly revealed doctrine has received no ob-


339


jective increase since the days of the apostles,” and
‘it is no change of doctrine when that which has
always been held implicitly becomes the subject
of an explicit declaration’ (Hunter, Outlines of
Dogmatic Theology, I, 159, 164). Newman and
recent modernists, however, concede a development
in the doctrines of the church, but on the basis of
the traditional teaching derived from the apostles.
But once a development is conceded, questious
arise as to its principles and conditions, and the
whole authority that rests upon them falls to
the ground by the mere fact of an appeal from it
to the principles that govern its development.
The attempt to evade criticism by positing the
miraculous preservation of the tradition from error
involves a further appeal from the supposed au-
thority to a hypothetical miracle for which there is
no tittleof evidence. All the evidence is against it.
The history of the church shows that it has been as
liable to error, and as readily influenced by natural
conditions, as any other human institution.

(5) Inerrancy of Scripture—When Protestants
sought an external authority, they posited the
inerrancy and infallibility of the Bible, and the
whole Christian faith was founded upon that dogma.
“Holy Scripture is the judge, or rather the voice of
the supreme and infalhble judge, the Holy Spirit,
and the norm to which an inferior judge should
refer in deciding controversies of faith, and according
to which alone he should give sentence” (Quenstedt,
quoted in Hutterus Redivivus, 119, 10th ed). Protes-
tants found it necessary to interpret Scripture,
and to define doctrines in synods and councils, but
their decisions had authority only because they
were supposed to be expositions of Scripture, and
in that sense, the expression of God’s mind. They
differed from the “Catholic” councils in that they
claimed no authority of their own and repudiated
any authority that might be derived from tradition
or the ministerial office.

(6) Anglican appeal to antiquity —In the Anglican
church too, the Scriptures as infallible were the
ultimate authority, but some kind of a coérdinate
authority was claimed for the priesthood as stand-
ing in the succession of the apostles, and for the
church Fathers and councils of the first six cents.
And the tendency has been to lay increasing
emphasis on the latter factors, as criticism has
undermined the literal and external authority of
Scripture.

(7) Limitations of external authority —All the
above-mentioned theories contain an element of
truth, and the authorities they posit have in their
turns ruled the minds and lives of men; but none
of them can be regarded as adequate and final
expressions of the mind of God to man. (a) It is
superfluous to demonstrate that they are not in-
fallible; in spite of that they might still be all the
authority that man can have or need. (b) They all
rest on the assumption that God’s self-revelation
came to an end with the apostolic age. The Bib-
lical theory admittedly does, and the tradition
theories strictly interpreted are in exactly the same
case. An authority resting upon a _ traditional
teaching handed down faithfully from the apostles
would differ in no essential respect from one resting
upon the written words of the apostles. They
would be equally limited, literal, external and
mechanical. But problems of mind and conduct
have arisen, which the apostles never contemplated,
and which their teaching (whether preserved in
written or oral tradition matters nothing) could
not solve. (c) As a matter of fact no traditional
teaching of the apostles supplementing their writ-
ings has ever been discovered or can be discovered.
What has been put forward as such is in manifest
contradiction to their writings. (d) The idea that


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Authority


there is a consensus of opinion among church
Fathers is equally illusory. If there were, it would
need to be proved that such opinion could have any
binding authority in religion. (e) The Bible is not
one body of truth all standing at the same level,
and whatever view of its inspiration may be held,
some further authority will be needed to discrimi-
nate between the lower and the higher in its teaching.
(f) Above all, an authority which is merely external
and objective is no authority at all to the mature
religious life. Blind submission to any external
authority, creed, church or book, is the condition of
a slave, and in such case “our spiritual intelligence
is not quickened and developed by communion with
the infinite wisdom, but arrested and quelled. Only
then, on the other hand, are we spiritually enfran-
chised when we receive a revelation as from God,
not because we are awed or terrified or allured by
our-selfish interests into reception of it, but because
our own minds and hearts respond to it, because we
see and know it to be true” (J. Caird, University Ser-
mons [1898], 204-5).

Theories of internal authority are in the nature

of the case not so easily classified or defined as those

of external; nor have they as yet
2. Internal filled so large a place in the public
Authority life of the church. But it would be a

serious error to suppose that all the
men who gave their adherence to systems of exter-
nal authority lived in mere subjection to them.
The history of mysticism in the church is the his-
tory of independent thought resting in a direct knowl-
edge of God that transcended all external authority.
Montanism and Gnosticism each in its own way
appealed to an inner criterion of truth. All heresies
involved some independent judgment, and appealed
to authorities that were neither objective nor es-’
tablished. The Protestant Reformation was an
open revolt against external authority, and al-
though it resulted for a time in the substitution of
another external authority, neither its original mo-
tive, nor its permanent force had any kinship with
it. Luther’s free criticism of the Bible, and Cal-
vin’s appeal to the testimony of the Holy Spirit as
the final principle of its interpretation, are well
known. No body of Protestants at present founds
its faith on the mere letter of Scripture or creed.
Inward authority has been conceived in many ways
and expressed by many terms, such as the Logos
(Gr apologists); the Paraclete (Montanus); ecstasy
(Mystics); knowledge as opposed to faith or creed
(Gnostics); the personal experience of faith (Luther) ;
the testimony of the Holy Spirit (Calvin); the inner
light (Quakers); individual experience (Pietists);
practical reason (Kant); religious feeling (Schleier-
macher); the historical Christ (Ritschl); conscience
(Martineau); the living Christ (R. W. Dale);
the consciousness of Christ (A. M. Fairbairn);
the Christ of history and of experience (D. W. For-
est) and many more. The variety suggests at
first the denial rather than the affirmation of au-
thority, but it is only in such a variety that the
principles of an adequate authority can be recog-
nized.

The ultimate authority in religion is God as He
reigns in men’s hearts. But both the experience .
itself and the expression and interpretation of it
vary with each individual. A religious authority
to be real and effective must win the response of
the human spirit, and in that personal relation of
Spirit with spirit lie the conditions of variation.
Yet human reason and conscience everywhere tend
to acknowledge one standard, to recognize one ideal
and to obey one Lord. Nothing can force such a
uniformity but the inward fitness of one supreme
revelation to the common demands of humanity.
No agreement yet exists as to the possibility or


Authorized VS THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


340


reality of such a revelation. But wherever men
lend themselves to the spiritual contact of Jesus
Christ with their souls, without the intervention of
human creeds or institutions, their conscience and
reason approve His moral supremacy and their
spirits recognize His intimate knowledge of the
Father.

LireraturEe.—Besides books


Bruce, Chief End of Revelation;
and Oracles of God;


already mentioned,
Sanday, Inspiration,
Oman, Vision and Authority, and
The Problem of Faith and Freedom; A. M. Fairbairn,
Catholicism, Roman and Anglican; Sabatier, The Reli-
gions of Authority; Watson, The Philosophical Basis of
Religion; Kaftan, The Truth of the Christian Religion;
Gwatkin, The Knowledge of God; Iverach, art. ‘‘ Author-
ity" in Hastings, Enc of Theol. and Ethics; E. O.
Davies, Prolegomena to Systematic Theology, esp. for
Bibliography.
T. Rees


AUTHORIZED, 6’-thor-iz’d, VERSION. See
ENGLIsH VERSIONS.


AVA, a’va. See Avva.


AVAIL, a-val’ (0, shdwah, “to be equal,”
‘hence “to be enough,’ “to avail’): Used in the
sense of “satisfy” (Est 5 13). Queen Esther’s
exceptional favor availed not to satisfy Haman,
because of his insane jealousy of his rival Morde-
cai. "Irxtw, ischiid, ‘to be strong,” tr4 also “pre-
vail’ (Rev 12 8); with a negative signifies in-
competence, e.g. the impossibility of redemptive
merit or power in an outward ceremony or act
(Gal 6 6; 6 15 AV): “neither circumcision avail-
eth anything,” contrasted with the efficacy of faith
‘Sn Christ Jesus.’ Used also to express the efficacy
of prayer (Jas 6 16).


AVARAN, av’a-ran: A surname of Eleazar, the
third son of Mattathias (1 Macc 2 5). It is
doubtfully conjectured that Eleazar received this
surname from the episode related in 1 Macc 6
43-46; the word may mean “‘the piercer,” referring
to his stabbing of the elephant. Some connect it
with VI, har, ‘to be white,” and connect it with
Eleazar’s white complexion. The Syr reads ‘“Chav-
ran” and the Vulg ‘‘Abaron”; the LXX in 6 43 gives
Sauardn which is an error for Hledzaros atiran; LXX
V corrects to airan.

AVEN, a’ven (78, Gwen, “emptiness,” “vanity’’):
Used in Ezk 30 17 for On or Heliopolis, in Egypt.
See On. Asa term of contempt Hosea calls Beth-el
“Beth-aven” (4 15; 10 5). So Amosspeaks of some
valley near Damascus as “‘the valley of Aven’’ (i.e.
of the idol, 1 5), m which Baalbek (Heliopolis) was
situated. The word is rendered “‘idol’ in Isa 66 3.


AVENGE, a-venj’, AVENGER, a-venj’ér:

Avenge.—The general idea connected with this
word is that of inflicting punishment upon the
wrongdoer. Since emphasis may be placed upon
the deed itself, the wrongdoer, or the injured party,
the vb. is found an intransitive (only Lev 19 18;
see below), transitive (28 4 8 et al.); and also
active (Dt 32 43), passive (Jer 5 9) and reflexive
(Est 8 13). In 1 8°26 26 ff avenge is tr? from
JW", yasha‘, “to save” (RVm “thine own hand
saving thee”), in Hos 1 4 from IPB, pakadh, “to
visit,” and in 2 S 18 19 ff from ODW, shaphat, “to
judge,”’ but the usual Heb word is OP2, nakam, or
derivatives, “to avenge.” The tr in RV differs
in some places from AV: Nu 31 3 (RV “execute
Jeh’s vengeance’; cf 2S 22 48; Ps 18 47; Lev
26 25); Lev 19 18 (RV ‘take vengeance’); Jgs
6 2 (RV “for that the leaders took the lead in
Israel” from 378, para‘, “to be free, to lead’).
In the NT avenge is tr? from the Gr éxdicéw,


ekdikéd, “to do justice,” “to protect” (Lk 18 3 ff
et al.) and AV Rev 18 20, xplyw, krind, “to judge’
(RV “God hath judged your judgment”’).

Avenger.—I.e. the person who inflicts punish-
ment upon the evil-doer for a wrong experienced by
himself (rom Dpi, nakam, “to avenge”; Ps 8 2
et al.) or by someone else from Na, ga’al, “to re-
deem”; Nu 365 12 ff et al.). In the NT avenger
occurs only once; “the Lord is an avenger in all
things” (1 Thess 4 6). It was the duty of the
nearest relative to execute vengeance upon the
murderer of his kin: he became the go’él. With
reference to the protective legislation and custom,
see Gont. Cf Bioop; Revencn, REVENGER.

é A. L. Bresiica

AVERSE, a-virs’ (AW, shubh, “to turn back,”

“vetreat’’): Quiet, peaceful wanderers (Mic 2 8).


AVIM, av’im. See Avvo.


AVIMS, av’imz (Dt 2 23). See Avvmm.


AVITES, 'vits.


AVITH, a’vith ("Y, ‘dwith): The royal city of
Hadad king of Edom (Gen 36 35; 1 Ch 1 46).
The LXX reads Ter@alp, Getthaim. There is no clue
to its identification.


AVOID, a-void’: Archaic use in 1 8 18 11 for
“escaped.” In RV of NT only in 2 Cor 8 20
(eredrbuevor, stellbmenot with negative), lit. “ar-
ranging that not,” etc, i.e. by anticipation providing
that something should not occur. In AV for “turn
away from,” éxxdlvere, ekklinete: Rom 16 17; 1 Tim
6 20; “refuse,” mapairod, paraitot, 2 Tim 2 23;
mwepiataco, pertistaso, Tit 3 9.


AVOUCH, a-vouch’: In EV only in Dt 26 17.
18, in the sense of “to confess,” “avow,” “publicly
and solemnly declare.” The Heb form is likewise
unique (Hiph. of ’amar).


AVVA, av’a (R32, ‘awwa’; AV Ava, a’va): A
province, the people of which Shalmaneser king of
Assyria placed in the cities of Samaria in the room
of the children of Israel taken into exile by him
(2 K 17 24). It is probably the same as Ivva
(2 K 18 34; 19 13; Isa 37 13), a province con-
quered by Assyria.


AVVIM, av’im, AVITES, &A’vits (D"°9, ‘awwim;
‘Evaior, Heuatoi, also unaspirated; also used to
represent the name of the Hivites): The early in-
habitants of the southern extremity of Canaan after-
ward occupied by the Philis (Dt 2 23; cf Josh 13
3.4, AV “Avim,” 4’vim). The Avvim of Josh 18 23
was a town of Benjamin, not a people. Gesenius
supposes the name to mean “‘dwellers in the desert,”
but it was more probably the name of some pre-Sem
tribe. The Avvim are described as living in Hdgérim
or “encampments” and extending as far as the out-
skirts of Gaza.


AWAIT, a-wat’: Only in Acts 9 24 AV, in its
now obsolete sense as a noun, “ambush”: “their
laying await was known of Saul.” RV “their plot.”


AWAKE, a-wak’ (7P7, yakac, “to waken”;
“J, ‘ir, “to rouse up” from sleep; éyelpe,
egetré, ‘‘to arouse from sleep”): The ordinary terms
for awaking from natural slumber: as of Jacob at
Bethel (Gen 28 16); of Solomon at Gibeon (1 K
3 15); of Jesus in the storm-tossed boat (Lk 8 24).
Used fig. with striking effect of awaking from mental,
moral and spiritual sleep: as when Deborah calls


See AVVIM.


341


upon herself to awake to the fervor and eloquence
ot poetry (Jgs 6 12); of Zion’s awaking to moral
vigor and beauty (Isa 52 1); of waking from
spiritual death (Eph 6 14); from the grave in
resurrection (Dn] 12 2). Poetically used of the
rising north wind (Cant 4 16); of music (Ps 108 2);
of the sword in battle (Zec 13 7); of a lover’s
affection (Cant 2 7); of God Himself responding
to prayer (Ps 59 4). Also used of moral awaking,
as from drunkenness: éxvidw, eknépho, ‘to become
sober” (cf Joel 1 5). Dwicut M. Pratr


AWAY WITH: (1) “To endure,” “to bear with”
(Isa 1 18), “I cannot away with iniquity and the
solemn meeting,” ie. endure the combination of
wickedness and worship. In the Heb merely, ‘‘I am
unable iniquity and the solemn meeting.” (2) To
destroy (aipw, aird). Found in such expressions as
pant 22 22, “Away with such a fellow from the
earth.


AWE, 6: Fear mingled with reverence and
wonder, a state of mind inspired by something
terrible or sublime. In AV and RY it occurs in
Ps 4 4: “Stand in awe, and sin not’ (where RVm
has, ‘Be ye angry,” so LXX; ef Eph 4 26); Ps
33 8; 119 161. In the following passages RV sub-
stitutes ‘‘stand in awe of” for AV “fear”: Ps 22 23
(Gr phobotimenot); Isa 29 23; 1S 18 15; Mal 2 5;
and in He 12 28 it substitutes “awe” for AV
“reverence” (Gr déos, here only in NT). In all
these passages, except 18 18 15 (Gr ewlabetio,
where it describes Saul’s feeling toward David), the
word stands for man’s attitude of reverential fear
toward God. This is the characteristic attitude of
the pious soul toward God in the Scriptures, esp. in
the OT. It arises from a consciousness of the in-
finite power, sublimity and holiness of God, which
fills the mind with the “‘fear of the Lord,” and a
dread of violating His law. See Fran.

D. Miatt Epwarps

AWL, 61 (2299, marge): “Bore his ear through
with an awl” (Ex 216; Dt 1617). The ear
was pierced as being the organ of hearing, thus
signifying the servant’s promise of obedience. See
Bors.


Awls.


AX (AXE), AX-HEAD, aks‘hed: Nine different
Heb words have been rendered ‘‘ax’’:

(1) JI", garzen. This unquestionably was one
of the larger chopping instruments, as the uses to
which it was put would imply (Dt 19 5; 20 19;
1 K 67; Isa 10 15). The modern ax used by the
woodchoppers in Syria has a shape much like the
ancient stone and bronze axes, with the exception
that it is fastened to the handle by passing the
latter through a hole in the ax-head, whereas the
Egyp sculptures show that their ax-heads were held
to the handles by means of thongs. The so-called
battle-ax found at Tell el-Hesy was probably fas-
tened in this way. Syrian peasants are frequently
seen carrying in their belts small hatchets the heads
of which are shaped like a battle-ax and which are
bound to the handles by thongs.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 4tthorized VS


(2) “EP, ma‘deGr, is used in Isa 44 12 (AV ren-
ders “tongs”’) and in Jer 10 3. °


Assyrian Ax.


(3) OP, kardom, is used in Jgs 9 48; 18 13
20.21; Ps 74 5; Jer 46 22. The present Arab.
word, kudim, which is the name for the native
adze, is from the same origin. Ancient forms of the
adze are shown in Figs. 4 and 7._ The adzeis the
only chopping instrument of the Syrian carpenter.
He uses it for many purposes, where a forcigner
would use a saw or chisel or plane, and with a skill
which theforeigner envies. Many students of Syrian
life believe that the adze is a tool which has survived
from the early Heb times.


Egyptian Ax.


(4) DTNB, bareel (Dt 195; 2K 65): The
interest associated with this word is that it literally
means “iron,” although the context indicates that
it means “ax.” If the word iron was not used
here to mean ‘‘metal,” then iron axes were used by
the children of Israel. If iron axes existed, how-
ever, they have long since disappeared as the re-
sult of corrosion, since the only ones discovered
have been of stone, copper or bronze. See Bronze.


(5) VIN, maghzerah (2 S 12 31) is lit. “a
cutting instrument,” and might be rendered, “a
blade” or sickle.


Axes.


(6) M90, meghérah (1 Ch 20 2), trdin this one
passage as axes, but better tr? ‘‘saws.’’

(7) AV], herebh (Ezk 26 9), rendered ax in this
passage only. It is usually tr’ sword. It could
also mean pickax.


Axle
Azazel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


342


(8) Sow, kashshil (Ps 74 6 AV), lit. “a feller,”
hence an ax.

(9) TE, mappég (Jer 51 20), lit. “a smiter,”
hence a war club or battle-ax. The Gr word used
in the NT is 4é»y, axiné (Mt 38 10; Lk 8 9).

James A. Parc

AXLE-TREE, ak’s’l-tré. See Sea, Taz Mouten.

AYIN, a’yén (717, ‘ayin, “eye” or “fountain”):
The 16th letter of the Heb alphabet, so named,
probably, because the original form resembled the
eye. ‘Ayin (¥) is usually neglected in pronun-
ciation, and the inverted comma (‘) is the sign
most commonly employed to represent it in trans-
literation. The same sound is found in the Arab.
and other Sem languages. The Arabs have two
pronunciations, one a very strong guttural formed
at the back of the palate, something like a rattled
ror rg, the other similar in quality, only less harsh
and guttural. The LXX reproduced ‘ayin in some
cases by gamma, g. The numerical value of this
letter is 70. ‘Ayin begins each verse of the 16th
section of Ps 119in the Heb. W. W. Daviss


AZAEL, az’a-el (’Afdandos, Azdélas; cf Asahel
[Ezr 10 15]): Father of Jonathan, one of two chief
investigators of foreign marriages (1 Esd 9 14).


AZAELUS, az-a-é/lus (B, 'Afdndos, Azdélas;
A, ’Atand, Azaél; omitted in Ezr 10): A., son of
Ezora, put away his “strange wife” (1 Esd 9 34).


AZAL, a’zal.


AZALIAH, az-a-li’a (MOEN, “adgalyahu, “Jeh
has set aside’): A son of Meshullam and father of
Shaphan the scribe, famous in connection with the
discovery of the law in the reign of King Josiah
(2 K 22 8).

AZANIAH, az-a-ni’a (WRITS, ’dzanyah, “Jeh has
given ear’): A son of Jeshua, a Levite who signed
the covenant (Neh 10 9).


AZAPHION, a-za’fi-on.
AZARA, az’a-ra.
AZARAEL, a-zii’ra-el.
AZARATIAS, az-a-ra’yas (B, ’Aftapatas, Azaraias;
A, Zapatas, Saraias; AV Saraias); cf Seraiah [Ezr
7 1)): An ancestor of Ezra (1 Esd 8 1).
AZAREEL, a-zir’é-el.


AZAREL, az’a-rcl (NTI, ‘dzar’él, “God is
helper”; AV reads Azareel in nos. 1-5, Azarael in


See AZEL.


See ASSAPHIOTH.
See Asara.


See AzaREL.


See AZAREL.


no. 6):

(1) A Korahite who entered the army of David
at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 6).

(2) A musician in the temple appointed by lot;
son of Heman (1 Ch 25 18; cf Uazziel, ver 4).

(3) A captain of the tribe of Dan in the service
of David (1 Ch 27 22).

(4) One of those who had “strange wives,” a
son of Bani (Ezr 10 41).

(5) The father of Amashai, a priest who dwelt
in Jerus after the Exile (Neh 11 13).

(6) A priest’s son who played the trumpet in the
procession when the wall was dedicated (Neh 12
36). A. L. Bresiicn


AZARIAH, az-a-ria (TY and MY,
‘dzaryahu and ‘dzaryah, “Jeh has helped”):

(1) King of Judah. See Uzzran.

(2) A Judahite of the house of Ethan the Wise
(1 Ch 2 8).


(3) The son of Jehu, descended from an Egyp
through the daughter of Sheshan (1 Ch 2 38).

(4) A son of Ahimaaz and grandson of Zadok
(1 Ch 6 9).

(5) A son of Zadok the high priest and an offi-
cial of Solomon (1 K 4 2).

(6) A high priest and sou of Johanan (1 Ch 6 10).

(7) A Levite, ancestor of Samuel, and Heman
the singer (1 Ch 6 36).

(8) A son of Nathan and captain of Solomon’s
tax collectors (1 K 4 5).

(9) A prophet in the reign of King Asa; his
father’s name was Oded (2 Ch 15 1-8).

(10 and 11) Two sons of Jehoshaphat, king of
Judah (2 Ch 21 2).

(12) King of Judah (2 Ch 22 6, called Ahaziah
in ver 1).

(13) A son of Jeroham, who helped to overthrow
Athaliah, and place Joash on the throne (2 Ch 23 1).

(14) A son of Johanan and a leading man of
Ephraim, mentioned in connection with the emanci-
pated captives taken by Pekah (2 Ch 28 12).

(15) A Levite of the family of Merari, who took
part in cleansing the temple im the days of Heze-
kiah (2 Ch 29 12).

(16) A high priest who rebuked King Uzziah
for arrogating to himself priestly functions (2 Ch
26 16-20).

(17) The father of Seraiah and son of Hilkiah
(1 Ch 6 13 f).

(18) A son of Hoshaiah, and a bitter enemy of
Jeremiah (Jer 43 2 ff).

(19) One of the royal captives taken to Babylon,
whose name was changed to Abed-nego (Dnl 1 7).

(20) The son of Maaseiah, who helped repair
the walls of Jerus (Neh 3 23 f).

(21) A Levite who assisted Ezra to expound the
Law (Neh 8 7).

(22) Apriest who sealed the covenant (Neh 10 2).

(23) A prince of Judah mentioned in connection
with the dedication of the walls of Jerus (Neh 12
32 f). W. W. Davies


AZARIAS, az-a-ri‘as (’Afapias,
'Atapelas, Azaretas):

(1) A., who put away his “strange wife” (1 Esd
9 21); cf Uzziah (Ezr 10 21).

(2) A., who stood at the right side of Ezra when
the law was read to the people (1 Esd 9 43);
omitted in Ezr 8 4.

(3) A., who interpreted the law to the people
(1 Esd 9 48); cf Azariah (Neh 8 7).

(4) A., a name assumed by the angel Raphael
(Tob 5 12; 6 6.13; 7 8; 9 2). See Rarwasrn.

(5) A., a general in the service of Judas Maccabee
(1 Macc 5 18.56.60).

(6) A., one of the three men thrown into the
fiery furnace (Three vs 2.66); cf Azariah (Dnl 1
6 ff; 2 17), Abed-nego (Dnl 1 7; a 49; 3 12 ff).

A. L. BREsLICH

AZARU, az’a-ri (B, 'Afapot, Azarati; A,
'Afovpod, Azourov; AV Azuran): The descendants
of A. returned with Zerubbabel to Jerus (1 Esd
5 15); omitted in Ezr and Neh; cf: however Azzur
(Neh 10 17).


AZAZ, a’zaz (TTY, ‘azaz, “powerful”’): A de-
scendant of Reuben (1 Ch 6 8).


AZAZEL, a-z4’zel COINTE , ‘dza@’zél; &woropmatos,
apopompaios; AV Scapegoat, RVm “‘removal’’):
I. Tre Mganine or THE Wonrp
1. The Passages to Be Considered
2. The Proposed Interpretations
2 The Etymology
(2) The Explanation
II. Whaat Is Done 1n ConneEcTION witH AZAZEL
1. The Significance of This Action
2. The Jewish Liturgy


Azarias, and


343


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Axle
Azazel


I. The Meaning of the Word.—This word is
found in connection with the ceremony of the Day
of Atonement (q.v.). According to


1. The Lev 16 8, Aaron is to cast lots upon
Passages the two goats which on the part of the
to Be Con- congregation are to serve as a sin
sidered offering (ver 5), ‘one lot for Jeh, and


the other lot for Azazel.’ In ver 10,
after the first goat has been set apart as a sin
offering for Jeh, we read: “But the goat, on which
the lot fell for Azazel, shall be set alive before Jch,
to make atonement for him, to send him away
for Azazel into the wilderness.’ In ver 26 we
read: “And he that letteth go the goat for Azazel
shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water.”
Before this, in vs 21f mention had been made of
what should be done with the goat. After the
purification of the (inner) sanctuary, of the tent of
meeting, and of the altar, the living goat is to be
brought, ‘‘and Aaron shall lay both his hands upon
the head of the live goat, and confess over him all
.... their sins; and he shall put them upon the
head of the goat, and shall send him away by the
hand of a man that is in readiness into the wilder-
ness: and the goat shall bear upon him all their
iniquities unto a solitary land: and he shall let go
the goat in the wilderness.” But in this last men-
tioned and most important passage the term under
consideration is not found.

(1) The etymology.—Some have derived the word
from ‘az+’azal (fortis abiens, ‘passing away in his
strength” or from an intentional altera-


2. The tion of ’el--‘azaz, robur Dei, “strength
Proposed of God”; cf below the angel of the Book
Interpreta- of Enoch); while others have regarded
tions the word as a broken plur. of a subst. in


the Arab. ‘azalé, and tr it as “‘Jonesome-
ness,”’ “desert.”’ Now there is an inclination to re-
gard it as a reduplication from ‘dzalzél, derived from
the root ‘dzal. If we accept this view, although it
is without certainty and an exact analogue cannot
be found, we could conclude from the way in which
this noun has been formed that we have before us
not an abstract term (remotio, “‘removal,” or abitus,
departure’), but a concrete noun, or an adj., longe
remotus (“far removed”) or porro abiens (‘going far
away”’).

(2) The explanation—In vs 10.22.26, we would
have an acceptable sense, if we regarded this word
as expressive of a distinct locality in the wilderness
(cf Jewisa Trapition, II, 2). But this_inter-
pretation is impossible, since the law in Lev 16
was given during the wanderings in the wilderness
and accordingly presupposed a constant change in
the encampment, even if this should be regarded
only as the historical background. By the use of
the same preposition l*¢ in connection with Jeh
and Azazel, it seems natural to regard the expres-
sions as entirely || and to think of some personal
being. Some interpret this word as referring to a
demon of the wilderness (cf Ps 106 37; Dt 32 17;
Lev 17 7; 2 Ch 11 15; Isa 18 21; 34 14; Mt
12 43 ff; Lk 11 24ff; Rev 18 2) and explain
the term as “one who has separated himself from
God,” or “he who has separated himself,” or “he
who misleads others.” But a demon of this kind
could not possibly be placed in contrast to Jeh
in this way; and asin the Book of En 6 6; 8 1 ff;
96; 10 4 ff; 18 1 ff; 69 2 one of the most promi-
nent of the fallen angels who taught mankind the
arts of war and luxury, revealed secrets to them,
and is now bound in the wilderness, and is there
preserved for the final judgment, because he was
mainly responsible for the presence of evil in the
world, is called Azael (also Azazel, or Azalzel), it
is highly probable that this name was taken from
Lev 16. In later times the word Azazel was by


many Jews and also by Christian theologians, such
as Origen, regarded as that Satan himself who had
fallen away from God. In this interpretation the
contrast found in ver 8, in case it is to be regarded
as a full parallelism, would be perfectly correct.
But it must be acknowledged that in Holy Scripture,
Satan is nowhere called by the name of Azazel,
and just as little is the wilderness regarded as his
permanent place of abode. Against these last two
interpretations we must also recall that in the most
significant passage, viz. vs 20 ff, the term Azazel
is not found at all. The same is true in the case
of the ceremony in connection with the purification
of leprous people and houses (Lev 14 7 ff. 49 ff),
which throughout suggests Lev 16. In this place


we have also the sevenfold sprinkling (cf 14 16 with


Lev 16 14 f); and in addition two animals, in this
case birds, are used, of which the one is to be slain
for the purpose of sprinkling the blood, but the
other, after it has been dipped into the blood of the
one that has been slain, is to be allowed to fly away.
In this way the essential thought in Lev 16 as
also in Lev 14 seems to be the removal of the
animal in either case, and it is accordingly advisable
to interpret Azazel adjectively, i.e. to forego find-
ing a complete parallelism in ver 8, and to regard
the preposition in connection with Jeh as used
differently from its use with Azazel, and to trans-
late as follows: ‘‘And Aaron shall cast lots over
both goats, the one lot [i.e. for the one goat] for
Jeh, and one lot for the goat that is destined to go
far away.” On the preposition l* used with the
second Azazel in ver 10 cf Ex 21 2. With this
interpretation a certain hardness yet remains for our
linguistic sense, because we cannot find a good tr
for the adj. But in favor of this interpretation and
against the personal interpretation we can appeal
also to the feeling of the LX X translators who trans-
late apopompaios, diestalménos, and also to that of
Aquilos, who translates trdgos apoludmenos, apo-
leluménos, kekrataioménos, and of Symmachus who
translates aperchémenos, aphieménos. (The general
idea expressed by all these words is ‘removal,”
“sending away,” “releasing” or “dismissal.’”’) It is
true that the LXX in one place translates eis tén
apopémpén, which however could be also an ab-
stract cireumlocution for a conception that, though
used elsewhere, is yet awkward. In the Vulg we
have caper emissarivus and Luther says ‘‘der ledige
Bock,” which are probably based on a wrong ety-
mology, since ‘éz signifies only a goat or perhaps
this word ‘‘Bock” is here only supplied from the
connection, and that quite correctly, so that Luther
and the Vulg can also be cited in favor of our
interpretation.
If. What Is Done in Connection with Azazel.—
Both goats, according to ver 5, are to be regarded
as a single sin-sacrifice, even should
1. The we interpret Azazel as demon or
Significance Satan, and we are accordingly not at
of This all to understand that a sacrifice was
Action brought to these beings. This too is
made impossible by the whole tenor
of the OT in general, as of Lev 16 in particular, so
that in ver 8 the two members introduced by the
preposition l¢ would not at all be beings of exactly
the same importance. Both goats, so to say,
represent two sides of the same thing. The second
is necessary to make clear what the first one, which
has been slain, can no longer represent, namely, the
removal of the sin, and accordingly has quite often
aptly been called the hircus redivivus. But what
is to be represented finds its expression in the
ceremony described in vs 20f. Whatever may be
the significance of the laying on of hands in other
connections, whether the emphasis is placed more on
the disposal or on the appropriation of the property,


Azaziah
Baal


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


344


at this place it certainly is only a symbol of the
transfer of guilt, which is confessed over the goat
and is then carried into the wilderness by the goat
‘upon which it has been laid. In order to make
this transfer all the more impressive, both the
hands are here brought into action, while e.g. in
Lev 1 4 only one hand is used. The fact that the
goat is accompanied by somebody and that it is to
be taken to an uninhabited place is to indicate the
absolute impossibility of its return, i.e. the guilt
has been absolutely forgiven and erased, a deep
thought made objectively evident in a transparent
manner and independently of the explanation of
Azazel, which is even yet not altogether certain.
In the personal interpretation, we could have, in
addition to the idea of the removal of the guilt,
also a second idea, namely, that Azazel can do no
harm to Israel, but must be content with his claim

to a goat which takes Israel’s place.
The actions in connection with Azazel, as was
also the case with the Day of Atonement, were
interpreted more fully by the Talm


2. The and the traditions based on it (cf
Jewish ATONEMENT, Day or, 11[,2). The lots
Liturgy could be made of different, materials;


in later times they were made of gold.
The manner of casting the lots was described in
full. The goat that was to be sent into the wilder-
ness was designated by a black mark on the head,
the other by one on the neck. On the way from
Jerus to the wilderness, huts were erected. From
a distance it was possible to see how the goat was
hurled backward from a certain cliff, called Béth-
Hadfidi (Béth-hudédan, 12 miles E. of Jerus).
By means of signals made with garments, news
was at once sent to Jerus when the wilderness had
been reached. WiLHELM M6LLER


AZAZIAH, az-a-zi’a (WITTY , ‘dzazyaha, ‘“Yabwe
is strong,” or ‘‘strengthens”’):

(1) A Levite musician who participated in the
services held on the return of the ark to Jerus
(1 Ch 15 21). His name is omitted from the list
in ver 18.

(2) Father of Hoshea, who was the leader of
Ephraim at the time that David enumerated the
people (1 Ch 27 20).

(3) A Levite who had charge of the offerings
brought to the temple in the days of Hezekiah
(2 Ch 31 13).


AZBASARETH, az-bas’a-reth: The name of an
Assyr king. AV form ‘‘Azbasareth” comes from
the Vulg. See AsBASARETH.


AZBUK, az’buk (puTY , ‘dzbaik): The father of
a certain Nehemiah—not the great governor of the
same name, though a contemporary (Neh 3 16).


AZEKAH, a-zé'ka (MpI2, ‘dzékah): A town of
some importance in the Shephelah of Judah men-
tioned (Josh 15 35) next to Socoh. In Josh 10
10 the defeated kings of the Amorites are described
as flying before Joshua ‘‘by the way of the ascent of
Beth-horon . . . . to Azekah, and unto Makkedah”
and (ver 11) as the host fled “Jeh cast, down great
stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and
they died.’ In 18 17 1 it is recorded that before
David’s combat with Goliath, the Philis “gathered
together at Socoh, which belongeth to Judah, and
encamped between Socoh and Azekah, in Ephes-
dammin.” In 2 Ch 11 9 it is mentioned as one
of the frontier cities which Rehoboam fortified and
in Jer 34 7,it is one of the two fortified cities re-
maining to Judah in the Shephelah which Nebu-
chadnezzar was besieging. ‘‘Azekah and the towns
{m, “‘daughters’’] thereof” is mentioned among the


cities reoccupied by Jews returning after the Exile
(Neh 11 30). In all the three last references the
place is mentioned along with Lachish. d

All the data suit Tell Zakaréyeh on the N. side
of the Vale of Elah (Wédy es-Sunt) and some 3 miles
N.W. of Socoh (Kh. Shuweikeh). This site, which
was partially excavated by the Palestine Eexplora-
tion Fund, is one of great natural strength. “The
hill stands almost isolated, rising abruptly for
almost 350 ft. above the Vale of Elah; .... to
the W. the fall is also very great, while to the S.
the éell is joined by a neck of land (about 100 ft.
below the summit) to a hill behind.” The summit
is about 350 yds. by 150 yds., and is much larger
than Tell el-Hesy (Lachish) (Bliss). Excavations
showed that it was a very ancient site which had
been powerfully fortified, and the rock under the
city was excavated in a series of very extraordinary
underground chambers which could be used as
places of refuge. The site suits the narrative of
Joshua’s battle very well, as there is a long-used
high route running N. to 5S. from the neighborhood
of Ajalon. Its position as a frontier fortress is
comparable with that of Lachish: the name Za-
karéyeh, seems to be a survival of Azekah.

See PEFS, 1899, 10 ff; PHF, Ili, 441.

< E. W. G. Masterman

AZEL, 4’zel (O¥8, ’dcél, “noble”):

(1) A descendant of King Saul, through Jona-
than (1 Ch 8 37f; 9 43 f).

(2) Azel, a’zel, AV Azal (OBR, 'acél; "Acatp,
Asaél; Zec 14 5): A place not far from Jerus.
There may be an echo of the name in that of Wady
Yasiul, to the right of ‘Ain el-Laz, in Wady en-Nar.


AZEM, &’zem: AV form for Ezem (thus RV)
(Josh 15 29; 19 3).


AZEPHOURITH, az-é-fi’rith. See ArsiPHURITH.


AZETAS, a-zé’tas (’Afnras, Azétds): The head
of a family accompanying Zernbbabel out of cap-
tivity (1 Esd 6 15). Neither Ezra nor Nehemiah
gives this name in his list.


AZGAD, az’gad (“aT , ‘azgadh, “strong is Gad’’):
In the list of those who returned from Babylon
with Zerubbabel are mentioned “‘the children of
Azgad” (1,222, Hzr 212; 2,322, Neh 7 17).
110 males with their chief returned with Ezra
(Ezr 8 12). Azgad was among the leaders who
signed the Covenant after Nehemiah (Neh 10 15).


AZIEI, a-zi'é-i: An ancestor of Ezra (2 Esd 1 2).
eva (Ezr T 3) and Ozias (1 Esd 8 2; AV
zias).


AZIEL, a’zi-el (ONY, az’el, “God is power”;
cf HPN, 210, 309): A Levite singer who played
une psalteries (1 Ch 15 20); cf Jaaziel (1 Ch 15
18).


AZIZA, a-zi'za (RTT, ‘dziza’, “the powerful’):
A. had taken a foreign wife (Ezr 10 27): cf Zardeus
(1 Esd 9 28 RV).


AZMAVETH, az-ma’veth (MATY, ‘azmaweth):

(1) One of David’s 30 mighty men (2 S 23 31;
1 Ch 11 38).

(2) A descendant of Jonathan, the son of Saul
(1 Ch 8 36; 9 42).

(3) Father of two warriors who joined David at
Ziklag (1 Ch 12 3).

(4) The name of one set over David’s treasures
ce 27 25). Some identify him with (1) and


345


AZMAVETH, az-ma’veth (MVAT?, ‘azmaweth;
*Aopad or ’ALnd0, Asmdth or Azméth, ‘‘strong one
of death”; Ezk 2 24): Is probably identical with
el-Hizmd, a village a little to the N. of ‘Anata
(Anathoth). It corresponds to Beth-azmaveth
(Neh 7 28).


AZMON, az’mon (JVAX2, ‘agmon; 'Acepdva,
Aseména, ‘‘strong’): On the S.W. border of
Israel (Nu 34 4.5; Josh 15 4). Trumbull identi-
fies it with ‘Ain el-Qaseimeh, N.W. of Kadesh
Barnea (Kad. Bar., 117, 289 f).


AZNOTH-TABOR, az’noth-ta’bor (TAM MTR,
-aznoth tabhor, ‘“‘peaks of Tabor”): A placein western
Naphtali, evidently in the vicinity of Mt. Tabor
(Josh 19 34). The exact locality is not. known.


AZOR, 4’zor (‘Afap, Azér, “help”[?]): An an-
cestor of Jesus Christ (Mt 1 13 f).


AZOTUS, a-zd’tus. See AsHpop (1 Macc 9 15;
Acts 8 40).


AZRIEL, as'ri-el (ON™TY, ‘aari’al, “God’s
help’):

(1) One of the leading men of the half-tribe of
Manasseh, E. of the Jordan, who with others of
his tribe was carried captive by the king of Assyria
(1 Ch 5 24 ff).

(2) The father of Jerimoth of the tribe of Naph-
tali in the reign of King David (1 Ch 27 19).

(3) The father of Seraiah, one of the officers sent
by Jehoiakim to arrest Jeremiah and Baruch
(Jer 36 26).


AZRIKAM, az-ri’kam (OPT, ‘azrikam, “my
help has arisen’):


BAAL, ba’al:

I. Name anp CrARaAcCTER OF BAA
II. Arrrisutes oF Baa
III. Baat-Worsuip
IV. TeEempves, Etc

. Uses or THE Name
VI. Forms or Baa
. Baal-berith
. Baal-gad
. Baal-hamon
. Baal-hermon
. Baal-peor
. Baal-zebub

Baal (9B, ba‘al; BéoA, Baal, or Badd, Badl):
The Bab Belu or Bel, “Lord,” was the title of the
supreme god among the Canaanites.

I. Name and Character of Baal.—In Babylonia
it was the title specially applied to Merodach of
Babylon, which in time came to be used in place of
his actual name. As the word in Heb also means
“possessor,” it has been supposed to have originally
signified, when used in a religious sense, the god of a
particular piece of land or soil. Of this, however,
there is no proof, and the sense of ‘“‘possessor’’
is derived from that of “lord.” The Bab Bel-
Merodach was a Sun-god, and so too was the Can
Baal whose full title was Baal-Shemaim, “lord of
heaven.” The Phoen writer Sanchuniathon (Philo
Byblius, Fragmenta II) accordingly says that the
children of the first generation of mankind ‘in time
of drought stretched forth their hands to heaven
toward the sun; for they regarded him as the sole
Lord of heaven, and called him Beel-samén, which
means ‘Lord of Heaven’ in the Phoen language and
is equivalent to Zeus in Gr.” Baal-Shemaim had a
temple at Umm el-Awamid between Acre and Tyre,


Cie DO


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Azaziah
Baal


(1) A descendant of King David through Zerub-
babel (1 Ch 8 23).

(2) A prince of Judah in the time of Ahaz. He was
slain by Zichri, an Ephraimite soldier (2 Ch 28 7).

(3) One of Azel’s sons, a Benjamite, descended
from King Saul (1 Ch 8 38; 9 44).

(4) A Levite of the house of Merari and a resi-
dent of Jerus (1 Ch 9 14; Neh 11 15).


AZUBAH, a-zi’ba (T2112, ‘dztbhah, “desola-
tion’):

(1) A wife of Caleb, by whom she had three sons
(1 Ch 2 18f).

(2) The daughter of Shilhi and mother of King
Jehoshaphat (1 K 22 42; 2 Ch 20 31).


AZUR, a’zur. See Azzur.
AZURAN, az’f-ran, a-zit’ran. See Azarvu.


AZZAH, az’a (UY, ‘azzah, “strong’”’): AV form
(Dt 2 28; 1 K 4 24; Jer 25 20) for RV “Gaza.”


AZZAN, az’an (719 , ‘azedn, “strong” or “thorn”):
Father of Paltiel of the tribe of Issachar. One of


the commissioners selected to divide the land
between the tribes (Nu 34 26).


AZZUR, az’ur (WHY, ‘azzir, “helpful’’):

(1) The father of Hananiah, a false prophet of
Gibeon in the days of Zedekiah (Jer 28 1 ff).

(2) One of those who, with Nehemiah, sealed the
covenant on the return from Babylon (Neh 10 17).

(8) The father of Jaazaniah, “one of” the princes
of the people who gave wicked counsel to the city
of Jerus (Ezk 11 1f). AV has ‘Azur’ for (1) and
(3), but the Heb form of (3) is WY, ‘azur.


and his name is found in inscriptions from the
Phoen colonies of Sardinia and Carthage.

Il. Attributes of Baal.—As the Sun-god, Baal
was worshipped under two aspects, beneficent and
destructive. On the one pa
hand he gave light and
warmth to his worship-
pers; on the other hand
the fierce heats of sum-
mer destroyed the vege-
tation he had himself
brought into being.
Hence human victims
were sacrificed to him
in order to appease his
anger in time of plague
or other trouble, the vic-
tim being usually the
first-born of the sacrificer
and being burnt alive. In
the OT this is euphemis- &
tically termed ‘‘passing” ~
the victim “through the
fire’ (2 K 16 3; 21 6).


Baal.

The forms under which
Baal was worshipped were necessarily as numerous
as the communities which worshipped him. Each
locality had its own Baal or divine “Lord” who
frequently took his name from the city or place to
which he belonged. Hence there was a Baal-Zur,


“Baal of Tyre’; Baal-hermon, “Baal of Hermon”
(Jgs 3 3); Baal-Lebanon, “Baal of Lebanon”; Baal-
Tarz, “Baal of Tarsus.’ At other times the title
was attached to the name of an individual god,
thus we have Bel-Merodach, “‘the Lord Merodach”
(or “Bel is Merodach”’) at Babylon, Baal-Melkarth


Baal
Baal-shalishah THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


346


at Tyre, Baal-gad (Josh 11 17) in the north of
Palestine. Occasionally the second element was a
noun as in Baal-Shemaim, “lord of heaven,” Baal-
zebub (2 K 1 2), “Lord of flies,” Baal-Hamman,
usually interpreted ‘Lord of heat,” but more prob-
ably “Lord of the sunpillar,” the tutelary deity of
Carthage. All these various forms of the Sun-god
were collectively known as the Baalim or ‘“Baals’’
who took their place by the side of the female Ash-
taroth and Asherim. At Carthage the female con-
sort of Baal was termed Pené-Baal, “‘the face” or
“reflection of Baal.”

HI. Baal-Worship.—In the earlier days of
Heb history the title Baal, or ‘‘Lord,’”’ was applied
to the national God of Israel, a usage which was
revived in later times, and is familiar to us in the
AV. Hence both Jonathan and David had sons
called Merib-baal (1 Ch 8 34; 9 40) and Beeliada
(1 Ch 14 7). After the time of Ahab, however,
the name became associated with the worship and
rites of the Phoen deity introduced into Samaria
by Jezebel, and its idolatrous associations accord-
ingly caused it to fall into disrepute. Hosea (2 16)
declares that henceforth the God of Israel should
no longer be called Baali, “my Baal,” and personal
names like Esh-baal (1 Ch 8 33; 9 39), and
Beeliada into which it entered were changed in
form, Baal being turned into bésheth which in Heb
at any rate conveyed the sense of “shame.”

IV. Temples, etc.—Temples of Baal at Samaria
and Jerus are mentioned in 1 K 16 32; 2 K 11
18; where they had been erected at the time when
the Ahab dynasty endeavored to fuse Israelites
and Jews and Phoenicians into a single people under
the same national Phoen god. Altars on which
incense was burned to Baal were set up in all the
streets of Jerus according to Jeremiah (11 13),
apparently on the flat roofs of the houses (Jer 32
29); and the temple of Baal contained an image of
the god in the shape of a pillar or Bethel (2 K 10
26.27). In the reign of Ahab, Baal was served in
Israel by 450 priests (1 K 18 19), as well as by
prophets (2 K 10 19), and his worshippers wore
special vestments when his ritual was performed
(2 K 10 22). The ordinary offering made to the
god consisted of incense (Jer 7 9) and burnt sacri-
fices; on extraordinary occasions the victim was
human (Jer 19 5). At times the priests worked
themselves into a state of ecstasy, and dancing round
the altar slashed themselves with knives (1 K 18
26.28), like certain dervish orders in modern Islam.

V. Use of the Name.—In accordance with its
signification the name of Baal is generally used with
the definite art.; in the LXX this often takes the
feminine form, doxbvn (aischtiné) “shame” being
intended to be read. We find the same usage
in Rom 11 4. The feminine counterpart of Baal
was Baalah or Baalath which is found in a good
many of the local names (see Baethgen, Beitrdge
zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte, 1888).

VI. Forms of Baal.—Baal-berith (M72 592,
ba‘al berith; BaadBept0, Baalberith), ‘(Covenant-
Baal,” was worshipped at Shechem
after the death of Gideon (Jgs 8 33;
9 4). In Jgs 9 46 the name is re-
placed by El-berith, ‘‘Covenant-god.”
The covenant was that made by the god with his
worshippers, less probably between the Israelites
and the native Canaanites.

Baal-gad (713 593, ba'al gadh; BadayéSa, Ba-
lagéda), ‘Baal [lord] of good luck” (or “Baal is

Gad”) was the god of a town called
2. Baal- after his name in the north of Pal,
gad which has often been identified with
Baalbek. The god is termed simply
Gad in Isa 66 11 RVm; where he is associated


i. Baal-
berith


with Meni, the Assyr Manu (AV “troop” and
‘“number’’). :

Baal-hamon (jWAM 592, ba'al hamon; Becha-
pdv, Beelamén) is known only from the fact that
Solomon had a garden at a place
of that name (Cant 8 11). Thename
is usually explained to mean ‘Baal
of the multitude,” but the cuneiform
tablets of the Tell el-Amarna age found in Pal show
that the Egyp god Amon was worshipped in Canaan
and identified there with the native Baal. We
are therefore justified in reading the name Baal-
Amon, a parallel to the Bab Bel-Merodach. The
name has no connection with that of the Cartha-
ginian deity Baal-hamman.

Baal-hermon (717077 bya , ba‘al hermon; Bada-
eppov, Balaermén) is found in the name of ‘‘the
mountain of Baal-hermon” (Jgs 3 3; cf
1 Ch 5 23), which also bore the names
of Hermon, Sirion and Shenir (Saniru
in the Assyr inscriptions), the second
name being applied to it by the Phoenicians and
the third by the Amorites (Dt 3 9). Baal-hermon
will consequently be a formation similar to Baal-
Lebanon in an inscription from Cyprus; according
to the Phoen writer Sanchuniathon (Philo Byblius,
Fragmenta II) the third generation of men “begat
sons of surprising size and stature, whose names
were given to the mountains of which they had
obtained possession.”

Baal-peor (“IP SYR, baal pdr; Becdheydp,
Beelphegér) was god of the Moabite mountains,
who took his name from Mount Peor
(Nu 23 28), the modern Fa‘tr, and
was probably a form of Chemosh
(Jerome, Comm., Isa 15). The sensual
rites with which he was worshipped (Nu 25 1-3)
indicate his connection with the Phoen Baal.

Baal-zebub (J7AT bya, ba‘al zbhabh; Baadpvia
@cés, Baalmuia Theds (‘Baal the fly god”) was

worshipped at Ekron where he had a
6. Baal- famous oracle (2 K 1 2.3.16). The
zebub name is generally tr? “the Lord of
flies,” the Sun-god being associated
with the flies which swarm in Pal during the earlier
summer months. It is met with in Assyr inscrip-
tions. In the NT the name assumes the form of
Beelzebul (SeeAfeSovr), in AV BEELZEBUB (q.V.).

A. H. Sayce

BAAL, ba’al (O22, ba‘al, “‘lord,’’ ‘‘master,” “‘pos-
sessor’’) :

(1) A descendant of Reuben, Jacob’s first-boru
son, and the father of Beerah, prince of the Reuben-
ites, ‘whom Tiglath-pileser (1 Ch 5 5.6) king of
Assyria carried away captive.”

(2) The fourth of ten sons of Jeiel (AV “‘Jehiel’’),
father and founder of Gibeon. His mother was
Maacah; his brother Kish father of Saul (1 Ch
8 29f; 9 35.36.39; cf 18 14 50f). These pas-
sages identify Jeiel and Abiel as the father of Kish
and thus of Baal. For study of confusions in the
genealogical record, in 1 Ch 9 36.39, see NER;
Kiso; ABIEL; JEIEL.

(3) In composition often the name of a man and
not of the heathen god, e.g. Baal-hanan, a king of
Edom (Gen 36 88; 1 Ch 1 49); also a royal
prefect of the same name (1 Ch 27 28). Gesenius
thinks that Baal in compound words rarely refers
to the god by that name. See Baat (deity).

(4) A city of the tribe of Simeon (1 Ch 4 38).
See BAALATH-BEER. Dwicut M. Pratt


3. Baal-
hamon


4, Baal-
hermon


5. Baal-
peor


BAAL (593, ba'al; Baad, Badal): 1 Ch 4 33.
See BAALATH-BEER.


347


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bee iets


BAALAH, bi/a-la (M222, ba'dlah; “ possessor,”
“mistress ’’): Three occurrences of this name:
ie = Kim1aTH-JEARIM (q.v.) (Josh 16 9.10; 1 Ch

(2) A city in the Negeb of Judah (Josh 16 29).
In Josh 19 3 Balah and in 1 Ch 4 29 Bilhah;
perhaps also Bealoth of Josh 15 24. The site is
unknown; but see PEF, III, 26.

(3) Mount Baalah (Josh 15 11), a mountain
ridge between Shikkeron (Ekron) and Jabneel
unless, as seems probable, the suggestion of M.
Clermont-Ganneau (Rev. Crit, 1897, 902) is correct.
that for "7, har (=‘mount’’), we shouldread Wi,
nahar (“river”). In this case the border in ques-
tion would be the Nahr rubin. Here there is an
annual feast held—attended by all classes and
famous all over Syria—which appears to be a real
survival of ‘Baal worship.” .

E. W. G. Mastrerman

BAALATH, ba’a-lath (M222, ba'dlath; A, Baa-
Adv, Baalon):

(1) A town on the border of Dan (Josh 19 44)
associated with Eltekeh and Gibbethon—possibly
Bela‘in.

(2) (“Mistress-ship”’): A store city of Solomon,
mentioned with Beth-horon (1 K 9 18; 2 Ch 8 6)
and possibly the same as (1).

BAALATH-BEER, ba’s-lath-ba’ér (IND PbI3,
ba‘dlath b°’ér, “lady [mistress] of the well’’; Josh 19
8 [in 1 Ch 4 38, Baal]): In Josh this place is
designated ‘‘Ramah of the South,” i.e. of the Negeb,
while in I § 80 27 it is described as Ramoth of
the Negeb. It must have been a prominent hill
(rémah=“‘height’’) in the far south of the Negeb
and near a well (6’ér). The site is unknown though
Conder suggests that the shrine Kubbet el Baul may
retain the old name.


BAALBEK, bal’bek, bal-bek’.


BAAL-BERITH, béa-al-bé’rith (M"IB SPB, ba‘al
berith =“‘Baal of the Covenant’’): An idol wor-
shipped by the Shechemites after Gideon’s death
(Jgs 8 33), as protector and guardian of engage-
ments. His temple is also referred to in Jgs 9 4.
See Baat (1).


BAALE-JUDAH, ba’al-é-joo’da.
JEARIM.


BAAL-GAD, béi/al-gad (13 593, ba'al gadh;
Bakayasd, Balagadd, Bodyé8, Balgdd): Joshua in
his conquest reached as far north as Baal-gad in
the valley of Lebanon, under Mount Hermon (Josh
11 17). This definitely locates if} in the valley
between the Lebanons, to the W. or N.W. of Her-
mon. It must not be confused with Baal-hermon.
Conder thinks it may be represented by ‘Ain
Jedeideh.


BAAL-HAMON, ba-al-ha’mon. See Baat (1).


BAAL-HANAN, ba-al-ha/nan (320 593, ba'al
hanaén, “the Lord is gracious”’):

(1) Aking of Edom (Gen 36 38f; 1 Ch I 49f).

(2) A gardener in the service of David (1 Ch
27 28).


BAAL-HAZOR, ba-al-ha’zor (4i2H SB, ba‘al
hacér; Botkacdp, Bailasér, Beddacdp, Bel-la-sér):
A place on the property of Absalom where his
sheep-shearers were gathered, beside Ephraim (2 §
13 23). The sheep-shearing was evidently the oc-
casion of afestival which was attended by Absalom’s
brethren. Here he compassed the death of Amnon
in revenge for the outrage upon his sister. The


See AVEN; On.


See KirratTs-


place may be identified with Tell ‘Agar, a mountain
biel ness 3,318 ft. above the sea, 4 miles N.E. of
ethel.


BAAL-HERMON, bi/al-hdr’mon (}V72) bya,
ba‘al herman; Badd "Eppdv, Badl Erman): Baal-
gad under Mount Hermon is described as “toward
the sunrising” in Josh 18 5. If Mount Lebanon
proper is here intended the reading may be taken as
correct. But in Jgs 3 3 Baal-gad is replaced by
Baal-hermon. One or the other must be due to a
seribal error. The Baal-hermon of 1 Ch 5 23
lay somewhere E. of the Jordan, near to Mount
Hermon. It may possibly be identical with Banids.


BAALI, ba’a-li bya, ba‘dlz, ‘my master’):
Baal, a common name for all heathen gods, had in
common practice been used also of Jeh. Hosea (2
16.17) demands that Jeh be no longer called Ba‘dli
(“my Baal’ =“my lord’’) but ’Isht (“my husband’’),
and we find that later the Israelites abandoned the
use of Ba‘al for Jeh.


BAALIM, ba’a-lim (O°2YS0, ha-be'alim): Plur.
of Baat (q.v.).


BAALIS, bé/a-lig (07593, ba'lis, perhaps for
Baalim, “gods’; LXX Bedeod, Beleisé, Bedvod,
Belisé, Baadls, Baalis; Ant, X, ix, 3, Baddrmos,
Badlimos): King of the children of Ammon, the
instigator of the murder of Gedaliah (Jer 40 14).
Cf Ant, X, ix, 3.


BAAL-MEON, bi‘al-mé’on (j\92 S¥B, ba'al
mon; Beedwedv, Beelmedn): A town built by
the children of Reuben along with Nebo, ‘their
names being changed” (Nu 82 38), identical with
Beon of ver 8. As Beth-baal-meon it was given
by Moses to the tribe of Reuben (Josh 13 17).
Mesha names it as fortified by him (MS, 1. 9). It
appears in Jer 48 23 as Beth-meon, one of the cities
of Moab. Onom speaks of it as a large village near
the hot springs, i.e. Callirrhoe, in Wady Zerka
Main, 9 miles from Heshbon. This points to the
ruined site of Ma‘in, about 4 miles S.W. of Madeba.
The ruins now visible however are not older than
Rom times. Ewine


BAAL-PEOR, ba-al-p@’or. See Baau (1).


BAAL-PERAZIM, b§4-al-pé-ra’zim, b4-al-per’a-
zim (O°EIB PB, baal p'racim; Baad’ dapacely,
Baal’pharasein, “the lord of breakings through’):
The spot in or near the Valley of Rephaim where
David obtained a signal victory over the Philis; it
was higher than Jerus for David asked, ‘Shall I
go up against the Philis?” (2 8S 5 20; 1 Ch 14 11).
The exact site is unknown, but if the Vale of Reph-
aim is el Beka‘a, the open valley between Jerus and
Mar Elias, then Baal-perazim would probably be
the mountains to the E. near what is called the
“Mount of Evil Counsel’ (see JERusaALEM). The
Mount Perazim of Isa 28 21 would appear to be
the same spot. E. W. G. Masrerman


BAALSAMUS, ba-al’sa-mus (BadAcapos, Badl-
samos; AV Balasamus): B. stood at the right side
of Ezra, when the law was read to the people (1 Esd
9 43). Cf Maaseiah (Neh 8 7).


BAAL-SHALISHAH, bi-al-shal‘i-sha, ba-al-sha-
Ie'sha (BSW VA, batal shalishah; BowWeapwd,
Baithsarisd): Whence a man came to Gilgal with
first-fruits (2 K 4 42) was probably not far from the
latter place. According to the Talm (Sanh. 12a)
the fruits of the earth nowhere ripened so quickly.


Baal-tamar
Babel, Babylon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


348


It is called by Eusebius Baithsarith (Jerome
“Bethsalisa’’), and located 15 miles N. of Diospolis
(Lydda). Khirbet Sirtsiaé almost exactly fits this
description. Gilgal (Jiljalieh) lies in the plain
about 43 miles to the N.W. Khirbet Kefr Thilth,
3 Miles farther north, has also been suggested. The
Arab. Thilth exactly corresponds to the Heb Shalz-
shah. W. Ewine


BAAL-TAMAR, ba-al-ta’mar ("AM SPB, ba'al
tamar; Badd Oapép, Badl Thamar, ‘Baal of the palm
tree’): Evidently a seat of heathen worship (Jes
20 33) between Bethel and Gibeah (cf vs 18.31).
The place was known to Eusebius (Onom s.v.), but all
trace of the name is now lost. Conder suggests
that it may be connected with the palm tree of
Deborah (Jgs 4 5) which was between Bethel and
Ramah (HDB, s.v.).


BAALZEBUB, bA-al-zé’bub (3737 292, baal z*-
bhibh=‘‘Lord of flies’; Béad-pviav, Béal-mutan): A
deity worshipped by the Philis at Ekron (2 K 1 2.
3.6.16). All that can be gathered from this one
reference to him in ancient lit. is that he had some
fame as a god that gave oracles. Ahaziah, son of
Ahab, and king of Israel, went to consult him whether
he should recover of his sickness, and was therefore
rebuked by Elijah, who declared that his death would
be the result of thisinsult to Jeh. Why he was called
‘Jord of flies,” or whether his real name has not been
corrupted and lost are matters of conjecture. See
Baat (1).


BAAL-ZEPHON, bi-al-zé'fon (fDY Sy3,
ba‘al ¢*phin; Beedkoerdv, Beelsepphén; Ex 14 2.
9; Nu 33 7): The name means “Lord of the
North,” and the place was opposite the Heb camp,
which was between Migdol and the sea. It may
have been the shrine of a Sem deity, but the posi-
tion is unknown (see Exopvus). Goodwin (see
Brugsch, Hist. Egt., II, 363) found the name
Baali-Zapuna as that of a god mentioned in an
Egyp papyrus in the British Museum.


BAANA, ba’a-na (OT and Apoc; Baavd, Baand;
NVA, ba‘dna’, “son of oppression”):

(1, 2) Two commissariat-officers in the service of
Solomon (1 K 4 12; 4 16; AV “Baanah”).

(3) Father of Zadok, the builder (Neh 3 4).

(4) A leader who returned with Zerubbabel to


Jerus (1 Esd 6 8). Cf Baanah (Ezr 2 2; Neh
77; 10 27).
BAANAH, ba/a-na (M22, ba‘indh, “son of


oppression”’):
a Captain in the army of Ish-bosheth (2 S 4
2


(2) Father of Heleb, one of David’s mighty men
(2 8 23 29; 1 Ch 11 30).

(3) Returned with Zerubbabel to Jerus; a leader
and one who sealed the covenant (Ezr 2 2; Neh
7 7; 10 27). See Baana (4).


BAANI, ba‘a-ni (A, Baavi, Baani; B, Baavel,
Baanei; AV Maani =Bani [Ezr 10 34]): The
descendants of B. put away their “strange wives”
(1 Esd 9 34).


BAANIAS, bid-a-ni’as. See Banneas (Apoc).


BAARA, ba’a-ra (R773, ba'ira’, “the burning
eee A wife of the Benjamite Shaharaim (1 Ch

8).

BAASEIAH, bia-a-si’a, ba-a-sé’ya (TODS ,
ba‘éséyah, ‘the Lord is bold’): Perhaps for MBIA,
ma‘dséyah, after the Gr Maacal, B, Maasai, “the


work of the Lord.” Cf HPN, 293. An ancestor
of Asaph, the musician (1 Ch 6 40).


BAASHA, ba’a-sha (NWI, ba'sha’, ‘‘boldness’’):
King of Israel. B., son of Ahijah, and of common
birth (1 K 16 2), usurped the throne of Nadab,
the son of Jeroboam, killed Nadab and exterminated
the house of Jeroboam. He carried on a long war-
fare with Asa, the king of Judah (cf Jer 41 9), began
to build Ramah, but was prevented from completing
this work by Ben-hadad, the king of Syria. He is
told by the prophet Jehu that because of his sinful
reign the fate of his house would be like that of
Jeroboam. B. reigned 24 years. His son Elah
who succeeded him and all the members of his
family were murdered by the usurper Zimri (1 K
15 16 ff; 16 1ff; 2 Ch 16 1ff). The fate of his
house is referred to in 1 K 21 22; 2K 99. Cf
Asa; Evay; Zmnri. A. L. Bresiicn


BABBLER, bab’lér (j3W3 SYD, ba‘al ha-lashon;
AV of Eccl 10 11 lit. “master of the tongue”; RV
CHARMER; Aamoris, lapistés, AV of Ecclus 20
7; RV BRAGGART; oteppoddyos, spermolégos; AV
and RV of Acts 17 18): The latter Gr word is used
of birds, such as the crow, that live by picking up
small seeds (spérma, ‘‘a seed,’’ légein, ‘to gather’’),
and of men, for “hangers on” and “parasites”? who
obtained their living by picking up odds and ends
off merchants’ carts in harbors and markets. It
carries the “suggestion of picking up refuse and
scraps, and in lit. of plagiarism without the capacity
to use correctly” (Ramsay). The Athenian philos-
ophers in calling Paul a spermologos, or “ignorant
plagiarist,” meant that he retailed odds and ends
of knowledge which he had picked up from others,
without possessing himself any system of thought
or skill of language—without culture. In fact it
was a fairly correct description of the Athenian
philosophers themselves in Paul’s day.

Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller and Roman Citizen,
141 ff. T. Rees


BABBLING, bab’‘ling (MW, sith; RV COM-
PLAINING): The consequence of tarrying long
at the wine (Prov 23 29 AV); Aadia, lalia, RV
“talk” (Eeclus 19 6; 20 5 AV); xevodwria, keno-
phonta, lit. “making an empty sound” (1 Tim 6
20; 2 Tim 2 16 AV and RV).


BABE, bab:

(1) (W2, na‘ar; wats, pais) of a male infant
: aCnts old (Ex 2 6) tr? elsewhere ‘‘boy” or
tt a a2

(2) (SAY, ‘olal, DXDbYM, ta'dhilim) in the
general sense of “child” (Ps 8 2; 17 14; Isa 3 4).

(3) (Bpépos, bréphos) an unborn or newborn
child (AV and RV of Lk 1 41.44; 2 12.16; 1 Pet
22 and RV of Lk 18 15 [AV “‘infants’’]; Acts
7 19 [AV “young children”] and 2 Tim 3 15 [AV
“child’’]).

(4) (vimvos, népios = Lat infans) “a child that
cannot speak.” (AV and RV of Mt 11 25; 21 16;
Lk 10 21; Rom 2 20; 1 Cor 3 1; He 6 13) the
same word is tr? “child,” plur. “children” (in
AV and RV of 1 Cor 18 11; Gal 4 13; Eph
4 14) the vb. népidzete is tr4 in AV “be ye chil-
dren” and in RV “be ye babes’? (1 Cor 14 20).
Népios is used metaphorically of those who are
like children, of simple and single minds, as opposed
to the “wise and understanding” (Mt 11 25=Lk
10 21; cf 1 Cor 14 20). “Babes in Christ” are
men of little spiritual growth, carnal as opposed to
spiritual (1 Cor 31; cf He 6 13; Eph 4 14).
Népios is also used of a child as a minor or infant
in the eye of the law (Gal 4 1.3). T. Rees


349


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Baal-tamar
Babel, Babylon


BABEL, ba’bel, BABYLON, bab‘i-lon (Topo-
graphical): Babylon was the Gr name of the city
written in the cuneiform script of the Babylonians,
bab-ili, which means in Sem, “‘the gate of god.”
The Hebrews called the country, as well as the city,
Babhel. This name they considered came from the
root, balal, ‘to confound” (Gen 11 9). The name
in Sumerian ideographs was written Din-tir, which
means “life of the forest,” and yet ancient ety-
mologists explained it as meaning “place of the


Mound Covering Nippur Tower.


seat of life’ (shubat baldte). Ka-dingirra, which
also means “gate of god,’”’ was another form of the
name in Sumerian. It was also called Su-anna
(which is of uncertain meaning) and Uru-azagga,
“the holy city.”

Herodotus, the Gr historian, has given us a
picture of Babylon in his day. He says that the
city was a great square, 42 miles in circuit. Ctesias
makes it 56 miles. This, he writes, was surrounded
by a moat or rampart 300 ft. high, and 75 ft. broad.
The earliest mention of Babylon is in the time of
Sargon I, about 2700 BC. That monarch laid the
foundations of the temple of Anunit, and also those
of the temple of Amal. In the time of Dungi
we learn that the place was sacked. The city
evidently played a very unimportant part in the
political history of Babylonia of the early period, for
besides these references it is almost unknown until
the time of Hammurabi, when its rise brought about
a new epoch in the history of Babylonia. The
seat of power was then transferred permanently from
the southern states. This resulted in the closing
of the political history of the Sumerians. The
organization of the empire by Hammurabi, with
Babylon as its capital, placed it in a position from
which it was never dislodged during the remaining
history of Babylonia.

The mounds covering the ancient city have fre-
quently been explored, but systematic excavations
of the city were not undertaken until 1899, when
Koldewey, the German excavator, began to un-
cover its ancient ruins in a methodical manner. In
spite of what ancient writers say, certain scholars
maintain that they grossly exaggerated the size
of the city, which was comparatively small, espe-
cially when considered in connection with large cities
of the present era.

In the northern part of the city there was situated
what is called the North Palace on the east side of
the Euphrates, which passed through the city. A
little distance below this point the Arakhtu canal
left the Euphrates, and passing through the southern
wall rejoined the river. There was also a Middle
and Southern Palace. Near the latter was located
the Ishtar gate. The temple E-makh was close to
the east side of the gate. Other canals in the city
were called Merodach and Libilkhegala. In the
southern portion of the city was located the famous
temple E-sag-ila. This fane was called by the Gr
historian, “the temple of Belus.”’ Marduk or


Merodach (as written in the OT), the patron deity
of the city, received from Enlil, as Hammurabi
informs us, after he had driven the Elamites out
of Babylonia, the title bél matdte, “lord of lands,”’
not the name which Enlil of Nippur had possessed.
In the past there has been a confusion. The ideo-
gram Enlil or Ellil had been incorrectly read Bel.
This necessitated speaking of the old Bel and the
young Bel. Beyond being called 6é, “lord,” as
all other gods were called, Enlil’s name was not
Bel. Marduk is the Bel of the OT, as well as the
god called Bel in the Assyr and Bab inscriptions.

The temple area included an outer, central and
inner court. The shrine of Ishtar and Zamama
occupied the central court, and the ziggurrat the
inner court. In the temple proper, the shrine
Ekua was located, in which stood the golden image
of Marduk. This, the ancient writers say, was 40
ft. high. On the topmost stage there was a shrine
dedicated to Marduk. It is assumed that it was
50 ft. long by 70 ft. broad and 50 ft. in height.

Nabopolassar rebuilt the temple and its tower.
Nebuchadrezzar enlarged and embellished the
sanctuary. He raised the tower so that ‘its head
was in the heavens,” an expression found in the
story of the Tower of Babel in Gen, as well as in
many of the building inscriptions. See LOT B,
121 ff, and the art. on BaBEL, TowER oF.

One of the chief works of Nebuchadrezzar was
the building of Aiburshabu, the famous procession
street of the city, which extended from the Ishtar
gate to E-sag-ila. It was a great and magnificent
causeway, built higher than the houses. Walls
lined it on either side, which were decorated with


Building Inscription of Nebuchadrezzar II,


glazed tiles, portraying lions, life size in relief. The
pavement was laid with blocks of stone brought
from the mountains. This procession street figured
prominently on the New Year’s festal day, when
the procession of the gods took place.

A knowledge of the work Nebuchadrezzar did
serves as a fitting commentary to the passage in


Babel, Babylon THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


350


Dnl 4 30: “Is not this great Babylon, which I have
built?” He had made the city one of the wonders
of the world.

The two sieges by Darius Hystaspes and the one
by Xerxes destroyed much of the beauty of the
city. Alexander desired to make it again a great
center and to build an immense fortress in the city;
but in the midst of this undertaking he was mur-
dered, while living in the palace of Nebuchadrezzar.
The temple, though frequently destroyed, was in
existence in the time of the Seleucids, but the city
had long since ceased to be of any importance. See
also BABYLONIA. Ciay


BABEL, BABYLON (23, babhal; Assyro-Bab
Babli, Bab-tlani, “gate of god,” or “of the gods,”
rendered in Sumerian as Ka-dingira, “gate of god,”
regarded as a folk-etymology): (See BasEL, TowER
oF, sec. 14.)


1. Names by Which the City Was Known

2. Probable Date of Its Foundation

3. Its Walls and Gates from Herodotus

4. Its Position, Divisions, Streets and Temple

5. The Works of Semiramis and Nitocris

6. Ctesias’ Description—the Palaces and Their Deco-
rated Walls

7. The Temple of Belus and the Hanging Gardens

8. Other Descriptions

9. Nebuchadrezzar’s Account

10. Nehuchadrezzar’s Architectural Work at Babylon

11. The Royal Palaces

12. Quick Building

13. The Temples Restored by Nehuchadrezzar

14. The Extent of Nebuchadrezzar’s Architectural Work

15. Details Concerning the City from Contract-Tablets

16. Details Concerning Bahylon from Other Sources

17. Modern Exploration .

18. Description of the Ruins—the Eastern Walls

19. The Western Walls

20. The Palaces

21. The Site of Bahylon's Great Tower

22. The Central and Southern Ruins

23. A Walk through Bahylon

24. The Istar-Gate and the Middle Palace

25. The Festival-Street

26. The Chamher of the Fates

27. The Northern Palace and the Gardens

28. Historical References to Babylonian Buildings

LirerRaTuRS


The name of the great capital of ancient Baby-
lonia, the Shinar of Gen 10 10; 14 1, other names
of the city being Tin-dir, “seat of


1. Names life,’ 2 (ki), probably an abbre-
by Which viation of Bridu (ki) “the good city”
the City (=Paradise), Babylonia having seem-


Was Known ingly been regarded as the Garden of
io Eden (PSBA, June 1911, p. 161); and
Su-anna, “the high-handed” (meaning, apparently,
“high-walled,” “hand” and “defense” being inter-
changeable terms). It is possible that these vari-
ous names are due to the incorporation of outlying
districts as Babylon grew in size.
According to Gen 10 9, the founder of Babylon
was Nimrod, but among the Babylonians, it was
Merodach who built the city, together
2. Probable with Erech and Niffer (Calneh) and
Date of Its their renowned temples. The date
Foundation of its foundation is unknown, but it
certainly went back to primitive times,
and Babylon may even have equaled Niffer in
antiquity (the American explorers of that site have
estimated that its lowest strata of habitations go
back to 8,000 years BC). Babylon’s late assump-
tion of the position of capital of the country would
therefore be due to its rulers not having attained
power and influence at an earlier period. Having
once acquired that position, however, it retained
it to the end, and its great god, Merodach, became
the head of the Bab pantheon—partly through the
influence of Babylon as capital, partly because the
city was the center of his worship, and the place
of the great Tower of Babel, concerning which many
wonderful things were said. See Base., Townr or;
Conrusion oF TonGuEs.


According to Herodotus, the city, which lay in a
great plain, was square in its plan and measured
120 furlongs (stadia) each way—480

3. Its Walls in all. Each side was therefore about


and Gates 14 miles long, making a circuit of
from He- nearly 56 miles, and an area of nearly
rodotus 196 sq. miles. As the space inclosed


is so great, and traces of the walls
would seem to be wanting, these figures may be
regarded as open to question. Around the city,
Herodotus says, there was a deep and broad moat
full of water, and then came a wall 50 royal cubits
thick and 200 cubits high, pierced by 100 gate-
ways with brazen gates and lintels. Reckoning the
cubit at 182 in., this would mean that Babylon’s
walls were no less than 311 ft. high; and regarding
the royal cubit as being equal to 21 in., their thick-
ness would be something like 87 ft. Notwith-
standing that Babylon has been the quarry of the
neighboring builders for two millenniums, it is sur-
prising that such extensive masses of brickwork
should have disappeared without leaving at least a
few recognizable traces.
The city was built on both sides of the Euphrates,
and at the point where the wall met the river there
was a return-wall running along its
4, Its Posi- banks, forming arampart. The houses


tion, Divi- of Babylon were of 3 and 4 stories.
sions, The roads which ran through the city
Streets were straight, and apparently inter-


and Temple sected each other at right angles,
like the great cities of America. The
river-end of each of the streets leading to the river
was guarded by a brazen gate. Within the great
outer wall was another, not much weaker, but
inelosing a smaller space. Each division of the
city contained a great building, the one being the
king’s palace, strongly fortified around, and the
other the temple of Zeus Belos—an erection with
brazen gates measuring two furlongs each way.
Within this sacred precinct was a solid tower meas-
uring a furlong each way, and surmounted by other
towers to the number of eight. An ascent ran
around these towers, with a stopping-place about
the middle where the visitor might rest. Upon
the topmost tower a large cell was built, wherein
was a couch and a golden table. No image was
placed in the cell, and no one passed the night there,
except a woman of the people, chosen by the god.
In another cell below was a golden image of Zeus
sitting, his seat and footstool being likewise of gold,
with, near by, a large golden table. The total
weight of the precious metal here was 800 talents.
Upon a small golden altar outside the cell young
sucklings only were sacrificed, and upon another
(not of gold) full-grown animals were offered.
The hydraulic works of Babylon are attributed
by Herodotus to two queens, Semiramis and Nito-


cris. The former made banks of
5. The earth on the plain which were worth
Works of seeing, preventing the river from flood-
Semiramis ing the plain like asea. The second,


and Nitocris Nitocris, altered the channel of the
river in such a way that it flowed three
times in its course to the village Andericca, and the
traveler by water therefore took three days to pass
this spot. She also raised the banks of the river,
and dug a great lake above Babylon. The place
which was dug out she made into a swamp, the
object being to retard the course of the river. The
many bends and the swamp were on the shortest
route to Media, to prevent the Medes from having
dealings with her kingdom and learning of her affairs.
Other works were a bridge across the Euphrates,
and a tomb for herself over the most frequented
gate of the city.
Both Herodotus and Ctesias were eyewitnesses


351


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Babel, Babylon


of the glory of Babylon, though only at the period
when it had begun to wane. It is exceedingly prob-
able, however, that their accounts will be super-
seded in the end, by those of the people who best
ae the city, namely, the inhabitants of Babylon
itself.
According to Ctesias, the circuit of the city was
not 480, but 360 furlongs—the number of the days
in the Bab year—and somewhat under
6. Ctesias’ 42 miles. The E. and W. districts
Description were joined by a bridge 5 furlongs or


—the Pal- 1,080 yards long, and 30 ft. broad.
aces and At each end of the bridge was a royal
Their Dec- palace, that on the eastern bank
orated being the more magnificent of the two.
Walls This palace was defended by three


walls, the outermost being 60 furlongs
or 7 miles in circuit; the second, a circular wall,
40 furlongs (43 miles), and the third 20 furlongs
(23 miles). The height of the middle wall was 300
ft., and that of its towers 420 ft., but this was ex-
ceeded by the height of the inmost wall. Ctesias
states that the walls of the second and third in-
closures were of colored brick, showing hunting-
scenes-——the chase of the leopard and the lion, with
male and female figures, which he regarded as Ninus
and Semiramis. The other palace (that on the W.
bank) was smaller and less ornate, and was inclosed
only by a single wall 30 furlongs (33 miles) in cir-
cuit. This also had representations of hunting-
scenes and bronze statues of Ninus, Semiramis and
Jupiter-Belus (Bel-Merodach). Besides the bridge,
he states that there was also a tunnel under the
river. He seems to speak of the temple of Belus
(see BaBEL, TowsrR oF) as being surmounted by
three statues—Bel (Bel-Merodach), 40 ft. high,
his mother Rhea (Dawkina, the Dauké of Damas-


cius), and Bel-Merodach’s _ spouse
7. The Juno or Beltis (Zér-panitu™). The
Temple celebrated Hanging Gardens be seems
of Belus to describe as a square of which each
and the side measured 400 ft., rising in_ter-
Hanging races, the topmost of which was plant-
Gardens ed with trees of various kinds. If


this was the case, it must have re-

sembled a temple-tower covered with verdure.

The Assyr sculptures, however, indicate something
different (see sec. 27).

With regard to the size of the city as given by

other authorities, Pliny copies Herodotus, and

makes its circuit 480 furlongs (Nat.


8. Other Hist. vi.26); Strabo (xvii. sec. 5), 385;
Descrip- Q. Curtius (v.i. sec. 26), 368; Clit-
tions archus (apud Diod. Sic. ii.7), 365.


Though the difference between the
highest and the lowest is considerable, it is only
what might be expected from independent esti-
mates, for it is doubtful whether any of them are
based on actual measurements. Diodorus (1.9,
end) states that but a small part of the inclosure
was inhabited in his time (he was a contemporary
of Caesar and Augustus), but the abandonment of
the city must then have been practically completed,
and the greater part given over, as he states, to
cultivation—even, perhaps, within the space in-
closed by the remains of walls today. It is note-
worthy that Q. Curtius says (v.i. sec. 27) that as
much as nine-tenths consisted, even during Baby-
lon’s most prosperous period, of gardens, parks,
paradises, fields and orchards; and this the later
contract-tablets confirm. Though there is no con-
firmation of the height of the walls as given by these
different authorities, the name given to the city,
Su-anna, “the high walled” (see above), indicated
that it was renowned for the height of its defensive


structures.


Among the native accounts of the city, that of
Nebuchadrezzar is the best and most instructive.
From this record it would seem that


9. Nebu- there were two principal defensive
chadrez- structures, Imgur-Enlil and Némitti-
zar’s Enlil—“Eulil has been gracious’ and
Account “Enlil’s foundation” respectively. The


: construction of these, which protected
the inner city only, on the eastern and western sides
of the Euphrates, he attributes to his father Naboni-
dus, as well as the digging of the moat, with the
two ‘‘strong walls” on its banks, and the embank-
ment of the Arahtu canal. He had also lined the
Euphrates with quays or embankments—probably
the structures to which the Gr writers refer—but he
had not finished the work. Within Babylon itself
he made a roadway from Du-azaga, the place where
the fates were declared, to Aa-ibur-Sab, Babylon’s
festival-street, which lay by the gate of Beltis or
Mah, for the great New-Year’s festival of Mero-
dach and the gods.

Nebuchadrezzar, after his accession, completed
the two great walls, lined the ditches with brick,
and increased the thickness of the

10. Nebu- two walls which his father had built.
chadrez- He also built a wall, traces of which
zar’s Archi- are apparently extant, on the W. side


tectural of Babylon (he apparently refers to
Work at what may be called the “city,” in
Babylon contradistinction to ‘greater Baby-


lon’’), and raised the level of Aa-ibur-
Sabi from the “holy gate” to the gate of Nand;
together with the gateways (in consequence of the
higher level of the pathway) through which it passed.
The gates themselves were constructed of cedar over-
laid with copper (bronze), most likely in the same
manner as the gates of Imgur-Bél (Balawat) in
Assyria (reign of Shalmaneser II, cir 850 BC).
Probably none of Babylon’s gates were of solid
bronze, notwithstanding the statements of Herod-
otus; but the thresholds were wholly of that metal,
stone being very rare, and perhaps less durable.
These gates were guarded by images of bulls and
giant serpents or composite dragons of the same
metal. Nebuchadrezzar also built a wall on the E.
bank of the river, 4,000 cubits distant, “high like a
mountain,” to prevent the approach of an enemy.
This wall also had cedar gates covered with copper.
An additional defense made by him was an enormous
lake, “like unto the broad sea to cross,” which was
kept in by embankments.
The royal palaces next claimed the great king’s


attention. The palace in which Nabopolassar

had lived, and wherein, in all probabil-
11. The ity, Nebuchadrezzar had passed his
Royal younger days, had suffered from the
Palaces floods when the river was high. The


foundations of this extensive edifice,
which extended from the wall called Imgur-Enlil
to Ltbil-hégala, the eastern canal, and from the
banks of the Euphrates to Aa-ibur-Sab4, the festi-
val-street, were thoroughly repaired with burnt
brick and bitumen, and the doorways, which had
become too low in consequence of the raising of
that street, were raised to a suitable height. He
caused the whole to tower aloft, as he has it, ‘‘moun-
tainlike”’ (suggesting a building more than one
story high). The roof of this palace was built of
cedar, and the doors were of the same wood covered
with bronze. Their thresholds, as in other cases,
were bronze, and the interior of the palace was
decorated with gold, silver, precious stones and other
costly material.

Four hundred and ninety cubits from Némitti-
Enlil lay, as the king says, the principal wall,
Imgur-Enlil, and in order to guarantee the former
against attack, he built two strong embankments,


Babel, Babylon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


352


and an outer wall “like a mountain,” with a great
building between which served both as a fortress
and a palace, and attached to the old
12. Quick palace built by his father. According
Building to Nebuchadrezzar’s account, which is
confirmed by Berosus (as quoted by Jos
and Eusebius), all this work was completed in 15
days. The decorations were like those of the other
palace, and blocks of alabaster, brought, apparently,
from Assyria, strengthened the battlements. Other
defences surrounded this stronghold.
Among the temples which Nebuchadrezzar re-
stored or rebuilt may be mentioned E-kua, the
shrine of Merodach within E-sagila


18. The (the temple of Belus); the sanctuary
Temples called Du-azaga, the place of fate,
Restored where, on every New-Year’s festival,
by Nebu- on the 8th and 9th of Nisan, ‘‘the king
chadrezzar of the gods of heaven and earth” was


placed, and the future of the Bab
monarch and his people declared. Every whit as
important as E-sagila, however, was the restoration
of E-temen-an-ki, called ‘‘the Tower of Babylon”
(see BaBEL, TowER oF), within the city; and con-
nected, as will be seen from the plan, with that
structure. Among the numerous temples of Babylon
which he rebuilt or restored were E-mah, for the god-
dess Nin-mah, near the [Star-gate; the white hme-
stone temple for Sin, the Moon-god; E-ditur-kalama,
“the house of the judge of the land,” for Samas, the
Sun-god; E-sa-tila for Gula, the goddess of healing;
E-hursag-ella, “the house of the holy mountain,” etc.
The amount of work accomplished by this king,
who, when walking on the roof of his palace, lifted
up with pride, exclaimed “Is not this
14. The great Babylon, which I have built?”
Extent of | (Dnl 4 30), was, according to his own
Nebuchad- records and the Gr writers, enormous,
rezzar’s and the claim he made fully justified.
Architectur- But if he boasts of the work he did, he
al Work is just in attributing much to his father
Nabopolassar; though in connection
with this it is to be noted that his ascribing the
building of the walls of Babylon to his father is not
to be taken literally—in all probability he only
restored them, though he may have added supple-
mentary defences, as Nebuchadrezzar himself did.
Besides Nebuchadrezzar’s inscriptions, various
other texts give details concerning the topography
of Babylon, among them being the
15. Details contract-tablets, which mention vari-
Concerning ous districts or quarters of the city,
the City such as Té which is within Baby-
lon; the city of Sula which is within
Babylon; the new city which is within Babylon,
upon the new canal. Within the city were also
several Hugsétu—perhaps ‘farms,’ such as Hussétu
$a Iddina-Marduk, ‘Iddina-Marduk’s farm,” ete.
The various gates are also referred to, such as the
gate of Samai, the city-gate of UraS, and the gate of
Zagaga, which seems to have lain in “the province
of Babylon,” and had a field in front of it, as had
also the gate of Enlil. According to an Assyr
and a Bab list of gates, the streets
16. Details bore names connected with those of
Concerning the gates to which they led. Thus
Babylon the street of the gate of Zagaga, one
from Other of the gods of war, was called “the
Sources street of Zagaga, wha expels his
enemies”; that of the gate of Merodach
was ‘‘the street of Meredach, shepherd of his land’’;
while the street of [Star’s gate was “the street of
Istar, patron of her people.’ The city-gates named
after Enlil, Addu (Hadad or Rimmon), Sama’ the
Sun-god, Sin the Moon-god, etc, had streets simi-
larly indicated. Certain of the streets of Babylon


are also referred to on the contract-tablets, and such
descriptive indications as ‘‘the broad street which
is at the southern gate of the temple E-tur-kalama”’
seem to show that they were not in all cases sys-
tematically named. If the streets of Babylon were
really, as Herodotus states, straight, and arranged
at right angles, this was probably outside the walls
of the ancient (inner) city, and most likely due to
some wise Bab king orruler. Details of the streets
have been obtained at the point called Merkes (sec.
22) and elsewhere, and seem to show that the Baby-
lonians liked the rooms of their houses to be square.
Such streets as slanted were therefore full of rec-
tangles, and must have presented a quite peculiar

appearance.
Jt is this inner city which has most attracted the
attention of explorers, both English and German,
and it is on its site that the latter have


17. Mod- carried on their systematic excavations.
em Explo- Indeed, it is probable that the houses
ration of the most numerous class of the people


—artisans, merchants, workmen, etc—
lay outside the walls to which the Bab royal in-
scriptions refer. It may be supposed that the


Brick Bearing the Name of Nebuchadrezzar.


houses in this district were mainly low buildings
of unbaked clay (of which, indecd, portions of the
temples and palaces were built), and these would
naturally disappear more easily than if they had
been built of baked brick. Even when baked,
however, the brick-built. ruins of Babylonia and
Assyria have a tendency to disappear, owing to the
value which bricks, both baked and unbaked, have
for the erection of new houses in the neighborhood.
Concerning the extent of the exterior city much
doubt naturally exists, but it may well have covered
the tract attributed to it (see sec. 3, above). Nine-
veh, at the time of its prosperity, also had enormous
suburbs (see NinEVEH).
The ruins of Babylon lie between 80 and 90 kilo-
meters (50 miles or less) from Bagdad. The first
thing seen on approaching them is the
18. De- broad high ridge of Babil, which marks
scription of the site of the ruins of the Northern
the Ruins— Palace. After some time, the ruins of
The East- the ancient walls are reached. They
ern Walls are still several yards high, and slope
down gently to the plain. Starting to
the N. of Babil, the wall stretches for about 875
yds. due E., and then runs southwards for another
930 yds., taking at that point a course to the 8.E.
for about 2 miles 160 yds. (3,300 meters). A wide
gap occurs here, after which it runs to the S.W.,
and is lost in the open fields at the end of about 14
miles (2 kilometers). ‘That this is the old city-
wall,” says Weissbach, ‘there can be no doubt,
aud the name Sur, ‘city-wall,’ given it by the


353


Arabs, proves that they have fully recognized its
nature.” At the northern end it exists in its origi-
nal extent, the plain out of which it rises being
the old bed of the Euphrates, which, in the course
of the cents., has become filled up by the desert-
sand. At the period of Babylon’s glory, the river
had a much straighter course than at present, but


Stone Object Containing an Inscription of
Nebuchadrezzar I.


it reoccupies its old bed about 600 meters (656
yds.) 8. of Babil, leaving it afterward to make a
sharp bend to the W. From the point where the
city wall first becomes recognizable on the N. to its

apparent southernmost extremity is about 3 miles.
On the W. side of the river the traces of the wall
are much less, the two angles, with the parts ad-
joining them, being all that is recog-


19. The nizable. Beginning on the N. where
Western the Euphrates has reached its mid-
Walls point in its course through the city,


it runs westward about 547 yds.
(500 meters) W.S.W., and then, bending almost
at a right angle S.S.E., turns E. again toward the
Euphrates, but is lost in the plain before reaching


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Babel, Babylon


theriver. The distance of the two angles from each
other is about 1 mile, 208 yds. (1,800 meters), and
its distance from the Euphrates is at most % of
a mile (1 kilometer). The western portion of the
city therefore formed a rectangle with an area of
about 1.8 miles, and the eastern quarter, with the
projection on the N., 64 square miles. According to
Fried. Delitzsch, the size of Babylon was about the
same as Munich or Dresden. This, of course,
is an estimate from the extant remains—as has
been indicated above, there was probably a large
suburban extension beyond the walls, which would
account for the enormous size attributed to the city
by the ancients. :
Among the Arabs, the northern ruin is called
Babil, though it is only the remains of a palace. Its
present height is 30 meters (98 ft.,
20. The 5 in.), and its rectangular outline is
Palaces still easily recognizable. Its sides face
the cardinal points, the longest being
those of the N. and 8. This building, which
measures 100 meters (109 yds.), was well protected
by the city wall on the N. and E., the Euphrates
protecting it on the W. Continuing to the S., the
path at present leads through orchards and palm-
groves, beyond which is a rugged tract evidently
containing the remains of ancient structures, prob-
ably of inconsiderable height. After further palm-
groves, an enormous ruin is encountered, steep
onthe E. and S., sloping on the N. and W. This is
the Gasr (Qasr), also called Emjellibeh (Mujelli-
bah), “the overturned,” identical with the great
palace of Nabopolassar and his son Nebuchadrezzar,
referred to so prominently by the latter king in his
records. Its longest side skirts the old Euphrates
bed, and measures 300 meters (828 yds.). Its sur-
face is very uneven, projections of 15 meters (over
49 ft.) alternating with deep depressions. On the
N.W. side enormous walls of exceedingly hard
yellow brick still tower to a considerable height.
8. of this the plain, broken only by a few inconsider- .
able mounds, extends for a distance of half a kilo-
meter (#,; mile), and terminates on the 8. with
another enormous ruin-mound, called Ishan Amran
ibn ‘Ali. It measures 600 meters (656 yds.) from
N. to S., and 400 (437 yds.) from E. to W., its
average height being 25 meters (82 ft.). About
the middle, and close to each other, are two Moslem
domed tombs, the first called Ibrahim al-Khalil
(“Abraham the Friend” [of God]—probably a late
addition to the name of another Abraham than the
Patriarch), and the other Amran ibn ‘Ali, from
which the ruin receives its modern name.
Near the S. termination of the plain on which the
village of Jim-jimeh lies, there is a square depression
several yards deep, measuring nearly


21. The 100 meters (over 100 yds.) each way.
Site of In the middle of this depression, the
Babylon’s sides of which do not quite face the
Great cardinal points, there rises, to a height
Tower of about 13 ft., a platform of sun-dried


brick about 60 meters (197 ft.) each
way, its sides being parallel with the outer boundary
of thedepression. This depression, at present called
Sahan, ‘‘the dish,” is partly filled with foundation-
water. Centered in its southern side is a rectangular
hollowing-out similarly formed, about 50 meters (164
ft.) long, extending toward the ruin called Amran.
E. of the Qasr and Emjellibeh are several mounds
bearing the name of Hhmereh, so called from the
principal mound on the S.E., named
22. The Ishan al-Oheimar, “the red_ ruin,”
Central from the color of its bricks. Close to
and South- the S.E. corner of the Qasr lies the
ern Ruins ruin called Merkes, “the central-point,”
and to the S. of that again is a long
and irregularly shaped mound bearing the name of


Babel, Babylon
Babel, Tower of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


354


Ishan al-Aswad, “the black ruin.” From this
enumeration of the principal remains on the site
of Babylon, it will be easily seen that public build-
ings in this, the most ancient quarter of the city,
were exceedingly numerous. Indeed, the district
was regarded as being of such importance that the
surrounding walls were not thought altogether suffi-
cient to protect it, so another seemingly isolated
rampart, on the E., was built, running N. and S.,
as an additional protection.

The remains on the western side of the river are
insignificant, the changed course of the river being
in all probability responsible for the destruction of
at least some of the buildings.

There is much work to be done before a really
complete reconstruction of the oldest quarter of

Babylon can be attempted; but some-
23. A Walk thing may be said about the sights to
through be seen when taking a walk through
Babylon the more interesting portion, which, as

we know from Herodotus’ narrative,
could be visited by strangers, though it is possible
that permission had to be obtained beforehand.
Entering by the Uras-gate, some distance to the
E. of the Euphrates, one found oneself in Aa-ibur-
Saba, the Festival-street, which was a continuation
of the royal roadway without the inner wall, com-
ing from theS. This street ran alongside the Arah-
tu canal, on its western bank. After a time, one
had the small temple of Ninip on the right (on the
other side of the canal), and E-sagila, the great
temple of Belus, on the left. This celebrated shrine
was dedicated to Merodach and other deities associ-
ated with him, notably his spouse Zér-panttu™ (=
Juno), and Nebo, “the teacher,” probably as the
one who inculcated Merodach’s faith. The shrine
of Merodach therein, which was called 2£-kua, is
said by Nebuchadrezzar to have been magnificently
decorated, and into the temple itself that king had
caused to be brought many costly gifts, acquired
by him in the lands over which he had dominion.
Connected with E-sagila on the N.W. by a causeway
and prgbably a staircase, was the great temple-
tower E-temen-an-ki, which, as is indicated above,
is not now represented by a tower, but by a depres-
sion, the bricks having been employed, it is said,
to repair the Hindiyeh canal. This great build-
ing was a striking monument of the city, and must
have been visible for a considerable distance, its
height being something over 300 ft. The stages
of which it was composed are thought to have been
colored like those of the similar tower laid hare
by the French excavations at Khorsabad (Ddar-
Sarru-ukin) in Assyria. Canseways or streets
united this building with Aa-ibur-Sabi, the festi-
val-street along which the traveler is supposed to be
proceeding. Continuing to the N., the visitor
crossed a canal at right angles, named Libil-
bégalli, ‘‘may he [the god] bring fertility,” and
found himself immediately opposite the royal
palace—the extensive building now known as the
Qasr. According to Weissbach, its area occupied
no less than 4% hectares (rather more than 11 acres)
and it was divided, as we know from the inscrip-
tions of Nebuchadrezzar, into two parts, connected
by a corridor. The building was richly decorated,
as the Babylonians understood such things, the
interior walls being lined with enameled brick and
other material.

_ Passing along the eastern side of the palace, the
visitor came to the IStar-gate—a massive doorway
faced with enameled brick in Nebuchadrezzar’s
time, and decorated with colored enameled reliefs
of the lion, the bull and the dragon of Babylon. On
the right of this gateway was to be seen the temple
of the goddess Nin-mah, Mcrodach’s spouse—a
temple of sun-dried brick with traces of white


coloring. It was a celebrated shrine of the Baby-
lonians, in the usual architectural style with re-
cessed buttresses, but modest from our modern
point of view. Nin-mah was the goddess of repro-
duction, who, under the name of Aruru, had aided
Merodach to create mankind, hence the honor in

which she was held by the Babylonians.
The IStar-gate was apparently a part of the more
ancient fortifications of Babylon, but which por-
tion of the primitive city it enclosed is


24, The doubtful. In the time of Nebuchad-
IStar-Gate rezzar it pierced the continuation, as
and the it were, of the wall on the western
“Middle- bank of the river. Passing through
Palace”? this gateway, the visitor saw, on the


W., the ‘“middle-palace,” an enormous
structure, built by Nebuchadrezzar, as he boasts,
in 15 days—a statement which seems somewhat of
an exaggeration, when we come to consider the
massiveness of the walls, some of which have a
thickness of several yards. He describes this as
having been ‘‘a fortress” (déru), ‘mountainlike”
(Sadani), and on its summit he built an abode for
himself—a “great palace,” which was joined with
his father’s palace on the S. of the intervening wall.
It is possibly this latter which was built in 15 days—
not the whole structure, including the fortress. It
was raised “high as the forests,” and decorated with
cedar and all kinds of costly woods, its doors being
of palm, cedar, cypress, ebony(?) and _ ivory,
framed in silver and gold, and plated with copper.
The thresholds and hinges of its gates were bronze,
and the cornice round its top was in (an imitation
of) lapis-lazuli. It was a house for men to admire;
and it is not improbable that this was the palace
upoh which he was regarded as having been walk-
ing when he referred to “great Babylon,” which he
had built.

But the street Aa-ibur-Sabi, along which the
visitor is conceived to be walking, was also a highly
decorated causeway, fitted for the


25. The pathway of the great gods. Its
Festival- width varied from 11 to 22 yds., and
Street it was paved with regularly hewn


and fitted natural stones—limestone
and a brownish-red stone with white veins—while
its walls were provided with a covering of brick
enameled in various colors with representations of
lions, some of them in relief. Theinscriptions which
it bore were white on a rich dark-blue ground, also
enameled. There were various other streets in
Babylon, but these have still to be identified.
At the end of the Procession-street, and at right
angle to it, was the Merodach canal, which com-
municated directly with the Euphra-


26. The tes. At this point also, and forming
Chamber its end-portion, was the Chamber of
of the Fates (Parak Stmdte), where, yearly,
Fates the oracles were asked and declared.


In close connection with this was the
Temple of Offermgs (Bit niké) or festival-house (Bit
Gkiti). Concerning these places more information is
needed, but it would seem that, before Nebuchad-
rezzar’s time, the Chamber of Fates was simply
decorated with silver—he, however, made it glorious
with pure gold. It is at this point that the Proces-
sion-street is at its widest. The position of the
Temple of Offerings is at present uncertain.
What may have lain on the other side of the
Arahtu-canal, which here made a bend to the N.W.,
and flowed out of the Euphrates some-
27. The what higher up, is uncertain; but in
Northern the extreme N. of the city was the
Palace and palace now represented by the ruin
the Gardens called Babil. This was likewise built
by Nebuchadrezzar, but it may be
doubted whether it was really founded by him.


355


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Babel, Babylon
Babel, Tower of


The presence of traces of wells here made Hormuzd
Rassam think that this was probably the site of
the Hanging Gardens, but further exploration is
needed to decide the point, though it may be re-
garded as not unlikely that this identification is
correct. In that case it would represent the palace
shown in the Assyr saloon at the British Museum—
a building apparently protected by three walls,
and adorned with columns resting on the backs of
lions in an attitude of walking. On the adjoining
slab is a representation of a small building—also
with columns—on a hill. A figure of a king sculp-
tured on a stele is seen on the left, with an altar in
front of it, showing that divine honors were paid
tohim. The hill is thickly wooded with trees which
may be olives, poplars, etc, and on the right is a
series of arches on which other trees are planted.
Irrigation channels stretch in a long stream to the
left and in shorter streams to the right. As this
belongs to the time of A&Sur-bani-4pli, about 650
BC, and refers to that king's operations against his
brother Samaé-Sum-ukin, the king of Babylon, it
is clear that something similar to the Hanging Gar-
dens existed before the time of Nebuchadrezzar,
and therefore, if it was his queen who had them
made, before the time of their reputed founder. This
would be the point first reached by the Assyr
army when advancing to the attack. Such a park
as is represented here with its hills and streams, and
thickly planted trees, must have made the palace
in the vicinity the pleasantest, in all probability,
in all Babylonia, and excited the admiration of every
one who visited the sights of the city.
The architectural history of the city of Babylon
has still to be written, but something is already
known about it, especially its central
28. Histor- point of interest, the great temple
ical Refer- E-sagila, wherein Merodach was wor-
ences to shipped. The 5th year of Sumu-la-ila
Babylonian was known as that in which the great
Buildings fortress of Babylon was built; and
his 22d was that in which a throne of
gold and silver was completed and made for Mero-
dach’s supreme abode (paramaha). Later on
Abil-Sin, in his 17th year, made a throne(?) for
Sama’ of Babylon; and Hammu-rabi, in his 3rd,
12th and 14th years, also made thrones for the gods
~Nannar of Babylon (the Moon-god), Zér-panitu™,
Merodach’s consort, and [Star of Babylon. Samsu-
jluna, his son, in his 6th year, placed a “praying
statue” in E-sagila before Merodach, followed, in
his 8th, by the dedication of some bright-shining
object (mace?) of gold and silver, to the god; and
on that occasion it is stated that he made H-sagila
to shine like the stars of heaven. Passing over
many other references to kings who adorned the
temples of the city, the work done there by Agu-
kakrime (cir 1480 BC) may be mentioned. This
ruler, who belonged to the Kassite dynasty, not
only brought back the images of Merodach and
Zer-panitu™ to their temple, but also restored the
building and its shrine, and made rich offerings
thereto. Later on, after the destruction of the city
by Sennacherib, his son Esarhaddon, and his grand-
sons Samas-Sum-ukin, king of Babylon, and Aséur-
bani-Apli, king of Assyria, all took part in the restor-
ation of Babylon’s temples and palaces. The work
of Nabopolassar and Nebuchadrezzar has already
been referred to. In 330 BC (reign of Alexander
the Great), an attempt was made, by the tithes
of the pious, to clear away the rubbish around
E-sangil (E-sagila), but to all appearance no real
restorations were made—or, at least, the stage
at which they could have been put in hand was
not reached. In the year 269 BC Antiochus
Soter claims, like Nebuchadrezzar and other Bab


kings, to have restored the temples E-sagila and
E-zida (the latter at Borsippa). Though in late
times the temples were more or less dilapidated,
the services to all appearance continued to be per-
formed, and may even have gone on until well in
the Christian era, Bab religion and philosophy being
still held in honor as late as the 4th cent. The
downfall of Babylon as a city began with the found-
ing of Seleucia on the Tigris, in the reign of Seleucus
Nicator (after 312 BC). The inhabitants of Baby-
lon soon began to migrate to this new site, and the
ruined houses and walls of the old capital ultimately
became the haunts of robbers and outlaws. It is
said that the walls were demolished by later (Se-
leucid) kings on that account, and it is not improb-
able that, with the walls, any houses which may have
remained habitable were cleared away. Fortunate-
ly, the palaces restored by Nebuchadrezzar were
too firmly built to be easily demolished, hence
their preservation to the present day.


Lirerature.—Fried. Delitzsch, Babel and Bible, 1903;
Fr. H. Weissbach, Das Stadtbild von Babylon, 1904, R.
Koldeway, Die Tempel von Babylon und Borsippa, 1911.

_ T. G. PincuEs

BABEL, TOWER OF: This expression does not


occur in the OT, but is used popularly for the tower
(253%, mighddl) built by the inhabitants of the
world who, traveling in the East, built a city on the
Plain of Shinar, with a tower ‘“‘whose top may
reach unto heaven’’—an expression which is re-
garded as meaning ‘‘a very high tower.”’

There was a great difference, however, between
a Can mighdél or watchtower, and the great Tower


at Babylon. The watchtower was
1. General simply a high structure, probably
Form of without any special shape or form,
Babylonian which depended upon the will of the
Temple- architect and the nature of the ground
. Towers upon which it was erected. The


Tower of Babel or Babylon, however,
was a structure peculiar to Babylonia and Assyria.
According to all accounts, and judging from the ruins
of the various erections extant in those countries,
Bab towers were always rectangular, built in stages,
and provided with an inclined ascent continned
along each side to the top. As religious ceremonies
were performed thereon, they were generally sur-
mounted by a chapel in which sacred objects or
images were kept.

These erections had, with the Babylonians, a
special name: zigquratu, meaning, apparently,

“peak,” or the highest point of a
2. Their mountain, this word being applied
Babylonian to the mountain-height upon which
Name Ut-napistim, the Bab Noah, offered

sacrifices on coming forth from the
ark (or ship) when the waters of the great Flood
had sufficiently subsided. It has also been thought
that they were used as observatories when the
Babylonians studied the starry heavens. This is
probable, but as these structures were of no great
height, it is possible that, in the clear atmosphere
of the Bab plains, there was no real necessity to
go above the surface of the earth when making their
observations. ;

There has been much difference of opinion as to
the geographical position of the Tower of Babel.

Most writers upon the subject, fol-
8. Where- lowing the tradition handed down


abouts of | by the Jews and Arabs, have identified
the Tower it with the great Temple of Nebo
of Babel in the city of Borsippa, now called


the Birs-Nimroud (explained as a
corruption of Birj Nimroud, ‘“Tower of Nimrod”).
This building, however, notwithstanding its impor-
tance, was to all appearance never regarded by the
Babylonians as the Tower of Babel, for the very


Babel, Tower of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


356


good reason that it was not situated in Babylon,
but in Borsippa, which, though called, in later times,
“the second Babylon,” was naturally not the original
city of that name. The erection regarded by the
Babylonians as the great Tower of their ancient
city was B-temen-ana-ki, “the Temple of the founda-
tion of heaven and earth,” called by Nabopolassar
and Nebuchadrezzar ziggurat Bdbili, “the Tower
of Babylon”—the world-renowned fane dedicated
to Merodach and his consort Zér-panttu™, Baby-
lon’s chief deities.
This structure was situated in the southern por-
tion of the city, not far from the right bank of the
Euphrates, and according to Weiss-
4. Its Posi- bach, is now represented by a depres-
tion at sion within which is the original rec-
Babylon tangular core of unbaked brick. From
its shape, the Arabs have made this
site Sahan, ‘the dish.” These remains of the great
temple-tower of Babylon, within the memory of men
not so very old, towered, even in its ruined state,
high above the surrounding plain. The burnt bricks
of the ancient Babylonians, however, who “had
brick for stone, and slime [bitumen] for mortar”
(11 3m), are still good and have a commercial
value, so they were all cleared out, with whatever
precious material in the way of antiquities they
may have contained, to repair, it is said, the banks
of the Hindiyeh Canal. Certain records in the shape
of conical ‘‘cylinders,’’ however, came into the mar-
ket, and were acquired by the museums of Europe
and America. As these refer to the restoration of the
building by Nabopolassar, and the part taken by his
sons Nebuchadrezzar and Nabd-Sum-lixir in the cere-
monies attending the rebuilding, it is very probable
that they formed part of the spoils acquired.
E-temen-ana-ki, to give the Bab (Sumerian)
name, consisted of six stages built upon a platform,


5. A Baby-
lonian De-
scription of
the Tower


and provided with a sanctuary at.


the top. A tablet seemingly giving
a detailed description of this build-
ing was for a time in the hands of the
late George Smith in the year 1876.
Unfortunately he had not time to give
a tr of the document, or to publish the text, but
his detailed account of it (Athenaeum, February 12,
1876) is exceedingly interesting.

First there was the outer court called the “grand
court,’”’ measuring, according to G. Smith’s esti-
mate, 1,156 ft. by 900 ft., and a smaller one, called
“the court of Star and Zagaga,” 1,056 ft. by 450 ft.
Round the court were six gates admitting to the
temples: (1) the grand gate; (2) the gate of the
rising sun (east); (3) the great gate; (4) the gate of
the colossi; (5) the gate of the canal; and (6) the
gate of the tower-view.

After this came a space or platform apparently
walled—a ki-gallu square in form, and measuring
3 ku each way. Its size is doubtful,
as the value of the ku is unknown. The
sides of this inclosure faced the cardinal
points. In its walls were four gates,
one on each side, and named from the points toward
which they looked. Within this inclosure stood a
large building measuring 10 gar (Smith: 200 ft.) each
way. Unfortunately, the name of this erection was
damaged, so that its nature and use are uncertain.

Round the base of the Tower were small temples
or chapels dedicated to the various gods of the

Babylonians. On the E. were 16
7. The shrines, the principal of them being
Chapels dedicated to Nebo and Ta&métu, his
and Shrines spouse; on the N. were two temples

dedicated to Ea (Aé) and Nusku re-
spectively; on the S. was a single temple to the
two great gods, Anu and Bel (Enlil?). It was on
the W., however, that the principal buildings lay—


6. The
Platform


a double house with a court between the wings 35
cubits (Smith: 58 ft.) wide. These two wings were
not alike in dimensions, the erection on one side
being 100 cubits by 20 (166 ft. by 34 ft.) and on the
other 100 cubits by 65 (166 ft. by 108 ft.). In
these western ohanibere stood the couch of the god,
and the golden throne mentioned by Herodotus,
with other objects of great value. The couch was
stated to have measured 9 cubits by 4 (15 ft. by
6 ft. 8in.).


Building Inscription of Nabopolassar.
(Giving an account of his restoration of the Tower of Babel.)


In the center of these groups of buildings stood
the great Tower in stages, called by the Babylonians
“the Tower of Babel” (zigqurat Babili).


8. The The stages decreased from the lowest
Tower in upward, but each was square in plan.
Its First The first or foundation-stage was 15
Stage gar each way by 5} gar high (300 ft.


by 110 ft. high), and seems to have
been decorated with the usual double recesses which
are a characteristic of Assyr-Bab architecture.
The second stage was 13 gar square and 3 gar
high (260 ft. by 60 ft.). A term was applied to it
which G. Smith did not understand,
9. The but he notes that it probably had
Remaining sloping sides. The stages from the
Stages 3d to the 5th were all of equal height,
namely, 1 gar (20 ft.), and were
respectively 10 gar (200 ft.), 83 gar (170 ft.) and 7
gar (140 ft.) square. The dimensions of the 6th
stage were omitted, but may be restored in accord-
ance with the others, namely, 5} gar sq. (110 ft.)
by 1 gar (20 ft.) high.
On this was raised what Smith calls the 7th stage,
namely, the upper temple or sanctuary of the god
Bel-Merodach, 4 gar long, 3} gar


10. The broad and 23 gar high (80, 60 and 50
Chapel at ft. respectively). He does not men-
the Top tion the statue of the god, but it may


be supposed that it was set up in this
topmost erection. The total height of the tower
above its foundation was therefore 15 gar (300 ft.),


357


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Babel, Tower of


the same as the breadth of its base. It cannot be
said that it was by any means a beautiful erection,
but there was probably some symbolism in its
measurements, and in appearance it probably
resembled (except the decoration) the temple-
tower of Calah as restored in the frontispiece to
Layard’s Monuments of Nineveh, 1st series, in which
a step-pyramid with a similarly high basement-
stage is shown.
With this detailed description, which is quite
what would be expected in a Bab account of such
a celebrated fane, the description in
11. Herod- Herodotus (1.181 ff) agrees. He states
otus’ De- that it was a temple square in form,
scription two furlongs (1,213 ft.) each way, in the
midst of which was built a solid tower
a furlong square (nearly 607 {t.). This, however,
must have been the platform, which, with the six
stages and the chapel on the top, would make up
the total of eight stages of which Herodotus speaks.
The ascent by which the top was reached he de-
scribes as running ‘‘outside round about all the
towers’—wording which suggests, though not
necessarily, that it was spiral—i.e. one had to
walk round the structure 7 times to reach the top.
Representations on Bab boundary-stones suggest
that this view would be correct, though a sym-
metrical arrangement of inclined paths might have
been constructed which would have greatly im-
proved the design. At the middle of the ascent,
Herodotus says, there was a stopping-place with
seats to rest upon, which rather favors this idea,
At the top of the last tower there was a large cell,
and in the cell a large couch was laid, well covered;
and byitagoldentable. There was no image there,
nor did any human being spend the night there,
except only a woman of the natives of the place
chosen by the god, ‘‘as say the Chaldeans who are
the priests of this god.””. These men told Herodotus
that the god often came to the cell, and rested upon
the couch, ‘‘but,”’ he adds, “I do not believe them.”
After mentioning parallels to this at Egyp Thebes
and Patara in Lycia, he gocs on to speak of another
cell below (that referred to in G. Smith’s tablet)
wherein was a great image of Zeus (Bel-Merodach)
sitting, with a footstool and a large table, all of
gold, and weighing no Jess than 800 talents. Out-
side of this cell was an altar to the god, made of
gold; and also another altar, whereon full-grown
animals were sacrificed, the golden altar being for
sucklings only. The Chaldaeans also told him that
there was, in the precincts of the building, a statue
12 cubits high, and of solid gold. Darins Hystaspis
desired to take possession of this valnable object,
but did not venture. His son Xerxes, however,
was not so considerate of the feelings of the people
and the priesthood, for he also killed the priest when
he forbade him to meddle with it.
The Bible record does not state who the people
were who journeyed in the East and built the city
and the Tower. The indefinite “they”


12. The might be taken to mean whatever
Builders people were there at the time the record
of the was written, and probably presupposes
Tower that the reader would certainly know.


As the Tower of Babel bears, in the
native inscriptions, a Sumero-Akkadian name, it
may be supposed that the builders referred to be-
longed to that race. It is noteworthy that nothing
is said in Gen concerning the stoppage of the

erection, though they ceased to build
13. Tradi- the city. Bochart records a Jewish
tions Con- tradition which makes the tower to
cerning Its have been split through to its founda-
Destruction tion by fire which fell from heaven

—suggested probably by the condition
of the tower at “the second Babylon,” i.e. the


' Birs Nimroud. Another tradition, recorded by
Eusebius (Prep. Evang., ix; Chronicon, 13; Syn-
cel. Chron., 44) makes it to have been blown down
by the winds; ‘‘but when it approached the heavens,
the winds assisted the gods, and overturned the
work upon its contrivers: and the gods introduced
a diversity of tongues among men, who, until that
time, had all spoken the same janguage.” The
place where they built the Tower was called Baby-
lon, on account of the confusion of languages.
Here we have again the statement as
14. The in Gen that the meaning of Babel is
Meaning “confusion.” This, as is well known,
of “Babel” is based upon the purely Heb ety-
mological law, which makes bdilal,
“to confuse,” or “mingle,” assume a reduplicate
form; but as far as the cuneiform inscriptions,
which are now very numerous, give us information,
Babel, from baldlu, “‘to mingle” (the root in ques-
tion), was an impossibility. But on the Bab side,
that the rendering of the name as Bab-tli (-ildni),
“gate of god” (“‘of the gods’’) was a folk-etymology,
is undoubted, notwithstanding that the Sumero-
Akkadian form Ka-dingira, with the same meaning,
is far from rare. It is noteworthy, however, that
one of the forms used by Nebuchadrezzar is Bab-
ilam, with the mimmation or “emming,’’ which is
a characteristic of the Bab language; moreover, a
place-name Babalam also occurs, which may be a
still earlier, and perhaps the original, form. Not-
withstanding that one would like to see in Babalam,
“the place of bringing together,” and in Babilam,
“the bringer together,” the termination -am would
seem to be an insurmountable difficulty.
That the building of the city would have been
stopped when the confusion of tongues took place
is natural—the departure of the greater
15. The part of the inhabitants made this
Ultimate inevitable. When the population in-
Destruction creased again, the building of the city
of the was continued, with the result that
Tower Babylon ultimately became the great-
est city of the then known world. The
Tower, notwithstanding what had been said as to
its destruction, remained, and when, as happened
from time to time, its condition became ruinous,
some energetic Bab king would restore it. Alex-
ander and Philip of Macedon began clearing away
the rubbish to rebuild the great temple of Belus
(Bel-Merodach) connected with it and there is
hardly any doubt that the Tower would have been
restored likewise, but the untimely death of the
former, and the deficient mental caliber of the latter
for the ruling of a great empire, put an end to the
work. The Tower therefore remained unrepaired—
“The tower was exceedingly tall. The third part
of it sank down into the ground, a second third
was burned down, and the remaining third was
standing until the time of the destruction of Baby-
lon” (Rabbi Yéhanan, Sanhedhrin, 109, 1).
Concerning the reputed intention of the builders
of the Tower, to carry it as high as the heavens,
that, notwithstanding the Talm and


16. No other writings, may be dismissed at
Idea of once. The intention was to build a
Reaching very high tower, and that is all that
Heaven is implied by the words employed.


That the Babylonians would have
liked their tower to reach heaven may be conceded,
and the idea may be taken as symbolical of Baby-
lon’s pride, the more especially as they regarded it as
“the house of the foundation of heaven and earth.”’
Though at present brought lower than the other
temple-towers of Babylonia, its renown remains as
one of the great glories of that renowned capital.
Dedicated as it was to the gods whom they wor-
shipped, and chiefly to the glory of Merodach, the


Babi
Babylonia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


358


representative of Bab monotheism, the Babyloni-
ans’ descendants, the native Christians, have no
reason to remember this erection of their forefathers
with shame, but rather with pride. The rallying-
point of nations, Babylon, while it existed, was
always a great commercial center, and many are the
languages which have resonnded in the Tower’s
vicinity. The confusion of tongues led to the
Jewish fiction that the air of Babylon and Borsippa
caused forgetfulness, and was therefore injurious
to students of the Law, causing them to forget it as
the builders of the Tower had of old forgotten their
speech (Rashi, Sanhedhrin, 109, 1). This, however,
did not prevent the rabbis of Babylon from being
more celebrated than those of the Hcly Land, and
even of Jerus itself. See also Astronomy.
T. G. PINcHESs

BABI, ba’bi (A, BaBi, Babi; B, Bavgp, Baiér) =
Bebai (Ezr 8 11). The descendants of B. re-
turned with Ezra to Jerus (1 Esd 8 37).


BABYLON IN THE NT: Babylon (BaBvAév,
Babulén), is used in NT in at least two different

senses :
In Mt 1 11.12.17; Acts 7 48 the old Mesop city
is plainly meant. These all refer to the captivity
in Babylon and do not demand any


1. Meso- further discussion.
potamian All the references to Babylon in
Babylon Rev are evidently symbolic. Some


of the most important passages are
14 8; 16 19; 17 5; 18 2.10.21. In 17 5 Babylon
is designated as mustérion. This undoubtedly in-

dicates that the name is to be under-
2. Symbolic stood fig. A few interpreters have be-
Sense lieved that Jerus was the city that was

designated as Babylon, but most schol-
ars hold that Rome was the city that was meant.
That interpretation goes back at least to the time of
Tertullian (Adv. Marc., iii.13). This interpretation
was adopted by Jerome and Augustine and has been
commonly accepted by the church. There are some
striking facts which point to Rome as the city that
is designated as Babylon.

(1) The characteristics ascribed to this Babylon
apply to Rome rather than to any other city of that
age: (a) as ruling over the kings of the earth
(17 18); (b) as sitting on seven mountains (17 9);
(c) as the center of the world’s merchandise (18
3.11-13); (d) as the corrupter of the nations (17
2; 18 3; 19 2); (e) as the persecutor of the saints
(17 6).

(2) Rome is designated as Babylon in the Sibyl-
line Oracles (6 143), and this is perhaps an early
Jewish’ portion of the book. The comparison of
Rome to Babylon is common in Jewish apocalyptic
literature (see 2 Esd and the Apoc Bar).

(3) Rome was regarded by both Jews and Chris-
tians as being antagonistic to the kingdom of God,
and its downfall was confidently expected. This
conception is in accord with the predicted downfall
of Babylon (Rev 14 8; 18 2.10-21). As Babylon
had been the oppressor of Israel, it was natural that
this new power, which was oppressing the people of
God, should be designated as Babylon.

In 5 13 Babylon is designated as the place from
which 1 Pet was written. Down to the time of the

Reformation this was generally under-
3. In 1 Peter stood to mean Rome, and two cursives

added ‘“‘en Roma.” Since the Reforma-
tion, many scholars have followed Erasmus and
Calvin and have urged that the Mesop Babylon
is meant. Three theories should be noted:

(1) That the Egyp Babylon, or Old Cairo, is
meant. Strabo (XVII, 807) who wrote as late as
18 AD, says the Egyp Babylon was a strong for-
tress, founded by certain refugees from the Mesop


'B 18),


Babylon. But during the ist cent. this was not
much more than a military station, and it is quite
improbable that Peter would have gone there.
There is no tradition that connects Peter in any
way with Egypt.

(2) That the statement is to be taken lit. and
that the Mesop Babylon is meant. Many good
scholars hold to this view, and among these are
Weiss and Thayer, but there is no evidence that
Peter was ever in Babylon, or that there was even
a church there during the 1st cent. Mark and
Silvanus are associated with Peter in the letter
and there is no tradition that connects either of
them with Babylon. According to Jos (Ant,
XVIII, ix, 5-9), the Jews at this time had largely
been driven out of Babylon and were confined to
neighboring towns, and it seems improbable that
Peter would have made that his missionary field.

(3) That Rome was the city that was desig-
nated as Babylon. The Apocalypse would indi-
cate that the churches would understand the
symbolic reference, and it seems to have been so
understood until the time of the Reformation.
The denial of this position was in line with the
effort to refute Peter’s supposed connection with
the Rom church. Ancient tradition, however, makes
it seem quite probable that Peter did make a visit
to Rome (see Lightfoot, Clement, II, 493 ff).

Internal evidence helps to substantiate the
theory that Rome was the place from which the
letter was written. Mark sends greetings (1 Pet
and we know he had been summoned to
Rome by the apostle Paul (2 Tim 411). The
whole passage, ‘She that is in Babylon, elect
together with you, saluteth you,” seems to be
fig., and that being true, it is natural that Baby-
lon should have been used instead of Rome. The
character of the letter as a whole would point to
Rome as the place of writing. Ramsay thinks this
book is impregnated with Rom thought beyond any
other book in the Bible (see The Church in the Rom
Empire, 286). A. W. Forrune


BABYLON IN OT. See Basset, BaByLon.
BABYLONIA, bab-i-]d’ni-a:


1. Mounds 22. Shuruppak

2. Explorations 23. Kisurra

3. Names 24. Umma

4. Semites 25. Accad

5. Sumerians 26. Opis

6. Home of the Semites 27. Basime

7. Immigration 28. Drehem

8. Language 29. Urumma

9. Script 30. First Dynasty of Babylon
10. Architecture 31. Sealand Dynasty

11. Art 32. Cassite Dynasty

12. Literature 33. Cassite Rule

13. Libraries 34. Isin Dynasty

14. Personal Names 35. Nebuchadrezzar I

15. History of Kingdoms 36. Sealand Dynasty

16. Kish 37. Bit-Bazi Dynasty

17. Lagash 38. Other Rulers

18. Adab 39. Babylonian Dynasty
19. Nippur 40. Neo-Babylonian Rulers
20. Erech 41. Persian Rulers of Bab
21. Larsa LitERATURE


Babylonia is a plain which is made up of the
alluvial deposits of the mountainous regions in the
North, where the Tigris and Euphrates have their
source. The land is bounded on the N. by Assyria
and Mesopotamia; on the E. by Elam, separated
by the mountains of Elam; on the 8. by the sea
marshes, and the country Kaldu (Chaldaea); and
on the W. by the Syrian desert. Some of the cities of
the lower country were seaport towns in the early
period, but now are far inland. This land-making
process continues even at the present time at the
rate of about 70 ft. a year.

This plain, in the days when Babylonia flourished,
sustained a dense population. It was covered with
a network of canals, skilfully planned and regulated,


359


which brought prosperity to the land, because of
the wonderful fertility of the soil. The neglect of
these canals and doubtless, also, the change of
climate, have resulted in altered conditions in the
country. It has become a cheerless waste. Dur-
ing some months of the year, when the inundations
take place, large portions of the land are partially
covered with swamps and marshes. At other
times it looks like a desolate plain.
_ Throughout the land there are seen, at the present
time, ruin-hills or mounds of accumulation of débris,
which mark the site of ancient cities.
1. Mounds Some of these cities were destroyed
in a very early era, and were never
rebuilt. Others were occupied for millenniums,
and their history extends far into the Christian era.
The antiquities generally found in the upper stratum
of the mounds which were occupied up to so late
a period, show that they were generally inhabited
by the Jews, who lived there after the Babylonians
had disappeared.
The excavations conducted at various sites have
resulted in the discovery, besides antiquities of
almost every character, of hundreds
2. Explora- of thousands of inscriptions on clay
tions and stone, but principally on the
former material. At Tello more than
60,000 tablets were found, belonging largely to the
administrative archives of the temple of the 3d
millennium BC. At Nippur about 50,000 inscrip-
tions were found, many of these also belonging to
temple archives. But about 20,000 tablets and
fragments found in that city came from the library
of the school of the priests, which had been written
in the 8d millennium BC. At Sippar, fully 30,000
tablets were found, many being of the same general
character, also representing a library. At Delehem
and Djokha, temple archives of the same period
as those found at Tello have come to light in great
numbers, through the illicit diggings of Arabs.
Babylon, Borsippa, Kish, Erech and many other
cities have yielded to the explorer and the Arab
diggers inscribed documents of every period of
Bab history, and embracing almost every kind of
lit., so that the museums and libraries of America
and Europe have stored up unread inscriptions
numbering hundreds of thousands. Many also


Bronze Goat Head from Tello.


are in the possession of private individuals. After
the work of excavating Babylonia has been com-
pleted and the inscriptions deciphered, many of the
re-Christian cents. in Bab history. will be better
nown than some of those of our Christian era. The


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Babi
Babylonia


ancient history of the Babylonians will be recon-
structed by the help of these original sources.
Lengthy family genealogies will be known, as indeed
in some instances is now the case, as well as the Bab
contemporaries of Ezekiel, Abraham and all the
other Bib. characters.


Silver Vase of Entemena, 3d Millennium BC.


The Gr name of Babylonia which is in use at the
present time is derived from the name of the city
of Babylon, the capital and chief city
of the land from the time of the First
Dynasty of Babylon, about 2000 BC
(see Bapyton). The name of the land in the very
earliest period which is represented by antiquities,
and even inscribed objects, is not known. But in
a comparatively early age the northern part is called
Uri, and the southern part, Engi or En-gira. The
second part of the latter name is perhaps the same
as in Su-gir, which is thought to be the origin of the
OT Shinar. Su-gir and Su-mer are names of the
same country. And inasmuch as Mer and Gir
were names of the same west Sem deity, who played
animportant réle in the early history of Babylonia,
it is not improbable that the element Su is also to
be identified with the ancient name of Mesopotamia.
Su is also in Su-bartu, the name of the country to
the N. This name is also written Su-Gir.

Subsequent to 2000 BC the ideograms read in
Sumerian, Uri and Engi, were pronounced in Sem-
Bab, Accad and Sumer. The former received its
name from the capital of the kingdom Accad, one
of the cities mentioned in Gen 10 10. The title,
‘king of Accad and Sumer’’ was used by rulers as
late as the Ist millennium BC.

The name by which the land is known in the 2d
millennium BC is Kar-Duniash, the exact deriva-
tion of which is in doubt. Kar means ‘garden,
land” in Sem and Sumerian; and Duniash being
preceded by the determinative for deity, has been
regarded as a name of a Cassite god. A more
recently advanced explanation is that Duniash is
equivalent to Bél-matdtt, which means “lord of


3. Names


Babylonia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


360


lands.” The meaning of the name, as stated, must
be regarded as undetermined.

In the time of the late Assyr empire a nation in
the extreme southern part ‘of the land, called by
the Greeks Chaldaea, which is derived from the
name Kaldu, came into existence. In the Assyr
historical inscriptions the Jand is usually called Bit-
Yakin. This people seems to have issued from
Aram. Under Bib. Merodach-baladan they ruled
Babylonia for a time. The Neo-Bab Dynasty,
founded by Nabopolassar, is supposed to be Chal-
daean in origin, in consequence of which the whole
land in the Gr period was called Chaldaea.


The home of the Semites has been placed in
different parts of the ancient world. A number
of scholars look to Arabia and others

6. Home of to Africa for their original habitation,
the Semites although their theories generally are
not based upon much archaeological

evidence. Unquestionably, the previous, if not the
original home of the Sem Babylonians, is to be
found in the land of the Amorites, that is in Syria.
In the earliest known period of Bab history, which
apparently belongs to the age not very far removed
from the time when the Semites entered Babylonia,
Amurru was an important factor in the affairs of


FRAGMENTS OF INscRIBED VASES OF THE Harty SuMERIAN Perron.


Two distinct races are found occupying the land
when we obtain the first glimpses of its history.
The northern part is occupied by the
4. Semites Semites, who are closely allied to the
Amorites, Aramaeans and Arabs; and
the southern part by a non-Sem people called
Sumerians. Their cultures had been originally
distinct, but when they first become known to us
there has taken place such an amalgamation that
it is only by the knowledge of other Sem cultures
that it is possible to make even a partial differentia-
tion of what was Sem-Bab and what was Sumerian.
The Semites, it would almost seem, entered the
land after the Sumerians had established themselves,
but this can only be regarded as a conjecture.
Although the earliest Sumerian settlement belongs
to a remote period, few traces of the pre-historic
umerian have been found. The
archaeological remains indicate that
this non-Sem race is not indigenous
to the land, and that when they came
into the country they had already attained to a
fair degree of culture. But there is no evidence,
as yet, in what part of the ancient world the ele-
ments of their culture were evolved, although vari-
ous attempts have been made by scholars to locate
their original home.


5. Sumer-
ians


the nations, and it was a land which the world con-
querors of Babylonia, both Sumerian and Sem,
endeavored to subjugate. This points to the fact
that the culture of Amurru was then already old.
Egyp inscriptions fully substantiate this. We look
to the land of the Amorites as the home of the Sem
Babylonians, because of the important part played
by the chief god of that land Amurru or Uru, in the
Bab religion and nomenclature. In fact nearly
all of the original names of the Sem Bab sun-deities
are derived from the names and epithets of the
great Sun-god of the Amorites and Aramaeans (see
Amurru, 108 ff). These and many other considera-
tions point to Amurru, or the land of the Amorites,
as the previous home of the Semites who migrated
into Babylonia and who eventually became masters
of the land.

The original settlements in Babylonia, as stated
above, belong to a prehistoric time, but throughout
the history of the land fresh Sem migra-
tions have been recognized. In the
Isin and First Dynasty of Babylonia,
Amorites or Canaanites seem to flood
thecountry. In the 2d millennium a foreign people
known as Cassites ruled Babylonia for nearly six
centuries. The nomenclature of the period shows that
many Hittites and Mittanaeans as well as Cassites


7. Immi-
grations


361


lived in Babylonia. In the 1st millennium the
thousands of names that appear in the contract
lit. indicate a veritable Babel of races: Egyptians,
Elamites, Persians, Medes, Tabalites, Hittites,
Cassites, Ammorites, Edomites, notably Hebrews,
are among the peoples that occupied the land.
The deportation of the Israelites by the Assyr
kings and of the Jews by the Bab kings, find con-
firmation besides the historical inscriptions in the
names of Hebrews living in Babylonia in the cor-
responding periods.

The languages of Babylonia are Sem and Su-
merian. The latter is an agglutinative tongue like

the Turkish, and belongs to that great
8. Lan- unclassifiable group of languages, called
guage for the sake of convenience, Turanian.
It has not been shown, as yet, to be
allied to any other known language.

The Sem language known as the Bab, with which
the Assyr is practically identical, is of the common
Sem stock. After the Semites entered the land,
their language was greatly influenced by the Su-
merian tongue. The Semites being originally de-
pendent upon the Sumerian scribes, with whom the
script had originated, considered in connection
with the fact that the highly developed culture of
the Sumerians greatly influenced that of the Semites,
brought about the peculiar amalgamation known
as Bab. The language is, however, distinctively
Sem, but it has a very large percentage of Sumerian
loan-words. Not knowing the cognate tongues of
the Sumerian, and having a poor understanding
of the pronunciation of that language, it is impos-
sible to ascertain, on the other hand, how much
the Sumerian language was influenced by the Sem.

In the late period another Sem tongue was used
extensively in the land. It was not because of the
position occupied by the Aramaeans in the politi-
cal history of western Asia, that their language
became the lingua franca of the Ist millennium
BC. It must have been on account of the wide-
spread migrations of the people. In the timé of
Sennacherib it seems to have been used as the diplo-
matic language in Assyria as well as among the
Hebrews, as the episode in 2 K 18 26 would show.
Then we recall the story of Belshazzar, and the
edicts of the late period referred to in the OT,
which were in Aram. (Ezr 4 7, etc). In Assyria
and Babylonia, many contract tablets have been
found with Aram. reference notes written upon them,
showing that this was the language of those who
held the documents. The Hebrews after the exile
used Aramaic. This would seem to point to Baby-
lonia as the place where they learned the language.
The Bab language and the cuneiform script con-
tinued to be used until the 3d or 2d cent. BC, and
perhaps even later, but it seems that the Aram. had
generally supplanted it, except as the literary and
legallanguage. In short the tongue of the common
people or the spoken language in all probability in
the late period was Aramaic.

The cuneiform writing upon clay was used both
by the Sumerians and the Semites. Whether this

script had its origin in the land, or
9. Script in the earlier home of the Sumerians,

remains a question. It is now known
that the Elamites had their own system of writing
as early as that of the earliest found in Babylonia;
and perhaps it will be found that other ancient
peoples, who are at the present unknown to us, also
used the cuneiform script. A writing similar to
the Bab was in use at an early time in Cappadocia.
The Hittites and other peoples of that region also
employed it. The origin of the use of clay as a
writing material, therefore, is shrouded in mystery,
but as stated above, the system used by the Semites
in Babylonia was developed from the Sumerian.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Babylonia


The script is not alphabetic, but ideographic and
phonetic, in that respect similar to the Chinese.
There are over 500 characters, each one of which
has from one to many values. The combination
of two or more characters also has many values.
The compilation of the values of the different signs
used in various periods by both the Sumerians and
Assyrians numbers at the present about 25,000,
and the number will probably reach 30,000.

The architecture of Babylonia is influenced by
the fact that the building material, in this alluvial

plain, had to be of brick, which was
10. Archi- largely sun-dried, although in certain
tecture prosperous eras there is much evidence
of kiln-dried bricks having been used.
The baked brick used in the earliest period was the
smallest ever employed, being about the size of the


Brick Stamp of Sargon I.


ordinary brick used at the present time. The size
of the bricks in the era prior to the 3d millennium
varied from this to about 6X10X3in. At Nippur,
Sargon and his son Naram-Sin used a brick, the
largest found, about 20 in. square, and about 4 in. in
thickness. Following the operations of these kings
at Nippur is the work of Ur-Engur, who used a
brick about 14 in. square and nearly 4 in. in thickness.
This size had been used at Tello prior to Sargon’s
time, and was thereafter generally employed. It
remained the standard size of brick throughout the
succeeding cents. of Bab history. Adobes, of which
the greater portion of the buildings were con-
structed, were usually double the thickness of kiln-
dried bricks. The pillar made of bricks, as well as
the pilaster constructed of the same material, seems
to have come into use at a very early age, as is
shown by the excavations at Tello.

A large number of Bab builders had the brick
makers employ brick stamps which gave their
names and frequently their titles, besides the name
of the temple for which the bricks were intended.
These enable the excavator to determine who the
builders or restorers were of the buildings uncovered.
Naturally, in a building like the temple of Enlil
at Nippur, inscribed bricks of many builders
covering a period of over 2,000 years were found.
These by the help of building inscriptions, which
have been found, enable scholars to rewrite con-
siderable of the history of certain Bab temples.
The walls of the city were also built of clay bricks,


Babylonia


principally adobes.
great thickness.

Clay was also employed extensively in the manu-
facture of images, weights, drains, playthings, such
as animals, baby rattles, etc, and of inscriptions of
every kind. Pottery, with the exception of the
blue glaze employed in the late period, was usually
plain, although some traces of painted pottery have
been found. Although every particle of stone found
in Babylonia was carried into the country, either
by man or by inundations, still in certain periods it
was used freely for statues, steles, votive objects,
and in all periods for door sockets, weights and seal
cylinders. Building operations in stone are scarcely
known in Babylonia until perhaps the time of the
greatest of all ancient builders, Nebuchadrezzar II,
who laid a pavement in the causeway of Babylon,
Aa-ibur-sabu, with blocks of stone from a mountain
quarry. See BaByLon.

The sculpture of the Sumerians, although in
most instances the hardest of materials was used, is

one of the great achievements of their

11. Art civilization. Enough examples have
been found to trace the development
of their art from comparatively rude reliefs of the
archaic period to the finished sculpture of Gudea’s
time, 3d millennium BC, when it reached a high
degree of excellence. The work of the sculpture
of this age shows spirit and originality in many
respects unique. In the earliest period the Baby-
lonians attempted the round, giving frequently the
main figures in full face. The perfection of detail,
in their efforts to render true to life, makes their
modeling very superior in the history of art. The
Sumerian seems to have been able to overcome
difficulties of technique which later sculptors sys-
tematically avoided.

. Practically every Babylonian had his own per-
sonal seal. He used it as the signature is used at
the present time or rather as the little stamp upon
which is engraved the name of the individual
at the present time, in the Orient, to make an im-
pression upon the letter which was written for him
by a publie scribe. Thousands of these ancient seals
have been found. They were cut out of all kinds
of stone and metal. The style in the early period
was usually cylindrical, with a hole passing length-
wise through them. In the late period the signet
was commonly used. Many of these gems were
exquisitely cut by lapidists of rare ability. Some
of the very best work of this art belongs to the 3d
millennium BC. The boldness in outline, and the
action displayed are often remarkable. The most
delicate saws, drills and other tools must have
been employed by the early lapidist. Some of his
early work is scarcely surpassed in the present age.

The gold and silver smiths of the early age have
left us some beautiful examples of their art and
skill. A notable one is the silver vase of Entemena
of Lagash, mounted on a bronze pedestal, which
stands on four feet. There is a votive inscription
engraved about its neck. The bowl is divided into
two compartments. On the upper are engraved
seven heifers, and on the lower four eagles with ex-
tended wings, in some respects related to the totem
or the coat of arms of Lagash. While attention to
detail is téo0 pronounced, yet the whole is well
rendered and indicates remarkable skill, no less
striking than the well-known work of their Egyp
contemporaries. Bronze was also used extensively
for works of art and utensils. Some remarkable
specimens of this craft have been found at Tello.

In studying the magnificent remains of their art,
one is thoroughly impressed with the skill displayed,
and with the fact that there must have been a long
period of development prior to the age to which
these works belong, before such creations could have


The walls usually were of very


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


362


been possible. Although much of the craftsman’s
work is crude, there is considerable in the sculpture
and engraving that is well worthy of study. And
in studying these remains one is also impressed with
the fact that they were produced in an alluvial
plain.


Statue of Gudea from Tello.


The literature in a narrow sense is almost entirely
confined to the epics, which are of a religious char-
. acter, and the psalms, hymns, incanta-
12. Litera- tions, omens, etc. These are the
ture chief remains of their culture. See
BaBYLonia AND AssSYRIA, RELIGION OF.
In a general sense almost every kind of lit. is
found among the hundreds of thousands of clay
tablets unearthed in Babylonia. The inscribed
votive objects are of all kinds and descriptions.
The stone vase taken in booty was dedicated to
the deity of the conqueror. The beautiful piece of
lapis lazuli, agate, cornelian, etc, obtained, was
inscribed and devoted in the same way. Slabs,
tablets and cones of all shapes and sizes, were
inscribed with the king’s name and titles, giving
the different citics over which he ruled and referring
esp. to the work that he had accomplished for his
deity. From the decipherment of these votive
objects much valuable data are gathered for the
reconstruction of the ancient history of the land.
_ The same is true of what are known as building
inscriptions, in which accounts of the operations of
the kings in restoring and enlarging temples, shrines,
walls and other city works are given. Canal digging
and dredging, and such works by which the people
benefited, are frequently mentioned in these in-
scriptions.

Epistolary literature, for example, the royal
letters of Hammurabi, the diplomatic correspond-
ence found in Egypt (see Tait et-AMARNA) or the
royal letters from the Library of Ashurbanipal
(see ASHURBANIPAL), as well as the private corre-
spondence of the people, furnishes valuable historical
and philological data.

The thousands of tablets found in the school
libraries of Sippar and Nippur, as well as of the
library of Ashurbanipal, among which are all kinds


363


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Babylonia


of inscriptions used in the schools of the priests
and scribes, have furnished a great deal of material
for the Assyr dictionary, and have thrown much
light upon the grammar of the language. The legal
lit. is of the greatest importance for an understand-
ing of the social conditions of the people. It is also
valuable for comparative purposes in studying the
codes of other peoples. See Cops or HammuraBl.

The eommereial or legal transactions, dated in all
periods, from the earliest times until the latest,
also throw important light upon the social condi-
tions of the people. Many thousands of these
documents have been found, by the help of whieh
the very life that pulsated in the streets of Bab
eities is restored.

The administrative documents from the temple
arehives also have their value, in that they furnish
important data as regards the maintenanee of the
temples and other institutions; and ineidentally
much light on the nationality and religion of the
people, whose names appear in great numbers upon
them. The records are receipts of taxes or rents
from districts close by the temples, and of commer-
cial transactions condueted with this revenue. A


Fisher, the arehitect of the Nippur expedition
(see LOTB, 183). Professor Scheil, in publishing
his results, has also given a plan of the school he
diseovered, and a full description of its arrangements,
as well as the pedagogical methods that had been
employed in that institution of learning. This
has also been attempted by others, but in a less
scientifie manner. One of the striking features of
these libraries is the use of the large reference
cylinders, quadrangular, pentagonal and hexagonal
in shape. ‘There was a hole cut lengthwise through
them for the purpose of mounting them like revoly-
ing stands. These libraries, doubtless, contained
all the works the Babylonians possessed on law,
scienee, literature and religion. There are lexical
lists, paradigm tablets, lists of names, of places,
countries, temples, rivers, officers, stones, gods,
ete. Suffieient tablets have been deciphered to
determine their general character. Also hundreds
of exercise tablets have been found, showing the
progress made by pupils in writing, in mathematics,
in grammar, and in other branches of learning.
Some tablets appear to have been written after
‘dietation. Doubtless, the excavators found the


Seat CYLINDERS.


large portion of these archives consists of the salary
payments of storehouse officials and priests. There
seems to have been a host of tradesmen and
functionaries in connection with the temple. Be-
sides the priest, elder, seer, seeress, Soreerer, sorceress,
singer, ete, there were the farmer, weaver, miller,
carpenter, smith, butcher, baker, porter, overseer,
scribe, measurer, watchman, etc. These documents
give us an insight into Bab system of bookkeeping,
and show how carefully the administrative affairs of
the temple were conducted. In fact the temple was
provided for and maintained along lines quite
similar to many of our modern institutions.
The discovery of the Library of Ashurbanipal at
Nineveh speaks volumes for the culture of Assyria,
but that culture was largely borrowed
18. Libraries from the Babylonians. Much that
this library contained had been
secured from Bab libraries by the seribes employed
by Ashurbanipal. In every important center there
doubtless existed schools and libraries in connection
with the temples. At Nippur, in 1890, Dr. J. P.
Peters found sueh a library, bnt unfortunately,
although he termed it such, his Assyriologists did
not recognize that one of the greatest discoveries
of antiquity had been made. It remained for Dr.
J. H. Haynes, a decade later, to discover another
portion of this library, which he regarded as such,
because of the large number of tablets which he
uncovered. Pére Seheil, prior to Dr. Haynes’s dis-
eovery, had the good fortune while at Sippar to
discover a part of the school and library of that
important center. Since Professor Scheil’s excava-
tions, Arabs have unearthed many inscriptions of
this library, which have found their way to museums
and into the hands of private individuals.
The plan of the Nippur Library, unearthed by
Dr. Haynes, has been published by Mr. C. S.


waste heaps of the school, where these tablets had
been thrown for the purpose of working them over
again as raw material, for new exercises. The
sehool libraries must have been large. Consider-
ing for instance that the ideographie and phonetic
values of the cuneiform signs in use numbered
perhaps 30,000, even the syllabaries which were
required to contain these different values must have
been many in number, and esp. as tablets, unlike
books made of paper, have only two sides to them.
And when we take into consideration all the differ-
ent kinds of lit. which have been found, we must
realize that these libraries were immense, and num-
bered many thousands of tablets.

In modern times the meaning of names given
children is rarely eonsidered; in fact, in many

instanees the name has suffered so
14, Personal much through changes that it is diffi-
Names cult to ascertain its original meaning.

Then also, at present, in order to avoid
eonfusion the child is given two or more names.
It was not so with the ancient Babylonian. Origi-
nally the giving of a name was connected with some
special circumstanee, and though this was not always
the case thronghout the history of Babylonia, the
correct form of the name was always preserved.

The name may have been an expression of their
religious faith. It may have told of the joy experi-
enced at the birth of an heir. It may even betray
the suffering that was involved at the birth of the
ehild, or the life that the parents had lived. In
short, the names afford us an intimate glimpse into
the everyday life of the people.

The average Bab name is theophorous, and indi-
cates one of the deities worshipped by the family,
and often the city. For example, it is suggestive
that persons with names compounded with Enlil and
Ninib hailed from Nippur. Knowing the deities


Babylonia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


364


of the surrounding people we have also important
evidence in determining the origin of peoples in
Babylonia having foreign names. For example,
if a name is composed of the Hittite deity Teshup,
or the Amorite deity Amurru, or the Aramaean god
Dagan, or the Egyp god Esi (Isis), foreign influence
is naturally looked for from the countries repre-
sented. Quite frequently the names of foreign
deities are compounded with Bab elements, often
resulting from mixed marriages.


Clay Tablet with Seal Impression.


Theophorous names are composed of two, three,
four and even five elements. Those having two
or three elements predominate. Two-element names
have a diety plus a verbal form or a subst.; or
vice versa: for example, Nabu-na’id (Nabonidus),
“Nebo is exalted,” or Shulman-asharedu (Shal-
maneser), ‘““Shalman is foremost.’? Many different
combinations are found in three-element names
which are composed of the name of the deity, a
subst., a verbal form, a pronominal suffix, or some
other form of speech, in any of the three positions.
Explanations of a few of the familiar Bib. names
follow: Sin-akhe-erba (Sennacherib), “Sin has in-
creased the brothers’; | Marduk-apal-iddin (Mero-
dach-baladan), ‘(Marduk has given a son’; Ashur-


akh-iddin (Esarhaddon), “Ashur has given a
brother’; Ashur-bani-apal, “‘Ashur is creating a
son”; Nabu-kudurri-usur (Nebuchadrezzar), ‘“O


Nebo, protect the boundary”; Amel-Marduk (Evil-
Merodach), ““Man of Marduk’; Bel-shar-usur (Bel-
shazzar), ‘‘O Bel, protect the king.” Some Bab
names mentioned in the Bible are really of foreign
origin, for example, Amraphel and Sargon. Amra-
phel originally is west Semitic and is written
Hammurabi (pronounced Hammu-rabi, the first
letter being the Semitic heth). Sargon was per-
haps originally Aramaean, and is camposed of the
elements shar and the god Gan. When written in
cuneiform it was written Shargani, and later Shar-
rukin, being tr’ “the true king.”’ Many names in
use were not theophorous; for example, such per-
sonal names as Ululd, “the month Ulul”’; names
of animals, as Kalbé, ‘dog,” gentilic names, as
Akkadai, “the Akkadian,” names of crafts, as
Pahdru, “potter,” etc.

The ht. abounds in hypochoristica. One element
of a name was used for the sake of shortness, to
which usually a hypochoristica suffix was added, like
Marduké (Mordecai). That is, the ending a or ai
was added to one of the elements of a longer name.

The written history of Babylonia at the present
begins from about 4200 BC. But instead of finding
things crude and aboriginal in this, the earliest
period, the remains discovered show that the people
had attained to a high level of culture. Back


of that which is known there must lie a long
period of development. This is attested in many
ways; for instance, the earliest writing
15. History found is so far removed from the
of City- original hieroglyphs that it is only
Kingdoms possible to ascertain what the origi-
F nal pictures were by knowing the
values which the signs possessed. The same con-
clusion is ascertamed by a study of the art and
literature. Naturally, as mentioned above, it is
not impossible that this development took place
in a previous home of the inhabitants.

The history of early Babylonia is at present a
conflict of the kings and patesis (priest-kings) of
the different city-kingdoms, for supremacy over
each other, as well as over the surrounding peoples.
The principal states that figure in the early history
are: Kish, Lagash, Nippur, Akkad, Umma, Erech,
Ur and Opis. At the present time more is known
of Lagash, because the excavations conducted at
that site were more extensive than at others. This
makes much of our knowledge of the history of the
land center about that city. And yet it should
be stated that the hegemony of Lagash lasted for
a long period, and the kingdom will ultimately
occupy a prominent position when the final histor
of the land is written. Nippur, where considerable
work was also done, was not the seat of rulers, but
the sacred city of the god Enlil, to whom the kings
of other cities generally did obeisance. Following
is a list of known rulers of the different city-
kingdoms.

El-Ohemir, identified as the ancient city of
Kish, not far from Babylon, is one of the oldest

Sem centers of the land. No system-
16. Kish atic excavations have been conducted
at this site, but besides the inscriptions
which the Arabs have unearthed, several of the
rulers are known to us through votive inscriptions
discovered at Nippur and elsewhere. The rulers of
Kish are: Utug p. (patesi), cir 4200 BC; Mesilim
k. (king), cir 4000 BC; Lugal-tarsi k.; Enbi-
Ishtar k.; Manishtusu k., cir 2650 BC; Urumush
k., cir 2600; Manana k.; Sumu-ditana k. and
Tanium k. :

The excavations by the French under De Sarsez

and Cross at Teilo, the ancient city Lagash, have

yielded more inscriptions of ancient
17. Lagash Bab rulers than those at any other site.

Lagash was destroyed about 2000 BC,
and only partially rebuilt in the post-Bab period.
The known rulers are: Lugal-shag-Engur patesi, cir
4000 BC, contemporary with Mesilim k. of Kish;
*Badu k.; *En-khegal k.; Ur-Ninak.; Akurgal p.;
Eannatum p. and k.; Enannatum I p.; Entemena
p.; Enannatum II p.; Enetarzi p.; Enlitarzi p.;
Lugal-anda p.; Uru-kagina k., contemporary with
Lugal-zaggisi, k. of Uruk; Engilsa p., contemporary
with Manishtusu k. of Kish; Lugul-ushumgal p.,
contemporary with Sargon of Accad; Ur-Babbar p.,
contemporary with Naram-Sin of Accad; Ur-E
p.; Lugal-bur p.; Basha-Kama p.; Ur-Mama p.;
Ug-me p.; Ur-Bau p.; Gudea p.; Nammakhini p.;
Ur-gar p.; Ka-azag p.; Galu-Bau p.; Galu-Gula p.;
Ur-Ninsun p.; Ur-Ningirsu p.; contemporary with
Ur-Engur k. of Ur-abba p.; *Galu-kazal p.; *Galu-
andul p.; *Ut-Lama I p.; *Alla, *Ur-Lama II p.;
contemporary with Dungi k. of Ur; Arad-Nannar
p. Unfortunately, with the exception of about one-
third of these rulers, the exact order is yet to be
ascertained. (Asterisk denotes unidentified forms.)

The mounds of Bismaya which have been identi-
fied as Adab were partially excavated by Dr.

Edgar J. Banks, for the University of
18. Adab Chicago. Its remains indicate that
it is one of the oldest cities discovered.
A ruler named Esar, cir 4200 BC, is known from a


365


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Babylonia


number of inscriptions, as well as a magnificent
statue of the king, discovered by Dr. Banks.
The large group of mounds covering an area, the
circumference of which is three miles, called in
ancient times Nippur, but now Noufar,
19. Nippur was excavated as mentioned above
by Drs. Peters and Haynes for the
University of Pennsylvania.- While a great number
of Bab kings and patesis are represented by inscrip-
tions discovered at Nippur, practically all had their
seats of government at other places, it being the
sacred city.
The mounds at the present called Warka, but
representing ancient Erech (Gen 10 10), covering
an area whose circumference is 6 miles,
20. Erech have been tentatively examined by
Loftus and other explorers. Many
inscriptions have also been uncarthed by the Arabs
at this site. The rulers of this city known to us
are: Ilu-(m)a-ilu, Lugal-zaggisi k., contemporary
with Uru-kagina of Lagash; Lugal-kigubnidudu
k.; Lugal-kisalsi k.; Sin-gashid k., cir 2200 BC,
and Sin-gamil k.
Senkereh known in the OT as Ellasar (Gen 14 1),
and in the inscriptions as Larse, has been explored
by Loftus and others. The known
21. Larsa rulers of the city are: Gungunu k.,
contemporary of Ur-Ninib k. of Isin;
Sumv-ilu; Nur-Adad; Sin-iddinam; Eri-Aku (Bib.
Arioch) cir 2000 BC, son of Kudur-Mabug k. of
Elam, and Rim-Sin (or Rim-Aku), his brother.
The present Fara, which in ancient times was
called Shuruppak, was partially excavated by the
Cartan under Koldewey, Andraea,
22. Shurup- and Noeldeke. It is also a very
pak ancient city. It yielded little to the
spade of the excavator. It is close by
Abu-Hatab, and known as the place where the scenes
of the Bab Delugestory occurred. Two rulers known
from the inscriptions found there are Dada and Ha-
ladda, belonging to a comparatively early period.
The site now known as Abu-Hatab is the ancient
Kisurra. It was partially excavated by the Ger-
mans. It flourished as a city in the
23. Kisurra 3d millennium BC. The two rulers
of this city that are known are Idinilu
p., and Itur-Shamash p. (?).
The site now called Jokha lying to the N.W. of
Lagash is an ancient Sumerian city known as Umma.
The site has been explored by Dr.
24. Umma Peters and others, but more recently
surveyed by Andraea and Noeldeke.
It proved to be a city destroyed in the early period.
Arabs have lately found thousands of documents
belonging to the ancient archives of the city. Some
of the rulers known are: Ush p., Enakalli and
Urlumma p., contemporaries of Enannatum I of
Lagash; Ili p., appointed by Entemena p., of Lagash;
Kur-Shesh p., time of Manishtusu; *Galu-Babbar
p.;_ Ur-nesu p., contemporary of Dungi k., of Ur.
The city mentioned in Gen 10 10 as Accad, one
of Nimrod’s cities, has not been explored, but is
well known by the inscriptions of Sar-
25. Accad gon and his son Naram-Sin as well as
omen-texts of later eras. Sargon was
ausurper. He was born in concealment, and sent
adrift in an ark of bulrushes like Moses. He was
rescued and brought up by Akki, a farmer. He
assumed the title “king of the city” (Shar-ali), or
“king of Uri” (Shar Uri). Later he conquered
the entire country, and became the “king of Accad
and Sumer.” In his latter years he extended his
conquests to Elam, Amurru and Subartu, and
earned for himself the title “king of the Four
Quarters,’ which his son Naram-Sin inherited.
The latter followed up the successes of his father
and marched into Magan, in the Sinaitic peninsula.


Naram-Sin, as well as his father, was a great builder.
Evidences of their operations are seen in many cities.
Naram-Sin was succeeded by Bingani, who appar-
ently lost the title “king of the Four Quarters,”
being only called ‘‘king of the City, or Uri.”
The exact site of the city of Opis is still in doubt,
but the city is represented by the
26. Opis ruler Zuzu k., who was defeated by
Eannatum p., of Lagash.
The city Basime also remains unidentified, but
is represented by Ibalum p., a contemporary of
Manishtusu k., of Kish, and son of Ilsu-
27. Basime rabi, apparently another patesi of that


city.
A site not far from Nippur, called Delehem or
Drehem, which was explored by Dr. Peters, has
recently yielded thousands of tablets
28. Drehem from the Temple archives dated in the
reigns of kings in the Ur Dynasty.
The extensive group of mounds lying on the west
side of the Euphrates, called Mugayyar, and gen-
erally known as Ur of the Chaldees, is
29. Urumma the ancient Urumma. It was explored
by Taylor and others, and proved to
have been an important capital from the middle
of the 3d millennium BC. The dynasty which
had made the city its capital is known through
inscriptions discovered there and at Tello, Nippur,
Drehem and Djokha. Thousands of inscriptions
dated in what is commonly called the Ur Dynasty
have been published. The dynasty was founded by
Ur-Engur, who is conspicuous for his building
operations at Nippur and other cities. A dynastic
tablet of a much later period, the provenience of
which is in doubt, gives the rulers of this dynasty
founded about 2400 BC, and the number of years
that they reigned.


Urnumma Dynasty
Ur-Engur, 18 years
Dungi (son), 58 years
Bur-Sin (son), 9 years
Gimil-Sin (son), 7 years
Ibi-Sin (son), 25 years
Five kings, 117 years


The same tablet gives also the following list of
the rulers of Isin. Ishbi-Urra, the founder, lived
about 2283 BC.

Isis Dynasty


Ishbi-Urra, 32 years
Gimil-ilishu (son), 10 years
Idin-Dagan (son), 21 years
Ishme-Dagan (son), 20 years
Libit-Ishtar (son), 11 years
Ur-Ninib, 28 years
Bur-Sin II (son), 28 years
Iter-iqisha (son), 5 years
Urra-imitti (brother), 7 years
Sin-igisha, 6 months
Enlil-bani, 24 years
Zambia, 3 years
, 5 years

Ea: , 4 years

Sin-magir, 11 years

Damicq-ilishu (son), 23 years

Sixteen kings, 225 years and 6 months
About the time the Nisin Dynasty came to a


close, and while the Larsa Dynasty was ruling, the
First Dynasty of Babylon was estab-


30. First lished. Following is a list of 11
Dynasty of rulers of this dynasty who ruled 300
Babylon years:


I. First Dynasty or BaspyLon


Sumu-abum, 14 ycars
Sumu-la-el, 36 years


Babylonia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


366


Sabium (son), 14 years
Abil-Sin (son), 18 years
Sin-muballit (son), 20 years
Hammu-rabi (son), 43 years
Samsu-iluna (son), 38 years
Abi-eshuh (son), 28 years
Ammi-Ditana (son), 37 years
Ammi-Zaduga (son), 21 years
Samsu-Ditana (son), 32 years


The First Dynasty of Babylon came into promi-
nence in the reign of Sin-muballit who captured
Nisin. Eri-Aku of the Larsa Dynasty shortly after-
ward took the city. When Hammurabi came to the
throne he was subject to Eri-Aku (Bib. Arioch) of
Larsa, the son of the Elamite king, Kudur-Mabug.
The latter informs us that he was suzerain of
Amourru (Pal and Syria), which makes intelligible
the statement in Gen 14, that the kings of Canaan
were subject to the king of Elam, whose name was
Chedorlaomer (Kudur-Lagamar). In his 31st year,
Hammurabi, who is the Amraphel of Gen 14 1,
succeeded in throwing off the Elamite yoke, and not
only established his independence but also became
the complete master of Babylonia by driving out
the Elamites.

In the region of the Pers Gulf, south of Baby-
lonia, ruled a dynasty partly contemporaneously

with the First Dynasty, extending
31. Sealand over the reigns of about five of the
Dynasty last kings, and over several of the

Cassite Dynasty, known as the Sea-
land Dynasty. The annalist records for the latter
the following list of 11 kings who ruled 368 years:


II. Sratanp Dynasty
Tlima-ilu, 60 years
ltti-ili-nibi, 55 years
Damai-ilishu, 36 years
Ishkibal, 15 years

Shushshi (brother), 27 years
Gulkishar, 55 years
Pesh-gal-daramash (son), 50 years
Adara-kalama (son), 28 years
Ekur-ul-anna, 26 years
Melamma-kurkura, 7 years
Ea-gamil, 9 years


The First Dynasty of Babylon came to an end
through an invasion of the Hittites. They plun-
dered Babylon and perhaps ruled that

32. Cassite city for a number of years. A new


Dynasty dynasty was then established about
1750 BC by a foreign people known as
Cassites. There were 36 kings in this dynasty


ruling 576 years and 9 months. Unfortunately
the tablet containing the list is fragmentary.


II. Cassire Dynasty


Gandash, 16 years
Agum I (s), 22 years
Kashtiliash I, usurper, 22 years; b. of Ulambur-
iash and s. of Burna-buriash
Du(?) shi (s), 8 years
Abirattash (b ?)
Tazzigurmash (s)
Agum II (s)
; Long gap


*Kara-indash I, contemporary with Ashur-rim-
nisheshu, k. of Assyria

*Kadashman-Enlil I (s?)

*Kuri-Galzu I

Burna-buriash II, contemporary of Buzur-Ashur,
k. of Assyria

*Kara-Indash II, son-in-law of Ashur-uballit, k.
of Assyria

*Nazi-Bugash (usurper)


Kuri-Galzu ITI (s. of Burna-buriash), 23 years;
contemporary of Ashur-uballit, and Enlil-
nirari, kings of Assyria

Nazi-Maruttash (s), 26 years; contemporary of
Adad-nirari I, p. of Assyria.

Kadashman-Turgu (s), 17 years

Kadashman-Enlhil II, 7 years

Kudur-Enlil (s), 9 years

Shagarakti-Shuriash (s), 13 years

Kashtiliash II (s), 8 years

Enlil-nadin-shum, 13 years

Kadashman-Kharbe II, 13 years

Adad-shum-iddin, 6 years

Adad-shum-usur, 30 years

Meli-Shipak (s?), 15 years

Marduk-apil-iddin (s), 13 years

Zamama-shum-iddin, 1 year

Bel-mu—, 3 years


The region from which these Cassites came has
not yet been determined, although it seems to be
the district N.E. of Assyria. Gan-
33. Cassite dash, the first king, seems to have
ule enjoyed the all-embracing title, ‘King
of the Four Quarters of the World.”
Little is known of the other rulers until Agum II,
who claims the rule of the Cassites, Accad, Babel,
Padan, Alman and Guti. In his inscriptions he
records the conquest of Khani in Asia Minor, and
the fact that he brought back to Babylon the statues
of Marduk and Zarpanit, which had been earried
off by the Hittites. The Cassite rule, while extend-
ing over many cents., was not very prosperous. At
Nippur the excavations showed active operations
on the part of a few kings in restoring the temple
and doing obeisance to Enlil. The rulers seemed
to have conformed to the religion of the land, for
few foreign elements have been recognized as having
been introduced into it during this era. The many
Cassite names found in the inscriptions would indi-
cate an influx from a Cassite quarter of no small
proportion. And yet it should be noted that, in
the same era, Hittite and Mittanean influence, as is
shown by the nomenclature, is as great as the
Cassite. It was during this period that Assyria
rose to power and influence, and was soon to be-
come the master of the Mesopotamian region.


IV. Istw on Pasue Dynasty
11 Kings; began to rule about 1172 BC
Marduk . . . 17 years
Wanting, 6 years
Nebuchadrezzar I, contemporary of
Ashur-resh-ishi, k. of Assyria
Enlil-nadin-apal
Marduk-nadin-akhi, contemporary of
Tiglath-pileser I, k. of Assyria
Marduk-shapik-zer-mati, contempo-
rary of Ashur-bel-kala, k. of Assyria
Adad-apal-iddin, 22 years
Marduk-akh-erba, 11/2
Marduk-zer. . . . , 12 years
Nabu-shum-libur, 8(?) years


The most famous king of this dynasty, in fact of
this era, was Nebuchadrezzar I, who reéstablished


34. Isin
Dynasty


firmly the rule of Babylon. He
35. Neb- carried on a successful expedition into
uchadrez- Elam as well as into Amurru where
zar I he fought against the Hittite. He


also conquered the Lulubites. But in
contest for supremacy with Assyria Ashur-resh-
ishi triumphed, and he was forced to retreat inglori-
ously to Babylon. His successors failed to with-
stand the Assyrians, esp. under Tiglath-pileser I,
and were allowed to rule only by sufferance. The
Babylonians had lost their prestige; the Assyrians
had become the dominant people of the land. Few


367


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Babylonia


rulers of the dynasty which followed are known
except by name. The dynasties with one exception
were of short duration.


V. Sgauanp Dynasty


3 Kings
Simmash-Shipak, 18 years; about
36. Sealand 1042 BC
Dynasty Ea-mukin-shum, 6 months
Kashshu-nadin-akhi, 3 years
VI. Brr-Bazi Dynasty
3 Kings
Eulmash-shakin-shum, 17 years; about
37. Bit-Bazi 1020 BC
Dynasty Ninib-kudur-usur, 3 years


Shilanim-Shuqamuna, 3 months

VII. An Elamitic King, whose name
is not known

VIII. 13(?) kings who ruled 36 years

IX. A dynasty of 5(?) kings


X. Basytonran Dynasty


Following is a partial list of the 22 kings who
ruled until the destruetion of Babylon by Sen-
nacherib, when the Assyr kings as-
39. Baby- sumed direct eontrol. Ashurbanipal,
lonian Dy- however, introduced a new policy
nasty and viceroys were appointed.
Shamash-mudammiq
Nabu-shar-ishkun I
Nabu-apal-iddin
Marduk-nadin-shum
Marduk-balatsu-iqbi
Bau-akh-iddin
Nabvu-shum-ishkun II
Nabonassar
Nabu-nadin-zer; 747-734 BC
Nabu-shum-ishkun III; 733-732 BC
Nabu-mukin-zer; 731-729 BC
Pul (Tiglath-pileser III); 729-727 BC
Ulula (Shalmanesar V); 727-722 BC
Merodach-baladan 1; 722-710 BC
Sargon; 710-705 B
Sennaecherib; 704-702 BC
Marduk-zakir-shum (1 month)
Merodach-baladan II (9 months)
Bel-ibni; 702-700 BC
Ashur-nadin-shum; 700-694 BC
Nergal-ushezib; 694-693 BC
Mushezib-Marduk; 692-689 BC
Sennacherib; 689-681 BC
Esarhaddon; 681-668 BC
Ashurbanipal; 668-626 BC
Shamash-shum-ukin; 668-648 BC
Kandalanu; 648-626 BC
Ashur-etil-ilani-ukin; 626-
Nabopolassar; 626-


During the time of Sennachcrib, Merodach-
baladan the Chaldaean became a great obstacle to
Assyria’s maintaining its supremacy over Baby-
lonia. Three times he gained possession of Baby-
lon, and twice had himself proelaimed king. For
thirty years he plotted against Assyria. What
is learned from the inscriptions coneerning him
furnishes an interesting commentary on the send-
ing of the embassy, in 704 BC, to Hezekiah (2 K
20 12; Isa 39 1) in order to induce him to revolt
against Assyria, which he knew would help his own
cause. Finally Sennacherib, in 690, after he had
experieneed much trouble by the repeated uprisings
of the Babylonians, and the aspirations of Mero-
dach-baladan, endeavored to obliterate Babylon
from the map. His son and suceessor Esarhaddon,
however, tried to make Babylon again happy and
prosperous. One of his first acts was to send back


38. Other
Rulers


to Babylon the statue of Bel-Merodach. He re-
built the city, and also restored other Bab temples,
for instance, that of Enlil at Nippur. The Baby-
lonians solemnly deelared him king. Ashurbanipal,
his son and successor, followed his poliey. The evi-
dence of his operations at Nippur is everywhere
seen in the shape of stamped, kiln-dried bricks.

Before Esarhaddon died, he had planned that
Babylonia should become independent and be ruled
by his son, Shamash-shum-ukin, while Assyria he
handed down to Ashurbanipal. But when the latter
eame to the throne, Assyria permitted the former
only to be appointed vieeroy of Babylon. It seems
also that even some portions of Babylonia were
ruled direetly by Ashurbanipal.

After fifteen years Shamash-shum-ukin rebelled
and attempted to establish his independence,
but Sennacherib besieged Babylon and took it,
when Shamash-shum-ukin destroyed himself. Ka-
dalanu was then appointed viceroy, and ruled over
part of the country. Nabopolassar was the last
viceroy appointed by Assyria. At last the time had
arrived for the Babylonians to come again unto their
own. Nabopolassar who perhaps was a Chaldaean
by origin, made an alliance with the Umman Manda.
This he strengthened by the marriage of his son
Nebuchadrezzar to the daughter of Astyages, the
king. Nineveh finally fell before the Umman
Manda hordes, and was razed to the ground. This
people took possession of Northern Assyria. The
Armenian vassal states, and Southern Assyria, as
well as the title to Pal, Syria and Egypt, fell to
Babylonia.


Ruuers oF Ng&o-BABYLONIAN EMPIRE


Nabopolassar; 625-604 BC
Nebuchadrezzar II (s); 604-568 BC
Evil-Merodach (s); 561-560 BC


40. Neo- Neriglissar (brother-in-law); 559-556
Babylonian BC
Rulers Labosoarchad (s); 556 BC


Nabonidus; 555-539 BC
Cyrus conquered Babylonia in 539 BC


Nabopolassar having established himself king
of Babylon became the founder of the neo-Baby-
lonian empire. He was succeeded by his son,
Nebuchadregzar I], who like Hammurabi and
Sargon is among the greatest known characters
in Bab history. He is the Bib. Nebuchadrezzar
who carried the Jews into captivity. There are a
number of lengthy records of Nebuchadrezzar con-
cerning the buildings he erected, as well as of other
public acts, but unfortunately only a fragment of a
historieal inscription referring to him has been found.
The building inscriptions portray him as the great
builder he is represented to be in the OT (see
BasByton). He made Babylon the mistress of the
eivilized world.

Evil-Merodach, his son and successor, is also
mentioned in the OT. Two short reigns followed
when the ruling dynasty was overthrown and
Nabonidus was placed upon the throne. The
king, who delighted in exploring and restoring
ancient temples, placed his son at the head of the
army. Nabonidus desiring to centralize the reli-
gion of Babylonia, brought to Babylon many of the
images of deities from other cities. This greatly
displeased the people, and excited a strong feeling
against him. The priesthood was alienated, and
the military party was displeased with him, for in
his antiquarian pursuits he left the defence of the
empire to others. So when Cyrus, king of Anshan
and ruler of Persia, entered the country, he had
little difficulty in defeating the Babylonians in a
battle at Opis. Sippar immediately surrendered
to the invader, and the gates of Babylon were


Babylonia
Bab. and Assyr.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


368


thrown open to his army under Gobryas, his
general. Nabonidus was imprisoned. Three
months later Cyrus entered Babylon; Belshazzar,
who doubtless had set up his throne after his father
had been deposed, was slain a week later on the
night of the eleventh of Marchesvan. This scene
may have occurred in the palace built by Nebuchad-
rezzar. This event, told by the chronicler, is a
remarkable verification of the interesting story
related of Belshazzar in Dnl. The title used by the
kings who follow the Bab Dynasty is ‘King of
Babylon and King of Countries.”


Prrsian RULERS or BABYLONIA


Cyrus; 538-529 BC
Cambyses; 529-522 BC
Barzia

41. Persian Nebuchadrezzar IIT

Rulers of | Darius I; 521-485 BC

Babylonia Xerxes; 485~464 BC
Artaxerxes I; 464-424 BC
Xerxes II; 424-423 BC
Darius II; 423-404 BC
Artaxerxes II; 405-358 BC
Artaxerxes III (Ochos); 358-338 BC
Arses; 338-335 BC
Darius III; 335-331 BC


Alexander the Great conquered Babylonia 331
BC.


Several of the Pers rulers figured prominently in
the OT narratives. Cyrus in a cylinder inscription,
which is preserved in a fragmentary form, endeavors
to justify himself in the eyes of the people. He
claims that the god Marduk raised him up to take
the place of Nabonidus, and to defend the religion
of the people. He tries to show how éonsiderate
he was by returning to their respective cities the
gods that had been removed from their shrines;
and esp. by liberating foreign peoples held in bond-
age. While he does not mention what exiles were
allowed to return to their native homes, the OT
informs us that the Jews were among those de-
livered. And the returning of the images to their
respective places is also an interesting commentary
on Ezr 1 7, in which we are told that the Jews
were allowed to take with them their sacred vessels.
The spirit manifested in the proclamation for the
rebuilding of the temple (Ezr 1 1.4) seems also
to have been in accordance with his policy on
ascending the Bab throne. A year before his
death he associated with himself Cambyses his
son, another character mentioned in the OT. He
gave him the title “King of Babylon,” but retained
for himself “King of Countries.” A  usurper
Smerdis, the Magian, called Barzia in the inscrip-
tions, assumed the throne of Babylonia, but Darius
Hystaspes, who was an Aryan and Zoroastrian in
religion, finally killed Smerdis and made himself king
of Babylon. But before he was acknowledged king
he had to reconquer the Babylonians. By so doing
the ancient tradition that Bel of Babylon conferred
the legitimate right to rule that part of the world
ceased to be acknowledged. Under Nidinta-Bel,
who assumed the name Nebuchadrezzar III, the
Babylonians regained their independence, but it
was of short duration, lasting less than a year.


Literature.—History: Rogers, History of Bab and As-
syr, 1902; Winckler, History of Bab and Assyr, 1907; King,
Sumer and Accad, 1910. Religion: Jastrow, Religion of
Baband Assyr, 1898; Rogers, Religion of Bab and Assyr,
Esp. in Its Relation to Israel, 1908; Sayce, The Religions
of Ancient Egypt and Bab, 1903. Literature: Assyr and
Bab Lit., in ‘The World's Great Books''; edited by
R.F. Harper. Relation to OT: Price, The Monuments
and the OT, 1907; Pinches, The OT in the Light of the
Records of Assyr and Bab, 1902; Clay, Light on the OT
from Babel, 1908; Clay, Amurru, the Home of the Northern
Semites, 1909, Seealso‘‘ Literature'’ in Assyria.


A. T. Cuay


BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA, THE RELIGION
FE:


I. Derinrtion
1. First Period
2. Second Period
3. Third Period
II. Tue Sourcrs
Ill. Tse History
IV. Tae Pantareon
. Enlil, Evil


Marduk (OT Merodach)
. Nabu (OT Nebo)
. Nergal, the city god of Kutu (OT Guthah)
10. Ninib
11. Ramman
12. Tammuz
13. Asshur
V. Hymns anp PRAYERS
VI. Magic
1. Magqlu
2. Shurpu
Tue Last THinGs


PONSMPMLOM
™m
a
2
B
iJ
wn
o


Mytus anp Epics

Toe AstrRaL THEORY OF THE UNIVERSE

. Tue RELATIONS WITH THE RELIOION OF ISRAEL
LiteR ATURE

I, Definition.—The religion of Babylonia and
Assyria is that system of belief in higher things
with which the peoples of the Tigris and Euphrates
valley strove to put themselves into relations, in
order to live their lives. The discoveries of the
past cent. have supplied us with a mass of informa-
tion concerning this faith from which we have
been able to secure a greater knowledge of it than
of any other ancient oriental religion, except that
of Israel. Yet the information which is thus come
into our hands is embarrassing because of its very
richness, and it will doubtless be a long time before
it is possible to speak with certainty concerning
many of the problems which now confront us.
Progress in the interpretation of the literature is
however so rapid that we may now give a much
more intelligible account of this religion than could
have been secured even so recently as five years
ago.

For purposes of convenience, the religion of
Babylonia and Assyria may be grouped into three
great periods.

(1) The first of these periods extends from the
earliest_times, about 3500 BC, down to the union
oe Bab states under Hammurabi, about 2000

(2) The second period extends to the rise of the
Chaldeess empire under Nabopolassar, 625 BC,
an ¢

(3) The third period embraces the brief history
of this Chaldaean or neo-Bab empire under Cyrus,
538 BC,

The Assyr religion belongs to the second period,
though it extends even into the third period, for
Nineveh did not fall until 607 BC.

ff. The Sources.—The primary sources of our
knowledge of this religion are to be found in the
distinctively religious texts, such as hymns, prayers,
priestly rituals and liturgies, and in the vast mass
of magical and incantation literature. The major
part of this religious lit. which has come down to
us dates from the reign of Ashurbanipal (668-625
BC) though much of it is quite clearly either copied
from or based upon much older material. If,
however, we relied for our picture of the Bab and
Assyr religion exclusively upon these religious
texts, we should secure a distorted and in some
places an indefinite view. We must add to these
in order to perfect the picture practically the whole
of the lit. of these two peoples.

The inscriptions upon which the kings handed
down to posterity an account of their great deeds
contain lists of gods whom they invoked, and these


369


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Babylonia
Bab. and Assyr.


must be taken into consideration. The laws also
have in large measure a religious basis, and the
business inscriptions frequently invoke deities
at the end. The records of the astronomers, the
state despatches of kings, the reports of general
officers from the field, the handbooks of medicine,
all these and many other divisions of a vast lit.
contribute each its share of religious material.
Furthermore, as the religion was not only the faith
of the king, but also the faith of the state itself, the
progress of the commonwealth to greater power
oftentimes carried some local god into a new rela-
tionship to other gods, or the decadence of the
commonwealth deprived a god of some of his
powers or attributes, so that even the distinctively
political inscriptions have importance in helping
us to reconstruct the ancient literature. -

Hl. The History.—The origin of the Bab religion
is hid from our eyes in those ancient days of which
we know little and can never hope to know much.


Babylonian Idols.


In the earliest documents which have come down
to us written in the Sumerian language, there are
found Sem words or constructions or both. It
seems now to be definitely determined that a Sumer-
ian people whose origin is unknown inhabited Baby-
lonia before the coming of the Semites, whose
original home was in Arabia. Of the Sumerian
faith before a union was formed with the Semites,
we know very little indeed. But we may perhaps
safely say that among that ancient people, beneath
the belief in gods there lay deep in their conscious-
ness the belief in animism. They thought that
every object, animate or inanimate, had a 2? or
spirit. The word seems originally to have meant
life. Life manifests itself to us as motion; every-
thing which moves has life. The power of motion
separates the animate from the inanimate. All
that moves possesses life, the motionless is lifeless
or dead. aa

Besides this belief in animism, the early Sume-
rians seem to have believed in ghosts that were
related to the world of the dead as the 27 was related
to the world of the living. The id or ghost was a
night demon of baleful influence upon men, and
only to be cast out by many incantations. The
lil was attended by a serving-maid (ardat hh,
“maid of night”) which in the later Sem develop-
ment was transformed into the feminine liitu.
It is most curious and interesting that this ghost
demon of the Sumerians lived on through all the
history of the Bab religion, and is mentioned even
in one of the OT prophets (Isa 34 14; Heb Lilith,
tr? “night monster”). The origin of the Sem reli-
gion brought by the ancient Sem people and united
with this Sumerian faith is also lost in the past.


It seems to be quite clear that the gods and the
religious ideas which these Semites brought with
them from the desert had very little if any impor-
tance for the religion which they afterward pro-
fessed in Babylonia. Some of the names of their
gods and images of these they very probably brought
with them, but the important thing, it must always
be remembered, about the gods is not the names but
the attributes which were ascribed to them, and
these must have been completely changed during
the long history which follows their first contact
with the Sumerians. From the Sumerians there
flowed a great stream of religious ideas, subject
indeed to modifications from time to time down the
succeeding cents. In our study of the pantheon
we shall see from time to time how the gods changed
their places and how the ideas concerning them
were modified by political and other movements.
In the very earliest times, besides these ideas of
spirits and ghosts, we find also numbers of local
gods. Every center of human habitation had its
special patron deity and this deity is always asso-
ciated with some great natural phenomenon. It
was natural that the sun and moon should be made
prominent among these gods, but other natural
objects and forces were personified and deified,
streams, stones and many others.

Our chief source of information concerning the
gods of the first period of religious development
before the days of Hammurabi is found in the his-
torical inscriptions of the early kings and rulers.
Many of these describe offerings of temples and
treasures made to the gods, and all of them are
religious in tone and filled with ascriptions of praise
to the gods. From these early texts Professor
Jastrow has extricated the names of the following
deities, gods and goddesses. I reproduce his list
as the best yet made, but keep in mind that some
of the readings are doubtful and some were certainly
otherwise read by the Babylonians or Sumerians,
though we do not now know how they ought to
be read. The progress of Assyr research is con-
tinually providing corrected readings for words
hitherto known to us only in ideograms. It is
quite to be expected that many of these strange,
not to say grotesque, names will some day prove
to be quite simple, and easy to utter: En-lil (El-
lil, Bel) Belit, Nin-khar-sag, Nin-gir-su, who also
appears as Dun-gur, Bau, Ga-tum-dug, Nin-din-
dug, Ea, Nin-a-gal, Gal-dim-zu-ab, Nin-ki, Dam-
gal-nun-na, Nergal, Shamash, A or Malkatu, the
wife of Shamash, Naunar, or Sin, Nin-Urum,
Innanna, Nana, Anunit, Nina, Ishtar, Anu, Nin-
dar-a, Gal-alim, Nin-shakh, Dun-shagga, Lugal-
banda, with a consort Nin-sun, Dumu-zi-zu-ab,
Dumu-zi, Lugal-Erim, Nin-e-gal and Ningal,
Nin-gish-zi-da, Dun-pa-uddu, Nin-mar, Pa-sag,
Nidaba, Ku(?)-anna, Shid, Nin-agid-kha-du, Nin-
shul-li, En-gubarra, Im-mii-khu(?), Ur-du-zi, Kadi,
Nu-ku-sir-da, Ma-ma, Za-ma-ma, Za-za-ru, Im-

a-ud-du, Ur-e-nun-ta-ud-du-a, Khi-gir-nunna,
ihrahseuh Gur-mu, Zar-mu, Dagan, Damu, Lama,
Nesu, Nun-gal, An-makh, Nin-si-na, Nin-asu. In
this list great gods and goddesses and all kinds of
minor deities are gathered together, and the list
looks and sounds hopeless. But these are local
deities, and some of them are mere duplications.
Nearly every place in early times would have a
sun-god or a moon-god or both, and in the political
development of the country the moon-god of the
conquering city displaced or absorbed the moon-
god of the conquered. When we have eliminated
these gods, who have practically disappeared, there
remains a comparatively small number of gods who
outrank all the others.

In the room of some of these gods that disap-
peared, others, esp. in Assyria, found places. There


Bab. and Assyr.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


370


was, however, a strong tendency to diminish the
number of the gods. They are in early days
mentioned by the score, but as time goes on many
of these vanish away and only the few remain.
As Jastrow has pointed out, Shalmaneser II (859-
825 BC) had only eleven gods in his pantheon:
Ashur, Anu, Bel, Ea, Sin, Shamash, Ninib, Nergal,


7
,


Worshipping Heavenly Bodies (from a Cylinder of
White Agate).


Nusku, Belit and Ishtar. Sennacherib (704-681
BC) usually mentions only eight, namely, Ashur,
Sin, Shamash, Bel (that is, Marduk), Nabu, Ner-
gal, Ishtar of Nineveh and Ishtar of Arhela. But
we must not lay much emphasis upon the small-
ness of this numher, for in his building inscriptions
at the end he invokes twenty-five deities, and even
though some of these are duplicates of other gods,
as Jastrow correctly explains, nevertheless the
entire list is considerably increased over the eight
above mentioned. In the late Bah period the
worship seems chiefly devoted to Marduk, Nabu,
Sin, Shamash and Ishtar. Often there seem little
faint indications of a further step forward. Some
of the hymns addressed to Shamash seem almost,
upon the verge of exalting him in such a way as to
exclude the other deities, but the step is never
taken. The Babylonians, with all their wonder-
ful gifts, were never able to conceive of one god, of
one god alone, of one god whose very existence
makes logically impossihle the existence of any other
deity. Monotheism transcends the spiritual grasp
of the Bab mind.

Amid all this company of gods, amid all these
speculations and combinations, we must keep our
minds clear, and fasten our eyes upon the one sig-
nificant fact that stands out above all others. It is
that the Bahylonians were not able to rise above
polytheism; that beyond them, far beyond them,
lay that great series of thoughts about God that
ascribe to him aloneness, to which we may add the
great spiritual ideas which today may roughly be
grouped under ethical monotheism. Here and
there great thinkers in Babylonia grasped after
higher ideas, and were able only to attain to a sort
of pantheism of a speculative kind. A personal
god, righteous and holy, who loved righteousness
and hated sin, this was not given to them to con-
ceive.

The character of the gods changed indeed as the
people who revered them changed. The Baby-
lonians who built vast temples and composed many
inscriptions emphasizing the works of peace rather
than of war, naturally conceived their deities in a
manner different from the Assyrians whose powers
were chiefly devoted to conquests in war, but
neither the Babylonians nor the Assyrians arose
to any such heights as distinguish the Heh book of
Psalms. As the influence of the Babylonians and
Assyrians waned, their gods declined in power,
and none of them survived the onrush of Gr civil-
ization in the period of Alexander.


IV. The Pantheon.—The chief gods of the Bab
and Assyr pantheon may now be characterized in
turn.

In the earliest times known to us the greatest
of the gods is the god of Nippur whose name in the

Sumerian texts is Enlil or Hllil. In the
1. Enlil, Sem pantheon of later times he was
Ellil identified with the god Bel, and it is as

Bel he hag heen chiefly known. During
the whole of the first epoch of Bab history up to
the period of Hammurabi, he is the Lord of the
World and the King of the Land. He was origi-
nally the hero of the Flood story, but in the form
in which it has come down to us Marduk of Babylon
has deprived him of these honors. In Nippur was
his chief temple, called Z-kur or “mountain house.”
It was built and rebuilt by the kings of Babylonia
again and again from the days of Sargon I (3800
BC) onward, and no less than twenty kings are
known to us who pride themselves on their work of
rebuilding this one temple. He is saluted as “the
Great Lord, the command of whose mouth cannot
he altered and whose grace is steadfast.” He would
seem, judging from the name of his temple and
from some of his attributes, to have been originally
a god of the mountains where he must have had his
original dwelling-place.

The name of the god Anu was interpreted as
meaning heaven, corresponding to the Sumerian
word ana, “heaven,’’ and he came
thus to be regarded as the god of
heaven as over against Enlil who was
the god of earth, and Ea who was the god of the
waters. Anu appears first among the great gods
in an inscription of Lugalsaggi, and in somewhat
later times he made his way to the top of the ear-
liest triad which consists of Anu, Enlil and Ea.
His chief seat of worship was Uruk, but in the Assyr
period he was associated with the god Adad in
a temple in the city of Asshur. In the myths and
epics he fills an important réle as the disposer of all
events, but he cannot be thought of as quite equal
in rank with Enlil in spite of his position in the
heavens. Antu or Anatu
is mentioned as the wife
of Anu, hut hers is a color-
less figure, and she may
probahly be regarded as
little else than a gram-
matical invention owing
to the desire of theSemites
to associate the feminine
with the masculine in their : \
languages. FENN pene

The reading of the name pa
of the god a still re-

mains uncer-
3. Ea tain. Itmay

perhaps have
been Ae, as the Gr Aas
would seem to indicate.
His chief city of worship
was Eridu, which in the
earliest period was situ-
ated on the Pers Gulf,
near the mouths of the
Euphrates and the Ti-
gris. His temple was there
called H-absu, which
means “house of the
deeps,” interpreted also
as ‘house of wisdom.”
He must have been a god
of great importance in early times, but was left
behind by the growing influence of Ellil and in
a later period retained honor chiefly because he
was assumed to be the father of the god Marduk,


2. Anu


ak
Ni


ANY
EAN


371


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bab. and Assyr.


and so was reverenced by the people of the city of
Babylon. As the lord of wisdom he filled a great
réle in exorcisms down to the very last, and was
believed to be the god who was most ready to re-
spond to human need in direful circumstances.
Ea’s wife is called Damkina.

Sin was the city god of Uru (Ur of the Chaldaeans


inthe OT). He was originally a local god who came
early to a lofty position in the canon
4. Sin because he seems always to have been


identified with the moon, and in Baby-
lon the moon was always of more importance than
the sun because of its use in the calendar. His


Worshipping the Lunar Deity.


temple was called E-kishshirgal, ie. “house of
light.””, His worship was widespread, for at a very
early date he had a shrine at Harran in Mesopo-
tamia. His wife is called Ningal, the Great Lady,
the Queen, and his name probably appears in
Mt. Sinai. Heis addressed in hymns of great beauty
and was regarded as a most kindly god.
The Sun-god, Shamash, ranks next after Sin in
the second or later triad, and there can be no
doubt that he was from the beginning
5. Shamash associated with the sun in the heavens.
His seats of worship were Larsa in
southern Babylonia and Sippar in northern Baby-
lonia, in both of which his temple was called E-bab-


From an Engraving on a Babylonian Cylinder, Repre-
senting the Sun-God and One of His Priests.


bar, “shining house.” He also is honored in mag-
nificent hymns in which he is saluted as the enemy
and the avenger of evil, but as the benignant
furtherer of all good, esp. of that which concerns
the races of men. All legislation is ascribed to him
as the supreme judge in heaven. To him the Baby-
lonians also ascribe similar powers in war to those
which the Egyptians accorded to Re. Fromsome of
the texts one might have supposed that he would
have come to the top of the triad, but this appears
not to have been the case, and his influence ex-
tended rather in the direction of influencing minor
local deities who were judged to be characterized
by attributes similar to those ascribed to him in the
greater hymns.

The origin and the meaning of the name of the
goddess Ishtar are still disputed, but of her rank there
can be no doubt. In the very earliest
inscriptions known to us she does not
seem to have been associated with the
planet Venus as she is in later times. She seems


6. Ishtar


rather to have been a goddess of fruitfulness and
of love, and in her temple at Uruk temple-prosti-
tution was a feature. In the mythological lit. she
occupies a high place as the goddess of war and of
the chase. Because of this later identification
she became the chief goddess of the warlike Assyr-
ians. Little by little she absorbed all the other
goddesses and her name became the general word
for goddess. Her chief seats of worhip were Uruk
in southern Babylonia, where she was worshipped in
earliest times under the name of Nana, and Akkad in
northern Babylonia, where she was called Anunitu,
and Nineveh and Arbela in Assyria. Some of the
hymns addressed to her are among the noblest prod-
ucts of Bab and Assyr religion and reach a con-
siderable ethical position. This development of a
sexual goddess into a goddess who severely judged
thesins of men is one of the strangest phenomena in
the history of this religion.
Marduk (in the OT Merodach) is the city-god
of Babylon where his temple was called H-sagila
(“lofty house’) and its tower H-teme-
7. Marduk nanki (“house of the foundation of
heaven and earth’). His wife is Sar-
panitu, and, as we have already seen, his father was
Ea, and in later days Nabu was considered his son.
The city of Babylon in the earliest period was in-
significant in importance compared with Nippur and
Eridu, and this city-god could not therefore lay
claim to a position comparable with the gods of these
cities, but after Hammurabi had made Babylon the
chief city of all Babylonia its god rapidly increased
in importance until he absorbed the attributes of the
earlier gods and displaced them in the great myths.
The speculative philosophers of the neo-Bab period
went so far as to identify all the earlier gods with
him, elevating his worship into a sort of henotheism.
His proper name in the later periods was gradually
displaced by the appellative Belu “lord,” so that
finally he was commonly
spoken of as Bel, and his SS
consort was called Belit. Aa,
He shares with Ishtar and aay
Shamash the honor of
having some of the finest
hymns, which have come ¢
down to us, sung to his ;


Poereht


name.

Nabu (in the OT Nebo)
was the city-god of Bor-

sippa. His

8. Nabu name is clear-
ly Sem, and
means “speaker” or ‘“‘an-
nouncer.’”’? In earlier times
he seems to have been a
more important god than
Marduk and was wor-
shipped as the god of :
vegetation. His temple ,.
in Borsippa bore the ‘)


name E-zida (“perpetual {fj
house’) with the tower
E-uriminanki (“house of
the seven rulers of heaven
and earth’). In later
times he was identified i
with the planet Mercury. Aes.
Nergal, the city-god of iE


Kutu (in the OT Cuthah),
was the god
of the under-
world and his wife Eresh-kigal was the
sovereign lady of the under-world. He was also
the god of plague and of fever, and in later days
was associated with the planet Mars, though
scholars who are attached to the astral theory


ang


9. Nergal nee


Bab. and Assyr.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


372


(see below) think that he was identified at an earlier
date with Saturn. For this view no certain proof
has yet been produced.

Unfortunately the correct pronunciation of the
name of the god Ninib has not yet been secured.

He seems originally to have been a god
10. Ninib of vegetation, but in the later philo-
sophical period was associated with the
planet Saturn, called Kaimanu (Kewan, Chiun, Am
6 26 AV, ERV). As a god of vegetation he be-
comes also a god of healing and: his wife Gula was
the chief patroness of physicians. He comes also
to be regarded as a mighty hero in war, and, in
this capacity generally, he fills a great réle in the
Assyr religion.

Ramman is the god of storms and thunder among

the Babylonians and in the Assyr pantheon he is

usually called Adad. This form of the
11. Ram- name is doubtless connected with the
man Aram. god Hadad. In the Sumerian
period his name seems to have been
Ishkur. His wife is called Shala.

The name Tammuz is derived from the Sumerian

Dumuzi-zuab (“real child of the water depths’).

He is a god of vegetation which is
12. Tam- revived by the rains of the spring.
muz Tammuz never became one of the
great gods of the pantheon, but his
popularity far exceeded that of the many gods who
were regarded as greater than he. His worship is
associated with that of Ishtar whose paramour he
was, and the beautiful story of the descent of Ish-
tar to Hades was written to describe Ishtar’s pur-
suit of him to the depths of the under-world seek-
ing to bring him up again. His disappearance in
the under-world is associated with the disappearance
of vegetation under the midsummer heat which
revives again when the rain comes and the god
appears once more on the earth. The cult of
Tammuz survived the decay of Bab and Assyr
civilization and made its way into the western
world. It was similar in some respects to that of
Osiris in Egypt, but was not so beautiful or so
humane. .

The supreme god of Assyria, Asshur, was original-

ly the local god of the city which bears the same

name. During the whole of Assyr
13. Asshur history his chief réle is as the god of

war, but the speculative philosophers of
Assyria absorbed into him many of the character-
istics of Ellil and Marduk, going even so far as to
ascribe to him the chief place in the conflict with the
sea monster Tiamat in the creation epoch.

V. Hymns and Prayers.—The religious lit. of
the Babylonians and Assyrians culminated in a
great series of hymns to the gods. These have
come down to us from almost all periods of the
religious history of the people. Some of them go
back to the days of the old city-kingdoms and
others were composed during the reign of Naboni-
dus when the fall of Babylon at the hands of Cyrus
wasimminent. The greatest number of those that
have come down to us are dedicated to Shamash,
the Sun-god, but many of the finest, as we have
already seen, were composed in honor of Sin, the
Moon-god. None of these reached monotheism.
All are polytheistic, with perhaps tendencies in
the direction of pantheism or henotheism. This
incapacity to reach monotheism may have been
partially due to the influence of the local city
whose tendency was always to hold tightly to the
honor of the local god. Babylonia might struggle
never so hard to lift Marduk to high and still
higher position; but in spite of all its efforts he
remains to the very end of the days only one god
among many. And even the greatest of the Bab
kings, Nebuchadrezzar and Nabonidus, continued to


pay honor to Shamash in Sippar, whose temple they
continually rebuilt and adorned with ever greater
magnificence. Better than any description of the
hymns is a specimen adequately to show their
quality. Here aresome lines taken from an ancient
Sumerian hymn to the Moon-god which had been
copied and preserved with an Assyr tr in the library
of Ashurbanipal:


O Lord, chief of the gods, who alone art exalted on earth
and in heaven,

Father Nannar, Lord, Anshar, chief of the gods,

Father Nannar, Lord, great Auu, chief of the gods,

Father Nannar, Lord, Sin, chief of the gods,

Father Nannar, Lord of Ur, chief of the gods,

Father Nannar, Lord of H-gish-shir-gal, chief of the gods,

Father Nannar, Lord of the veil, brilliant one, chief of the

ods,

Father Nannar, whose rule is perfect, chief of the gods,

Father Nannar, who does march in great majesty, chief
of the gods, z ;

O strong, young bull, with strong horns, perfect in
muscles, with beard of lapis lazuli color, full of glory
and perfection, r 2

Self-created, full of developed fruit, heautifw to look
upon, in whose being one cannot sufficiently sate


mself ;

Mother womb, begetter of all things, who has taken up
his exalted habitation among living creatures;

O merciful, gracious father, in whose hand rests the life
of the whole world,

O Lord, thy divinity is full of awe, like the far-off heaven
and the broad ocean.

O creator of the land, founder of sanctuaries, proclaimer
of their names,

O father, begetter of gods and men, who dost build
dwellings and establish offerings,

Who dost call to lordship, dost bestow the scepter,
determinest destinies for far-off days.


Much of this is full of fine religious feeling, and
the exaltation of Sin sounds as though the poet
could scarcely acknowledge any other god, but the
proof that other gods were invoked in the same
terms and by the same kings is plentiful.

Some of these hymns are connected with magical
and incantation lit., for they serve to introduce
passages which are intended to drive away evil
demons. <A very few of them on the other hand
rise to very lofty conceptions in which the god
is praised as a judge of righteousness. A few lines
from the greatest of all the hymns addressed to
Shamash, the Sun-god, will make this plain:


Co.umn II
Who plans evil—his horn thou dost destroy,
40 Whoever in fixing boundaries annuls rights.
The unjust judge thou restrainest with force.
Whoever accepts a bribe, who does not judge
justly—on him thou imposest sin.
But he who does not accept a brihe, who has a care
for the oppressed,
To him Shamash is gracious, his life he prolongs.
45 The judge who renders a just decision
Shall end in a palace, the place of princes shall he
his dwelling.


Couvumn III
The seed of those who act unjustly shall not flourish.
What their mouth declares in thy presence
Thou shalt burn it up, what they purpose wilt thou


annul.
15 Thou knowest their transgressions: the declara-
tion of the wicked thou dost cast aside.
Everyone, wherever he may be, is in thy care.
Thou directest their judgments, the imprisoned
dost thou liberate.
Thou hearest, O Shamash, petition, prayer, and
appeal.
Humility, prostration, petitioning, and reverence.
20 With loud voice the unfortunate one cries to thee.
The weak, the exhausted, the Oppresshd, the lowly,
Mother, wife, maid appeal to thee.
He who is removed from his family, he that dwelleth
far from his city.


There is in this hymn no suggestion of magic or
sorcery. We cannot but feel how close this poet
came to an appreciation of the Sun-god as a judge
of men on an ethical basis. How near he was to
passing through the vale into a larger religious life!

The prayers are on the whole upon a lower plane,
though some of them, notably those of Nebuchad-


373


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bab. and Assyr.


rezzar, reach lofty conceptions.
serve as a sufficient example:

O eternal ruler, lord of all being, grant that the name
of the king that thou lovest, whose name thou hast pro-
claimed, may flourish as seems pleasing to thee. Lead
him in the right way. Iam the prince that cheys thee,
the creature of thy hand. Thou hast created me, and
hast Intrusted to me dominion over mankind. According
to thy mercy, O Lord, which thou bestowest upon all,
may thy supreme rule he merciful! The worship of
thy divinity implant in my heart! Grant me what
seeras good to thee, for thou art he that hast fashioned
my life.

VI. Magic.—Next in importance to the gods in
the Bab religion are the demons who had the power
to afflict men with manifold diseases of body or
mind. A large part of the religion seems to have
been given up to an agonized struggle against these
demons, and the gods were everywhere approached
by prayer to assist men against these demons.
An immense mass of incantations, supposed to have
the power of driving the demons out, has come
down to us. The use of these incantations lay
chiefly in the hands of the priests who attached
great importance to specific words or sets of words.
The test of time was supposed to have shown that
certain words were efficacious in certain instances.
If in any case the result was not secured, it could
only be ascribed to the use of the wrong formula;
hence there grew up a great desire to preserve
exactly the words which in some cases had brought
healing. Later these incantations were gathered
into groups or rituals classified according to purpose
or use. Of the rituals which have come down to
us, the following are the most important:

Maglu, i.e. “burning,” so called because there
are in it many symbolic burnings of images or

witches. This series is used in the
1. Maqlu delivering of sufferers from witches or
sorcerers.

Shurpu is another word for burning, and this
series also deals much in symbolic burnings and
for the same purposes as the former.

In these incantations we make the
acquaintance of a large number of
strange demons such as the rabisu, a demon that
springs unawares on its victims; the labartu, which
attacks women and children; and the lilu and the
lilitu, to which reference has been made before,
and the utuku, a strong demon. ”

These incantations are for the most part a
wretched jargon without meaning, and a sad com-
mentary on the low ‘position occupied by the
religion which has attained such noble heights as
that represented in the hymns and prayers. It is
strange that the higher forms of religion were not
able to drive out the lower, but these incantations
continued to be carefully copied and used down to
the very end of the Bab commonwealth.

VIL The Last Things.—In_ Babylonia, the
great question of all the ages—“If a man die shall
he live again?””—was asked and an attempt made
to answer it. The answer was usually sad and
depressing. After death the souls of men were
supposed to continue in existence. It can hardly
be called life. The place to which they have gone
is called the “land of no return.” There they
‘lived in dark rooms amid the dust and the bats
covered with a garment of feathers, and under the
dominion of Nergal and Ereshkigal. When the
soul arrived among the dead he had to pass judg-
ment before the judges of the dead, the Annunaki,
but little has been preserved for us concerning the
manner of this judgment. There seems to have
been at times an idea that it might be possible for
the dead to return again to life, for in this under-
world there was the water of life, which was used
when the god Tammuz returned again to earth.
The Babylonians seem not to have attached so


The following may


2. Shurpu


much importance to this after-existence as did the
Egyptians, but they did practice burial and not
cremation, and placed often with the dead articles
which might be used in his future existence. In
earlier times the dead were buried in their own
houses, and among the rich this custom seems to
have prevailed until the very latest times. For
others the custom of burying in an acropolis was
adopted, and near the city of Kutha was an acropo-
lis which was especially famous. In the future
world there seem to have been distinctions made
among the dead. Those who fell in battle seem to
have had special favor. They received fresh water
to drink, while those who had no posterity to put
offerings at their graves suffered sore and many
deprivations. It is to be hoped that later dis-
coveries of religious texts may shed more light
upon this phase of the religion which is still obscure.
VU. Myths and Epics.—In ancient religions the
myth fills a very important place, serving many
of the functions of dogma in modern religions.
These myths have come down to us associated
usually with epics, or made a part of ancient
stories which belong to the ibrary of Ashurbanipal.
Most of them have been copied from earlier Bab
originals, which go back in origin to the wonderful
period of intellectual and political development
which began' with Hammurabi. The most inter-
esting of those which have been preserved for us
are the story of Adapa and the story of Gilgames.
This same divine being Adapa, son of Ea, was em-
ployed in .Ea’s temple at Eridu supplying the
ritual bread and water. One day, while fishing in
the sea, the south wind swept sharply upon hin,
overturned his boat, and he fell into the sea, the
‘house of the fishes.” Angered by his misfortune,
he broke the wings of the south wind, and for seven
days it was unable to bring the comfort of the sea
coolness over the hot land. And Anu said:


“Why has the south wind for seven days not blown
over the land?”
His messenger Ilabrat answered him:
“My Lord,
Adapa, the son of Ea, hath broken the wing of
The south wind.”


Then Anu ordered the culprit brought before
him, and before he departed to this ordeal Ea gave
him instructions. He is to go up to the gatekeepers
of heaven, Tammuz and Gish-zida, clad in mourn-
ing garb to excite their sympathy. When they
ask why he is thus attired he is to tell them that his
mourning is for two gods of earth who have dis-
appeared (that is, themselves), and then they will
intercede for him. Furthermore, he is cautioned
not to eat the food or drink the water that will be
set before him, for Ea fears that food and water of
death will be set before him to destroy him. But
exactly the opposite happened. Tammuz and
Gish-zida prevailed in pleading, and Anu said:
“Bring for him food of life that he may eat it.”
They brought him food of life, but he did not eat.
They brought him water of life, but he did not
drink. They brought him a garment; he put it
on. They brought him oil; he anointed himself
with it. ; .

Adapa had obeyed Ea literally, and by so doing
had missed the priceless boon of immortality.
Some of the motives in this beautiful myth are
similar to those found in Gen. Food of life seems
to belong to the same category as the tree of life in
Gen. The Bab doctrine was that_man, though of
Divine origin, did not share in the Divine attribute
of immortality. In the Gen story Adam lost _im-
mortality because he desired to become like God.
Adapa, on the other hand, was already endowed
with knowledge and wisdom and failed of immor-


Bab. and Assyr.
Bacchides


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


374


tality, not because he was disobedient like Adam,
but because he was obedient to Ea his creator.
The legend would seem to be the Bab attempt to
explain death.

The greatest of all the Bab epics is the story of
Gilgames, for in it the greatest of the myths seem
to pour into one great stream of epic. It was
written upon twelve big tablets in the library of
Ashurbanipal, some of which have been badly
broken. It was, however, copied from earlier
tablets which go back to the First Dynasty of
Babylon. The whole story is interesting and
important, but its greatest significance lies in the
eleventh tablet which contains a description of the
great flood and is curiously parallel to the Flood
story in the Book of Gen.


The Deluge Tablet.


IX. The Astral Theory of the Universe.—We
have now passed in review the main features of
the Bab and Assyr religion. We have come all the
way from a primitive animism to a higher organized
polytheism with much theological speculation
ending in a hope for existence after death, and we
must now ask whether there is any great organizing
idea which will bring all this religion and specula-
tion into one great comprehensive system. A
theory has been propounded which owes its ex-
position generally to Professor Hugo Winckler of
the University of Berlin, who in a series of vol-
umes and pamphlets has attempted to prove that
the whole of the serious thinking and writing in the
realm of religion among both the Babylonians and
Assyrians rests down upon a Weltanschauung, a
theory of the universe. This theory of Winckler’s
has found acceptance and propagation at the hands
of Dr. Alfred Jeremias, and portions of it have
been accepted by other scholars. The doctrine
is extremely complicated and even those who accept
it. in part decline it in other parts and the exposition
of it is difficult. In the form which it takes in
the writings of Winckler and Jeremias, it has been
still further complicated quite recently by sundry
alterations which make it still more difficult. Most
of these can only be regarded as efforts to shield
the theory from criticisms which have been suc-
cessful in pointing out its weakness.

According to Winckler and Jcremias, the Baby-
lonians conceived of the cosmos as divided primarily
into a heavenly and an earthly world, each of
which is further subdivided into three parts. The
heavenly world consists of (1) the northern ocean ;


(2) the zodiac; (3) the heavenly ocean; while the
earthly world consists of (1) the heaven, i.e. the air
above the earth; (2) the earth itself; (3) the waters
beneath the earth. These great subdivisions were
ruled by the gods Anu in the heaven above, Bel in
the earth and air, and Ea in the waters beneath.
More important than these is the zodiac, the
twelve heavenly figures which span the heavens
and through which the moon passes every month,
the sun once a year, and the five great planets
which are visible to the naked eye have their
courses. These moving stars serve as the inter-
preters of the Divine will while the fixed stars, so
says Jeremias, are related thereto as the commentary
written on the margin of the Book of Rev. The
rulers of the zodiac are Sin, Shamash and Ishtar,
and according to the law of correspondence, the
Divine power manifested in them is identical with
the power of Anu, Bel and Ea. The zodiac rep-
resents the world-cycle in the year, and also in the
world-year, one of these gods may represent the
total Divine power which reveals itself in the cycle.
By the side of these three, Sin, Shamash and Ish-
tar, which represent respectively the moon, sun
and Venus, there are arranged Marduk which is
Jupiter, Nabu which is Mercury, Ninib which is
Mars, and Nergal which is Saturn, these being the
planets known to the ancients. Now upon these
foundations, according to Winckler, and his school,
the ancient priests of Babylonia built a closely knit
and carefully thought-out world-system of an
astral character, and this world-system forms the
kernel of the ancient and oriental conception of the
universe. This conception of the universe as a
double-sided principle is of tremendous importance.
First, the heavenly world with its three divisions
corresponds exactly to the earthly world with its
three divisions. Everything on earth corresponds
to its counterpart in heaven. The heavens are a
mizxror of earth, and in them the gods reveal their
will and purpose. Everything which has hap-
pened is only an earthly copy of the heavenly
original. It is still written in the heavens above
and still to be read there. All the myths and all
the legends, not only of Babylonia, but of all the
rest of the ancient world, are to be interpreted in
accordance with this theory; nothing even in his-
tory is to be understood otherwise. ‘An oriental
history without consideration of the world era is
unthinkable. The stars rule the changes of the
times” (Jeremias). The consequences of this
theory are so overpowering that it is difficult to
deal with it in fairness to its anthors and in justice
to the enormous labor and knowledge which they
have put upon it.

It is impossible within the reasonable limits
which are here imposed to discuss the theory in
detail, and for our purpose it will be sufficient to
say that to the great majority of modern scholars
who have carefully considered it in its details it
seems to lack evidence sufficient to support so
enormous a structure. That an astrological struc-
ture similar at least to this actually did arise in the
Hellenistic period is not here disputed, The sole
dispute is as to the antiquity of it. Now it does
not appear that. Winckler and Jeremias have been
able to produce proof, first, that the Babylonians
had enough knowledge of astronomy before the
7th cent. BC to have constructed such a system;
and in the second place, there is no evidence
that all the Bab gods had an astral character
in the earlier period. On the contrary, there seems,
as we have already attempted to show in the
discussion of the pantheon, to be good reason to
believe that many of the deities had no relation
whatever to the stars in early times, but were rather
gods of vegetation or of water or of other natural


875


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bab. and Assyr.
Bacchides


forces visible in earthly manifestations. The
theory indeed may be said to have broken down by
its own weight, for Winckler and Jeremias attempted
to show that this theory of the universe spread to
Israel, to the Greeks and to the Romans, and that
it affords the only satisfactory explanation of the
religion and of the history of the entire ancient
world. An attempt has been made similar to pre-
vious abortive efforts to unlock all the doors of the
ancient past with one key (see an interesting
example cited in Rogers, Religion of Babylonia
and Assyria, 224-25). Instead of gaining ad-
herence in recent times, the theory would appear
to have lost, and even those who have given a
tentative adherence to its claims, cautiously qualify
the extent of their submission.

X. The Relations with the Religion of Israel.—
No question concerning the religion of Babylonia
and Assyria is of so great interest and importance
to students of the Bible as the question of the
relation between this religion and the faith of Jeh,
as professed by Israel. It seems now to be clearly
demonstrated that the religion of Israel has bor-
rowed various literary materials from its more
ancient neighbor. The stories of creation and of
the flood, both of them, as far as the literary con-
tents are concerned, certainly rest upon Bab origi-
nals. This dependence has, however, been exagger-
ated by some scholars into an attempt to dem-
onstrate that Israel took these materials bodily,
whereas the close shifting and comparison to which
they have been subjected in the past few years
would seem to demonstrate beyond peradventure
that Israel stamped whatever she borrowed with
her own genius and wove an entirely new fabric.
Israel used these ancient narratives as a vehicle
for a higher and purer religious faith. The ma-
terial was borrowed, the spirit belonged to Israel,
and the spirit was Divine. Words and literary
materials were secured from Babylonia, but the
religious and spiritual came from Israel and from
Israel’s God. The word Sabbath is Bab indeed,
but the great social and religious institution which
it represents in Israel is not Bab but distinctively
Heb. The Divine name Yahweh appears among
other peoples, passes over into Babylonia and
afterward is used by Israel, but the spiritual God
who bears the name in Israel is no Bab or Kenite
deity. The Babylonians, during all their history
and in all their speculations, never conceived a
god like unto Him. He belongs to the Hebrews
alone.

The gods of Babylonia are connected, as we have
seen, with primitive animism or they are merely
local deities. The God of Israel, on_the other
hand, is a God revealed in history. He brought
Israel out of Egypt. He is continually made
known to His people through the prophets as a
God revealed in history. His religion is not devel-
oped out of Bab polytheism which existed as poly-
theism in the earliest periods and endured as poly-
theism unto the end. The religion of Israel, on
the other hand, though some of its material origins
are humble, moved steadily onward and upward
until the great monotheistic idea found universal
acceptance in Israel. The religions of Philistia
and Phoenicia, Moab, and of Edom, were subject
to the same play of influences from Babylonia and
Egypt, but no larger faith developed out of them.
In Israel alone ethical monotheism arose, and ethical
monotheism has no roots in Babylonia. The study
of the religion of Babylonia is indeed of the highest
importance for the understanding of Israel’s faith,
but it is of less importance than some modern
scholars have attempted to demonstrate.


L rune.—L. W. King, Bab Religion and Mythology,
London, 1899: M. Jastrow, Jr., The Religion of Baby-


lonia and Assyria, Boston, 1898 (compietely revised by
the author and tr¢ into German under the title Dve
Religion Babyloniens und Assyriens, Giessen, appearing
in parts, and soon to be completed. This is the standard
book on the subject); Regers, The Religion of Babylonia
and Assyria, Esp. tn Its Relation to Israel, New York,
1908; Hermann Schneider, Kultur und Denken der
Babylonier und Juden, Leipzig, 1910; R. P. Dhorme
La religion assyrio-babylontenne, Paris, 1910. Detailed
ilt. on the separate phases of the religien wiil be found in
these books.


Rosert W. Rogers
BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY. See Captivity.


BABYLONIANS, bab-i-ld‘ni-anz: The inhabi-
tants of BaBYLonia (q.v.). They were among the
colonists planted in Samaria by the Assyrians
(Ezr 49). “The likeness of the Babylonians in
Chaldea”’ (Ezk 23 15) refers to the pictures which
were common on the walls of Bab palaces, and the
reports of them being heard in Jerus, or copies of
them seen there, awakened the nation’s desire for
these unknown lovers, which Judah had ample oc-
casion to repent of (vs 17.23; cf 2 K 24).


BABYLONISH GARMENT, bab-i-lo’nish gar’-
ment: In AV, Josh 7 21, for BanyLonisH MaNntTLe,
which see.


BABYLONISH MANTLE, man’t’] (AV Baby-
lonish Garment): One of the articles taken by
Achan from the spoil of Jericho (Josh 7 21). In
the Heb “‘a mantle of Shinar.” Entirely gratuitous
is the suggested correction of Shinar to sé‘ar, mak-
ing ‘“‘a hairy mantle.” The Gr has psilén poikilén,
which Jos apparently understood to mean ‘‘a royal
garment all woven out of gold” (Ant, V, i, 10).
The Vulg calls it a “scarlet pallium,” and some of
the rabbinical traditions make it a purple robe.
Such classical writers as Pliny and Martial speak
of the weaving of embroidered stuffs as a famous
industry of Babylonia. Many tablets that have
been deciphered indicate that the industry was in-
deed widely extended, that its costly products were
of great variety and that some of them were ex-
ported to distant markets; in fine, that the account
in Joshua is characterized by great verisimilitude.

Witus J. BEECHER

BACA, b3’ka (N22, bakha’): In AV in Ps 84 6,
where RV has ‘‘the valley of Weeping,” with a
marginal variant which is best put in the form, “the
valley of the balsam-trees.’’ The word is elsewhere
used only in the duplicated account of one of David's
battles (2 S 6 23.24; 1 Ch 14 14.15). There the
tr is “the mulberry trees,” with ‘‘the balsam-trees”’
in the margin in RV. Conjecturally the word is,
by variant spelling, of the stem which denotes
weeping; the tree is called “weeper” from some
habit of the trickling of its gum or of the moisture
on it; the valley of weeping is not a geographical
locality, but a picturesque expression for the ex-
periences of those whose strength is in Jeh, and who
through His grace find their sorrows changed into
blessings. Wis J. BEECHER


BACCHIDES, bak’i-déz (BoxxiSys, Bakchidés):
B., ruler over Mesopotamia and a faithful friend of
both Antiochus Epiphanes and Demetrius Soter,
established at the request of the latter the rulership
over Judaea for Alcimus, who, desiring to become
high priest, had made false accusations against
Judas Maccabee (1 Mace 7 8 ff; Ant, XII, x, 2).
B. is sent the second time to Judaea after the Syrian
general Nicanor was killed near Adasa and Judas
Maccabee had gained control of the government
(1 Mace 9 1 ff; Ant, XIT, x). B. after an unsuc-
cessful battle near Bethbasi was forced to make
peace with Jonathan, the brother of Judas Macca-
bee (1 Macc 9 58 ff; Ant, XIII, i). In 1 Mace
10 12 and 2 Macc 8 30 reference is made to the


Bacchurus
Baggage


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


376


strongholds B. built during his 2d campaign against
Jerus (1 Macc 9 50). Cf Aucimus; Brerupasi;
JonaTHan MaccasEs; Jupas MaccaBrE; ADaSA;
NICANOR. A. L. BREsLIcH


BACCHURUS, ba-ki’rus (Baxxotpos, Bakehot-
ros): One of the “holy singers” who put away
ni “strange wife’ (1 Esd 9 24). Omitted in

ar 10.


BACCHUS, bak’us (Atévuros, Didnusos; later
Baxxos, the Feast of Bacchus; Avoviova, Dio-
nisia): The god of wine. His worship had ex-
tended over the whole Gr and Rom world cents.
before the Christian era, and had degenerated into
an orgy of drunkenness and unnamable immoralities,
possibly under the influence of oriental Baal wor-
ship, such as the Heb prophets condemned. It has
been surmised that Dionysus was originally not a
Gr, but an oriental deity. His worship had been
introduced into Egypt, perhaps by the Ptolemies,
and Ptolemy Philopator (222-204 BC) had branded
the Jews there with his emblem, the sign of the ivy.
When Antiochus Epiphanes made his assault upon
Jerus in the year 168 BC, he determined to extir-
pate the worship of -Jeh, which he recognized as the
strength of the Jewish resistance, and to replace it by
Gr religion. All worship of Jeh and the observance
of Jewish rites, such as the Sabbath and circum-
cision, were prohibited. Heathen worship was
set up all over Judaea, and in the temple at Jerus
on the altar of burnt offering an altar to Jupiter
was erected, “the abomination that maketh deso-
late” (Dnl 11 31), and a swine was sacrificed upon it
(see ABOMINATION OF DESOLATION). The immoral
practices associated with heathen worship in those
days established themselves in the temple. When
this feast of Bacchus (Dionysus) with all its revelry
came round, the Jews were compelled to go in pro-
cession in honor of Bacchus (Dionysus), wearing
wreaths of ivy,the emblem of the god (2 Macc 6 7).
Some years later, when the worship of Jeh had been
restored, Nicanor the general of Demetrius I, in
conducting the war against Judas Maccabaeus,
threatened the priests that, unless they delivered
Judas up as a prisoner, “he would raze the temple
of God even with the ground, break down the altar,
and erect there a temple unto Bacchus (Dionysus)
for all to see’ (2 Macc 14 33). See Dionysia.

LireRaTuRE.—Cheyne, art. ‘‘Bacchus,’’ #£B; Kent,
Hist of the Jewish People, 1, 328-29; Jos, Ant, XII, v, 4.

T. Reus

BACENOR, ba-sé’nor (Baxjvwp, Bakéndr): An
officer in the army of Judas Maccabee engaged in
war against Gorgias, governor of Idumaea (2 Macc
12 35). Cf Ant, XII, viii, 6.


BACHRITE, bak’rit.


BACK, BACK PARTS:

(1) (ADR, ’ahar, “back side” asin AV): ‘He led
the flock to the back of the wilderness” (Ex 3 1),
i.e. “to the pasture-lands on the other side of the
desert from the Midianite encampments.”’

(2) (WIN, ’ahdr, “hinder part,” “the West’):
Used of God in an anthropomorphic sense (‘Thou
shalt see my back,’’ Ex 33 23) to signify “the after-
glow of the Divine radiance,” the faint reflection
of God’s essential glory. See also Isa 38 17 and
ef 1 K 14 9 and Neh 9 26.

(3) (érieOev, Spisthen, ‘back side’): “A book
written within and on the back” (Rev 5 1), ‘“‘but
the back of a book is not the same as the reverse
side of a roll. St. John was struck, not only with
the fact that the roll was sealed, but also with the
amount of writing it contained’ (HDB, I, 231).
Cf Ezk 2 10. M. O. Evans


See BECHER.


BACKBITE, bak’bit (237, raghal; S0dé, do-
160): To slander the absent, like a dog biting behind
the back, where one cannot see; to go about as a
talebearer. ‘He that backbiteth [RV slandereth]
not with his tongue” (Ps 15 3).

Backbiters, bak’bit-érz (Gr karaAadot, katdlalot):
Men who speak against. Vulg “detractors” (Rom
1 30).

Backbiting, bak’bit-ing ("H)Q, sether): Adj. “a
backbiting tongue’’; lit. ‘‘a tongue of secrecy” (Prov
25 23). xaradadid, katalalid: subst. “a speaking
against” (2 Cor 12 20; Wisd 111); “evil speak- |
ing’ (1 Pet 21). yAéooa rpiry, glossa trtté: “a
backbiting tongue” (AV of Ecclus 28 14.15); more
lit. tr in RV “‘a third person’s tongue.”


T. REES
BACKSIDE, bak’sid’.


BACKSLIDE, bak’slid’ (935W'), m*shiabhah; Hos
11 7; 14 4 and often in Hos and Jer, 231W, sho-
bhabh; ADV, shobhébh, in Jer, 4 times: all meaning
“turning back or away,’’ “apostate,” “rebellious.”
19, sarar, in Hos 4 16=“‘stubborn,” “rebellious’’;
RV “stubborn’”’): In all places the word is used
of Israel forsaking Jeh, and with areference to the
covenant relation between Jeh and the nation, con-
ceived as a marriage tie which Israel had violated.
Jeh was Israel’s husband, and by her idolatries with
other gods she had proved unfaithful (Jer 3 8.14;
14 7; Hos 14 4). It may be questioned whether
Israel was guilty so much of apostasy and defection,
as of failure to grow with the growing revelation of
God. The prophets saw that their contemporaries
fell far short of their own ideal, but they did not
realize how far their predecessors also had fallen
short of the rising prophetic standard in ideal and
action. See APosTasy.

Backslider, bak’slid’ér (49 390, giigh lébh):
“The backslider in heart shall be filled with his
own ways” (Prov 14 14). But RV “backslider’”
conveys the wrong impression of an apostate. The
Heb expression here implies simply non-adherence
to the right, ““The bad man reaps the fruits of his
act” (Toy, Prov, in loc.). T. Rees


BADGER, baj’ér (OOM or WON, tahash or
iahash): The word tahash occurs in the descriptions
of the tabernacle in Ex 25, 26, 35, 36 and 39, in
the directions for moving the tabernacle as given in
Nu 4, and in only one other passage, Ezk 16 10,
where Jerus is spoken of as a maiden clothed and
adorned by her Lord. In nearly all these passages
the word tahash occurs with ‘dr, “‘skin,’”’ rendered:
AV “badgers’ skins,” RV “sealskin,” RVm ‘“por-
poise-skin,” LX X dérmata huaktnthina. In all the
passages cited in Ex and Nu these skins are men-
tioned as being used for coverings of the tabernacle;
in Ezk 16 10, for shoes or sandals. The LXX
rendering would mean purple or blue skins, which
however is not favored by Talmudic writers or by
modern grammarians, who incline to believe that
tahash is the name of an animal. The rendering,
“badger,” is favored by the Talmudic writers and
by the possible etymological connection of the word
with the Lat taxus and the German Dachs. The
main objection seems to be that badgers’ skins
would probably not have been easily available to
the Israelites. The badger, Meles taxus, while fairly
abundant in Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon, does not
seem to occur in Sinai or Egypt.

A seal, Monachus albiventer (Arab. fulemeh), the
porpoise, Phocoena communis, and the common
dolphin, Delphinus delphis, are all found in the
Mediterranean. The dugong, Halicore dugong,
inhabits the Indian Ocean and adjoining waters
from the Red Sea to Australia. The Arab. tukhas


See Back.


377


or dukhas is near to tahash and is applied to the
dolphin, which is also called deifin. It may be
used also for the porpoise or even the seal, and is
said by Tristram and others to be applied to the
dugong. The statement of Gesenius (Boston, 1850,
s.v. ‘“‘tahash’’) that the Arabs of Sinai wear sandals
of dugong skin is confirmed by recent travelers,
and is of interest with reference to Ezk 16 10,
“IT... . shod thee with badgers’ skin’ (AV).
The dugong is a marine animal from 5 to 9 ft. in
length, frequenting the shore and feeding upon sea-
weed. It belongs to the order Sirenia. While
outwardly resembling Cetacea (whales and por-
poises), the Sirenia are really more allied to the
Ungulata, or hoofed animals. The dugong of the


Indian Ocean and the manatee of the Atlantic and |


of certain rivers of Africa and South America, are
the only living representatives of the Sirenia.
third species, the sea-cow of Behring Sea, became
extinct in the 18th cent. The seal and porpoise
of the RV, the dolphin, and the dugong are all
of about the same size and all inhabit the seas
bordering on Egypt and Sinai, so that all are possi-
ble candidates for identification with the iahash.
Of the four, recent opinion seems most to favor the
dugong.

Mr. S. M. Perlmann has suggested (Zodlogist,
ser. 4, XII, 256, 1908) that the okapi is the animal
indicated by tahash.

Gesenius (Leipzig, 1905) cites Bondi (Aegyptiaca,
i. ff) who adduces the Egyp root ths and makes the
expression ‘or tahash mean “soft-dressed skin.”
This suits the context in every passage and is a
very promising explanation. ALrrep Evy Day


BAEAN, bé’an (vtol Balav, huiot Batan; AV
Bean; 1 Macc 6 4): A tribe mentioned only
because of its malignant hatred of the Jews. Its
aggressive hostility against their religion and the
rebuilding of their sanctuary duplicated the con-
spiracy of Sanballat and his confederates against
the restoration of Jerus and the temple in the days
of Nehemiah (ef Neh 4 7.8). Utterly exterminated
by Judas Maccabaeus who burned alive, in towers,
many of the imprisoned people. See Maon.


BAG: Bags of various kinds are mentioned in
the Eng. Bible, but often in a way to obscure rather
than tr the original. .

(1) “Bag” is used for a Heb word which means
a shepherd’s “bag,’”’ rendered “wallet” in RV.
This “bag” of the shepherd or ‘‘haversack”’ of the
traveler was of a size sufficient for one or more days’
provisions. It was made of the skin of animals,
ordinarily undressed, as most of the other “bags”
of ancient times were, and was carried slung across
the shoulder. This is the “scrip for the journey”
(ipa, péra) mentioned in Mt 10 10 and || (AV).
(“Serip” is OE, now obsolete.) A unique word
appears in 1 § 17 40.49 which had to be explained
even to Heb readers by the gloss, “the shepherd’s
bag,” but which is likewise rendered “wallet” by the
ARV.

(2) “Bag” translates also a word (Badddvrioy,
balléntion) which stands for the more finished
leather pouch, or satchel which served as a “purse”
(see Christ’s words, Lk 10 4 AV: “Carry neither
purse, nor scrip,” and 12 33 AV: “Provide your-
selves bags which wax not old’). The word ren-
dered “purse” in Mt 10 9: “Get you no gold,
nor silver, nor brass in your, purses’; Mk 6 8:
“No money in their purse,” is a different word
entirely ({évy, z6n2), the true rendering of which
is “girdle”? (RVm). _ The oriental “girdle,” though
sometimes of crude leather, or woven camel’s hair
(see GrxpLE), was often of fine material and elegant
workmanship, and was either made hollow so as


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bacchurus
Baggage


to carry money, or when of silk or cloth, worn in
folds, when the money was carried in the folds.

(83) The small ‘“merchant’s bag” often knotted
in a handkerchief for carrying the weights, such as
is mentioned in Dt 25 13: “Thou shalt not have
in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small,”
was another variety. This too was used as a
“purse,”’ as in the case of the proposed common
purse of the wicked mentioned in Prov 1 14:
‘We will all have one purse,” and sometimes car-


- ried in the girdle (cf Isa 46 6).


(4) Then there was the “bag” (TMX, ¢*rar,
rendered “bundle” in Gen 42 35) which was the
favorite receptacle for valuables, jewels, as well
as money, used fig. with fine effect in 1 S 25 29:
“The soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle
of life’ =“‘life’s jewel-case’”’ (see 2 K 12 10 where
the money of the temple was said to be put up
“tied up” in bags). This was a “bag” that could
be tied with a string: ‘Behold, every man’s bundle
of money was in his sack,” and (cf Prov 7 20)
‘He hath taken a bag of money with him”’ (cf Hag
1 6: “earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes”’).

A seal was sometimes put on the knot, which
occasions the figure of speech used in Job (14 16.17),
‘Dost thou not watch over my sin? My trans-
gression is sealed up in a bag,’’ i.e. it is securely
kept and reckoned against me (cf also 1 8 9 7; 21
5 where the Heb "3D , kelt, is rendered by “vessels”
and stands for receptacles for carrying food, not
necessarily bags).

(5) Another Heb word O°, harif; Arab. harifat,
is used, on the one hand, for a “bag” large enough
to hold a talent of silver (see 2 K 5 23, “bound
two talents of silver in two bags’’), and on the other,
for a dainty lady’s satchel, such as is found in Isa
3 22 (wrongly rendered “‘crisping pins” in AV).
ne is the most adequate Heb word for a large

ag.

(6) The “bag” which Judas carried (see Jn 12
6 AV, “He was a thief and had the bag’; ef. 13 29)
was in reality the small “box” (RVm) originally
used for holding the mouthpieces of wind instru-


ments (Kennedy, in 1-vol HDB). The Heb
(THN, 'argaz, found only here) of 1S 6 8,
rendered “coffer” in EV and tr? yAorodxopyor,


glossékomon, by Jos, appears to stand for a small
“chest”? used to hold the gold figures sent by the
Philis as a guilt offering. It is from a word that
means “to wag,” “to move to and fro”; ef the simi-
lar word in Arab. meaning a bag filled with stones
hung at the side of the camel to “preserve” equilib-
rium (Gesenius). But the same word Jos uses is
found in modern Gr and means “‘purse” or “bag”
(Hatch). Later to “carry the bag” came to mean
to be treasurer. Geo. B. Eager


BAGGAGE, bag’aj:

(1) O39, kelt, “the impedimenta of an army’’):
“David left his b. in the hand of the keeper of the
b.” (1 § 17 22); “at Michmash he layeth up his
b.” (Isa 10 28). ARV gives b. for “stuff” at
1 § 10 22; 25 13; 30 24. :

(2) (drocxev}, aposkeué: “Beside the b.” (Jth 7
2), “a great ado and much b.” (1 Mace 9 35.39),


Bago
Balance


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


378


‘the women and the children and also the b.” (AV
“and other b.”; 2 Mace 12 21).

(3) (drockevd fous, aposkeudzomai, “to make ready
for leaving,” ‘‘to pack up baggage’): ‘‘We took up
[made ready RVm] our b.” (Acts 21 15, AV “car-
riages’”’), i.e. what they could carry=Eng. “‘lug-
gage”; but others understand the term of the loading
of the baggage animals. M. O. Evans


BAGO, ba’go (A, Bayé, Bagé; B, Baval, Banai =
Bigvai [Ezr 8 14]): The descendants of B. returned
with Ezra to Jerus (1 Esd 8 40).


BAGOAS, ba-gi’as (Baydéas, Bagéas): The
eunuch in charge of the household of Holofernes
whom the latter engaged to bring Judith to his
palace (Jth 12 11 ff; 13 1.8; 14 14). Cf Juprra.


BAGOI, bag’6-1 (A, Bayot, Bagoi; B, Bocat,
Bosai = Bigvai [Ezr 2 14; Neh 7 19}]): The de-
scendants of B. returned with Zerubbabel to Jerus
(1 Esd 6 14).


BAHARUMITE, ba-ha’rum-it, BARHUMITE,
bar-hi’mit (1 Ch 11 33; 2 23 31): A native
of Banuri (q.v.).


BAHURIM, bahi'rim (O73, bahurim; Ba-
ovpe(u, Baoureim, usually, but there are variants):
A place in the territory of Benjamin which lay on
an old road from Jerus to Jericho followed by David
in his flight from Absalom (2 8 16 32—16 5 ff).
It ran over the Mount of Olives and down the
slopes to the E. The Talm identifies it with Ale-
math, the modern Almii, about a mile beyond
‘Anata, going from Jerus. If this identification is
correct, Wady Farah may be the brook of water
(2 8 17 20). Here Paltiel was parted from his
wife Michal by Abner (2S 3 16). It was the
home of Shimei, who ran along a ridge of the hill
cursing and throwing stones at the fugitive king
(28 16 5; 1K 28). In Bahurim Jonathan and
Ahimaaz, the messengers of David, were concealed
in a well by a loyal woman (25 17 18 ff). Az-
maveth, one of David’s heroes, was a native of
Bahurim. In 2 S 23 31 we should read, as in
1 Ch 11 33, Barahumite. W. Ewine


BAITERUS, ba-i’tér-us (Barrypots, Baitérois;
AV Meterns): The descendants of B. returned with
Zerubbabel to Jerus (1 Esd 5 17). Omitted in
Ezr 2 and Neh 7.


BAJITH, ba’jith. See Bayiru.


BAKBAKKAR, bak-bak’ar (1pap3, bakbakkar,
“investigator”’): A Levite (1 Ch 9 15).


BAKBOUK, bak’buk (PAP, bakbik, “bottle”
perhaps onomatopoetical, referring to the clucking
noise created by the pouring out of the contents of
a bottle=Acub [1 Esd 5 31]): The descendants of
B. returned with Zerubbabel to Jerus (Ezr 2 51;
Neh 7 53).


BAKBUKIAH, bak-bt-ki’a ("p33 , bakbukyah,
“the Lord pours out”’):

(1) A Levite who “dwelt in Jerus” after the re-
turn from Babylon (Neh 11 17).

(2) A Levite who returned with Zerubbabel to
Jerus (Neh 12 9).

(3) A Levite and porter keeping “the watch at
the store-houses of the gates” (Neh 12 25).


BAKEMEATS, bak’méts: Only in Gen 40 17
AV and ERV. ‘All manner of baked food for
Pharaoh” ARV. Any kind of meat baked or
cooked. See Brean; Foon.


BAKING, bak’ing. See Breap.
BAKING PAN. See Brean; Pan.


BALAAM, ba’lam (D953, bil'am, “devourer”):
The son of Beor, from a city in Mesopotamia
called Pethor, a man possessing the gift of prophecy,
whose remarkable history may be found in Nu 22
9—-24 25; cf 31 8.16; Dt 23 4; Josh 13 22; 24 9;
Neh 13 2; Mic 6 5; 2 Pet 2 15; Jude ver 11;
Rev 2 14.

When the children of Israel pitched their tents
in the plains of Moab, the Moabites entered into

some sort of an alliance with the
1. History Midianites. At the instigation of

Balak, at that time king of the Moab-
ites, the elders of the two nations were sent to
Balaam to induce him, by means of a bribe, to
pronounce a curse on the advancing hosts of the
Israelites. But in compliance with God’s com-
mand B. refused to go with the elders. Quite
different was the result of a second request en-
hanced by the higher rank of the messengers and
by the more alluring promises on the part of Balak.
Not only did God permit B. to go with the men,
but he actually commanded him to do so, caution-
ing him, however, to act according to further in-
structions. While on his way to Balak, this in-
junction was strongly impressed on the mind of
B. by the strange behavior of his ass and by his
encounter with the Angel of the Lord.

Accompanied by Balak who had gone out to
meet the prophet, B. came to Kiriath-huzoth. On
the next morning he was brought up “into the
high places of Baal’? commanding a partial view of
the camp of the Israelites. But instead of a curse
he pronounced a blessing. From there he was
taken to the top of Peor, yet this change of places
and external views did not alter the tendency of
B.’s parables; in fact, his spirit even soared to
greater heights and from his lips fell glowing words
of praise and admiration, of benediction and glori-
ous prophecy. This, of course, fully convinced Balak
that all further endeavors to persuade the seer to
comply with his wishes would be in vain, and the
two parted.

Nothing else is said of B., until we reach Nu 31.
Here in ver 8 we are told of his violent death at
the hands of the Israelites, and in ver 16 we learn
of his shameful counsel which brought disgrace and
disaster into the ranks of the chosen people.

Now, there are a number of interesting problems
connected with this remarkable story. We shall

try to solve at least some of the more
2. Prob- important ones.
lems (1) Was B. a prophet of Jeh?
For an answer we must look to Nu
22-24. Nowhere is he called a prophet. He is
introduced as the son of Beor and as a man reputed
to be of great personal power (cf Nu 22 6b). The
cause of this is to be found in the fact that he
had intercourse of some kind with God (cf Nu 22
9.20; 22 22-35; 23 4; 23 16). Furthermore, it is
interesting to note how B. was enabled to deliver
his parables. First it is said: “And Jeh put
a word in B.’s mouth” (Nu 28 5; cf ver 16), a
procedure seemingly rather mechanical, while
nothing of the kind is mentioned in Nu 24. In-
stead we meet with the remarkable sentence: “And
when B. saw that it pleased Jeh to bless Israel,
he went not, as at the other times, to meet
with enchantments ....” (Nu 24 1), and then:
“the Spirit of God came upon him” (ver 26). All
this is very noteworthy and_highly instructive,
esp. if we compare with it vs 8 RVm and 4: ‘‘The
man whose eye is opened saith; he saith, who hear-
eth the words of God, who seeth the vision of the


379


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bago
Balance


Almighty,” etc. The inference is plain enough:
B. knew the Lord, the Jeh of the Israelites, but his
knowledge was dimmed and corrupted by heathen
conceptions. He knew cnough of God to obey Him,
yet for a long time he hoped to win Him over to
his own selfish plan (cf 23 4). Through liberal
sacrifices he expected to influence God’s actions.
Bearing this in mind, we see the import of Nu 24 1.
After fruitless efforts to cajole God into an attitude
favorable to his hidden purpose, he for a time be-
came a prophet of the Lord, yielding to the en-
nobling influences of His spirit. Here was a chance
for his better nature to assert itself permanently
and to triumph over the dark forces of paganism.
Did he improve this opportunity? He did not
(ef Nu 81 8.16).

(2) Is the B. of Nu 22-24 identical with the
person of the same name mentioned in Nu 31?
Quite a number of scholars deny it, or, to be more
accurate, there are according to their theory two
accounts of B.: the one in Nu 22-24 being favor-
able to his character, and the other in Nu 31 being
quite the reverse. It is claimed the two accounts
could only be made to agree by modifying or
eliminating Nu 24 25. Now, we believe that
Nu 81 16 actually does modify the report of B.’s
return contained in Nu 24 25. The children of
Israel slew B. with the sword (Nu 31 8). Why?
Because of his counsel of ver 16. We maintain
that the author of 24 25 had this fact in mind when
he wrote the Ist ver of Nu 25: “And .... the
people began to play the harlot,” etc. Thus, he
closely connects the report of B.’s return with
the narrative contained in Nu 25. Therefore we
regard Nu 31 8.16 as supplementary to Nu 22-
24. But here is another question:

(3) Is the narrative in Nu 22-24 the result of
combining different traditions? In a general way,
we may answer this question in the affirmative,
and only in a general way we can distinguish be-
tween two main sources of tradition. But we main-
tain that they are not contradictory to each other,
but supplementary.

(4) What about the talking of the ass and the
marvelous prophecies of B.? We would suggest
the following explanation. By influencing the
soul of B., God caused him to interpret_correctly
the inarticulate sounds of the animal. God’s act-
ing on the soul and through it on the intellect and
on the hearts of men—this truth must be also ap-
plied to B.’s wonderful prophetic words. They are
called m*shalim or sayings of a prophet, a diviner.

In the 1st of these ‘‘parables’’ (Nu 23 7-10) he
briefly states his reasons for pronouncing a blessing;
in the 2d (vs 18-24) he again emphasizes the fact
that he cannot do otherwise than bless the Israelites,
and then he proceeds to pronounce the blessing
at some greater length. In the 3d (Nu 24 3-9)
he describes the glorious state of the people, its
development and irresistible power. In the last
four parables (vs 15-24) he partly reveals the
future of Israel and other nations: they are all
to be destroyed, Israel’s fate being included in the
allusion to Eber. Now, at last, B. is back again
in his own sphere denouncing others and predicting
awful disasters. (On the “star out of Jacob,”’ ver
17, see ASTRONOMY, ii, 9; SraR oF THE Maat.)

This may furnish us a clue to his character. It,


indeed, remains “‘instructively composite.” A

soothsayer who might have become
3. B.’s a prophet of the Lord; a man who
Character loved the wages of unrighteousness,


and yet a man who in one supreme
moment of his life surrendered himself to God’s
holy Spirit; a person cumbered with superstition,
covetousness and even wickedness, and yet capable
of performing the highest service in the kingdom


of God: such is the character of B., the remarkable
OT type and, in a sense, the prototype of Judas
Iscariot.

In 2 Pet 2 15 B.’s example is used as a means
to illustrate the pernicious influence of insincere

Christian teachers. The author might

4. B.asa have alluded to B. in the passage
Type immediately preceding 2 Pet 2 15
because of his abominable counsel.
This is done in Rev 2 14. Here, of course, B. is
the type of a teacher of the church who attempts to
advance the cause of God by advocating an unholy
alliance with the ungodly and worldly, and so con-
ene the life of the church to the spirit of the

esh.

Literaturs.—Bishop Butler's Sermons, ‘‘Balaam”’;
Icc, ‘* Numbers.”

WituiAM Baur
BALAC, ba’lak. See Bana.


BALADAN, bal’a-dan (778332, bal’ddhan, “He
fie. Merodach] has given a son’’): Baladan is said
in 2 K 20 12 and Isa 39 1 to have been the father
of Berodach (Merodach)-Baladan, king of Babylon.
Some have thought that the Bib. writer was wrong
here, inasmuch as it is said in the inscriptions of
Sargon (Annals, 228, 315; Pr., 122), that Merodach-
Baladan was the son of Yakin. It is evident,
however, from the analogy of Jehu, who is called
by the Assyr kings the son of Omri, that Yakin is
to be looked upon as the founder of the dynasty
or kingdom, rather than as the father of Merodach-
Baladan. The Bith Yakin, over which Merodach-
Baladan is said to have been king, corresponds
exactly to the phrase Bith Khumria, or House of
Omri, over which Jehu is said to have ruled. There
is no reason, then, for supposing that there is an
error in either case. There is, however, good
reason for believing that the Merodach-Baladan
of the Book of Kings was the son of another king
of the same name. That only the latter part of
the father’s name is here mentioned may be com-
pared with the Shalman of Hos 10 14 for the more
fully written Shalmaneser of 2 K 17 3; and with
the Jareb of Hos 5 13 and 10 6, probably for
Sennacherib. Such abbreviation of proper names
was usual among the Assyrians and Babylonians.
See Tallquist, Namenbuch, xiv—xix.

R. Dick Witson

BALAH, ba’la (33, balah; Bord, Bold): A
place, unidentified, in the territory of Simeon
(Josh 19 3), called Bilhah in 1 Ch 4 29. It may
be identical with Baalah in Judah (Josh 16 29).


BALAK, ba’lak (pes, balak, ‘“devastator” or
“one who lays waste”): Mentioned in connection
with the story of Balaam (Nu 22-24; cf Josh 24 9;
Jgs 1125; Mic 6 5; Rev 2 14). He was the
king of Moab who hired Balaam to pronounce a
curse on the Israelites. See BALAAM.


BALAMON, bal’a-mon (Bodapév, Balamén;
AV Balamo): In the field between Balamon and
Dothaim Manasses, the husband of Judith, was
buried (Jth 8 3). Cf Baal-hamon (Cant 8 11).


BALANCE, bal’ans: The Eng. word “balance”
is from the Lat bilanz=“having two scales’ (bi=
“two” and lanc=“plate,” or “scale’’). It is used
to render three Heb words: (1) D°3TN2, mé’znayim
(Lev 19 36; Job 6 2; Ps 62 9; Prov 11 1; Isa 40
12.15; Jer 32 10, ete); (2) M3, kaneh (Isa 46 6),
and (3) OB, peles (Prov 16 11). Itisfound in the
sing., e.g. ‘fa just balance’ (Prov 16 11); “a pair
of balances’ (Rev 6 5, etc), as well asin the plur.,


Balance
Bamoth


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


330


e.g. “just balances” (Lev 19 36), “weighed in the
balances” (Dnl 6 27, etc).


Balance (from Egyptian Tomb).


(1) The “balances”
differed little, if at all, from those used by the
gyptians (Wilkinson, Anc. Egypt

1. Balances [1878], II, 246f). They consisted,
among the probably, of a horizontal bar, either
Ancient pivoted on a perpendicular rod (see
Hebrews; Erman, Aegypten, I, 615 for similar
the Parts, Egyp balances), or suspended from
etc a cord and held in the hand, the
more primitive form. At the ends of

the bar were pans, or hooks, from which the things
to be weighed were suspended, sometimes in bags.


Assyrian Balance (from Sculptures at Khorsabad).


A good description of the more developed and final
form is this: A beam with its fulerum in the middle
and its arms precisely equal. From the ends of the
arms were suspended two scales, the one to receive
the object to be weighed, the other the counter-
poise, or weight.


of the ancient Hebrews |


(2) The weights were of stone at first and are so
named in Dt 25 13 AVm. A pair of scales (AV “a
pair of balances’’) is used in Rev 6 5 by a figure of
speech for the balance as a whole; only once is the
beam so used, in Isa 46 6, lit. “weigh silver in
the beam.” Abraham, we are told (Gen 23 16),


| “weighed the silver.”


The basis and fountain-head of all systems of
weights and measurements is to be traced, it is now
thought, to Babylonia; but the primi-
2. Probably tive instruments and systems were
of Bab subject to many modifications as they
Origin entered other regions and passed into
the derivative systems. The Rom
“balance” is the same as our steelyard (vulgarly
called “‘stillyards’’). Cf the Chinese, Danish, etc.
Though the “balances” in ancient times were
rudely constructed, the weighing could be done
quite accurately, as may be seen in


3. The the use of equally primitive balances
System of in the East today. But the system
Weighing wasliabletofraud. A ‘‘false balance”
Liable to might be lit. one so constructed that
Fraud the arms were of unequal length, when


the longer arm would be intended, of
course, for the article to be weighed. The system
was liable, however, to various other subtle abuses
then as now; hence the importance in God’s
sight of “true weights’ and a “‘just balance” is
enforced again and again (see Lev 19 36; Prov 11
1; 16 11; 20 23; Am 8 5; Mic 6 11, etc).
“A false balance is an abomination to Jehovah”
(Prov 11 1; cf 20 23), and ‘‘a just balance and scales
are Jehovah’s” (Prov 16 11). Hos (12
4. “Wicked 7) condemns ‘‘the balances of deceit’ in
Balances” the hand of the wicked; Am (8 5 AV)
Condemned cries out upon “falsifying the balances
by deceit,” and Mic (6 11) denounces
‘wicked balances.”” Indeed, the righteousness of a
just balance and true weights, and the iniquity of
false ones are everywhere emphasized by the law-
makers, prophets and moral teachers of Israel, and
the preacher or teacher who would expose and
denounce such things in God’s name today need be
at no loss for texts and precedents. See WeicuTs
AND MEasurRss.


Lirerarure.—Wilkinson, Egypt; Erman,
Egypt; Lepsius, Denkmdler; and arts. on ‘‘ Balance,”
etc, in DB, EB, Jew Enc, HDB, EB, etc.

Gro. B. Eager

BALANCINGS, bal’aus-ins: “The balancings of
the clouds” (Job 37 16), the manner in which they
are poised and supported in the air, alike with their
mysterious spreadings and motions, challenge the
strongest intellect to explain.


BALASAMUS, ba-las’a-mus.
BALD LOCUST, béld lo’kust. See Locust.


BALDNESS, béld’ness (AMP, korhah): The
reference in the Bible to baldness is not to the
natural loss of hair, but to baldness produced b
shaving the head. This was practised as a mar
of mourning for the dead (Lev 21 5; Isa 16 2;
22 12); as the result of any disaster (Am 8 10;
Mic 1 16). The custom arose from the fact that
the hair was regarded as a special ornament.
It was the custom of the people of the land, and
the Israelites were strictly forbidden to practise it
(Lev 21 5; Deut 14 1). These are striking pas-
sages with reference to the knowledge the Israelites
had concerning the future life. This is saying to
them what Paul said to the Thessalonians (I Thess
4 13). To call one a “bald head” was an epithet
of contempt, and was sometimes applied to persons
who were not naturally bald. It was the epithet
applied by certain infidel young men to Elisha


Ancient


See BaaLsaMus.


381


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Balance
Bamoth


(2 K 2 23.24). In a fig. sense it is used to express
the barrenness of the country (Jer 47 5). See
Harr; Suave. Jacos W. Kapp


_ BALL, bél (WW, ddr): A rare Heb word used
in this sense only in Isa 22 18, and correctly
rendered in ARV “He will surely wind thee round
and round, and toss thee like a ball into a large
country.’ De Or, Béttcher, Jastrow, following
Talm, regard the noun as kaddir, but perhaps in-
correctly. See also GaMEs.


BALM, bim (MX, ¢*rt, 2, cori; LXX pytiva,
rhétiné): The name of an odoriferous resin said
to be brought from Gilead by Ishmacelite Arabs
on their way to Egypt (Gen 87 25). It is tr?
“balm” in AV and RV, but is called ‘mastic,”
RVm. In Gen 43 11 it is one of the gifts sent by
Jacob to Joseph, and in Ezk 27 17 it is named as
one of the exports from Judaea to Tyre. The
prophet Jeremiah refers fig. to its medicinal prop-
erties as an application to wounds and as a seda-
tive (8 22; 46 11, 61 8). The name is derived
from a root signifying “‘to leak,” and is applied to
it as being an exudation. There is a sticky, honey-
like gum resin prepared at the present day at Jericho,
extracted from the Balanites Aegyptiaca grown in
the Ghér, and sold to travelers in small tin boxes
as “Balm of Gilead,” but it is improbable that this
is the real ¢ért and it has no medicinal value. The
material to which the classic authors applied the
name is that known as Mecca balsam, which is
still imported into Egypt from Arabia, as it was in
early times. This is the exudation from the
Balsamodendron opobalsamum, a native of southern
Arabia and Abyssinia. The tree is small, ragged-
looking and with a yellowish bark like that of a
plane tree, and the exudation is said to be gathered
from its smaller branches. At the present day it
grows nowhere in Pal. Dr. Post and other botanists
have sought for it on the Ghor and in Gilead, and
have not found it, and there is no trace of it in the
neighborhood of Jericho, which Pliny says is its
only habitat. Strabo describes it as growing by
the Sea of Galilee, as well as at Jericho, but both
these and other ancient writers give inconsistent
and incorrect descriptions of the tree evidently at
second hand. We learn from Theophrastus that
many of the spices of the farther East reached the
Mediterranean shore through Pal, being brought
by Arab caravans which would traverse the indefi-
nitely bounded tract E. of Jordan to which the name
Gilead is given, and it was probably thus that the
balm received its local name. Mecca balsam is an
orange-yellow, treacly fluid, mildly irritating to the
skin, possibly a weak local stimulant and antiseptic,
but of very little remedial value.

ALEx. MacatisTrR

BALM OF GILEAD: The people of Jericho
today prepare for the benefit of pilgrims a “Balm
of Gilead” from the zakkium (Balanites Aegyptiaca),
but this has no serious claims to be the balm of
antiquity. If we are to look beyond the borders
of modern Pal we may credit the tradition which
claims that Mecca balsam, a product of Balsamo-
dendron Gileadense and B. opobalsamum, was the
true “balm,” and Post (HDB, I, 236) produces
evidence to show that these plants were once
grown in the Jordan valley. Yet another supges-
tion, made by Lagarde, is that the cori =ortpag, and
if so then “balm” would be the inspissated juice of
the Storax-tree (Styrax officinalis), a common in-
habitant of Gilead. See also Bato.

E. W. G. MasteRMAN

BALNUUS, bal-nii’us (A, Badvotos, Balnoidos;
B, Badvois, Balnois=Binnui [Ezr 10 30]): B.
put away his “strange wife’ (1 Esd 9 31).


BALSAM, bél’sam (OWA, basam, DWA, besem;
HSicpara, héduismata; Ovprdpara, thumidmata):
Is usually “spices” but in RVm (Cant 6 1.13;
6 2) is rendered as “balsam.”” It was an ingre-
dient in the anointing oil of the priests (Ex 26 6;
35 28). The Queen of Sheba brought it as a present
to Solomon (1 K 10 2) in large quantity (ver 10)
and of a finer quality (2 Ch 9 9) than that brought
as a regular tribute by other visitors (1 K 10 25).
In the later monarchy Hezekiah had a treasure of
this perfume (2 Ch 32 27) which he displayed to
his Bab visitors (Isa 39 2); and after the cap-
tivity the priests kept a store of it in the temple
(1 Ch 9 30). According -to Ezekiel the Syrians
imported it from Sheba (27 22). There is a tradi-
tion preserved in Jos (Ant, VIII, vi, 6) that the
Queen of Sheba brought roots of the plant to
Solomon, who grew them in a garden of spices at
Jericho, probably derived from the references to such
a garden in Cant 5 1.13; 6 2. This may be the
source of the statements of Strabo, Trogus and Pliny
quoted above (see Baum). It was probably the
same substance as the Batm described above, but
from the reference in Ex 30 7; 35 8, it may have
been used as a generic name for fragrant resins.
The root from which the word is derived signifies
“to be fragrant,” and fragrant balsams or resins
are known in modern Arab. as bahasdn. The trees
called in 2 8 6 23.24 (RVm) “balsam-trees” were
certainly not those which yielded this substance,
for there are none in the Sh*péhiah, but there are
both mulberry trees and terebinths in the district
between Rephaim and Gezer. When used as a per-
fume the name basam seems to have been adopted,
but as a medicinal remedy it is called gdr7.

ALEX, MACALISTER

BALTASAR, bal-ta’sar (Badracdp, Baliasdr;
AV Balthasar): ;

(1) The Gr of Heb, "ENUQ22, béltesha’gcar, or
“zENDe3 , bélte’shaccar, perhaps corresponding to
Balét-Sar-usur, “protect the life of the king,” the
Bab cognomen of Daniel. Ci Belteshazzar (Dn! 1
7; 2 26; 4 8ff, et al.). [

(2) B. is also. the Gr of the Heb “"ENW2A, bal-
sha’c¢car, or “ZBNOR, bél’shagcar, the name of the
last king of Babylon (corresponding to the Bab
Bél-Sar-usur; KAT, III, 396; Syr Blitshazzar; Vulg
Baltassar). Cf Bar 1 11 and Belshazzar (Dnl 6 1ff;
71; 81).

(3) The name of one of the Magi who according -
to the legend visited Jesus at Bethlehem: Melchior
from Nubia, Balthasar from Godolia, Caspar from
Tharsis. A. L. Bresiicu


BAMAH, ba’ma, ba’ma (22, bamah, “high
place’): The word appears in Ezk 20 29 where
reference is made to former “high-place worship,”
the prophet speaking with contempt of such manner
of worship. Ewald suggests a play of words,
NB, ba’, “come,” and MA, mah, “what,” “what
[mah] is the high place [ba-mah] whereunto ye come
[ba’]?” 1t is possible that reference is made to a

rominent high place like the one at Gibeon (cf 1

3 4; 1 Ch 16 39; 21 29; 2 Ch 1 3) for which
the name “Bamah” was retained after the reform
mentioned by thé prophet.


BAMOTH, ba’ moth, BAMOTH-BAAL, ba’moth-
ba’al (OPER MD, bamath-ba'al, “high places of
Baal’): Bamoth is referred to in Nu 21 19.20, as
a station in the journeyings of Israel N. of the
Arnon. It is probably the same place as the
Bamoth-baal of Nu 22 41 (RVm), whither Balak,
king of Moab, conducted Balaam to view and to
curse Israel. Bamoth-baal is named in Josh 13 17


Ban
Bank, Banking


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


382


as one of the cities given to Reuben. Mesha, on
the M8, speaks of having “rebuilt”? Beth-bamoth.


BAN (A, Bav, Ban; B, Bawdv, Baindn; 1 Esd
6 37=Tobiah [Ezr 2 60; Neh 7 62]; some MSS of
the LXX read Bova, Boud): The descendants of B.
were not able to trace their ancestry to show “how
they were of Israel.”


BANAIAS, ban-4-i’as (Bavalas, Banatas; 1 Esd
9 35=Benaiah [Ezr 10 43]): B. put away his
“strange wife.”


BAND: The Eng. word has two generic mean-
ings, each shading off into several specific meanings:
(1) that which holds together, binds or encircles:
a bond; (2) a company of men. The second sense
may philologically and logically have been derived
from the first, men being held together by social
ties. Both meanings appear in OT and NT rep-
resenting various Heb and Gr words.

(1) A band (a) (WiON, 'Zsar): a flaxen rope (Jgs
16 14); a band of iron and brass (Dnl 4 15.23);
metaphorically of a false woman’s hands (Ecel 7 26).
(b) (2217, hebhel): “The bands of the wicked have
robbed me” (AV of Ps 119 61), where “bands” =
“troops” by mistr; RV “The cords of the wicked
have wrapped me round”; plur. hobhlim= “bands”
=the name of the prophet’s symbolic staff repre-
senting the brotherhood between Judah and
Israel (Zee 11 7.14). (c) (MAY, ‘dbhoth): “I
drew them with cords of a man, with bands of
love’ (Hos 11 4; cf Ezk 3 25; 4 8; Job 89 10).
(d) (MDW, saéphah): the edge of the round opening
in the robe of the ephod with a band (RV “binding’”’)
round about the hole of it (only in Ex 39 23).
(e) (MMAR VW, hargiibboth): bands (RV “bonds”)
of wickedness (Isa 58 6); bands (=pains) in death
(Ps 73 4); RVm (“pangs,” Cheyne, “torments”).
(f) (1212, matah): the cross bar of oxen’s yoke,
holding them together (Lev 26 13; Ezk 34 27 AV;
RV “bars”). (g) (70%, médsér): a fetter: “Who
hath loosed the bonds of the swift ass?” (Job 39 5;
Ps 2 3; 107 14; Isa 28 22; 52 2; Jer 2 20; all in
AV and RV). The same Heb word (in Ps 116 16;
Jer 5 5; 27 2; 308; Nah 1 13) is tr? “bonds”
in AV, and in ERV of Ps 116 16, and Nah 1 13,
but “bands” in ERV of Jer 5 5; 27 2; 20 8;

_ARV has. “bonds” throughout. See Bown.
(h) (MSW, madshekhoth): “Canst thou....
loose the bands of Orion?” (only in Job 38 31).
(i) (decpbs, desméds, ctvéecuos, stindesmos): a fetter:
that which binds together: of the chains of a luna-
tic or prisoner (Lk 8 29; Acts 16 26; 22 30 AV),
metaphorically of the mystic union of Christ and
the church (Col 2 19). These words are often tr4
by “bond” in AV and RV. (j) (severypla, zeukté-
ria): the rudder’s bands (only in Acts 27 40).

(2) Acompany of men (a) (7974, g*dhudh): a band
of soldiers (2 8 4 2;1 K 11 24 AV; 2 K 6 23; 13
20.21; 24 2;1 Ch 7 4; 12 18.21; 2 Ch 221). So
RV (except in 1 K 11 24, “troop”). (6) (ON,
ré’sh): “head” =“division”: “The Chaldeans made
three bands” (Job 1 17); 1 Ch 12 23 RV trans-
lates “heads.”’ (c) (D573, hayil): “a band of men’
RV the “host” (only in 1S 10 26). (d) ([N,
‘ighappim): “the wings of an army,” only in Ezk
armies of the King of Judah (12 14; 17 21);
of Gomer and of Togarmah (38 6); of Gog (RV
“hordes’’) (88 9.22; 39 4). (e) (QE, mahdneh):
“eamp”: only in Gen 32 7.10; RV “companies.’’
(f) (VEN, hécée): of locusts dividing into com-
panies or swarms (Prov 30 27).  (g) (emeipa,
speira): usually a “cohort” (see RVm) of Rom


soldiers; the tenth part of a legion, about 600 men:
(Mt 27 27; Mk 15 16; Acts 10 1; 21 31; 27 1).
A smaller detachment of soldiers (Jn 18 3.12; ef 2
Mace 8 23; Jth 14 11). (hk) (rotety ovo rpodiy, poi-
ein sustrophén): ‘‘to make a conspiracy”: ‘The
Jews banded together” (Acts 23 12). T. Reus

(8) The Augustan Band (emeipa ZeBaorh, spetra
Sebasté) to which Julius, the Rom centurion
who had charge of St. Paul as a prisoner on his
voyage to Rome, belonged, was a cohort apparently
stationed at Caesarea at the time (Acts 27 1).
Schiirer (GJV, I3, 461f) is of opinion that it was
one of five cohorts mentioned by Jos, recruited
in Samaria and called Sebastenes from the Gr name
of the city of Samaria (Sebaste). This particular
cohort had in all likelihood for its full name Cohors
Augusta Sebastenorum, Augusta being an honorifie
title of which examples are found in the ease of
auxiliary troops. Sir William Ramsay, following
Mommsen (Si. Paul the Traveller, 315, 348), thinks
it denotes a body of legionary centurions, selected
from legions serving abroad, who were employed by
the emperor on confidential business between the
provinces and Rome, the title Augustan being
conferred upon them as a mark of favor and dis-
tinction. The grounds on which the views of
Mommsen and Ramsay rest are questioned by
Professor Zahn (Introduction to the NT, I, 551 ff),
and more evidence is needed to establish them. See
Army (Roman).

(4) The Italian Band (cweipa "Itadukn, speira
Ttaliké) was a cohort composed of volunteer
Rom citizens born in Italy and stationed at Caes-
area at this time (Acts 10 1). Schiirer maintains
that there could have been no Rom cohort there
at this time, although he accepts the testimony of
inscriptions to the presence of an Italian cohort at
a later time. He accordingly rejects the story of
Cornelius, holding that the author of the Acts has
given in this narrative conditions belonging to a later
time (GJV, I, 462f). In reply to Schiirer, Blass
asks why one of the five cohorts mentioned by Jos
may not have been composed of Rom citizens
living at Caesarea or Sebaste, and bearing this
name (Blass, Acia Apostolorum, 124). From a
recently discovered inscription, Sir W. M. Ramsay
has ascertained that there was an Italian cohort
stationed in Syria in 69 AD, which heightens the
probability of one actually being found in Caesarea
at 41-44 AD,and he shows that even if his cohort
was at the time on duty elsewhere a centurion like
Cornelius might well have been at Caesarea at the
time mentioned (Expositor, 5th ser., IV, V, with
Schiirer’s rejoinder). The subject of detached
service in the provinces of the Rom Empire is ad-
mittedly obscure, but nothing emerges in this dis-
cussion to east doubt upon the historical character
of St. Luke’s narrative. See Army (Roman).


T. Nicon
BANDS, BEAUTY AND. See Beauty anp
Banps.


BANDS OF RUDDER. See Rupper.


BANI, ba’ni (133 , bani, “posterity’’):
Pee A Gadite, one of David’s mighty men (2 §
(2) A Levite whose son was appointed for service
in the tabernacle at David’s time (1 Ch 6 46).

(3) A Judahite whose son lived in Jerus after
the captivity (1 Ch 9 4).

(4) The descendants of B. (called Binnui, Neh
7 15) returned with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 10) and
had taken “strange wives” (Ezr 10 29),

(5) B. who had taken a “strange wife” (Ezr 10
38) mentioned with his brothers, the sons of B.
who also had taken “strange wives” (Ezr 10 34).


383


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ban
Bank, Banking


(6) Son of B., a Levite and builder (Neh 3 17).

(7) B., who instructed the people at Ezra’s time
(Neh 8 7).

(8) Three Levites mentioned in connection with
the temple worship at Ezra’s time (Neh 9 4.5).

(9) A Levite who sealed the covenant with Neh
(Neh 10 13).

(10) A leader of the people who also signed the
covenant (Neh 10 14).

(11) One whose son Uzzi was overseer of the
Levites at Jerus (Neh 11 22). See Brnnut.

A. L. Bresiicu

BANIAS, ba-ni’as (B, Bavias, Bantas; A, Bavi,
Bant; AV Banid (1 Esd 8 36]): An ancestor of
Salimoth. The descendants of B. returned with
Ezra to Jerus. The name is omitted (Ezr 8 10),
perhaps due to the oversight of a copyist or a
mistaken reading of "32, bené, “sons of,” for "22,
bani.


BANIAS. See Cazsargea PHILIPPI.


BANID, ba’nid (1 Esd 8 36): In RV Banias,
which see.


BANISHMENT, ban’ish-ment.
MENTS.


BANK, bank:

(1) (MEW, saphah, “lip,” “edge’): ‘By the b.
of the Jordan” (2 K 2 18); ‘‘Upon the b. of the
river were very many trees” (Ezk 47 7.12).

(2) (FA, gadhah, cuttings’): Always of banks
overflowed (Josh 3 15; 4 18; Isa 8 7), as also

(3) (FI, gidhyah, 1 Ch 12 15).

(4) (mebo, sollah, “mound,” “rampart”): “Cast
up ab. against the city” (2 § 20 15, ERV ‘‘mount,”
ARV “mound”; cf 2K 19 32; Isa 37 33).
“Banks of sweet herbs’ (Cant 6 13); ‘the mar-
ginal rendering is the right one, ‘towers of per-
fumes,’ i.e. plants with fragrant leaves and flowers
trained on trellis-work”’ (Speaker's Comm. in loc.).

(5) (xépaé, chdraz, ‘a stake,” “‘entrenchment’’):
“Thine enemies shall cast up a bank about thee”
(Lk 19 43 AV “‘trench”). It is probably a mili-
tary term and stands for a “‘palisade’”’ (so RVm),
i.e. probably an embankment of stakes strength-
ened with branches and earth, with a ditch behind
it, used by the besiegers as_a protection against
arrows or attacking parties (Lat vallum), such, no
doubt, as was employed by Titus in the siege of
Jerus, 70 AD (Jos, BJ, V, vi, 2).

(6) Bank, Bankine (q.Vv.). M. O. Evans


BANK, BANKING: “Banking” in the full
modern sense, of taking money on deposit and
lending it out on interest, is of com-
paratively recent origin. A few
“banks of deposit”” were founded in
Italy in the Middle Ages, but the
earliest “banks of isgue,’’ of the modern sort, were
those of Amsterdam (1609) and Hamburg (1619),
beginning in the 17th cent. The law of Moses
forbade Israelites to charge each other interest
(Ex 22 25; Lev 26 35.37; Dt 23 19), but let
them lend on interest to Gentiles (Dt 23 20),
though this law was often evaded or disregarded
(Neh 6 10.12). Banks and banking, however,
are found in operation in the Gr cities; ‘“money-
changers,” sitting at their tables (trdpezat) in the
market place, both changed coins and took money
on deposit, giving high interest; and banking of a
sort, in its incipient stages, existed among the an-
cient Hebrews. But the Phoenicians are now
thought to have been the inventors of the money-
changing, money-lending system which is found in


See Punisu-


1. Intro-
ductory


more or less modified and developed forms among
ancient peoples and in full development and opera-
tion in the palmy days of the Rom Empire. In the
Gr-Rom period, without doubt, bankers both
received money on deposit, paying interest, and let
it out at a higher rate, or employed it in trade, as the
publicani at Rome did, in farming the revenues

of a proviuce (Plumptre).
(1) The Heb money-changer, like his modern Syr-
ian counterpart, the sardf (see PEFS, 1904, 49 ff,
where the complexity of exchange in


2. Banking Pal today is graphically described),
among the changed the large coins current into
Ancient those of smaller denominations, e.g.
Hebrews giving denarii for tetradrachms, or


silver for gold, or copper for silver.

(2) But no mean part of his business was the
exchanging of forcign money, and even the money of
the country of a non-Phoen standard, for shekels
and half-shekels on this standard, the latter being
accepted only in payment of the temple dues (see
Money). The ‘“money-changers” of Mt 21 12,
as the Gr signifies, were men who made small
change. Such men may be seen in Jerus now with
various coins piled in slender pillars on a table
(cf ept trdpezan, Lk 19 23), ready to be used in
changing money for a premium into such forms, or
denominations, as would be more current or more
convenient for immediate use.

(3) “Usury” in EV is simply OE for what we
today call “interest,” i.e. the sum paid for the use of
money, Lat usura; and “interest”? should take the
place of it in all passages in the OT and NT, where
it has such significance.

The Gr word rendered (tékos), ‘‘usury’’ in the NT
(see Lk 19 23f) means lit. ‘‘what is born of money,”
“what money brings forth or produces.”’ ‘‘Usury’’ has
come to mean ‘‘exorbitant interest,’’ but did not mean
this at the time of AV, 1611.

(1) In Christ’s time, and immediately following,
there was great need for money-changers and

money-changing, esp. on the part of
3. Banking foreign Jews whom custom forbade
in NT to put any but Jewish coins into the
Times temple treasury (see Mk 12 41). It

was mainly for the convenience of
these Jews of the Dispersion, and because it was
in order to a sacred use, that the people thought it
proper to allow the money-changers to set up their
cay in the outer court of the temple (see Mt 21
12 ff).


, ;
{| Bye
Bank: Money Changer.


(2) The language of Mt 26 27, ‘Thou oughtest
to have put my money to the bankers,’ etc,
would seem to indicate the recognition by Christ
of the custom and propriety of lending out money on
interest (cf 19 23). The “exchangers” here are
“bankers” (cf Mt 25 27). The Gr (trapezttat)
is from a word for ‘“‘bauk” or ‘“‘bench”’ (érdpeza),
i.e. the “table” or “counter’’ on which the money
used to be received and paid out. These “bankers”
were clearly of a higher class than the “small-
change men” of Mt 21 12, ete (cf “changers of


Bannaia
Baptism


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


384


money,” Jn 2 14, and “changers,” Jn 2 15 EV).
Christ upbraids the ‘“‘slothful servant’’ because
he had not given his pound to “the bank’ (or
“banker,” epr trapezan, lit. “on a banker’s table’),
who, it is implied, would have kept it safe and paid
interest for it (Lk 19 23f). It is noteworthy
that the “ten minae” of ver 24 are those acquired
by “the good servant” from the “fone” which was
first lent him. So these wealthier bankers even
then in a way received money on deposit for in-
vestment and paid interest on it, after the fashion
of the Greeks.
(1) In Christ’s parable (Lk 19 23 ff) “the bank’
(it. ‘‘a bank,’ “‘table’”’) is taken by some to mean
“the synagogue,” by others to mean
4, Interpre- “the church” (Lange, LJ, I, 1, 414);


tations, ie. it is thought that Christ meant
Figurative to teach that the organized body,
Uses, ete  ‘‘synagogue” or “church,” might use


the gifts or powers of an adherent or
disciple, when he himself could not exercise them
(ef DCG, art. “Bank”).

(2) Then some have thought that Christ was
here pointing to prayer as a substitute for good
works, when the disciple was unable to do such.
Such views seem far-fetched and unnecessary (cf
Bruce, Parabolic Teaching of Christ, 209 f).

(3) The “money-changers,” then as now, had
ever to be on guard against false money, which
gives point to the oft-quoted extra-scriptural say-
ing (agraphon) of Jesus to His disciples: ‘Be ye
expert money-changers” (Gr ginésthat trapezitat
dékimoi; see Origen, in Joam, XIX), which was
taken (Clem., Hom., III, 61) to mean, ‘Be skilful
in distinguishing true doctrine from false’? (HDB,
1-vol). Gro. B. Eager


BANNAIA, ba-na’ya.


BANNAS, ban’as (Bawvos, Bénnos; AV Banuas):
A name occurring in the list of those who returned
from the captivity with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 5 26).
Bannas and Sudias are represented by Hoodaviah
in the lists of Ezra and Nehemiah.


BANNEAS, ban-@’as (Bavvatas, Bannatas; AV
Baanias {1 Esd 9 26]=Benaiah [Ezr 10 25]): B.
put away his “strange wife.”


See SaBANNEUS.


BANNER, ban’ér (Ensign, Stanparp): The
Eng. word “banner” is from banderia, Low Lat,
meaning a banner (cf bandum, Lat, which meant
first a “band,” an organized military troop, and then
a “flae”). It has come to mean a flag, or standard,
carried at the head of a military band or body, to
indicate the line of march, or the rallying point,


Assyrian Standards and Banners.


and it is now applied, in its more extended signifi-
cance, to royal, national, or ecclesiastical ‘‘banners”’
also. We find it applied sometimes to a streamer
on the end of a lance, such as is used by the Arab
sheik today. ‘‘B.” occurs in the following signifi-
cant OT passages: (1) in the sing., ‘Lift ye up a b.


upon the high mountain” (Isa 18 2 AV); “a b. to
them that fear thee” (Ps 60 4); and (2) in the plur.,
“Tn the name of our God we will set up our b.” (Ps

20 5); “‘terrible as an army with b.” (Cant 6 4).
The Hebrews, it would seem, like the Assyrians,
the Egyptians, and other ancient nations, had
military ensigns. As bearing upon


1. Military this question, a very significant pas-
Ensigns sage is that found in Nu 2 2: “The
among the children of Israel shall encamp every
Hebrews man by his own standard, with the en-


signs of their fathers’ houses.” ‘Stand-
ard-bearer”’ in Isa 10 18 AV, “They shall be as
when a standard-bearer fainteth,” is not a case in
point, but is to be rendered asin RVm, “‘as when a
sick man pineth away.”


J OQ


—


Egyptian Standards.


In this noted passage a distinction seems in-
tentionally made (another view is held by some)
between “‘the ensigns of their fathers’


2. A Dis- houses’ (lit. “signs’’; cf Ps 74 4, where
tinction the reference is thought by some today
with a to be to the standards of Antiochus’
Difference army), and “the standards’ of the four


great divisions of the Heb tribes in the
wilderness (cf the “banner” of Cant 2 4 and 6 4.
10). The relation of these to the “‘standard”’ of Nu
21 Sf (Heb nés, AV and RV “standard’’) is by no
means clear. The word nés, here tr? “standard,”
seems to have meant at first a pole set up on an
eminence as a signal for mustering troops (ef “‘mast”
Isa 3017 ERVm). But it occurs frequently in the
prophets both in this lit. and original sense, and in
the fig. or derived sense of a rallying point for God’s
people (see Isa 5 26; 11 10; Jer 4 21 and else-
where). Here the rendering in EV alternates be-
tween “ensign” and “banner” (see HDB, 1-vol, art.
“Banner”). Geo. B. Eacer


BANNUS, ban’us (Bavvots, Bannotis [1 Esd 9
34]=Bani or Binnui [Ezr 10 29.30]): The sons of
B. put away their “‘strange wives.”


BANQUET, ban’kwet: (1) “Banquet” and “ban-
queting”’ in AV always include and stand for wine-
drinking, not simply “feast’’ or ‘‘feast-


1. The ing’ in our sense. Thus (Cant 2 4),
Ancient “He brought me to the banqueting-
Hebrew house’’ is lt. “the house of wine,’’ and
Customs Est 7 2 has in the Heb “‘a banquet of


wine.” In the NT we see a reflection
of the same fact in 1 Pet 4 3 AV, “We walked in
... . excess of wine, banquetings” (Gr “drinkings”’;
RV “carousings”’). Amos 6 7 AV, ‘The ban-
quet of them that stretched themselves,” where the
reference seems to be to reclining at wine-drinkings.
See Mua.s.
The Heb of Job 1 4 ("MW WY), AV tr ‘make a
banquet,’’ may refer to a social feast of a less objection-
able sort (cf 41 6 AV), though the Heb [MH ="‘to


drink’’ 755 =“ wine,’’ was used as synonymous with ‘‘ban-
quet.’”’ “ See Symposium.


385


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bannaia
Baptism


Music, dancing and merriment usually attended
all such festivities. Certainly the ancient Hebrews,
like other peoples of the ancient East, were very
fond of social feasting, and in Christ’s day had
acquired, from contact with Greeks and Romans,
luxurious and bibulous habits, that often carried
them to excess in their social feasts.

Among the Greeks the word for “feast’’ (doché) is
from déchomai ‘‘to receive” (cf our Eng. usage, “‘to
receive” and “‘reception’”). This word doché is used
with poiein “to make,” to signify “to make” or
“give a feast.”’ Cf Lk 5 29 where Levi “made a
feast.”

(1) In view of existing customs and abuses,
Christ taught His followers when they gave a

banquet to invite the poor, etc (Lk


2. In 14 13), rather than, as the fashion
Christ’s of the day called for, to bid the rich
Teaching and influential, Much in the NT
and Prac- that has to do with banquets and
tice banquetings will be obscure to us of the


West if we do not keep in mind the
many marked differences of custom between the
East and the West.

(2) “Banquets” were usually given in the house
of the host to specially invited guests (Lk 14 15;
Jn 2 2), but much more freedom was accorded
to the uninvited than we of the West are accus-
tomed to, as one finds to be true everywhere in
the East today. The custom of reclining at meals
(see Meats; TrRicLIniuM, etc) was everywhere
in vogue among the well-to-do in Christ’s day, even
in the case of the ordinary meals, the guest leaning
upon the left arm and eating with the aid of the
right (cf Mt 26 20m “reclining,” and1 Cor 11 20,
“the Lord’s supper’’).

(3) Banquets” were considered normal parts
of weddings as they are now throughout the East.
Jesus and His disciples were bidden to one at Cana
in Galilee, and accepted the invitation (Jn 2 2 ff),
and wine-drinking was a part of the feast. The
“banquet”? Levi gave was in Christ’s honor (Lk
5 29). There were numbers present and marked
gradations in the places ai table (Mt 23 6; Mk
12 39; Lk 147; 20 46). Guests were invited in
advance, and then, as time-pieces were scarce,
specially notified when the feast was ready, which
helps to explain Christ’s words (Mt 22 4), “All
things are ready: come to the marriage” (cf Lk 14
17; Est 5 8; 6 14). °

(4) Matthew tells us (23 6) that the Pharisees
“love the chief place [‘‘uppermost rooms” AV] at
feasts.”

In Mt 22 3.4 “‘made a marriage feast,” is rendered by
some simply ‘‘a feast,” because Gr gdmos, ‘ marriage,’”’
was used by LXX to translate the Heb for ‘‘feast”’ in
Est 15. But, as this is the only known example of
such a use of gamos, it is better to take it here in the
lit. sense of ‘‘marriage feast,” as would seem to be re-

uired by the words ‘‘for his son” (Messiah). The
Gr is plur. (gamous) to indicate the several parts or stages
of the feast (Button, 23; cf Eng. ‘‘nuptials’’).

The “ruler of the feast’ (architriklinos, Jn 2
8.9), was usually one of the guests, and his business
was to see that wine was provided, superintend the
drinking, etc (cf Lk 22 27). ; .

(1) In Mt 22 4, “I have made ready my dinner,
“dinner” in Gr is ariston (cf Lk 11 38). “Supper”

(Gr detpnon) is found in Mt 23 6 and
3. A Dis- often in the NT. Both words are
tinction Giv- found in Lk 14 12. The question
ing Rise to arises, What was the distinction?
a Question Thus much may be said in answer:

The ariston (EV ‘‘dinner’’) was a meal
usually taken about the middle of the forenoon, with
variations of earlier or later; the deipnon (EV “sup-
per”), the one taken at the close of the day, often
after dark. In Ant, V, iv, 2 Jos supposes Eglon’s


guards (Jgs 3 24) were negligent about noon, ‘“‘both
because of the heat and because their attention was
turned to dinner’ (ariston). So the “dinner”
(ariston) was sometimes as late as noon. Yet Jn
(21 12.15) shows, on the other hand, that the ariston
was on some occasions taken shortly after dawn.

(2) Another question raised is this, Were the
ancient Jews accustomed to have two or three meals
a day? Vambery, quoted by Morison, gives a
saying of the Turks that is in point: ‘There are
only two meals a day, the smaller at 10 or 11 o’clock
in the morning, the second and larger after sunset.”
There seems no evidence to sustain the view,
maintained by Grimm and entertained by others,
that the Jews of Christ’s day were accustomed to
take a separate and slight meal on rising, as the
later Greeks and some of the later Romans did.
There is certainly no clear evidence that the Jews
of that day had more than two meals a day (see
DB, art. Meals”).

(3) The marriage feast of Mt 22 3f was an
ariston, somewhat like an Eng. ‘‘wedding-breakfast”’ ;
bat that in Lk 14 16 f was a deipnon, which was as
usual delayed till after dark (ver 17). Perhaps
the ariston in this case was preliminary, while the
marriage with its accompanying detpnon was after
dark; such things are not unheard of today (cf Mt
26 20 and 1 Cor 11 20, ‘‘the Lord’s deipnon’’).

Geo. B. Eacer

BANUAS, ban’ti-as (1 Esd 5 26): A misprint

for Bannas (RV), which see.


BAPTISM, bap’tiz’m (Tue Baptist INTERPRE-
TATION):


I. Merawnine or Baptism
Terminology

. Proselyte Baptism
. Greek Usage

_ NTU


. Baptismal Regeneration

II. Tue Sussecrs or Bartism
III. Tae Present OBLIOATION
LitERATURE

This art. is not a discussion of the whole subject,
but is merely a presentation of the Baptist inter-
pretation of the ordinance. The origin and his-
tory of the ordinance, as a whole, do not come with-
in the range of the present treatment.

I. Meaning of Baptism.—The vb. used in the
NT is farrifw (baptizd). The subst. béptisma
and baptismés occur, though the
latter is not used in the NT of the
ordinance of baptism except by impli-
cation (He 6 2, “the teaching of
baptisms”) where the reference is to the distinction
between the Christian ordinance and the Jewish
ceremonial ablutions. Some documents have it
also in Col 2 12 (cf He 9 10, “‘divers washings”’)
for a reference purely to the Jewish purifications
(cf the dispute about purifying in Jn 3 25). The
verb baptiz6 appears m this sense in Lk 11 38m
where the Pharisee marveled that Jesus “had not
first bathed himself before breakfast” (noon-day
meal). The Mosaic regulations required the bath
of the whole body (Lev 15 16) for certain unclean-
nesses. ‘Tertullian (de Bapiismo, XV) says that
the Jew required almost daily washing. Herodotus
(ii.47) says that if an Egyptian “touches a swine
in passing with his clothes, he goes to the river and
dips himself [béptd] from it”’ (quoted by Broadus in
Comm. on Matthew, 333). See also the Jewish
scrupulosity illustrated in Sir 34 25 and Jth 12 7
where baptizé occurs. Thesame thing appears in the
correct text in Mk 7 4, “‘And when they come from
the market-place, except they bathe themselves,
they eat not.” Here baptizé is the true text. The
use of rhantizé (‘sprinkle’) is due to the difficulty
felt by copyists not familiar with Jewish customs.


OUP G2 DO


1. Termi-
nology


Baptism


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


386


See also the omission of ‘‘couches” in the same verse.
The couches were “pallets” and could easily be
dipped into water. It is noteworthy that here
rhantizd is used in contrast with baptizd, showing
that beptizd did not mean sprinkle. The term
baptismés occurs in Jos (Ani, XVIII, v, 2) in con-
nection with John’s baptism (cf also Irenaeus 686
B about Christ’s baptism). In general, however,
baptisma is the subst. found for the ordinance.
The vb. baptizé is in reality a frequentative or in-
tensive of baptd (‘dip’). Examples occur where
that idea is still appropriate, as in 2 K 6 14 (LXX)
where Naaman is said to have “dipped himself
seven times in the Jordan” (ebaptisato). The
notion of repetition may occur also in Jos (Ani, XV,
iii, 3) in connection with the death of Aristobulus,
brother of Mariamne, for Herod’s friends ‘dipped
him as he was swimming, and plunged him under
water, in the dark of the evening.” But in general
the term baptizd, as is common with such forms in
the late Gr, is simply equivalent to bapté (cf Lk 16
24) and means “dip,’”’ ‘immerse,’ just as rhantizo,
like rhaind, means simply “‘sprinkle.”’

If baptizd never occurred in connection with a
disputed ordinance, there would be no controversy
on the meaning of the word. There are, indeed, fig.
or metaphorical uses of the word as of other words,
but the fig. is that of immersion, like our “im-
mersed in cares,’ ‘plunged in grief,” etc. It
remains to consider whether the use of the word for a
ceremony or ordinance has changed its significance
in the NT as compared with ancient Gr.

It may be remarked that no Baptist has written
a lexicon of the Gr language, and yet the standard
lexicons, like that of Liddell and Scott, uniformly
give the meaning of baptizé as “dip,” “immerse.”
They do not give “pour” or “sprinkle,” nor has
anyone ever adduced an instance where this verb
means “pour” or “sprinkle.’”’ The presumption is
therefore in favor of “dip” in the NT.

Before we turn directly to the discussion of the
ceremonial usage, a word is called for in regard to

Jewish proselyte baptism. It is still


2. Prose- a matter of dispute whether this
lyte Bap- _initiatory rite was in existence at the
tism time of John the Baptist or not.


Schiirer argues ably, if not conclusive-
ly, for the idea that this proselyte baptism was
in use long before the first mention of it in the 2d
cent. (cf The Jewish People in the Time of Jesus
Christ, Div ii, TJ, 319ff; also Edersheim, Life
and Times of Jesus, Appendix, xii, Baptism of
Proselytes). It matters nothing at all to the Baptist
contention what is truein thisregard. It would not
be strange if a bath was required for a Gentile who
became a Jew, when the Jews themselves required
such frequent ceremonial ablutions. But what
was the Jewish initiatory rite called proselyte bap-
tism? Lightfoot (Horae Hebraicae, Mt 3 7) gives
the law for the baptism of proselytes: “As soon as he
grows whole of the wound of circumcision, they
bring him to Baptism, and being placed in the water
they again instruct him in some weightier and in
some lighter commands of the Law. Which being
heard, he plunges himself and comes up, and,
behold, he is an Israelite in all things.” ‘To this
quotation Marcus Dods (Presbyterian) HDB
adds: “To use Pauline language, his old man is
dead and buried in the water, and he rises from this
cleansing grave a new man. The full significance
of the rite would have been lost had immersion
not been practised.” Lightfoot says further:
“Every person baptized must dip his whole body,
now stripped and made naked, at one dipping.
And wheresoever in the Law washing of the body or
garments is mentioned, it means nothing else than
the washing of the whole body.” Edersheim (op.


cit.) says: ‘Women were attended by those of their
own sex, the rabbis standing at the door outside.”
Jewish proselyte baptism, an initiatory ceremonial
rite, harmonizes exactly with the current meaning
of baptizd already seen. There was no peculiar
“sacred” sense that changed “dip” to “sprinkle.”

The Gr language has had a continuous history,
and baptizd is used today in Greece for baptism. As
is well known, not only in Greece, but
all over Russia, wherever the Gr church
prevails, immersion is the unbroken
and universal practice. The Greeks
may surely be credited with knowledge of the
meaning of their own language. ‘The substitution
of pouring or sprinkling for immersion, as the Chris-
tian ordinance of baptism, was late and gradual
and finally triumphed in the West because of the
decree of the Council of Trent. But the Baptist
position is that this substitution was unwarranted
and subverts the real significance of the ordinance.
The Gr church does practice trine immersion, one
immersion for each person of the Trinity, an old
practice (cf ter mergitamur, Tertullian ii.79 A), but
not the Scriptural usage. A word will be needed
later concerning the method by which pouring crept
in beside immersion in the 2d and later cents. Be-
fore we turn directly to the NT use of bapiizé it is
well to quote from the Greek Lexicon of the Roman
and Byzantine Periods by Professor E. A. Sophocles,
himself a native Greek. He says (p. 297): ‘“There
is no evidence that Luke and Paul and the other
writers of the NT put upon this verb meanings not
recognized by the Greeks.”’ We expect therefore to
find in the NT ‘‘dip,” as the meaning of this word
in the ceremonial sense of an initiatory Christian
rite. Thayer’s Lexicon likewise defines the word in
this ceremonial Christian use to mean ‘‘an immer-
sion in water, performed as a sign of the removal of
sin.

Baptists could very well afford to rest the matter
right here. There is no need to call for the testi-
mony of a single Baptist scholar on this subject.
The world of scholarship has rendered its decision
with impartiality and force on the side of the
Baptists in this matter. A few recent deliverances
will suffice. Dr. Alfred Plummer (Church of Eng-
land) in his new Commentary en Matthew (p. 28)
says that the office of John the Baptist was “‘to
bind them to a new life, symbolized by immersion
in water.” Swete (Church of England) in his
Commentary on Mark (p. 7) speaks of “the added
thought of immersion, which gives vividness to
the scene.” The early Gr ecclesiastical writers
show that immersion was employed (cf Barnabas,
XI, 11): “We go down into the water full of
sins and filth, and we come up bearing fruit in the
heart.” For numerous ecclesiastical examples see
Sophocles’ Lezicon.

But the NT itself makes the whole matter per-
fectly plain. The uniform meaning of “dip” for

baptiz6 and the use of the river Jordan
4. NT as the place for baptizing by John the
Usage Baptist makes inevitable the notion of
immersion unless there is some direct
contradictory testimony. Itisa matter that should
be lifted above verbal quibbling or any effort to
disprove the obvious facts. The simple narrative
in Mi 8 6 is that “they were baptized of him in
the river Jordan.” In Mk 1 9.10 the baptism is
sharpened a bit in the use of eis and ek. Jesus
“was baptized of John in [eis] the Jordan. And
straightway coming up out of [ek] the water, he
saw.’ Soin Acts 8 38 we read: “They both went
down into [eis] the water, both Philip and the
eunuch; and he baptized him. And when they
came up out of [ek] the water, the Spirit... .
caught away Philip.” If one could still be in doubt


3. Greek
Usage


387


about the matter, Paul sets it at rest by the sym-
bolism used in Rom 6 4, ‘‘We were buried therefore
with him through baptism into death: that like
as Christ was raised from the dead through the
glory of the Father, so we also might walk in new-
ness of life.’ The submergence and emergence
of immersion thus, according to Paul, symbolize
the death and burial to sin on the one hand and the
resurrection to the new life in Christ on the other.
Sanday and Headlam (Church of England) put it
thus in their Comm. on Romans (p. 153): “It
expresses symbolically a series of acts correspond-
ing to the redeeming acts of Christ. Immersion=
Death. Submersion=Burial (the ratification of
death). Emergence=Resurrection.” In Col 2 12
Paul again says: “having been buried with him in
baptism, wherein ye were also raised with him
through faith in the working of God, who raised
him from the dead.” The same image is here
presented. Lightfoot (Church of England) on
Colossians (p. 182) says: “Baptism is the grave
of the old man, ana the birth of the new. As he
sinks beneath the baptismal waters, the believer
buries there all his corrupt affections and past sins;
as he emerges thence, he rises regenerate, quickened
to new hopes and new life.”

There is nothing in the NT to offset this obvious
and inevitable interpretation. There are some
things which are brought up, but they vanish on
examination. The use of “with” after baptize
in the English tr is appealed to as disproving im-
mersion. It is enough to reply that the Committee
of the American Standard Revision, which had no
Baptist member at the final revision, substituted
“in” for “with.” Thus: “I indeed baptize you
in water unto repentance” (Mt 3 11; cf also Mk
18). Theuse of both “with” and “in” in Lk 3 16
is a needless stickling for the use of the Gr en with
the locative case. In Mk 1 8 en is absent in the
best MSS, and yet the American Revisers correctly
render ‘“‘in.” In Acts 1 5 they seek to draw the
distinction between the mere locative and en and
the locative. Asa matter of fact the locative case
alone is amply sufficient in Gr without en for the
notion of ‘in.’’ Thus in Jn 21 8 the tris: “But
the other disciples came in the little boat.”’ There
is no en in the Gr, but ‘‘the boat’’ is simply in the
locative case. If it be argued that we have the
instrumental case (cf the instrumental case of en as
in Rev 6 8, “kill with sword’’), the answer is that
the way to use water as an instrument in dipping
is to put the subject in the water, as the natural way
to use the boat (Jn 21 8) as an instrument is to get
into it. ‘The presence or absence of en with bap-
tizd is wholly immaterial. In either case “dip”
is the meaning of the vb. The objection that three
thousand people could not have been immersed in
Jerus on the day of Pentecost is superficial. Jerus
was abundantly supplied with pools. There were
120 disciples on hand, most of whom were probably
men (cf the 70 sent out before by Jesus). It is
not at all necessary to suppose that the 12 (Matthias
was now one of them) apostles did all the baptizing.
But even so, that would be only 250 apiece. I
myself have baptized 42 candidates in a half-hour
in a creek where there would be nodelay. It would
at most be only a matter of four or five hours for
each of the twelve. Among the Telugus this record
has been far exceeded. It is sometimes objected
that Paul could not have immersed the jailer in the
prison; but the answer is that Luke does not say
so. Indeed Luke implies just the opposite: ‘And
he took [took along in the Gr, para] them the same
hour of the night, and washed their stripes; and
was baptized.” He took Paul and Silas along with
him and found a place for the baptism, probably,
somewhere on the prison grounds. There is


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Baptism


absolutely nothing in the NT to controvert the
unvarying significance of baptizé.
Appeal bas been made to the Teaching of the
Twelve Apostles, which may belong to the first
half of the 2d cent. Here for the first
5. The time pouring is distinctly admitted as
“Didache” an ordinance in place of immersion.
Because of this remarkable passage it
is argued by some that, though immersion was the
normal and regular baptism, yet alongside of it,
pouring was allowed, and that in reality it was a
matter of indifference which was used even in the
Ist cent. But that is not the true interpretation
of the facts in the case. The passage deserves to
be quoted in full and is here given in the tr of Philip
Schaff (Presbyterian) in his edition of the Did (pp.
184 ff): “Now concerning baptism, baptize thus:
Having first taught all these things, baptize ye
into [es] the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, in living water. And if
thou hast not living water, baptize into other water;
and if thou canst not in cold, then in warm [water].
But if thou hast neither, pour water thrice upon
the head in [eis] the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”” There is thus no
doubt that early in the 2d cent. some Christians felt
that baptism wasso important that, when the real
baptism (immersion) could not be performed be-
cause of lack of water, pouring might be used in
its place. This is absolutely all that can be de-
duced from this passage. It,is to be noted that
for pouring another word (ekché6) is used, clearly
showing that baptizd does not mean “to pour.”
The very exception filed proves the Baptist con-
tention concerning baptizd. Now in the NT bap-
tizd is the word used for baptism. kched is never-
so used. Harnack in a letter to Rev. C. E. W.
Dobbs, Madison, Ind. (published in The Independ-
ent for February 9, 1885), under date of January
16, 1885 says: “(1) Baptizein undoubtedly sig-
nifies immersion (einiauchen). (2) No proof can
be found that it signifies anything else in the NT
and in the most ancient Christian literature. The
suggestion regarding ‘a sacred sense’ is out of the
question.” This is the whole point of the Baptists
admirably stated by Adolph Harnack. There is
no thought of denying that pouring early in the
2d cent. came to be used in place of immersion in
certain extreme cases. The meaning of baptizd is
not affected a particle by this fact. The question
remains as to why this use of pouring in extreme
cases grew up. The answer is that it was due to a
mistaken and exaggerated estimate put upon the
value of baptism as essential to salvation. Those
who died without baptism were felt by some to be
lost. Thus arose “clinic” baptisms.
(For the doctrine of baptismal regeneration see
Justin Martyr, First Apology, 61.) Out of this
perversion of the symbolism of bap-


6. Bap- tism grew both pouring as an ordi-
tismal Re- nance and infant baptism. If bap-
generation tism is necessary to salvation or the


means of regeneration, then the sick,
the dying, infants, must be baptized, or at any
rate something must be done for them if the real
baptism (immersion) cannot be performed because
of extreme illness or want of water. The Baptist
contention is to protest against the perversion of
the significance of baptism as the ruin of the sym-
bol. Baptism, as taught in the NT, is the picture
of death and burial to siu and resurrection to new
life, a picture of what has already taken place in the
heart, not the means by which spiritual change is
wrought. It is a privilege and duty, not a neces-
sity. It is a picture that is lost when something
else is substituted in its place. See BartismaL Ru-
GENERATION.


Baptism


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


388


Il, The Subjects of Baptism.—It is significant
that even the Teaching of the Twelve Apostles with
its exaggerated notion of the importance of baptism
does not allow baptism of infants. It says: ‘‘Hav-
ing first taught all these things.” Instruction
precedes baptism. That is a distinct denial of
infant baptism. The uniform practice in the NT is
that baptism follows confession. The people
“confessing their sins’’ were baptized by John (Mt
86). It is frankly admitted by Paedobaptist
scholars that the NT gives no warrant for infant
baptism. Thus Jacobus (Congregationalist) in
the Standard BD says: ‘‘We have no record in the
NT of the baptism of infants.” Scott (Presby-
terian) in the l-vol HDB says: “The NT con-
tains no explicit reference to the baptism of in-
fants or young children.’”? Plummer (Church of
England), HDB, says: ‘The recipients of Christian
baptism were required to repent and _ believe.”
Marcus Dods (Presbyterian), DCG, says: “A rite
wherein by immersion in water the participant
symbolizes and signalizes his transition from an
impure to a pure life, his death to a past he aban-
dons, and his new birth to a future he desires.”
It would be hard to state the Baptist interpretation
in better terms. Thus no room is foundin the NT
for infant baptism which would symbolize what the
infant did not experience or would be understood
to cause the regeneration in the child, a form of
sacramentalism repugnant to the NT teaching as
understood by Baptists. The dominant Baptist
note is the soul’s personal relation to God apart
from ordinance, church or priest. ‘The infant who
dies unbaptized is saved without baptism. The
baptized individual, child (for children are often
‘baptized by Baptists, children who show signs of
conversion) or man, is converted before his bap-
tism. The baptism is the symbol of the change
already wrought. So clear is this to the Baptist
that he bears continual protest against that per-
version of this beautiful ordinance by those who
treat it as a means of salvation or who make it
meaningless when performed before conversion.
Baptism is a preacher of the spiritual life. The
Baptist contention is for a regenerated church mem-
bership, placing the kingdom before the local church.
Membership in the kingdom precedes membership
in the church. The passages quoted from the
NT in support of the notion of infant baptism are
wholly irrelevant, as, for instance, in Acts 2 39
where there is no such idea as baptism of infants.
So in 1 Cor 7 14, where note husband and wife.
The point is that the marriage relation is sanctified
and the children are legitimate, though husband
or wife be heathen. The marriage relation is to
be maintained. Itis begging the question to assume
the presence of infants in the various household
baptisms in Acts. In the case of the family of
Cornelius they all spake with tongues and mag-
nified God (Acts 10 46). The jailer’s household
“rejoiced greatly’ (Acts 16 34). We do not even
know that Lydia was married. Her household may
have been merely ber employés in her business.
The NT presents no exceptions in this matter.

Ill. The Present Obligation.— The Baptists
make one more point concerning baptism. It is
that, since Jesus himself submitted to it and en-
joined it upon His disciples, the ordinance is of
perpetual obligation. The arguments for the late
ecclesiastical origin of Mt 28 19 are not convincing.
If it seem strange that Jesus should mention the
three persons of the Trinity in connection, with
the command to baptize, one should remember
that the Father and the Spirit were both manifested
to Him at His baptism. It was not a mere cere-
monial ablution like the Jewish rites. It was the
public and formal avowal of fealty to God, and the


names of the Trinity properly occur. The new heart
is wrought by the Holy Spirit. Reconciliation with
the Father is wrought on the basis of the work of
the Son, who has manifested the Father’s love in
His life and death for sin. The fact that in the
Acts in the examples of baptism only the name of
Jesus occurs does not show that this was the exact
formula used. It may bea mere historical summary
of the essential fact. The name of Jesus stood for
the other two persons of the Trinity. On the
other hand the command of Jesus may not have
been regarded as a formula for baptism; while in no
sense sacramental or redemptive, it is yet obliga-
tory and of perpetual significance. It is not to be
dropped as one of the Jewish excrescences on Chris-
tianity. The form itself is necessary to the signifi-
cance of the rite. Hence Baptists hold that immer-
sion alone is to be practised, since immersion alone
was commanded by Jesus and practised in the NT
times. Immersion alone sets forth the death to
sin, and burial in the grave the resurrection to new
life in Christ. Baptism as taught in the NT is “a
mould of doctrine,” a preacher of the heart of the
gospel. Baptists deny the right of disciples of Jesus
to break that mould. The point of a symbol is
the form in which it is cast. To change the form
radically is to destroy the symbolism. Baptists
insist on the maintenance of primitive NT baptism
because it alone is baptism, it alone proclaims the
death and resurrection of Jesus, the spiritual death
and resurrection of the believer, the ultimate resur-
rection of the believer from the grave. The disciple
is not above his Lord, and has no right to destroy this
rich and powerful picture for the sake of personal con-
venience, nor because he is willing to do something
else which Jesus did not enjoin and which has no as-
sociation with Him. The long years of perversion
do not justify this wrong to the memory of Jesus,
but all the more call upon modern disciples to follow
the example of Jesus who himself fulfilled righteous-
ness by going into the waters of the Jordan and re-
ceiving immersion at the hands of John the Baptist.


Literature.—The Greek Lexicons, like Suicer,- Lid-
dell and Scott, Sophocles, Thayer, Preuschen; the Bib.
Dictionaries; the Critical Commentaries on the NT; books
of antiquities like Smith’s Dictionary of Christian An-
tiquities; the new Sch-Herz; Bingham’s Antiquities of the
Christian Church; Schaff’s Creeds of Christendom; Neale’s
History of the Holy Eastern Church; Lives of Christ, like
Edersheim’s LTJM, or a survey of the customs of the
Jews like Schiirer’s HJ P; books on John the Baptist like
Reynolds’ John the Baptist, Feather’s Last of the Prophets,
Robertson's John the Loyal; special treatises on Baptism
like Wall's History of Infant Baptism, Stanley’s Christian
Institutions, Dargan’s Ecclesiology, Conant’s Baptizein,
Mozley’s Review of the Baptismal Controversy, Christian’s
Immersion, Broadus’ Immersion, Frost’s The Moral Dig-
nity of Baptism, Whitsitt's A Question in Baptist History,
Lofton’s The Baptist Reformation, Lambert’s The Sacra-
ments of the New Testament, Dale’s Classic Baptism and
Christian and Patristic Baptism, Kirtley’s Design of Bap-
tism, Forester’s The Baptist Position, Frost’s Baptist Why
and Why Not, Ford’s Studies in Baptism.

A. T. Ropertson


BAPTISM (Non-ImmersionistT Virw):


. Tue Scriptrorat Names ror tHe Rite
lI. Pre-Curistian Baprism
1. Baptism of Proselytes
2. Baptism of John
3. Baptism in the Pagan Mysteries
III. Curistian Baptism
1. The Administration of the Rite
2. The Mode of Using the Water
(1) Immersion
(2) Affusion
(3) eae
3. Who May Perform Baptism
4. Who May Receive Baptism
(1) Baptism of Infants
(2) Baptism for the Dead
IV. Tse Formvua or Baptism
V. Tse Docrrine or Baptism
The Doctrine of Infant Baptism
LiveraTuRE


Baptism (Bérticpa, béptisma, Bartirpds, baptis-
més, Bartltew, baptizein) has been from the earliest


389


times the initiatory rite signifying the recognition of
entrance into or of presence within the Christian
church. We find the earliest mention of the cere-
mony in the Epistle to the Gal (8 27), written about
20 years after the death of Jesus. There andin1 Cor
(1 138; 12 13) St. Paul takes for granted that every-
one who becomes a Christian (himself included) must
be baptized. The rite seems also to have existed
among the discipleship of Jesus before His death.
Weare told (Jn 4 1.2) that, although Jesus Himself
did not baptize, His disciples did, and that their bap-
tisms were more numerous than those of John.

i. Scriptural Names for the Rite.—The words
commonly used in the NT to denote the rite are
the verb baptizé, and the nouns baptisma and bap-
tismos; but none are employed in this sense alone.
The vb. is used to denote the ceremonial purifica-
tion of the Jews before eating, by pouring water
on-the hands (Lk 11 38; Mk 7 4); to signify
the sufferings of Christ (Mk 10 38.39; Lk 12 50);
and to indicate the sacrament of baptism. It is
the intensive form of bdéptein, ‘‘to dip,” and takes a
wider meaning. The passages Lk 11 38 and Mk
7 4 show conclusively that the word does not in-
variably signify to immerse the whole body. Some
have held that bapiismos invariably means cere-
monial purification, and that baptisma is reserved
for the Christian rite; but the distinction can hardly
be maintained. The former certainly means cere-
monial purification in Mk 7 4, and in 7 8 (AV);
but it probably means the rite of baptism in He
6 2. Exegetes find other.terms applied to Chris-
tian baptism. It is called ‘the Water’ in Acts 10
47: “Can any man forbid ‘the Water,’ that these
should not be baptized?”; the laver of the water
in Eph 5 26 RVm (where baptism is compared to
the bridal bath taken by the bride before she was
handed over to the bridegroom); and perhaps the
laver of regeneration in Tit 3 5 RVm (cf 1 Cor
6 11), and illumination in He 6 4; 10 32.

I. Pre-Christian Baptism.— Converts in the
early cents., whether Jews or Gentiles, could not

have found this initiatory rite, in
1. The which they expressed their new-born
Baptism of faith, utterly unfamiliar. Water is
Proselytes the element naturally used for cleans-
ing the body and its symbolical use
entered into almost every cult; and into none more
completely than the Jewish, whose ceremonial wash-
ings were proverbial. Besides those the Jew had
what would seem to the convert a counterpart
of the Christian rite in the baptism of proselytes
by which Gentiles entered the circle of Judaism.
For the Jews required three things of strangers
who declared themselves to be converts to the Law
of Moses: circumcision, baptism, and to offer
sacrifice if they were men: the two latter if they
were women. It is somewhat singular that no
baptism of proselytes is forthcoming until about
the beginning of the 3d cent.; and yet no com-
petent scholar doubts its existence. Schiirer is full
of contempt for those who insist on the argument
from silence. Its presence enables us to see both
how Jews accepted readily the baptism of John and
to understand the point of objectors who questioned
his right to insist that all Jews had to be purified
ere they could be ready for the Messianic kingdom,
although he was neither the Messiah nor a special
prophet (Jn 1 19-23). :

The baptism of John stood midway between. the
Jewish baptism of proselytes and Christian baptism.

It differed from the former because


2. The it was more than a symbol of cere-
Baptism monial purification; it was a baptism
of John of repentance, a confession of sin, and


of the need of moral cleansing, and
was a symbol of forgiveness and of moral purity.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Baptism


All men, Jews who were ceremonially pure and
Gentiles who were not, had to submit to this bap-
tism of repentance and pardon. It differed from
the latter because it only symbolized preparation
to receive the salvation, the kingdom of God which
John heralded, and did not imply entrance into
that kingdom itself. Those who had received it, as
well as those who had not, had to enter the Chris-
tian community by the door of Christian baptism
(Acts 19 3-6). The Jewish custom of baptizing,
whether displayed in their frequent ceremonial
washings, in the baptism of proselytes or in the
baptism of John, made Christian baptism a familiar
and even expected rite to Jewish converts in the 1st

cent.
Baptism, as an initiatory rite, was no less famil-
iar to gentile converts who had no acquaintance
with the Jewish religion. ‘The cere-


3. Baptism monial washings of the priests of pagan
in the religions have been often adduced as
Pagan something which might familiarize
Mysteries gentile converts with the rite which


introduced them into the Christian
community, but they were not initiations. A
more exact parallel is easily found. It is often for-
gotten that in the earlier cents. when Christianity
was slowly making its way in the pagan world
pagan piety had deserted the official religions and
taken refuge within the Mysteries, and that these
Mysteries represented the popular pagan religions
of the times. They were all private cults into
which men and women were received one by one,
and that by rites of initiation which each had to
pass through personally. When admitted the con-
verts became members of coteries, large or small,
of like-minded persons, who had become initiated
because their souls craved something which they
believed they would receive in and through the
rites of the cult. These initiations were secret,
jealously guarded from the knowledge of all out-
siders; still enough is known about them for us to
be sure that among them baptism took an impor-
tant place (Apuleius Metamorphoses xi). The rite
was therefore as familiar to pagan as to Jewish
converts, and it was no unexpected requirement
for the convert to know that baptism was the
doorway into the church of Christ. These heathen
baptisms, like the baptism of proselytes, were for
the most part simply ceremonial purifications; for
while it is true that both in the cult of the Mysteries
and beyond it a mode of purifying after great crimes
was baptizing in flowing water (Eurip. Jph. in
Tauri 167) or in the sea, yet it would appear that
only ceremonial purification was thought of. Nor
were ceremonial rites involving the use of water
confined to the paganism of the early cents. Sucha
ceremony denoted the reception of the newly born
child into pagan Scandinavian households. The
father decided whether the infant was to be reared
or exposed to perish. If he resolved to preserve
the babe, water was poured over it and a name
was given to it.
Il. Christian Baptism.—In the administration
of the rite of Christian baptism three things have
to be looked at: the act of baptizing;
1. The Ad- those who are entitled to perform it;
ministration and the recipients or those entitled
of the Rite to receive it. A complete act of bap-
tizing involves three things: what has
been called the materia sacramenti; the method of
its use; and the forma sacramenti, the baptismal
formula or form of words accompanying the use
of the water. The materia sacramenti is water and
for this reason baptism is called the Water Sacra-
ment. The oldest, ecclesiastical manual of discipline
which has descended to us, the Didache, says that
the water to be preferred is “living,” i.e. running


Baptism


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


390


water, water in a stream or river, or fresh flowing
from a fountain; “But if thou hast not living water,
baptize in other water; and if thou canst not in
cold, then in warm” (c. 7). In those directions the
prescriptions of the ceremonial for the Jewish bap-
tism of proselytes are closely followed. The
earlier canons of the church permit any kind of
water, fresh or salt, provided only it be true and
natural water (aqua vera et naturalis).

(1) Immersion—The use of the water is called


ablutio. According to the rules of by far the largest

portion of the Christian church the
2. The water may be used in any one of three
Mode of ways: immersion, where the recipient
Using the enters bodily into the water, and
Water where, during the action, the head


is plunged either once or three times
beneath the surface; affusion, where water was
poured upon the head of the recipient who stood
either in water or on dry ground; and aspersion
where water was sprinkled on the head or on the face.
It has frequently been argued that the word bap-
tizein invariably means ‘‘to dip’”’ or immerse, and
that therefore Christian baptism must have been
performed originally by immersion only, and that
the two other forms of affusion and aspersion or
sprinkling are invalid—that there can be no real
baptism unless the method of immersion be used.
But the word which invariably means “to dip’”’
is not baptizein but bapiein. Baptizein has a
wider signification; and its use to denote the
Jewish ceremonial of pouring water on the hands
(Lk 11 38; Mk 7 4), as has already been said,
proves conclusively that it is impossible to conclude
from the word itself that immersion is the only valid
method of performing therite. It may be admitted
at once that immersion, where the whole body
including the head is plunged into a pool of pure
water, gives a more vivid picture of the cleansing
of the soul from sin; and that complete surround-
ing with water suits better the metaphors of burial
in Rom 6 4and Col 2 12, and of being surrounded
by cloud in 1 Cor 10 2.

(2) Affusion.—On the other hand affusion is cer-
tainly a more vivid picture of the bestowal of the
Holy Spirit which is equally symbolized in baptism.
No definite information is given of the mode in
which baptism was administered in apostolic times.
Such phrases as “‘coming up out of the water,”
‘“went down into the water” (Mk 1 10; Acts 8 38)
are as applicable to affusion as to immersion. The
earliest account of the mode of baptizing occurs in
the Didache (c. 7), where it is said: ‘“Now concerning
Baptism, thus baptize ye: having first uttered all
these things, baptize in the name of the Father, and
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, in living water.
But if thou hast not living water, baptize in other
water; and if thou canst not in cold, then in warm.
But if thou hast neither, pour water upon the head
thrice in the name of Father, and Son, and Holy
Ghost.” This seems to say that to baptize by im-
mersion was the practice recommended for general
use, but that the mode of affusion was also valid aud
enjoined on occasions. What is here prescribed in
the Didache seems to have been the practice usually
followed in the early cents. of the Christian church.
Immersion was in common use: but affusion was
also widely practised: and both were esteemed usual
and valid forms of baptizing. When immersion
was used then the head of the recipient was plunged
thrice beneath the surface at the mention of each
name of the Trinity; when the mode was by af-
fusion the same reference to the Trinity was kept
by pouring water thrice upon the head. The two
usages which were recognized and prescribed by the
beginning of the 2d cent. may have been in use
throughout the apostolic period although definite


information is lacking. When we rememher the
various pools in Jerus, and their use for ceremonial
washings it is not impossible to suppose that the
3,000 who were baptized on the day of Pentecost
may have been immersed, but, when the furnishing
and conditions of Palestinian houses and of oriental
jails are taken into account, it is difficult to con-
ceive that at the baptisms of Cornelius and of the
jailer, the ceremony was performed otherwise
than by affusion. It is a somewhat curious fact
that if the evidence from written texts, whether
ancient canons or writings of the earlier Fathers,
be studied by themselves, the natural conclusion
would seem to be that immersion was the almost
universal form of administering the rite; but if the
witness of the earliest pictorial representation be
collected, then we must infer that affusion was the
usual method and that immersion was exceptional;
for the pictorial representations, almost without
exception, display baptism performed by affusion,
j.e. the recipient is seen standing in water while
the minister pours water on the head. It may
therefore be inferred that evidence for the almost
universal practice of immersion, drawn from the
fact that baptisms took place in river pools (it is
more than probable that when we find the names of
local saints given to pools in rivers, those places
were their favorite places of administering the rite),
or from the large size of almost all early mediaeval
baptisteries, is by no means so conclusive as many
have supposed, such places being equally applicable
to affusion. It is also interesting to remember
that when most of the Anabaptists of the 16th
cent. insisted on adult baptism (re-baptism was their
name for it) immersion was not the method prac-
tised by them. During the great baptismal scene
in the market-place of the city of Miinster the
ordinance was performed by the ministers pouring
three cans of water on the heads of the recipients.
They baptized by affusion and not by immersion.
This was also the practice among the Mennonites or
earliest Baptists. This double mode of administering
the sacrament—by immersion or by affusion—pre-
vailed in the churches of the first twelve cents., and
it was not until the 13th that the practice of aspersio
or sprinkling was almost universally employed.

(3) Aspersion.—The third method of administer-
ing baptism, viz. by aspersio or sprinkling, has a
different history from the other two. It was in the
early cents. exclusively reserved for sick and infirm
persons too weak to be submitted to immersion or
affusion. There is evidence to show that those
who received the rite in this form were somewhat
despised; for the nickuames clinici and grabatorii
were, unworthily Cyprian declares, bestowed on
them by neighbors. The question was even raised
in the middle of the 3d cent., whether baptism
by aspersio was a valid baptism and Cyprian was
asked for his opinion on the matter. His answer
is contained in his Ixxvth epistle (Ixix Hartel’s
ed). There he contends that the ordinance ad-
ministered this way is perfectly valid, and quotes
in support of his opinion various OT texts which
assert the purifying effects of water sprinkled (Ezk
36 25.26; Nu 8 5-7; 19 89.12.13). It is not
the amount of the water or the method of its applica-
tion which can cleanse from sin: ‘(Whence it appears
that the sprinkling also of water prevails equally
with the washing of salvation .. . . and that where
the faith of the giver and receiver is sound, all
things hold and may be consummated and per-
fected by the majesty of God and by the truth of
faith.’ His opinion prevailed. Aspersio was rec-
ognized as_a valid, though exceptional, form of
baptism. But it was long of commending itself
to ministers and people, and did not attain to
almost general use until the 13th cent.


391


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Baptism


The idea that baptism is valid when practised
in the one method only of immersion can scarcely be
looked on as anything else than a ritualistic idea.

The Scripture nowhere describes or limits the
qualifications of those who are entitled to perform

the rite of baptism. We find apostles,


38. Who wandering preachers (Acts 8 38), a
May Per- private member of a small and per-
form Bap- secuted community (Acts 9 18) per-
tism forming the rite. So in the sub-


apostolic church we find the same liber-
ty of practice. Clement of Alexandria tells us
that the services of Christian women were necessary
for the work of Christian missions, for they alone
could have access to the gynaeceum and carry the
message of the gospel there (Strom., III, 6). Such
women missionaries did not hesitate to baptize.
Whatever credit may be given to the Acts of Paul
and Theckla,it is at least historical that Theckla
did exist, that she was converted by Paul, that
she worked as a missionary and that she baptized
her converts. Speaking generally it may be said
that as a sacrament has always been looked upon as
the recognition of presence within the Christian
church, it is an act of the church and not of the
individual believer; and therefore no one is en-
titled to perform the act who is not in some way a
representative of the Christian community—the
representative character ought to be maintained
somehow. As soon as the community had taken
regular and organized form the act of baptism was
suitably performed by those who, as office-bearers,
naturally represented the community. It was recog-
nized that the pastor or bishop (for these terms
were synonymous until the 4th cent. at least)
ought to preside at the administration of the sacra-
ment; but in the early church the power of dele-
gation was recognized and practised, and elders
and deacons presided at this and even at the
Eucharist. What has been called lay-baptism is
not forbidden in the NT and has the sanction
of the early church. When superstitious views of
baptism entered largely into the church and it was
held that no unbaptized child could be saved, the
practice arose of encouraging the baptism of all
weakling infants by nurses. The Reformed church
protested against this and was at pains to repudiate
the superstitious thought of any mechanical efficacy
in the rite by deprecating its exercise by any save
approved and ordained ministers of the church.
Still, while condemning lay-baptism as irregular,
it may be questioned whether they would assert
any administration of the rite to be invalid, pro-
vided only it had been performed with devout faith
on the part of giver and receiver. :
The recipients of Christian baptism are all
those who make a presumably sincere profession
of repentance of sin and of faith in


4. Who the Lord Jesus Christ, the Saviour;
May Re- together with the children of such
ceive Bap- believing parents. The requirements
tism are set forth in the accounts given us of


the performance of the rite in the NT,
in which we see how the apostles obeyed the com-
mands of their Master. Jesus had ordered them to
“make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them
into the name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Spirit” (Mt 28 19)—to “preach the gospel
to the whole creation. He that believeth and is
baptized shall be saved; but he that disbelieveth
shall be condemned” (Mk 16 15.16). The apostle
Peter said to the inquirers on the Day of Pentecost,
“Repent ye, and be baptized every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ unto the remission of your
sins; and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Spirit’’; and 3,000 were added to the church through
the initiatory rite of baptism. The Samaritans,


who believed on Jesus through the preaching of
Philip, were admitted to the Christian community
through baptism; though in this case one of the
baptized, Simon Magus, after his reception, was
found to be still in “the bond of iniquity” (Acts
8 12.23). The jailer and all his, Lydia and her
household, at Philippi, were baptized by St. Paul
on his and her profession of faith on Jesus, the
Saviour. There is no evidence in any of the ac-
counts we have of apostolic baptisms that any
prolpaes course of instruction was thought to

e necessary; nothing of classes for catechumens
such as we find in the early church by the close of
the 2d cent., or in modern missionary enter-
prise. We find no mention of baptismal creeds,
declarative or interrogative, in the NT accounts
of baptisms. The profession of faith in the Lord
Jesus, the Saviour, made by the head of the family
appears, so far as the NT records afford us informa-
tion, to have been sufficient to secure the baptism
of the “household”—a word which in these days
included both servants and children.

(1) Baptism of infants—This brings us to the
much-debated question whether infants are to be
recognized as lawful recipients of Christian bap-
tism. The NT Scriptures do not in so many words
either forbid or command the baptism of. children.
The question is in this respect on al} fours with the
change of the holy day from the seventh to the
first day of the week. No positive command au-
thorizes the universal usage with regard to the Chris-
tian Sabbath day; that the change is authorized
must be settled by a weighing of evidence. So
it is with the case of infant baptism. It is neither
commanded nor forbidden in so many words;
and the question cannot be decided on such a basis.
The strongest argument against the baptizing of
infants lies in the thought that the conditions of the
rite are repentance and faith; that these must be
exercised by individuals, each one for himself and
for herself; and that infants are incapable either
of repentance or of faith of this kind. The argu-
ment seems weak in its second statement; it is more
dogmatic than historical; and will be referred
to later when the doctrine lying at the basis of the
rite is examined. On the other hand a great deal
of evidence supports the view that the baptism of
infants, if not. commanded, was at least permitted
and practised within the apostolic church. St.
Paul connects baptism with circumcision and implies
that under the gospel the former takes the place
of the latter (Col 2 12); and as children were
circumcised on the 8th day after birth, the inference
follows naturally that children were also to be
baptized. In the OT, promises to parents included
their children. In his sermon on the Day of Pente-
cost St. Peter declares to his hearers that the
gospel promise is “to you and to your children”
and connects this with the invitation to baptism
(Acts 2 38.39). Itis also noteworthy that children
shared in the Jewish baptism of proselytes. Then
we find in the NT narratives of baptisms that
“households” were baptized—of Lydia (Acts 16
15), of the jailer at Philippi (Acts 16 32), of
Stephanas (1 Cor 1 16). It is never said that the
children of the household were exempted from the
sacred rite. One has only to remember the posi-
tion of the head of the household in that ancient
world, to recollect how the household was thought
to be embodied in its head, to see how the repent-
ance and faith of the head of the household was
looked upon as including those of all the members,
not meray children but servants, to feel that had
the children been excluded from sharing iu the rite
the exclusion would have seemed such an unusual
thing that it would have at least been mentioned
and explained. Our Lord expressly made very


Baptism


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


392


young children the types of those who entered into
His kingdom (Mk 10 14-16); and St. Paul so
unites parents with children in the faith of Christ
that he does not hesitate to call the children of
the believing husband or wife “‘holy,” and to imply
that the children had passed from a state of “un-
cleanness” to a state of “holiness” through the
faith of a parent. All these things seem to point
to the fact that the rite which was the door of en-
tance into the visible community of the followers
of Jesus was shared in by the children of believing
parents. Besides evidence for the baptism of chil-
dren goes back to the earliest times of the sub-
apostolic church. Irenaeus was the disciple of
Polycarp, who had been the disciple of St. John,
and it is difficult to draw any other conclusion from
his statements than that he believed that the bap-
tism of infants had been an established practice
in the church long before his days (Adv. Haer., II,
22; cf 39). The witness of Tertullian is specially
interesting; for he himself plainly thinks that
adult baptism is to be preferred to the baptism of
infants. He makes it plain that the custom of
baptizing infants existed in his days, and we may
be sure from the character and the learning of the
man, that had he been able to affirm that infant-
baptism had been a recent innovation and had not
been a long-established usage descending from apos-
tolic times, he would certainly have had no hesitation
in using what would have seemed to him a very
convincing way of dealing with his opponents.
Tertullian’s testimony comes from the end of the
2d cent. or the beginning of the 8d. Origen,
the most learned Christian writer during the first
three cents. and who comes a little later than
Tertullian, in his 14th Homily on St. Luke bears
witness to the fact that the baptism of infants was
usual. He argues that original sin belongs to
children because the church baptizes them. At
the same time it is plain from a variety of evidence
too long to cite that the baptism of infants was not
a universal practice in the early church. The
church of the early cents. was a mission church.
It drew large numbers of its members from heathen-
dom. In every mission church the baptism of
adults will naturally take the foremost place and
be most in evidence. But is is clear that many
Christians were of the opinion of Tertullian and
believed that baptism ought not to be administered
to children but should be confined to adults. Nor
was this a theory only; it was a continuous practice
handed’ down from one generation to another in
some Christian families. In the 4th cent. few Chris-
tian leaders took a more important place than Basil
the Great and his brother Gregory of Nyssa. They
belonged to a family who had been Christians for
some generations; yet neither of the brothers
was baptized until after his personal conversion,
which does not appear to have come until they had
attained the years of manhood. The whole evi-
dence seems to show that in the early church, down
to the end of the 4th cent. at least, infant and
adult baptism were open questions and that the
two practices existed side by side with each other
without disturbing the unity of the churches. In
the later Pelagian controversy it became evident
that the theory and practice of infant baptism had
been able to assert itself and that the ordinance
was always administered to children of members of
the charch.

(2) Baptism for the dead—St. Paul refers to a
custom of ‘‘baptizing for the dead” (1 Cor 15 29).
What this ‘vicarious baptism” or ‘baptism for
the dead” was it is impossible to say, even whether
it was practised within the primitive Christian
church. The passage is a very difficult one and
has called forth a very large number of explanations,


which are mere guesses. Paul neither commends
it nor disapproves of it; he simply mentions its
existence and uses the fact as an argument for the
resurrection. See Baptism For THE Dap.

IV. The Formula of Baptism.— The Formula
of Christian baptism, in the mode which prevailed,
is givenin Mt 28 19: “I baptize thee in the name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”
But it is curious that the words are not given in any
description of Christian baptism until the time of
Justin Martyr: and there they are not repeated
exactly but in a slightly extended and explanatory
form. Hesays that Christians “receive the washing
with water in the name of God, the Ruler and Father
of the universe, and of our Saviour, Jesus Christ,
and of the Holy Spirit” (1 Apol., 61). In every
account of the performance of the rite in apostolic
times a much shorter formula isin use. The 3,000
believers were baptized on the Day of Pentecost
‘in the name of Jesus” (Acts 2 38); and the same
formula was used at the baptism of Cornelius
and those that were with him (Acts 10 48). In-
deed it would appear to have been the usual one,
from St. Paul’s question to the Corinthians: “Were
ye baptized into the name of Paul?” (1 Cor 1 13).
The Samaritans were baptized ‘“‘into the name of
the Lord Jesus” (Acts 8 16); and the same formula
(a common one in acts of devotion) was used in the
case of the disciples at Ephesus. 1n some instances
it is recorded that before baptism the converts
were asked to make some confession of their faith,
which took the form of declaring that Jesus was
the Lord or that Jesus Christ was the Son of God.
It may be inferred from a phrase in 1 Pet 3 21
that a formal interrogation was made, and that the
answer was an acknowledgment that Jesus Christ
was Lord. Scholars have exercised a great deal
of ingenuity in trying to explain how, with what
appear to be the very words of Jesus given in the
Gospel of Mt, another and much shorter formula
seems to have been used throughout the apostolic
church. Some have imagined that the shorter
formula was that used in baptizing disciples during
the lifetime of Our Lord (Jn 4 1.2), and that the
apostles having become accustomed to it con-
tinued to use it during their lives. Others declare
that the phrases ‘in the name of Jesus Christ’? or
“of the Lord Jesus’ are not meant to give the
formula of baptism, but simply to denote that the
rite was Christian. Others think that the full
formula was always used and that the narratives
in the Book of Acts and in the Pauline Epistles
are merely brief summaries of what took place—
an idea rather difficult to believe in the absence
of any single reference to the longer formula.
Others, again, insist that baptism in the name of
one of the persons of the Trinity implies baptism in
the name of the Three. While others declare that
St. Matthew does not give the very words of Jesus
but puts in His mouth what was the common for-
mula used at the date and in the district. where the
First Gospel was written. Whatever explanation
be given it is plain that the longer formula became
universal or almost universal in the sub-apostolic
church. Justin Martyr has been already quoted.
Tertullian, nearly half a century later, declares ex-
pressly that the ‘law of baptism has been imposed
and the formula prescribed” in Mt 28 19 (De Bapt.,
13); and he adds in his Adversus Prazean (c. 26):
“And it is not once only, but thrice, that we are
immersed into the Three Persons, at each several
mention of Their names.” The evidence to show
that the formula given by St. Matthew became the
established usage is overwhelming; but it is more
than likely that the use of the shorter formula
did not altogether die out, or, if it did, that it was
revived. The historian Socrates informs us that


393


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Baptism


some of the more extreme Arians “corrupted”
baptism by using the name of Christ only in the
formula; while injunctions to use the longer formula
and punishments, including deposition, threatened
to those who presumed to employ the shorter which
meet us in collections of ecclesiastical canons (A pos.
Canons, 43, 50), prove that the practice of using the
shorter formula existed in the 5th and 6th cents.,
at all events in the East.

V. The Doctrine of Baptism.—The sacraments,
and baptism as one of them, are always described to
be (1) signs representing as in a picture or figure
spiritual benefits (1 Pet 3 21), and also (2) as
seals or personal tokens and attestations confirma-
tory of solemn promises of spiritual benefits.
Hence the sacrament is said to have two parts:
“the one an outward and sensible sign, used accord-
ing to Christ’s appointment; the other an inward
and spiritual grace thereby signified.” It is held,
moreover, that when the rite of baptism has been
duly and devoutly performed with faith on the part
of both giver and receiver, the spiritual benefits
do follow the performance of the rite. The ques-
tion therefore arises: What are the spiritual and
evangelical blessings portrayed and solemnly
promised in baptism? In the New Testament we
find that baptism is intimately connected with the
following: with remission of sins, as in Acts 22
16 (‘“‘Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins’), and in He 10 22; with regeneration or the
new birth, as in Tit 3 6 and Jn 3 5 (this idea also
entered into the baptism of proselytes and even
into the thought of baptism in the Mysteries; neo-
phytes were taught that in the water they died
to their old life and began a new one [Apuleius
Meta. xi]); with ingrafting into Christ, with union
with Him, as in Gal 3 27—and union in definite
ways, in His death, His burial and His resurrection,
asin Rom 6 3-6; with entering into a new relation-
ship with God, that of sonship, as in Gal 3 26.27;
with the bestowal of the Holy Spirit, as in 1 Cor 12
13; with belonging to the church, as in Acts 2 41;
with the gift of salvation, as in Mk (?) 16 16;
Jn 35. From these and similar passages theo-
logians conclude that baptism is a sign and seal of
our ingrafting into Christ and of our union with
Him, of remission of sins, regeneration, adoption and
life eternal; that the water in baptism represents
and signifies both the blood of Christ, which takes
away all our sins, and also the sanctifying influence
of the Holy Spirit against the dominion of sin and
the corruption of our human nature; and that bap-
tizing with water signifies the cleansing from sin by
the blood and for the merit of Christ, together with
the mortification of sin and rising from sin to newness
of life by virtue of the death and _resurrection of
Christ. Or to put it more simply: Baptism teaches
that all who are out of Christ are unclean by reason
of sin and need to be cleansed. It signifies that just
as washing with water cleanses the body so Ged in
Christ cleanses the soul from sin by the Holy Spirit
and that we are to see in this cleansing not merely
pardon but also an actual freeing of the soul from
the pollution and power of sin and therefore the
beginnings of a new life. The sacrament also
shows us that the cleansing is reached only through
connection with the death of Christ, and further
that through the new life begun in us we become
in a special way united to Christ and enter into a
new and filial relationship with God. Probably
ail Christians, reformed and unreformed, will
agree in the above statement of the doctrinal mean-
ing in the rite of baptism; and also that when the
sacrament is rightly used the inward and spiritual
grace promised is present along with the outward
and visible signs. But Romanists and Protestants
differ about what is meant by the right use of the


sacrament. They separate on the question of its
efficacy. The former understand by the right use
simply the correct performance of the rite and the
placing no obstacle in the way of the flow of efficacy.
The latter insist that there ean be no right use of the
sacrament unless the recipient exercises faith, that
without faith the sacrament is not efficacious and
the inward and spiritual blessings do not accompany
the external and visible signs. Whatever minor dif-
ferences divide Protestant evangelical churches on
this sacrament they are all agreed upon this, that
where there is no faith there can be no regeneration.
Here emerges doctrinally the difference between
those who give and who refuse to give the sacrament

to infants.
The latter taking their stand on the fundamental
doctrine of all evangelical Christians that faith
is necessary to make any sacrament


The Doc- efficacious, and assuming that the
trine of In- effect. of an ordinance is always tied
fant Bap- _—to the precise time of its administra-
tism tion, insist that only adults can per-


form such a conscious, intelligent, and
individually independent act of faith, as they be-
lieve all Protestants insist on scriptural grounds to
be necessary in the right use of asacrament. ‘There-
fore they refuse to baptize infants and young
children.

The great majority of evangelical Protestants
practise infant baptism and do not think, due ex-
planatlons being given, that it in any way conflicts
with the idea that faith is necessary to the efficacy
of the sacrament. The Baptist position appears
to them to conflict with much of the teaching of the
NT. It implies that all who are brought up in the
faith of Christ and within the Christian family still
lack, when they come to years of discretion, that
great change of heart and life which is symbolized
in baptism, and can only receive it by a conscious,
intelligent and thoroughly independent act of faith.
This seems in accordance neither with Scripture
nor with human nature. We are told that a child
may be full of the Holy Ghost from his mother’s
womb (Lk 1 15); that little children are in the
kingdom of Christ (Mt 19 14); that children of
believing parents are holy (1 Cor 7 14). Is there
nothing in the fact that in the NT as in the OT the
promise is ‘to you and your children’? Besides,
the argument of those who oppose the baptism
of infants, if logically carried out, leads to conse-
quences which few of them would accept. Faith
is as essential to salvation, on all evangelical theol-
ogy, as it is for the right use of the sacrament; and
every one of the arguments brought against the
baptism of infants is equally applicable to the denial
of their salvation. Nor can the Baptist position
be said to be true to the facts of ordinary human
nature. Faith,in its evangelical sense of fiducia
or trust, is not such an abrupt thing as they make
it. Their demand for such a conscious, intelligent,
strictly individualist act of faith sets aside some
of the deepest facts of human nature. No one,
young or old, is entirely self-dependent; nor are our
thoughts and trust always or even frequently en-
tirely independent and free from the unconscious
influences of others. We are interwoven together
in society; and what is true generally reveals itself
still more strongly in the intimate relations of the
family. Is it possible in all cases to trace the crea-
tive effects of the subtle imperceptible influences
which surround children, or to say when the slowly
dawning intelligence is first able to apprehend
enough to trust in half-conscious ways? It is but
a shallow view of human nature which sets all such
considerations on the one side and insists on regard-
ing nothing but isolated acts of knowledge or of
faith. With all those thoughts in their minds, the


Baptism


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


394


great majority of evangelical churches admit and
enjoin the baptism of infants. They believe that
the children of believing parents are “‘born within the
eburch and have interest in the covenant of grace
and a right to its seal.” They explain that the ef-
ficacy of a sacrament is not rigidly tied to the exact
time of administration, and ean be appropriated
whenever faith is kindled and is able to rest on the
external sign, and that the spiritual blessings signified
in the rite can be appropriated again and again with
each fresh kindling of faith. They declare that no
one can tell how soon the dawning intelligence may
awaken to the act of appropriation. Therefore these
churches instruct their ministers in dispensing the
sacrament to lay vows on parents that they will train
up the infants baptized ‘‘in the knowledge and fear
of the Lord,” and will teach them the great blessings
promised to them in and through the sacrament
and teach them to appropriate these blessings for
themselves. They further enjoin their ministers to
admonish all who may witness a baptismal service
to look back on their own baptism in order that
their faith may be stirred afresh to appropriate for
themselves the blessings which accompany the
proper use of the rite.


Lirerature.—The literature on the subject of baptism
is very extensive. It may be sufficient to select the follow-
ing: J.S. Candlish, The Sacraments, 10th thousand, 1900;
J.C. W. Augusti, Denkwiirdigheiten aus d. christ. Archd-
ologie, V, 1820; Héfling, Das Sakrament der Taufe, 1846-48;
J.B. Moziey, Review of the Baptismal Controversy, 2d ed,
1895; W. Goode, The Doctrine of the Church of England as
to the Effects of Baptism in the Case of Infants, 1849; W.
Wall, History of Infant Baptism, 1705; E. B. Underhill,
Confessions of Faith . . . . of Baptist Churches of England
(Hanserd Knollys Soc., IX), 1854.

T. M. Linpsay


BAPTISM (Luraeran Doctrine):
I.


Tue TERM
1. The Derivation
2. The Meaning
3. The Application”
4. Equivalent Terms
Il. Tue Onpinance
1. The Teaching of Scripture
(1) An Authoritative Command
(2) A Clear Declaration of the Object in View
(3) A Definite Promise
(4) A Plain Indication of the Scope
2. The Biblical History of the Ordinance
3. Types of Baptism
III. Duirricuities
1. Are Mt 28 18-20 and Mk 16 15.16 Genuine?
2. Was the Trinitarian Formula Usedin NT Times ?
3. Was Christian Baptism Really a New Ordinance ?
4, Should Infants Be Baptized ?
5. Why Did Paul not Baptize?
6. What Is the Baptism for the Dead?
I, The Term—The word “baptism” is the
Anglicized form of the Gr béptisma, or baptismés.
These Gr words are verbal nouns de-
1. The rived from baptizé, which, again, is
Derivation the intensive form of the vb. bépta.
“Baptismos denotes the action of
baptizein (the baptizing), baptisma the result of the
action (the baptism)” (Cremer). This distinction
differs from, but is not necessarily contrary to, that
of Plummer, who infers from Mk 7 4 and He 9 10
that baptismos usually means lustrations or cere-
monial washings, and from Rom 6 4; Eph 4 5;
1 Pet 3 21 that baptisma denotes baptism proper
(HDB). . ,
The Gr words from which our Eng. “baptism”
has been formed are used by Gr writers, in classical
antiquity, in the LXX and in the
2. The NT, with a great latitude of meaning.
Meaning It is not possible to exhaust their
meaning by any single Eng. term.
The action which the Gr words express may be
performed by plunging, drenching, staining, dip-
ping, sprinkling. The nouns baptisma and bap-
tismos do not occur in the LXX; the verb baptizo
occurs only in four places, and in two of them in a
fig. sense (2 K 6 14; Jth 12 7; Isa 21 4; Ecclus


81 (84) 25). Wherever these words occur in the
NT, the context or, in the ease of quotations, a
comparison with the OT will in many instances
suggest which of the various renderings noted above
should be adopted (cf Mk 7 4; He 9 10 with
Nu 19 18.19; 87; Ex 24 46; Acts 2 16.17.41
with Joel 2 28). But there are passages in which
the particular form of the act of baptizing remains
in doubt. ‘‘The assertion that the command to
baptize is a command to immerse is utterly un-
authorized” (Hodge).

In the majority of Bib. instances the vbs. and
nouns denoting baptism are used in a lit. sense, and

signify the application of water to an
3. The Ap- object or a person for a certain pur-
plication pose. The ceremonial washings of

the Jews, the baptism of proselytes to
the Jewish faith, common in the days of Christ,
the baptism of John and of the disciples of Christ
prior to the Day of Pentecost, and the Christian
sacrament of baptism, are literal baptisms (bap-
tismus fluminis, “baptism of the river,’ i.e. water).
But Scripture speaks also of fig. baptisms, with-
out water (Mt 20 22; Mk 10 88; Lk 12 50=the
sufferings which overwhelmed Christ and His
followers, especially the martyrs—baptismus san-
guinis, “baptism of blood”; Mt 3 11; Mk 1 8;
Lk 3 16; Acts 1 5; 11 16=the outpouring of the
miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost, which was a
characteristic phenomenon of primitive Christianity
—baptismus flaminis, “baptism of wind, breeze,”
ic. ‘‘spirit’’). Some even take Mt 21 25; Mk
11,30; Acts 18 25; 1 Cor 10 2 in a syneedochical
sense, for doctrine of faith, baptism being a promi-
nent feature of that doctrine (baptismus luminis,
“baptism of light’’).

Scripture occasionally alludes to Christian bap-
tism without employing the regular term. Thus
in Tit 3 5, and Eph 6 26 we have
the term loutrén, “washing,” instead
of baptisma. From this term the Lat
church derived its lavacrum (Eng.
“laver’) as a designation of baptism. In He 10
22 we have the verbs rhantizd and lod, “sprinkle”
and “wash”; in Eph 6 26 the verb katharizo,
“cleanse”; in 1 Cor 611 the verb apoloio,
“wash,” are evidently synonyms of baptizd, and
ie act has been so denominated from its prime
effect.

I, The Ordinance.— Christian baptism, as
now practised, is a sacred ordinance of evangelical

grace, solemnly appointed by the risen
1. The Christ, prior to His entering into the
Teaching of state of glory by His ascension, and


4. Equiva-
lent Terms


Scripture designed to be a means, until His
Ae _ second coming, for admitting men to
discipleship with Him. Mt 28 18-20 and its


parallel Mk 16 15.16 are the principal texts of
Seripture on which the church in all ages has based
every essential point of her teaching regarding this
ordinance. The host of other baptismal texts of
Scripture expand and illustrate the contents of
these two texts. We have in these texts:

(1) An authoritative (Mt 28 19) command, is-
sued in plain terms: ‘Make disciples . . . . bap-
tizing.” This command declares (a) speciem
actus, i.e. it indicates with sufficient clearness, by
the use of the term “baptize,” the external element
to be employed, viz. water, and the form of the
action to be performed by means of water, viz.
any dipping, or pouring, or sprinkling, since the
word “baptize” signifies any of these modes. On
the strength of this command Luther held: ‘“Bap-
tism is not simple water only, but it is the water
comprehended in God’s command”; and the
Westminster Shorter Catechism (Ques. 94) calls
baptism “a washing with water.” Water is dis-


395


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Baptism


tinctly mentioned as the baptismal element in
Acts 8 38; 10 47; Eph 5 26; He 10 22. ‘There
is no mention of any other element” (Plummer).
The phraseology of Eph 6 26, “the washing of


water with the word,” shows that not the external’


element alone, nor the physical action of applying
the water, constitutes baptism; but “the word”
must be added to the element and the action, in
order that there may be a baptism. (Detrahe
verbum, et quid est aqua nisi aqua? Accedit verbum
ad elementum, et fit sacramentum, “Remove the
word and what is water but water? The word is
added to the element and it becomes a sacrament’
Augustine). ‘Without the Word of God the water
is simple water, and no baptism” (Luther). The
command prescribes (b) exercitium actus, i.e. it en-
joins a continued exercise of this function of the
messengers of Christ for all time.

(2) A clear declaration of the object in view—
The participle “baptizing” qualifies the impera-
tive “make disciples,” and expresses that, what the
imperative states as the end, is to be attained by
what the participle names as a means to that end.
The participle “baptizing,” again, is qualified by
“teaching” (ver 20). The second participle is not
connected by ‘‘and” with the first, hence, is subor-
dinate to the first (Meyer). Discipleship is to be ob-
tained by baptizing-teaching. There is no rigid law
regarding the order and sequence of these actions
laid down in these words; they merely state that
Christ desires His disciples to be both baptized and
fully informed as to His teaching.

(3) A definite promise: salvation (Mk 16 16),
i.e. complete and final deliverance from all evil,
the securing of ‘the end of faith’ (1 Pet 1 9).
This is a comprehensive statement, as in 1 Pet 3
21, of the blessing of baptism. Scripture also states,
in detail, particular baptismal blessings: (a)
Regeneration, Tit 3 5; Jn 3 3.5. Despite Calvin
and others, the overwhelming consensus of inter-
preters still agrees with the ancient church and
with Luther in explaining both these texts of bap-


tism. (b) Remission of sins, or justification (Acts
238; 2216; 1Cor611; Eph 6 26; He 10
22). This blessing, no doubt, is also intended in


1 Pet 3 21, where eperétéma has been rendered
“answer” by the AV while the RV renders ‘‘in-
terrogation.” The word denotes a legal claim,
which a person has a right to set up (see Cremer
s.v. and Rom 81). (c) The establishment of a
spiritual union with Christ, and_a new relation-
ship with God (Gal 3 26.27; Rom 6 3.4; Col
212). In this connection the prepositions with
which baptizein in the NT connects may be noted.
Baptizein eis, “to baptize into,” always denotes
the relation into which the party baptized is placed.
The only exception is Mk 1 9. Baptizein en, or
epi, “to baptize in’ (Acts 10 48; 2 38), denotes the
basis on which the new relation into which the bap-
tized enters, is made to rest (Cremer). (d) The
sanctifying gifts of the Holy Spirit (1 Cor 12 13;
Tit 35). All these blessings Scripture declares
to be effects of baptism (Wirkung der Taufe,
Riehm, Handwérterb.). ‘Baptism is called ‘wash-
ing of regeneration,’ not merely because it sym-
bolizes it, or pledges a man to it, but also, and
chiefly, because it effects it” (Holtzmann, Huther,
Pfleiderer, Weiss). ‘Regeneration, or being be-
gotten of God, does not mean merely a new capacity
for change in the direction of goodness, but an
actual change. The legal washings were actual
external purifications. Baptism is actual internal
purification’ (Plummer). To these modern au-
thorities Luther can be added. He says: “Bap-
tism worketh forgiveness of sin, deliversfrom death
and the devil, and gives eternal salvation to all
who believe, as the words and promises of God de-


clare” (Smaller Catech.). In Tit 3 5 AV the force
of the preposition did, ‘“‘by,”’ deserves to be noted:
it declares baptism to be the regenerating, renew-
ing, justifying, glorying medium to the heirs of
eternal life. The baptismal promise is supported,
not only in a general way, by the veracity and sin-
cerity of the Speaker, who is the Divine Truth
incarnate, but also in a special way, by the Author’s
appeal to His sovereign majesty (Mt 28 18), and
by the significant assurance of His personal (‘‘I”
=eg6, is emphatic: Meyer) presence with the dis-
ciples in their afore-mentioned activity (Mt 28 20;
cf Mk 16 20).

(4) A plain indication of the scope: ‘‘all nations,”
“the whole creation” (pdsé té ktiset to be understood
asin Col 1 23=“‘all men’). Baptism is of univer-
sal application; it is a cosmopolitan ordinance be-
fore which differences such as of nationality, race,
age, sex, social or civil status, are leveled (cf Col 3
11 with 1 Cor 12 13). Accordingly, Christ orders
baptism to be practised “alway” (lit. “all days’),
“even unto the end of the world,” i.e. unto the con-
summation of the present age, until the Second
Advent of the Lord. For, throughout this period
Christ promises His coéperative presence with the
efforts of His disciples to make disciples.

(5) A prescribed formula for administering the
ordinance: “into the name of the Father and of
the Son and of the Holy Spirit.” The belief in the
Trinity is fundamental to Christianity; accordingly,
the sacred rite by which men are initiated into the
Christian religion justly emphasizes this belief.
The three Persons are mentioned as distinct from
one another, but the baptismal command is issued
upon their joint and coequal authority (‘in the
name,” not “names’’), thus indicating the Unity
in Trinity. This ancient baptismal formula rep-
resents “the Father as the Originator, the Son as
the Mediator, the Holy Ghost as the Realization,
and the vital and vitalizing blessing of the promise
and fulfilment,” which is extended to men in this
ordinance (Cremer).

After the Lord had entered into His glory, we
find that in the era of the apostles and in the primi-

tive Christian church baptism 1s the


2. The established and universally acknowl-
Biblical edged rite by which persons are ad-
History mitted to communion with the church
of the (Acts 2 38.41; 8 121.36.38; 9 18; 10
Ordinance 471f; 16 15.33; 18 8; 22 16; Rom 6


8; 1 Cor 12 13; Gal 3 27). Even in
cases where an outpouring of the special gifts of the
Holy Spirit had already taken place, baptism is still
administered (Acts 10 44 ff; 11 15f). ‘Thus, bap-
tism occupied among the Gentile converts to Chris-
tianity, and later among all Christians, the same
position as circumcision in the Old Covenant (Col
2111; Gal 6 2). It is, essentially, part of the
foundation on which the unity of the Christian
society rested from the beginning (Eph 4 5; 1 Cor
12 13; Gal 3 27f)” (Riehm, Handwérterb.).

In 1 Cor 10 1.2 the apostle states that the
Israelites ‘‘were all baptized unto Moses in the
cloud andinthesea.” Farrar attempts

3. Types the following solution of this type:
of Baptism ‘The passing under the cloud (Ex 14

19) and through the sea, constituting
as it did their deliverance from bondage into free-
dom, their death to Egypt, and thcir birth to a new
covenant, was a general type or dim shadow of
Christian baptism (compare our collect, ‘figuring
thereby Thy holy baptism’). But the typology
is quite incidental; it is the moral lesson which is
paramount. ‘Unto Moses’; rather, into. By this
‘baptism’ they accepted Moses as their Heaven-
sent guide and teacher” (Pulpit Comm.). In 1 Pet
3 21 the apostle calls baptism the antitupon of the


Baptism


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


396


Deluge. Delitzsch (on He 9 24) suggests that
tupos and antitupon in Gr represent the original
figure and a copy made therefrom, or a prophetic
foretype and its later accomplishment. The
point of comparison is the saving power of water
in either instance. Water saved Noah and his
family by floating the ark which sheltered them,
and by removing from them the disobedient gen-
eration which had sorely tried their faith, as it had
tried God’s patience. In like manner the water of
baptism bears up the ark of the Christian church
and saves its believing members, by separating them
from their filthy and doomed fellow-men.
Il. Difficulties.—Feine (PER?, XIX, 396 f) and
Kattenbusch (Sch-Herz, 1, 485f) argue that the
Trinitarian formula in Mit 28 19 is
1. Are Mt spurious, and that the text in Mk
28 vs 18- _— belongs to a section which was added
20 and Mk to this Gospel at a later time. The
16 vs 15.16 former claim had first been advanced
Genuine? by Conybeare, but later research by
Riggenbach has established the gen-
uineness of the Trinitarian formula in Mt. Feine
still maintains his doubts, however, on subjective
grounds. As to the concluding section in Mk
(16 9-20), Jerome is the first to call attention to
its omission in most Gr MSS to which he had access.
But Jerome himself acknowledged ver 14 as gen-
uine. Gregory of Nyssa reports that, while this
section is missing in some MSS, in the more ac-
curate ones many MSS contain it. No doctrinal
scruple can arise on account of this section; for it
contains nothing that is contrary to the doctrine of
Scripture in other places on the same subject; and
it has always been treated as genuine by the Chris-
tian church. The question is a purely historical
one (see Bengel, Apparatus Criticus, 170 f).
No record of such use can be discovered in the
Acts or the epistles of the apostles. The baptisms
recorded in the NT after the Day of
2. Was the Pentecost are administered ‘in the
Trinitarian name of Jesus Christ’? (Acts 2 38),
Formula “into the name of the Lord Jesus”
Used in (8 16), “into Christ’? (Rom 6 3; Gal
NT Times? 3 27). This difficulty was considered
by the Fathers; Ambrose says: Quod
verbo tacitum fuerat, expressum est fide, “What had
not been expressed in word, was expressed by faith.”
On close inspection the difficulty is found to rest on
the assumption that the above are records of bap-
tismal formulas used on those occasions. The fact is
that these records contain no baptismal formula at
all, but “merely state that such persons were bap-
tized as acknowledged Jesus to be the Lord and the
Christ” (Plummer). The same can be said of any
person baptized in our day with the Trinitarian
formula. That this formula was the established
usage in the Christian church is proven by records
of baptisms in Justin (Apol., I, 61) and Tertullian
(Adv. Praz., XXV1).
Baptism was practised among the Jews prior
to the solemn inauguration of this ordinance by the


risen Christ. The ceremonial wash-
3. Was ings of the Jews are classed with the
Christian transient forms of the Levitical wor-
Baptism ship (He 9 9.10), which had not been
Really a intended to endure except “until a
New Or- time of reformation.” They were
dinance? removed when Christian baptism was


erected into an abiding ordinance of
the church of God (Col 2 11-13). It is erroneous
to say that those ancient washings developed into
Christian baptism. A shadow does not develop
into a substance. Nor do we find the origin of
Christian baptism in the baptism of proselytes,
which seems to have been a Jewish church custom
in the days of Christ. Though the rite of bap-


tism was not unknown to the Jews, still the bap-
tism of John startled them (Jn 1 25). Such pas-
sages as Isa 4 4 (1 16); Ezk 36 25; 37 23; Zec
13 1 had, no doubt, led them to expect a rite of
purification in the days of the Messiah, which would
supersede their Levitical purification. The dele-
gation which they sent to John was to determine
the Messianic character of John and his preaching
and baptizing. Johannic baptism has been a
fruitful theme of debate. The question does not
affect the personal faith of any Christian at the
present time; for there is no person living who
has received Johannic baptism (Chemnitz). The
entire subject and certain features of it, as the
incident recorded Acts 19 1~7, will continue to be
debated. It is best to fix in our minds a few essen-
tial facts, which will enable us to put the Scriptural
estimate on the baptism of John. John had
received a Divine commission to preach and bap-
tize (Lk 3 2; Jn 1 33; Mt 21 25). He baptized
with water (Jn 3 23). His baptism was honored
by a wonderful manifestation of the holy Trinity
(Mt 3 16.17), and by the Redeemer, in His capacity
as the Representative of sinful mankind, the sin-
bearing Lamb of God, accepting baptism at John’s
hand (Mt 3 13 ff; Jn 1 29ff). It was of the
necessity of receiving John’s baptism that Christ
spoke to Nicodemus (Jn 3 3 ff). The Pharisees
invited their eternal ruin by refusing John’s baptism
(Lk 7 30); for John’s baptism was to shield them
from the wrath to come (Mt 3 7); it was for the
remission of sin (Mk 1 4); it was a washing of
regeneration (Jn 8 5). When Jesus began His
public ministry, He took up the preaching and bap-
tism of John, and His disciples practised it with
such success that John rejoiced (Jn 3 22.25-36;
4 1.2). All this evidence fairly compels the belief
that there was no essential difference between the
baptism of John and the baptism instituted by
Christ; that what the risen Christ did in Mt 28
18-20 was merely to elevate a rite that had pre-
viously been adopted by an order ‘from above” to
a permanent institution of His church, and to pro-
claim its universal application. The contrast
which John himself declares between his baptism
and that of Christ is not a contrast between two
baptisms with water. The baptism of Christ,
which John foretells, is a baptism with the Holy
Ghost and with fire, the Pentecostal baptism. But
for the general purpose of begetting men unto a
new life, sanctifying and saving them, the Spirit
was also bestowed through John’s baptism (Jn 3 5).
The command in Mt 28 19; Mk 16 16 is all-
embracing; so is the statement concerning the
necessity of baptism in Jn 3 5. After


4. Should reading these statements, one feels
Infants Be inclined, not to ask, Should infants be
Baptized? baptized? but Why should they not


be baptized? The onus probandi rests
on those who reject infant baptism. The desire to
have their infants baptized must have been mani-
fested on the day when the first three thousand
were baptized at Jerus, assuming that they were all
adults. The old covenant had provided for their
children; was the new to be inferior to the old in
this respect? (See Plummer in HDB.) The bap-
tism of entire households is presumptive evidence
that children and infants were baptized in apostolic
times (Acts 16 15.33; 18 8; 1 Cor 1 16). The
arguments against infant baptism imply defective
views on the subject of original sin and the efficacy
of baptism. Infant faith—for, faith is as necessary
to theinfant as to the adult—may baffle our attempts
at explanation and definition; but God who extends
His promises also to children (Acts 2 39), who es-
tablished His covenant even with beasts (Gen 9
16.17); Christ who blessed also little children (Mk


397


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Baptism


10 13 ff), and spoke of them as believers (Mt 18 6),
certainly does not consider the regeneration of a
child or infant a greater task than that of an adult
(ef Mt 18 3.4).
Paul did’ baptize Crispus, Gains and Stephanas
with his household. These baptisms he performed
at Corinth alone; we have no record
5. Why Did of his baptisms at other places. What
Paul not Paul declares in 1 Cor 1 14-17 is,
Baptize? that by his baptizing he could not have
become the cause of the divisions in
the Corinthian congregation, because he had bap-
tized only a few persons at Corinth, and, moreover,
he had not baptized in his own name, hence had
attached no one to his person. The statement,
“Christ sent me not to baptize,” is made after the
Sem idiom, and means: ‘not so much to baptize
as to preach” (Farrar in Pulpit Comm.). If they
are taken in any other sense, it is impossible to pro-
tect Paul against the charge that he did something
that he was not authorized to do, when he bap-
tized Crispus, etc.
1 Cor 15 29 is sometimes taken to mean that
the early Christians practised baptism by proxy.
After they had been converted to
6. WhatIs Christianity, it is held, they desired
the Baptism to convey the benefits of their faith
for the to their departed friends who had died
Dead? in paganism, by having themselves
baptized ‘‘in their behalf,” perhaps
on their graves. We have no evidence from _his-


wailed in the early


tor ctiee—prevall
Ciera eh ee Nor does the text suggest it.
e Gr preposition hupér expresses also the motive
that may prompt a person to a certain action. In
this case the motive was suggested by the dead,
viz. by the dead in so far as they shall rise. The
context shows this to be the meaning: If a person
has sought baptism in view of the fact that the
dead are to rise to be judged, his baptism is value-
less, if the dead do not rise. Sce BaPTisM FOR THE
Drab. W. iH. T. Dav


BAPTISMAL REGENERATION, bap-tiz’mal ré-


jen-ér-a’shun: As indicated in the general arts. on
Baptism and SacraMENT, the doctrine ordinarily
held by Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Baptists,
Methodists, and also by Low-Church Episcopalians,
differs from that of the Roman and Greek churches,
and of High-Church Anglicans, in its rejection of
the idea that baptism is the instrumental cause of
regeneration, and that the grace of regeneration
is effectually conveyed through the administration
of that rite wherever duly performed. The teach-
ing of Scripture on this subject is held to be that
salvation is immediately dependent on faith, which,
as a fruit of the operation of the Spirit of God in
the soul, already, in its reception of Christ, implies
the regenerating action of that Spirit, and is itself
one evidence of it. To faith in Christ is attached
the promise of forgiveness, and of all other bless-
ings. Baptism is administered to those who al-
ready possess (at least profess) this faith, and sym-
bolizes the dying to sin and rising to righteous-
ness implicit in the act of faith (Rom 6). It is
the symbol of a cleansing from sin and renewal by
God’s Spirit, but not the agency effecting that
renewal, even instrumentally. Baptism is not,
indeed, to be regarded as a bare symbol. It may
be expected that its believing reception will be
accompanied by fresh measures of grace, strength-
ening and fitting for the new life. This, however,
as the life is already there, has nothing to do with
the idea of baptism as an opus operatum, working
a spiritual change in virtue of its mere administra-
tion. In Scripture the agency with which regen-
eration is specially connected is the Divine ‘word


(cf 1 Pet 1 23). Without living faith, in those
capable of its exercise, the outward rite can avail
nothing. The supposed “regeneration” may be
received—in multitudes of instances is received—
without the least apparent change in heart or life.

The above, naturally, applies to adults; the case
of children, born and growing up within the Chris-
tian community, is on a different footing. Those
who recognize the right of such to baptism hold
that in the normal Christian development children
of believing parents should be the subjects of Di-
vine grace from the commencement (Eph 6 4);
they therefore properly receive the initiatory rite
of the Christian church. The faith of the parent,
in presenting his child for baptism, lays hold on
God’s promise to be a God to him and to his chil-
dren; and he is entitled to hope for that which
baptism pledges to him. But this, again, has no
relation to the idea of regeneration through baptism.

JamMEs ORR


Aneuican (Hico-Cuurca) DoctRinr


Regeneration, the initial gift of life in Christ, is,
in the church’s normal system, associated with the
sacrament of baptism. The basis for this teach-
ing and practice of the church is found primarily
in Our Lord’s discourse to Nicodemus (Jn 3 1-8)
wherein the new birth is associated not only with
the quickening Spirit but with the element of water.
The Saviour’s words, lit. tr’, are as follows: ‘Ex-
cept one be born [out] of water and Spirit (ex hi-
datos kai pneimatos genndomai), he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God.” (That it is the imper-
sonal aspect of the Divine Spirit, ie. as equiv-
alent to “spiritual life’? which is here presented,
is indicated by the absence of the art.in the Gr
of ver 5.) Entrance into the kingdom of God
implies entrance into the church as the outward
and visible embodiment of that kingdom. Our
Lord, in the passage above cited, does not limit
the possibility or the need of ‘‘new birth” to those
who have arrived at adult age, or “years of dis-
cretion,’ but uses the general pronoun 7ls, fis,
“anyone.” The Anglican church does not, how-
ever, teach that baptism is unconditionally neces-
sary, but only that it is “generally” necessary to
salvation (cf the language of the Church Cate-
chism with the qualification mentioned in the
Prayer-Book ‘‘Office for the Baptism of Those of
Riper Years,” ‘‘Whereby ye may perceive the great
necessity of this Sacrament, where it may be had’’).
It is not taught that the grace of God is absolutely
or unconditionally bound to the external means,
but only that these sacramental_agencies are the
ordinary and normal channels of Divine grace.

The typical form of baptism is that appropriate
to the initiation of adults into the Christian body.
Justin Martyr in his First Apology (ch Ixi) no
doubt testifies to what was the general view of
Christians in the 2d cent. (cir 150 AD): “As many
as are persuaded and believe that the things taught
and said by us are true, and, moreover, take upon
them to live accordingly, are taught to pray and
ask of God with fasting for forgiveness of their
former sins; ... . and then they are brought to
a place of water, and there regenerated after the
same manner with ourselves; for they are washed
in the name of God, the Father and Lord of the
universe, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of
the Holy Spirit.” For the due administration of
this sacrament, personal faith and repentance on
the part of the candidate are prerequisite conditions.
However, “the baptism of young children” (ie.
of infants) “is in any wise to be retained in the
Church, as most agreeable to the institution of
Christ” (XXXIX Articles, Art. XXVII, sub fin.).
In the service “For the Baptism of Infants.” repent-


Baptism


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


398


ance and faith are promised for the children by
their ‘‘sureties” (ordinarily known as “‘sponsors” or
“eodparents’’), “which promise, when they come to
age [the children] themsclves are bound to perform.”
The person, whether adult or infant, receives in
his baptism a real forgiveness; a washing away of
all sins, whether original or actual. He also re-
ceives, at least in germ, the beginnings of new life
in Christ; which life, however, must be developed
and brought to perfection through his personal
coéperation with the grace of God. But regen-
eration, as such, Js not conversion; it is not even
faith or love, strictly speaking. These latter,
while they are conditions, or effects, or evidences of
regeneration, are not regeneration itself, which is
purely the work of God, operating by His creative
power, through the Holy Ghost. The moral test
of the existence of spiritual life is the presence in
heart and conduct of the love of God and of obe-
dience to His commandments (see 1 Jn passim).
It may be added that the bestowment of the gifts
of spiritual strength—of the manifold graces and
of the fulness of the Holy Spirit—is primarily
associated with the laying on of hands (confirma-
tion) rather than with baptism proper; the rite of
confirmation was, however, originally connected
with the baptismal service, as an adjunct to it.
The newly-made Christian is not to rest content
with the initial gift of life; he is bound to strive
forward unto perfection. Confirmation is, in a
sense, the completion of baptism. ‘The doctrine of
laying on of hands” is accordingly connected with
“the doctrine of baptisms,” and both are reckoned
by the author of the Epistle to the He as among
“the first principles of Christ”? (He 6 1.2 AV).


Lirerature.—For the Anglican doctrine on the sub-
ject of regeneration in baptism the following author-
ities may be consulted: Hooker, Ecclesiastical Polity,
V, lix, lx; Waterland, The Doct. Use of Christian Sacra-
ments; Regeneration; Wall, Infant Baptism; R.1. Wilber-
force, The Doctrine of Holy Baptism; Darwell Stone,
Holy Baptism, in ‘'The Oxford Library of Practical
Theology''; A. J. Mason, The Faith of the Gospel. For
patristic teaching on this subject, cf Tertullian, De
Baptismo.

Witi1am SAMUBL BisHoP


LUTHERAN DocTRINE


Regeneration is here taken in its strict meaning
to denote that internal spiritual change, not of the
substance, but of the qualities, of the


1. Defini- intellect and will of natural man, by
tion of which blindness, darkness in regard to
Terms spiritual matters, esp. the gospel, is


removed from the former, and spiritual
bondage, impotency, death from the latter (2 Cor
3 5; Acts 26 18; Phil 2 13), and the heart of the
sinner is made to savingly know and appropriate
the Lord Jesus Christ and the merits of His atoning
sacrifice, as its only hope for a God-pleasing life
here in time and a life in glory hereafter. Re-
generation in the strict sense signifies the first spir-
itual movements and impulses in man, the beginning
of his thinking Divine thoughts, cherishing holy
desires and willing God-like volitions. But it does
not signify the radical extinction of sin in man; for
evil concupiscence remains also in the regenerate
as a hostile element to the new life (Rom 7 23-25;
Gal 6 16.17). Peccatum tollitur in baptismo, non
ut non sit, sed ut non obsit—Augustine. “Sin is re-
moved in baptism, not that it may not be, but that
it may not hurt.” Reduced to its lowest terms,
regeneration in the strict sense may be defined as
the kindling of saving faith in the heart of the
sinner; for according to 1 Jn 6 1, “whosoever be-
lieveth that Jesus is the Christ is begotten of God.”
Such terms as new creation (2 Cor 5 17; Gal 6
15 m), spiritual quickening, or vivification (Eph 2 5;
Rom 6 11), spiritual resurrection (Eph 2 6; Col


3 1), are true synonyms of regeneration in the strict
sense. In the point of time justification coincides
with regeneration in the strict sense; for it is by
faith, too, that the sinner is justified. But these
two spiritual events must not be confounded; for
justification affects, not the internal conditions of
the sinner’s heart, but his legal standing with God
the righteous Judge. Regeneration is called baptis-
mal regeneration in so far as it occurs in the event
and as an effect of the application of the Christian
baptism. See Baprism (1), I, 6. :
The two leading texts of Scripture which declare
in plain terms that baptism is a means for effecting
: regeneration in the strict sense are
2. Scrip- Jn 35 and Tit 3 5. But this doc-
tural Basis trine is implied in Acts 2 38; Eph 5
of This 26; Gal 3 27; 1 Pet 3 21. In Jn 3
Doctrine 7 it is immaterial whether dndthen
gennéthénat is rendered “‘to be born
from above” or “to be born a second time.” For
the second birth is never of the flesh (Jn 1 13;
8 4.5); hence, is always of divine origin, ‘from
above.” It is ascribed to the agency of the entire
Trinity: the Father (Jas 118; 1 Pet 1 3); the
Son (Jn 1 12); and the Spirit (Tit 3 5). But
by appropriation it is generally attributed to the
Spirit alone, whose particular function is that of
Quickener (see Cremer, Bibl.-theol. Wérterb., 9th ed,
s.v. “pneuma,” 894f). Baptism is an instrument
by which the Holy Spirit effects regeneration.
‘“‘Water and the Spirit” (Jn 3 5) is a paraphrastic
description of baptism: ‘“‘water,” inasmuch as the
man is baptized therewith (1 Jn 5 7.8; Eph & 26)
for the forgiveness of sin (Acts 2 33; 22 16; 1 Cor
6 11), and “Spirit,” inasmuch as the Holy Ghost is
given to the person baptized in order to his spiritual
renewal and sanctification; “both together—the
former as causa medians, the latter as causa effi-
ciens—constitute the objective and causative ele-
ment out of which (cf 1 13) the birth from above
is produced [ek]” (Meyer). In Tit 35 “the ex-
pression (6 loutro% palingenestas, lit. ‘bath of re-
generation,’ has been very arbitrarily interpreted
by some expositors, some taking loutron as a fig.
name for the regeneration itself, or for the praedica-
tio evangelit, ‘preaching of the gospel’ or for the
Holy Spirit, or for the abundant imparting of
the Spirit. From Eph 6 26 it is clear that it can
mean nothing else than baptism; ef too, He 10 22;
1 Cor 6 11; Acts 22 16.” Of this laver of re-
generation Paul says that through it (did), i.e. by
its instrumentality, men are saved. Meyer is right
when, correcting a former view of his, he states:
“According to the coutext, Paul calls baptism the
bath of the new birth, not meaning that it pledges
us to the new birth (‘to complete the process of
moral purification, of expiation and sanctification,’
Matthies), nor that it is a visible image of the new
birth (De Wette), for neither in the one sense nor in
the other could it be regarded as a means of saving.
Paul uses that name for it as the bath by means of
which God actually brings about the new birth.”
The application of baptism and the operation of the
Spirit must be viewed as one undivided action.
Thus the offense of Spurgeon, Weiss and others at
“regeneration by water-baptism” can be removed.
Baptism does not produce salutary effects ex
opere operato, i.e. by the mere external performance
of the baptismal action. No instru-
3. Faith in ment with which Divine grace works
Baptism does. Even the preaching of the gos-
pel is void of saving results if not
“mixed with faith’ (He 4 2AV). Luther correctly
describes the working of baptism thus: ‘‘How can
water do such great things? It is not the water
indeed that does them, but the Word of God which
is in and with the water (God’s giving hand), and


399


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Baptism


faith which trusts such word of God in the water
(man’s receiving hand).” But this faith, which is
required for a salutary use of the gospel and bap-
tism, is wrought by these as instruments which the
Holy Spirit employs to produce faith; not by
imparting to them a magical power but by uniting
His Divine power with them (Rom 10 17; 2 Cor
4 6; Eph 5 26).
The comprehensive statements in Jn 3 6; Eph
23 (“by nature”) show that infants are in need
of being regenerated, and Mt 18 3.6,
4. Infants that they are capable of faith. It is
and Adults not more difficult for the Holy Spirit
to work faith in infants by baptism,
than in adults by the preaching of the gospel.
And infant faith, though it may baffle our attempts
at exact definition, is nevertheless honored in Serip-
ture with the word which denotes genuine faith,
pistetein, i.e. trustiully relying on Christ (Mt 18
6; ef 2 Tim 3 15; 1 5). In the case of adults
who have received faith through hearing and read-
ing the gospel (Jas 118; 1 Pet 1 23; 1 Cor 4
15), baptism is still “the washing of regeneration,”
because it is a seal to them of the righteousness
which these people have previously obtained by
believing the gospel (Rom 4 11-13; Gal 3 7);
and it reminds them of, and enables them to dis-
charge, their daily duty of putting away the old
and putting on the new man (Eph 4 22.24), just as
the Word is still the regenerating word of truth (Jas
1 18) though it be preached to persons who are
regenerated a long time ago. Accordingly, Luther
rightly extends the regenerating and renewing in-
fluences of baptism throughout the life of a Christian,
when he says ‘‘Baptizing with water signifies that
the old Adam in us should, by daily contrition and
repentance, be drowned and die, with all sins and
evil lusts; and, again, a new man should come forth
and arise, who shall live before God in righteousness
and purity forever’’ (Smaller Catech.). :
W. 4H. T. Dav
BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD (farrifopar trip
wav vexpov, baplizomai hupér ton nekrén): Some of
the Corinthian Christians denied the
resurrection of the dead, and Paul ad-
vances three arguments to convince
them that the dead will be raised: (1)
“Tf there is no resurrection of the dead, neither hath
Christ been raised,’”’ but Christ is raised (1 Cor 15
13.20). (2) If the dead are not raised, why are
men being baptized for the dead (ib 15 29)? (8)
Why should the apostle himself wage his spiritual
warfare (ib 15 30)? The first argument rests upon
the central fact of Christianity, and the other two
are appeals to the consistency of the Corinthians,
and of Paul himself. Whatever “baptism for the
dead” meant, it was, in Paul’s opinion, as real, valid
and legitimate a premise from which to conclude
that the dead would rise as his own sufferings. The
natural meaning of the words is obvious. Men in
Corinth, and possibly elsewhere, were being con-
tinually baptized on behalf of others who were at
the time dead, with a view to benefiting them in the
resurrection, but if there be no resurrection, what
shall they thus accomplish, and why do they do
it? ‘The only legitimate reference is to a practice
.... of survivors allowing themselves to be bap-
tized on behalf of (believing?) friends who had died
without baptism” (Alford in loc.).
Tertullian believed that Paul referred to a custom
of vicarious baptism (Res., 48c; Adv. Marc., 5.10).
There is evidence that the early church
2. Patristic knew such a practice. Epiphanius men-
Evidence tions a tradition that the custom
obtained among the Cerinthians (Haer.
28 6). And Chrysostom states that it prevaile
among the Marcionites.


1. Paul’s
Argument


But commentators have offered between thirty
and forty other interpretations, more or less
strained, of the passage. (For a sum-
3. Modern mary of different views see T. C.
Views Edwards and Stanley, Comms., ad
loc.) Two of the most reasonable
views from recent commentators are: ‘What
shall they do who receive baptism on account of
the dead? i.e. with a view to the resurrection of the
dead?’ and therefore to sharing in it themselves
(Canon Evans, Speaker’s Comm., ad loc.); ‘that
the death of Christians led to the conversion of
survivors, who in the first instance ‘for the sake of
the dead’ (their beloved dead), and in the hope
of reunion, turn to Christ”? (Findlay, Hapositor’s
Greek Test., ad loc.). Both ideas may be true, but
they are simply imported into this passage, and the
latter also is quite irrelevant to the argument and
makes Paul identify conversion with baptism.
But why is all this ingenuity expended to evade
the natural meaning? Because (1) such a custom
would be a superstition involving the
4. The principle of opus operatum; and (2)
Difficulty Paul could not share or even tolerate
a contemporary idea which is now
regarded as superstition. To reply (with Alford)
that Paul does not approve the custom will not
serve the purpose, for he would scarcely base so
great an argument, even as an argumentum ad
hominem, on a practice which he regarded as wholly
false and superstitious. The retort of those who
denied the resurrection would be too obvious. But
why should it be necessary to suppose that Paul
rose above all the limitations of his age? The idea
that symbolic acts had a vicarious significance
had sunk deeply into the Jewish mind, and it
would not be surprising if it took more than twenty
years for the leaven of the gospel to work all the
Jew out of Paul. At least it serves the apostle’s
eredit ill to make his argument meaningless or
absurd in order to save him from sharing at all in
the inadequate conceptions of his age. He made for
himself no claim of infallibility. T. Rees


BAPTISM OF FIRE (év rvetpart dylw kal amvol,
en pneiimati hagié kat purt): This expression is used
in Mt 3 11. The copulative «a! requires that the
baptism ‘in the Holy Ghost and in fire,” should
be regarded as one and the same thing. It does
violence to the construction, therefore, to make this
statement refer to the fire of judgment. The diffi-
culty has always been in associating fire with the
person of the Holy Ghost. But in the connection
of fire with the work or influence of the Holy Ghost
the difficulty disappears. The thought of John is
that the Saviour would give them the Divine Sanc-
tifier as purifying water to wash away their sins and
as a refining fire to consume their dross; to kindle
in their hearts the holy flame of Divine love and
zeal; to illuminate their souls with heavenly wis-
dom. The statement, therefore, in this verse indi-
cates the manner in which Christ will admit them
to discipleship and prepare them for His service.
See Baptism; Fire. Jacop W. Karr


BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT: The ex-
pression “baptism of the Holy Spirit” is based on a
number of predictions found in our


1. The four Gospels and in connection with
Biblical these the record of their fulfilment
Material in the Book of Acts. The passages


in the Gospels are as follows: Mt 3
11: “Zindeed baptize you in water unto repentance:
but he that cometh after me is mightier than I,
whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall bap-
tize you in the Holy Spirit and in fire.” The last
clause is atrés das Barrice év mvedpare ayly


Baptism
Bar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


400


cal rupt=autés humads baptiset en pneimati ha-
gio kat puri. In Mk 1 8 and Lk 3 16 we have
the declaration in a slightly modified form; and in
Jn 1 33 John the Baptist declares that the de-
scent of the Spirit upon Jesus at the baptism of the
latter marked out Jesus as “he that baptizeth in
the Holy Spirit.” Again in Jn 7 37.38 we read:
“Now on the last day, the great day of the feast,
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink. He that believeth
on me, as the scripture hath said, from within him
shall flow rivers of living water.” Then the evangel-
ist adds in ver 39: ‘‘But this spake he of the Spirit,
which they that believed on him were to receive:
for the Spirit was not yet given; because Jesus
was not yet glorified.” These are the specific
references in the four Gospels to the baptisms of the
Holy Spirit. In Acts we find direct reference by
Luke to the promised baptism in the Holy Spirit.
In 1 5 Jesus, just before the ascension, contrasts
John’s baptism in water with the baptism in the
Holy Spirit which the disciples are to receive “‘not
many days hence,” and in ver 8 power in witness-
ing for Jesus is predicted as the result of the baptism
in the Holy Spirit. On the evening of the resur-
rection day Jesus appeared to the disciples and
“he breathed on them, and saith unto them,
Receive ye the Holy Spirit” (Jn 20 22). This
was probably not a wholly symbolic act but an
actual communication to the disciples, in some
measure, of the gift of the Spirit, preliminary to the
later complete bestowal.

We observe next the fulfilment of these predic-
tions as recorded in Acts. The gift of the Holy
Spirit on the Day of Pentecost and the miraculous
manifestations which followed are clearly the chief
historical fulfilment of the prediction of the baptism
of the Holy Spirit. Among the manifestations of
the coming of the Spirit at Pentecost were first those
which were physical, such as “a sound as of the
rushing of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house
where they were sitting’ (Acts 2 2), and the
appearance of “tongues parting asunder, like as of
fire; and it sat upon each one of them” (Acts 2 3).
Secondly, there were spiritual results: ‘And they
were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to
speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance” (Acts 2 4). In vs 16 ff Peter declares
that this bestowment of the Holy Spirit is in ful-
filment of the prediction made by the prophet Joel
and he cites the words in 2 28 ff of Joel’s prophecy.

There is one other important passage in Acts in
which reference is made to the baptism of the Holy
Spirit. While Peter was speaking to Cornelius (Acts
10 44) the Holy Spirit fell on all that heard the
word and they of the circumcision who were with
Peter “were amazed” “‘because that on the Gentiles
also was poured out the gift of the Holy Spirit.”
When giving the brethren at Jerus an account of
his visit to Cornelius, Peter declares that this event
which he had witnessed was a baptism of the Holy
Spirit (Acts 11 16): “And I remembered the word
of the Lord, how he said, John indeed baptized with
water; but ye shall be baptized in the Holy Spirit.”

We consider next the significance of the baptism
of the Holy Spirit from various points of view.

(1) From the point of view of OT teaching as to
the gift of the Spirit—The prophecy of Joel quoted

by Peter indicates something extra-


2. Signifi- ordinary in the gift of the Spirit at
cance of Pentecost. The Spirit now comes in
Baptism of new forms of manifestation and with
the Holy newpower. The various classes men-
Spirit tioned as receiving the Spirit indicate


the wide diffusion of the new power.
In the OT usually the Spirit was bestowed upon
individuals; here the gift is to the group of dis-


ciples, the church. Here the gift is permanently
bestowed, while in the OT it was usually transient
and for a special purpose. Here again the Spirit
comes in fulness as contrasted with the partial
bestowment in OT times.

(2) From the point of view of the ascended Christ.
—In Lk 24 49 Jesus commands the disciples to
tarry in the city “until ye be clothed with power
from on high,” and in Jn 15 26 He speaks of the
Comforter “whom I will send unto you from the
Father,’”’ “he shall bear witness of me’; and in
Jn 16 13 Jesus declares that the Spirit when He
comes shall guide the disciples into all truth, and
He shall show them things to come. In this verse
the Spirit is called the Spirit of truth. It was fitting
that the Spirit who was to interpret truth and guide
into all truth should come in fulness after, rather
than before, the completion of the life-task of the
Messiah. The historical manifestation of Divine
truth as thus completed made necessary the gift
of the Spirit in fulness. Christ Himself was the
giver of the Spirit. The Spirit now takes the place
of the ascended Christ, or rather takes the things
of Christ and shows them to the disciples. The
baptism of the Spirit at Pentecost thus becomes
the great historic event signalizing the beginning
of a new era in the kingdom of God in which the
whole movement is lifted to the spiritual plane, and
the task of evangelizing the world is formally begun.

(3) The significance of the baptism of the Spirit
from the point of view of the disciples —It can scarcely
be said with truth that Pentecost was the birth-
day of the church. Jesus had spoken of His church
during His earthly ministry. The spiritual rela-
tion to Christ which constitutes the basis of the
church existed prior to the baptism of the Holy
Spirit. But that baptism established the church in
several ways. First in unity. The external bond
of unity now gives place to an inner spiritual bond
of profound significance. Secondly, the church
now becomes conscious of a spiritual mission, and
theocratic ideals of the kingdom disappear. Third-
ly, the church is now endued with power for its
work. Among the gifts bestowed were the gift
of prophecy in the large sense of speaking for God,
and the gift of tongues which enabled disciples to
speak in foreigntongues. The account in the second
ch of Acts admits of no other construction. There
was also bestowed power in witnessing for Christ.
This was indeed one of the most prominent bless-
ings named in connection with the promise of the
baptism of the Spirit. The power of working
miracles was also bestowed (Acts 3 4 ff; 5 12 ff).
Later in the epistles of Paul much emphasis is
given to the Spirit as the sanctifying agency in the
hearts of believers. In Acts the word of the Spirit
is chiefly Messianic, that is, the Spirit’s activity
is all seen in relation to the extension of the Mes-
sianic kingdom. The occasion for the outpouring
of the Spirit is Pentecost when men from all nations
are assembled in Jerus. The symbolic representa-
tion of tongues of fire is suggestive of preaching,
and the glossolalia, or speaking with tongues which
followed, so that men of various nations heard the
gospel in their own languages, indicates that the
baptism of the Spirit had a very special relation to
the task of world-wide evangelization for the bring-
ing in of the kingdom of God.

The question is often raised whether or not the
baptism of the Holy Spirit occurred once for all or is

repeated in subsequent baptisms. The
3. Finality evidence seems to point to the former ,
of the Bap- view to the extent at least of being
tism of the limited to outpourings which took place
Holy Spirit in connection with events recorded in
the early chapters of the Book of Acts.
The following considerations favor this view:


401


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Baptism
Bar


_ C) In the first ch of Acts Jesus predicts, accord-
ing to Luke’s account, that the baptism of the Holy
Spirit would take place, “not many days hence”
(Acts 1.5). This would seem to point to a defi-
nite and specific event rather than to a continuous
process.

(2) Again, Peter's citation in Acts 2 17-21 of
Joel’s prophecy shows that, in Peter’s mind the event
which his hearers were then witnessing was the
definite fulfilment of the words of Joel.

(3) Ne otice in the third place that only one other
event in the NT is described as the baptism of the
Holy Spirit, and for special reasons this may be
regarded as the completion of the Pentecostal
baptism. The passage is that contained in Acts
10 1—11 18 in which the record is given of the
following events: (a) miraculous vision given to
Peter on the housetop (10 11-16) indicating that the
things about to occur are of unique importance;
(6) the speaking with tongues (10 45.46); (c) Peter
declares to the brethren at Jerus that the Holy
Ghost fell on the Gentiles in this instance of Corne-
lius and his household ‘as on us at the beginning”
(11 15); (d) Peter also declares that this was a ful-
filment of the promise of the baptism of the Holy
Spirit (11 16.17); (e) the Jewish Christians who
heard Peter’s account of the matter acknowledged
this as proof that, God had also extended the privi-
leges of the gospel to the Gentiles (11 18). The
baptism of the Holy Spirit bestowed upon Cornelius
and his household is thus directly linked with the
first outpouring at Pentecost, and as the event which
signalized the opening of the door of the gospel
formally to Gentiles it is in complete harmony with
the missionary significance of the first great Pente-
costal outpouring. It was a turning point or crisis
in the Messianic kingdom and seems designed to
complete the Pentecostal gift by showing that Gen-
tiles as well as Jews are to be embraced in all the
privileges of the new dispensation.

(4) We observe again that nowhere in the epistles
do we find a repetition of the baptism of the Spirit.
This would be remarkable if it had been understood
by the writers of the epistles that the baptism of the
Spirit was frequently to be repeated. There is
no evidence outside the Book of Acts that the
baptism of the Spirit ever occurred in the later
NT times. In 1 Cor 12 13 Paul says, ‘‘For in
one Spirit were we all baptized into one body
..... and were all made to drink of one Spirit.”
But here the reference is not to the baptism of the

‘Spirit, but rather to a baptism into the church
which is the body of Christ. We conclude, there-
fore, that the Pentecostal baptism taken in con-
junction with the baptism of the Spirit in the case
of Cornelius completes the baptism of the Holy
Spirit according to the NT teaching. The baptism
of the Spirit as thus bestowed was, however, the
definite gift of the Spirit in His fulness for every
form of spiritual blessing necessary in the progress
of the kingdom and as the permanent and abiding
gift of God to His people. In all subsequent NT
writings there is the assumption of this presence of
the Spirit and of His availability for all believers.
The various commands and exhortations of the
epistles are based on the assumption that the bap-
tism of the Spirit has already taken place, and that,
according to the prediction of Jesus to the disci-
ples, the Spirit was to abide with them forever
(Jn 14 16). We should not therefore confound
other forms of expression found in the NT with the
baptism of the Holy Spirit. When Christians are
enjoined to “walk by the Spirit” (Gal 5 16) and
“be filled with the Spirit” (Eph 6 18), or when the
Spirit is described as an anointing (xplopa=
chrisma) asin 1 Jn 2 20-27, and asthe “carnest of
our inheritance” (éppasév=arrabén), as in Eph 1


14, and when various other similar expressions are
employed in the epistles of the NT, we are not to
understand the baptism of the Holy Spirit. These
Maer neues ‘indicate pert of the Spirit’s work
in believers or of the believer’s appropriation of the
gifts and blessings of the Spirit rather than the

historical baptism of the Spirit.
Three final points require brief attention, viz.
the relation of the baptism of the Spirit to the bap-
tism in water, and to the baptism in


4. Relation fire, and to the laying on of hands.


of Baptism (1) We note that the baptism in
of the fire is coupled with the baptism in the
Spirit to Spirit in Mt 3 11 and in Lk 3 16.
Other These passages give the word of John
Baptisms the Baptist. John speaks of the


coming One who “shall baptize you
in the Holy Spirit and in fire’ (Lk 3 16). This
baptism in fire is often taken as being parallel and
synonymous with the baptism in the Spirit. The
context however in both Mt and Lk seems to favor
another meaning. Jesus’ Messianic work will be
both cleansing and destructive. The ‘“‘you” ad-
dressed by John included the people generally and
might naturally embrace both classes, those whose
attitude to Jesus would be believing and those who
would refuse to believe. His action as Messiah
would affect all men. Some He would regenerate
and purify through the Holy Ghost. Others He
would destroy through the fire of punishment.
This view is favored by the context in both gospels.
In both the destructive energy of Christ is coupled
with His saving power in other terms which admit
of no doubt. The wheat He gathers into the garner
and the chaff He burns with unquenchable fire.

(2) The baptism of the Holy Spirit was not
meant to supersede water baptism. This is clear
from the whole of the history in the Book of Acts,
where water baptism is uniformly administered
to converts after the Pentecostal baptism of the
Spirit, as well as from the numerous references to
water baptisms in the epistles. The evidence here
is so abundant that it is unnecessary to develop
it in detail. See Rom 6 3; 1 Cor 1 14-17; 10 2;
12 13; 16 29; Gal 3 27; Eph 4 5; Col 2 12;
1 Pet 3 21.

(8) In Acts 8 17 and 19 6 the Holy Spirit is
bestowed in connection with the laying on of the
hands of apostles, but these are not to be regarded
as instances of the baptism of the Spirit in the
strict sense, but rather as instances of the reception
by believers of the Spirit which had already been
bestowed in fulness at Pentecost.


Literaturs.—Arts. on Holy Spirit in HDB and DCG;
art. on ‘Spiritual Gifts’’ in #B; Moule, Veni Creator;
Smeaton, The Doctrine of the Holy Spirit; Kuyper, The
Work of the Holy Spirit.


See also Hoty Spirit.
E. Y. Muturs

BAPTISM, INFANT. See Baptism (1), II; (II),
Ill, 3, v; (IID, II, 3.

BAPTIST, bap’tist. See Joun THE Baptist.

BAR, bir (prefix): Aram. for the Heb j2, bén,
“son.” Cf Aram. sections of Ezr and Dnl. In the
OT the word is found three timesin Prov 31 2 and
once in Syr Ps 2 12 (Hier. translates “pure’”’). In
the NT “Bar” is frequently employed as prefix to
names of persons. Cf Barabbas; Bar-Jesus; Bar-
Jonah; Barnabas; Barsabbas; Bartholomew; Barti-
maeus. See BEN. ;


BAR, biir (subst.):

(1) IM, berith=“‘a bolt”’ (Ex 26 26-29; 36 11;
36 31-34; 39 33; 40 18; Nu 3 36; 431; Dt
35; Jgs 163; 1S 237; 1 K 4 18; 2 Ch 8 5;
14 7; Neh 8 3.6.13-15; Job 38 10 “bars and doors”’


Barabbas
Barefoot


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


402


for the sea (the bank or shore of the sea); Ps 107
16; 147 13 “the bars of thy gates’: the walls of
the city were now rebuilt and its gates only closed
and barred by night [see Neh 7 3]; Prov 18 19,
“bars of a castle’; Isa 45 2; Jer 49 31; 51 30;
Lam 2 9; Ezk $8 11): meaning “‘arockin the sea”
(Jon 2 6).

(2) OVA, mot=“a staff,” “stick,” ‘pole’ (Nu 4
10.12m); “strong fortification and great impedi-
ment” (Isa 45 2; Am 1 5, “‘the bolt of Damascus”’:
no need here to render prince, as some do [G. A.
Smith in loc.]).

(3) "3, badh= “staff,” ‘‘part of body,” “strength”
(Job 17 16, “bars of Sheol’: the gates of the world
of the dead; cf Isa 38 10; some read, ‘Will the
bars of Sheol fall?’’).

(4) S09, mtil=“‘something hammered out, a
(forged) bar” (Job 40 18). See Door; GartE;
Houses. Frank E. Hirscu


BARABBAS, ba-rab’as (BapaBBas, Barabbas):
For Aram. Bar-abba=lit. “son of the father,” i.e.
of the master or teacher. Abba in the time of
Jesus was perhaps a title of honor (Mt 23 9), but
became later a proper name. The variant Bar-
rabban found in the Harclean Syr would mean
“son of the rabbi or teacher.” Origen knew and
does not absolutely condemn a reading of Mt 27
16.17, which gave the name “Jesus Barabbas,”
but although it is also found in a few cursives and
in the Aram. and the Jerus Syr VSS in this place
only, it is probably due to a scribe’s error in tran-
scription (WH, App., 19-20). If the name was
simply Barabbas or Barrabban, it may still have
meant that the man was a rabbi’s son, or it may
have been a purely conventional proper name, sig-
nifying nothing. He was the criminal chosen by
the Jerus mob, at the instigation of the priests, in
preference to Jesus Christ, for Pilate to release on
the feast of Passover (Mk 15 15; Mt 27 20.21;
Lk 23 18; Jn 18 40). Mt calls him “a notable
[i.e. notorious] prisoner” (27 16). Mk says that he
was “bound with them that had made insurrection,
men who in the insurrection had committed murder”
(15 7). Luke states that he was cast into prison
“for a certain insurrection made in the city, and for
murder” (23 19; ef Acts 3 14). John calls him a
“robber” or “brigand” (18 40). Nothing further
is known of him, nor of the insurrection in which he
took part. Luke’s statement that he was a mur-
derer is probably a deduction from Mark’s more
circumstantial statement, that he was only one of
a gang, who in a rising had committed murder.
Whether robbery was the motive of his crime, as
Jn suggests, or whether he was ‘‘a man who had
raised a revolt against the Rom power” (Gould)
cannot be decided. But it seems equally improb-
able that the priests (the pro-Rom party) would
urge the release of a political prisoner and that
Pilate would grant it, esp. when the former were
urging, and the latter could not resist, the execution
of Jesus on a political charge (Lk 23 2). The
insurrection may have been a notorious case of
brigandage. To say that the Jews would not be
interested in the release of such a prisoner, is to
forget the history of mobs. The custom referred
to of releasing a prisoner on the Passover is other-
wise unknown. “What Mt [and Jn] represents as
brought about by Pilate, Mk makes to appear as if
it were suggested by the people themselves. An
unessential variation’? (Meyer). For a view of the
incident as semi-legendary growth, see Schmiedel in
EB. See also Allen, Matthew, and Gould, Mark, ad
loc., and art. ‘“Barabbas” by Plummer in HDB.

T. Rens


BARACHEL, bar’a-kel (OND, barakh’él, “God
blesses”): B., the Buzite, of the family of Ram, was
the father of Elihu, who was the last one to reason
with Job (Job 32 2.6). Cf Buz; Ram.


BARACHIAH, bar-a-ki’a (Bapaxlas, Barachias;
AV Barachias; Mt 23 35): Father of Zachariah
who was murdered between the sanctuary and the
altar. It is possible that reference is made to
Zechariah, the son of Jehoiada (2 Ch 24 20 ff),
whom Matthew by mistake calls ‘'Z., the son of
B.” Lk 11 51 omits the name of the father of Z.
(ef Zahn’s Kommentar, 649, note).

BARACHIAS, bar-a-ki’as. See BARacHIaH.

BARAK, bia’rak (P73, barak, “lightning flash’’):
The name occurs in Sabaean OPT, in Palmyrene
p13, and in Punic Barcas, as surname of Hamilcar;
and as Divine name in Assyr Ramman-Birku
and Gibil-Birku (Del. Assyr, HWB, 187). Barak
was the son of Abinoam of Kedesh, a refuge city .
in Mt. Naphtali. He was summoned by the
prophetess Deborah to lead his countrymen to war
against the Canaanites under the leadership of
Sisera. From the celebrated ode of Deborah we
gather that Israel suffered at the hand of the enemy;
the caravan roads were in danger, traffic almost
ceased; the cultivated country was plundered
(Jgs 5 6.7). The fighting men in Israel were dis-
armed, a shield was not to be seen nor a spear
among forty thousand men (ver 8). The prophet-
ess raised the signal of struggle for independence.
Soon Barak came to her aid. With an army of
10,000 men—according to Jgs 4 10 they were all
drawn from Zebulun and Naphtali, whereas Jgs
5 13-18 adds Benjamin, Machir and Issachar to
the list of faithful tribes—Barak, accompanied
by Deborah, rushed to the summit of Mt. Tabor.
This location was very favorable to the rudely
armed Israelites in warding off the danger of the
well-armed enemy. The wooded slopes protected
them against the chariots of the Canaanites. In
addition they were within striking distance should
the enemy expose himself on the march. Under
the heavy rainfall the alluvial plain became a
morass, in which the heavy-armed troops found
it impossible to move. Soon the little stream
IXishon was filled with chariots, horses and Canaan-
ites. Sisera abandoned his chariot and fled on
foot. Barak pursued him and found him mur-
dered by Jael in her tent. This completed the
victory. See Brpan; Moore, “Judges,” ad loc.

SamMuEL CoHon

BARBARIAN, bir-ba’ri-an, BARBAROUS, bir-
ba-rus (BdpBapos, bdérbaros): A word probably
formed by imitation of the unintelligible sounds
of foreign speech, and hence in the mouth of a
Greek it meant anything that was not Gr, language,
people or customs. With the spread of Gr lan-
guage and culture, it came to be used generally for
all that was non-Gr. Philo and Jos sometimes
called their own nation “barbarians,” and so did
Rom writers up to the Augustan age, when they
adopted Gr culture, and reckoned themselves with
the Greeks as the only cultured people in the world.
Therefore Greek and barbarian meant the whole
human race (Rom 1 14).

In Col 3 11, “barbarian, Scythian” is not a
classification or antithesis but a “climax” (Abbott)
= “barbarians, even Scythians, the lowest type of
barbarians.” In Christ, all racial distinctions,
even the most pronounced, disappear.

In 1 Cor 14 11 Paul uses the term in its more
primitive sense of one speaking a foreign, and
therefore, an unintelligible language: ‘If then I


403


know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be to
him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that speak-
eth will be a barbarian unto me.” The speaking
with tongues would not be a means of communi-
cation. The excited inarticulate ejaculations of
the Corinthian revivalists were worse than useless
unless someone had the gift of articulating in intelli-
gible language the force of feeling that produced
them (dtinamis tés phonés, lit. “the power of the
sound’’).

In Acts 28 2.4 (in AV of ver 2 “barbarous
people’ =barbarians) the writer, perhaps from the
Gr-Rom standpoint, calls the inhabitants of
Melita barbarians, as being descendants of the
old Phoen settlers, or possibly in the more general
sense of ‘‘strangers.” For the later sense of
“brutal,” ‘cruel,’ “savage,” see 2 Macc 2 21;
425; 16 2. T. Ress


BARBER, bar’bér:

(1) The Eng. word “barber” is from Lat barba,
“beard” =a man who shaves the beard. Dressing
and trimming the hair eame to be added to his work.
“Barber” is found only once EV, in Ezk 6 1,
“Take thee a sharp sword; as a barber's razor shalt
thou take it unto thee, and shalt cause it to pass
upon thy head and upon thy beard” (cf Haghigha’
4b, Shab, § 6).


An Oriental Barber.


(2) In Gen 41 14 we probably have a case of
conformity to Egyp, rather than Palestinian cus-
tom, where Joseph “shaved himself, and changed
his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh. It is
known that Egyptians of the higher classes shaved
the beard regularly and completely (as the Hit-
tites, Elamites and early Babylonians seem to have


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Barabbas
Barefoot


done), except that fashion allowed, as an exception
to the rule, a small tuft, or ‘“goatee,”’ under the chin.

(8) We learn from various Scriptural allusions,
as well as from other sources (cf W. Max Miiller,
Asien und Europa, 296 ff), that the business of the
oriental barber included, besides ceremonial shav-
ing, the trimming and polling of the hair and the
beard. Cf 2S 19 24 where it appears that the
moustache (Heb sdphdm; AV “beard’’) received
regular trimming; and 1S 21 14, where the neg-
lect of the beard is set down as a sign of madness.

That men wore wigs and false beards in aneient
days, the latter showing the rank of the wearer,
appears from Herod. ii.36; iii.12; and Wilkinson,
Anc. Egypt, II, 324, etc. Jos, Vita, II, gives one
case where false hair appears to have been used as
an intentional disguise. See also Polyb. iii.78.

(4) The business of the barber (see Ezk 5 1,
“as a barber’s razor shalt thou take it unto thee,
and shalt cause it to pass upon thy head and upon
thy beard’’), outside of ceremonial shaving, may
have consisted in trimming and polling the beard
and the hair of the head. Of other nations with
whom Israel of old came in contaet, the Hittites
and Elamites, it is now known, shaved the beard
completely, as the earliest Babylonians also seem
to have done.

(5) The prohibition enjoined in the Mosaic law
upon ‘the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok”
(Ezk 44 15.20) forbidding either “shaving the
head,” or ‘‘suffering their locks to grow long,’’ or
shaving off the corners of their beard (Lev 21 5),
was clearly, in a sense peculiar to the priests, etc:
“They [the priests] shall only cut off,” i.e. trim, not
shave, “the hair of their heads’ (Ezk 44 200).
But in the Apos Const, I, 3, insistence is laid upon
the Bib. prohibition as applicable to all as regards
the removal of the beard (ef Clement of Alex.,
Paed., III, ed Migne, I, 580f). Jerome on Ezk
44 20 and some of the Jewish sages find the basis of
this prohibition in the fact that God gave a beard
to man to distinguish him from the woman—so,
they reasoned, it is wrong thus to go against Na-
ture (cf Bahya, on Lev 19 27). :

(6) In the Pal of the Gr period, say in the 3d
cent. BC, when there was a large infusion of Hel-
lenic population and influence, clipping of the
beard prevailed in some circles, being omitted only
in times of mourning, etc. The common people,
however, seem to have seen little distinction be-
tween clipping the beard and shaving. But see
pictures of captive Jews with clipped beard in the
British Museum.

Lireraturs.—Benzinger, heb. Arch., 110; Nowack,
Lehrbuch der Heb. Arch., 134; W. Max Miiller, Asien und
Europa, 296 ff.

Gro. B. Eacer

BARCHUS, bar’kus (B, Baxots, Bachotis; A,
Bapxové, Barchoué; AV Charchus, from Aldine ed,
Charkous; 1 Esd 6 32 = Barkos [Ezr 2 53; Neh
7 55]): The descendants of B. (temple-servants)
returned with Zerubbabel to Jerus.


BAREFOOT, bAr’f6ot: The word is found in the
following passages: EV, “He went barefoot’
(2 8 15 30); “{Isaiah] did so, walking
.... barefoot” (Isa 20 2); and like the
Egyptians, ‘naked and barefoot” (1sa
20 3.4). It seems that David in his
flight before Absalom ‘went barefoot,” not to
facilitate his flight, but to show his grief (2 8 16
30), and that Micah (1 8) makes “going barefoot’
a sign of mourning (LXX “to be barefoot”; AV
“stripped’’). The nakedness and bare feet of the
prophet Isaiah (20 2) may have been intended to
symbolize and express sympathy for the forlorn
condition of captives (cf Job 12 17.19, where AV


1. Intro-
ductory


Barhumite
Barnabas


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


404


and RV have “spoiled,” but some authorities give
as the true tr “barefoot’’).


Jastrow, in art. on ‘‘Tearing the Garments” (Jour. of
the Am. Oriental Soc., X XI, 23-39) presents a view worth
considering of going barefoot as a sign of mourning and
then of griefin general (cf also Jew Enc, art. ‘‘ Barefoot’).
All these passages seem to imply the discomfort of going
barefoot on long journeys, over stony roads or hot
sands; but then, as now, in the Orient sandals seem to
Baye, been little worn ordinarily in and around the house.

ee HOES.


The “shoes” of the ancients, as we know from
many sources, were ‘‘sandals,” i.e. simply soles,
for the most part of rawhide, tied to


2. An the feet to protect them against the
Ancient gravel, stones or thorns of the road.
Oriental Shoes of the modern sort, as well as
Custom socks and stockings, were unknown.


In ancient times it was certainly a
common custom in Bible lands to go about in
and around one’s house without sandals. The
peasantry, indeed, like the fellaheen of today, being
hardened to it, often went afield barefoot. But for
a king, or a prophet, a priest or a worshipper, to go
barefoot, was another matter, as it was also for a
mourner, for one in great distress, to be found walk-
ing the streets of a city, or going any distance in
bare feet. Here we come again to customs peculiar
to the Orient, and of various significance. For
instance, it was considered then, as it is now in
the Moslem world, profane and shocking, nothing
short of a desecration, to enter a sanctuary, or walk
on “holy ground,’ with dust-covered shoes, or
unwashed feet. Moses and Joshua were com-
manded to take off their shoes when on “holy
ground” (Ex 35; Josh 615). “No one was
allowed to walk on the temple ground with shoes
on, or with dust on his feet’’ (Ber., IX, 5; ef Jam-
blichus, Pythagoras, §105). No one in the East
today is allowed to enter any mosque with shoes
on, or without first putting slippers furnished for
the purpose over his shoes. As a rule, too, the feet
must be cleansed by ablution in every such case,
as well as hands and feet before each meal.

The priests of Israel, as would seem true of the
priests in general among the ancients, wore no
shoes when ministering (see Silius


3. Priests Italicus, III, 28; ef Theodoret on
on Duty Ex 3, questio 7; and Yer. Shet., 5,
Went 48d). Anciently, certainly the priests
Barefoot of Israel, when going upon the plat-


form to serve before the ark, in Taber-
nacle or temple, as later in the synagogue to bless
the congregation, went barefoot; though today,
strange to say, such ministering priests among the
Jews wear stockings, and are not supposed _to be
barefoot (Satah, 40a; RH, 316; Shulhan ’ Arikh,
’Orah Hayyim, 128, 5; see Jew Enc, art. ‘“Bare-
foot’).
The reason or reasons for the removal of the
shoes in such cases as the above, we are not at a
loss to divine; but when it comes to the


4. Reasons removal of the shoes in times of mourn-
for the ing, etc, opinions differ. Some see
Ancient in such customs a trace of ancestor-
Custom worship; others find simply a rever-


sion or return to primitive modes of
life; while others still, in agreement with a widely
prevalent Jewish view, suggest that it was adopted
as a perfectly natural symbol of humility and sim-
plicity of life, appropriate to occasions of grief,
distress and deep solemnity of feeling.
The shoes are set aside now by many modern
Devas the Day of Atonement and on the Ninth
0 :


LITERATURE.— Winer, BR, s.v. '‘ Priester und Schuhe”;
Riehm, Handwérterbuch des bib. Alt., s.v. ‘‘Schuhe.”


Gro. B. Eacer
BARHUMITE, bar-hi’mit. See Banarumitn.


BARIAH, ba-ri’ah (7°73, bdrith, “fugitive’’):
B. was a descendant of David in the line of Solomon
(1 Ch 3 22).


BAR-JESUS, bar-j@’zus (Bapmmrots, Bariésozs):
“A certain sorcerer [Gr mdgos], a false prophet, a
Jew” whom Paul and Silas found at Paphos in
Cyprus in the train of Sergius Paulus, the Rom
proconsul (Acts 13 67f). The proconsul was “a
man of understanding” (lit. a prudent or sagacious
man), of an inquiring mind, interested in the
thought and magic of his times. This character-
istic explains the presence of a magos among his
staff and his desire to hear Barnabas and Saul.
Bar-Jesus was the magician’s Jewishname. Elymas
is said to be the interpretation of his name (ver 8).
It is the Gr transliteration of an Aram. or Arab.
word equivalent to Gr magos. From Arab. ‘alama,
“to know” is derived ‘alim, ‘‘a wise” or “learned
man.” In Koran, Sur n. 106, Moses is called
Sahir ‘altm, ‘wise magician.”” Elymas therefore
means ‘‘sorcerer’’ (cf Simon ‘‘Magus’’).

The East was flooding the Rom Empire with its
new and wonderful religious systems, which, cul-
minating in neo-Platonism, were the great rivals
of Christianity both in their cruder and in their
more strictly religious forms. Superstition was
extremely prevalent, and wonder-workers of all
kinds, whether imposters or honest exponents of
some new faith, found their task easy through the
credulity of the public. Babylonia was the home
of magic, for charms are found on the oldest tablets.
““Magos”’ was originally applied to the priests of
the Persians who overran Babylonia, but the title
degenerated when it was assumed by baser per-
sons for baser arts. Juvenal (vi.562, etc), Horace
(Sat. i.2.1) and other Lat authors mention Chal-
daean astrologers and impostors, probably Bab
Jews. Many of the Magians, however, were the
scientists of their day, the heirs of the science of
Babylon and the lore of Persia, and not merely
pretenders or conjurers (see Macrc). It may have
been as the representative of some oriental system,
a compound of “science” and religion, that Bar-
Jesus was attached to the train of Sergius Paulus.

Both Sergius and Elymas had heard about the
teaching of the aposties, and this aroused the
curiosity of Sergius and the fear of Elymas. When
the apostles came, obedient to the command of
the proconsul, their doctrine visibly produced on
him a considerable impression. Fearing lest his
position of influence and gain would be taken by
the new teachers, Elymas ‘withstood them, seeking
to turn aside the proconsul from the faith”’ (ver 8).
Paul, inspired by the Holy Spirit, worked a wonder
on the wonder-worker by striking him blind with
his word, thus revealing to the proconsul that
behind him was Divine power. Sergius Paulus
believed, “being astonished at the teaching of the
Lord” (ver 12). S. F. Hunter


BAR-JONAH, bir-jd’na (Bap-wvas, Bar-iénds):
Simon Peter’s patronymic (Mt 1617). Bar is
Aram. for “son” (cf Bar-timaeus, Bartholomew,
etc), and corresponds to Heb bén. Thus we are to
understand that Peter’s father’s name was Jonah.
But in Jn 1 42; 21 15-17, according to the best
reading, his name is given as John (so RV, instead
of AV Jona, Jonas). There are two hypotheses to
account for this difference: (1) Jénas (Jonah) in
Mt 16 17 may be simply a contraction of Iéanés
(John); (2) Peter’s father may have been known
by two names, Jonah and John.

D. Mraut Epwarps


BARKOS, bir’kos (prs, barkés, “party-col-
ored” [?]; ef HPN. 68. n. 2): The descendants


405


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Barhumite
Barnabas


of B. returned with Zerubbabel to Jerus (Ezr 2 53;
Neh 7 55). Cf Barchus (1 Esd 6 32).


BARLEY, bir’li (W727 , s°‘drah):

(1) In the Bible, as in modern times, barley
was a characteristic product of Pal—‘“a land of
wheat and barley, and vines and fig-trees,” etc
(Dt 8 8); the failure of whose crop was a national
disaster (Joel 1 11). It was, and is, grown chiefly
as provender for horses and asses (1 K 4 28),
oats being practically unknown, but it was, as it
now is, to some extent, the food of the poor in
country districts (Ruth 217; 2 K 4 42; Jn 6
9.13). Probably this is the meaning of the dream
of the Midianite concerning Gideon: ‘Behold, I
dreamed a dream; and, lo, a cake of barley bread
tumbled into the camp of Midian, and came unto
the tent, and smote it so that it fell, and turned it
upside down, so that the tent lay flat. And his
fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save
the sword of Gideon, the son of Joash, a man of
Israel’ (Jgs 7 13 f). Here the barley loaf is type
of the peasant origin of Gideon’s army and perhaps,
too, of his own lowly condition.


Bringing Home the Barley Harvest.


Barley was (Ezk 4 9) one of the ingredients
from which the prophet was to make bread and
“eat it as barley cakes” after having baked it under
repulsive conditions (ver 12), as a sign to the people.
The false prophetesses (Ezk 13 19) are said to have
profaned God among the people for “handfuls of
barley and for pieces of bread.”

Barley was also used in the OnDEAL oF JEAL-
ousy (s.v.). It was with five barley loaves and two
fishes that Our Lord fed the five thousand (Jn 6
9.10).

(2) Several varieties of barley are grown in Pal.
The Hordeum distichum or two-rowed barley is
probably the nearest to the original stock, but
Hordeum tetrastichum, with grains in four rows,
and Hordeum hexastichum, with six rows, are also
common and ancient; the last is found depicted
upon Egyp monuments.

Barley is always sown in the autumn, after the
“early rains,” and the barley harvest, which for any
given locality precedes the wheat harvest (Ex 9
31 £), begins near Jericho in April—or even March—
but in the hill country of Pal is not concluded until
the end of May or beginning of June. ;

The barley harvest was a well-marked season of
the year (see Time) and the barley-corn was a well-
known measure of length. Sec WEIGHTS AND
MEASURES. E. W. G. MastermMan


BARN, barn (M1719), m°ghdrah, “a granary,”
“fear,” Hag 219; DDS, ’asdm, “a storehouse,”
Prov 3 10; T3102, mamm*ghtrah, “a repository,”
Joel 117; aro0qxn, apothéké, Mt 6 26; 13 30;
Lk 12 18.24): A place for the storing of grain,
usually a dry cistern in the ground, covered over
with a thick layer of earth. “Grain is not stored in


the East until it is threshed and winnowed. The
apothéké in Rom times was probably a building
of some kind. But the immemorial usage of the
East has been to conceal the grain, in carefully
prepared pits or caves, which, being perfectly dry,
will preserve it for years. It thus escaped, as far
as possible, the attentions of the tax-gatherer as -
well as of the robber—not always easily distin-
guished in the East; cf Jer 41 8” (Temple Dic-
tionary, 215).

Figurative of heaven (Mt 13 30). See Acnrt-
CULTURE; GARNER. M. O. Evans


BARNABAS, bidr’na-bas (Bapvéfas, Barndbas,
“son of exhortation,” or possibly “son of Nebo”’):
This name was applied to the associate of Paul,
who was originally called Joses or Joseph (Acts
4 36), as a testimony to his eloquence. Its lit.
meaning is “‘son of prophecy” (bar, ‘‘son’”’; n*bha’ah,
“prophecy”). Cf word for prophet in Gen 20 7;
Dt 18 15.18, etc. This is interpreted in Acts
4 36 as “son of exhortation” RV, or “son of con-
solation” AV, expressing two sides of the Gr
pardklésis, that are not exclusive. The office of a
prophet being more than to foretell, all these inter-
pretations are admissible in estimating Barnabas
as a preacher. ‘Deismann (Btbelstudien, 175-78)
considers Barnabas the Jewish Grecized form of
Barnebous, a personal Sem name recently discovered
in Asia Minor inscriptions, and meaning ‘son of
Nebo” (Standard BD in loc.).

He was a Levite from the island of Cyprus,
and cousin, not “nephew” (AV), of the evangelist
Mark, the word anépsios (Col 4 10), being used in
Nu 86 11, for ‘father’s brothers’ sons.” When
we first learn of him, he had removed to Jerus,
and acquired property there. He sold “a field,”
and contributed its price to the support of the poorer
members of the church (Acts 4 36 ff). In Acts
11 24 he is described as “a good man and full of
the Holy Spirit” (cf Isa 11 2; 1 Cor 12 8.11)
“and of faith,” traits that gave him influence and
leadership. Possibly on the ground of former
acquaintanceship, interceding as Paul’s sponsor
and surety, he removed the distrust of the disciples
at Jerns and secured the admission of the former
persecutor into their fellowship. When the preach-
ing of some of the countrymen of Barnabas had
begun a movement toward Christianity among
the Greeks at Antioch, Barnabas was sent from
Jerus to give it encouragement and direction, and,
after a personal visit, recognizing its importance
and needs, sought out Paul at Tarsus, and brought
him back as his associate. At the close of a year’s
successful work, Barnabas and Paul were sent to
Jerus with contributions from the infant church for
the famine sufferers in the older congregation (11
30). Ordained as missionaries on their return (13
3), and accompanied by John Mark, they proceeded
upon what is ordinarily known as the “First Mission-
ary Journey” of Paul (Acts 134.5). Its history
belongs to Paul’s life. Barnabas as well as Paul is
designated “an apostle” (Acts 14 14). Up_ to
Acts 13 43, the precedency is constantly ascribed
to Barnabas; from that point, except in 14 14 and
15 12.25, we read “Paul and Barnabas,” instead of
“Barnabas and Saul.” The latter becomes the
chief spokesman. The people at Lystra named
Paul, becanse of his fervid oratory, Mercurius,
while the quiet dignity and reserved strength of
Barnabas gave him the title of Jupiter (Acts 14
12). Barnabas escaped the violence which Paul
suffered at Iconium (14 19). _

Upon their return from this first missionary
tour, they were sent, with other representatives
of the church at Antioch, to confer with the apostles
and elders of the church at Jerus concerning the


Barnabas, Ep. of
Baruch, Book of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


406


obligation of circumcision and the ceremonial law
in general under the NT—the synod of Jerus.
A separation from Paul seems to begin with a
temporary yielding of Barnabas in favor of the in-
consistent course of Peter (Gal 2 13). This was
followed by a more serious rupture concerning
Mark. On the second journey, Paul proceeded
alone, while Barnabas and Mark went to Cyprus.
Luther and Calvin regard 2 Cor 8 18.19 as
meaning Barnabas by “the brother whose praise
is spread through all the churches,” and indicat-
ing, therefore, subsequent joint work. The inci-
dental allusions in 1 Cor 9 6 and Gal 2 13 (“even
Barnabas”) show at any rate Paul’s continued
appreciation of his former associate. Like Paul,
he accepted no support from those to whom he
ministered.

Tertullian, followed in recent years by Grau
and Zahn, regard him as the author of the Epistle
to the He. The document published among
patristic writings as the Epistle of Barnabas, and
found in full in the Codex Sinaiticus, is universally
assigned today to a later period. ‘“The wniter
nowhere claims to be the apostle Barnabas; possibly
its author was some unknown namesake of ‘the
son of consolation’” (Lightfoot, Apostolic Fathers,
239 f). H. E. Jacoss


BARNABAS, EPISTLE OF. See ArocryPHAL
Epist Les.


BARNABAS, GOSPEL OF. See ApocryPHaL
GosPELs.


BARODIS, ba-ro’dis (Bapwiecls, Barédeis, 1 Esd
6 34): The descendants of B. (sous of the servants
of Solomon) returned with Zerubbabel to Jerus.
Omitted in Ezr 2 and Neh 7.


BARREL, bar’el: The word “‘barrel’’ in AV (see
1 K 17 12.14.16; 18 33: “The barrel of meal,”
“fill four barrels with water,’ etc) stands for the
large earthenware jar (so ARV) used in the East
for carrying water from the spring or well, and for
storing grain, etc, according to a custom that still
persists. It is elsewhere (EV) more fitly rendered
“pitcher.” See House; PitcueEr, etc.


BARREN, bar’en, BARRENNESS, bar’en-nes
(MZ, ctyah; MTDNA, méichah; S38, shakhal;
“Wp? , ‘akdr; oretpos, steiros; apyds, argés):

(1) Of land that bears no crop, either (a) because
it is naturally poor and sterile: ¢iyah “dry” (Joel
2 20), m*léhah, “salt” (Job 39 6 AV), shakhal,
“miscarrying”’ (2 KK 2 19.21), or (6) because it is,
under God’s curse, turned into a m*léhdah or salt
desert, for the wickedness of the people that dwell
therein (Ps 107 34 AV; cf Gen 3 17.18).

(2) Of females that bear no issue: ‘dakar: Sarah
(Gen 11 30); Rebekah (25 21); Rachel (29 31);
Manoah’s wife (Jgs 13 2.3); Hannah (1S 2 5);
steiros: Elisabeth (Lk 1 7.36).

In Israel and among oriental peoples generally
barrenness was a woman’s and a family’s greatest
misfortune. The highest sanctions of religion and
patriotism blessed the fruitful woman, because
children were necessary for the perpetuation of the
tribe and its religion. It is_ significant that the
mothers of the Heb race, Sarah, Rebekah and
Rachel, were by nature sterile, and therefore God’s
special intervention shows His particular favor to
Israel. Fruitfulness was God’s special blessing to
His people (Ex 23 26; Dt 714; Ps 1139). A
complete family is an emblem of beauty (Cant 4 2;
6 6). Metaphorically, Israel, in her days of adver-
sity, when her children were exiled, was barren, but
in her restoration she shall rejoice in many children


?


(Isa 54 1; Gal 4 27). The utter despair and
terror of the destruction of Jerus could go no farther
than that the barren should be called blessed (Lk
23 29).

(3) Argés is tr? in AV “barren,” but in RV more
accurately ‘idle’ (2 Pet 1 8). T. Rezs


BARSABAS, bir’sa-bas, BARSABBAS, biir-sab’-
as. See JosepH BarsaBBas; Jupas BaRsaBBas.


BARTACUS, bir’ta-kus (Bdprakos, Bdrtakos;
Jos ‘PaBefauns, Rhabezdkés; Vulg Bezazes [1 Esd
4 29]): The father of Apame. He is called “‘the
illustrious,” probably because of rank and merits.
The family seems to be of Pers origin since the name
Bartacus (Syr PUN) in the form of Artachaeas
is mentioned by Herod. (vii.22.117) as a person of
rank in the Pers army of Xerxes and the name of
his daughter Apame is identical with that of a Pers
princess who married Seleucus I, Nicator, and be-
came the mother of Antiochus I. Apamea, a city in
Asia Minor founded by Seleucus I, is named in honor
of his wife Apame. Cf ApamE; ILLUSTRIOUS.


BARTHOLOMEYW, bir-thol’d-mti (Bapodo-
patos, Bartholomatos, i.e. ‘son of Tolmai or Tal-
mai’): One of the Twelve Apostles (Mt 10 3;
Mk 318; Lk 614; Acts 113). There is no
further reference to him in the NT. According to
the ‘‘Genealogies of the Twelve Apostles” (Budge,
Contendings of the Apostles, II, 50) ‘Bartholomew
was of the house of Naphtali. Now his name was
formerly John, but Our Lord changed it because
of John the son of Zebedee, His beloved.” A
“Gospel of Bartholomew” is mentioned by Hiero-
nymus (Comm. Proem ad Matth.), and Gelasius gives
the tradition that Bartholomew brought the Heb
gospel of St. Matthew to India. In the ‘‘Preaching
of St. Bartholomew in the Oasis’ (cf Budge, I,
90) he is referred to as preaching probably in the
oasis of Al Bahn4sa, and according to the ‘Preaching
of St. Andrew and St. Bartholomew” he labored
among the Parthians (Budge, II, 183). The
“Martyrdom of St. Bartholomew” states that he
was placed in a sack and cast into the sea.

From the 9th cent. onward, Bartholomew has
generally been identified with Nathanael, but this
view has not been conclusively established. See
NaTHANAEL, Cc Kerr


BARTHOLOMEW, GOSPEL OF. See Arocry-
PHAL GosPELS; BARTHOLOMEW.


BARTIMAEUS, biir-ti-m@’/us (Bapripatos, Bar-
timaios): A hybrid word from Aram. bar=“son,”
and Gr timatos=“honorable.” For the improbabil-
ity of the derivation from bar-tim’ai=“son of the
unclean,’ and of the allegorical meaning=the
Gentiles or spiritually blind, see Schmiedel in EB.
In Mk (10 46-52) Bartimaeus is given as the name
of a blind beggar, whose eyes Jesus Christ opened
as He went out from Jericho on His last journey
to Jerus. An almost identical account is given by
Lk (18 35-43), except that the incident occurred
“‘as he drew nigh unto Jericho,” and the name of the
blind man is not given. Again, according to Mt
(20 29-34), “as they went out from Jericho”
dike Mk) two blind men (unlike Mk and Lk) re-
ceive their sight. It is not absolutely impossible
that two or even three events are recorded, but so
close is the similarity of the three accounts that it
is highly improbable. Regarding them as referring
to the same event, it is easy to understand how
the discrepancies arose in the passage of the story
from mouth to mouth. The main incident is clear
enough, and on purely historical grounds, the
miracle cannot be denied. The discrepancies


407


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Barnabas, Ep. of
Baruch, Book of


themselves are evidence of the wide currency of the
story before our Gospels assumed their present
form. It is only a most mechanical theory of
inspiration that would demand their harmonization.
T. Rees

BARUCH, ba'ruk, bar'uk (JI2, barak; Bapotx,
Barotich, “‘blessed”’):

(1) Son of Neriah and brother of Seraiah, King
Zedekiah’s chamberlain (Jer 61 59). He was the
devoted friend (Jer 32 12), the amanuensis (36
4 ff.32) and faithful attendant (36 10 ff; Jos, Ant,
X, vi, 2) of the prophet Jeremiah. He seems to
have been of noble family (see Ant, X, ix, 1; ef
Jer 61 59; Bar 1 1). He was also according to
Jos a man of unusual acquirements (Ant, X, ix, 1).
He might have risen to a high position and seemed
conscious of this, but under Jeremiah’s influence
(see Jer 45 5) he repressed his ambition, being
content to throw in his lot with the great prophet
whose secretary and companion he became. Jere-
miah dictated his prophecies to Baruch, who read
them tothe people (Jer 36). The king (Jehoiakim)
was greatly angered at these prophecies and had
Baruch arrested and the rollburnt. Baruch however
rewrote the prophet’s oracles. In the final siege of
Jerus Baruch stood by his master, witnessing the
purchase by the latter of his ancestral estate in
Anathoth (Jer 32). According to Jos (Ant, X, ix, 1)
he continued to reside with Jeremiah at Mizpah
after the fall of Jerus. Subsequent to the murder
of Gedaliah, he was accused of having unduly
influenced Jeremiah when the latter urged the
people to remain in Judah—a fact which shows how
great was the influence which Baruch was believed
to have had over his master (Jer 43 8). He was
carried with Jeremiah to Egypt (Jer 43 6; Ant,
X, ix, 6), and thereafter our knowledge of him is
merely legendary. According to a tradition pre-
served by Jerome (on Isa 30 6f) he died in Egypt
soon after reaching that country. Two other tra-
ditions say that he went, or by Nebuchadnezzar
was carried, to Babylon after this king conquered
Egypt. The high character of Baruch and the
important part he played in the life and work of
Jeremiah induced later generations still further to
enhance his reputation, and a large number of
spurious writings passed under his name, among
them the following: (a) The ApocaLyPsE or BarucH
(q.v.); (b) the Book of Baruch; (c) the Rest of the
Words of Baruch; (d) the gnostic Book of Baruch;
(e) the Lat Book of Baruch, composed originally
in Lat; (f) a Gr Apocalypse of Baruch belonging
to the 2d cent. of our era; (g) another Book of
Baruch belonging to the 4th or 5th cent.

(2) A son of Zabbai who aided Nehemiah in
rebuilding the walls of Jerus (Neh 3 20).

(3) One of the priests who signed the covenant
with Nehemiah (10 6).

(4) The son of Colhozeh, a descendant of Perez,
the son of Judah (Neh 11 5).

T. Wirton Daviss

BARUCH, APOCALYPSE OF. See Apoca-
tryptic LITERATURE.


BARUCH, BOOK OF: One of the Apocryphal or
Deutero-canonical books, standing between Jer and
Lam in the LXX, but in the Vulg after these two
books.

I. Name.—See under Barucu for the meaning
of the word and for the history of the best-known
Bib. personage bearing the name. Though Jewish
traditions link this book with Jeremiah’s amanuensis
and loyal friend as author, it is quite certain that
it was not written or compiled for hundreds of years
after the death of this Baruch. According to Jer
45 1 it was in the 4th year (604 BC) of the reign
of Jehoiakim (608-597 BC) that Baruch wrote


down Jeremiah’s words in a book and read them in
the ears of the nobles (EV “‘princes,”’ but king’s sons
are not necessarily meant; Jer 36). The Book of
Baruch belongs in its present form to the latter half
of the 1st cent. of our era; yet some modern Roman
Catholic scholars vigorously maintain that it is the
work of Jeremiah’s friend and secretary.

I. Contents.—This book and also the Epistle
of Jeremy have closer affinities with the canonical
Book of Jer than any other part of the Apoc. It
is probably to-this fact that they owe their name and
also their position in the LXX and in the Vulg.
The book is apparently made up of four separate
parts by independent writers, brought together
by an R, owing it is very likely to a mere accident
—each being too small to occupy the space on one
roll they were all four written on one and the same
roll. The following is a brief analysis of the four
portions of the book:

Historical Introduction, giving an account of the
origin and purpose of the book (1 1-14). Vs

1f tell us that Baruch wrote this book


1. Histor- at Babylon “in the fifth month [not
ical Intro- ‘year’ as L XX], in the seventh
duction day of the month, what time as the


Chaldeans took Jerus, and burnt it
with fire’ (see 2 K 26 8ff). Fritzsche and others
read: “In the fifth year, in the month Sivan [see
ver 8], in the seventh day of the month,” etc. Um
gives the date of the feast Pentecost, and the
supposition is that the party who made a pilgrimage
to Jerus did so in order to observe that feast. Ac-
cording to vs 3-14, Baruch read his book to King
Jehoiachin and his court by the (unidentified)
river Sud. King and people on hearing the book
fell to weeping, fasting and praying. As a result
money was collected and sent, together with
Baruch’s book, to the high priest Jehoiakim,} to
the priests and to the people at Jerus. The money
is.to be used in order to make it possible to carry
on the services of the temple, and in particular
that prayers may be offered in the temple for the
king and his family and also for the superior lord
King Nebuchadnezzar and his son Baltasar (=
the Belshazzar of Dnl 6).

Confession and prayer (1 15—3 8) (1) of the
Palestinian remnant (lt 15—2 15). The speakers
are resident in Judah not in Babylon


2. Confes- (ver 15; cf 2 4), as J. T. Marshall
sion and and R. H. Charles rightly hold. This
Prayer. section follows throughout the arrange-


ment and phraseology of a prayer con-
tained in Dnl 9 7-15. It is quite impossible to
think of Dnl as being based on Bar, for the writer
of the former is far more original than the author
or authors of Bar. But in the present section the
original passage in Dnl is altered in a very significant
way. Thusin Dnl (9 7) the writer describes those
for whom he wrote as ‘the men of Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerus and all Israel[ites]: those
near and those far off, in all the lands [countries]
whither thou hast driven them on account of their
unfatthfulness toward thee.’ The italicized words
are omitted from Bar 1 15, though the remaining
part of Dnl 9 7 is added. Why this difference?
Tt is evident, as Marshall has ably pointed out,
that the R of the section intends to put the
confession and prayer of 1 15—2 5 into the mouths
of Jews who had not been removed into exile.
Ewald (History, V, 208, 6) holds that Dnl 9 7-9 is
dependent on Bar 1 15—2 17. The section may
thus be analyzed: ;
(a) 1 15-22: Confession of the sins of the nation
from the days of Moses down to the exile. The


180 spelt in the canonical books; but it is Joacim
or Joachim in Apoc AV, and in the Apoc RV it is
invariably Joakim.


Baruch, Book of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


408


principle of solidarity (see Century Bible, ‘“Psalms,”’
II, 21, 195, 215) so governed the thoughts of the
ancient Israelites that the iniquities of their fore-
fathers were in effect their own.

(6) 2 1-5: God’s righteous judgment on the
nation in humbling and scattering them.

Confession and prayer (2) of the exiles in Babylon
2 16—3 8. That the words in this section are sup-
posed to be uttered by Bab exiles appears from 2
13f; 3 7f and from the general character of the
whole. This portion of the book is-almost as de-
pendent on older Scriptures as the foregoing. Three
sources secm in particular to have been used.

(a) The Book of Jer has been freely drawn upon.

(b) Deuteronomic phrases occur frequently, esp.
in the beginning and end. These are perhaps taken
second-hand from Jer, a book well known to the
author of these verses and deeply loved by him.

(c) Solomon’s prayer as recorded in 1 K 8 is
another quarry from which our author appears to
have dug.

This section may be thus divided:

(a) 2 6-12: Confession, opening as the former
(see 1 15) with words extracted from Dnl 9 7.

(8) 2 13—3 8: Prayer for restoration.

3 1-8 shows more independence than the rest,
for the author at this point makes use of language
not borrowed from any original known to us. As
such these verses are important as a clue to the
writer’s position, views and character.

In 3 4 we have the petition: ‘Hear now the
prayer of the dead Israelites,” etc, words which
as they stand involve the doctrine that the dead
(Solomon, Daniel, etc) are still alive and make
intercession to God on behalf of the living. But
this teaching is in opposition to 2 17 which occurs
in the same context. Without making any change
in the Heb consonants we can and should read for
“dead [méthé] Israelites” ‘‘the men of [m2thé] Israel.”
The LXX confuses the same words in Isa 5 13..

The praise of ‘‘ Wisdom,” for neglecting which
Israel is now in a strange land. God alone is the

author of wisdom, and He bestows it


3. The not upon the great and mighty of this
Praise of — world, but upon His own chosen people,
Wisdom who however have spurned the Divine


gift and therefore lost it (3 9—4 4).

The passage, 3 10-13 (Israel’s rejection of ‘“Wis-
dom” the cause of her exile), goes badly with the
context and looks much like an interpolation. The
dominant idea in the section is that God has made
Israel superior to all other nations by the gift of
‘Svisdom,’’ which is highly extolled. Besides stand-
ing apart from the context these four verses lack the
rhythm which characterize the other verses. What
is so cordially commended is described in three ways,
each showing up a different facet, as do the eight syn-
onyms for the Divine word in each of the 22 strophes
in Ps 119 (see Century Bible, “Psalms,” 1], 254).

(1) It is called most frequently “Wisdom.”

(2) In4 1litisdescribed as the Commandments of
God and as the Law or more correctly as authorita-
tive instruction. The Heb word for this last (tardh)
bears in this connection, it is probable, the technical
meaning of the Pent, asense which it never has in the
OT. Ci Dt 4 6, where the keeping of the command-
ments is said to be ‘‘wisdom”’ and understanding.

(1) The line of thought here resembles closely
that pursued in Job 28, which modern scholars

rightly regard as a later interpolation.
4. The De- Wisdom, the most valuable of pos-


pendence _ sessions, is beyond the unaided reach
of This of man. God only can give it—that
Wisdom is what is taught in these parts of
Section both Bar and Job with the question


“Where shall wisdom be found?”
(Job 28 12; cf Bar 3 14 f, where a similar question


forms the basis of the greater portion of the section
of Job 38f). Wisdom is not here as in Prov hypos-
tatized, and the same is true of Job 28. This in
itself is a sign of early date, for the personifying
of “wisdom” is a later development (cf Philo,
John 1).

(2) The language in this section is modeled largely
on that of Dt, perhaps however through Jer, which
is also esp. after ch 10 Deuteronomic in thought
and phraseology. See ante II, 2 (2 16).

The most original part of this division of the book
is where the writer enumerates the various classes
of the world’s great ones to whom God had not
given “wisdom’’: princes of the heathen, wealthy
men, silversmiths, merchants, theologians, philos-
ophers, etc (3 16 ff). See Wispom.

The general thought that pervades the section,
4 5—65 9, is words of cheer to Israel (i.e. Judah)

in exile, but we have here really,


5. Words according to Rothstein, a compilation
of Cheer edited so skilfully as to give it the ap-
to Israel pearance of a unity which is not real.


Harlier Bib. writings have throughout
been largely drawn upon. Rothstein (Kautzsch,
Die Apokryphen, etc, 213-15) divides the section in
the following manner:

(1) 4 59a: Introductory section, giving the
whole its keynote—‘‘Be of good cheer,” etc; 4 7f
follows Dt 32 15-18.

(2) 4 96-29: A song, divisible into two parts.

(a) Personified Jerus deplores the calamities of
Israel in exile (vs 96-16).

(b) She urges her unfortunate children to give
themselves to hope and prayer, amending thcir
ways so that God may bring abont their deliver-
ance (vs 17-29).

(c) 4 30—5 9: A second song, beginning as the
first with the words, ‘‘Be of good cheer,” and having
the same general aim, to comfort exiled and op-
pressed Israel.

In all three parts earlier Scriptures have been
largely used, and in particular Deutero-Isaiah has
had much influence upon the author. But there
do not seem to the present writer reasons cogent
enough for concluding, with Rothstein, that these
three portions are by as many different writers.
There is throughout the same recurring thought
“Be of good cheer,” and there is nothing in the style
to suggest divergent authorship.

(3) The relation between 4 36—59 and Ps
Sol 11. It was perhaps Ewald (Geschichte, IV,
498) who first pointed out the similarity of language
and viewpoint between Bar 4 36—5 9 and Ps
Sol 11, esp. 11 3-8. The only possible explanation
is that which makes Bar 4 36 ff an imitation of
Ps Sol 11. So Ewald (op. cit.); Ryle and James
(Ps Sol, Ixx, ii ff).

Ps Sol were written originally in Heb, and refer-
ences to Pompey (d. 48 BC) and to the capture of
Jerus (63 BC) show that this pseudepigraphical
Psalter must have been written in the first half
of the 1st cent. BC. Bar, as will be shown, is of
much later date than this. Besides it is now
almost certain that the part of Bar under discussion
was written in Gr (see below, IV) and that it
never had a Heb original. Now it is exceedingly
unlikely that a writer of a Heb psalm would copy
a Gr original, though the contrary supposition 1s
a very likely one.

On the other hand A. Geiger (Psalt. Sol., XI,
137-39, 1811), followed by W. B. Stevenson (Temple
Bible), and many others argue for the priority of
Bar, using this as a reason for giving Bar an earlier
date than is usually done. It is possible, of course,
that the Pseudo-Solomon and the Pseudo-Baruch
have been digging in the same quarry; and that
the real original used by both is lost.


409


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Baruch, Book of


Hf, Language.—F¥or our present purpose the
book must be divided into two principal parts: (1)
1—3 8; (2) 3 9-5 9. There is general agreement
among the best recent scholars from Ewald down-
ward that the first portion of the book at least was
written originally in Heb. (1) In the Syro-Hex. text
there are margin notes to 1 17 and 2 3 to the effect
that these verses are lacking in the Heb, i.e. in the
original Heb text.

(2) There are many linguistic features in this
first part which are best explained on the supposition
that the Gr text is from a Heb original. In 2 25
the LXX EV apostolé at the end of the verse means
“a sending of.’ The EV (‘‘pestilence’’) renders
a Heb word which, without the vowel signs (in-
troduced late) is written alike for both meanings
(dbr). The mistake can be explained only on the
assumption of a Heb original. Similarly the read-
ing ‘‘dead Israelites” for ‘“‘men of Israel” (=Israel-
ites) in 3 4 arose through reading wrong vowels
with the same consonants, which last were alone
written until the 7th and 8th cents. of our era.

Frequently, as in Heb, sentences begin with Gr
kat (=“‘and’’) which, without somewhat slavish
copying of the Heb, would not be found. The
construction called paratazis characterizes Heb; in
good Gr we meet with hypotazis.

The Heb way of expressing ‘‘where’’ is put lit.
into the Gr of this book (2 4.13.29; 3 8). Many
other Heb idioms, due, it 1s probable, to the trans-
lator’s imitations of his original, occur: in “to
speak in the ears of” (13); the word “man?
(anthropos) in the sense “everyone” (2 3); “spoken
by thy servants the prophets” is in Gr by ‘‘the hand
of the servants,’? which is good Heb but bad Gr.
Many other such examples could be added.

There is much less agreement among scholars
as to the original language or languages of the second
part of the book (3 9—6 9). That this part too
was written in Heb, so that in that case the whole
book appeared first in that language, is the position
held al defended by Ewald (op. cit.), Kneucker
(op. cit.), Konig (Hin), Rothstein (op. cit.) and
Bissell (Lange). It is said by these writers that this
second part of Bar equally with the first carries
with it marks of being a tr from the Heb. But one
may safely deny this statement. It must be ad-
mitted by anyone who has examined the text of the
book that the most striking Hebraisms and the
largest number of them occur in the first part of
the book. Bissell writes quite fully and warmly
in defense of the view that the whole book was
at first written in Heb, but the Hebraisms which he
cites are all with one solitary exception taken from
the first part of the book. This one exception is
in 4 15 where the Gr conjunction Aétz is used for the
relative hé, the Heb ’désher having the meaning of
both. There seems to bea Hebraism in 4 21: ‘He
shall deliver thee from... . the hand of your
enemies,” and there are probably others. But
there are Hebraisms in Hellenistic Gr always—
the present writer designates them ‘“Hebraisms”’
or “Semiticisms’” notwithstanding what Deismann,
Thumb and Moulton say. In the first part of this
book it is their overwhelming number and their
striking character that tell so powerfully in favor
of a Heb original. of

(3) The following writers maintain that the
second part of the book was written first of all in
Gr: Fritzsche, Hilgenfeld, Reuss, Schtirer, Gifford,
Cornill and R. H. Charles, though they agree
that the first part had a Heb original. This is
probably the likeliest view, though much may be
written in favor of a Heb original for the whole book
and there is nothing quite decisively against it.
J. Turner Marshall (HDB, I, 253) tries to prove
that 3 9—4 4 was written first in Aram., the rest


of the book (4 5—5 9) in Gr. But though he
defends his case with great ability he does not
appear to the present writer to have proved his
thesis. Ewald (op. cit.), Hitzig (Psalmen?, II, 119),
Dillmann, Ruetschi, Fritzsche and Bissell were
so greatly impressed by the close likeness between
the Gr of Bar and that of the LXX of Jer, that they
came to the conclusion that both books were tr? by
the same person. Subsequently Hitzig decided that
Bar was not written until after 70 AD, and therefore
abandoned his earlier opinion in favor of this one—
that the translator of Bar was well acquainted with
the LXX of Jer and was strongly influenced by it.
IV. Date or Dates.—It is important to distinguish
between the date of the completion of the entire
book in its present form and the dates of the several
parts which in some or all cases may be much older
than that of the whole as such. :
1 1-14 was written after the completion of the
book expressly to form a prologue or historical ex-
planation of the circumstances under
1. The His- which the rest of the book came to be
torical In- written. To superficial readers it
troduction could easily appear that the whole
book was written by one man, but a
careful examination shows that the book is a com-
pilation. One may conclude that the introduction
was the last part of the book to be composed and
that therefore its date is that of the completion of
the book. Reasons will be given (see below) for
believing that 4 5—6& 9 belongs to a time subse-
quent to the destruction of Jerus and its temple
in 70 AD. This is still more true of this intro-
duction intended as a foreword to the whole book.
The following points bear on the date of the
section 1 15—3 8, assuming it to have one date:
(1) The generation of Israelites to


2. Confes- which the writer belonged were suffer-
sion and ing for the sins of their ancestors; see
Prayer esp. 3 1-8.


(2) The second temple was in exist-
ence in the writer’s day. 2 26 must (with the best
scholars) be tré as follows: ‘‘And thou hast made the
house over which thy name is called as it is this
day,’”’ i.e. the temple—still in being—is shorn of its
former glory. Moreover though Dnl 9 7-14 is
largely quoted in 1 15—2 12, the prayer for the
sanctuary and for Jerus in Dnl 9 16 is omitted,
because the temple is not now in ruins.

(3) Though it is implied (see above II, 2, [1]}) that
there are Jews in Judah who have never left their
land there are a large number in foreign lands, and
nothing is said that, they were servants of the Bab
king.

(4) The dependence of 2 13—3 8 on Dt, Jer and
1 K 8 (Solomon’s prayer) shows that this part of
the book is later than these writings, i.e. later than
say 550 BC. Cf2 13 with Dt 28 62and Jer 42 2.

(5) The fact that Dnl 9 7-14 has influenced
Bar 1 15—2 12 proves that a date later than Dnl
must be assumed for at least this portion of Bar.
The temple is still standing, so that the book belongs
somewhere between 165 BC, when Dnl was written,
and 71 AD, when the temple was finally destroyed.

Ewald, Gifford and Marshall think that this
section belongs to the period following the conquest
of Jerus by Ptolemy I (320 BC). According to
Ewald the author of 1 1—3 8 (regarded as by one
hand) was a Jew living in Babylon or Persia. But
Dnl had not in 320 BC been written. Fritzsche,
Schrader, Keil, Toy and Charles assign the section
to the Maccabean age—a quite likely date. On the
other hand Hitzig, Kneucker_ and Schiirer prefer
a date subsequent to 70 AD. The last writer
argues for the unity of this section, though he
admits that the middle of ch 1 comports ill with
its context.


Baruch, Book of
Basilisk


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


410


It has been pointed out (see above, II, 3) that 3
10-13 does not belong to this section, being manifest-
ly a later interpolation. The depend-


3. The ence of this Wisdom portion on Job 28
Wisdom and on Dt implies a post-exilic date.
Section The identification of Wisdom with the
3:9—4:4 Torah whichis evidently a synonym for


the Pent, argues a date at any rate
not earlier than 300 BC. But how much later we
have no means of ascertaining. The reasons ad-
duced by Kneucker and Marshall for a date immedi-
ately before or soon after the fall of Jerus in 70 AD
have not convinced the present writer.
The situation implied in these words may be
thus set forth:
(1) A great calamity has happened


4. Words to Jerus (4 9f). Nothing is said
of Cheer proving that the whole land has shared
4:5—5:9 the calamity, unless indeed this is


impliedin 4 5f.

(2) A large number of Jerusalemites have been
transported (4 10).

(3) The nation that has sacked Jerus and earried
away many of its inhabitants is “shameless,” hav-
ing “a strange language, neither reverencing old
men nor pitying ehildren” (4 15).

(4) The present home of the Jerusalemites is a
great city (4 32-35), not the country.

Now the above details do not answer to any
dates in the history of the nation except these two:
(a) 586 BC, when the temple was destroyed by the
Babylonians; (b) 71 AD, when the temple was
finally destroyed by the Romans. But the date
586 BC is out of the question, and no modern
scholar pleads for it. We must therefore assume
for this portion of the book a date soon after 70 AD.
In the time of Pompey, to which Graetz assigns the
book, neither Jerus nor the temple was destroyed.
Nor was there any destruction of either during the
Maccabean war. In favor of this date is the de-
pendence of 4 36 ff on Ps Sol 11 (see above, II, 5, [3]).

Rothstein (in Kautzsch) says that in this section
there are at least three parts by as many different
writers. Marshall argues for four independent
parts. But if either of these views is correct the
R has done his work exceedingly well, for the whole
harmonizes well together.

Kneucker, author of the fullest Commentary,
endeavors to prove that the original book consisted
of 1 1f+3a (the heading) +38 9—5 9, and that
it belongs to the reign of Domitian (81-96 AD).
The confession and prayer in 1 15—3 8 were written,
he says, somewhat earlier and certainly before 71
AD, and as a separate work, being inserted in the
book by the scribe who wrote 1 4-14.

V. Versions.— The most important VSS are
the following. It is assumed in the article that the
Gr text of the book up to 3 8 is itself a tr from a
Heb text now lost. The same remark may be true
of the rest of the book or of a portion of it (see
above, IIL).

There are two versions in this language: (1)
The Vulg which is really the Old Lat, since Jerome’s
revision was confined to the Heb Serip-
tures, the Apoe being therefore omitted
in this revision. This version is a
very lit. one based on the Gr. It is therefore for
that reason the more valuable as a witness to the
Gr text. (2) There is a later Lat tr, apparently
a revision of the former, for its Latinity is better;
in some eases it adopts different readings and in a
general way it has been edited so as to bring it into
harmony with the Vatican uncial (B). This Lat
version was published in Rome by J. Maria Caro
(d. cir 1688) and was reprinted by Sabatier in
parallel eolumns with the pre-Jeromian version
noticed above (see Bibliotheca Casinensis, I, 1873).


1. Latin


There are also in this language two extant ver-
sions: (1) The Pesh, a very lit. tr, ean be seen in
the London (Walton’s) Polyglot and
most conveniently in Lagarde’s Libr.
Apoc. Syr., the last being a more aecu-
rate reproduction. (2) The Hexap. Syr tr made by
Paul, bishop of Telle, near the beginning of the
7th eent. AD. It has been published by Ceriani
with eritieal apparatus in his beautiful photograph-
lithographed edition of the Hexap. Syr Bible.

There is a very literal tr to be
8. Arabic found in the London Polyglot, referred
to above.


LitERATURE.—For editions of the Gr text see under
ApocrrpHa. Of commentaries the fullest and best is
that by Kneucker, Das Buch Baruch (1879), who gives
an original German rendering based on a restored Heb
original. Other valuable commentaries are those by
Fritzsche (1851); Ewald, Die Propheten, etc (1868),
III, 251-82 (Eng. tr); The Prophets of the OT, V, 108—
37, by Reusch (1855); Zoéckler (1891) and Rothstein
(op. cit.); and_in Eug., Bissell (in Lange's series edited
by D. 8. Schaff, 1880); and Gifford (Speaker's Comm.,


2. Syriac


1888). The S.P.C. bas a handy and serviceable
volume published in the series of popular commentaries
on the OT. But this commentary, thongh published


quite recently (my copy belongs to 1894, ‘‘nineteenth
thousand”’),
scholarship.

Arts. dealing with introduction occur in the various
Bible Dictionaries (DB, Westcott and Ryle; HDB,
J. T. Marshall, able aud original; #B, Bevan, rather
slight). To these must be added excellent arts. in Jew
Enc (G. F. Moore), and EB (R. H. Charles).

T. Wirron Davigs

BARZILLAI, bar-zil'é-i, bar-zil’1 (2772, barzil-
lay; BepfeAXl, Berzelli, ‘man of iron” [BDB, but cf
Cheyne, £B)):

(1) A Gileadite of Rogelim who brought provi-
sions to David and his army to Mahanain, in their
flight from Absalom (2 S 17 27-29). When David
was returning to Jerus after Absalom’s defeat, B.
conducted him over Jordan, but being an old man
of 80 years of age, he declined David’s invitation
to come to live in the capital, and sent instead his
son Chimham (2 § 19 31-39). David before his
death charged Solomon to ‘‘show kindness unto the
sons of B.” (1.K 2 7). Cheyne in #B, without
giving any reason, differentiates this B. from B. the
Gileadite (Ezr 2 61=Neh 7 63). See (2) below.

(2) The father of a family of priests who in
Ezra’s time, after the return of the exiles, could
not trace their genealogy. ‘Therefore were they
deemed polluted and put from the priesthood.”
This B. had taken “a wife of the daughters of B.
the Gileadite,” and had adopted his wife’s family
name (Ezr 2 61.62=Neh 7 63.64). His original
name is given as Jaddus (AV Addus) (1 Esd 6 38).
(See ZorzELLEUS; RVm “Phaezeldaeus.”’)

(3) B. the Meholathite, whose son Adriel was
married to Saul’s daughter, either Michal (2 8
21 8) or Merab (1 S 18 19). T. Rees


BASALOTH, bas’a-loth (A, Baadé0, Baaléth; B,
Baooadéu, Basalém; 1 Esd 6 31=Bazluth [Ezr 2 52]
and Bazlith [Neh 7 54]): The descendants of B.
(temple-servants)returned with Zerubbabel to Jerus.


BASCAMA, bas’ka-ma (Backapdé, Baskamd [1
Maec 13 23]): A town located in the country of
Gilead, where Tryphon slew Jonathan, the son of
Absalom. Cf JonaTHan (Apoe).


BASE, bis:

(1) Subst. from Lat basis, Gr Baos, basis, a
foundation. (a) (M93, mekhdndh): the fixed
resting-place on which the lavers in Solomon’s
temple were set (1 K 7 27-43; 2 K 16 17; 26 13.
16; 2 Ch 4 14; Jer 27 19; 52 17.20; ef Ezr 3 3;
Zec 6 11 ARVm). (6) (72, kén): pedestal in AV
and RV (1 K 7 29.31) and in RV only (Ex 30 18.
28; 31 9; 35 16; 38 8; 39 39; 40 11; Lev 8 11) of


needs strengthening on the, side of its


411


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Baruch, Book of
Basilisk


the base of the laver of the tabernacle (AV “foot’’).
(c) (FN, yarekh): “base of candlestick” (RV of Ex
25 31; 37.17) AV “shaft.” (d) (TiD", y*sddh):
RV “base of altar’; AV ‘“bottom’’ (Ex 29 12; 38
8; Lev 4 7.18.25.30.34; 59; 815; 99). (e) (4a,
gabh): RV “elevation,” i.e: basement of altar; AV
“higher place’ (Ezk 43 13).

(2) Adj. from Fr. bas—low, or Welsh bas—
“shallow”: of lowly birth or station, of voluntary
humility, and of moral depravity. (a) ODD,
shaphal, Sw , sh'phal): of David's self-humiliation
(2 8 6 22): “a modest unambitious kingdom”
(Ezk 17 14; 29 14.15 [BDB]; Dnl 4 17 [ARV
“lowest”’)]): of shk*phélah=“lowland.” (b) (Mop,
kalah): men of humble birth and station as opposed
to the nobles (Isa 3 5). (¢c) (DW 22, bli-shém):
“nameless,’”’ “of no account”: “children of fools,
yea, children of basemen” (Job 30 8). (d) AVmen,
sons, daughters, children of Belial; lit. “worthless
persons’; in ARV “base,” except 1 S 1 16 ‘“‘wieked
woman”; also ERV of Dt 18 13, “base,” which
elsewhere retains AV rendering. (e) (ramevés, ta-
peinds): “lowly,” “humble or abject” (2 Cor 10 1);
RV, “lowly”; so Paul’s enemies said he appeared
when present in the church at Corinth. (f) (dyevis,
agenés): ‘of low birth,” “of no account”? (1 Cor
1 28): “base things of the world.” (g) (dyopaios,
agoratos): ‘‘belonging to the market-place,”’ loafers,
worthless characters (Acts 17 5): “certain lewd
fellows of the baser sort”’; RV ‘‘eertain vile fellows
of the rabble.” T. Ress


BASEMATH, bas’é-math, BASHEMATH, bash’~
é-math, BASMATH, bas’math (N2W2, bas-math,
‘fragrant’’):

(1) Basemath, one of the wives of Esau, a
daughter of Elon, the Hittite (Gen 26 34; AV
Bashemath), probably identical with or a sister
of Adah whom he also married (Gen 36 2). Cf
ADAH.

(2) Basemath (AV Bashemath), another wife
of Esau, a daughter of Ishmael and a sister of Ne-
baioth (Gen 86 3.4.10.13.17). This wife is also
called Mahalath (Gen 28 9), and is of the house
of Abraham. Esau married her because his father
was not pleased with his other wives who were
daughters of Canaan. Cf Mauauara.

(2) Basemath (AV Basmath), the daughter of
Solomon, and wife of Ahimaaz, a eommissariat-
offieer in the service of Solomon (1 K 4 15).

: . L. BresiicH

BASHAN, ba’shan (JW2O, ha-bashan, “the
Bashan”; Baodv, Basdn): This name is probably


the same in meaning as the cognate.


Arab. bathneh, “soft, fertile land,”
or bathaniyeh (batanaea), ‘this land
sown with wheat’ (‘‘wheatland”).
It often occurs with the art., “the Bashan,” to
describe the kingdom of Og, the most northerly
part of the land E. of the Jordan. It stretehed
from the border of Gilead in the 8. to the slopes of
Hermonin the N. Hermon itself is never definitely
included in Bashan, although Og is said to have
ruled in that mountain (Josh 12 5; 18 11). In
Dt 3 10 Salecah and Edrei seem to indicate the E.
and W. limits respectively. This would agree with
Josh 12 5; 13 11, which seem to make Geshur
and Maaeath the western boundary of Bashan.
If this were so, then these unconquered peoples
literally “dwelt in the midst of Israel.” On the
other hand Dt 4 47 may mean that the Jordan
formed the western boundary; while Dt 33 22
makes Bashan extend to the springs of the Jordan.
If Golan lay in the district in whieh its name is
still preserved (el Jaulén), this also brings it to the lip


1. Bound-
aries


of the Jordan valley (Dt 4 43). “A mountain of
summits,” or ‘‘protuberanees”’ (Ps 68 15.16: Heb),
might describe the highlands of the Jaulan, with
its many voleanic hills as seen from the W. ‘A
mountain of God” however does not so well apply
to this region. Perhaps we should, with Wetz-
stein (Das batandische Giebelgebirge) take these
phrases as descriptive of Jebel Hauradn, now usually
called Jebel ed-Druze, with its many striking sum-
mits. This range proteeted the province from en-
croachment by the sands of the wilderness from the
E. On the 8. Bashan marehed with the desert
steppe, el-Hamdd, and Gilead. Of the western
boundary as we have seen there ean be no certainty.
It is equally impossible to draw any definite line
in the N.

Bashan thus ineluded the fertile, wooded slopes

of Jebel ed-Druze, the extraordinarily rich plain of

el-Hauran (en-Nukrah—see HaurRan),
2. Charac- the rocky tract of el-Leja’, the region
teristics now known as el-Jédur, resembling the

Hauraén in character, but less eulti-
vated; and, perhaps, the breezy uplands of el
Jauldn, with its splendid reaches of pasture land.
It was a land rich in great cities, as existing ruins
sufficiently testify. It can hardly be doubted that
many of these oceupy sites of great antiquity. We
may specially note Ashtaroth and Edrei, the cities
of Og; Golan, the eity of refuge, the site of which
is still in doubt; and Salecah (Salkhad), the fortress
on the ridge of the mountain, marking the extreme
eastern limit of Israel’s possessions.

The famous oaks of Bashan (Isa 2 18; Ezk
27 6) have their modern representatives on the
mountain slopes. It seems strange that in Scrip-
ture there is no notice of the wheat crops for which
the eountry is in such repute today. Along with
Carmel it stood for the fruitfulness of the land
(Isa 83 9 ete); and their languishing was an evi-
dent mark of God’s displeasure (Nah 1 4). The
“bulls of Bashan” represent blatant and brutal
strength (Ps 22 12, etc). It is long since the lion
deserted the plateau (Dt 33 22); but the leopard
is still not unknown among the mountains (Cant
4 8).

In pre-Israelite days Bashan was ruled by Og
the Amorite. His defeat at Edrei marked the end

of his kingdom (Nu 21 33 ff; Josh
8. History 13 11), and the land was given to the

half tribe of Manasseh (Josh 13 30,
etc). Inthe Syrian wars Bashan was lost to Israel
(1 K 22 3ff; 2 K 8 28; 10 32f), but it was re-
gained by Jeroboam II (2 K 14 25). It was in-
corporated in the Assyr empire by Tiglath-pileser
Ill (2 K 16 29). In the 2d cent. BC it was in
the hands of the Nabataeans. It formed part of
the kingdom of Herod the Great, and then belonged
to that of Philip and Agrippa IT. W. Ewine


BASHAN -HAVVOTH- JAIR, ba’shan-hav’oth-
ja'ir WR) PAT TWS, bashdn hawwoth ya’ir). See
Havvorts-Jair.


BASHEMATH, bash’é-math. See Basemarn.


BASILISK, baz’i-lisk (DR, cepha‘, WEY,
ciph'éni, from obs root YP, gapha*, “to hiss”: Isa
11 8; 14 29; 69 5; Jer 8 17; Prov 23 32m. In
Prov 23 32, AV has “adder,” m “cockatrice”; in
the other passages cited AV has “‘coekatrice,” m
“adder” [exeept Jer 8 17, no m]): The word is
from Bacidloxos, basiliskos, ‘‘kinglet,’”’ from bast-
leis, “king,” and signifies a mythical reptile hatched
by a serpent from a cock’s egg. Its hissing drove
away other serpents. Its look, and esp. its breath,
was fatal. According to Pliny, it was named from
a crown-like spot onitshead. It has been identified


Basin, Bason
Bastard


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


412


with the equally mythical CockaTriceE (q.v.). In
all the passages cited, it denotes a venomous ser-
pent (see ADDER; SeRPENTS), but it is impossible
to tell what, if any, particular species is referred to.
It must be borne in mind that while there are
poisonous snakes in Pal, there are more which are
not poisonous, and most of the latter, as well as
some harmless lizards, are commonly regarded as
deadly. Several of the harmless snakes have crown-
like markings on their heads, and it is quite con-
ceivable that the basilisk myth may have been
founded upon one of these. AuFRep Evy Day


BASIN, b4’s’n, BASON: The ARV has “basin,”
the AV and RV “bason,” the preferred spelling of
the Eng. revisers. In the Appendix
1. The to the Revised OT the American
Terms Used Revisers (§ viii) say, “The modern
and Their spelling is preferred for the following
Meaning words’; then follow among others
“basin” for “bason’’; but no similar
statement appears in the Appendix to the Revised
NT. The Heb word so rendered in EV is chiefly
used for the large bowl of bronze (AV “brass’’)
employed by the priests to receive the blood of the
sacrificial victims (Ex 27 3; cf 29 16; 1 K 7 45,
etc). It is found only once in secular use (Am 6
6, ‘“‘drink wine in bowls’’), if the text there is cor-
rect; the LXX has it otherwise. See Bownt. The
“basins” of Ex 12 22; 2 S 17 28 were probably of
earthenware.


ie |
|
—


: i ci a
et SU MR AVA


Washing before Eating.


While the priests’ bowls were of bronze, similar
bowls or basins of silver were presented by the
princes of the congregation, according

2. Of Va- to Nu 7 13ff; and those spoken of
rious Ma- in 1 K 7 50 as destined for Solomon’s
terials and temple were of gold (cf 1 Ch 28 17).
Forms (1) The well-known eastern mode
of washing the hands was and is by

pouring water on the hands, not by dipping them
in water, an act, of course, calling for the aid of an


attendant. Elisha “poured water on
3. The the hands of Elijah” (2 K 3 11; see
Typical Kitto’s note in Pictorial Bible*, U,
Ewer of 330). A disciple came to be known
the East as “one who poured water on the


hands of another.” Such was beyond
question the prevailing custom among the ancient
Hebrews, as it was, and is, among eastern peoples
in general.. They incline to look with disgust, if not
with horror, upon our western practice of washing
face and hands in water retained in a basin.

(2) The typical vessel of the East used in such
ablutions has a long spout, not unlike our large
coffee-pot (see Kitto, Pict. Bib., Il, 331, note).
While the EV unfortunately often suggests nothing


like such pouring, the Heb expresses it, e.g. in 1 8
25 41, where we have the Qal of radhag (7M);
cf Kennedy in 1-vol HDB, and HDB, arts. “Bath,”
“Bathing.” Kennedy shows that “affusion,”
“pouring on” of water, was meant in many cases
where we read “bathe” or “wash” in EV. Lane
(Mod. Egypt, ch v) says: “‘A servant brings him a
basin and ewer (called fisht and ibreek) of tinned
copper or brass. The first has a cover with holes,
with a raised receptacle for the soap; and the water
is poured upon the hands and passes through the
ewer into the space below; so that when the basin
is brought to a second person the water with which
the former has washed is not seen.”

(1) A wash-basin of a special sort was used by
Jesus for washing the disciples’ feet (see Jn 13 5).

The Gr is niptér (umrip), eita bdllet
4. ABasin hiudér eis tén niptéra, tr’ RV, “then
of a Unique he poureth water into the basin.”
Sort This word nipiér is not found else-

where in the NT, nor in the LXX, nor,
indeed, in Gk profane lit. But fortunately the
general sense is here made plain by the context
and by comparison of the cognate verbs niptein
and nizein. It evidently denotes an article, not
necessarily a vessel, specifically suited to the use
of washing a part of the body, e.g. the hands or the
feet, and hence is used with the art., “the basin,”
RV. It is doubtful, therefore, if “basin,” or
“bason,” conveys a true idea of either the oriental
article here meant or the scene portrayed. The
fact that, according to the custom of the day, the
position of the disciples here was reclining, precludes
the possibility of the use of a “basin” of our sort,
in the way we are accustomed to, i.e. for immersing
the feet in the water, in whole or in part.

(2) So it is likely that the niptér was a jug, or
ewer, With a dish, saucer, or basin placed under it
and combined with it to catch the dripping water.
We know from other sources that such a vessel
was kept in the Jewish house regularly for ordinary
handwashings, etc (see Mt 15 2; Mk 7 8), and
for ceremonial ablutions. Hence it would naturally.
be ready here in the upper room as a normal part
of the preparation of the “goodman of the house”
for his guests (AV Mk 14 14; Lk 22 12), and so
it is distinguished by the Gr art. t6n. Jesus Himself
used the niptér, standing, doubtless, to impress
upon His disciples the lessons of humility, self-
abasement and loving service which He ever sought
to impart and illustrate.

(3) Our conclusion, we may say with George
Farmer in DCG, art. “Bason,” is that niptér was
not simply one large basin, but the set of ewer and
basin combined, such a set. as was commonly kept
in the Jewish house for the purpose of cleansing
either the hands or the feet by means of affusion.
The Arab. tisht, authorities tell us, is the exact
rendering of niptér, and it comes from a root which
means “to pour,” or “rain slightly.’ (See Anton
Tien, reviser of the Arab. prayer-book, author of
Arab. and Mod. Gr Grammars, etc, quoted in DCG,
art. ‘“Bason.’’) : Geo. B. Eager


BASKET, bas’ket: Four kinds of “baskets”
come to view in the OT under the Heb names,
dudh, tene’, saland kelabh. There is little, however,
in these names, or in the narratives where they
are found, to indicate definitely what the differences
of size and shape and use were. The Mish renders
us some help in our uncertainty, giving numerous
names and descriptions of “baskets” in use among
the ancient Hebrews (see Kreugel, Das Hausgerdt
in der Mishnah, 39-45). They were variously made
of willow, rush, palm-leaf, etc, and were used for
various purposes, domestic and agricultural, for
instance, in gathering and serving fruit, collecting


413


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Basin, Bason
Bastard


alms in kind for the poor, etc. Some had handles,
others lids, some both, others neither.

(1) Dadh was probably a generic term for various
kinds of baskets. It was probably the ‘‘basket” in

which the Israelites in Egypt carried
1. Meaning the clay for bricks (cf Ps 81 6, where
of OT it 1s used as a symbol of Egyp bond-
Terms age), and such as the Egyptians them-

selves used for that purpose (Wilk.,
Anc. Egypt, I, 379), probably a large, shallow
basket, made of wicker-work. It stood for a basket
that was used in fruit-gathering (see Jer 24 1),
but how it differed from Amos’ “basket of summer
fruit?’ (Am 8 1) we do not know. Dddh is used
for the “‘pot’’ in which meat was boiled (1 8S 2 14),
showing probably that a pot-shaped “basket” was
known by this name. Then it seems to have stood
for a basket tapering toward the bottom like the
calathus of the Romans. So we seem forced to con-
clude tbat the term was generic, not specific.

(2) The commonest basket in use in OT times
was the sal. It was the “basket”? in which the
court-baker of Egypt carried about his confec-
tionery on his head (Gen 40 16). It was made
in later times at least of peeled willows, or palm-
leaves, and was sometimes at least large and flat
like the canistrum of the Romans, and, like it, was
used for carrying bread and other articles of food
(Gen 40 16; Jgs 619). Meat for the meat
offerings and the unleavened bread, were placed in
it (Ex 29 3; Lev 8 2; Nu 6 15). It is expressly
required that the unleavened cakes be placed and
offered in such a “basket.” While a “‘basket,’’ it
was dish-shaped, larger or smaller in size, it would
seem, according to demand, and perhaps of finer
texture than the diadh.

(3) The tene’ was a large, deep basket, in which
grain and other products of garden or field were
carried home and kept (Dt 28 5.17), in which the
first-fruits were preserved (Dt 26 2), and the
tithes transported to the sanctuary (Dt 26 2 f).
It has been thought probable that the habya, the
basket of clay and straw of the Pal peasantry of
today, is a sort of survival or counterpart of it.
It has the general shape of a jar, and 1s used for
storing and keeping wheat, barley, oats, etc. At
the top is the mouth into which the grain is poured,
and at the bottom is an orifice through which it


a :
TMS
i ae fy


can be taken out as needed, when the opening is
again closed with a rag. The LXX translates
tene’ by kdrtallos, which denotes a basket of the
shape of aninverted cone. _ ;

(4) The term kélubh, found in Am 8 1 for a “fruit-
basket,” is used in Jer 5 27 (AV and RV. “cage”’)
for a bird-cage. But it is not at all unreasonable
te suppose that a coarsely woven basket with a
cover would be used by a fowler to carry home his
feathered captives.


In the NT interest centers in two kinds of ‘‘bas-

ket,” distinguished by the evangelists in their

accounts of the feeding of the 5,000

2. Meaning and of the 4,000, called in Gr képhinos
of NT and spuris (WH sphuris).

Terms (1) The kophinos (Mt 14 20; Mk

6 43; Lk 917; Jn 613) may be

confidently identified with the kiphia’ of the Mish,

which was provided with a cord for a handle by


: ee y Sas


Modern Oriental Baskets.


means of which it could be carried on the back with
such provisions as the disciples on the occasions
under consideration would naturally have with
them (cf Kreugel, and Broadus, Comm. in loc.).
The Jews of Juvenal’s day carried such a specific
“provision-basket’’ with them on their journeys
regularly, and the Lat for it is a transliteration
of this Gr word, cophinus (cf Juvenal iii.14, and
Jastrow, Dict., art. ‘‘Basket’’). Some idea of its
size may be drawn from the fact that in CIG, 1625,
46, the word denotes a Boeotian measure of about
two gallons.

(2) The sphuris or spuris (Mt 15 37; Mk 8 8)
we may be sure,from its being used in letting Paul
down from the wall at Damascus (Acts 9 25, etc),
was considerably larger than the kophinos and quite
different in shape and uses. It might for distinction
fitly be rendered “hamper,” as Professor Kennedy
suggests. Certainly neither the Gr nor ancient
usage justifies any confusion.

(3) The sargdné (2 Cor 11 33) means anything
plaited, or sometimes more specifically a fish-basket.

Gro. B. Eacrer

BASMATH, bas’math. Sce Basemata.


BASON, ba’s’n. See Basin.

BASSA, bas’a. See Bassal.

BASSAI, bas’‘a-i, bas’I (Bacoal, Bassat, Bassd;
AV Bassa; 1 Esd 5 16; Bezai [Ezr 2 17; Neh


7 23]): The sons of B. returned with Zerubbabel
to Jerns.


BASTAI, bas’ ta-i.


BASTARD, bas’tard (T2, mamzér; vé0os, nd-
thos): In Dt 23 2 probably the offspring of an
incestuous union, or of a marriage within the pro-
hibited degrees of affinity (Lev 18 6-20; 20 10-21).
He and his descendants to the tenth generation are
excluded from the assembly of the Lord. (See
Driver, adloc.). Zechariah (9 6), after prophesying
the overthrow of three Phili cities, declares of the
fourth: ‘And a bastard [RVm ‘‘a bastard race’’}
shall dwell in Ashdod,” meaning probably that a
“mixed population” (BDB) of aliens shall invade
and settle in the capital of the Philis. In He (12 8)
in its proper sense of “born out of wedlock,”’ and
therefore not admitted to the privileges of paternal
care and responsibility as a legitimate bas =

. REES


See BasTHal.


Basthai
Bath Kol


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


414


BASTHAI, bas’th4-i, bas’thi (Bac@al, Basthai;
AV Bastai; 1 Esd 5 31=Besai [Ezr 2 49; Neh
7 52]): The descendants of B. (temple-servants)
returned with Zerubbabel to Jerus.


BAT (HeOY, ‘dtaléph; Lev 11 19; Dt 14 18;
Isa 2 20): Bats are the most widely distributed of
mammals, reaching even the oceanic islands, and
modern science has revealed the existence of an
astonishing number of species, nearly twenty being
recorded from Pal. These include both fruit-eating
and insect-eating bats, the latter being the smaller.


Bats’ Ears.


It has not always been realized that they are mam-
mals, and so it is not surprising that they should
be mentioned at the end of the list of unclean birds
im Lev 11 19 and Dt 14 18. It may, however,
be significant that they are at the end of the list
and not in the middle of it. The fruit bats are a
pest to horticulturists and often strip apricot and
other trees before the fruit has ripened enough to
be picked. On this account the fruit is often in-
closed in bags, or the whole tree may be surrounded
with a great sheet or net. They commonly pick
the fruit and eat it on some distant perch beneath
which the seeds and the ordure of these animals are
scattered. The insect bats, as in other countries,
flit about at dusk and through the night catching
mosquitoes and larger insects, and so are distinctly
beneficial.

The reference in Isa 2 20, “cast... . idols
. . . . to the moles and to the bats’ refers of course
to these animals as inhabitants of dark and deserted
places. As in the case of many animal names the
etymology of ‘dtaléph is doubtful. Various deriva-
tions have been proposed but none can be regarded
as satisfactory. The Arab. name, watwat, throws
no light on the question. ALFRED ELY Day


BATANAEA, bat-a-n@’a: The name used in Gr
times for BasHaNn (q.v.), Jos, Life, II; Ant, XV, x,
1; XVII, ii, 1, “toparchy of Batanaea.”’


BATH (Ma, bath): A liquid measure equal to
about 9 gallons, Eng. measure. It seems to have
been regarded as a standard for liquid measures
(Ezk 45 10), as in the case of the molten sea and
the lavers in Solomon’s temple (1 K 7 26.38), and
for measuring oil and wine (2 Ch 2 10; Ezr 7 22;
Isa 5 10; Ezk 45 14). Its relation to the homer
is given in Ezk 46 11.14). See Wricuts anp
MEASURES.


BATH, bath, BATHING, bath’ing: Bathing in
the ordinary, non-religious sense, public or private,
is rarely met with in the Scriptures.

1. Ordinary We find, however, three exceptional
Bathing and interesting cases: (1) that of
Pharaoh’s daughter, resorting to the

Nile (Ex 2 5); (2) that of Bath-sheba, bathing on
the house-top (2 8 11 2 RV); (3) the curious case
mentioned in 1 K 22 38. (To wash with royal


blood was supposed to be beneficial to the com-
plexion.)

The dusty, limestone soil of Pal and the open
foot-gear of the Orient on stockingless feet, called
for frequent washing of the feet (Gen 24 32; 43
24; Jgs 19 24; 1 8 26 41; 28 11 8; Cant 5 8,
etc), and bathing of the body for refreshment;
but the chief concern of the writers of Scripture was
with bathing of another sort. Indeed, something
of the religious sense and aspect of bathing, in ad-
dition to that of bodily refreshment, seems to have
entered into the ordinary use of water, as in the
washing of the hands before meals, ete (see Gen 18
4; 19 2; Lk 7 44).

The streams and ponds, when available, were the
usual resorts for bathing (Ex 2 5; 2 K 6 10, etc),

but the water-supply of large cities,
2. Bathing stored up in great pools or large cis-
Resorts terns, was certainly available at times

to some degree for bathing (2 8 11 2);
though, as Benzinger says, no traces of bathrooms
have been found in old Heb houses, even in royal
palaces. In Babylon, it would seem from Sus
15, there were bathing pools in gardens, though this
passage may refer simply to bathing in the open
air. Certainly public baths as now known, or plunge-
baths of the Gr type, were unknown among the
Hebrews until they were brought in contact with
the Gr civilization. Such baths first come into
view during the Gr-Rom period, when they are
found to be regularly included in the gymnasia,
or “places of exercise’ (1 Macc 1 14). Remains
of them, of varying degrees of richness and archi-
tectural completeness, may be seen today in various
parts of the East, those left of the cities of the De-
capolis, esp. at Gerash and Amman, being excellent
examples (cf also those at Pompeii). A remarkable
series of bath-chambers has recently been discovered


Plan of the Baths in the Castle at Gezer (PEF).


by Mr. R. A. 8. Macalister at Gezer in Pal, in
connection with a building supposed to be the
palace built by Simon Maccabaeus. For an inter-
esting account of it see PEFS, 1905, 294 f.

When we consider that in Pal six months of the
year are rainless, and how scarce and _pricelessly


415


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Basthai
Bath Kol


valuable water is during most of the year, and in
many places all the year round; and when we
recall how the Bedouin of today looks


3. Gr on the use of water for cleansing in
versus such times and places of scarcity, view-
Sem Ideas ing it as a wanton waste (see Benzinger,


; Heb. Arch., 108, note), the rigid re-
quirement of it for so many ritual purposes by
the Mosaic law is, to say the least, remarkable (see
ABLUTION; CLEAN AND UNCLEAN, etc). Cer-
tainly there was a marked contrast between the
Gr idea of bathing and that of the Hebrews and
Asiatics in general, when they came in contact.
But when Gr culture invaded Pal under Antiochus
Epiphanes (cir 168 BC), it brought Gr ideas and
Gr bathing establishments with it; and under
Herod (40-44 BC) it was given the right of way and
prevailed to no mean degree (see Anecdote of


Gamaliel II in Schiirer, HJP, I, i, 18, 53).


But “bathing” in the Bible stands chiefly for
ritual acts—purification from ceremonial unclean-
ness, from contact with the dead,


4. Cere- with defiled persons or things, with
monial “holy things,” i.e. things ‘‘devoted,”
Purification or “under the ban,” etc (see CLEAN


AND UNCLEAN, etc). The Heb of the
OT does not sharply distinguish between bathing and
partial washing—both are expressed by rahag, and
the RV rightly renders “wash” instead of “‘bathe”’
in some cases. Talmudic usage simply codified
custom which had been long in vogue, according
to Schiirer. But Kennedy grants that the ‘‘bath”
at. last became, even for the laity, “an important
factor in the religious life of Israel.” We read of
daily bathing by the Essenes (Jos, BJ, II, viii, 5).
Then later we find John, the Baptizer, immersing,
as the record clearly shows the apostles of Christ
did also (Acts 8 38; Rom 6 3f); cf Lk 11 38
where Bar7ltw, baptizd, in passive = “washed.”
In Jn & 2-7 we have an example of bathing for
health. There are remains of ancient baths at
Gadara and at Callirrhoe, E. of the
6. Bathing Jordan, baths which were once cele-
for Health brated as resorts for health-seekers.
There are hot baths in full operation
today, near Tiberias, on the southwestern shore of


the Lake of Galilee, which have been a health resort
from time immemorial. It is probably true, however,
as some one has said, that in OT times and in NT
times, the masses of the people had neither privacy
nor inclination for bathing. Gro. B. Eacrr


BATH KOL, bath’kol, bath kél Ap M2, bath
kal, “the daughter of the voice”): Originally sig-
nifying no more than “sound,” “tone,” “call’’
(e.g. water in pouring gives forth a “sound,” bath
kél, while oil does not), sometimes also ‘‘echo.”’
The expression acquired among the rabbis a special
use, signifying the Divine voice, audible to man and
unaccompanied by a visible Divine manifestation.
Thus conceived, bath kél is to be distinguished from
God’s speaking to Moses and the prophets; for
at Sinai the voice of God was part of a larger
theophany, while for the prophets it was the
resultant inward demonstration of the Divine


will, by whatever means effected, given to them
to declare (see Vorcr). It is further to be distin-
guished from all natural sounds and voices, even
where these were interpreted as conveying Divine
instruction. The conception appears for the first
time in Dnl 4 28 (EV 31)—it is in the Aram. portion
—where, however, kal=kél, ‘‘voice” stands without
berath=bath, “daughter”: ‘A voice fell from
heaven.” Jos (Ant, XIII, x, 3) relates that John
Hyrcanus (135-104 BC) heard a voice while offer-
ing a burnt sacrifice in the temple, which Jos ex-
pressly interprets as the voice of God (cf Bab
Sotah 33a and Jerus S$dtah 24b, where it is called
bath kal). In the NT mention of ‘a voice from
heaven” occurs in the following passages: Mt 3
17; Mk 1 11; Lk 3 22 (at the baptism of Jesus);
Mt 17 5; Mk 97; Lk 9 35 (at His transfigura-
tion); Jn 12 28 (shortly before His passion);
Acts 9 4; 22 7; 26 14 (conversion of Paul), and
10 13.15 (instruction of Peter concerning clean
and unclean). In the period of the Tannaim (cir
100 BC-200 AD) the term bath kdl was in very
frequent use and was understood to signify not the
direct voice of God, which was held to be super-
sensible, but the echo of the voice (the bath being
somewhat arbitrarily taken to express the dis-
tinction). The rabbis held that bath k6l had been


Bath-rabbim
Bear, The


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


416


an occasional means of Divine communication
throughout the whole history of Israel and that
since the cessation of the prophetic gift it was the
sole means of Divine revelation. It is noteworthy
that the rabbinical conception of bath kdl sprang
up in the period of the decline of OT prophecy
and flourished in the period of extreme traditional-
ism. Where the gift of prophecy was clearly lack-
ing—perhaps even because of this lack—there
grew up an inordinate desire for special Divine
manifestations. Often a voice from heaven was
looked for to clear up matters of doubt and even
to decide between conflicting interpretations of the
law. So strong had this tendency become that
Rabbi Joshua (cir 100 AD) felt it to be necessary
to oppose it and to insist upon the supremacy and
the sufficiency of the written law. It is clear that
we have here to do with a conception of the nature
and means of Divine revelation that is distinctly
inferior to the Bib. view. For even in the Bib.
passages where mention is made of the voice from
heaven, all that is really essential to the revelation
is already present, at least in principle, without the
audible voice.


LitERATURE.—F. Weber, System der altsynagogalen
paldstinischen Theologie, 2d ed, 1897, 194 ff; J. Ham-
burger, Real-Enc des Judentums, II, 1896; W. Bacher,
Agada der Tannaiten and Agada der paldst. Amorder
(see Index); Jew Enc, II, 588 ff; “Bath Kol’ in TSBA,
IX, 18; P. Fiebig, Rel. in Gesch. und Gegenwart, I, s.v.

J. R. Van PET


BATH-RABBIM, bath-rab’im, THE GATE OF
(BWM WW, sha‘ar bath-rabbim; LXX év wbdats
Qvyarpds moAAdy, en ptilais thugatrés pollén, lit.
‘Gn the gates of the daughter of the many.” The
gate of Heshbon near which were the pools compared
to the Shulammite’s eyes (Cant 7 4). Guthe would
translate “by the gate of the populous city.”
Cheyne would amend the passage and read


“Thine eyes are like Solomon’s pools,
By the wood of Beth-cerem,”’


and transfer the scene to the pools of Solomon,
S. of Bethlehem (#B, s.v.). But this is surely very
violent. One of the pools of Heshbon still survives,
measuring 191 ft.x139 ft., and is 10 ft. deep.
The walls however have been rent by earthquakes,
and now no longer retain the water. W. Ewine


BATH-SHEBA, bath-shé’ba, bath’shé-ba
(Yawn, bath-shebha‘, “the seventh daughter,”
or ‘the daughter of an oath,” also called Bathshua
[yawna, bath-sha], “the daughter of opulence”
{1 Ch 8 5]; the LXX however reads Bérsabeé
everywhere; cf BatusHus; HPN, 65, 67, 77, 206
for Bath-sheba, and 67, 69, n. 3, for Bathshua):
Bath-sheba was the daughter of Eliam (2 § 11 3)
or Ammiel (1 Ch 3 5); both names have the
same meaning. She was the beautiful wife of
Uriah the Hittite, and because of her beauty was
forced by David to commit adultery (2 8 11 2 ff;
Ps 61). Her husband Uriah was treacherously
killed by the order of David (2 8 11 6ff). After
the death of her husband David made her his wife
and she lived with him in the palace (2 S 11 27).
Four sons sprang from this marriage (2 S 6 14;
1 Ch 8 5), after the first child, the adulterine,
had died (2 S 12 14 ff). With the help of the
prophet Nathan she renders futile the usurpation
of Adonijah and craftily secures the throne for her
son Solomon (1 K 1 11ff). Later Adonijah suc-
ceeds in deceiving Bath-sheba, but his plan is frus-
trated by the king (1 K 2 13 ff). According to
Jewish tradition, Prov 31 is written by Solomon
in memory of his mother. In the genealogy of
Jesus (Mt i 6) Bath-sheba is mentioned as the
former wife of Uriah and the mother of Solomon


by David. See Anoniyan; AMMIEL; BaTHsHUA;
Davin; Eniam; Nataan; Sotomon.
A. L. BRESLICH

BATHSHDA, bath’shti-a (WN, bath-shi',
“the daughter of opulence’ or ‘‘the daughter of
Shua”; cf BaTu-sHeBa; for derivation see HPN,
67, 69, n. 3):

(1) In Gen 38 2 and 1 Ch 2 3, where the name
is tr? “Shua’s daughter,” the wife of Judah.

(2) In 1 Ch 3 5, the daughter of Ammiel and
wife of David. See BaTH-sHEBA.


BATH-ZACHARIAS, bath-zak-a-ri’as. See BrTu-
ZACHARIAS.


BATTERING-RAM, bat’ér-ing-ram. See SizcE.
BATTLE. See War.


BATTLE-AXE, bat’’l-ax.
II, 1; Ax (Axe).


BATTLE-BOW, bat’’l-bd: Found in the striking
Messianic prophecy: ‘‘The battle bow shall be cut
off’ (Zec 9 10). The prophet is predicting the
peace that shall prevail when Zion’s king cometh,
‘Just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon
an ass, even upon a colt the foal of an ass.” The
words convey their full significance only when read
in the light of the context: “I will cut off the
chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerus;
and the battle bow shall be cut off; and he shall
speak peace unto the nations’ (cf 10 4). The
battle-bow was sometimes made of tough wood,
sometimes of two straight horns joined together

Hom. Ji. iv.105-11), and sometimes of bronze.
In Ps 18 34 RV we find “bow of brass,” but it
probably should be of “bronze” (MYM), n*hdsheth),
a metal very different from our brass, which is a
mixture of copper and zinc. The point of the pas-
sage in this connection (‘‘He teacheth my hands to
war; so that mine arms do bend a bow of bronze’’),
as well as of that in 2 K 9 24 (“And Jehu drew
his bow with his full strength’’) is that it required
great strength to bend the battle-bow. See
ARCHERY; ARMOR. Gro. B. Eager


BATTLEMENT, bat’’l-ment.
tion; Hovuss.


See Armor, ARMS,


See Forvirica-


BAVAI, bav’4-1.


BAVVAI, bav’a-i ("33, bawway; LXX A, Bevel,
Benet; B, Bedel, Bedet; AV Bavai, ““wisher” [?]{Neh
3 18]): Perhaps identical with or a brother of
Binnui (Neh 3 24). See Brynur. B., “the son of
Henadad, the ruler of half the district of Keilah,”’
was of a Levitical family. He is mentioned as one
of those who repaired the wall of Jerus after the
return from Babylon (Neh 3 17 f).


BAY, bi. See Cotors.


BAY, ba (jit8>, lashon, lit. “tongue”; KéAwos,
kélpos): The word occurs in the sense of inlet of
the sea in the OT only in Josh 16 2.5; 18 19, and
in NT only in Acts 27 39 (of Malta, AV “creek’’).


BAYITH, ba’yith (M2, bayith; AV Bajith,
“house” [Isa 15 2]): A town in the country of
Moab. The reading of RVm, ‘‘Bayith and Dibon
are gone up to the high places to weep,’’ seems to
be the proper rendering of this passage. Duhm
et al., by changing the text, read either “house of”
or “daughter of.’’ The construct of this word beth
is frequently used in compound words. See Beta.


See Bavval.


417


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bath-rabbim
Bear, The


BAY TREE, ba’tré’ (AV only; Ps 37 35; MTN,
’ezrah): The word means “native,” “indigenous,”
and RV tr® ‘‘a green tree in its native soil.”


BAZLITH, baz’lith, BAZLUTH, baz'luth (M">Z2,
baglith, Neh 7 54; ™M75¥3B, daglath, Ezr 2 52;
Basaloth, 1 Esd 5 31, ‘‘asking’’): The descendants


of B. (temple-servants) returned with Zerubbabel
to Jerus.


BDELLIUM, del’i-um (m>5a, bedhdlah): The
word occurs twice in the Pent: (1) in Gen 2 12,
in conjunction with gold and onyx, as a product of
the land of Haviuaw (q.v.), and (2) in Nu 11 7,
where the manna is likened to this substance in
appearance: “The appearance thereof as the
appearance of bdellium.’”’ The latter comparison
excludes the idea of b°dhélah being a precious stone,
and points to the identification of it with the
fragrant resinous gum known to the Greeks as
bdellion, several kinds being mentioned by Dios-
_ corides and Pliny. It was a product of Arabia,
India, Afghanistan, etc. JAMES ORR


BEACH, béch (alytadés, aigiaids): The part of
the shore washed by the tide on which the waves
dash (Mt 18 2.48; Jn 21 4; Acts 21 5; 27 39.40).


BEACON, bé’k’n. The tr of the Heb JF,
toren, which usually means “mast” (cf Isa 33 23;
Ezk 27 5), but in Isa 30 17 being used in parallel-
ism with “ensign” the meaning may be “‘signal-
staff” (Isa 30 17 ARVm “‘pole’’).


BEALIAH, bé-a-li’a (mmopa, b*alyah, ‘‘Jehovah
is Lord,” cf HPN, 144, 287): B., formerly a friend
of Saul, jomed David at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 5).


BEALOTH, bé’a-loth (FMDIA, be'alath; Badde,
Baléth): An unidentified city of Judah in the Negeb
(Josh 15 24).


BEAM, bem: The word is used to translate
various OT terms:

(1) 34, gébh (1 K 6 9), yoy, cla’, “a rib”
(1K73), UP, karah (2Ch3 7; 34 11;
Cant 1 17), all refer to constructional beams used
in buildings for roofing and upper floors, main
beams being carried on pillars generally of wood.
The last term is used in 2 K 6 2.5 (‘‘as one was
felling a beam’’) of trees which were being cut into
logs. A related form is Mp, karah (used of the
Creator, Ps 104 3; of building, Neh 2 8; 3 3.6).
Yet another term, O°D2, kdphim, is used in Hab
211: “The stone shall cry out of the wall, and
the beam out of the timber shall answer it’—a
protest against sin made by inanimate things. The
Donay version, in translating, ‘‘the timber that is
between the joints of the building,” suggests the
use of bond timbers in buildings, similar to that
used at one time in Eng. brickwork It probably
refers to its use in mud brick buildings, although
bond timbers might also be used in badly built
stone walls. The Arabs of the present day use
steel joints to strengthen angles of buildings.

(2) Beam, in weaving, represents two words,
INS, veregh (Jgs 16 14, the beam of a loom to
which Samson’s hair was fastened; used in Job
76 of a weaver’s shuttle), and V3, mdanor
(18 177; 28 2119; 1 Ch 11 23; 20 5), of a
spear-staff.

(3) In the NT Jesus uses the word doxds, dokés,
“a rafter,” in bidding the censorious person first
cast the “beam” out of his own eye before attempt-


ing to remove the “mote” from another’s eye
(Mt 73; Lk 6 41.42). See Ancuitecturr; House.


ArcH. C. Dickin
BEAN, bé’an. See Bazan.


BEANS, bénz (058, pal; Arab. fal): A very
common product of Pal; a valuable and very an-
cient article of diet. The Bible references are
probably to the Faba vulgaris (N.D. Leguminosae)
or horsebean. This is sown in the autumn; is in
full flower—filling the air with sweet perfume—
in the early spring; and is harvested just after the
barley and wheat. The bundles of black bean
stalks, plucked up by the roots and piled up beside
the newly winnowed barley, form a characteristic
feature on many village threshing-floors. Beans
are threshed and winnowed like the cereals.
Beans are eaten entire, with the pod, in the unripe
state, but to a greater extent the hard beans are
cooked with oil and meat.

In Ezk 4 9, beans are mentioned with other
articles as an unusual source of bread and in 28
17 28 David receives from certain staunch friends
of his at Mahanaim a present, which included
“beans, and lentils, and parched pulse.’’

: .E. W. G. Masterman

BEAR, bar (27 or 215%, dobh; cf Arab. dubb):
In 1 § 17 34-37, David tells Saul how as a shep-
herd boy he had overcome a lion anda bear. In 2
K 2 24 it is related that two she bears came out of
the wood and tore forty-two of the children who had
been mocking Elisha. All the other references to
bearsare fig.; cf 2 S 17 8; Prov 17 12; 28 15; Isa
11 7; 59 11; Lam 3 10; Dnl 7 5; Hos 13 8; Am
5 19; Rev 18 2. The Syrian bear, sometimes named


Syrian Bear—Ursus Syriacus.


as a distinct species, Ursus Syriacus, is better to be
regarded as merely a local variety of the European
and Asiatic brown bear, Ursus arctos. It still
exists in small numbers in Lebanon and is fairly
common in Anti-Lebanon and Hermon. It does
not seem to occur now in Pal proper, but may well
have done so in Bible times. It inhabits caves in
the high and rugged mountains and issues mainly
at night to feed on roots and vegetables. It is
fond of the hummus or chick-pea which is sometimes
planted in the upland meadows, and the fields have
to be well guarded. The fig. references to the bear
take account of its ferocious nature, esp. in the case
of the she bear robbed of her whelps (2 8 17 8;
Prov 17 12; Hos 13 8). It is with this character
of the bear in mind that Isaiah says (11 7), “And
the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones
shall lie down together.” Aurrep Exy Day


BEAR, bar, THE (ARCTURUS). A great north-
ern constellation. See Astronomy, IT, 13.


Bear, Born
Beatitudes


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


418


BEAR, bar (vb.), BORN, bérn (127, yaladh):
Occurs frequently in its lit. sense, alluding to mother-
hood (Gen 16 11; 17 17.19.21; 18 13; 22 23; 30 3;
Lev 12 5; Jgs 138 3; 6 7; Ruth 1 12; 1 K 3 21;
Jer 29 6); in the NT yevvdw, genndd, in the same
sense (Lk 1 13).

Figurative: It is often used with reference to
the beginning of the spiritual life or regeneration
(Jn 113; 33-8; 1 Jn 229; 39,47: 5 1.4.18
AV). See REGENERATION.


BEAR, bar, BORNE, barn (ND) , ndsa’; AnpPive,
lambdné, avadhépo, anaphérd, Baordte, basidzd): In
EV the physical sense is familiar, of supporting or
carrying any weight or burden. The tr of RV is to
be preferred in Ps 75 3 (‘have set up”); Lam 3 28
(“hath laid it upon him’); Zeph 1 11 (“were laden
with silver’); Lk 18 7 (“he is longsuffering over
them’); Jn 12 6 (“took away what was put there-
in’); Acts 27 15 (“could not face the wind’’).

Figurative: The words are used in the fig. sense
of enduring or taking the consequences of, be it for
oneself or as representative for others: one’s own
iniquity (Lev 5 17 and often); chastisement (Job
34 31); reproach (Ps 69 7; 89 50); or the sins of
others (Isa 63 4.11.12; Mt 8 17; He 9 28; 1 Pet
2 24). InIsa 46 1-7 astriking contrast is presented
between the idols of Babylon whom their worshippers
had carried (borne) about and which would be borne
away by the conquerors, and Jeh who had carried
(borne) Israel from the beginning. ‘Jacob and Israel
H borne by me from their birth... . and I
will bear; yea, I will carry.” ‘They bear it upon
the shoulder,” etc. M. O. Evans


BEARD, bérd:

(1) Western Semites in general, according to the
monuments, wore full round beards, to which they
evidently devoted great care. The nomads of the
desert, in distinction from the settled Semites, wore
a clipped and pointed beard (see Jer 9 26: “‘all
that have the corners of their hair cut off, that
dwell in the wilderness’; and cf 25 23; 49 32,
etc).


Beards (Egyptian in Top Row; Other Nationalities
in Bottom Row).


(2) Long beards are found on Assyr and Bab
monuments and sculptures as a mark of the highest
aristocracy (cf Egyp monuments, esp. representa-
tions by W. Max Miller, Asien und Europa, 140).
It is not clear that it was ever so with the Jews.
Yet it is significant that the Heb “elder” (zaken)
seems to have received his name from his long beard
(cf bene barbatus).

(3) The view of some that it was customary among
the Hebrews to shave the upper lip is considered by
the best authorities as without foundation. The
mustache (Heb saphaém, “beard’’), according to 2 S
19 24, received regular “trimming” (thus EV after


the Vulg, but the Heb is generic, not specific: ‘He
had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard”).

(4) In one case (1 § 21 13.14) the neglect of the
beard is set down as a sign of madness: ‘“[He] let
his spittle fall down upon his beard. Then said
Achish, . . . . Lo, ye see the man is mad.”

(5) It was common Sem custom to cut both hair
and beard as a token of grief or distress. Isaiah
(15 2), describing the heathen who have “gone up
to the high places to weep,” says ‘‘Moab waileth
over Nebo, and over Medeba; on all their heads is
baldness, every beard is cut off.” Jeremiah (41
5), describing the grief of the men of Samaria for
their slain governor, Gedaliah, says, ‘‘There came
men from... . Samaria [his sorrowing subjects]
even four score men, having their beards shaven and
their clothes rent,” ete. And Amos, in his prophecy
of the vision of the “basket of summer fruit”
(8 1ff), makes Jeh say to His people: “I will
turn your feasts into mourning; ... . I will bring
sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every
head’”’ (8 10). On the other hand it was even more
significant of great distress or fear to leave the beard
untrimmed, as did Mephibosheth, the son of Saul,
when he went to meet King David, in the crisis
of his guilty failure to go up with the king accord-
ing to his expectation: ‘‘He had neither dressed
his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his
clothes, from the day the king departed until the
day he came home in peace.” (Cf 15 21 13.14;
2 19 24.)

(6) Absalom’s hair was cut only once a year, it
would seem (2 8 14 26; cf rules for priests, Levites,
etc, Ezk 44 20). But men then generally wore their
hair longer than is customary or seemly with us
(ef Cant 5 2.11, “His locks are bushy, and black
as a raven”). Later, in NT times, it was a dis-
grace for a man to wear long hair (1 Cor 11 6-15).
To mutilate the beard of another was considered a
great indignity (see 2 S 10 4; cfIsa 50 6, “plucked
off the hair”). The shaving of the head of a cap-
tive slave-girl who was to be married to her captor
marked her change of condition and prospects (Dt
21 12; W.R. Smith, Kinship, 209).


Lirerature.—Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians, II, 324,
349; Herod. i.195; ii.36; iii.12; Jos, Ané, VIII, viii, 3;
XVI, viii, 1; W. R. Smith, Kinship, 209; RS, 324; Well-
hausen, Skizzen, III, 167.


Gro. B. Eacrr

BEAST, bést: This word occurs often in both Old
and New Testaments and denotes generally a
mammal (though sometimes a reptile) in distine-
tion to a man, a bird or a fish. In this distinction
the Eng. is fairly in accord with the Heb and Gr
originals. The commonest Heb words behémah
and hai have their counterpart in the Arab. as do
three others less often used, b*tr (Gen 45 17;
Ex 22 5; Nu 20 8 AV), nephesh (Lev 24 18), and
tebhah (Prov 9 2). Bthémah and Arab. bahimah
are from a root signifying vagueness or dumbness
and so denote primarily a dumb beast. Hai and
Arab. haiwdn are from the root hayah (Arab. haya),
“to live,” and denote primarily living creatures.
Betr, “cattle,” and its root-verb, bé‘ar, “to graze,”
are identical with the Arab. ba‘tr and ba‘ara, but
with a curious difference in meaning. Bair is a
common word for camel among the Bedawin and
the root-verb, ba‘ara, means ‘‘to drop dung,” ba‘rah
being a common word for the dung of camels, goats,
and sheep. Nephesh corresponds in every way with
the Arab. nephs, “breath,” “soul” or “self”? Tebhah
from {fabhah, ‘to slaughter,’ is equivalent to the
Arab. dhibh from dhabaha, with the same meaning.
Both @nplov, thérion (‘wild beast”), and ¢Gov, zdon
(“living thing’), occur often in the Apocalypse.

hey are found also in a few other places, as
mammals (IIe 13 11) or fig. (Tit 1 12). Thérion
is used also of the viper which fastened on Paul’s


419


hand, and this has parallels in classical Gr. Beasts
of burden and beasts used for food were and are an
important form of property, hence xrijvos, kténos
(“possession”), the word used for the good Samari-
tan’s beast (Lk 10 34) and for the beasts with
which Lysias provided Paul for his journey to Caes-
area (Acts 23 24).

For “swift beast,” kirkdrath, ‘dromedary” (Isa
66 20 AV), see Cameu. For ‘‘swift beast,’ rekhesh,
see Horse (Mic 1 13 AV; 1 K 4 28 AVm; ef Est
8 10.14). See also Witp Brast.


ALFRED Ey Day
BEAST-FIGHT, bést’fit. See Gamss.


BEATEN GOLD. See Gop (BraTteEn).
BEATEN OIL. See O11 (Beaten).
BEATING, bét’ing. See PunisHMENtTs.


BEATITUDES, bé-at’i-taids: The word ‘‘beati-
tude” is not found in the Eng. Bible, but the Lat
beatitudo, from which it is derived,
1. The occurs in the Vulg version of Rom
Name 46 where, with reference to Ps 32
1.2, David is said to pronounce the
“‘beatitude” of the man whose transgressions are
forgiven. In the Lat church beatitudo was used not
only as an abstract term denoting blessedness, but
in the secondary, concrete sense of a particular
declaration of blessedness and esp. of such a declara-
tion coming from the lips of Jesus Christ. Beati-
tudes in this derivative meaning of the word occur
frequently in the OT, particularly in the Pss
(82 1.2; 411; 65 4, etc), and Jesus on various
occasions threw His utterances into this form
(Mt 11 6; 18 16; 16 17; 24 46, with the Lukan
parallels; Jn 1817; 2029). But apart from
individual sayings of this type the name Beatitudes,
ever since the days of Ambrose, has been attached
specifically to those words of blessing with which,
according to both Mt and Lk, Jesus began that
great discourse which is known as the Sermon on
the Mount.
When we compare these Beatitudes as we find
them in Mt 5 3-12 and Lk 6 20-23 (24-26), we
are immediately struck by the resem-
2. The Two blances and differences between them.
Groups To the ordinary reader, most familiar
with Mt’s version, it is the differences
that first present themselves; and he will be apt to
account for the discrepancy of the two reports, as
Augustine did, by assigning them to two distinct
occasions in the Lord’s ministry. A careful com-
parative study of the two narratives, however, with
some attention to the introductory circumstances in
each case, to the whole progress of the discourses
themselves, and to the parabolic sayings with which
they conclude, makes this view improbable, and
points rather to the conclusion that what we have to
do withis two varying versions given by the Evangel-
ists of the material drawn from an underlying source
consisting of Logia of Jesus. The differences, it
must be admitted, are very marked. (a) Mt has
8 Beatitudes; Lk has 4, with 4 following Woes.
(b) In Mt the sayings, except the last, are in the
3d per.; in Lk they are in the 2d. (c) In Mt the
blessings, except the last, are attached to spiritual
qualities; in Lk to external conditions of poverty
and suffering. Assuming that both Evangelists
derived their reports from some common Logian
source, the question arises as to which of them has
adhered more closely to the original. The question
is difficult, and still gives rise to quite contrary
opinions. One set of scholars decides in favor of Mt,
and accounts for Lk’s deviation from the Matthaean
version by ascribing to him, on very insufficient


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bear, Born
Beatitudes


grounds, an ascetic bias by which he was led to
impart a materialistic tone to the utterances of
Jesus. Another set inclines to the theory that Lk’s
version is the more literal of the two, while Mt’s
partakes of the nature of a paraphrase. In support
of this second view it may be pointed out that Lk
is usually more careful than Mt to place the say-
ings of Jesus in their original setting and to pre-
serve them in their primitive form, and further that
owing to the natural tendency of the sacred writers
to expand and interpret rather than to abbreviate
an inspired utterance, the shorter form of a saying
is more likely to be the original one. It may be
noted, further, that in Mt 5 11.12 the Beatitude
takes the direct form, which suggests that this may
have been the form Mt found in his source in the
case of the others also. On the whole, then, proba-
bilities appear to favor the view that Lk’s version
is the more literal one. It does not follow, however,
that the difference between the two reports amounts
to any real inconsistency. In Lk emphasis is laid
on the fact that Jesus is addressing His disciples
(6 20), so that it was not the poor as such whom
He blessed, but His own disciples although they
were poor. It was not poverty, hunger, sorrow or
suffering in themselves to which He promised great
rewards, but those experiences as coming to spiritual
men and thus transformed into springs of spiritual
blessing. And so when Mt, setting down the Lord’s
words with a view to their universal application
rather than with reference to the particular cir-
cumstances in which they were uttered, changes
“the poor” into ‘the poor in spirit,’”’ and those that
“hunger” into those that “hunger and thirst after
righteousness,” he is giving the real purport of the
words of Jesus and recording them in the form in
which by all men and through all coming time they
may be read without any chance of misunder-
standing.

As regards the Beatitudes of the meek, the merci-
ful, the pure in heart, the peacemakers, which are
given by Mt only, they may have been spoken by
Jesus at the same time as the rest and have been
intended by Him in their association with the other
four to fill out a conception of the ideal character
of the members of the Kingdom of God. In view,
however, of their omission from Luke’s list, it is
impossible to affirm this with certainty. That
they are all authentic utterances of Jesus Himself
there is no reason to doubt. But they may have
been originally scattered through the discourse
itself, each in its own proper place. Thus the
Beatitude of the meek would go fitly with vs 38 ff,
that of the merciful with 43 ff, that of the pure in
heart with 27 ff, that of the peacemakers with 23 ff.
Or they may even have been uttered on_ other
occasions than that of the Sermon on the Mount
and have been gathered together by Matthew and
placed at the head of the Sermon as forming along
with the other four a suitable introduction to Our
Lord’s great discourse on the laws and principles
of the Kingdom of God. ;

With regard to the number of the Beatitudes
in Matthew’s fuller version, some have counted 7

only, making the list end with ver 9.
3. Number, But though the blessing pronounced


Arrange- on the persecuted in_vs 10-12 differs
ment, from the preceding Beatitudes, both
Structure in departing from the aphoristic form


and in attaching the blessing to an
outward condition and not to a disposition of the
heart, the || in Lk (6 22f) justifies the view that
this also is to be added to the list, thus making 8
Beatitudes inall. On the arrangement of the group
much has been written, most of it fanciful and
unconvineing. The first four have been described
as negative and passive, the second four as positive


Beautiful Gate
Bed, Bedstead


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


420


and active. The first four, again, have been repre-
sented as pertaining to the desire for salvation, the
second four as relating to its actual possession.
Some writers have endeavored to trace in the group
as a whole the steadily ascending stages in the de-
velopment of the Christian character. The truth
in this last suggestion lies in the reminder it brings
that the Beatitudes are not to be thought of as
setting forth separate types of Christian character,
but as enumerating qualities and experiences that
are combined in the ideal character as conceived
by Christ—and as exemplified, it may be added,
in His own life and person.

In respect of their structure, the Beatitudes are
all alike in associating the blessing with a promise
—a promise which is sometimes represented as
having an immediate realization (vs 3.10), but in
most cases has a future or even (cf ver 12) an escha-
tological outlook. The declaration of blessedness,
therefore, is based not only on the possession of the
quality or experience described, but on the present
or future rewards in which it issues. The poor in
spirit are called blessed not merely because they
are poor in spirit, but because the kingdom of
heaven is theirs; the mourners because they shall
be comforted; those that hunger and thirst after
righteousness because they shall be filled; those
who are persecuted because a great reward is laid
up for them in heaven. The Beatitudes have
often been criticized as holding up an ideal of which
limitation, privation and self-renunciation are the
essence, and which lacks those positive elements
that are indispensable to any complete conception of
blessedness. Bunt when it is recognized that the
blessing in every case rests on the associated promise,
the criticism falls to the ground. Christ does
demand of His followers a renunciation of many
things that seem desirable to the natural heart,
and a readiness to endure many other things from
which men naturally shrink. But just as in His
own case the great, self-emptying was followed by
the glorious exaltation (Phil 2 6 ff), so in the case
of His disciples spiritual poverty and the bearing
of the cross carry with them the inheritance of the
earth and a great reward in heaven.

Literaturs.—Votaw in HDB, V, 14 ff; Adeuey in
Expositor, 5th ser., II, 365 ff; Stanton, The Gospels as
Historical Documenis, II, 106 ff, 327 f; Gore, Sermon on
the Mount, 15 ff; Dykes, Manifesto of the King, 25-200.

. C. Lampert

BEAUTIFUL, bi'ti-f661, GATE, gat. See Temrie.


BEAUTY, bi’ti: The space allotted to this topic
allows liberty only for the statement of two prob-
lems to students of the Bible. They should give
distinct attention to the interblending of aesthetics
with ethics in the Scripture. They should observe
the extent and meaning of aesthetics in Nature.

That the Bible is an ethical book is evident.
Righteousness in all the relations of man as a moral

being is the key to its inspiration, the
1. Aesthet- guiding light to correct understanding
ics in Scrip- of its utterance. But it is everywhere
ture inspired and writ in an atmosphere

of aesthetics. Study will bring ont
this fact from Gen to Rev. The first pair make
their appearance in a garden where grew “every
tree that is pleasant to the sight” (Gen 2 9), and
the last vision for the race is an abode in a city
whose gates are of pearl and streets of- gold (Rev
21 21). Such is the imagery that from beginning
to end is pictured as the home of ethics—at first
in its untried innocence and at last in its stalwart
righteousness. The problem will be to observe the
intermingling of these two elements—the beautiful
and the good—in the whole Scripture range. A
few texts will set before us this kinship and then the

’ Bible student can detect it as he reads,


‘One thing have I asked of Jeh, that will I seek after:
That I may dwell in the house of Jeh all the days of my


life,
To hehold the heauty of Jeh,
And to inquire in his temple’ (Ps 27 4).


“For all the gods of the peoples are idols;
But Jeh made the heavens.
Honor and majesty are before him:

Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary”’ (Ps 96 5.6).

If we catch the spirit set forth in such and
similar Psalms, we can use it as'a magnetic needle
to detect its like wherever we shall read: and we
shall find that like in abundance. It is only neces-
sary to turn to the directions given for making the
Ark of the Covenant and its encircling tabernacle,
and the decorations of the priests that were to
minister in the worship of Jeh in the ceremonies
described, as given in Ex 25 ff, to see that every
resource of Israel was brought to bear to render
ark and tabernacle and their service beautiful.
One will find in a concordance half a column of
references under the word ‘Ark’ and a column and
a half under the word “Tabernacle.” By looking
up these references one can realize how much care
was spent to give and preserve to these aids to
worship the attractiveness of beauty.

In 1 Ch 15 and 16 we have an account of
David’s bringing in the Ark of the Covenant. into
his own city to rest in a tent he had provided for it.
On this occasion a demonstration was made with
all the aesthetics of which the music of that day
was capable. “And David spake to the chief of
the Levites to appoint their brethren the singers,
with instruments of music, psalteries and harps
and cymbals, sounding aloud and lifting up the
voice with joy.” And David himself gave to the
celebration the aesthetics of one of the noblest of
his psalms (1 Ch 16 8-36).

It is almost idle to refer to Solomon and his
temple (1 K 6ff; 2 Ch 3ff). It is a common
understanding that the civilization of Solomon’s
day was drawn upon to its utmost in every depart-
ment of aesthetics, in the building of that house
for Jeh and in the appointments for the worship
there to be conducted. Beauty of form and color
and harmony of sound were then and there inte-
grated—made one—with worship in holiness. The
propriety of that association has been seen and
felt through the ages.

There is beauty in speech. It is a fact that the
supreme classics in the lit. of the tongues of two of
the dominant nations of the earth, the Eng. and
the German, are tr® of the Bible. There is no
explanation of such fact except that the original
justified the tr. You can read indifferently from
one tr to the other and catch the same acsthetic
gleam. Nobility and poetry of thought lay in
what was to be tr’. Here is proof that cannot be
gainsaid that the Scripture authors sought the aid
of aesthetics as garb for the ethics they taught.
So they wrote in poetry. So they used allegory,
iNustration, figure, metaphor that would charm and
hold. The parables of Jesus are examples of this
method of clothing thought. They do their ethical
work because they have swept into it figure and
imagery from familiar aesthetic perceptions. “The
sower went forth to sow’ (Mt 18 3). That is a
glad sight—always has been and always will be.
That is why a picture of “The Sower’” hangs on the
walls of a Christian home. Just the painting—
and every beholder remembers the parable and
cannot forget its ethics. The intensity of thought
concentrated upon ethics in the NT has drawn
away attention from the partnership between these
two principles in religion. But it 1s there, and we
shall see it when once we look for it.

It is something to which we do not wake up till
late in life—to wit, the illimitableness of the pro-


421


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Beautiful Gate
Bed, Bedstead


vision in Nature for beauty. Common consent
awards beauty to the rainbow. Reflect that every

drop of water in the ocean, or in the
2. Aesthet- hydrated rocks, or in the vapor floating


ics in over Saturn, has in it the possibility
Nature of rainbow coloring. In fact all matter

has color of which the rainbow is only
specimen. Any element incandescent has a spec-


trum partially coincident with that of water and
ranging above and below it in the infinite capacity
it has to start ether undulations. As apparently
the larger part of the matter of the universe is
incandescent, we can sce that the ficld for expres-
sion in color is infinite. No one but the infinite
God can see it all.

If we come down to this plain, plodding earth,
cultivation of aesthetic sense will bring out beauty
everywhere, from the grandeur of mountain scenery
to aesthetic curves and colors revealed only by
the microscope. We say the butterfly is beautiful.
But the larva from which it is derived often carries
as much beauty in mottling of color and of the
fineness of finish of spine and mandible. Looking
across the scale in this way the evidence of theism
from beauty itself becomes convincing. Beauty
becomes a messenger of and from God—as_ Ins
was to the Greek and the rainbow to the Hebrew
(Ecel 3 11).

This from Amiel’s Journal Intime, I, 233, sets
forth the radical, inexpugnable position of beauty in
Nature and in philosophy thereof correctly inter-
pretative: “To the materialist philosopher the
beautiful is a mere accident, and therefore rare. To
the spiritualist philosopher the beautiful is the rule,
the law, the universal foundation of things, to which
every form returns as soon as the force of accident
is withdrawn.”

As we accustom ourselves to make larger and
larger synthesis in the department of aesthetics,
what diapason of theistic message may we not
hear? Beauty wherever and however expressed
is a medium of revelation. It is a bush ever burn-
ing, never consumed. Before it “‘put off thy shoes
from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou
standest is holy ground.”’ That beauty should be—
to that intent, for that end, from everlasting hath
wrought the Ancient of Days. C. CavERNO


BEAUTY, bi’ti, AND BANDS, bandz (Q72,
no‘am, and eget hobh‘lim): The names given
in Zec 11 7.14 to two symbolical staves, the first
signifying Jeh’s covenant of grace with the peoples,
and the second representing the brotherhood of
Judah and Israel. The breaking of the two staves
is symbolic of the breaking of Jeh’s covenant and
of the union between Judah and Israel.


BEBAI, bé’ba-i, beb’ai (122, bébhay; LXX
BnPat, Bebat, ‘“fatherly’’):

(1) Descendants of B. returned with Ezra to
Jerus (Ezr 8 11 called Babi; 1 Esd 8 37); one
of these is Zechariah, the son of Bebai (Kar 8
11, Zacharias; 1 Esd 8 37). 623 returned with
Zerubbabel to Jerus (Ezr 2 11; 1 Esd 5 13; Neh
7 16 gives the number 628); some of these had
married “strange wives” (Ezr 10 28; 1 Esd 9 29).

(2) A chief of the people who sealed the covenant
with Nehemiah (Neh 10 15).

(3) An unknown town (Jth 16 4).
B and Vulg.


BECAUSE, bé-kés’ (iva, hina, “in order that’’):
“The multitude rebuked them, b. [AV; RV ‘‘that”]
they should hold their peace” (Mt 20 31).


BECHER, bé’kér (733, bekher, ‘the firstborn”’;
cf HPN, 88):


Omitted in


(1) Son of Benjamin (Gen 46 21; 1 Ch 7 6.8).

(2) Son of Ephraim whose family is called Be-
cherites (AV ‘‘Bachrites”’), Nu 26 35 (1 Ch 7 20
called Bered). Cf Brrep.


BECHORATH, bé-kor’ath. See BecoraTa.


BECK, bek, BECKON, bek’’n (vetpa, netima):
This word from nedé, ‘to nod,” “beckon,” ‘make
a sign” by moving the head or eyes (Lk 6 7;
Jn 13 24; Acts 21 40; 24 10), occurs only in 2
Macc 8 18, “Almighty God who at a beck can
cast down both them that come against us, and
also all the world,” RV, ‘‘able at a beck.” So Shak,
“troops of soldiers at their beck”; ‘‘nod” is now
generally used.


BECOME, bé-kum’: .

' (1) Gr ginomai, used in NT for a change of
state, corresponding to Heb héyaéh of OT. Cf
Mt 18 3 with Dt 27 9.

(2) For what is ‘fitting, suitable, proper, in NT:
“oréper” (Mt 315; Eph 6 3; 1 Tim 2 10);
in OT, TIND, na@’dwah, TN), nd ah, Ps 93 5:
“Holiness becometh thy house.” In this sense,
the adv. “becomingly’” must be interpreted:
“Walk becomingly toward them that are without”
(1 Thess 4 12), i.e. in a way that is consistent with
your profession.


BECORATH, bé-ko’rath (M7ID3, bekharath,
“the first birth”; AV Bechorath): A forefather of
Saul of the tribe of Benjamin (1 8 9 1).


BECTILETH, bek’ti-leth (76 weSiov Baukrerrald,
t6 pedion Baikteilatth): A plain which is defined as
‘near the mountain which is at the left hand of the
upper Cilicia” (Jth 2 21). The name in Syr is Beth
Ketilath, “house of slaughter.” So far there is no
clue to its identification.


BED, BEDCHAMBER, BEDSTEAD: For the
very poor of the East, in ancient times as now, the
“hed” was and is, as a rule, the bare ground; and
the bedclothes, the gown, simléh, or “outer gar-
ment,” worn during the day (‘‘For that is his only
covering, it is his garment for his skin: wherein
shall he sleep?” [Ex 22 27]; cf Dt 24 13, “Thou
shalt surely restore to him the pledge when the sun
goeth down, that he may sleep in his garment’’).

When one was on a journey, or watching his
flock by night as a shepherd, such a “‘bed” was the
most natural, and often a stone would serve as a
pillow. (See Gen 28 11, where Jacob “took one
of the stones of the place, and put it under his
head, and lay down in that place to sleep.’’)


An advance on this custom, which came in due
course of time, or under change of circumstances,
was the use of a mat on the floor as a bed, with
or without covering. At first it was lit. laid on the
floor, which was generally of one common level, in


Bed, Bedstead
Beelzebub


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


422


some convenient place near the wall; but later it
was put on an elevation, either a raised part of the
floor on one side, or a bedstead, which gave rise to
the expression “going up to the bed’ (cf Gen 49
33 EV, ‘He gathered up his feet into the bed,”
and Ps 132 3, “go up into my bed’’).

With a later development and civilization, ‘“beds’’
came to be built upon supports and constructed in
different forms, which fact is reflected in the variety
of names given the “bed” in the Heb and related
languages.


Mattress with Pillow.


(1) The following Heb words are used in the
Bible for “bed,” and, though it is impossible at this
remove of time and place and custom


1. OT to differentiate them sharply, they will
Terms for repay study: TW, mittah (Gen 48 2,
Bed, and ‘‘And Israel strengthened himself, and
Sleeping sat upon the bed’; Ex 8 3, “trogs
Customs . . . shall come into thy bedchamber,
of the and upon thy bed”); ADW), mishkabh,
Hebrews cf (Gen 49 4, Jacob to Reuben: “Be-


cause thou wentest up to thy father’s
bed; then defiledst thou it”); WI , ‘eres (Prov 7 16,
the “strange woman’ says: “I have spread my
couch with carpets of tapestry”; cf Ps 41 3,
“Thou makest all his bed in his sickness”); 270,
mac¢a (once only, Isa 28 20, ‘For the bed is shorter
than that a man can stretch himself on it; and the
covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in
it”); and FAL, y¢at' (Job17 13, “I have spread my
couch in the darkness’; 1 Ch 5 1, “He defiled his
father’s couch”; cf Gen 49 4 where the same
“father’s bed” is mishka@bh; Ps 63 6, “when I
remember thee upon my bed’; Ps 132 3, “nor go
up into my bed”’).

(2) It is a far cry from the simple sleeping cus-
toms of Dt 24 13 to the luxurious arts and customs
of the post-exilic days, when beds of fine wood and
ivory are found in use among the Hebrews, as
well as pillows of the most costly materials elabo-
rately embroidered (see Jth 10 21; Est 16; ef
Cant 3 10); but it all came about as a natural,
as well as artificial development, with changed
conditions and contacts and increasing civilization


Bedstead.


and luxury. As marking the several stages of that
development, we find pictures of the poor, first
sleeping upon the ground without mat or mattress,
then in a single sleeping-room for the whole family,
often without a separate bed, then with “beds”
that were simply wadded quilts, or thin mattresses,
and mats for keeping them off the ground; then
with still better “beds” laid upon light portable,
wooden frames, or upon more elevated bedsteads
(ef Ps 182 3 and Mk 4 21 RV “under the bed’’).
The degree of richness depended, of course, upon


time and place, in a measure, but more upon the
wealth and station of the family and the style of
the house or tent in which they lived, as it does
even with the Bedouin of today. The prophet
Amos gives a vivid and significant picture of the
luxury of certain children of Israel, “that sit in
Samaria in the corner of a couch, and on the silken
cushions of a bed” (3 12); and of certain children of
luxury “that lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch
themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs
out of the flock .... that drink wine in bowls,
and anoint themselves with the chief oils; but they
are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph” (Am 6
4-6; ef Rev 18 10-13).

(3) We find that the poor, while sleeping for the
most part in their ordinary clothing, often, in cold
weather, made their beds of the skins of animals, old
cloaks, or rugs, as they do still in the East. The
“beds” and “bedding” now in ordinary use among
Orientals are much the same, we may be sure, as
they were in olden times. ‘“Bedsteads” of any
pretention were and are rare among the common
people; but the richness of “beds” and ‘“‘bedsteads”’
among Asiatics of wealth and rank was quite equal
to that of the Greeks and Romans (cf Prov 7 16.
17, “I have spread my couch with carpets of tapes-
try, with striped cloths of the yarn of Egypt.
I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and
cinnamon”); Cant 1 16.17: “The beams of our
house are cedars, and our rafters are firs...


Couch Bed with Head Rest.


also our couch is green.” Cf the “‘palanquin’’ of
Solomon, “of the wood of Lebanon,” ‘the pillars
thereof of silver,’’ “the bottom of gold,” and ‘the
seat of purple” (3 9.10).

As soon as any family could afford it, a
special bedroom would be set apart, and the whole
family would sleep in it (see Lk 11 5-8, ‘“My
children are with me in bed’). When the house
had two stories the upper story was used for sleep-
ing, or, during very hot weather, preferably the
roof, or the room on the roof. See Hovss.
When morning came the “bed,” a wadded quilt
or mattress, used with or without covering accord-
ing to the season, was rolled up, aired and sunned,
and then put aside on the raised platform, or
packed away in a chest or closet.

The words mishkabh and mittah came to have a fig.
meaning signifying the final resting-place; and ‘eres used
of the ‘‘bedstead’’ of the King of Og (Dt 3 11) is thought
by some to mean his sarcophagus (Benzinger, Heb Arch.,
123; Nowack,I, 143). Gen 47 31,‘‘And Israel bowed him-


self upon the bed’s head” is not rightly rendered (seo
Starr, and Crit. Comm. in loc.).


(1) We find several Gr words, «Alyn, kliné,


kpd8Baros, krébbatos, and xolry, koité, used in the
NT somewhat indiscriminately and


2. NT rendered EV by ‘‘bed,” “couch,” ete;
Terms for but, as with the Heb words noted,
Bed, Their there is little to indicate just exactly
Meaning, what they severally stand for, or how
etc they are related to the Heb terms


rendered ‘“‘bed” or “couch” in the
OT. Of one thing we can be sure, reasoning from


423


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA  Be4, Bedstead


Beelzebub


what we know of “‘the unchanging East,” the ‘‘beds”
and sleeping customs of the Hebrews in Christ’s
time were in the main about what they were in
later OT times.

(2) An interesting case for study is that of the
man “sick of the palsy” whom they brought to
Jesus “lying on a bed,” and who when healed
“took up the bed, and went forth before them all’
(Mt 9 2.6; Mk'2 4.12; Lk 518.19; ef Jn &
8-12). Here the ‘‘bed’”’ on which the sick of the
palsy lay was let down from the housetop ‘‘through
the tiles with his couch into the midst before
Jesus’ (Lk 6 18.19); and when the man was
healed Jesus commanded him, as Luke says, to
“take up [his] couch and go unto [his] house,’”’ and he
“took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his
house, glorifying God” (5 24.25). It seems, there-
fore, that this “bed” was a “‘pallet’’ and ‘“‘couch”
combined, a thin mattress upon a light portable
frame, such as we have already seen was in use
among the ancients. Another kindred case was
that of the sick man at the pool of Bethesda (Jn
6 2ff) whom Jesus healed and commanded to
“take up his bed and walk,’ and he “‘took up his
bed and walked”; only in this case the ‘“‘bed’’ is
a “pallet” without the frame, it would seem.

(3) Jesus in His teaching (Mk 4 21; cf Lk 8
16) asks, in language which is significant in this
connection: “Is the lamp brought to be put under
.... the bed?” (Lk 8 16: ‘No man, when he hath
lighted a lamp, covereth it with a vessel, or putteth
it under a bed’’). Here, clearly, “the bed” is the
“bedstead,”’ bedclothes, draperies and all, under
which “the lamp” would be obscured and hindered
in its function of “giving light to all in the room.”
Again (Lk 17 34) Jesus says, ‘‘In that night there
shall be two men on one bed,”’ which is incidental
evidence that the “beds” of that day were not all
“pallets” or “couches” for one only (cf Lk 11 7,
“My children are with me in bed”; Cant 1 16; 3
10; Prov 7 16.18).

(4) For fig. use in the prophets (e.g. Ezk 23 17)
and in the NT (e.g. ‘‘Let the bed be undefiled,” He
13 4), see commentaries in loc.

Gro. B. Eaczr


BEDAD, bé’dad (773, bedhadh, “alone’”):
Father of Hadad, king of Edom “before there
reigned any king over the children of Israel’”’ (Gen
36 35; 1 Ch 1 46).


BEDAN, bé’dan (773, bedhdn, “son of judgment” .


?):
(1) One of the leaders in Israel who with Jerub-
baal, Jephthah and Samuel is mentioned as a de-
liverer of the nation (1 S 12 11). The text is
questioned because LXX, Syr and Arab. read Barak
instead.

(2) A son of Ulam of the house of Manasseh


(1 Ch 7 17).
BEDCHAMBER, bed’cham-bér.
BEDEIAH, be-dé’ya (772, dédheyah, “serv-
ant of Jeh”): A son of Bani who had married a
“strange wife’ (Ezr 10 35).


BEDSTEAD, bed’sted. See Brp.


See Brn.


BEE, be (M4, debhorah; cf Arab. dabr, “a
swarm of bees,” also Arab. debbar, “a wasp,” said
to be a corruption of zunbar, “a wasp”; all are
apparently from the Heb dabhar, “‘to speak,
“orrange,” “lead,” “follow,” or from Arab. dabara,
“follow” [cf Arab. dabbara, “arrange’’], though the
connection in meaning is not apparent): Honey
is mentioned many times in the Bible, esp. in the
OT, but the word “bee’’ occurs only four times, and


only one of the four times in connection with honey,
in the story of Samson (Jgs 14 8). Both wild
and domesticated bees are found today in Pal,
but it is not clear that bees were kept in Bible
times, although it would seem very probable. The
frequently recurring phrase, ‘a land flowing with
milk and honey,” certainly suggests that the honey
as well as the milk is a domestic product. The
hives now in use are very primitive and wasteful
as compared with hives that are made in Europe
and America. Sometimes a large water jar is
used. More frequently a cylinder about 3 or 4 ft.
long and 6 in. in diameter is constructed of mulberry
withes plaited together and plastered with mud or
cow dung. A number of these cylinders are placed
horizontally, being piled up together under some
rude structure which serves as a protection from the
direct rays ofthesun. In the passage already cited
it is related that Samson found a swarm of bees and
honey in the carcase of the lion which he had killed
on his previous visit. We are not told how much
time had intervened, but it does not take long in
the dry climate of Pal for scavenging beasts and
insects to strip the flesh from the bones and make
the skeleton a possible home for a swarm of bees.
The other three passages refer to the offensive
power of bees. In Dt 1 44, in the speech of Moses
he says, “The Amorites . . . . chased you, as bees
do”; in Ps 118 12, the psalmist says, ‘‘They com-
passed me about like bees’’; in Isa 7 18, the bee
is the type of the chastisement that the Lord will
bring from the land of Assyria.
Aurrep Exry Day

BEEF, béf. See Catriz.


BEELIADA, bé-é-li’a-da (oPePa, beelyadha',
“the Lord knows”; Eniapa, which see; cf HPN,
144, 192, n. 1, 202): A son of David (1 Ch 14 7).


BEELSARUS, bé-el’sa-rus, bé-el-si’rus (Beed-
gwépos, Beelsdros): One who accompanied Zerub-
babel in the return from the captivity (1 Esd 6 8),
called Bilshan in Ezr 2 2 and Neh 7 7.


BEELTETHMUS, béel-teth’mus (BeéAreOpos,
Beéliethmos; Balthemus): One of the officers of
King Artaxerxes in Pal (1 Esd 2 16.25). Accord-
ing to Professor Sayce, the name by etymology
means “lord of official intelligence’ or “‘post-
master.” Rendered “chancellor” in Ezr 4 8 and
“story-writer”’ in 1 Esd 2 17.


BEELZEBUB, bé-el’zé-bub (in AV and RV 1s
an error [after Vulg] for Beelzebul [RVm], BeeAte-
BovA, Beelzeboul; WH, BeeteBotA, Beezeboul): In
the time of Christ this was the current name for
the chief or prince of demons, and was identified
with Saran (q.v.) and the Devin (q.v.). The Jews
committed the unpardonable sin of ascribing
Christ’s work of casting out demons to Beelzebul,
thus ascribing to the worst source the supreme
manifestation of goodness (Mt 10 25; 12 24.27;
Mk 3 22; Lk 11 15.18.19). There can be little
doubt that it is the same name as BAALZEBUB (q.v.).
It is a well-known phenomenon in the history of
religions that the gods of one nation become the
devils of its neighbors and enemies. When the
Aryans divided into Indians and Iranians, the Devas
remained gods for the Indians, but became devils
(daevas) for the Iranians, while the Ahuras remained
gods for the Iranians and became devils (asuras)
for the Indians. Why Baalzebub became Beelze-
bul, why the b changed into 1, is a matter of con-
jecture. It may have been an accident of popular
pronunciation, or a conscious perversion (Beelzebul
in Syr = “lord of dung’), or OT zbhiibh may have
been a perversion, accidental or intentional of ebhal


Beer
Beg, Begging


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


424


(=“house”), so that Baalzebul mednt “lord of

the house.”’ These are the chief theories offered

(Cheyne in HB; Barton in Hastings, FRE). .
T. Rees

BEER, bé’ér (N32, ber; dpéap, phréar; Lat
puteus =‘‘well”’): :

(1) A station on the march of the Israelites to
the N. of the Arnon (Nu 21 16). Here it was
that they sang round the well this song:

‘Spring up O well; greet it with song,

eli, that the princes have dug,
The nobles of the people have bored,

With the sceptre—with their staves’ (Nu 21 i6ff).
The place is not identified.

(2) The town to which Jotham fled from his
brother Abimelech after declaring his parable from
Mt. Gerizim (Jgs 9 21). This may be identical
with Berrots, which see.


BEERA, bé-@'ra, bé/@r-a (WINS, b°érd’, “ex-
pounder”): A descendant of Asher (1 Ch 7 37).


BEERAH, bé-é'ra, bé/ér-a (VNB, b°erah; “ex-
pounder’’): A prince of the house of Reuben whom


Tiglath-pileser carried away captive (1 Ch 5 6).
Cf2 K 15 29; 16 7.


BEER-ELIM, bé-ér-é’lim (o">N ANS , ber elim;
dpéap rot ’Arcreip, phréar toi Aletm, lit. ‘well of
E.”’): Probably lay to the N. of Moab, answering
to Eglaim in the S. (Isa 15 8). It may possibly
be identical with Brrr (1); but there is no certainty.


BEERI, bé-@'ri (“WS4, 6°’ ert, ‘“expounder’’):
(1) Father of Judith, one of Esau’s wives (Gen


26 34).
(2) The father of the prophet Hosea (Hos 1 1).


BEER-LAHAI-ROI, bé-ér-la-hi’roi, bé-ér-]a-hi-
rot ONS DD AND, ber lahat r5't, “well of the
Living One that seeth me’): ‘‘A fountain of water
in the wilderness,” ‘the fountain in the way to
Shur” (Gen 16 7-14). It was the scene of Hagar’s
theophany, and here Isaac dwelt for some time
(Gen 16 7f; 24 62; 26 11). The site is in The
Negeb between Kadesh and Bered (16 14). Row-
land identifies the well with the modern ‘Ain
Moiléhhi, cir 50 miles 8. of Beersheba and 12 miles
W. of ‘Ain Kadis. Cheyne thinks that Hagar’s
native country, to which she was fleeing and from
which she took a wife for Ishmael, was not Egypt
(micrayim), but a north Arabian district called by
the Assyrians Musri (EB). 8S. F. Hunrer


BEEROTH, bé-é’roth, bé’ér-oth (NIWNS , b’ érath-
Bypse, Berdth): One of the cities of the Canaanites
whose inhabitants succeeded in deceiving Israel, and
in making a covenant with them (Josh 9 3 ff).
Apparently they were Hivites (ver 7). The occa-
sion on which the Beerothites fled to Gittaim where
they preserved their communal identity is not indi-
cated. The town was reckoned to Benjamin (2 §
4 2f). Onom places it under Gibeon, 7 Rom miles
from Jerus on the way to Nicopolis (Amwds). If
we follow the old road by way of Gibeon (el-J7b)
and Bethhoron, Beeroth would lie probably to the
N.W. of el-J7b. The traditional identification is
with el-Bireh, about 8 miles from Jerus on the great
north road. If the order in which the towns are
mentioned (Josh 9 17; 18 25) is any guide as to
position, el-Bireh is too far to the N.W. The
identification is precarious. To Beeroth belonged
the murderers of Ish-bosheth (2 8 4 2), and Naharai,
Joab’s armor-bearer (2 S 23 37; 1 Ch 11 39). It
was reoccupied after the Exile (Ezr 2 25; Neh
7 29). W. Ewine


-Position


BEEROTH BENE-JAAKAN, ben’é-ja’a-kan
(jp22 "22 FSB, beerath bene yo'dkan,; RVm
“the wells of the children of Jaakan”): A desert
camp of the Israelites mentioned before Moserah
(Dt 10 6). In Nu 33 31.32 the name is given
simply ‘“Bene-jaakan,” and the situation after
Moseroth. See WaNDERINGS OF ISRAEL.


BEEROTHITE, bé-@’roth-it, bé’ér-oth-it, BE-
ROTHITE ("71783, b’erathi; 2845.9; 2 Ss
23 37; shortened form, 1 Ch 11 39). See BeErors.


BEERSHEBA,, bé-@r-shé’ba (JAW “ND, ber
shabha'; BypraBée, Bérsabée): Allotted originally
to Simeon (Josh 19 2), one of ‘the uttermost cities
of the tribe of the children of Judah” (Josh 16 28).

(1) The most probable meaning of Beersheba
isthe “well of seven.” “Seven wells” is improbable

on etymological grounds; the numeral
1. The should in that case be first. In Gen
Meaning of 21 31 Abraham and Abimelech took
the Name an oath of witness that the former had

dug the well and seven ewe lambs
were offered in sacrifice, ‘Wherefore he called that
place Beer-sheba; because there they sware both of
them.” Here the name is ascribed to the Heb root
Yaw, shabha', “to swear,” but this same root is
connected with the idea of seven, seven victims
being offered and to take an oath, meaning “‘to
come under the influence of seven.”

Another account is given (Gen 26 23-33),
where Isaac takes an oath and just afterward,
“the same day Isaac’s servants came, and told him
concerning the well which they had digged, and
said unto him, We have fonnd water. And he
called it Shibah: therefore the name of the city is
Beer-sheba unto this day.”

(2) Beersheba was a sacred shrine. “‘Abraham
planted a tamarisk tree in Beer-sheba, and called

there on the name of Jeh, the Ever-
2. A Sacred lasting God” (Gen 21 33). Theoph-
Shrine anies occurred there to Hagar (Gen

21 17), to Isaac (26 24), to Jacob
(46 2), and to Elijah (1 K 19 5). By Amos
(5 5) it is classed with Bethel and Gilgal as one
of the rival shrines to the pure worship of Jeh,
and in another place (8 14) he writes ‘“They shall
fall, and never rise up again,” who sware, ‘‘As the
way [i.e. cultus] of Beer-sheba liveth.” The two
unworthy sons of Samuel were judges in Beersheba
(1 8 8 2) and Zibiah, mother of King Jehoash,
was born there (2 K 12 1; 2 Ch 24 1),

(8) Geographically Beersheba marked the south-
ern limit of Judah, though theoretically this ex-
tended to the “river of Egypt” (Gen
15 18)—the modern Wady el‘ Avish—
60 miles farther south. It was the
extreme border of the cultivated land.
From Dan to Beersheba (2 8 17 11, etc) or from
Beersheba to Dan (1 Ch 21 2; 2 Ch 30 5) were
the proverbial expressions, though necessarily
altered through the changed conditions in later
years to “from Geba to Beer-sheba” (2 K 23 8) or
“from Beer-sheba to the hill-country of Ephraim”
(2 Ch 19 4).

(4) Today Beersheba is Bir es-Seba‘in the Wady
es Seba‘, 28 miles 8.W.of Hebron on ‘‘the southern

border of a vast rolling plain broken
4. Modern by the torrent beds of Wady Khalil
Beersheba and Wady Seba” (Robinson). The

plain is treeless but is covered by
verdure in the spring; it is dry and monotonous
most of the year. Within the last few years this
long-deserted spot—a wide stretch of shapeless
ruins, the haunt of the lawless Bedouin—has been
re-occupied; the Turks have stationed there an


3. Its


ae


srrgatie!
ie


BEERSHEBA, OVERLOOKING THE DESERT


425


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Beer
Beg, Begging


enlightened Kaimerkhan (subgovernor); govern-
ment offices and shops have been built; wells have
been cleared, and there is now an abundant water
supply pumped even to the separate houses.
Robinson (BW, XVII, 247 ff) has described how
he found seven ancient wells there—probably still
more will yet be found. The whole neighborhood
is strewn with the ruins of the Byzantine city which
once flourished there; it was an episcopal see. It
is probable that the city of OT times stood where
Tell es Seba‘ now is, some 2} miles to the E.; from
the summit a commanding view can be obtained
(PEF, III, 394, Sheet XXIV).
E. W. G. Masrerman

BEESHTERAH, bé-esh’té-ra (Josh 21 27). See

ASHTAROTH.


BEETLE, bé’t’] (RV CRICKET; ‘35m, hargal;
see Locust): This name occurs only in Lev 11 22
as one of four winged jumping insects (shere¢
ha-‘Gph) which may be eaten. It certainly is not
a beetle and is probably not a cricket. Probably
all four are names of locusts, of which more than
30 species have been described from Syria and Pal,
and for which there are at least 8 Arab. names in
use, though with little distinction of species. Closely
allied to hargal are the Arab. harjalet, a troop of
horses or a flight of locusts, from harjal, ‘‘to gallop,”
and harjawdn, ‘‘a wingless locust.”

ALFRED Ey Day

BEEVES, bévs (Lev 22 21 AV). See Carre.


BEFORE, bé-fir’: The tr of a great variety of
Heb and Gr words. “Haran died b. [ERV “in
the presence of,” lit. “before the face of”] his father
Terah” (Gen 11 28). To be “before” God is to
enjoy His favor (Ps 31 22). “The Syrians be-
fore” (Isa 9 12 RVm “on the east,” as “behind,”
owing to the position of Canaan, relative to Syria,
implies the west).


BEG, BEGGAR, BEGGING: It is significant that
the Mosaic law contains no enactment concerning
beggars, or begging, though it makes
ample provision for the relief and care
of “the poor in the land.” Bib. Heb
seems to have no term for professional
begging, the nearest approach to it
being the expressions ‘‘to ask [or seek}
bread” and “to wander.” This omis-

sion certainly is not accidental; it comports with the
very nature of the Mosaic law, the spirit of which
is breathed in this, among other kindred _provi-
sions, that a poor Hebrew who even sold himself
for debt to his wealthy brother was allowed to serve
him only until the Jubilee (see Jupiner), and his
master was forbidden to treat him as a slave (Lev
26 39). These laws, as far as actually practised
have always virtually done away with beggars and
begging among the Jews.
Begging, however, came to be known to the
Jews in the course of time with the development of
the larger cities, either as occurring
2. Begging among themselves, or among neigh-
Not Un- boring or intermingling peoples, as
known to may be inferred from Ps 69 15; ef
the Ancient 109 10, where Jeh is besought that
Jews the children of the wicked may be
cursed with beggary, in contra-dis-
tinction to the children of the righteous, who have
never had to ask bread (Ps 87 25, “I have been
young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed asking [EV “beg-
-ging”] bread.” For the Heb expression corre-
sponding to “begging” see Ps 69 15, ‘“They shall
wander up and down for food’; and cf Ps 119 10,
“Let me not wander,” etc.


1. No Law
Concerning
Beggars or
Begging in
Israel


The first clear denunciation of beggary and alms-
taking in Jewish lit. is found in Ecclus (Sirach)
40 28-30, where the Heb for ‘‘beg-
ging” is to “wander,” etc, as in Ps
59 15, according to the ed of Cowley
and Neubauer, Oxford, 1897. There
as well as in Tobit, and in the NT,
where beggars are specifically men-
tioned, the word eleémosiiné has as-
sumed the special sense of alms given
to the begging poor (cf Tob 4 7.16.17; 12 8-11;
Feclus [Sir] 3 14.30; 7 10; 16 14; Mt 6 2-4; 20
30-34; Mk 10 46-52; Lk 11 41; 12 33; Jn 9 1-
41; Acts 9 36; 10 2.4.31; 24 17).


3. Begging
and Alms-
taking De-
nounced in
Jewish
Literature


Jerusalem Beggars.


As to professional beggars, originally, certainly,
and for a long time, they were a despised class
among the Hebrews; and the Jewish
4. Profes- communities are forbidden to support
sional Beg- them from the general charity fund
gars a (BB, 9a; Yéreh Dé‘ah, 250, 3). But
Despised __ the spirit of the law is evinced again in
Class that it is likewise forbidden to drive a
beggar away without an alms (ha-Yadh
ha-Hdzakah,1.c. 7 7).
Begging was well known and beggars formed a
considerable class in the gospel age. Proof of this
is found in the references to almsgiving
6. Inthe inthe Sermon on the Mount (Mt 5-7
Gospel Age and parallels), and in the accounts of
beggars in connection with public
places, e.g. the entrance to Jericho (Mt 20 30
and parallels), which was a gateway to pilgrims going
up to Jerus to the great festivals and in the neigh-
borhood of rich men’s houses (Lk 16 20), and
esp. the gates of the Temple at Jerus (Acts 3 2).
This prevalence of begging was due largely to the
want of any adequate system of ministering relief,
to the lack of any true medical science and the
resulting ignorance of remedies for common dis-
eases like ophthalmia, for instance, and to the
impoverishment of the land under the excessive
taxation of the Rom government (Hausrath,
Hist of NT Times, 1, 188 (Eng. tr Williams and
Norgate], ef Edersheim, L and T of Jesus, II, 178).
That begging was looked down upon is incidentally
evidenced by the remark of the unjust steward,
“To beg I am ashamed’ (Lk 16 3); and that,
when associated with indolence, it was strongly con-
demned by public opinion appears from Sir (40
28-30).
The words used for ‘‘ beg,” ‘‘beggar’' of EV in the NT


differ radically in idea: in those formed from aités (Mk
10 46; Lk 16 3; 18 35; Jn 9 8 RV) the root idea is


Beggarly
Bel and Dragon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


426


that of ‘‘asking,"’ while ptéchés (Lk 16 20.22) suggests the
cringing or crouching of a beggar. Butsee Mt 5 3 where

the word for ‘‘humble"' is ptéchos.
A marked change has come over Jewish life in
modern times, in this as well as in other respects.
Since the 17th cent. the Jewish poor


6. A in many parts of the world have made
Change in it a practice, esp. on Fridays and on
Modern the eves of certain festivals, to go
Times systematically from house to house


asking alms. In parts of Europe
today it is a full-grown abuse: crowds of Jewish
beggars push their way and ply their trade about
the synagogue doors (Abrahams, FB, art. ‘‘Alms,”’
310). So the Jewish beggar, in spite of the spirit
of the law and ancient Jewish custom, has, under
modern conditions too well known to require ex-
planation here, become a troublesome figure and
problem in modern Jewish society. For such beggars
and begging, see Jew Enc, arts. “Schnorrers,”
“Alms,” etc, and for another kind of begging among
modern Jews, and collections for poverty-stricken
Jewishsettlersin Pal, seearts.“‘Halukah,” ‘‘Charity,”’
etc.


LitERATURE.—Saalschtitz, Arch. der Hebrder, II, ch
xviii (KGnigsberg, 1855-56); Riehm, Handwérterbuch zu
den Bichern des AT, s.y. “Almosen"'; cf Jew Enc, HDB
and Ene B, arts, ‘‘Alms"’; and Abrahams, Jewish Life in
the Middle Ages, chs xvii, xviii (Philadelphia, 1896);
Mackie, Bible Manners and Customs; Day, The Social Life


of the Hebrews.
Gro. B. Eacur

BEGGARLY, beg/ér-li (wrwxés, pldchds): The
word has the thought of “to crouch” or ‘‘cringe,”
such as is common with professional beggars. It
is used in Mt 5 3 and Gal 4 9, and in both cases
means complete spiritual destitution. As used in
Gal it expresses the contrast between their present
condition and the former estate, toward which he
says they are again tending. Paul has in mind
both the Jewish and heathen systems of religion
with all their outward show. He therefore here
emphasizes the immeasurable superiority of the
riches and liberty in Christ. He further expresses
this same thought of the law in Rom 8 3 and He
7:18. In view of the wretchedness of the condi-
tion indicated by the word “‘beggarly,’”’ he states
his astonishment that they should so little appre-
ciate the liberty and riches which they now enjoy as
even to think of going back to the former condition.

Jacop W. Kapp

BEGIN, bé-gin’: To make the first movement to-
ward a given end (on: halal; apxopar, drchomai).
Those who interpret it in many passages pleonas-
tically mean by this, that in such passages as “‘began
to teach” or “began to speak,” nothing more is
intended than to express vividly and graphically
the thought of the dependent infinitive. Mt 4 17;
Lk 3 23; Acts 1 1 are so understood. For con-
trary opinion, see Thayer’s Lexicon and Winer’s
Grammar of NT Greek.

The noun, épx%, arché, “beginning,” in the
writings of John, is used sometimes in an abstract
sense, to designate a previous stage (Jn 1 1.2;
8 25; 1 Jn 1 1; 3 8) and, sometimes, the Source
or First Cause (Rev 3 14; 21 6; 22 13). Often
used also, not for the absolute beginning, but, rela-
tively, for the starting-point of some important
movement (1 Jn 2 7.24; Acts 11 15; Phil 4 15).

. H. E. Jacoss

BEGINNING, bé-gin’ing (MUN, ré’shith; apxh,
arché): The natural meaning of the word is with
reference to time. The primitive Gr root means
“to be long,” ‘to draw out.” Thus it is used to
refer to some point of time long drawn out, or long
past (Gen 1 1). It is used also to express the in-
auguration of a particular event (Ex 12 2). The
principal interest in the word centers in the use of


it in Jn 11. It must be interpreted here by that
which follows in the statement as to the relation
of the Logos to the Eternal God and the use of the
word “was.” It is true that the word arché cannot
be separated from the idea of time, but when time
began He already was, and therefore He was from
eternity. See Time; Ererniry.

Figurative: In a fig. sense it is used of that which
is most excellent, the chief part (Prov 1 7); of the
most eminent person (Col 1 18); the author (Rev
3 14). Jacop W. Kapp


BEGOTTEN, bé-got’’n (729, yaladh; “to bear,”
“bring forth,” “beget’’; denotes the physical rela-
tion of either parent to a child, Gen 3 16; 4 18):
Used metaphorically of God’s relation to Israel
(Dt 32 18) and to the Messianic king (Ps 2 7);
(yervdw, genndd, ‘to beget,’ or “bear’): gen-
erally used of a father (Mt 1 1-16); more rarely
of a mother (Lk 1 13.57); used metaphorically of
causing or engendering moral] and spiritual relations
and states (1 Cor 4 15; Philem 10); of the new
birth of the Holy Spirit (Jn 3 3 ff). Men who
obey and love God as sons are begotten of Him
(Jn 113; 1 Jn 2 29; 3 9; 4 7; 5 1.4.18; cf 1 Pet
1 23). Used esp. of God’s act in making Christ
His Son: “Thou art my Son; this day have I begot-
ten thee” (Ps 2 7) quoted in Acts (13 33) in refer-
ence to His resurrection (cf Rom 1 4). The same
passage is cited (He 1 5) as proving Christ’s filial
dignity, transcending the angels in that “he hath
inherited a more excellent name than they,’ i.e. the
name of son; and again (He 5 5) of God conferring
upon Christ the glory of the priestly office.

Commentators differ as to whether the act of
begetting the Son in these two passages is (a) the
eternal generation, or (b) the incarnation in time, or
(c) the resurrection and ascension. The imme-
diate context of 1 5 (see 1 3) seems to favor the
last view (Westcott). The first view would not be
foreign to the author’s thought: with 5 5 cf 6 20,
“a, high priest forever” (Alford). The author of
He thinks of the eternal and essential sonship of
Christ as realized in history in His ascension to the
“right hand of the Majesty” (1 3). And what is
emphatic is the fact and status of sonship, rather
than the time of begetting. T. Rees


BEGUILE, bé-gil’: In 2 Pet 2 14 AV (cf Jas
1 14) the word dededgw, deledzé, is tr? “beguile,”
and means particularly to ‘‘entice,”’ ‘catch by bait.”
Doubtless Peter got this idea from his old business
of fishing, baiting the hook to beguile the fish. In
Rom 711; 1618; 1 Cor 318 the word is
élarataw, exapaidd, and means “to cheat” or “to
thoroughly deceive.” The thought is to be so
completely deceived as to accept falsehood for the
truth, believing it to be the truth. In Col 2 4.18
AV; Jas 1 22 the word is rapahoylfopat, paralogizo-
mai, and means “to miscalculate,” “to be imposed
upon.” It refers particularly to being beguiled by
mere probability. See Deceit; Drusion.

Jacosp W. Kapp

_ BEHALF, bé-hif’: ‘On the part of” (Ex 27 21,
i.e. so far as it affects them); “on the side of”
(Job 36 2). For hupér, “over,” in the sense of
furnishing assistance, as in 2 Cor 6 20, “‘in the
interest of Christ”? (ver 21); “for our good,” ‘in
his cause’ (Phil 1 29); also, often in 2 Cor, in
general sense of “concerning” (5 12; 7 4; 8 24;
9 2; 12 5). Huper does not of itself indicate sub-
stitution, although one who shelters [‘is over”]
another, suffers “in his stead” (AV 2 Cor 5 20),
as well as “in his behalf.”


BEHAVIOR, bé-hav’yér (O70, tatam, “taste,”
“flavor,” hence “intellectual taste,” i.e. judgment,


427


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Beggarly
Bel and Dragon


reason, understanding): Of significance as referring
to David’s feigning madness before Achish, king
of Gath, being “sore afraid.” Gesenius renders
it “changed his understanding,” i.e. his mental
behavior and outward manner (1 S 21 18, and title
to Ps 34).

Twice used in the NT (AV) of the well-ordered
life of the Christian (xéomsos, késmios, ‘‘well-
arranged,” ‘“‘modest,’’ i.e. living with decorum:
1 Tim 3 2), defining the blameless life expected
of a minister (overseer), “A bishop must be... .
of good behavior,’ RV “orderly” (xardernya,
katdstéma, ‘‘demeanor,” “deportment’’), includ-
ing, according to Dean Alford, ‘gesture and habit”
as the outward expression of a reverent spirit
(1 Pet 31.2). “Aged women... . in behavior
as becometh holiness” (Tit 23; RV “reverent
in demeanor’’). Dwrent M. Prarr


BEHEADING, bé-hed’ing. See PuNISHMENTs.


BEHEMOTH, bé’hé-moth, bé-hé’moth (N03,
behémoth: Job 40 15): Apparently the pl. of b-
hémah, “a beast,” used of domestic or wild animals.
The same form, b°h@méth, occurs in other passages,
eg. Dt 28 26; 32 24; Isa 186; Hab 2 17,
where it is not rendered “behemoth” but ‘‘beasts.”
According to some, the word b¢héméth, occurring
in Job 40 15, is not a Heb word, the pl. of
behémah, but a word of Egyp origin signifying
‘water ox.” This etymology is denied by Cheyne
and others. The word has by various writers becn
understood to mean rhinoceros and elephant, but
the description (Job 40 15-24) applies on the
whole very well to the hippopotamus (Hippopot-
amus amphibius) which inhabits the Nile and other
rivers of Africa. Esp. applicable are the references
to its great size, its eating grass, the difficulty with
which weapons penetrate its hide, and its frequent-
ing of streams.

“He lieth under the lotus-trees,
In the covert of the reed, and the fen.
The lotus-trees cover him with their shade;
The willows of the brook compass him about.”

The remains of a fossil hippopotamus of appar-
ently the same species are found over most of
Europe, so that it may have inhabited Pal in early
historical times, although we have no record of it.
There is a smaller living species in west Africa,
and there are several other fossil species in Europe
and India. The remains of Hippopotamus minutus
have been found in enormous quantities in caves
in Malta and Sicily.

For an elaborate explanation of behemoth and
leviathan (q.v.) as mythical creatures, see Cheyne,
EB, s.v. ALFRED Ery Day


BEHOLDING, bé-héld’ing: Many Heb and Gr
words are so rendered in EV, but érorredoavres,
epoptetsantes, “your good works, which they
behold” (1 Pet 212); “beholding your_ chaste
behavior’ (8 2), and énérrat, epoptat, ‘We were
eyewitnesses of his majesty’ (2 Pet 1 16) are
peculiar to Peter. The fact that this word is used
only by Peter and is used in both epistles is an
argument for identity of authorship. The word
epéptés denotes one who had been initiated into the
innermost secrets of his faith and who enjoyed the
highest religious privileges; but now in_contradic-
tion to the secrecy of all pagan “mysteries” (Eleu-
sinian, ete) the apostles would share with all the
faithful every spiritual vision which they enjoyed
(“we made known unto you’’). ;

In 2 Cor 3 18, for arom pifbuevot, katoptri-
zdmenoi, the ERV gives “‘reflecting (as a mirror)
the glory of the Lord,” ARV ‘‘beholding (as in a
mirror,” etc). Kédéopiron was a muror of polished


metal. We cannot clearly and fully behold the
outshining of spiritual grandeur in Christ Jesus,
but in the gospel God accommodates and adjusts
the vision as we are able to bear it, and the glory
beheld becomes glory imparted to (and reflected
by) the beholder.

John’s Gospel gives us Gedouat, thedomai (“to look
closely at’’), and ewpéw, thedréd (‘to discern’’). ‘‘We
beheld [etheasémetha] his glory’ (Jn 1 14),
they may behold [thedrésin] my glory” (17 24). In
classic lit., the former word is closely associated
with theatrical spectacles, and the latter with ath-
letie games, and they both convey the idea of
unceasing interest, deepening in this connection into
love and joy. M. O. Evans


BEHOOVE, bé-hoov’: Used in the NT for two
Gr words det (Lk 24 26; Acts 17 3) and ophetld
(He 2 17); the former referring to a physical,
and the latter to a moral, necessity (Bengelon,
1 Cor 11 10). The former means ‘‘must,”’ that
is, it is required by the order which God has or-
dained; the latter, “ought,” that is, it is required
as a debt.


BEIRUT, ba’ract’. See Beryrus.


BEKA, bé’ké (YP, beka', ““‘half”): Half a shekel,
the amount contributed by each male of the Israel-
ites for the use of the Sanctuary (Ex 38 26). Its
value varied according to the standard used, but
on the ordinary, or Phoen, standard it would rep-
resent about 122 grains. See WerIGHTS AND
Mzasures.


BEL, bel, bal (3, bél): Appellative name of a
Bab god (cf Baat), in the OT and Apoc identified
with Marduk or Merodach, the tutelary deity of
Babylon (cf Isa 46 1; Jer 51 44; Bar 6 41).
See BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA, THE RELIGION OF.


BEL AND THE DRAGON. See Danizxt, Boox
oF, X.


BEL, bel, bal, AND THE DRAGON, drag’un
(Gr words: Spdkov, drékon, “dragon,” “serpent”;
éxtés, ekiés, “except”; bSpacis, hérasis, “vision,”
“prophecy”; Sts, dphis, “serpent”; rdbpayirdpevos,
sphragisdmenos, ‘having sealed”; xwpls, choris, “ex-
cept.” Heb or Aram. words: DF, Aatham, “to
seal’; RD, zépha’, “pitch”; NDZT, za‘dpha’,
“storm,” “wind”; WM2, na@hash, “snake”; 73M,
tannin, ‘“‘serpent,” ‘‘sca monster’’):

I. Inrropuctory P .
II. Name or Bet anp THE Draoon (in the Various
Recensions, Versions and Codices)
III, Conrents
1. The Bel Story: the God of Bel ie
2. The Dragon Story; Meaning of ‘‘ Dragon”;
Serpent-Worship in Babylon
IV. Textvat AUTHORITIES
1. Manuscripts .
2. Recensions or Versions
1) Greek
3} Syriac
3) Latin
(4) Aramaic
VV. OniainaL, Lanavaee:
1. Greek
2. Hebrew
3. Aramaic eee
4, Reasons for Regarding Hehrew as Likeliest
VI. TeacuiIne x 1
Little in this work that is distinctly Jewish. God
is great, absolute and ever-living; angels inter-
vene for special ends; the absurdity of idol-
worship
AuTHOR, Puace AND Dats or Composition
Prohably not in Babylon; perhaps_ the Heb
text originated in Pal ahout 146 BC or later.
The LX X version produced in Egypt ahout 100
BC, which may he the date and language of the
Book. © (Theodotion’s version) was produced
probably at Ephesus ahout 180 AD


PaincipaL OPINIONS


Vil.


Bel and Dragon THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


428


VIIL Canoniciry anp AUTHENTICITY


Accepted as canonical by the Jews of Egypt but

rejected by the Jews of Pal. Accepted as part of

the Bible by Gr and Lat church Fathers, by the

Council of Trent and therefore by the Rom church;

denied by Protestants to be canonical
LirERATURE

I. Introdactory.—Bel and the Dragon is the third
of the three Apocryphal additions to Daniel, The
Sone or THE THREE CHILDREN and SUSANNA (q.V.)
being the other two. In the Gr and Lat VSS (see
below, “IV. Textual Authorities’”’) these ‘‘additions”’
form an integral part of the canonical Book of
Dnil, and they are recognized as such and therefore
as themselves canonical by the Council of Trent.
But the Song of the Three Children is the only
piece having a necessary connection with the Heb
canonical Book of Dnl; in the Gr and Lat texts
it follows Dnl 3 24. The other two are appended
and appear to have an origin independent of the
book to which they are appended and also of each
other, though in all three as also in the Heb Book
of Dnl the name and fame of Daniel stand out prom-
inently.

Hl. Name.—Since in the Gr and Lat recensions
or VSS Bel forms a portion of the Book of Dnl it
does not bear a special name. But in the only two
known MSS of the LXX in Syro-Hexaplar (see
below, “IV. Textual Authorities”) these words
stand at the head of the ‘‘addition’”’ now under con-
sideration: ‘From [or ‘‘a part of”] the prophecy
of Habakkuk son of Joshua of the tribe of Levi.”
That the Bib. writing prophet of that name is
meant is beyond question. In ® this fact is dis-
tinctly stated (see ver 33); and it is equally beyond
question that these tales could never have come from
the prophet so called (see below ‘VIII. Canonicity
and Authenticity”).

In codd. A and B of ® the title is: Horasis 12,
i.e. ch 12 of Dnl, canonical Dn] being comprised
in 11 chs. In the Vulg, Bel forms ch 14, but, as
in the case of the earlier chs, it has no heading.

In the Syr Pesh (W) the story of Bel is preceded
by “Bel the idol,” and that of the Dragon by
“Then follows the Dragon.” Bel and the Dragon
is the title in all Protestant VSS of the Apocrypha,
which rigidly keep the latter separate from the
books of the Heb canon.

Hl, Contents.—The stories of Bel and of the
Dragon have a separate origin and existed apart:
they are brought together because they both agree
in holding up idolatry to ridicule and in encouraging
Jewish believers to be true to their religion. The
glorification of Daniel is also another point in which
both agree, though while the Daniel of the Bel
story appears as a shrewd judge corresponding to
the etymology of that name, he of the Dragon story
is but a fearless puritan who will die rather than be
faithless to his religion.

It is evident however that the editor of the
“additions” has fused both stories into one, making
the Dragon story depend on that which precedes
(see vs 23f). It seems very likely that, in a Nes-
torian list mentioned by Churton (Uncanonical and
Apocryphal Scriptures, 391), Bel and the Dragon is
comprised under the title, The Little Daniel.

The two stories as told in common by LXX and
8 may be thus summarized:

There is in Babylon an image of Bel which Daniel
refuses to worship, though no form of worship is

mentioned except that of supplying
1. The the god with food. The king (Cyrus
Story of Bel according to 9) remonstrates with the

delinquent Hebrew, pointing out to
him the immense amount of food consumed daily
by Bel, who thus proves himself to be a living god.
Daniel, doubting the king’s statement as to the
food, asks to be allowed to test the alleged fact.


His request being granted, he is shown by ex-
pressed desire the lectisternia, the sacred tables being
covered by food which the god is to consume during
the night. The doors are all sealed by arrangement,
and after the priests have departed Daniel has the
temple floor strewn with light ashes. When the
morning breaks it is found that the doors are still
sealed, but the food has disappeared. Upon ex-
amination the tracks of bare feet are found on the
ash-strewn floor, showing that the priests have
entered the temple by a secret way and removed
the food. Angered by the trick played on him
the king has the priests put to death and the image
destroyed.

The word Bel, a short form of Baal, occurs in the
OT in Isa 46 1; Jer 50 2; 51 44, where it stands
for Merodach or Marduk, chief of the Bab deities.
Originally however it denotes any one of the Bab
local deities, and esp. the principal deity worshipped
at. Nippur (for similar use of the Heb “Baal” see
art. on this word). In © Cyrus appears as an
abettor of Bel-worship, which is quite in_accord-
ance with the practice of the early Pers kings to
show favor to the worship of the conntries they
conquered. See Century Bible, “Ezr, Neh and
Est,” 40.

There is in Babylon a great live dragon wor-
shipped by a large number of the inhabitants,

who lavishly feed it. In the present


2. The case the god is or is represented by
Dragon a living creature which can be fed,
Story and, indeed, needs feeding. Daniel


refuses to bow down before the dragon
and makes an offer to the king to kill it. Be-
lieving the god well able to care for himself, the
king accepts Daniel’s challenge. Daniel makes a
mixture of which pitch forms the principal ingre-
dient and thrusts it down the dragon’s throat, so
that ‘it bursts asunder and dies.” The people are
infuriated at the death of their god and demand
that the king shall have the god-murderer put to
death, a demand to which the royal master yields
by having Daniel cast into a den of lions, as was
done to other culprits found guilty of capital
charges. But though the prophet remained in the
company of 7 lions for 6 days he suffered no injury.
On the last day when Daniel, without food, was
naturally hungry, a miracle was performed by
way of supplying him with food. Habakkuk (see
above, “IJ. Name’’), when cooking food for his
reapers, heard an angel’s voice commanding him
to carry the food he had prepared to Daniel in the
lions’ den in Babylon. Upon his replying that he
did not know where the den, or even Babylon, was,
the angel laid hold of his hair and by it carried the
prophet to the very part of the den where Daniel
was. Having handed the latter the meal intended
for the reapers, he was safely brought back by the
angel to hisown home. It would seem that Habak-
kuk was protected from the lions as well as Daniel.
Seeing all this the king worshipped God, set Daniel
free, and in his stead cast his accusers into the lions’
den, where they were instantly devoured.

Zéckler in his commentary (p. 215) speaks of the
‘fluidity” of the Dragon myth, and he has been
followed by Marshall and Daubney. But what in
reality does the Gr word drakén, rendered ‘‘dragon,”
mean? In the LXX the word is used generally
(15 times) to translate the Heb tannin which de-
notes a serpent or sea monster. It is this word
(tannin) which in the Aram. version of the Dragon
story translates the Gr drakin. Now in Ex 4 3
and 79 the Heb tannin and nahdsh (“serpent”)
seem identified as are the Gr drakién and ophis in
Rev 12 9. We may therefore take drakin in the
present story to stand for a serpent. We know
that in Babylon the god Nina was worshipped in the


429


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bel and Dragon


form of a serpent (see Sayce, Hibbert Lectures,
281 f), and it is more probable that it is the worship
of this god or of some other serpent deity that is
here meant, than that there is any allusion to the
Bab story according to which Marduk the supreme
deity of Babylon engaged in a conflict with Tiamat
the monster—foe to light and order. (1) The
dragon of the present story is a god and not as
Tiamat, a kind of devil, and a male, not a female.
(2) The dragon in the present story is a serpent,
which is not true of Tiamat. (3) Apsu (male) and
Tiamat (female) are Bab deities who give birth to
the gods of heaven; these gods subsequently led
by their mother Tiamat engaged in a fierce contest
with Marduk.

Since Gunkel published his book, Schépfung und
Chaos (1895), it has been the fashion to see reflec-
tions of the Marduk-Tiamat conflict throughout
the OT. But recent investigations tend to show
that Bab mythology has not dominated Heb
thought to the extent that was formerly thought,
and with this statement Gunkel himself now agrees,
as the last ed of his commentary on Genesis proves.

IV. Textual Authorities.—

(1) Greek.—There exist in Gr two forms of the
text (see below). (a) The LXX text has been pre-

served in but one original MS, the cod.
1. Manu-  Christianus (from the Chigi family who
scripts owned it, published in Rome in 1772).
This belongs to about the 9th cent.
This text has been printed also in Cozza’s Sacrorum
Bibliorum vestustissima fragmenta Graeca et Latina,
part ili, Romae, 1877, and in Swete’s ed of the LXX
side by side with ©. In Tischendorf’s LXX it occurs
at the close of the ordinary text of the LXX. (0)
Of 9 (the text of Theodotion) we have the following
important MSS: B, A, Q (cod Marchalianus), T (vs
1.2-4 only) and A (from ver 21 to ver 41).

(2) Syriac—There exists in the Ambrosian
Library at Milan, a MS of the 8th cent. of the
Syro-Hexaplar version made by Paul of Tella in 617
AD at Alexandria from col vi (L.XX) of Origen’s
Hexapla. This most valuable MS has been edited
and published by Ceriani. :

(1) Greek.—(a) The LXX: Of this we have but
one MS (see above under “‘Manuscripts’’) and until

its publication at Rome in 1772 what


2. Recen- is now known as 9 was believed to be
sions or the real LXX version, notwithstanding
Versions hints to the contrary by early Chris-


tian writers. (6) 8, or the version of
Theodotion: This version appears to be a revision
of the LX X, with the help, perhaps, as in the case
of the canonical Daniel, of a Heb (or Aram.) original,
now lost. It is much less pedantic than Aquila’s
Gr tr which preceded it, and its Gr is better. It is
also a better tr than the LXX; yet it has many
transliterations of Heb words instead of tr. This
version of Daniel displaced that of the LXX at a
very early time, for though Origen gave place to the
LXX in his Hexapla, in his writings he almost
always cites from ©. In his preface to Daniel
Jerome points to the fact that in his own time the
church had rejected the LXX in favor of 8, men-
tioning the defectiveness of the former as the ground.
Even Irenaeus (d. 202) and Porphyry (d. 305) pre-
ferred © to the LXX. Field was the first to point
out that it isthe work of Theodotion (not the LXX)
that we have in 1 Esd, etc.

(2) Syriac.—In addition to the Syro-Hexaplar
version (see above, under ““Manuscripts’”) the Pesh
version must be noted. It follows © closely, and is
printed in Walton’s Polyglot (in one recension only
of Bel and the Dragon) and in a revised text edited
by Lagarde in 1861; not as R. H. Charles (Enc
Brit, VII, 807) erroneously says in The Book of Tobit
by Neubauer.


(3) Latin.—(a) The old Lat version, which rests
on 9, fragments of which occur in Sabatier’s work,
Bibliorum sacrorum Latinae versiones antiquae (1743,
etc, II). (6) The Vulg, which follows Jerome's tr, is
also based on 9, and follows it closely. °

(4) Aramaic—For the Aram. version published
by M. Gaster and claimed to be the text of the
book as first written, see below, ‘V. Original
Language.”

V. Original Language.—It has been until re-
cent years most generally maintained that Bel and
the Dragon was composed and first edited in the
Gr language. So Eichhorn, de Wette, Schrader,
Fritzsche, Schiirer and Konig. In favor of this the
following reasons have been given: (1) No Sem ©
original with reasonable claims has been discovered.
Origen, Eusebius and Jerome distinctly say that no
Heb (or Aram.) form of this tract existed or was
known in their time. (2) The Hebraisms with
which this work undoubtedly abounds are no more
numerous or more crucial than can be found in
works by Jewish authors which are known to have
been composed in the Gr language, such as the con-
tinual recurrence of kat (=“‘and”), kat efpe (“and
he said’’), etc.

On the other hand, the opinion has been growing
among recent scholars that this work was written
first of all either in Heb or Aram. Some of the
grounds are the following: (1) It is known that
Theodotion in making his tr of other parts of the
OT (Dnl) endeavored to correct the LX X with the
aid of the MT. A comparison of the LXX and
of © of Bel and the Dragon reveal differences of a
similar character. How can we account for them
unless we assume that Theodotion had before him
a Sem original? A very weak argument, however,
for the translator might have corrected on a priori
principles, using his own judgment; or there might
well have been in his time different recensions of
the LXX. Westcott (DB, I, 397a; 2d ed, 714a)
holds that some of @’s changes are due to a desire
to give consistency to the facts. (2) Much has
been made of the Semiticisms in the work, and it
must be admitted that they are numerous and
striking. But are these Hebraisms or Aramaisms?
The commonest and most undoubted Semiticism
is the repeated use of kai and kat egéneto with the
force of the waw-consecutive and only to be ex-
plained and understood in the light of that con-
struction. But the waw-consecutive exists only
in classical Heb; Aram. and post-Bib. Heb, including
late parts of the OT (parts of Eccl, etc), know
nothing of it. It must be assumed then that if the
Semiticisms of this work imply a Sem original, that
original was Heb, not Aram.

The following Hebraisms found in the LXX and
in © may briefly be noted: (1) The use of the Gr
kat with all the varied meanings of the waw-consecu-
tive (see below, under ‘‘VI. Teaching”). The be-
ginning of a sentence with kai én (‘‘and there was’)
(vs 1.3 in LXX; 2f, etc, in ©) agrees with the Heb
waw-consecutive construction, but makes poor Gr.
In ver 15 kai egeneto can be understood only in the
light of the Heb for which it stands. (2) The
syntactical feature called parataxy (codrdination)
presents itself throughout the Gr of this piece, and
it has been reproduced in the Eng. tr’ (AV, RV) as
any Eng. reader can see. In the classical languages
it is hypotaxy that prevails. If, as seems likely,
those responsible for LXX and © followed a Heb
original, they failed to make sufficient allowance
for the peculiar force of the waw-consecutive idiom,
for this does not involve hypotaxy to any consider-
able extent. (3) The constant occurrence of
Kirios (“Lord”) without the art. implies the Heb
Yahwe; and the phrase the “Lord God” is also
Heb. (4) There are difficulties and differences


Bet aad Dragon THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


best explained by assuming a Heb origin. The
Gr word sphragisamenos has no sense in ver 14
(LXX) for, retaining it, we should read of a sealing
of the temple (of Bel) and also of a sealing with
signet rings of the doors. The Heb word “shut”
(satham) is written much like that for “seal”
(hatham), and was probably, as Marshal suggests,
mistaken for the latter. The temple was “shut”
and the doors “sealed.” In ver 10 the LXX
(choris) and © (ektés) have 2 words of similar sense,
which are best explained as independent renderings
of one Heb word.

Marshall, identifying this dragon story with the
Bab creation-myth of Marduk and Tiamat, thinks
that instead of “pitch” used in making the obolus
with which Daniel destroyed the dragon, the origi-
nal Aram. document has “storm wind,” the two
words being in Aram. written much alike (za‘épha’
=“storm wind,” and zépha@’=pitch). But the fact
is quite overlooked that the obolus contained not
only pitch, but also “fat” and “hair” (see ver 27).
Besides, in the Aram. version, published by Gaster,
to which Marshall attaches great importance as
at least a real source, we have four ingredients, viz.
pitch (2ép*tha’), fat, flax (kittd@n) and hair. Dr. Mar-
shall’s suggestion involves therefore not only the
confusion of two words spelled differently in Aram.,
but the substitution of 3 or 4 terms for one in the
original draft. Moreover in Bel and the Dragon
the several ingredients are made up into a cake
with which the dragon was gorged. Dr. Mar-
shall’s view assumes also an Aram. original which is
against the evidence. But the suggestion would not
have been made but for a desire to assimilate the
dragon story to the Bab creation-myth, though
in motive and details both differ so essentially.

In favor of a Sem original many writers have
cited the fact that forms of the story have been
found in Heb and Aram. In the 13th cent. Ray-
mund Martini in his Pugio Fidei (written against
the Jews) quotes Bel and the Dragon from a Heb
Midr on Gen which Neubauer discovered and which
is almost verbatim identical with the unique MS con-
taining Midr Rabba de Rabba (see Neubauer,
Tobit, viii, and Franz Delitzsch, de Habacuci, 82).
Still other Heb forms of these stories have been
found. All the “additions” to Dnl “occur in Heb
in the remains of Yosippon,”’ the ‘‘Heb Josephus,”
as he has been called. He wrote in the 10th cent.

But most important of all is the discovery by
Dr. M. Gaster of the dragon story in Aram., im~-
bedded in the Chronicles of Yerahmeel, a work of
the 10th cent. Dr. Gaster maintains that in this
Aram. fragment we have a portion of the original
Bel and the Dragon (see PSBA, 1894, 280ff
[Introd.], 312 [Text] and 1895 [for notes and tr]).
The present writer does not think Dr. Gaster has
made out his case. (1) If such an Aram. original
did really exist at any time we should have learned
something definite about it from early writers,
Jewish and Christian. (2) Dr. Gaster has dis-
covered an Aram. form of only two of the three
“additions,” those of the Song of the Three Children
and of the dragon story. What of the rest of the
Aram. document? (8) It has already been pointed
out that the waw-consecutive constructions implied
in the Gr texts go back to a Heb, not an Aram.
original. (4) The Aram. text of the Dragon story
not seldom differs both from the LXX and 9 as in
the following and many other cases: The two Gr
VSS have in ver 24 ‘The king [said],” which the
Aram. omits: in ver 85 the Aram. after “And Hab-
akkuk said” adds “to the angel,” which the LXX
and © are without. (5) The compiler of the Yerah-
meel Chronicle says distinctly that he had taken the
Song of the Three Children and the dragon story
from the writings of Theodotion (see PSBA, 1895,


430


283), he having, it is quite evident, himself put
them into Aram. Dr. Gaster lays stress on the
words of the compiler, that what he gives in Aram.
is that which ‘“Theodotion found” (loc. cit.). But
the reference can be only to the LX.X which this
translator made the basis of his own version; it is
far too much to assume that the Chronicler means
an Aram. form of the stories.

VI. Teaching.—The two stories teach the doc-
trine of the oneness and absoluteness of Yahwe,
called throughout Kurios (‘Lord’), a lit. rendering
of the Heb word, ’édhénai (‘Lord’) which the Jews
substituted for Yahwe in reading the Heb as do
now-a-day Jews. In the Gr and Lat VSS it is the
word read (the Keré perpetuum), not that written
Kethibh), which is tr4. It would have been more
consonant with universal practice if the proper
name Yahwe had been transliterated as proper
names usually are.

But very little is said of the character of Yahwe.
He is great and the only (true) God (ver 41}, the
living God in contrast with Bel (ver 57). Of the
nature of His demands on His worshippers, ritualistic
and ethical, nothing is said. There is no reference
to any distinctly Jewish beliefs or practices; nothing
about the téréh or about any Divine revelation to
men, about sacrifice or the temple or even a priest-
hood, except that in the LXX (not in 9) Daniel
the prophet is spoken of as a priest—strong evidence
of the low place assigned by the writer to the exter-
nal side of the religion he professed. Wedo however
find mention of an angel, a sort of deus ex machina
in the Dragon story (vs 34 ff); ef Dnl 6 22.

The incident of the transportation of Habakkuk
to Babylon shows that the writer had strong faith
in supernatural intervention on behalf of the pious.
Apart from this incident the two stories steer fairly
clear of anything that is supernatural. But vs 33-
39 are a late interpolation.

Vil, Author, Place and Date of Composition.—
Nothing whatever is known of the author of the
book and nothing definite or certain of the place
or date of composition. It has been commonly
felt, as by Bissell, etc, that it reflects a Bab origin.
Clay (see ver 7) abounded in Babylon (but surely
not only in Babylon); bronze (ver 7) was often used
in that country for the manufacturing of images,
and the lion, it is known, was native to the country
(but that was the case also in Pal in Bib. and even
post-Bib. times). None of the arguments for a
Bab origin have much weight, and there are con-
trary arguments of considerable force.

The anachronisms and inconsistencies are more
easily explained on the assumption of a non-Bab
origin. Besides, the Judaism of Babylon was of
a very strict and regulation kind, great attention
being given to the law and to matters of ritual.
There is nothing in Bel and the Dragon regarding
these points (see above under “Teaching’’).

f we assume a Heb original, as there are good
grounds for doing, it is quite possible that these
legends were written in Pal at a time when the
Jewish religion was severely persecuted: perhaps
when Antiochus VII (Sidetes, 139-128 BC) re-
conquered Judah for Syria and sorely oppressed
the subject people. Yet nothing very dogmatic
can be said as to this. We cannot infer much from
the style of the Heb (or Aram.?), since no Sem
original has come down to us. It is quite clear
that these ‘additions’ imply the existence of the
canonical Book of Dnl and belong to a subsequent
date, for they contain later developments of tra-
ditions respecting Daniel. The canonical Book of
Dn is dated by modern scholars about 160 BC, so
that a date about 136 BC (see above) could not be
far amiss.

Tf, on the other hand, we take for granted that


431


Belial


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bel. and Dragon


the LXX is the original text of the book, the date
of that recension is the date of the work itself. It
seems probable that this recension of Dnl was
made in Egypt about 150 BC (see 1 Mace 1 54;
2 59), and we have evidence that up to that date
the “three additions’ formed no part of the book,
though they exist in all Gr and Syr MSS of Dnl,
which have come down to us. Probably the “‘addi-
tions’’ existed as separate compositions for some time
before they were joined to Dnl proper, but it is
hardly too much to assume that they were united
no later than 100 BC. Yet the data for reaching
a conclusion are very slight. It may be added
that the Gr of the LXX is distinctly Alex in its
character, as Westcott, Bissell and others have
pointed out. Theodotion’s version is supposed to
have been made at Ephesus toward the end of the
2d cent. AD.

VHIL. Canonicity and Authenticity.—The Alex
Jews, recognizing the LXX as their Bible, accepted
the whole of the Apoc as canonical. The Pal Jews,
on the other hand, limited their canonical Scerip-
tures to the Heb OT. There is, of course, some
uncertainty (largely no doubt because it was origin-
ally a tr from the Heb) as to whether the LXX at
the first included the Apoe in its whole extent or
not, but all the evidence points to the fact that it
did, though individual books like Dnl existed apart
before they formed a portion of the Gr or Egyp
canon.

In the early Christian church all the three ‘“addi-
tions” are quoted as integral parts of Dal by Gr
and by Lat Fathers, as e.g. by Irenaeus (IV, 5, 2 f);
Tertullian (De idololatria, c.18); Cyprian (Ad fortu-
natum, c.11).

By a decree of the Council of Trent these “addi-
tions’? were for the Rom church made as much a
part of the Bible canon as the Heb Book of Dn.
Protestant churches have as a rule excluded the
whole of the Apoc from their Bibles, regarding its
books as either ‘Deutero-canonical” or “non-
canonical.’”’? In consequence of this attitude among
Protestants the Apoc has until lately been greatly
neglected by Protestant writers. But a great
change is setting in, and some of the best commen-
taries by Protestant scholars produced in recent
years deal with the Apoc and its teaching.

Julius Africanus (fl. first half of 3d cent. AD)
was the first to impugn the truth of the stories em-
bodied in the “additions” to Daniel. This he did
in a letter to Origen to which the recipient vigor-
ously replied. Ns

The improbabilities and contradictions of these
three pieces have often been pointed out from the
time of Julius Africanus down to the present day.
The following points may be set down as specimens:
(1) Daniel is called a priest in the L (ver 1),
and yet he is identified with the prophet of that
name. (2) Habakkuk the prophet (he is so called
in © [see ver 33], and no other can be intended) is
made to be a contemporary of Daniel and also of
the Pers king Cyrus (see vs 1 and 33 in the Eng.
Bible). Now Cyrus conquered Babylon in 538
BC, the principal Jews in Babylon returning to
Pal the following year. The events narrated in Bel
and the Dragon could not have occurred during
the time Cyrus was king of Babylon, but the LXX
speaks of “the king” without naming him. (3) It
was not Cyrus but Xerxes who destroyed the image
of Bel, this being in 475 BC (see Herod. i.183;
Strabo xvi.l; Arrian, Exped. Alez., vii.l). (4) It
is further objected that dragon-worship in Babylon,
such as is implied in the dragon story, is contrary
to fact. Star-worship, it has been said, did exist,
but not animal-worship. So Eichhorn and Fritzsche.
But there is every reason for believing that the wor-
ship of living animals as representing deity, and esp.


of the living serpent, existed in Babylon as among
other nations of antiquity, including the Greeks and
Romans (see Herzog, Ist ed, art. “Drache zu Baby-
lon,” by J. G. Miller). 1t has already been pointed
out (see list of meanings) that the word “dragon”
denotes a serpent.

Literaturs.— Eichhorn, Einleitung in die apoc.
Schriften des Alten Testaments (1795), 431 ff (remarkable
for its time: compares the LX X and ©); W. H. Daubney,
The Three Additions to Daniel (Cambridge, 1906; con-
tains much matter thongh rather uncritically treated);
the commentarics of Fritzsche (Vol I: still very rich in
material; it forms part of the Kurzgefasstes exegetisches
Handbuch); Bissell (in Lange's series, but nota tr); Ball,
Speaker's Commentary (thisis the best Eng. commentary
on the Apoc. See also Schiirer, Geschichte, III, 333, and
his art.in RE, I, 639; and the articles by Kamphausen in
£B,1I, 1014; Toy, in Jew Enc, II, 650; R. H. Charles, Hne
Brit, VII, 807, and esp. that by J. Turner Marshall in
HDB,I, 267. Fritzsche, Libri Veteris Testamenti_Graece
(1871), and Swete, The Old Testament in Greek, III, 1894,
and later editions, give the LX X and © on parallel pages.
In the ed of the LX X edited by Tischendorf, the LXX is
given in the text and © in an appendix.


T. Wirron Davies
BELA, bé’la. See Zoanr.


BELA, BELAH, bé’‘la (9>3, bela‘, “destruction” ;
AV Belah, Gen 46 21):

(1) B., the son of Beor, was the first king of Edom
previous to the kingdom of Israel and reigned in the
city of Dinhabah (Gen 36 32f; 1 Ch 1 43f).
LXX A, Baddx, Baldk.

(2) B., thefirstborn son of Benjamin (Gen 46 21;
1 Ch 7 6f; 1 Ch 8 1). He was the head of the
family of the Belaites (Nu 26 38), the father of
Addar (ealled Ard, Nu 26 40), Gera, Abihud,
Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah, Gera, Shephuphan
(ef Shephupham, Nu 26 39), Huram (1 Ch 8 3-5;
Nu 26 40).

(3) B., ason of Azaz, of the tribe of Reuben, was
a man of great power and wealth. His possessions
reached from Nebo to the Euphrates (1 Ch 6 8 ff).

. L. BREsLICH

BELAITES, bé’la-its cya, bal‘%, “belonging to
Bela’): The descendants of Bela (Nu 26 38).
Cf Bea (2).


BELCH, belsh: The primary idea of this word
is “to gush forth” as a fountain. As used in Ps 697
the thought is that these enemies had so cherished
these evil thoughts and bitter wrath that now
the heart is a very fountain of evil, and has taught
the tongue how to give utterance thereto. But the
previous verse shows that the Psalmist also had in
mind the howling and barking of the dogs about the
city. The imprecations of his enemies are like the
snarling, howling, barking of dogs which in an
eastern city makes the night hideous with the noise,
and is continued until the daybreak.

Jacop W. Kapp

BELEMUS, bel’é-mus (BfAepos, Bélemos; Bal-
samus): An officer of King Artaxerxes in Pal asso-
ciated with Beeltethmus in hindering the rebuilding
of eae (1 Esd 2 16): called Bishlam in
Ezr 4 7.


BELIAL, bé'li-al, bél’'yal (59722, beliya‘al;
Bediap, Beliar): This name, occurring very fre-
quently in the OT, has the sense of ‘‘worthlessness”’
(ef 2S 23 6m); accordingly in such phrases as
“sons of Belial” (Jgs 20 18; 18 10 27, ete),
“men of Belial” (1 8S 30 22; 1 K 21 13, ete),
which the ERV usually retains, the ARV more
correctly renders, “base fellows” (so “daughter of
Belial’ 18116, “wicked woman”). There is
here no suggestion of a proper name. After-
ward, however, ‘‘Belial’’? became a proper name for
Satan, or for Antichrist (thus frequently in the
Jewish Apocalyptic writings, e.g. in XII P, Bk
Jub, Asc Isa, Sib Or). In this sense Pau) used the


’ Belie
Ben-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


432


word in 2 Cor 6 15, “What concord hath Christ
with Belial?” (Beliar). Bousset thinks that Paul’s
“man of sin’ in 2 Thess 2 3, where some authori-
ties read ‘“‘man of lawlessness,” is a tr of this term.
The sense at least is similar. See ANTICHRIST;
Man or Srv. James ORR


BELIE, bé-li’: Is the tr of WOD, kahash, “to be
untrue” (Jer 5 12), “They have belied the Lord”
(ARV “denied Jeh’’), here used as synonym of
“give the lie to.”

In Wisd 1 11 “belie” tr® xarayeddouat, katapset-
domai (the kata prefix referring to the kata in kata-
lalid in the same verse), “A mouth that belieth
destroyeth a soul.”


BELIEF, bé-léf’. See Farrar.


BELIEVERS, bé-lév’érs (in AV and RV of Acts
5 14, for muorrevovres, pisteviontes, RVm “believing’’;
in AV of 1 Tim 4 12 for of moot, hoi pistot, RV
“them that believe’’): Equivalent phrases, they (he,
she) that believe (for of reriorevxéres, hoi pepisteu-
kétes; ol mucredovres, hoi pistetiontes; murrés [adj.],
pistés, etc) occur frequently as a regular description
of those who professed their faith in Christ, and
attached themselves to the Christian church. The
one essential condition of admission intothe Christian
community was, that men should believe in Jesus
Christ (Acts 16 31). The actual experiences of the
men thus denoted varied with all the possible degrees
and modifications of Farra (q.v.). Believers are
nowhere in the NT distinguished as a subordinate
class from the ‘Christians who know” as in the
gnostic antithesis of pistikot and gndstikot, “be-
hevers”’ and “knowers.” T. Ress


BELL (mi>2%9, m¢illoth, WWOID, pa'imén):
The former of these terms occurs only once (Zec
14 20) whereitisthustr’. It is derived from a verb
meaning “to tingle” or ‘‘dirl’” (1 S 3 11), and there
is, therefore, no objection etymologically to render-
ing the noun by “‘bells.”” But the little bell attached
to the harness of horses would hardly be a suitable
place for a fairly long inscription, and as buckles
shaped exactly hke cymbals (see Music) were used
as ornaments for horses, ‘‘cymbals”’ is probably a
better rendering.

The other Heb word for bell is found only in
Ex 28 383f; 39 25.26, where “bells of gold” are
directed to be attached to the hem of Aaron’s offi-
cial robe, that the people may hear him when he
enters and quits the sanctuary. Bells were not
employed by the Hebrews to summon the congre-
gation to worship, nor do Mohammedans so use
them at the present day. The church bell is a
peculiarly Christian institution, said to have been
introduced by Bishop Paulinus of Nola in Cam-
pania, who lived about the end of the 4th cent.
Little bells, however, like those attached to the
hem of Aaron’s robe, frequently form part of the
harness of horses, or are fastened to the necks of
the he-goats or wethers that lead the flock in eastern
lands. James MILuar


BELLOWS, bel’dz, bel’us: The word occurs once
only in EV, in Jer 6 29, where the prophet is pre-
dicting the coming of the destroyer (ver 26), “a
great nation’ from “the north country” (ver 22),
down upon Israel, because “all of them deal cor-
ruptly” (ver 28). ‘‘The bellows blow fiercely; the
lead is consumed of the fire.’ Here the imager
is drawn from the refiner’s art, and the “bellows”
are those used to make the refiner’s fires burn fiercely.
See Crarts, lI, 10.


BELLY, bel’i: 7iN9, gahén=“the external ab-
domen”’ (Gen 3 14; Lev 11 42). Mp, kobhah


=“the abdominal cavity” (Nu 26 8 ARV “body’’).
ja, befen=“the internal abdomen,” “the womb”
(1 K 7 20; Job 15 2.35 AV; 20 15.23; 40 16; Ps
17 14; Prov 18 25; 18 20; Jer 15; Ezk 3 3);
also fig. ‘‘the internal regions,” ‘‘the body of any-
thing” (Jon 2 2). MQ, mé'eh = “intestines,” “ab-
domen”’ (Dnl 2 32; Jon 117; 2 1.2). In the
NT xotAla, koilia=‘“‘a cavity,” esp. the abdominal
(Mt 12 40; 15 17; Mk 7 19); the seat of appe-
tite and of the carnal affections (Rom 16 18;
1 Cor 6 13; Phil 3 19; Rev 10 9.10); the inner-
most of the soul (ARVm Jn 7 38).
Frank E. Hirsce


Egyptian Bellows.


BELMAIM, bel’ma-im, AV Belmen (BeApaip,
Bemaim, Jth 7 3; Bowvpatv, Bailmain, 4 4): A
place in the neighborhood of Dothan (7 3}, to which
warning was sent to prepare for the invasion of
Holofernes (4 4). It probably answers to the
modern Bir Bil‘ameh (Ibleam), a ruined site about
half a mile S. of Jenin.


BELMEN, bel’men, BELMON, bel’mon.
BrLMAIM.


BELOMANCY, bel’é-man-si. See Aucury, IV, 2.


BELOVED, bé-luv’ed, bé-luv’d’ (ayamnrés, aga-
pétés): A term of affectionate endearment common
to both Testaments; in the OT found, 26 out of
42 times, in Solomon’s Song of Love. Limited
chiefly to two Heb words and their derivatives:
aT, 'ahébh, “to breathe’ or “long for,” hence
to love, corresponding to the NT, déyardw, agapdé,
“to prefer,” i.e. a love based on respect and benevo-
lent regard; 111, dadh, “love,’’ chiefly love between
the sexes, based on sense and emotion, akin to
prréw, philés (Lat amare). Used occasionally, in
their nobler sense, interchangeably, e.g. the former
of a hushand’s love for his wife (Dt 21 15.16);
twice of a lover (Cant 1 14.16), thus lifting the
affection of the Song of Sol out of mere amorous-
ness into the realm of the spiritual and possibly
Messianic. Both words used of God’s love for
His chosen: e.g. Solomon, “b. of his God’ (Neh
13 26); Benjamin “‘b. of Jehovah’’ (Dt 33 12); so
even of wayward Israel (Jer 11 15).

In the NT “beloved” used exclusively of Divine
and Christian love, an affection begotten in the
community of the new spiritual life in Christ, e.g.
“‘b. in the Lord” (Rom 16 8). The beauty, unity,
endearment of this love is historically unique, being
peculiarly Christian. ‘Brethren’ in Christ are
“beloved” (1 Thess 1 4; 1 Cor 16 58; Jas 1 16;
2 5). Many individuals are specified by name:
Timothy (2 Tim 1 2); Philemon (Philem ver 1);
Amplias, Urbane, Stachys, Persis (Rom 16 8.9.12),
etc. The aged John is the conspicuous NT illus-


See


433


tration of the depth and tenderness of Christian
love. In his epistles alone he addresses his dis-
ciples 12 times as “beloved.” Paul terms “God’s
elect”’ “holy and beloved” (Col 3 12).

The term rises to still Diviner significance as an
epithet of Christ, whom Paul, grateful for His
“freely bestowed” grace, terms ‘‘the Beloved.’’ This
is the word used repeatedly to express God the
Father’s infinite affection for Jesus His ‘‘beloved
Son” (Mt 3 17; 12 18; 17 5; Mk 1 11; 9 7; Lk
3 22; 20 13).

Agapétos rendered as above 47 times is 9 times
“dearly beloved” (RV uniformly omits ‘‘dearly’’)
and 3 times ‘‘well beloved” (RV omits ‘“‘well’’). The
former rendering found only oncein the OT (NAT,
ycdhidhith, “something beloved’), portraying God’s
tender love for His people: ‘dearly beloved of my
soul” (Jer 12 7). Thrice is Daniel spoken of as
“greatly beloved” of Gabriel and of God (N7707,
hdémadhoth, “precious,” i.e. delight=beloved; Dnl
9 23; 10 11.19). Through the apostles the word
has become familiar in pastoral and sermonic
address. Few NT words better illustrate the power
and impress of the Christian spirit on succeeding
centuries than this. Dwiaut M. Pratr


BELSHAZZAR, bel-shaz’ar (END , bélsha’¢car;
Badracdp, Baltasdr, Bab Bel-shar-usur): Accord-
ing to Dnl 5 30, he was the Chaldaean king
under whom Babylon was taken by Darius the
Mede. The Bab monuments speak a number of
times of a Bel-shar-usur who was the ‘‘firstborn
son, the offspring of the heart of’? Nabunaid, the
last king of the Bab empire, that had been founded
by Nabopolassar, the father of Nebuchadnezzar,
at the time of the death of Ashurbanipal, king of
Assyria, in 626 BC. There is no doubt that this
Belshazzar is the same as the Belshazzar of Dnl.
It is not necessary to suppose that Belshazzar was
at any time king of the Bab empire in the sense
that Nebuchadnezzar and Nabunaid were. It is
probable, as M. Pognon argues, that a son of
Nabunaid, called Nabunaid after his father, was king
of Babylon, or Bab king, in Harran (Haran), while
his father was overlord in Babylon. This second
Nabunaid is called ‘‘the son of the offspring of the
heart’’ of Nabunaid his father. It is possible that
this second Nabunaid was the king who was killed
by Cyrus, when he crossed the Tigris above Arbela
in the 9th year of Nabunaid his father, and put to
death the king of the country (see the Nabunaid-
Cyrus Chronicle, col. ii, 17); since according to the
Eshki-Harran inscription, Nabunaid the Second
died in the 9th year of Nabunaid the First. Bel-
shazzar may have been the son of the king who is
said in the same chronicle to have commanded the
Bab army in Accad from the 6th to the 11th year
of Nabunaid I; or, possibly longer, for the annals
before the 6th and after the 11th year are broken
and for the most part illegible. This same son of
the king is most probably mentioned again in the
same chronicle as having died in the night in which
Babylon was captured by Gobryas of Gutium. As
Nabunaid II, though reigning at Harran under the
overlordship of his father, is called king of Babylon
on the same inscription on which his father is called
by the same title; so Belshazzar may have been
called king of Babylon, although he was only crown

rince. It is probable, also, that as Nabunaid I

ad made one of his sons king of Harran, so he had
made another king of Chaldaea. This would account
for Belshazzar’s being called in Dnl 6 30 the
Chaldaean king, although, to be sure, this word
Chaldaean may describe his race rather than his
kingdom. The 3d year of Belshazzar, spoken of
in Dal 8 1, would then refer to his 3d year as sub-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Belie
Ben-


king of the Chaldaeans under his father Nabunaid,
king of Babylon, just as Cambyses was later sub-
king of Babylon, while his father oan was king
of the lands. From the Book of Dnl we might
infer that this subkingdom embraced Chaldaea and
Susiana, and possibly the province of Babylon; and
from the Nabunaid-Cyrus Chronicle that it extended
over Accad as well. That the city of Babylon alone
was sometimes at least governed by an official
called king is highly probable, since the father of
Nergal-shar-usur is certainly, and the father of
Nabunaid I is probably, called king of Babylon,
in both of which cases, the city, or at most the
province, of Babylon must have been meant, since
we know to a certainty all of the kings who had been
ruling over the empire of Babylon since 626 BC,
when Nabopolassar became king, and the names of
sate of these fathers of kings is found among
them. :

In addition to Nabunaid II, Belshazzar seems to
have had another brother named Nebuchadnezzar,
since the two Bab rebels against Darius Hystaspis
both assumed the name of Nebuchadnezzar the son
of Nabunaid (see the Behistun Inscription, I, 85,
89, 95). He had a sister also named Ina-esagila-
remat, and a second named probably Ukabu’-
shai’-na.

Belshazzar had his own house in Babylon, where
he seems to have been engaged in the woolen or
clothing trade. He owned also estates from which
he made large gifts to the gods. His father joins
his name with his own in some of his prayers to the
gods, and apparently appointed him commander of
the army of Accad, whose especial duty it was to
defend the city of Babylon against the attacks of
the armies of Media and Persia.

It would appear from the Nabunaid-Cyrus
Chronicle, that Belshazzar was de facto king of the
Bab empire, all that was left of it, from the 4th
to the 8th month of the 17th year of the reign of his
father Nabunaid, and. that he died on the night
in which Babylon was taken by Gobryas of Gutium
(that is, probably, Dartus roe Mxvs [q.v.]).

The objection to the historical character of the
narrative of Dnl, based upon the fact that Belshaz-
zarin § 11.18 is said to have been the son of Nebu-
chadnezzar, whereas the monuments state that be
was the son of Nabunaid, is fully met by supposing
that one of them was his real and the other his
adoptive father; or by supposing that the queen-
mother and Daniel referred to the greatest of his
predecessors as his father, just as Omri is called
by the Assyrians the father of Jehu, and as the
claimants to the Medo-Pers throne are called on the
Behistun Inscription the sons of Cyaxares, and as
at present the reigning sheikhs of northern Arabia
are all called the sons of Rashid, although in reality
they are not his sons.


LireratuRE.—The best sources of information as to
the life and times of Belshazzar for English readers are:
The Records of the Past; Pinches, The Old Testament in
the Light of the Historical Records of Assyria and Baby-
lonia; Sayce, The Higher Criticism and the Monuments;
and W. W. Wright's two great works, Daniel and His
Prophecies and Daniel and His Critvcs.

R. Dick Wiison


BELT. See Armor; Dress.

BELTESHAZZAR, bel-té-shaz’ar juxwyba,
béltsha’ccar; Bab Balat-sharugur, ‘protect his life’;
Dnl 4 8): The Bab name given to Daniel (Dnl 1
7; 226; 6 12). Not to be confounded with
Belshazzar.


BELUS, bé‘lus, TEMPLE OF. See Base.
BEN-., ben(prefix) (sing. JB, ben, “son of ”’; pl.


ga, beng, ‘‘sons of’ =Aram. 2, bar): This word is
used in sing. or pl. to express relationship of almost


Ben
Benhadad


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


434


any kind: (1) to a person; as such it is found as
part of many compound names like Benjamin, Ben-
hur, ete (ef Bar); (2) to a clan; in this connection
it is found in the pl. only: “children of Israel,”
“children of Ammon,’ cte; (3) to a town; perhaps
as place of birth (‘‘son of Jabesh”; 2 K 16 10 ff);
(4) to occupation, state of life, age, character,
quality even of things; (5) pecuharly employed in
the sense of “scholar,” ‘disciple’ (‘‘son of
prophet’’), or in phrases like ‘“‘son of death,’ ete;
(6) in poetry, ‘‘sons of flame” for “sparks” (Job
5 7m), etc. The frequent metaphorical use of the
word indicates that it was rarely used to express
the relation of father to son like the Arab. Ibn.
Ci HPN, 64ff. A. L. Brestica


BEN, ben (3, bén, “‘son’’): A Levite appointed
to assist as musician in the temple service (1 Ch
15 18). The text seems to be doubtful, since the
name is omitted in ver 20 and not mentioned at
allin the LXX.


BEN-ABINADAB, _ben-a-bin’a-dab, ben-ab-i-
na’dab (AJP AND, ben 'dbhinddhabh, “son of
Abinadab’’): One of the “‘eaptains” of Solomon who
provided for the king and his household, each for a
month in the year (1 K 4 11). His district was
the region of Dor. In AV he is called “the son of
Abinadab.” His wife was Tappath, the daughter
of Solomon.


BENAIAH, bé-na’ya, bé-ni’a (WIE, benayah,
WIS, bendyahu, “Jeh has built.” Cf HPN, 182,
265, 268):

(1) B., the son of Jehoiada of Kabzeel (ef Josh
16 21), was a man of ‘“‘mighty deeds” and was more
honorable than any of the mighty men of David
except the three chiefs. Therefore David made him
his chief counselor (2 8 23 23m; cf 1 Ch 27 34
where the order of names seems to be reversed)
and set him over the Cherethites (ef Carites, 2 K
11 4ff and m) and Pelethites and he was made
the 3d captain of the host and chief over the course
of the 3d month (1 Ch 27 5f; 25 8 18; 20 23;
1 Ch 1817; 28 23 20ff; 11 22ff). Being a
true friend of David (cf 2 S 15 18) he did not take
part in the usurpation of Adonijah (1 K 1 8.10.
26), and was therefore with others chosen by the
king to proclaim Solomon king over Israel (1 K 1
32 ff) and later by Solomon to execute Adonijah
(1 K 2 25), Joab (1 K 2 29ff), and Shimei
(1 K 2 46). Inrecognition of his services Solomon
appointed him over the host in Joab’s place (1 K
2 35; 4 4).

(2) B., a Pirathonite (cf Jgs 12 13.15), was one
of David’s 30 mighty men (2 S 23 30; 1 Ch 11
31). He was captain over the course of the 11th
month numbering 24,000 (1 Ch 27 14).

(3) Aruler of the house of Simeon (1 Ch 4 36).

(4) A Levite of second degree appointed as
singer (1 Ch 16 18) with “‘psalteries set to Ala-
moth” (1 Ch 16 20; 16 5).

(5) A priest appointed “to blow the trumpet
before the ark of God” (1 Ch 15 24; 16 6).

(6) The father of Jehoiada (1 Ch 27 34), but
see (1) above.

(7) An ancestor of Jahaziel of the house of Asaph
(2 Ch 20 14).

(8) An overseer in the service of Hezekiah
(2 Ch 81 18).

(9, 10, 11, 12) Four different men of Israel who
had taken “strange wives” (Ezr 10 25.30.35.43).

(13) The father of Pelatiah who was seen by
Ezekiel in his vision (zk 11 1.13).

A. L. Bresuica


BEN-AMMI, ben-am’t (“AY 32, ben ‘ammi, ‘son
of my kinsman,” Gen 19 38): The progenitor of
the Ammonites was a son of Lot’s younger daughter,
born after the destruction of Sodom. The account
of his birth as well as that of Moab was commonly
regarded as an expression of Israel’s intense hatred
and contempt toward these two nations. However,
this idea is rather unwarranted, in view of the fact
that the origin of the tribe of Judah (which is held
in especial honor by J) is accounted for in a similar
way (Gen 38). Gunkel (Schépfung und_ Chaos,
190) suggests that the narrative (19 30-38) was
originally a Moabitic account tracing the common
origin of Moab and Ammon to Lot. It presupposes
a universal catastrophe—such as the conflagration
of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim sug-
gests—in which all the human race, save Lot and
his two daughters, perished. In order to avert the
extinction of the race, his daughters resorted to in-
cestuous practices. In this ease we have here a
Moabite parallel to the Deluge story (Skinner,
Genesis, 313-14). While the eommon origin of the
two brother tribes is undoubtedly a fact (Jgs 10 6;
11 15.18.25; Dt 219; 2 Ch 20, ete), the folk-
etymology of their names is rather suspicious. The
name Ben-Ammi is probably derived from the deity
“Hmu,’”? which is the name for Nergal among the
Shuhites on the W. of the Euphrates, a land which
corresponds to the position of the Bené-‘Amma,
“children of his people” (Nu 22 5). The chief god
of the Kataban Arabs was called Ammi (Hom.,
ZDMG, V, 95, 525, n.1). In cuneiform inscriptions
this name appears as part of the title of the Am-
monite rulers (HDB). Neubauer (Studia Biblica,
1-26) suggests that the name Balaam is a compound
of Bel Am, that is, “Am is Lord.” For other
compounds with Ammi see Gray, HPN, 41-60.

: S. CoHon

BENCH (UP, keresh): Found only in EV in
Ezk 27 6, in the prophet’s “lamentation over
Tyre”: ‘They have made thy benches of ivory
inlaid in boxwood, from the isles of Kittim,”’ where
the word evidently stands for the “benches” of
the boat whose ‘“‘mast’’ (ver 5) and “oars’’ (ver 6)
have just been described, in the vivid figs. of speech
in which the city itself is pictured as a merchant-
ship. Cf ver 8, “Thy wise men, O Tyre, were in
thee, they were thy pilots.” See Suat.


BEN-DEKER, ben-d@kér (1PT"J3, ben-deker,
“son of Deker,” AV “son of Dekar’): The word
is derived from a Heb root meaning ‘‘to pierce.”
Cf HPN, 69. One of the 12 officers who provided
victuals for King Solomon and his household
(1 K 4 9).


BENEATH, bé-néth’: The adv. for “under”
(kato). In Jn 8 23, the words “ye are from be-
neath,” suggest hell in contrast to heaven. But
the succeeding clause, “ye are of this world,” gives
the key for the interpretation. Earth, not hell,
is expressed, although “that more awful meaning
surely is not excluded” (Alford).


BENE-BERAK, ben-é-bé/rak (PTR 723, bené
brrak; BavnBapdéx, Banébardk): A town in the
territory of Dan (Josh 19 45), represented by the


modern village Jbn Ibrak, about an hour S.E. of
Jaffa.


BENEDICTION, ben-é-dik’shun: From _ the
earliest times the records bear testimony that pro-
nouneing the benediction or giving the blessing was
a common practice. In the temple service, this
duty was assigned to the Aaronites and was made
an impressive part of the service. The form of the
benediction used is given in Nu 6 22-27. Refer-


435


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ben
Benhadad


ences to this practice may be found in Lev 9 22;
Dt 10 8; 2 Ch 30 27. After a time, minute
directions were given concerning it and careful
preparation was made for this part of the service.
All Aaronites, of proper age, were entitled to per-
form this service, except those who by previous
conduct or on account of physical defect were dis-
qualified. One who had killed another, whether
intentionally or otherwise, or who had violated
the marriage vows, had given himself excessively
to wine drinking or other excesses, or indeed had
been guilty of unrighteous conduct or life, was not
only prohibited from pronouncing the blessing,
but was required to withdraw before this part of
the service was performed. If one was blind even
of one eye, or had a defect in his hands or speech,
or was a hunchback, he was also excluded. Before
the priest could engage in this service he was re-
quired to wash his hands. Then, with uplifted
hands, while the people stood, he uttered the words
of blessing. The main idea was that thus the name
of Jeh was put on the people. Later it came to be
regarded as having some special blessing in and of
itself, a result against which the more spiritual of
the priests protested.

It was common not only to pronounce the bene-
diction in the public worship but also in the family.
We have such instances in Gen 9 26.27; 27 27-30.
This practice prevailed also on many other occa-
sions not only in Israel, but among the heathen as
well. We may readily see, therefore, that from
the very beginning of the Christian church the use
of the benediction was common. In the course of
time an extensive lit. developed on this subject and
it may be said that there are now three distinct
ideas in the church as to the benediction. That
section of the church which regards the minister
as clothed with sacerdotal powers, holds that the
blessings pronounced are actually conferred in the
act of the utterance of the words, because of the
powers conferred upon him when he was set aside
for the sacred office. On the other hand it is held
that it is merely a prayer that God may bestow
certain blessings on the people. From this position
others dissent, and teach that it is the declaration
of the special privileges and relations in which those
stand who have entered into covenant fellowship
with Christ; that the blessings now declared are
theirs by right of that relation, and are conferred
upon them by the Holy Spirit. The Gr and Rom
Catholic churches take the first position, and
therefore we find among them much of detail and
minutiae as to the manner in which it should be
pronounced. In the Gr church the priest raises
his hand with the thumb touching the third finger,
signifying the procession of the Holy Ghost from the
Father alone; or according to others to form the
sacred name IHS. In the Rom church the form
is, the thumb, first and second fingers are to be
open, to symbolize the Trinity. In this church
too, the benediction is pronounced in a multitude
of cases and in each case the thing so blessed by
the priest is made sacred. Crosses, church vessels,
houses, paschal eggs, churchyards, are thus blessed.
Every parish has a collection of these forms of
blessing in what is known as the “Benedictionale.”
The authority for this is based on some documents
claiming to reach back to early church history,
but as they belong to the forged decretal class, the
position of the Rom church on this subject is
untenable. :

Apostolic benedictions, as we find them in the
epistles, present considerable variety. One of the
striking features is that in a number of cases there
is the omission of the Holy Ghost. The best ex-
planation seems to be that the Father and the
Son effect the redemption of the world and the


Holy Ghost applies the blessing so wrought out.
“Grace, mercy and peace’ may then be said to be
sent from the Father and the Son through the
Holy Ghost to be the possession of all who have
come into the kingdom. The third person of the
Trinity, being thus in the act of applying the bless-
ing, is not mentioned. The fact that in other
cases Father, Son and Holy Ghost are mentioned,
proves that the writers knew the character and
office of the Holy Ghost. The most common form
used today is that in 2 Cor 18 14. Occasionally
some changes are introduced by ministers, but it
would seem best to adhere strictly to the Scriptural
forms. See Buesstna; SALUTATION.
Jacos W. Kapp

BENEFACTOR, ben-é-fak’t@ (Gr ewergétés, Lk
22 25): There is here a probable allusion to two
kings of Egypt (Ptolemy III and VII), who had
the surname ‘‘Euergetes,’? of whom the period
of the first was 247-242 BC, and of the second,
147-117 BC. Jesus draws the contrast between
worldly kingdoms, in which the title “benefactor”
is given those who rule with all the splendor of
earthly display and luxury, and His kingdom, in
which it belongs only to those whose work is that
of humble, obscure and often menial service.


BENEFIT, ben’é-fit (103, g¢mil=“‘a deed,”
2 Ch 32 25); AO}, yatabh=(causat.) “to make
well,” “to do good” (Jer 18 10). The pl. of
Saag, gemal, is found in Ps 103 2. Ps 68 19 (AV)
should be tr? “‘Blessed be the Lord. Day by day he
sustains us; God is our salvation.” xdpes, chdris=
“gift’’; “grace” (2 Cor 1 15, ‘‘a second benefit’’:
that is, two visits in the same journey). «vepyecia,
euergesia=“‘good deed done” (1 Tim 6 2: “be-
cause they that partake of the benefit [of their
service] are believing and beloved’); dyads,
agathés =“‘good”’ (Philem ver 14 AV; RV ‘‘good-
ness’’). Frank E. Hirscu


BENE-JAAKAN, ben-é-ja’a-kan, bé-né-ja’a-kan
(Jev1 "3D, bene yatékan: Nu 33 31.32). See
BEEROTH BENE-JAAKAN.


BENEVOLENCE, bé-nev’6-lens: AV tr of phrase
in TR of 1 Cor 7 3, rejected by RV which following
WH translates Gr opheilé, “due.” This refer-
ence to the marriage relation is explained in ver 4.
Cf Ex 21 10. :


BEN-GEBER, ben-gé’bér ("23°-ja, ben-gebher,
“gon of Geber”; AV son of Geber; the word is
derived from a Heb root meaning ‘to be strong.”
Cf HPN, 66, 69): One of the twelve commissariat
officers in the service of Solomon (1 K 4 18).


BENHADAD, ben-ha’dad (T3107 JA, ben-hddhadh;
LXX vlds ‘A8ép, huiés Hadér):


The Name
J. Bewuapap I
1. The Nae of Syria Founded
2. Syria and Judah
3. Shortsightedness of Asa
Il. Beznuavap II
Hadad-’idri of the Monuments
Expeditions against Israel
Alliance with Ahab
Biblical History Confirmed by the Monuments
Alliance Broken Off
Benhadad and Elisha :
Panic of Syrians at Samaria
. Murder of Benhadad
EnHADAD IIT é
. His Contemporaries
. The Assyrians in the West
3. Downfall of Damascus
Nirari ITI
4. Breathing Space for Israel
The name of three kings of Syria mentioned in


the historical books. Hadad is the Syrian god


III.


NE Go SIS) Ou oo ber


before Ramman-


Benhadad


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


436


L


of storms, and is apparently identical with Rim-
mon (2 k 6 18), the Assyr Rammanu, “the Thun-
derer,’’ whose temple was in Damascus.
The Name The name Benhadad, “son of Hadad,”
accords with the custom which ob-
tained in Sem mythology of calling a king or a
nation the son of the national god, as we have
Mesha‘, son of Chemosh, and the Moabites, children
of Chemosh. Benhadad seems to have become a
general designation for the kings of Syria (Am 1 4;
Jer 49 27).
I. Benhadad I was the son of Tabrimmon, who
is called (1 IX 16 18) “‘the son of Hezion, king of


Syria, that dwelt at Damascus.”
1. The Hezion has been with some plausi-
Kingdom bility identified with Rezon (1 K 11
of Syria 23.25) who founded the kingdom of
Founded Damascus and imparted to Syria


that temper of hostility to Israel
which became hereditary. Meanwhile the Ara-
maeans had shaken themselves free from the rule
of the Hittites, and with Damascus for a center
had planted strong settlements in the plains west-
ward from the Euphrates. By the time that
Benhadad entered into this succession, Syria was
the strongest power in this region of Western Asia,
and ready to take advantage of every opportunity
of increasing her dominions.
Such an opportunity presented itself in the appeal
of Asa, king of Judah, for help against Baasha,
king of Israel. The two Heb king-
2. Syria doms had been at feud ever since their
and Judah disruption. Baasha had pushed his
frontier southward to Ramah, within
5 miles of Jerus, and this commanding eminence
he proceeded to fortify. The danger of a hostile
fortress overlooking his capital, and the humiliation
of his rival’s presence so near, were more than Asa
could bear. It was at this juncture that he be-
thought him of Benhadad. Taking all the silver
and the gold that were left in the treasury of the
house of the Lord, and the treasury of the king’s
house, he sent them to Benhadad with a request
for an alliance, begging him at the same time to
break off the league he had with Baasha and thus
enable Asa to dislodge his enemy. Benhadad saw
an opening for the aggrandizement of his kingdom
and broke off the alliance he had had with Jeroboam
and Baasha. By an invasion of Northern Israel
_he obliged Baasha to withdraw from Ramah and
confine himself to the neighborhood of his own
capital (1 K 15 16 ff). Judah obtained relief,
but the price paid for it was too great. Asa had
surrendered his treasures, and very likely some of
his independence.
For his shortsightedness in laying himself under
obligation to Benhadad and relying upon the help
of Syria rather than upon the Lord
8. Short- his God, Asa was rebuked by _ the
sightedness prophet Hanani (2 Ch 16 1 ff). Ben-
of Asa hadad had extended his territories
by the transaction and seems to have
exercised henceforward some sort of sovereignty
over both the Heb kingdoms.


Literature.—McCurdy, HPM, I, 256; H. P. Smith,
OT History, 186.


Hl. Benhadad IH was in all probability the son
of Benhadad I. He is the Hadad-ezer, or Hadad-
dri, of the monuments. He comes

1. Hadad- first upon the scene of the Bib. history
4idri of the invading the land of Israel with a large
Monuments host, in which were 32 tributary kings,
and horses and chariots. He had

penetrated as far as Samaria, the newly built city
of Omri, now the capital of hisson Ahab. Benhadad
and his Syrian host had laid siege to Samaria and


Ahab had been summoned to surrender. Ahab
was disposed to come to terms, but the intolerable
proposals made by Benhadad drove him to resist-
ance. Encouraged by the elders of the people,
and acting on the counsel of a prophet, Ahab made
a sortie and falling upon the carousing Syrians put
them so completely to rout that Benhadad himself
only escaped on a horse with the horsemen.


Next year the Syrians resolved to retrieve their
defeat saying of the Israelites, ‘Their God is a
god of the hills; therefore they were


2. Expedi- stronger than we: but let us fight
tions against them in the plain, and surely
against we shall be stronger than they.” Ahab
Israel had been warned to expect the return


of the Syrians and was prepared for the
fresh attack. For seven days the two armies faced
each other, the Israelites “like two little flocks of
kids’ before a host that filled the country. On the
seventh day they joined battle near to Aphek, and
the Syrians met again an overwhelming defeat. Jeh
was proved to be God both of the plains and of the
hills. Benhadad was taken prisoner, and appeal-
ing to the clemency of the victor, he persuaded


437


Ahab to spare his life. A treaty was agreed upon
between the two monarchs under which Ahab’s
: people were to have bazaars of their
3. Alliance own in Damascus, as it would appear
with Ahab Benhadad I had had for his subjects
before in Samaria (1 K 20 1-34). The
treaty was denounced by a prophet, and Ahab was
warned that this man whom God had devoted to
destruction would be the destruction of himself and
his people. Under the treaty, however, there were
three years without war between Syria and Israel.
The treaty and the resulting period of peace
receive striking confirmation from the monuments.
From the monolith inscription of
4. Biblical Shalmaneser II we learn that this


History Assyr king in the 6th year of his reign
Confirmed (854 BC) had crossed the Tigris and
by the made his way across the Euphrates


Monuments on boats of sheepskin into Syria to
Halman (Aleppo). At Karkar he
encountered the combined forces of Damascus,
Hamath, Israel and the states which had united
to oppose his progress westward. Ahabbu Sir-’lai,
Ahab of Israel and Dad’idri, Hadadezer (Ben-
hadad II) of Damascus are named in the inscription
with chariots, horsemen and infantry, making
common cause against Shalmaneser and fighting
on the same side. It was Benhadad, as we gather,
that bore the brunt of the assault, but the result of
the battle was the complete rout of the allies with
the loss of 14,000 men. That the assistance of
Israel on the occasion was the outcome of the treaty
between Ahab and Benhadad, and that the com-
bination against Shalmaneser took place during the
ree years of peace, are in the highest degree prob-

able.
The disaster to the allies, however, seems to have
broken up the confederacy. When the king of
Syria is next mentioned in Bib. history,


5. Alliance it is defending the city of Ramoth-
Broken Gilead against the attack made upon
Off it by Ahab, who is found now in


alliance with Jehoshaphat, the king of
Judah, attempting unsuccessfully and with fatal
results to himself, to recover this city of Israel from
the weakened power of Damascus. At Ramoth-
Gilead Benhadad is not said to have 32 tributary
kings in his train, but 32 military commanders
who have taken their place (1 K 22 2.29-31).
The peace between Israel and Syria having been
broken, there was frequent, if not continuous, war
between the kingdoms, in which the


6. Benha- prophet Elisha is a prominent figure.
dad and He healed of his leprosy Naaman,
Elisha Benhadad’s commander-in-chief. He


disclosed to the king of Israel the
places wherever Benhadad pitched his camp. He
smote with blindness a great host whom Benhadad
had sent with horses and chariots to seize him at
Dothan, and led them into Samaria where he saw
them treated kindly and sent back to their master
(2 K 6 8-23). P
Some time after Benhadad again assembled all
his host and laid siege to Samaria. So great was
the famine that women ate their own
7. Panic of children. The king of Israel sent
Syrians at one of his men to put Elisha to death,
Samaria but Elisha closed his house against
him and announced that on the
morrow there would be great plenty in the city.
And so it happened. Certain lepers, despairing of
relief, had gone into the Syrian camp and learned
that the Syrians had abandoned their camp in a
panic, believing that the king of Israel had hired
the kings of the Musri and the northern Hittites
to raise the siege (2 K 6 24—7 20; cf Burney’s
note, 7 6


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Benhadad


Still another notice of Benhadad II is found in
the Annals of Shalmaneser, who records that in the
llth year of his reign he defeated a


8. Murder combination of 12 kings of the Hittites
of Ben- with Benhadad at their head, and
hadad slew 10,000 men. Of this there is no


record in Bib. history, but it must
have been shortly before the tragedy which ended the
career of the Syrian king. Benhadad had fallen sick
and sent his commander-in-chief, Hazael, to in-
quire as to the issue of his sickness of the prophet
Elisha, who was visiting Damascus. Elisha fore-
told the king’s death, and wept as he read to Hazael
the cruel purpose which the Syrian commander was
even then maturing. Hazael professed to be in-
credulous, but he departed from Elisha and the
very next day in cold blood put his master to death
and ascended the throne (2 K 8 7-15). Thus
ingloriously ended the reign of one of the most
powerful of the Syrian kings.
Literatvure.—McCurdy,HPM,1, 267 ff; Schrader,COT,
I,179 ff; Winckler, Geschichte Israels, Theil I, 1383-55.
Hf, Benhadad II was the son of the usurper
Hazael, and though not in the dynastic succession,
; assumed on the death of his father the
1. His Con- dynastic name. He was contem-
temporaries porary with Amaziah, king of Judah;
Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of
Israel; and Ramman-Nirari III, king of Assyria.
The fortunes of Israel had fallen low in the days of
Jehoahaz, and Hazael and Benhadad III were the
instruments of Jeh’s displeasure with the nation.
At this time Jehoahaz had no more than 53 horse-
men and 10 chariots and 10,000 footmen; for the
king of Syria had destroyed them and made them
like the dust in threshing (2 K 13 7). It was
when the fortunes of Israel were at the lowest ebb
by reason of the oppression of the king of Syria—
by this time Benhadad—that help came to them
and Jeh gave Israel a savior, so that Israel went
out from under the hands of the Syrians, ‘‘and the
children of Israel dwelt in their tents [in their
homes] as beforetime”’ (2 K 13 5). The “saviour”
of the Bib. narrative is the one allusion in Scripture
to the king of Assyria of that day, Ramman-
Nirari III, whose inscriptions record


2. The his victorious expedition to the West.
Assyrians ‘From the Euphrates to the land of
in the the Hittites,’ runs an inscription,
West “the west country in its entire com-


pass, Tyre, Zidon, the land Omri,
Edom, Philistia as far as the Great Sea of the sun-
setting, I subjected to my yoke; payment of
tribute I imposed upon them. Against Syria of
Damascus J marched; Mari, the king of Syria, in
Damascus his royal city I besieged.” He then
proceeds to tell of the subjugation of the monarch
and of the spoils obtained from his capital. That
Mari, which means in Aramaic “lord,” is Benhadad
III, the son of Hazael, is now generally believed.
With the capture of Damascus and the collapse
of the Syrian power under Mari (Benhadad III),
an era of recuperation and prosperity
3. Downfall became possible to Israel and Judah.


of Damas- So it came to pass that ‘“Jehoash the
cus before son of Jehoahaz took again out of the
Ramman- hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael
Nirari II the cities which he had taken out of


the hand of Jehoahaz by war. Three
times did Joash smite him, and recovered the cities
of Israel’ (2 K 13 25). Israel was able to breathe
freely for a time and Jeroboam II


4, Breath- restored the Northern Kingdom to its
ing Space former extent and glory. But the flame
for Israel of war which had been sent into the


house of Hazael and which devoured
the palaces of Benhadad (Am 1 4ff) was only


Ben-hail
Beriah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


438


waiting the time when the Assyrians would be free
to renew their expeditions to the West and carry
Samaria and Israel “into captivity beyond Damas-
cus” (Am 6 27).


Lirteraturse.—McCurdy, HPM, I, 291 ff; Schrader,
Cor, I, 202 ff.
T. Nicou


BEN-HAIL, ben-ha’il (2°7743 , ben-hayil, “son of
strength’; ef HPN, 65, 231): One of the princes
who was sent by Jehoshaphat “‘to teach in the cities
of Judah” (2 Ch 17 7).


BEN-HANAN, ben-ha’/nan (j20" 2, ben-hanan,
“son of grace’): A son of Shimon of the house of
Judah (1 Ch 4 20).


BEN-HESED, ben-hé’sed (T097]3, ben-hesedh,
“son of Hesed”’; AV son of Hesed; the word is
derived from a Heb root meaning ‘“‘to be kind”’):
A commissariat officer in the service of Solomon
(1 K 4 10).

BEN-HUR, ben-hir’ (VAN"]2, ben-har, “son
of Hur”; AV son of Hur; from a Heb root meaning
“to be white.” Cf HPN, 69,n.3): One of the twelve
commissariat officers in the service of Sclomon (1 1X
4 8).

BENINU, bé-ni’ni (73°72, benina, “our son’’):
A Levite who with Nehemiah sealed the covenant
(Neh 10 13).


BEN-JAAKAN, ben-ja’a-kan. See BENE-JAAKAN.
BENJAMIN, ben’ja-min (j"%732 , binydmin, or


Je, binyamin; Bevaciv, Beniaein, Bevnapty,
Beniamin):
(1) The His mother


sguneest of Jacob’s sons.
in giving him birth. As she felt death
approaching she called him Benoni,
1. The Pa- ‘son of my sorrow.” Fearing, prob-
triarch ably, that this might bode evil for
the child—for names have always pre-
served a peculiar significance in the Kast — Jacob
called him Benjamin, ‘‘son of the right hand”
(Gen 35 17ff). He alone of Jacob’s sons was
born in Pal, between Bethel and Ephrath. Later
in the ch, in the general enumeration of the children
born in Paddan-aram, the writer fails to except
Benjamin (ver 24). Joseph was his full brother.
In the history where Benjamin appears as an
object of solicitude to his father and brothers, we
must not forget that he was already a grown man.
At the time of the descent of Israel to Egypt Joseph
was about 40 years of age. Benjamin was not
much younger, and was himself the father of a
family. The phrase in Gen 44 20, ‘‘a little one,”
only describes in oriental fashion one much younger
than the speaker. And as the youngest of the
family no doubt he was made much of. Remorse
over their heartless treatment of his brother Joseph
may have made the other brothers especially tender
toward Benjamin. The conduct of his brethren
all through the trying experiences in Egypt places
them in a more attractive light than we should have
expected; and it must have been a gratification
to their father (Gen 42 ff). Ten sons of Benjamin
are named at the time of their settlement in Egypt
(Gen 46 21).

(2) At the Exodus the number of men of war
in the tribe is given as 35,400. At the second
census it is 45,600 (Nu 1 37; 26 41).
Their place in the host was with the
standard of the camp of Ephraim on
the west of the tabernacle, their prince
being Abidan the son of Gideoni (Nu 2 22f).  Ben-
jamin was represented among the spies by Palti the


Rachel die


2. The
Tribe


son of Raphu; and at the division of the land the
prince of Benjamin was Elidad the son of Chislon
(Nu 13 9; 34 21). ;
(3) The boundaries of the lot that fell to Benja-
min are pretty clearly indicated (Josh 18 11 ff).
It lay between Ephraim on the N.
3. Territory and Judah on the 8. The northern
frontier started from the Jordan over
against Jericho, and ran to the north of that town
up through the mountain westward past Beth-
aven, taking in Bethel. It then went down by
Ataroth-addar to Beth-horon the nether. From
this point the western frontier ran southward to
Kiriath-jearim. The southern boundary ran from
Kiriath-jearim eastward to the fountain of the
waters of Netophah, swept round by the south of
Jerus, and passed down through the wilderness by
Geliloth and the stone of Bohan, to the northern
shore of the Dead Sea at the mouth of the Jordan.
The river formed the eastern boundary. The lot
was comparatively small. This, according to Jos,
was owing to “the goodness of the land” (Ant,
V, i, 22); a description that would apply mainly
to the plains of Jericho. The uplands are stony,
mountainous, and pocr in water; but there is much
good land on the western slopes.
It will be seen from the above that Benjamin
held the main avenues of approach to the high-
lands from both HE. and W.: that by


4. Impor- which Joshua led Israel past Ai from
tance of Gilgal, and the longer and easier
Position ascents from the W., notably that


along which the tides of battle so
often rolled, the Valley of Aijalon, by way of the
Beth-horons. Benjamin also sat astride the great
highway connecting N. and 8., which ran along the
ridge of the western range, in the district where it
was easiest of defense. It was a position calling
for occupation by a brave and warlike tribe such as
Benjamin proved to be. His warriors were skilful
archers and slingers, and they seem to have culti-
vated the use of both hands, which gave them a
great advantage in battle (Jgs 20 16; 1 Ch 8 40;
12 2, etc). These characteristics are reflected in
the Blessing of Jacob (Gen 49 27). The second
deliverer of Israel in the period of the Judges was
Ehud, the left-handed Benjamite (Jgs 3 15).
The Benjamites fought against Sisera under
Deborah and Barak (Jgs 5 14). The story told
in Jgs 20 21 presents many difficulties
5. History which cannot be discussed here. It
is valuable as preserving certain fea-
tures of life in these lawless times when there was no
king in Israel. Whatever may be said of the
details, it certainly reflects the memory of some
atrocity in which the Benjamites were involved
and for which they suffered terrible punishment.
The election of Saul as first king over united Israel
naturally lent a certain prestige to the tribe. After
the death of Saul they formed the backbone of
Ish-bosheth’s party, and most unwillingly conceded
precedence to Judah in the person of David (2 S
2 15.25; 3 17 ff). It was a Benjamite who heaped
curses upon David in the hour of his deep humilia-
tion (2 8 16 5); and the jealousy of Benjamin
led to the revolt on David’s return, which was so
effectually stamped out by Joab (2 8 19f). Part
of the tribe, probably the larger part, went against
Judah at the disruption of the kingdom, taking
Bethel with them. 1 K 12 20 says that none
followed the house of David but the house of Judah
only. But the next verse tells us that Rehoboam
gathered the men of Judah and Benjamin to fight
against Jeroboam. It seems probable that as
Jerus had now become the royal city of the house of
David, the adjoining parts of Benjamin proved
loyal, while the more distant joined the Northern


439


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Ben-hail
Beriah


Kingdom. After the downfall of Samaria Judah
assumed control of practically the whole territory of
Benjamin (2 K 23 15.19, etc). Nehemiah gives
the Valley of Hinnom as the south boundary of
Benjamin in his time (Neh 11 30), while westward
it extended to include Lod and Ono. Saul of
Tarsus was a member of this tribe (Phil 3 5).

(4) A great-grandson of Benjamin, son of Jacob
(1 Ch 7 10).

(5) One of those who had married a foreign wife
(Ezr 10 32, and probably also Neh 3 23; 12 34).

W. Ewina
BENJAMIN, GATE OF. See Jerusatem.


BENJAMITE, ben’ja-mit: One belonging to the
tribe of Benjamin, such as Ehud (Jgs 3 15), Saul
(1 § 9 1.2), Sheba (2 S 201), Shimei (1 K'2 8),
etc.


BENO, bé’no Qa3, bend, “his son’’): The son of
Jaaziah of the house of Levi (1 Ch 24 26.27).


BEN-ONI, ben-d’ni (JIN JZ, ben-ani; inos
d8ivns pov, huids odunés mou, “son of my sor-
row”): The name given by the dying Rachel to her
new-born son; changed by his father Jacob to Brn-
gamin (Gen 35 18) q.v.


BEN-ZOHETH, ben-zi’heth (MMW 2, ben-zo-
héth, “son of Zoheth,” from a Heb root meaning
“to he strong[?]’’): A son of Ishi of the house of
Judah (1 Ch 4 20).


BEON, bé’on (Nu 32 3).


BEOR, bé’or (119A, be'or, ‘“destroyer’’[?]):

(1) Father of Bela, the first king of Edom (Gen
36 32; 1 Ch 1 48).

(2) The father of the seer Balaam (Nu 22 5;
243.15; 318; Dt 23 4; Josh 13 22; 24 9,
omitted in LXX; Mic 6 5; 2 Pet 2 15, AV and
RVm “Bosor’’).


BERA, bé’ra (JA, bera‘, ‘‘gift’’[?]; ef HPN, 74
n.): King of Sodom (Gen 14 2) who in the battle of
Siddim was subdued by Chedorlaomer.


BERACAH, béra’ka (173, berdkhah, ‘“bless-
ing,’’ AV Berachah): A Benjamite who joined David
at Ziklag (1 Ch 12 3).


BERACAH, bé-ra’ka, her’a-ka, VALLEY OF
(AV Berachah; 1272 P'Q2, ‘emek berakhah; xoas
etdoylas, koilds eulogias): After the victory of
Jehoshaphat and his people over Moab and Am-
mon, “On the fourth day they assembled themselves
in the valley of Beracah; for there they blessed
Jeh: therefore the name of that place was called The
valley of Beracah [i.e. of blessing] unto this day”
(2 Ch 20 26). In the Wady ‘Arrab there is a
ruin called Breikdt and the valley in its proximity
receives the same name. This is on the main road
from Hebron to Jerus and not far from Tekoa; it
suits the narrative well eee PEP, III, 352). ;


. W. G. MastermMan
BERACHIAH, ber-a-ki’a. See Berecuian.
_ BERAIAH, bé-ri’a (NID, bera’yah, “Jeh hath
created’): A son of Shimei of the house of Benja-
min (1 Ch 8 21).


BEREA, be-ré’a.


See Baat-MEon.


See Beraza.


BEREAVE, bé-rév’, BEREAVER, bé-rév’ér,
BEREFT, bé-reft’: Bereave is frequently used in the
OT in the (now almost obsolete) meaning of “to
deprive,” “to take away,” esp. with reference to


loss of children. The Heb word used here is bow,
shakhal, “to be childless,” or in the Piel “to make
childless” (cf Gen 42 36 et al.). In AV Eccl 4 8
(from the Heb 101, hagéer, ‘‘to lack’’) we read “and
bereave my soul of good” (RV “deprive”), and
in Ezk 36 14 (from Heb Swe , kdshal, ‘“‘to stumble’),
“neither bereave thy nations any more’ (RVm
‘cause to stumble’).

Bereaver, otherwise very rare, is found RV Ezk
36 13 (from Heb Sou, shakhél, ‘‘to be childless’’),
“a bereaver of thy nation” (AV “hast bereaved”).

Bereft is found in 1 Tim 6 5 (from the Gr
aposteré6, ‘‘to rob’) “bereft of the truth’? (AV
“destitute”’). The expression bereavement (RV Isa
49 20) in the phrase “the children of thy b.”’ means
“the children born to thee in the time when God
had afflicted thee.” A. L. Bresiicn


BERECHIAH, ber€ki’a (72, 3373,
Pan berekhyahi, “Jeh blesses,’ HPN, 216,

(1) A descendant of David (1 Ch 3 20).

(2) The father of Asaph, the singer (1 Ch 6 39
AV “Berachiah”; 16 17).
: ® A former inhabitant of Jerus, a Levite (1 Ch

(4) A doorkeeper for the ark at David’s time
(1 Ch 15 28).

(5) One of the heads of the children of Ephraim
(2 Ch 28 12).

(6) The father of Meshullam the builder (Neh
3 4.30; 6 18).

(7) The father of the prophet Zechariah (Zec
1 1.7). A. L. Bresiicu


BERED, bé’red (73, beredh, “hail,” from a Heb
root meaning “‘to be cold’’): The son of Shuthelah
of the house of Ephraim (1 Ch 7 20). Cf Bacumur.


BERED, bé’red (773, beredh; Bapd8, Bardd):
A place in the Negeb mentioned in the story of
Hagar (Gen 16 14). The well Beer-lahai-roi was
“between Kadesh and Bered.’”’ The Onkelos
Tg renders it Haghra’, which is the usual equiva-
lent of Shur, while the Jerus Tg renders it Hdlucah
which is also Shur (Ex 15 22). Hdligah is clearly
the city of Elusu mentioned by Ptolemy and from
the 4th to the 7th cents. by various ecclesiastical
writers. It was an important town on the road from
Pal to Kadesh and Mt. Sinai. This is without
doubt the very large and important ruin Kh.
Khalasa, some 70 miles 8. of Jerus on the road from
Beersheba and Rehoboth. ‘These ruins cover an
area of 15 to 20 acres, throughout which the founda-
tions and inclosures of houses are distinctly to be
traced... .. We judged that here there must
have been a city with room enough for a popula-
tion of 15,000 to 20,000 souls’ (Robinson, BR,
I, 201). E. W. G. Masterman


BERENICE, ber’e-nés.


BERI, be’ri (3, beri, ““wisdom”): A descend-
ant of Asher (1 Ch 7 36).


BERIAH, bé-ri'a, BERIITES, bé-ri‘its ("Y"2,
bert‘ah, “in shouting,” prob. derived from a Heb
root meaning ‘‘to make noise,” or ‘‘in evil,” from
another Heb root):

(1) Ason of Asher and father of Heber and Mal-
chiel (Gen 46 17; 1 Ch 7 30.31; the head of the
family of the Beriites, Nu 26 44 ff).

(2) A son of Ephraim, called B. by his father
because ‘it went evil with his house” (1 Ch 7 28).

(3) A descendant of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 13.16).

(4) A Levite in the line of Gershon (1 Ch 23
10f).


See BERNICE.


Berites


Beth THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE EN CYCLOPAEDIA


440


BERITES, bé’rits (2°73, bérim; according to
Klostermann and others, O° 33, bikhrtm): The
word is found only once in the OT (2 S 20 14).
The passage seems to be doubtful. The suggestion
of Klostermann does not improve matters any;
the other proposed reading, D2, bahirim (Vulg
viri electt), “choice young men,” is to be preferred.


BERITH, be’rith (72, berith, ‘“covenant’’).
See BaaL-BERITH.


BERNICE, bér-ni’sé (Bepvikn, Bernike, ‘‘vic-
torious”): One of the shameless women of the
Bible, mentioned in Acts 25 13.23; 26 30. She
was the eldest daughter of Herod Agrippa I (Acts
12 1.6.11.21) who ruled from 38-45 AD. Her
whole life from the Jewish standpoint was inces-
tuous. Its story is told by Jos (Ant, XIX, v, 1; XX,
vii, 1-3), also by Juvenal (6, 156). Her first hus-
band was her own uncle, Herod of Calchis. After
his death she consorted with her own brother Agrip-
pa II, with whom she listened to the impassioned
defense of Paul at Caesarea before Felix. For a
while she was married to King Ptolemy or Polemo
of Sicily, who for her sake embraced Judaism, by
the rite of circumcision. But she left him soon to
return to Agrippa. Later on she figures shame-
fully in the lives of Vespasian and Titus, father and
son. If heredity stands for anything, its lessons
are forcibly taught in the history of the Herodian
family. Henry E. Dosxer


BERODACH-BALADAN,
See MeronacH-BaLaDAN.


BERGA, be-ré’a (Bépova or Béppoa, Béroia):

(1) A town of southwestern Macedonia, in the
district of Emathia. It lay at the foot of Mt. Ber-
mius, on a tributary of the Haliacmon, and seems
to have been an ancient town, though the date of its
foundation is uncertain. A passage in Thucydides
(i.61) relating to the year 432 BC probably refers to
another place of the same name, but an inscription
(Inser Graec, II, 5, 2967) proves its existence at the
end of the 4th cent. BC, and it is twice mentioned
by Polybius (xxvii.8; xxviii.8). After the battle
of Pydna in 168 BC Bercea was the first city to
surrender to Rome and fell in the third of the four
regions into which Macedonia was divided (Livy
xliv.45; xlv.29). Paul and Silas came to Bercea
from Thessalonica, which they had been forced by
an uproar to leave, and preached in the synagogue
to the Jews, many of whom believed after a candid
examination of the apostolic message in the light
of their Scriptures (Acts 17 10.11). A number of
“Gr women of honorable estate and of men’’ also
believed, but the advent of a body of hostile Jews
from Thessalonica created a disturbance in conse-

uence of which Paul had to leave the city, though
Silas and Timothy stayed there for a few days
longer (Acts 17 12-15). Perhaps the Sopater of
Bercea who accompanied Paul to Asia on his last
journey to Jerus was one of his converts on this
visit (Acts 20 4). Bercea, which was one of the
most populous cities of Macedonia, early became a
bishopric under the metropolitan of Thessalonica
and was itself made a metropolis by Andronicus II
(1283-1328): there is a tradition that the first
bishop of the church was Onesimus. It played a
prominent part in the struggles between the Greeks
and the Bulgarians and Serbs, and was finally con-
quered by the Turks in 1373-74. The town, which
still bears among the Greeks its ancient name (pro-
nounced Verria) though called by the Turks Kara-
feria, possesses but few remains of antiquity with
the exception of numerous inscriptions (Leake,
Travels in Northern Greece, III, 290 ff; Cousinéry,


bé-rd’dak-bal’a-dan.


Voyage dans la Macédoine, I, 57 ff; Dimitsas,
Makedonia, in Greek, 57 ff). Marcus N. Top

(2) The place where Menelaus the ex-high priest
was executed by order of Antiochus Eupator, the
victim, according to local custom, being cast from
a tower 50 cubits high into a bed of ashes (2 Macc
13 3 ff). It was the ancient city of Halab, lying
about midway between Antioch and Hierapolis.
Seleucus Nicator gave it the name Berea. It was
a city of importance under the Moslems in the
Middle Ages, when the old name again asserted it-
self, and remains to the present time.

The name ‘‘Aleppo”’ came to us through the Vene-
tian traders in the days before the great overland
route to India via.Aleppo lost its importance
through the discovery of the passage round the Cape.
Aleppo is now a city of nearly 130,000 inhabitants.
The governor exercises authority over a wide dis-
trict extending from the Euphrates to the Med-
iterranean.

(3) (Bepéa, Beréa): A place mentioned in I
Macc 9 4. It may be identical with BrzRoTH
(q.v.) in Benjamin, a Hivite town, 8 miles N. of
Jerus, or with the modern Birez-Zait, 13 miles
N.W. of Jifneh. W. Ewina


BEROTH, bé’roth (1 Esd 6 19). See Brrrora.


BEROTHAH, bé-ri’tha (Ezk 47 16: “0113,
berathah; LXX B, ’ABOnpé, Abtherd; or BEROTHAL,
28 8 8; "NA, bérdthai, where for 41732, mib-
bérdthai, LXX reads ek tén eklektén pédlein,
“from the select cities’): Probably two forms of
the same name. Ezk 47 16 places it on the ideal
northern frontier of Israel, between Damascus and
Hamath. According to 2S 8 8 it was a city of
Hadadezer, king of Zobah. In the || passage (1 Ch
18 8) Cun is given in place of Berothai. Its site
is unknown. Ewald connected it with Beirdt
(so also apparently H. P. Smith, 7CC, “Samuel,”
307), but Ezekiel’s description excludes this view.
Others have sought it in the Wady Brissa, in the E.
slope of Lebanon, N. of Baalbec. A more plausible
conjecture identifies it with Bereitan (Brithén), a
village somewhat 8. of Baalbec (Baedeker, Pal’,
369). Possibly, however, the ideal northern frontier
line should be drawn farther south. See HETHLON;
ZEDAD; ZoBaH. C. H. THomson


BEROTHITE, bé'‘roth-it. See BErRoTuirs.


BERRIES, ber’is: Occurs in Jas 3 12 (AV) in
the phrase “olive berries” (édaia, elaiai). The
RV reads simply “olives.”


BERYL, ber’il. See Stones, Precious.


BERYTUS, ber’i-tus, bé-ri’tus (Bypvtés, Béru-
tés; Arab. grad ; mod. Beirfit, Beyrout, Bey-


routh): An ancient Phoen city situated on the N.
side of a promontory jutting out from the base of
Lebanon to the W. into the Mediterranean and
forming a bay on the N. connected with the fable
of St. George and the Dragon, and hence called
St. George’s Bay. The city is about 25 miles N.
of Sidon and about 12 8. of the famous Lycus, or
Dog River, at the mouth of which are found the
sculptured rocks bearing the monuments of the
ancient kings of Egypt, Babylonia and Assyria.
The city has been thought by some to be the
Berothai of 2 S 8 8 or the Berothah of Ezk 47 16,
but the connection in which these cities are men-
tioned seems to preclude the identification. The
town is, however, an ancient one, for it occurs in
Am Tab as Beruti where it is closely connected
with Gebal of which it may have been a dependency.


441


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Berites
Beth


Though not mentioned in OT or NT it appears in
the history of Herod the Great as an important
town where was assembled a court of 150 judges,
presided over by Saturninus, a former Rom consul,
to try the case which Herod brought against his two
sons, Alexander and Aristobulus, who were con-
demned there by the Rom court (Ant, XVI, xi, 2).
Beirdit was a Rom colony at this time where many
veterans settled and it afterward became the seat
of a great Rom law school which was attended, in
the days of Justinian, by thousands of students.
It was utterly destroyed by an earthquake in
551 AD, and for a time was abandoned. Many
remains of temples and public buildings of the Rom
period remain. It rose to some importance during
the Crusades and is at present the chief seaport of
Syria, and has the only harbor on the coast. It is
a town of about 125,000 inhabitants.
H. Porter

BERZELUS, bér-zé'lus. See Zorzevievs.

BESAI, bé’si ("03, bésay, ‘‘downtrodden”’): The
descendants of B. (Nethinim) returned with Zerub-
babel to Jerus (Ezr 2 49; Neh 7 52=Basthai, 1
Esd 5 31).


BESET, bé-set’ (ebreploraros, euperistatos): The
most common sense of this word is ‘to surround.”
This is the thought in Ps 139 5, and teaches the
omnipresence of God. Often wicked men find that
the things which they have done so envelope them
that they cannot escape ruin (Hos 7 2). The ref-
erence in He 12 1 is first of all against the sin of
apostasy against which repeated warning is given
in this book. But the warning is also against any
sin that is esp. dangerous to us. It, again and
again, surrounds us like a besieging army. To sur-
render would be traitorous and disgraceful, since
the Captain of the Lord’s host is with us.

Jacop W. Kapp

BESIDE, bé-sid’: Near to, or close to (Ps 23 2).
It is often used to refer to the mental state, to the
derangement of the mind (éiernu, existémi, Mk 3
21; Acts 26 24 AV). Orit may refer to the condi-
tion of being out of the ordinary course of the life.
A life consecrated to God and spent in the interest
of humanity is so designated (2 Cor 6 13). It has
the sense also of a state of being out of one’s usual
mind, but not of mental derangement, occasioned
by something that causes amazement or astonish-
ment (Mk 6 42). Or it may refer to a state in
which one is not conscious of present conditions,
but is rapt in vision (Acts 10 10). as :

Besides is used in the sense of in addition to or
that which is over and above what has been said
or is possessed (Lk 16 26; see ARVm “in”; Philem
ver 19). Jacop W. Kapp


BESIEGE, bé-s@j’.


BESODEIAH, bes-é-dé'ya, bes-é-di’a (M7 T104,
begodheyah, “in the confidence or counsel of Jeh”;
ef Jer 23 18.22; and HPN, 207, 221, 286): Father
of Meshullam, the builder (Neh 3 6).


See SIEGE.


BESOM, bé’zum: Occurs only once in Scripture :
“T will sweep it with the besom of destruction
(Isa 14 23). Refers to what was in store for Baby-
lon. The Heb word mat’éta’, rendered ‘“‘besom,” is
close of kin to the one (é7’té’ththa) rendered “‘sweep.””
In early Eng. “besom” was synonymous with
“broom,” and is still so used in some parts of Eng-
land.


BESOR, bé’sor, THE BROOK (Ti3 5m,
nahal besdr; A, Bexép, Bechdr, B, Beavd, Beand;
I § 30 9.10.21; Jos, Ant, VI, xiv, 6): A torrent-


bed (nahal) mentioned in the account of David's
pursuit of the Amalekites. Thought to be Wady
Ghazza, which enters the sea S.W. of Gaza.


BEST: Of five Heb originals the chief is 270,
tobh, “‘good,” expressing quality, character. Vari-
ously used of objects pleasing to the senses, feelings,
mind, moral sense, e.g. ‘‘best of the land” (Gen 47
6); “of sheep” (1 S 16 9); of persons “married
to whom they think best’”” (Nu 36 6); of abode,
Teay it liketh [RV “pleaseth’’] him best” (Dt

In Nu 18 12 the revenues of the priests were to
be “holy gifts,” e.g. the ‘‘best of the oil,” etc (aon ;
hélebh, ‘fat’’); also vs 29.30.32, the gifts of the
heave-offering were to be “‘of all the best,” indicat-
ing that the richest elements of life were to go
into the support and service of the sanctuary. Eo
“the choice [best] fruits’ (VOT, zimrah, lit.
“the song of the land’’), a beautifully poetic ex-
pression for the most celebrated fruits (Gen 43 11);
equally choice is TTB, pdzaz, “separate,” ‘‘the
finest [best] gold,’’ hence ‘purified’ (1 K 10 18).

Used but twice in the NT: (1) of spiritual
gifts (xpetrrov, kretiton, ‘better’ [RV ‘‘greater’’];
1 Cor 12 31); (2) of raiment (mp&ros, protos,
‘first’’), “best robe” (Lk 16 22), of special signifi-
cance as expressing the Father’s lavish love for the
repentant and returning sinner.

. Dwieut M. Prater

BESTEAD, bé-sted’ (TWP? , niksheh, ‘‘caught in
a snare,” ‘entrapped’; as Judah hard pressed in
their own land by the Assyrians [Isa 8 21 AV]):
Found only here. OF word sieden meaning ‘‘place,”
hence “‘set,”’ “beset”’; usually with ‘‘ll,”’ “sorely
bested.”” In RV rendered “sore distressed.”


BESTIALITY, bes-ti-al’i-ti. See Cres.


BESTOW, bé-st6’: The seven Heb words ren-
dered by this term variously mean ‘“‘to put’’ or
“place,’”’ ‘to give’; “do,” ‘“‘deposit,”’ as e.g. to
locate chariots and horsemen in cities (1 K 10 26);
or give a blessing (Ex 32 29). Four Gr words so
tr signify “‘to give,” “to labor,” ‘to feed,” “to
place around’’; as curdyw, sundgd, “to stow away
goods” (Lk 12 17); or puulfw, psdmiza, ‘give away”
(1 Cor 13 3). The term has richest significance
in expressing God’s abundant gift of grace and love,
bidwyt, diddmi (2 Cor 8 1 AV; 1 Jn 3 1).


BETAH, ba’ta (28 8 8). See Tisxara.


BETANE, bet’a-né (Batrédvn, Baiténg): A place
named in Jth 1 9, among those to which the mes-
sengers of Nebuchadnezzar were sent. From the
order in which they are named we should seek for
itS. of Jerus. It may be identical with Beit‘ Ainin,
about 3 miles N. of Hebron.


BETEN, be'ten (jQ2, beten; Barvé, Bainé): A
city of Asher mentioned between Hali and Achshaph
(Josh 19 25). Onom places it 8 Rom miles E. of
Ptolemais, giving it the name Bethseten. It may
be identical with the modern village e-B‘aneh, but
no certainty is possible.


BETH, bath (4): The second letter of the Heb
alphabet. With the daghesh it is transliterated in
this dictionary as b, and, without, as bh (=v).
It came also to be used for the number two (2)
and with the dieresis for 2,000. For name, etc,
see ALPHABET; BAYITH.


BETH, beth (in proper names; Gr transliteration
in LXX, BuO, bath, baith, or beth): This is the Eng.


Bethabara
Bethel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


442


transliteration for the Heb MA, béh, meaning
“house,” “tent,” “place.” It occurs in many com-
pound proper names formed similarly to the method
of compounding words in the German language, as
shown in the arts. immediately following. Thus
we have béth ‘dénath or ‘dnoth=“‘house of replies’’
(Josh 19 38; Jgs 1 33); beth’al=“‘house of God”
(Gen 12 8; 13 3), etc. We also find the word in
hybrid formations, e.g. Byé¢ayy, Béthphagé = Beth-
phage =“‘fig house” (Mt 21 1).
Franx E. Hirsca

BETHABARA, beth-ab’a-ra (N22 M73, beth
‘dbharah; BnOaBapa, Béthabard, “house of the
ford’): According to AV (following T'R) the place
where John baptized (Jn 1 28). RV (with Tisch,
WH following 8*BAC*) reads BETHANY. It is
distinguished from the Bethany of Lazarus and
his sisters as being ‘“‘beyond the Jordan.” The
reading ‘‘Bethabara” became current owing to
the advocacy of Origen. Various suggestions
have been made to explain the readings. G. A.
Smith (HGHL) suggests that Bethany (“house of


ered a well-known ford near Beisan called Abarah,
near the mouth of the valley of Jezreel. This is
20 miles from Cana and 60 miles from Bethany,
and all the conditions of the place fit in with the
history.” See also Betuany (2).
S. F. Hunter

BETH-ANATH, beth-ad’nath (M27 Ms, déth
‘dndth; Bawaa®, Bainathdth): A city in the terri-
tory of Naphtali, named with Horem and Beth-
shemesh (Josh 19 38; Jgs 1 33). It is represent-
ed by the modern village Ainatha, about 12 miles
N.W. of Safed. The name signifies the “house” or
“temple’’ of Anath, a goddess of the Canaanites.


BETH-ANOTH, beth-a’noth (M29 M3, bath
‘noth; Balavép, Baithandm, probably ‘House
of Anath’’—a god; Josh 15 59): The ruin of Beit
‘Aintn, 14 miles S.E. of Halhdl, in the neighbor-
hood also of Bethzur and Gedor—places mentioned
in association with it as towns in the hill country of
Judah—appears to be a probable site. The present
surface ruins belong to later ages.


BEtHANY.


the ship’) and Bethabara (“‘honse of the ford’’)
are names for the same place. Bethabara has also
been identified with Bethbarah, which, however,
was probably not on the Jordan but among the
streams flowing intoit (Jgs 7 24). It is interesting
to note that LXX® reads Baithabara for MT
Béth-‘drabhah, one of the cities of Benjamin (Josh
18 22). If this be correct, the site is in Judaea.

Another solution is sought in the idea of a cor-
ruption of the original name into Bethany and
Bethabara, the name having the consonants n, b and
r after Beth. In Josh 13 27 (LXX®8) we find
Baithanabra for Béthnimrah (MT), and Sir George
Grove in DB (arts. ‘‘Bethabara” and ‘Beth-
nimrah’’) identifies Bethabara and Beth-nimrah.
The site of the latter was a few miles above Jericho
(see BetH-NimRAH), “immediately accessible to
Jerus and all Judaea” (cf Mt 3 5; Mk 1 5, and
see art. “Bethany” in HB). This view has much
in its favor.

Then, again, as Dr. G. Frederick Wright ob-
serves: ‘“The traditional site is at the ford east
of Jericho; but as according to Jn 1 29.35.43 it
was only one day’s journey from Cana of Galilee,
while according to Jn 10 40; 11 3.6.17 it was two
or three days from Bethany, it must have been
well up the river toward Galilee. Conder discov-


BETHANY, beth’a-ni (Bndavia, Bethania):

(1) A village, 15 furlongs from Jerus (Jn 11
18), on the road to Jericho, at the Mount of Olives
(Mk 11 1; Lk 19 29), where lived ‘Simon the
leper” (Mk 14 3) and Mary, Martha and Lazarus
(Jn 11 18f). This village may justifiably be called
the Judaean home of Jesus, as He appears to have
preferred to lodge there rather than in Jerus itself
(Mt 21 17; Mk 1111). Here occurred the inci-
dent of the raising of Lazarus (Jn 11) and the feast
at the house of Simon (Mt 26 1-18; Mk 14 3-9;
Lk 7 36-50; Jn 12 1-8). The Ascension as re-
corded in Lk 24 50-51 is thus described: ‘‘He
led them out until they were over against Bethany:
and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. And
it came to pass, while he blessed them, he parted
from them, and was carried up into heaven.”

Bethany is today el‘Azaréyeh (‘the place of
Lazarus’—the L being displaced to form the art.).
It is a miserably untidy and tumble-down village
facing E. on the S.E. slope of the Mount of Olives,
upon the carriage road to Jericho. A fair number
of fig, almond and olive trees surround the houses.
The traditional tomb of Lazarus is shown and
there are some remains of mediaeval buildings,
besides rock-cut tombs of much earlier date (PEF,
III, 27, Sheet XVII).


443


(2) “Bethany beyond the Jordan” (Jn 1 28;
AV Bethabara; BnfaBapd, Béthabard, a reading
against the majority of the MSS, supported by
Origen on geographical grounds): No such place is
known. Grove suggested that the place intended
is BETH-NIMRAH (which see), the modern Tell nimrin,
a singularly suitable place, but hard to fit in with
Jn 1 28; cf 21. The traditional site is the ford
E. of Jericho. E. W. G. MasterMan


BETH-ARABAH, beth-ar’a-ba (T2793 MS, beth
ha-‘drabhah; BavlapaBa, Baitharabd, “place of the
Arabah’’): :

(1) One of the 6 cities of Judah “in the wilder-
ness” (Josh 15 61), on the borders of Benjamin and
Judah (Josh 15 6; 18 18 LXX). ‘The wilderness
of Judah” is the barren land W. of the Dead Sea.
Beth-arabah is not yet identified.

(2) One of the cities of Benjamin (Josh 18 22).
LXX® reads Baithabara, and this may be correct.
The names are easily confounded. See BeTHaBaARA.


BETHARAM, beth-a'ram (DI MB, bath ha-
ram). See Brru-HARAM.


BETH-ARBEL, beth-dr’bel (ONAIN MB, bath
’arba’l): The scene of a terrific disaster inflicted on
the inhabitants by Shalman (Hos 10 14). If the
place intended was in Pal, and was not the famous
city of that name on the Euphrates, then probably
it should be identified either with Irbid (or Jrbil) in
Galilee, or with Irbid, which corresponds to Arhela
of the Onom, E. of the Jordan, about 12 miles S.E.
of Gadara. If, as Schrader thinks (COT, II, 140),
Shalman stands for the Moabite king, Shalamanu,
a tributary of Tiglath-pileser, the eastern town
would be the more natural identification. Possibly
however the reference is to Shalmaneser III or IV.
For the Galilean site, see ARBEL; see also DB, s.v.

. Ewine

BETHASMOTH, beth-az’moth (AV Bethsamos;
Badarpdd, Baithasméth [1 Esd 6 18]; corresponds
to Beth-azmaveth in Neh 7 28): A town in the
territory of Benjamin, and may be identified with
the modern el-Hizmeh. See AZMAVETH.


BETH-AVEN, beth-a’ven (J]8 123, bath 'dwen;
Baldy, Baithén, Baatv, Baithain): A place on
the northern boundary of the territory of Benja-
min (Josh 18 12) E. of Bethel, near Ai (Josh 7 2),
W. of Micbmash (1 S 18 5; 14 23). Beth-aven,
“house of vanity,” i.e. “idolatry,” may possibly
represent an original bath-dn, “house of wealth.”
Wilson (PEFS, 1869, 126) suggests Khirbet An,
W. of Michmash. The name is used in mockery
for Bethel by Hosea (4 15; 10 5.8, etc; cf Am 5 5).


BETH-AZMAVETH, beth-az-ma’veth (Neh 7
28). See AzMAVETH.


BETH-BAAL-MEON, beth-ba-al-mé’on (Josh
13 17). See BaaL-MEON.


BETH-BARAH, beth-bi’ra (72 MS, bath
barah; BaOnpd, Baithérd): Perhaps Béth-‘débhara,
the guttural being lost in copying. It is a ford
which the Midianites were expected to pass in
fleeing from Gideon. Messengers were therefore
sent by Gideon to the Ephraimites bidding them
“take before them the waters, as far as Beth-
barah, even [RVm “and also”] the Jordan” (Jgs 7
24). “The waters’? were the streams emptying
themselves into the Jordan: “even the Jordan”
is a gloss on “the waters.’ Between the Jordan and
the modern Wady Fari‘ah an enemy could be en-
trapped; it is therefore probable that Beth-barah
was on that stream near its entrance into the Jor-
dan. See BETHABARA. S. F. Hunter


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bethabara
Bethel


BETHBASI, beth-ba’si (Ba6Bact, Baithbasi):
The name may mean ‘‘place of marshes’ =Heb
béth-b°gz. According to G. A. Smith there is a
Wady el-Bassah E. of Tekoa in the wilderness of
Judaea.. The name means “marsh,” which Dr.
Smith thinks impossible, and really ‘‘an echo of an
ancient name.”’ Jonathan and Simon repaired the
ruins of the fortified place ‘‘in the desert” (1 Macc
9 62.64). Jos reads Bethalaga, ie. Beth-hoglah
(Ant, XIII, i, 5). Pesh VS reads Beth-Yashan
(see JESHANAH), which Dr. Cheyne thinks is prob-
ably correct. Thus the origin of the name and the
site of the town are merely conjectural.

. F. Hunter

BETH-BIRI, beth-bir’i7 (AV _ Beth-birei, beth-
bir’é-i) "S373, beth birt; olkes Bpaovpoewpelp,
otkos Braoumseéreim; 1 Ch 4 31 [called in Josh
19 6, Beth-lebaoth, “abode of lions’’}): A site be-
longing to Simeon in the Negeb—unidentified.


BETH-CAR, beth’kir (1972, béth-kar; Ba.d-
x6p, Baithchér, Bedkyxdp, Belchér): “And the men of
Israel went out of Mizpah, and pursued the Philis,
and smote them, until they came under Beth-car”’
(18711). ‘Ain Karem has been suggested; if
Mizpah is nebi Samwil then this identification is
probable, as the pursuit would be along the deep
Wady beit Hannineh—a natural line of retreat for
the Philis to take. See BeTH-HACCHEREM.


BETH-DAGON, beth-da’gon (JJM, béeth-
ddghin; Byibayav, Bethdagén):

(1) A town in the Shephelah of Judah named
with Gederoth, Naamah, and Makkedah (Josh 15
41). It may be represented by the modern Beit
Dijan, about 6 miles §.E. of Jaffa. This however
is a modern site, and not inthe Shephelah. Nearly
2 miles to the south is Khirbet Dajan, a Rom site.
The connection in which it occurs leads us to expect
a position farther S.E.

(2) A city on the border of Asher (Josh 19 27)
which Conder would identify with Tell D’auk,
near the mouth of the Belus, in the plain of Acre.

The name seems to have been of frequent occur-
rence. There is a Beit Dejan about 6 miles E. of
Nablus, and Jos speaks of a fortress called Dagon
above Jericho (Ant, XII, viii, 1; BJ, I, ii, 3).
This would seem to indicate a widespread worship
of Dagon. But the name may mean “house of
corn.” W. Ewina


BETH-DIBLATHAIM, beth-dib-la-tha’im ("3
DINaI, beth dibhlathayim; olkos AcBAabalp,
otkos Deblaithaim, lit. “house of D.’’): A town
in Moab mentioned with Dibon and Nebo (Jer
48 22). It is probably identical with Almon-
diblathaim (Nu 33 46f). Mesha claims to have
fortified it along with Mehedeba and Ba‘al-me‘on
(see Moasite Stone). The place is not yet iden-
tified.


BETH-EDEN, beth-é’den (Am 1 5 AVm; EV
“house of Eden’). See CHILDREN oF EDEN.


BETHEL, beth’el (28°MM3, bath-al; Basdsa,
Baithél and otkos Q0t, ofkos theo, lit. “house of
God’):

(1) in town near the place where Abraham halted
and offered sacrifice on his way south from Shechem.

It lay W. of Ai (Gen 12 8). It is
1. Identifi- named as on the northern border of
cation and Benjamin (the southern of Ephraim,
Description Josh 16 2), at the top of the ascent

from the Jordan valley by way of
Ai (Josh 18 13). It lay S. of Shiloh (Jgs 21 19).
Onom places it 12 Rom miles from Jerus, on the


Bethel
Beth-hanan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


444


road to Neapolis. It is represented by the modern
Beitin, a village of some 400 inhabitants, which
stands on a knoll E. of the road to Nablus. There
are four springs which yield supplies of good water.
In ancient times these were supplemented by a
reservoir hewn in the rock 8S. of the town. The
surrounding country is bleak and barren, the hills
being marked by a succession of stony terraces,
which may have suggested the form of the ladder
in Jacob’s famous dream.


Bethel.


The town was originally called Luz (Gen 28 19,


etc). When Jacob came hither on his way to
Paddan-aram we are told that he
2. The lighted upon ‘‘the place” (Gen 28 11,
Sanctuary Heb). The Heb mdkim, like the
cognate Arab. makam, denotes a


sacred place or sanctuary. The makém was
doubtless that at which Abraham had sacrificed,
E. of the town. In the morning Jacob set up “for
a pillar’? the stone which had served as his pillow
(Gen 28 18; see PrnLtar—mageébhah), poured oil
upon it and called the name of the place Bethel,
“house of God”; that is, of God whose epiphany
was for him associated with the pillar. This spot
became a center of great interest, lending growing
importance to the town. In process of time the
name Luz disappeared, giving place to that of the
adjoining sanctuary, town and sanctuary being
identified. Jacob revisited the place on his return
from Paddan-aram; here Deborah, Rebekah’s nurse,
died and was buried under ‘‘the oak” (Gen 86 6f).
Probably on rising ground E. of Bethel Abraham
and Lot stood to view the uninviting highlands and
the rich lands of the Jordan valley (Gen 13 9 ff).
Bethel was a royal city of the Canaanites (Josh
12 16). It appears to have been captured by
Joshua (8 7), and it was allotted to
3. History Benjamin (Josh 18 22). InJgs 1 22ff
it isrepresented as held by Canaanites,
from whom the house of Joseph took it by treachery
(cf 1 Ch 7 28). Hither the ark was brought from
Gilgal (Jigs 2 1 LXX). Israel came to Bethel to
consult the Divine oracle (20 18), and it became an
important center of worship (1 5 10 3). The home
of the prophetess Deborah was not far off (Jgs 4 5).
ae visited Bethel on circuit, judging Israel (1 8


16).

With the disruption of the kingdom came Bethel’s
greatest period of splendor and significance. To
counteract the influence of Jerus as the national
religious center Jeroboam embarked on the policy
which won for him the unenviable reputation of
having “made Israel to sin.” Here he erected a
temple, set up an image, the golden ealf, and estab-
lished an imposing ritual. It became the royal
sanctuary and the religious center of his kingdom


(1 K 12 29 ff; Am 718). He placed in Bethel
the priests of the high placcs which he had made
(1 K 12 32). To Bethel came the man of God
from Judah who pronounced doom against Jeroboam
(1 K 18), and who, having been seduced from duty
by an aged prophet in Bethel, was slain by a lion.
According to the prophets Amos and Hosea the
splendid idolatries of Bethel were accompanied by
terrible moral and religious degradation. Against
the place they launched the most scathing denun-
ciations, declaring the vengeance such things must
entail (Am 3 14; 44; 5 1lm; 91; Hos 4 15;
5 8; 105.8.13). With the latter the name Bethel
gives place in mockery to Beth-aven. Bethel
shared in the downfall of Samaria wrought by the
Assyrians; and according to an old tradition, Shal-
maneser possessed himself of the golden calf (cf
Jer 48 18). The priest, sent by the Assyrians to
teach the people whom they had settled in the land
how to serve Jeh, dwelt in Bethel (2 K 17 28).
King Josiah completed the demolition of the
sanctuary at Bethel, destroying all the instruments
of idolatry, and harrying the tombs of the idolaters.
The monument of the man of God from Judah he
allowed to stand (2 K 23 4.15). The men of
Bethel were among those who returned from Baby-
lon with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 28; Neh 7 32), and
it is mentioned as reoccupied by the Benjamites
(Neh 11 31). Zechariah (7 2) records the send-
ing of certain men from Jerus in the 4th year of
King Darius to inquire regarding particular reli-
gious practices. Bethel was oneof the towns forti-
fied by Bacchides in the time of the Maccabees
(1 Mace 9 50; Ant, XIII, i, 3). It is named
again as a small town which, along with Ephraim,
was taken by Vespasian as he approached Jerus
(BJ, IV, ix, 9).

(2) A city in Judah which in 1 8 30 27 is called
Bethel; in Josh 19 4 Bethul; and in 1 Ch 4 30
Bethuel. The site has not been identified. In
Josh 15 30 LXX gives Baithel in Judah, where the
Heb has K¢siti—probably a scribal error.

W. Ewrna

BETHELITE, beth’el-it: The term applied to a
man who in the days of Ahab rebuilt Jericho
(1 K 16 34). See Hren.


BETHEL, MOUNT O87PS “Wh, har bath-’2l;
Baar Actta, Baithél louiza [1 S 18 2, RV “the
mount of Bethel”; Josh 16 1]): The hill which
stretches from the N.of the town to Tell ‘Agdr.
The road to Shechem lies along the ridge. An
army in possession of these heights easily com-
manded the route from north to south.


BETH-EMEK, beth-3’mek (pAIT MD, bath
hd-émek; Bnéaepéx, Béthaemék, “house of the
valley’): A town in the territory of Zebulun
(Josh 19 27). It has not been identified, but must
be sought somewhere E. of Acre, not far from
Kabil, the ancient Cabul.


BETHER, bé'thér (1102, bether): In Cant 2 17
mention is made of ‘the mountains of Bether.”
It is doubtful if a proper name is intended. The
RVm has, “perhaps, the spice malobathron.” A
Bether is prominent in late Jewish history as the
place where the Jews resisted Hadrian under Bar
Cochba in 135 AD. Its identity with Bitttr, 7
miles 8. W. of Jerus, is attested by an inscription.


BETHESDA, bé-thez’da (BnfecSa, Béthesdd;
TR, Jo 6 2 [probably NJOM 7D, beth hisda’,
‘house of mercy’’]; other forms occur as Béthza-
thé and Béthsaidd):

(1) The only data we have is the statement in
Jn 6 2-4: ‘Now there is in Jerus by the sheep


445


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bethel
Beth- hanan


gate a pool, which is called in Hebrew Bethesda, hav-
ing five porches. In these lay a multitude of them
that were sick, blind, halt, withered.” Many
ancient authorities add (as in RVm) ‘waiting for
the moving of the water: for an angel of the Lord
went down at certain seasons into the pool, and
troubled the water,” etc. ;


et
Pool of Bethesda.


The name does not help as to the site, no such
name occurs elsewhere in Jerus; the mention of the
sheep gate is of little assistance because


1. The the word “gate” is supplied, and even
Conditions were it there, its site is uncertain.
of the Sheep “pool” or “place” is at least
Narrative: as probable; the tradition about the
Jn 5:2 ‘“¢roubling of the water” (which may


be true even if the angelic visitant
may be of the nature of folk-lore) can receive no
rational explanation except by the well-known
phenomenon, by no means uncommon in Syria
and always considered the work of a supernatural
being, of an intermittent spring. The arrange-
ment of the five porches is similar to that demon-
strated by Dr. F. Bliss as having existed in Rom
times as the “Pool of Siloam”; the story implies
that the incident occurred outside the city walls,
as to carry a bed on the Sabbath would not have
been forbidden by Jewish traditional law. _

(2) Tradition has varied concerning the site.
In the 4th cent., and probably down to the Crusades,
a pool was pointed out as the true site, a little to
the N.W. of the present St. Stephen’s Gate; it was
part of a twin pool and over it were erected at two
successive periods two Christian churches. Later
on this site was entirely lost and from the 13th
cent. the great Birket Israel, just N. of the Temple
area, was pointed out as the site.

Within the last quarter of a cent., however, the
older traditional site, now close to the Church of

St. Anne, has been rediscovered, ex-
2. The cavated and popularly accepted. This
Traditional pool is a rock-cut, rain-filled cistern,
Site 55 ft. long X 12 ft. broad, and is
approached by a steep and winding
flight of steps. The floor of the rediscovered early


Christian church roofs over the pool, being support-
ed upon five arches in commemoration of the five
porches. At the western end of the church, where
probably the font was situated, there was a fresco,
now much defaced and fast fading, representing the
angel troubling the waters.
3) Although public opinion supports this site,
there is much to be said for the proposal, promul-
ated by Robinson and supported
3. A More by Conder and other good authorities,
Probable that the pool was at the “Virgin’s
Site Fount” (see Graon), which is today an
intermittent spring whose “troubled”
waters are still visited by Jews for purposes of cure.
As the only source of “living water” near Jerus, it is
a likely spot for there to have been a ‘‘sheep pool”
or “sheep place” for the vast flocks of sheep coming
to Jerus in connection with the temple ritual. See
BW, XXV, 80 ff. E. W. G. MasrerMan


BETH-EZEL, beth-é’zel (DENT MQ, bath ha-
’écel; otkos éxdpevos aitiis, oikos echémenos autés;
lit. “adjoining house’’): A place named along with
other cities in the Phili plain (Mic 1 11). The
site has not been identified. By some it is thought
to be the same as Azel of Zec 14 5; but see AzEL.


BETH-GADER, beth-ga/dér ("TA7FM2, béth-
gadhér; Baoyeidp, Baithgedér, or Babyabdv (B),
Baithgaidén): The name occurs between those of
Bethlehem and Kiriath-jearim in 1 Ch 2 51. Itis
possibly identical with Geder of Josh 12 13.


BETH-GAMUL,: beth-ga/mul (503 Ma, bath
gamil; otxos Tawar, otkos Gaimal; &, Tapwdd,
Gamold): A city in Moab named with Dibon,
Kiriathaim and Beth-meon (Jer 48 23). Conder
places it at Umm el-Jamal, toward E. of the
plateau, S. of Medeba (HDB, s.v.). Others (Guthe,
Kurz. bib. Wérterbuch, s.v.; Buhl, GAP, 268, etc)
favor Jemeil, a site 6 miles E. of Dhiban. Since the
town is not mentioned among the cities of Israel
Buhl doubts if it should be sought N. of the Arnon.


BETH-GILGAL, beth-gil’gal (535377 Mma, bath
ha-gilgal; Bn®ayyorya\, Béthaggalgdi; AV house
of Gilgal): The Gilgal which lay in the plain E.
of Jericho (Neh 12 29). See GiuGat.


BETH-HACCHEREM, beth-ha-ké’rem, _beth-
hak’e-rem (AV Beth-haccerem; OFDM MA, bath
ha-kerem; Bndaxxapps, Béthachcharmd [see DB],
“place of the vineyard”’): A district (in Neh 3 149
ruled over by one, Malchijah; mentioned in Jer
6 1 as a suitable signal station. From its associa-
tion with Tekoa (Jer 6 1) and from the statement
by Jerome that it was a village which he could see
daily from Bethlehem, the Frank mountain (Hero-
dium) has been suggested. It certainly would be a
unique place for a beacon. More suitable is the
fertile vineyard country around ‘Ain Karem (the
“spring of the vineyard’). On the top of Jebel
‘Ali, above this village, are some remarkable cairns
which, whatever their other uses, would appear
to have been once beacons. ‘Ain Karem appears
as Carem in the LXX (Josh 16 59). See Beru-car.

E. W. G. MasterMan

BETH-HAGGAN, beth-hag’an (j27 ™a, béth-
ha-gan, “house of the garden”). The place where
Ahaziah was slain by Jehu (2 K 9 27). The
words are rendered in EV ‘‘the garden house,’’ but
some take them to be apropername. The location
is doubtful.


BETH-HANAN, beth-ha’nan (1 K 4 9), ELON-
BETH-HANAN. See Eton.


Beth-haram
Beth-horon


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


446


BETH-HARAM, beth-hi/ram (DIM 73, beth
haram; Bolapav, Baithardn; A, Boappd, Baith-
arrd; AV wrongly, Beth-Aram): An Amorite city
taken and fortified by the Gadites (Josh 13 27;
Nu 32 36; in the latter passage the name appears
as Beth-haran, probably the original form). It
corresponds to Béthramphtha of Jos (Ant, XVIII,
ii, 1), which, according to Eusebius, was the name
used by the Syrians. Here was a palace of Herod
(Ant, XVII, x, 6; BJ, II, iv, 2). Onom says it
was called Livias. Jos says it was fortified by
Herod Antipas, who called it Julias for the wife of
Augustus (Ant, XVIII, ii, 1; BJ, II, ix, 1). The
name would be changed to Julias when Livia, by
the will of the emperor, was received into the Gens
Julia. It is represented by Tell er-Rameh in Wady
Hesban, about 6 miles E. of Jordan. W. Ewinea


BETH-HARAN, beth-ha’ran (JI Ma, beth
haran): A fenced city E. of the Jordan (Nu 32 36)
identical with Beru-HaraM, which see.


BETH-HOGLABH, beth-hog’la (ma nA, béeth-
hoghlah; LXX Baayhadp, Baithagladm, ‘house
of partridge’): Mentioned in Josh 15 6; 18 19,
identified with Ain Hajlah (“partridge spring’’)
lying between Jericho and the Jordan, where in
1874 there was still a ruined Gr monastery called
Kasr Hajlah, dating from the 12th cent. The
ruins are now destroyed. In Josh 15 5; 18 19
it is said to be at the mouth of the Jordan on a
Tongue (Lisén) of the Salt Sea. But it is now
several miles inland, probably because the Jordan
has silted up a delta to that extent. See DespSza.

GrorcE FREDERICK WRIGHT

BETH-HORON, beth-hi’ron (JVM 3, béeth-
héron [other Heb forms occur]; By®wpdv, Bétharén,
probably the “place of the hollow’; cf Hauran,
“the hollow’’):

(1) The name of two towns, Beth-horon the
Upper (Josh 16 5) and Beth-horon the Lower

(Josh 16 3), said to have been built


1. The (1 Ch 7 24) by Sheerah, the daughter
Ancient of Beriah. The border line between
Towns Benjamin and Ephraim passed by the


Beth-horons (Josh 16 5; 21 22), the
cities belonging to the latter tribe and therefore,
later on, to the Northern Kingdom. Solomon “built
Beth-horon the upper, and Beth-horon the nether,
fortified cities, with walls, gates, and bars” (2 Ch
85; 1K 917).

. From Egyp sources (Miller, As. und Europa, etc)
it appears that Beth-hdéron was one of the places
conquered by Shishak of Egypt from Rehoboam.
Again, many cents. later, Bacchides repaired Beth-
horon, “with high walls, with gates and with bars
and in them he set a garrison, that they might work
malice upon [‘‘vex’’] Israel” (1 Macc 9 50.51),
and at another time the Jews fortified it against

Holofernes (Jth 4 4.5).
(2) These two towns are now known as Beit
Ur el foka (i.e. “the upper”) and Beit Ur el tahta
(i.e. ‘‘the lower’), two villages crown-


2. The ing hill tops, less than 2 miles apart;
Modern the former is some 800 ft. higher than
Beit Ur el the latter. Today these villages are
foka and sunk into insignificance and are off
el tahta any important lines of communication,


but for many cents. the towns occupy-
ing their sites dominated one of the most historic
roads in history.

(8) When (Josh 10 10) Joshua discomfited the
kings of the Amorites “‘he slew them with a great
slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them by the way
of the ‘Ascent of Beth-horon.’”’ When the Philis
were opposing King Saul at Michmash they sent a


company of their men to hold “the way of Beth-
horon.” This pass ascends from the plain of Ajalon
(now Yalo) and climbs in about 7 hr. to
3. The Pass Beit Ur el tahia (1,210 ft.); it then
of the ascends along the ridge, with valleys
Beth-horons lying to north and south, and reaches
Beit Ur el foka (2,022 ft.), and pursuing
the same ridge arrives in another 43 miles at the
plateau to the N. of el Jib (Gibeon). At intervals
along this historic route traces of the ancient Rom
paving are visible. It was the great highroad into
the heart of the land from the earliest times until
about three or four cents. ago. Along this ronte
came Canaanites, Israelites, Philis, Egyptians,
Syrians, Romans, Saracens and Crusaders. Since
the days of Joshua (Josh 10 10) it has frequently
been the scene of arout. Here the Syrian general
Seron was defeated by Judas Maccabaeus (1 Macc
8 13-24), and six years later Nicanor, retreating
from Jerus, was here defeated and slain (1 Mace 7
89 ff; Jos, Ant, XII, x, 5). Along this pass in
66 AD the Rom general Cestius Gallus was driven
in headlong flight before the Jews. :
Now the changed direction of the highroad to
Jerus has left the route forsaken and almost for-
gotten. See PHF, III, 86, Sh XVII.
E. W. G. Masterman
BETH-HORON, THE BATTLE OF:
. The Political Situation
. Joshua's Strategy
. Joshua’s Command to the Sun and Moon
The Astronomical Relations of the Sun and Moon to
Each Other and to the Neighborhood of the Field
of Battle e
The ‘Silence’ of the Sun
“Jehovah Fought for Israel"’
. The Afternoon’s March
The Chronicle and the Poem Independent Witnesses
. Date of the Events
. The Records Are Contemporaneous with the Events
The battle which gave to the Israelites under
Joshua the command of southern Pal has always
excited interest because of the as-


PONE


OOMNaN


1


i. The tronomical marvel which is recorded
Political to have then taken place.
Situation In invading Pal the Israelites were


not attacking a single coherent, state,
but a country occupied by different races and di-
vided, like Greece at a later period, into a number
of communities, each consisting practically of but
a single city and the cultivated country around it.
Thus Joshua destroyed the two cities of Jericho
and Ai without any interference from the other
Amorites. The destruction of Jericho gave him
full possession of the fertile valley of the Jordan;
the taking of Ai opened his way up to the ridge
which forms the backbone of the country, and he
was able to lead the people unopposed to the moun-
tains of Ebal and Gerizim for the solemn reading
of the Law. But when the Israelites returned from
this ceremony a significant division showed itself
amongst their enemies. Close to Ai, Joshua’s most
recent conquest, was Beeroth, a small town in-
habited by Hivites; and no doubt because in the
natural order of events Beeroth might look to be
next attacked, the Hivites determined to make
terms with Israel. An embassy was therefore sent
from Gibeon, their chief city, and Joshua and the
Israelites, believing that it came from a distant land
not under the Ban, entered into the proposed
alliance. .
The effect on the political situation was imme-
diate. The Hivites formed a considerable state,
relatively speaking; their cities were well placed
on the southern highland, and Gibeon, their capital,
was one of the most important fortresses of that
district, and only 6 miles distant from Jerus, the
chief Amorite stronghold. The Amorites recog-
nized at once that, in view of this important defec-


447


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Beth-haram
Beth-horon


tion, it was imperative for them to crush the
Gibeonites before the Israelites could unite with
them, and this they endeavored to do. The
Gibeonites, seeing themselves attacked, sent an
urgent message to Joshua, and he at the head of his
picked men made a night march up from Gilgal
and fell upon the Amorites at Gibeon the next
day and put them to flight.


eri Monon Bee aon;
oe A. Uppea—~
porn tenan, GREE Ge


ey OFA


edna yeuhaalh e..
as oe Yaa mote
A \ i ‘


ORNS


exposed to a great danger, for the Amorites might
have caught him before he had gained a footing on
the plateau, and have taken him at a complete dis-
advantage. It was thus that the eleven tribes
suffered such terrible loss at the hands of the
Benjamites in this very region during the first
inter-tribal war, and probably the military sig-
nificance of the first repulse from Ai was of the


CPA

Ai
No. a A
ge


fea

; ’ j IEGRON
UO SAC eA Fae

a <a i a a


BarrLe or BETH-HORON.


We are not told by which route he marched, but
it is significant that the Amorites fled by the way
of Beth-horon; that is to say, not

2. Joshua’s toward their own cities, but away from
Strategy them. A glance at the map shows
that this means that Joshua had suc-

ceeded in cutting their line of retreat to Jerus. He
had probably therefore advanced upon Gibeon from
the south, instead of by the obvious route past Ai
which he had destroyed and Beeroth with which
he was in alliance. But, coming up from Gilgal by
the ravines in the neighborhood of Jerus, he was


same character; the forces holding the high ground
being able to overwhelm their opponents without
any fear of reprisals.

It would seem possible, therefore, that Joshua
may have repeated, on a larger scale, the tactics
he employed in his successful attack upon Ai
He may have sent one force to draw the Amorites
away from Gibeon, and when this was safely done,
may have led the rest of his army to seize the road
to Jerus, and to break up the forces besieging
Gibeon. If so, his strategy was successful up to a
certain point. He evidently led the Israelites


Beth-horon
Bethlehem


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


448


without loss up to Gibeon, crushed the Amorites
there, and cut off their retreat toward Jerus. He
failed in one thing. In spite of the prodigious
efforts which he and his men had made, the greater
part of the Amorite army succeeded in escaping
him and gained a long start in their flight, toward
the northwest, through the two Beth-horons.
It was at this point that the incident occurred
upon which attention has been chiefly fixed. The
Book of Jashar (which seems to have
3. Joshua’s been a collection of war songs and
Command other ballads) ascribes to Joshua the
command:
‘Sun, be thou silent upon (be) Gibeon {cf RVm];
And thou, Moon, in (d¢) the valley of Aijalon.
And the Sun was silent,
And the Moon stayed,
Until the nation had avenged themselves of their
enemies’ (Josh 10 12.13).
And the prose narrative continues, ‘““The sun stayed
in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down
about a whole day.” :
In these two, the ballad and the prose chronicle,
we have several distinct astronomical relations
indicated. The sun to Joshua was


4. The associated with Gibeon, and the sun
Astronom- can naturally be associated with a
ical locality in either of two positions: it
Relations may be overhead to the observer, in


which case he would consider it as
being above the place where he himself was stand-
ing; or on the other hand, he might see the locality
on the skyline and the sun rising or setting just
behind it. In the present instance there is no
ambiguity, for the chronicle distinctly states that
the sun was in “the midst of heaven”; lit. in the
halving of the heaven, that is to say overhead.
This is very important because it assures us that
Joshua must have been at Gibeon when he spoke,
and that it must have been noonday of summer
when the sun in southern Pal is only about 8° or
12° from the exact zenith. Next, the moon ap-
peared to be associated with the valley of Aijalon;
that is, it must have been low down on the horizon
in that direction, and since Aijalon is N.W. of
Gibeon it must have been about to set, which would
imply that it was about half full, in its ‘‘third
quarter,” the sun being, as we have seen, on the
meridian. Thirdly, ‘‘the sun hasted not to go
down,” that is to say, it had already attained the
meridian, its culmination; and henceforward its
motion was downward. ‘The statement that it was
noonday is here implicitly repeated, but a further
detail is added. The going down of the sun ap-
peared to be slow. This is the work of the after-
noon, that is of half the day, but on this occasion
the half-day appeared equal in length to an ordinary
whole day. There is therefore no question at all
of the sun becoming stationary iu the sky: the
statement does not admit of that, but only of its
slower progress. ;

The idea that the sun was fixed in the sky, ‘in
other words, that the earth ceased for a time to

rotate on its axis, has arisen from the
5. The unfortunate rendering of the Heb vb.
“Silence” diam, “be silent,” by “stand thou
of the Sun still.” It is our own word “dumb,”

both being onomatopoetic words from
the sound made when a man firmly closes his lips
upon his speech. The primary meaning of the
word therefore is ‘‘to be silent,” but its secondary
meaning is ‘‘to desist,’ “to cease,” and therefore
in some cases “‘to stand still.”

From what was it then that Joshua wished the
sun to cease: from its moving or from its shining?
It is not possible to suppose that, engaged as he
was in a desperate battle, he was even so much as


thinking of the sun’s motion at all. But its shining,
its scorching heat, must have been most seriously
felt by him. At noon, in high summer, the high-
land of southern Pal is one of the hottest countries
of the world. It is impossible to suppose that
Joshua wished the sun to be fixed overhead, where
it must have been distressing his men who had
already been 17 hours on foot. A very arduous
pursuit lay before them and the enemy not only
had a long start but must have been fresher than
the Israelites. The sun’s heat therefore must
have been a serious hindrance, and Joshua must
have desired it to be tempered. And the Lord
hearkened to his voice and gave him this and much
more. A great hailstorm swept up from the west,
bringing with it a sudden lowering of temperature,
arid no doubt hiding the sun and putting it to


“sitence.”’ And “Jehovah fought for Israel,” for
the storm burst with such violence
6. “Jeho- upon the Amorites as they fled down


vah Fought the steep descent between the Beth-
for Israel’? horons, that ‘‘they were more who
; died with the hailstones than they
whom the children of Israel slew with the sword”
(ver 11). This was the culminating incident of the
day, the one which so greatly impressed the sacred
historian. ‘‘There was no day like that before it or
after it, that Jehovah hearkened unto the voice of
aman” (ver 14). It was not the hailstorm in itself
nor the veiling of the sun that made the day so
remarkable. It was that Joshua had spoken, not
in prayer or supplication, but in command, as if all
Nature was at his disposal; and the Lord had heark-
ened and had, as it were, obeyed a human voice:
an anticipation of the time when a greater Joshua
should command even the winds and the sea, and
they should obey Him (Mt 8 23-27).
The explanation of the statement that the sun
“hasted not to go down about a whole day” is
found in ver 10, in which it is stated
7. The that the Lord discomfited the Amor-
Afternoon’s ites before Israel, ‘“‘and he slew them
March with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and
chased them by the way of the ascent
of Beth-horon, and smote them to Azekah, and un-
to Makkedah.” The Israelites had of course no
time-keepers, no clocks or watches, and the only
mode of measuring time available to them was the
number of miles they marched. Now from Gibeon
to Makkedah by the route indicated is some 30
miles, a full day’s march for an army. It is possi-
ble that, at the end of the campaign, the Israelites
on their return found the march from Makkedah
to Gibeon heavy work for an entire day. Measured
by the only means available to them, that after-
noon seemed to be double the ordinary length.
he sun had “hasted not to go down about a whole
ay.
Joshua’s reference to the moon in conuection
with the Valley of Aijalon appears at first sight
irrelevant, and has frequently been


8. The assumed to be merely inserted to com-
Chronicle plete the parallelism of the poem.
and the But when examined astronomically


Poem Inde- it becomes clear that it cannot have
dependent beeninserted haphazard. Joshua must
Witnesses have mentioned the moon because he

: actually saw it at the moment of
speaking. Given that the sun was “in the midst
of heaven,” above Gibeon, there was only a very
restricted arc of the horizon in which the moou
could appear as associated with some terrestrial
object; and from Gibeon, the Valley of Aijalon
does lie within that narrow arc. It follows there-
fore that unless the position assigned to the moon
had been obtained from actual observation at the
moment, it would in all probability have been an


449


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Beth-horon
Bethlehem


impossible one. The next point is esp. interest-
ing. The ballad does not expressly state whether
the sun was upon Gibeon in the sense of being upon
it low down on the distant horizon, or upon it, in
the sense of being overhead both to Joshua and to
that city. But the moon being above the Valley
of Aijalon, it becomes clear that the latter is the
only possible solution. The sun and moon cannot
both have been setting—though this is the idea that
has been generally held, it being supposed that the
day was far spent and that Joshua desired it to be
prolonged—for then sun and moon would have been
close together, and the moon would be invisible.
The sun cannot have been setting, and the moon
rising; for Aijalou is W. of Gibeon. Nor can the
sun have been rising, and the moon setting, since
this would imply that the time of year was either
about October 30 of our present calendar, or about
February 12. The month of February was already
past, since the Israelites had kept the Feast of the
Passover. October cannot have come; for, since
Beeroth, Gibeon and Jerus were so close together,
it is certain that the events between the return of
the Israelites to Gilgal and the battle of Beth-horon
cannot have been spread over several months, but
must have occupied only a few days. The poem
therefore contains implicitly the same fact that is
explicitly stated in the prose narrative—that the
sun was overhead—but the one statement cannot,
in those days, have been inferred from the other.
A third point of interest is that the position of the
moon gives an indication of the time of the year.
The Valley of Aijalon is 17° N. of W.
9. Date of from Gibeon, of which the latitude is
the Events 31° 51’ N. With these details, and
assuming the time to be nearly noon,
the date must have been about the 21st day of the
4th month of the Jewish calendar, corresponding
to July 22 of our present calendar, with a possible
uncertainty of one or two days on either side.
The sun’s declination would then be about 21°
N., so that at noon it was within 11° of the zenith.
It had risen almost exactly at 5 AM and would set
almost exactly at 7 PM. The moon was now about
her third quarter, and in N. lat. about 5°. It had
risen about 11 o’clock the previous night, and was
now at an altitude of under 7°, and within about
half an hour of setting. The conditions are not
sufficient to fix the year, since from the nature of
the luni-solar cycle there will always be one or two
years in each cycle of 19 that will satisfy the con-
ditions of the case, and the date of the Heb inva-
sion of Pal is not known with sufficient certainty to
limit the inquiry to any particular cycle.
It will be seen however that the astronomical
conditions introduced by the mention of the moon
are much more stringent than might


10. The have been expected. They supply
Records therefore proof of a high order that the
Contempo- astronomical details, both of the poem
raneous and prose chronicle, were derived from
with the actual observation at the time and
Events have been preserved to us unaltered.


Each, therefore, supplies a strictly con-
temporaneous and independent record.

This great occurrence appears to be referred to
in one other passsage of Scripture—the Prayer of
Habakkuk. Here again the rendering of the Eng.
VSS is unfortunate, and the passage should stand:
“The sun and moon ceased [to shine] in their hahitation;
At the light of Thine arrows they vanished,

And at the shining of Thy glittering spear.


Thou didst march through the land in indignation,
Thou didst thresh the nations in anger’ (Hab 3 11.12).


E. W. Maunver
BETHINK, bé-think’ fel) ON aU, héshibh ’el
lebh, “to lay to heart,”’ hence ‘‘recall to mind’’):


Anglo-Saxon word used only in seventh petition of
Solomon’s prayer at the dedication of the Temple.
If the people, carried into captivity, because of sin,
should ‘“‘take it to heart,” then God (he prayed)
would hear and forgive (1 K 8 47; 2 Ch 6 37).
A choice illustration of the mental and heart proc-
ess in reflection, repentance and conversion.


BETH-JESHIMOTH, beth-jesh’i-moth (M3
Mw, beth ha-yshimoth; B, ‘Avowwsd, Haisi-
moth; A, ?Aowoe, Asiméth, and other variants [see
DB, s.v.]): Mentioned as the point in the south
from which the camp of Israel stretched to Abel-
shittim in the plains of Moab (Nun 33 49). In
Josh 12 3 the way to Beth-jeshimoth is described
as 8. of the Arabah, near the Dead Sea. It was in
the lot assigned to Reuben (Josh 13 20), At what
times and how long it was actually held by Israel
we do not know; but it appears in Ezk 25 9 as be-
longing to Moab. It may be indentical with Khirbet
es-Suweimeh, where there are some ruins and a well,
about 3 miles E. of the mouth of the Jordan.

W. Ewine

BETH-LE-’APHRAH, beth-lé-af’ra (MDP? MA,
bath l‘aphrah; LXX é& olkov xara yédwra, ex oikou
katé gélota, “‘house of dust’’): The name of a place
found only in Mic 1 10. From the connection in
which it is used it was probably in the Phili plain.
There seems to be a play upon the name in the
sentence, “at Beth le-‘aphrah have I rolled myself
in the dust,” ‘aphrah meaning ‘“‘dust,” and possibly
another on Philistine in rolled, NW2BHN, hith-
pallashitht (see G. A. Smith, The Book of the Twelve
Prophets, called Minor, in loc.).


BETH-LEBAOTH, beth-lé-ba’oth, beth-leb’a-
oth (migad mg, bath lebha’oth; BowWarBée, Baith-
albdth, “house of lionesses’’?): A town in the
territory of Simeon (Josh 19 6). In 1 Ch 4 31
the name is given as Betb-birei: RV Brra-srrt
(q.v.).


BETHLEHEM, beth’lé-hem (OnS"ra, béth-
lehem; BoOdrgcéu, Baithleém, or Bnbdcép, Bethleém,
“house of David,” or possibly “the house of Lakh-
mu,’’ an Assyr deity):

I. Bethlehem Judah, or Eparats or EpHratHan
(q.v.) is now Beit Lahm (Arab. =“‘house of meat’’),
a town of upward of 10,000 inhabitants, 5 miles
S. of Jerus and 2,350 ft. above sea level. It occu-
pies an outstanding position upon a spur running
E. from the watershed with deep valleys to the
N.E. and8._ It is just off the main road to Hebron
and the south, but upon the highroad to Tekoa and
En-gedi. The position is one of natural strength;
it was occupied by a garrison of the Philis in the
days of David (2 8 23 14; 1 Ch 11 16) and was
fortified by Rehoboam (2 Ch 11 6). The sur-
rounding country is fertile, cornfields, fig and olive
yards and vineyards abound. Bethlehem is not
naturally well supplied with water, the nearest
spring is 800 yds. to the 8.E., but for many cents.
the “low level aqueduct”’ from ‘‘Sclomon’s Pools”
in the Arfas valley, which has here been tunneled
through the hill, has been tapped by the inhabitants;
there are also many rock-cut cisterns.

In 1 Ch 2 51 Salma, the son of Caleb, is described
as the “father of Bethlehem.” In Gen 35 19;

48 7 it is recorded that Rachel ‘‘was
1. Early buried in the way to Ephrath (the same
History is Beth-lehem).” ‘Tradition points

ont the site of Rachel’s tomb near
where the road to Bethlehem leaves the main road.
The Levites of the events of Jgs 17,19 were
Bethlehemites. In the list of the towns of Judah


Bethlehem
Bethsaida


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


450


the name Bethlehem occurs, in the LXX version

only in Josh 15 57.
Ruth, famous chiefly as the ancestress of David,
and of the Messiah, settled in Bethlehem with
her second husband Boaz, and it is


2. David noticeable that from her new home
the Beth- — she could view the mountains of Moab,
lehemite her native land. David himself ‘‘was


the son of that Ephrathite of Bethle-
hem-judah, whose name was Jesse” (1 § 17 12).
To Bethlehem came Samuel to anoint a successor
to unworthy Saul (1 § 16 4): ‘David went to and
fro from Saul to feed his father’s sheep at Beth-
lehem” (1 S 17 15). David’s “three mighty men”


The Shepherd’s Field and Field of Boaz.


“brake through the host of the Philis, and drew water
out of the well of Beth-lehem, that was by the gate,
and took it, and brought it to David” (2 § 23 14.
16). Tradition still points out the well. From
this town came those famous “sons of Zeruiah,”’
David’s nephews, whose loyalty and whose ruth-
less cruelty became at once a protection and a
menace to their royal relative: in 2 S 2 32 it is
mentioned that one of them, Asahel, was buried
‘4n the sepulchre of his father, which was in Beth-

lehem.”
After the time of David, Bethlehem would appear
to have sunk into insignificance. But its future fame
is pointed at by Micah (5 2): “But


3. Later thou, Beth-lehem Ephrathah, which
Bible art little to be among the thousands
History of Judah, out of thee shall one come


forth unto me that is to be ruler in
Israel; whose goings forth are from of old, from
everlasting.”

In the return of the Jews captive Bethlehe-
mites re-inhabited the place (Ezr 2 21; Neh 7 26
“men’?; 1 Esd 5 17 “sons’’).

In the NT Bethlehem is mentioned as the birth-
place of the Messiah Jesus (Mt 2 1.5; Lk 2 4.15)

in consequence of which event oc-


4. The curred Herod’s ‘“‘massacre of the inno-
Christian cents’ (Mt 2 8.16). Inasmuch as Ha-
Era drian devastated Bethlehem and set up


there a sacred grove to Adonis (Jerome,
Ep. ad Paul, \viii.3) it is clear that veneration of
this spot as the site of the Nativity must go back
before 182 AD. Constantine (cir 3380) founded a
basilica over the cave-stable which tradition pointed
out as the scene of the birth, and his church, un-
changed in general structure though enlarged by
Justinian and frequently adorned, repaired and
damaged, remains today the chief attraction of the
town. During the Crusades, Bethlehem became of
great importance and prosperity; it remained in
Christian hands after the overthrow of the Lat
kingdom, and at the present day it is in material
things one of the most prosperous Christian centers
in the Holy Land.

I. Bethlehem of Zebulun (Josh 19 15) was
probably the home of Ibzan (Jgs 12 8.10) though
Jewish tradition is in support of (1). See Jos,
Ant, V, vii, 138. This is now the small village of


Beit Lahm, some 7 miles N.W. of Nazareth on the

edge of the oak forest. Some antiquities have been

found here recently, showing that in earlier days

it was a place of some importance. It is now the

site of a small German colony. See PEF, I, 270,
: E. W. G. MasterMan


BETH-LEHEMITE, beth'lé-hem-it ("AMDT M3,
beth ha-lahmi): An inhabitant of Bethlehem, a
town in Judah, 5 miles S. of Jerus. Jesse is so
named in 1 S 16 18; 17 58, and Elhanan in 2S
21 19. The children of Bethlehem are referred to
in Ezr 2 21; Neh 7 26; 1 Esd 5 17.


BETHLEHEM, STAR OF. See Srar or THE
Maa.


BETH-LOMON, beth-ld’mon (BavAwpov, Baith-
limon; B, “PayeAopav, Rhagethlomén): The in-
habitants of this city are mentioned as returning
with Zerubbabel from Babylon (1 Esd 6 17). It
is the city of Bethlehem in Judah, the modern
Beit Lahm (Hzr 2 21).


BETH-MAACAH, beth-ma’a-ka.
BETH-MAACAH.


BETH-MARCABOTH, beth-miir’ka-both (m3
PAW, beh ha-markabhoth; BarOpaxepéep, Baith-
macheréb, “the house of chariots’): Mentioned
along with Hazar-susah, “the station of horses”
(Josh 19 5; 1 Ch 4 81) as cities in the Negeb
near Ziklag. It is tempting to connect these
stations with “‘the cities for his chariots, and the
cities for his horsemen” which Solomon built (1 K
9 19; cf 1 K 10 26). The site of Beth-marcaboth
has not been identified, but Guérin (La Terre Sainte.
Jerus et le Nord de la Judée, I1, 230) suggests Khan
Yunas, S.W. of Gaza, as a suitable chariot city.

E. W. G. Masterman

BETH-MEON, beth-mé’on: A city of Moab
(Jer 48 23), identical with BaaL-mEon (q.v.).


BETH-MERHAK, beth-mer’hak (PIVAR Ma,
béth ha-merhak; @& olkw tO paxpdv, en otkd td
makrdn, lit. ‘‘a place [house] that was far off”
(2 S 15 17 RVm “the Far House’’]): A place men-
tioned in the account of David’s flight from Absa-
lom. No town of this name is known on the route
which he followed. Some scholars think the name
denotes simply the outermost of the houses of the
city.


BETH-MILLO, beth-mil’6. See JERusALEM.


BETH-NIMRAH, beth-nim’'ra (W793 M3, bath
nimrah, “house of leopard,’ Nu 32 36, but in
ver 3 it is simply Nimrah): In Josh 13 27 the full
name appears. In Isa 15 6 the name appears as
Nimrim, identified as Tell Nimrim, between Jericho
and the mountains on the east, where there is
a fountain of large size. The city was assigned to
Gad. In the 4th cent. AD it was located as five
Rom miles N. of Livias. Eusebius calls it Betham-
naram (SEP, I, Tell Nimrin).


BETH-PALET, beth-pa’let. See BeTu-pELET.


BETH-PAZZEZ, beth-paz’ez (VEE ™ 2, bdéth
paccgég; Bypocadis, Bérsaphés, BaOdpacte, Batih-
phrasée): A town in the territory of Issachar,
named with En-gannim and En-haddah (Josh 19
21). The site has not been discovered; it probably
lay near the modern Jenin.


BETH-PELET, beth-pé’let (USB7MA , bath-pelet;


Babhaded, Baithphaléth, “house of escape’’;
AV Beth-palet; Josh 15 27, Beth-phelet, AV


See ABEL-


451


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bethlehem
Bethsaida


Neh 11 26): One of “‘the uttermost cities of the
tribe of the children of Judah toward the border
of Edom in the [Negeb] South” (Josh 15 21.27).
Site unknown.


BETH-PEOR, beth-pé/or (WWE M3, bath por;
olxos Poyép, oikos Phogér; in Josh (B), Badoydp,
Baithphogér, or Be8-, beth-): “Over against. Beth-
peor” the Israelites were encamped, “beyond the
Jordan, in the valley,’ when Moses uttered the
speeches recorded in Dt (Dt 3 29; 4 46). “In
the valley in the land of Moab over against Beth-
peor’ Moses was buried (Dt 34 6). Beth-peor and
the slopes of Pisgah (AV ‘‘Ashdoth-pisgah’”’) are
mentioned in close connection in Josh 13 20. Ac-
cording to Onom, Beth-peor was situated near
Mt. Peor (Fogor) opposite Jericho, 6 miles above
Livias. Mt. Peor is the “top” or ‘‘head’’ of Peor
(Nu 23 28). Some height commanding a view of
the plain E. of the river in the lower Jordan valley
is clearly intended, but thus far no identification is
possible. ‘The slopes of Pisgah” are probably the
lower slopes of the mountain toward Wady ‘Ayin
Misa. Somewhere N. of this the summit we are in
search of may befound. Conder suggested the cliff
at Minyeh, 8S. of Wady Jedeideh, and of Pisgah;
and would locate Beth-peor at el-Mareighat, “the
smeared things,’”’ evidently an ancient place of wor-
ship, with a stone circle and standing stones, about
4 miles E.,on the same ridge. This seems, however,
too far 8., and more difficult to reach from Shittim
than we should gather from Nu 26 1 ff.


W. Ewine

BETHPHAGE, beth’fa-jé, beth’faj (from MA
QD, b&th paghadh; Bedhayh, Bethphagé, or Byopayf,
Béthphagé; in Aram. “place of young figs’): Near
the Mount of Olives and to the road from Jerus
to Jericho; mentioned together with Bethany (Mt
21 1; Mk 11 1; Lk 19 29). The place occurs in
several Talmudic passages where it may be inferred


Bethphage.


that it was near but outside Jerus; it was at the
Sabbatical distance limit E. of Jerus, and was sur-
rounded by some kind of wall. The mediaeval
Bethphage was between the summit and Bethany.
The site is now inclosed by the Roman Catholics.
As regards the Bethphage of the NT, the most prob-
able suggestion was that it occupied the summit
itself where Kefr et Tar stands today. This village
certainly occupies an ancient site and no other name
is known. This is much more probable than the
suggestion that the modern Abu Dis is on the site
of Bethphage. E. W. G. MastTerMan


BETH-PHELET, beth-fé'let.


BETH-RAPHA, beth-ra‘fa (XP IMB, bath
répha@’; B, 6 Ba@pata, ho Bathrata, Balpepd, Bath-
rephd): The name occurs only in the genealogical
list in 1 Ch 4 12. It does not seem possible now
to associate it with any particular place or clan.


See BETH-PELET.


BETH-REHOB, beth-r@’hob (AUT MN}, béth-
r¢hobh; 6 otkos ‘Pad, ho ofkos Rhadb): An Aramaean
town and district which, along with Zobah and
Maacah, assisted Ammon against David (2 8 10
6.8, Rehob). It is probably identical with Rehob
(Nu 13 21), the northern limit of the spies’ journey.
Laish-Dan (probably Tell el-Kadi) was situated
near it (Jgs 18 28). The site of the town is un-
known. It has been conjecturally identified with
Hunin, W. of Banias, and, more plausibly, with
Banias itself (Thomson, The Land and the Book?,
218; Buhl, Geog., 240; Moore, ICC, Jgs, 399).

C. H. Tuomson

BETHSAIDA, beth-sa'i-da (BySoaidd, Béthsaidd,
“house of fishing’’):

(1) A city E. of the Jordan, in a ‘desert place’
(that is, uncultivated ground used for grazing) at
which Jesus miraculously fed the multitude with
five loaves and two fishes (Mk 6 32 ff; Lk 9 10).
This is doubtless to be identified with the village
of Bethsaida in Lower Gaulonitis which the Te-
trarch Philip raised to the rank of a city, and called
Julias, in honor of Julia, the daughter of Augustus.
It lay near the place where the Jordan enters the
Sea of Gennesaret (Ant, XVIII, ii, 1; BJ, II, ix
1; IfI, x, 7; Vita, 72). This city may be located
at ef-7'ell, a ruined site on the E. side of the Jordan
on rising ground, fully a mile from the sea. As
this is too far from the sea for a fishing village,
Schumacher (The Jauldn, 246) suggests that
el-‘Araj, “a large, completely destroyed site close
to the lake,” connected in ancient times with ef-
Tell “by the beautiful roads still visible,’ may have
been the fishing village, and et-Tell the princely
residence. He is however inclined to favor el-
Mes‘adiych, a ruin and winter village of Arab ei-
Tellawiyeh, which stands on an artificial mound,
about a mile and a half from the mouth of the
Jordan. It should be noted, however, that the
name is in origin radically different from Bethsaida.
The substitution of stn for sad is easy: but the in-
sertion of the guttural ‘ain is impossible. No trace
of the name Bethsaida has been found in the dis-
trict; but any one of the sites named would meet
the requirements.

To this neighborhood Jesus retired by boat with
His disciples to rest awhile. The multitude follow-
ing on foot along the northern shore of the lake
would cross the Jordan by the ford at its mouth
which is used by foot travelers to this day. The
“desert” of the narrative is just the barriych of the


_ Arabs where the animals are driven out for pasture.


The “green grass” of Mk 6 39, and the “much
grass’? of Jn 6 10, point to some place in the plain
of el-Bateihah, on the rich soil of which the grass is
green and plentiful compared with the scanty
herbage on the higher slopes.

(2) Bethsaida of Galilee, where dwelt Philip,
Andrew, Peter (Jn 1 44; 12 21), and perhaps also
James and John. The house of Andrew and Peter
seems to have been not far from the synagogue in
Capernaum (Mt 8 14; Mk 1 29, etc). Unless
they had moved their residence from Bethsaida to
Capernaum, of which there is no record, and which
for fishermen was unlikely, Bethsaida must have
lain close to Capernaum. It may have been the
fishing town adjoining the larger city. As in the
case of the other Bethsaida, no name has been
recovered to guide us to the site. On the rocky
promontory, however, E. of Khan Minyeh we find
Sheikh ‘Aly es-Satydadin, ‘Sheikh Aly of the Fisher-
men,” as the name of a ruined weley, in which the
second element in the name Bethsaida is represented.
Near by is the site at ‘Ain et-Tabigha, which many
have identified with Bethsaida of Galilee. The
warm water from copious springs runs into a little


Bethsaida
Bethuel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


452


bay of the sea in which fishes congregate in great
numbers. This has therefore always been a favor-
ite haunt of fishermen. If Capernaum were at
Khan Minyeh, then the two lay close together.
The names of many ancient places have been lost,
and others have strayed from their original localities.
The absence of any name resembling Bethsaida need
not concern us.

Many scholars maintain that all the NT refer-
ences to Bethsaida apply to one place, viz. Beth-

saida Julias. The arguments for and
Were There against this view may be summarized
Two as follows:
Bethsaidas? (a) Galilee ran right round the
lake, including most of the level coast-

land on the E. Thus Gamala, on the eastern shore,
was within the jurisdiction of Jos, who commanded
in Galilee (BJ, Il, xx, 4). Judas of Gamala (Ant,
XVIUTI, i, 1) is also called Judas of Galilee (ib, i, 6).
If Gamala, far down the eastern shore of the sea,
were in Galilee, a fortiori Bethsaida, a town which
lay on the very edge of the Jordan, may be described
as in Galilee.

But Jos makes it plain that Gamala, while added
to his jurisdiction, was not in Galilee, but in Gaulo-


nitis (BJ, IT, xx, 6). Even if Judas were born in -


Gamala, and so might properly be called a Gaulon-
ite, he may, like others, have come to be known as
belonging to the province in which his active life
was spent. “Jesus of Nazareth’? was born in
Bethlehem. Then Jos explicitly says that Beth-
saida was in Lower Gaulonitis (BJ, II, ix, 1).
Further, Luke places the country of the Gerasenes
on the other side of the sea from Galilee (8 26)—
antipera tés Galilaias (“over against Galilee’).

(b) To go to the other side—eis t6 péran (Mk
6 45)—does not of necessity imply passing from
the E. to the W. coast of the lake, since Jos uses
the vb. diaperaiéé of a passage from Tiberias
to Tarichaea ( Vita, 59). But (a) this involved a
passage from a point on the W. to a point on the S.
shore, ‘‘crossing over’ two considerable bays;
whereas if the boat started from any point in
el-Batethah, to which we seem to be limited by the
“much grass,” and by the definition of the district
as belonging to Bethsaida, to sail to et-T'ell, it was
a matter of coasting not more than a couple of miles,
with no bay to cross. (B) No case can be cited
where the phrase eis to peran certainly means any-
thing else than “to the other side.” (y) Mark
says that the boat started to go unto the other side
to Bethsaida, while John gives the direction “over
the sea unto Capernaum” (6 17). The two towns
were therefore practically in the same line. Now
there is no quesion that Capernaum was on “the
other side,’”’ nor is there any suggestion that the
boat was driven out of its course; and it is quite
obvious that, sailing toward Capernaum, whether
at Tell Him or at Khan Minyeh, it would never
teach Bethsaida Julias. (8) The present writer
is familiar with these watersin both storm and calm.
If the boat was taken from any point in el-Batethah
towards et-Tell, no east wind would have distressed
the rowers, protected as that part is by the moun-
tains. Therefore it was no contrary wind that
carried them toward Capernaum and the “land of
Gennesaret.”” On the other hand, with a wind
from the W., such as is often experienced, eight or
nine hours might easily be occupied in covering the
four or five miles from el-Batethah to the neighbor-
hood of Capernaum.

(c) The words of Mark (6 45), it is suggested
(Sanday, Sacred Sites of the Gospels, 42), have been
too strictly interpreted: as the Gospel was written
probably at Rome, its author being a native, not of
Galilee, but of Jerus. Want of precision on topo-
graphical points, therefore, need not surprise us.


But as we have seen above, the “want of precision”
must also be attributed to the writer of Jn 6 17.
The agreement of these two favors the strict
interpretation. Further, if the Gospel of Mark
embodies the recollections of Peter, it would be
difficult to find a more reliable authority for topo-
graphical details connected with the sea on which
his fisher life was spent.

(d) In support of the single-city theory it is
further argued that (a) Jesus withdrew to Beth-
saida as being in the jurisdiction of Philip, when
he heard of the murder of John by Antipas, and
would not have sought again the territories of the
latter so soon after leaving them. (B) Mediaeval
works of travel notice only one Bethsaida. (y)
The E. coast of the sea was definitely attached to
Galilee in AD 84, and Ptolemy (cir 140) places
Julias in Galilee. It is therefore significant that
only the Fourth Gospel speaks of ‘‘Bethsaida of
Galilee.” (8) There could hardly have been two
Bethsaidas so close together.

But: (a) It is not said that Jesus came hither that
he might leave the territory of Antipas for that of
Philip; and in view of Mk 6 30 ff, and Lk 9 10 ff,
the inference from Mt 14 13 that he did so, is not
warranted. (8) The Bethsaida of mediaeval
writers was evidently on the W. of the Jordan. If
it lay on the E. it is inconceivable that none of them
should have mentioned the river in this connection.
(y) If the 4th Gospel was not written until well into
the 2d cent., then the apostle was not the author;
but this is a very precarious assumption. John;
writing after 84 AD, would hardly have used the
phrase ‘“‘Bethsaida of Galilee” of a place only
recently attached to that province, writing, as he
was, at a distance from the scene, and recalling
the former familiar conditions. (8) In view of
the frequent repetition of names in Pal the near-
ness of the two Bethsaidas raises no difficulty.
The abundance of fish at each place furnished a good
reason for the recurrence of the name.

: W. Ewine
BETHSAMOS, beth-sa’mos. See BrETHAsMos.

BETH-SHEAN, beth-shé’an, BETH-SHAN,
beth’shan (JW°M"2 or JRW ND, déth-shan, or
béth-sh*'an; in Apoc BaOcav or Bebo dh, Baithsdn or
Bethsd): A city in the territory of Issachar assigned
to Manasseh, out of which the Canaanites were
not driven (Josh 17 11; Jgs 1 27); in the days of
Israel’s strength they were put to taskwork (Jgs
1 28). They doubtless were in league with the
Philis who after Israel’s defeat on Gilboa exposed
the bodies of Saul and his sons on the wall of the
city (1.8 31 7 ff), whence they were rescued by the
men of Jabesh, who remembered the earlier kind-
ness of the king (1 8 81 7ff; 28S 2112). In
1 K 4 12 the name applies to the district in which
the city stands. It was called Scythopolis by the
Greeks. This may be connected with the invasion
of Pal by the Scythians who, according to George
Syncellus, “overran Pal and took possession of
Beisan.” This may be the invasion noticed by
Herodotus, cir 600 BC (i.104-6). Here Tryphon
failed in his first attempt to take Jonathan by
treachery (1 Macc 12 40). It-fell to John Hyr-
canus, but was taken from the Jews by Pompey.
It was rebuilt by Gabinius (Ant, XIV, v, 3), and
became an important member of the league of the
“ten cities” (BJ, III, ix, 7). The impiousness of
the inhabitants 1s painted in dark colors by Jos
(Vita, 6; BJ, II, xviii, 3); and the Mish speaks
of it as a center of idol worship (‘Abhadhah Zarah,
1.4). Later it was the seat of a bishop.

It is represented by the modern Beisdn, in the
throat of the Vale of Jezreel where it falls into the


453


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bethsaida
Bethuel


Jordan valley, on the southern side of the stream
from ‘Ain Jalid. The ruins of the ancient city
are found on the plain, and’on the great mound
where probably stood the citadel. Between the town
and the stretch of marsh land to the S. runs the old
road from E. to W. up the Vale of Jezreel, uniting
in Esdraelon with the great caravan road from N.to
Ss. W. Ewine


BETH-SHEMESH, beth-she’mesh, beth’shé-
mesh (WOW M2, béth-shemesh; Bavlodpus, Baith-
sdmus, “house of the sun’): This name for a
place doubtless arose in every instance from the
presence of a sanctuary of the sun there. In
accordance with the meaning and origin of the
word, it is quite to be expected that there should
be several places of this name in Bible lands, and the
expectation is not disappointed. Analysis and
comparison of the passages in the Bible where a
Beth-shemesh is mentioned show four places of
this name.

The first mention of a place by this name is in
the description of the border of the territory of


Judah (Josh 15 10) which ‘‘went
1. Beth- dewn to B.” This topographical
shemesh of indication ‘down’ puts the place
Judah toward the lowlands on the E. or


W. side of Pal, but does not indicate
which. This point is clearly determined by the
account of the return of the ark by the Phili lords
from Ekron (1S 6 9-19). They returned the
ark to Beth-shemesh, the location of which they
indicated by the remark that if their affliction was
from Jeh, the kine would bear the ark ‘“‘by the way
of its own border.”’ The Philis lay along the west-
ern bordér of Judah and the location of B. of Judah
is thus clearly fixed near the western lowland, close
to the border between the territory of Judah and
that claimed by the Philis. This is confirmed by
the account of the twelve officers of the commissariat
of King Solomon. One of these, the son of Dekar,
had a Beth-shemesh in his territory. By excluding
the territory assigned to the other eleven officers,
the territory of this son of Dekar is found to be in
Judah and io lie along the Phili border (1 K 4 9).
A Phili attack upon the border-land of Judah tes-
tifies to the same effect (2 Cb 28 18). Finally,
the battle between Amaziah of Judah and Jehoash
of Israel, who “looked one another in the face”
at Beth-shemesh, puts B. most probably near the
border between Judah and Israel, which would
locate it near the northern part of the western
border of Judah’s territory. In the assignment
of cities to the Levites, Judah gave Beth-shemesh
with its suburbs (Josh 21 16). It has been iden-
tified with a good degree of certainty with the
modern ‘Ain Shems. ; 3

It may be that Ir-shemesh, “city of the sun,
and Har-heres, “mount of the sun,’’ refer to Beth-
shemesh of Judah (Josh 16 10; 19 41-43; 1 K
49; Jgs 1 33.35). Butthe worship of the sun was
so common and cities of this name so many 1n num-
ber that it would be hazardous to conclude with
any assurance that because these three names refer
to the same region they therefore refer to the same

lace. ee
Bp In the description of the tribal limits, it is said
of Issachar (Josh 19 22), ‘And the border reached
to Tabor, and Shahazumah, and Beth-
2. Beth- shemesh; and the goings out of their
shemesh of border were at the Jordan.” The de-
Issachar scription indicates that Beth-shemesh
was in the eastern part of Issachar’s
territory. The exact location of the city is not
known. ; .

A Beth-shemesh is mentioned together with

Beth-anath as cities of Naphtali (Josh 19 38).


There is no clear indication of the location of this

city. Its association with Beth-anath may indicate

that they were near each other in the

3. Beth- central part of the tribal allotment.

shemesh of As at Gezer, another of the cities of

Naphtali the Levites, the Canaanites were not
driven out from Beth-shemesh.

A doom is  poncunees upon ‘‘Beth-shemesh, that


is in the land of Egypt” (Jer 48 13). The Seventy

identify it with Heliopolis. There is
4. Beth- some uncertainty about this identifi-
shemesh cation. If Beth-shemesh, ‘‘house of
“that is the sun,” is here a description of
in the Heliopolis, why does it not have the
Land of art.? Ifit is a proper name, how does
Egypt” it come that a sanctuary in Egypt is


called by a Heb name? It may be
that the large number of Jews in Egypt with Jere-
miah gave this Heb name to Heliopolis for use
among themselves, B. being a tr of Egyp Perra as
suggested by Griffith. Otherwise, B. cannot have
been Heliopolis, but must have been some other, at
present unknown, place of Sem worship. This
latter view seems to be favored by Jeremiah’s
double threat: ‘He shall also break the pillars of
Beth-shemesh, that is in the land of Egypt; and the
houses of the gods of Egypt shall he burn with fire”
(ib). If B. were the “house of the sun,’’ then the
balancing of the statement would be only between
“pillars” and “houses,” but it seems more naturally
to be between Beth-shemesh, a Sem place of wor-
ship ‘that is in the land of Egypt” on the one hand,
and the Egyp place of worship, ‘the houses of the
gods of Egypt,” on the other.

But the Seventy lived in Egypt and in their inter-
pretation of this passage were probably guided by
accurate knowledge of facts unknown now, such as
surviving names, tradition and even written his-
tory. Until there is further light on the subject,
it is better to accept their interpretation and identify
this Beth-shemesh with Heliopolis. See On.

M. G. KYLE

BETH-SHEMITE, beth-shé’mit (WAWTN 2,
béth-shimshi [1 S 6 14.18]): An inhabitant of Beth-
shemesh in Judah (cf BETH-sHEMESH 1).


BETH-SHITTAH, beth-shit’a (MOY ma,
beth ha-shittah, “house of the acacia’): A place
on the route followed by the Midianites in their
flight before Gideon (Jgs 7 22). It is probably
identical with the modern Shutta, a village in the
Vale of Jezreel, about 6 miles N.W. of Beisan.


BETHSURA, beth-si’ra (Babcotpa, Baithsotira
[1 Macc 4 29, etc]), BETHSURON (2 Macc 11
5 RV): The Gr form of the name Betu-zur (q.v.).


BETH-TAPPUAH, beth-tap’t-a (Mpn-n3,
béth-tapputh; BeOarpové, Beththapphoué, “place of
apples” [see however APPLE]): A town in the hill
country of Judah (Josh 16 53), probably near
Hebron (cf Tappuah, 1 Ch 2 43), possibly the
same as Tephon (1 Macc 9 50). The village of
Tuffih, 34 miles N.W. of Hebron, is the probable
site; it stands on the edge of a high ridge, sur-
rounded by very fruitful gardens; an ancient
highroad runs through the village, and there are
many old cisterns and caves. (See PEF, III,
310, 379, Sh X XI.) E. W. G. Masrerman


BETHUEL, be-thi’el (N13, betha’ a; “dweller
in God”): A son of Nahor and Milcah, Abra-
ham’s nephew, father of Laban and Rebekah (Gen
22 23; 24 15.24.47.50; 25 20; 28 2.5). In the
last-named passage, he is surnamed “the Syrian.”
The only place where he appears as a leading


Bethuel
Between Tests.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


454


character in the narrative is in connection with
Rebekah’s betrothal to Isaac; and even here, his
son Laban stands out more prominently than he
—a fact explainable on the ground of the custom
which recognized the right of the brother to take a
special interest in the welfare of the sister (cf Gen
34 5.11.25; 2 S 18 20.22). Ant, I, xvi, 2 states
that Bethuel was dead at this time.
Frank E. Hirsca

BETHUEL, be-thi’el, beth’d-el (ONIN, betha’él,
“destroyed of God”): A town of Simeon (1 Ch 4
30), the same as Bethul (Josh 19 4), and, probably,
as the Beth-el of 1 S 30 27.


BETHUL, beth’vl, bé’thul (73, bethal): See
BETHUEL; CHESIL.


BETHULIA, bé-thi’li-a (BaWovdovd, Baithou-
loud): A town named ouly iu the Book of Jth
(46; 6 10ff; 7 1ff; 8 3; 106; 12 7; 15 3.6;
16 21 ff). From these refereuces we gather that
it stood beside a valley, on a rock, at the foot of
which was a spring, not far from Jenin; and that it
guarded the passes by which an army might march
to the 8. The site most fully meeting these con-
ditions is that of Sanaér. The rock on the summit
of which it stands rises sheer from the edge of Merj
el-Gharik, on the main highway, some 7 miles 8.
of Jenin. Other identifications are suggested:
Conder favoring Mithiltyeh, a little farther north;
while the writer of the article ‘“Bethulia” in HB
argues for identification with Jerus. W. Ewine


BETH-ZACHARIAS, beth-zak-a-ri’as (Bav0-


faxaprd, Baith-zacharid): Here Judas Maccabaeus
failed in battle with Antiochus Eupator, and his
brother Eleazar fell in conflict with an elephant
(1 Macc 6 32ff; AV “Bathzacharias’). It was a
position of great strength, crowning a promontory
which juts out between two deep valleys. It still
bears the ancieut name with little change, Beit
Zakaria. It lies about 4 miles S.W. of Bethlehem
(BR, Ill, 283 ff; Ant, XII, ix, 4).


BETH-ZUR, beth’zfr (M1313, béath-cur; Ba.d-
cote, Baith-sotr, ‘house of rock’’; less probably
‘house of the god Zur’’):

(1) Mentioned (Josh 16 58) as near Halhul and
Gedor in the hill country of Judah; fortified by
Rehoboam (2 Ch 11 7). In Neh 3 16 mentiou
is made of ‘‘Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler
of half the district of Beth-zur.” During the
Maccabean wars it (Bethsura) came into great
importauce (1 Macc 4 29.61; 6 7.26.31.49.50; 9
52; 10 14; 11 65; 14 7.33). Jos describes it as
the strougest place in all Judaea (Ant, XIII, v, 6).
It was inhabited in the days of Eusebius and Je-
rome.

(2) It is the ruined site Beit Sadr, near the main
road from Jerus to Hebron, and some 4 miles N. of
thelatter. Itsimportance layin its natural strength,
on a hilltop dominating the highroad, aud also in
its guarding the one southerly approach for a hostile
army by the Vale of Elah to the Judaean plateau.
The site today is conspicuous from a distance
through the presence of a ruined mediaeval tower.
(See PEF, Ill, 311, Sh XXT).

E. W. G. Masrerman

BETIMES, bé-timz’: In the sense of “early” is
the tr of two Heb words: (1) DDW, shakham, aroot
meaning ‘‘to incline the shoulder to a load,” hence
“to load up,” “start early”: in Geu 26 31 “they
rose up betimes in the morning,” also in 2 Ch 36 15
(ARV “early”); (2) of "IW, shahar, aroot meaning
“to dawn” in Job 8 5; 24 5, ARV “diligently,”
and in Ps 13 24, ‘‘chasteneth him betimes.”


In the Apoc (Sir 6 36) “‘betimes” is the tr of
épélfw, orthizd, lit. “to rise early in the morning,”
while in Bel ver 16 the same word is tr ‘“‘betime.””

In other cases the AV “betimes’” appears as
“before the time’ (Sir 61 30); ‘‘early” (1 Mace
4 52; 11 67); “the morning” (1 Macc 5 30).

Artuur J. KINSELLA

BETOLION, bé-td’li-on (Berokié [A], Byrodud
([B], Betoliéd or Bétolié; AV Betolius, bé-t6’-li-us):
A town the people of which to the number of 52
returned from Babylon with Zerubbabel (1 Esd
6 21). It corresponds to Bethel in Ezr 2 28.


BETOMESTHAIM, bé-téd-mes’tha-im, AV Be-
tomestham, bé-té-mes’tham (Beroper@Oau, Beto-
mesthdim [Jth 4 6]): BETOMASTHAIM, AV Be-
tomasthem (Baropacédip, Baitomasthdim [Jth 15
4]): The place is said to have been “over against
Jezreel, in the face of [i.e. eastward of] the plain
that is near Dothan.” It can hardly be Deir
Massin, which lies W. of the plain. The district
is clearly indicated, but no identification is yet
possible.


BETONIM, bet’é-nim, bétd’nim (0°03,
btinim; Boravei, Botanet or Botanin): A town
E. of the Jordan in the territory of Gad (Josh 13
26). It may be identical with Batneh, about 3
miles S.W. of es-Sait.


BETRAY, bé-tra’ (07, rdmah; wapadiSopr,
paradidimt): In the OT only once (1 Ch 12 17).
David warns those who had deserted to him from
Saul: “If ye be come to betray me to mine adver-
saries ... . the God of our fathers look thereon.”
The same Heb word is elsewhere tr‘ “beguile’’ (Gen
29 25; Josh 9 22), ‘‘deceive’ (1S 19 17; 28 12;
28 19 26; Prov 26 19; Lam 1 19).

In the NT, for paradidémi: 36 times, of the be-
trayal of Jesus Christ, and only 3 times besides
(Mt 24 10; Mk 13 12; Lk 21 16) of kinsmen
deliveriug up one auother to prosecution. In these
three places RV trauslates according to the more
general meaning, “to deliver up,’ and also (in
Mt 17 22; 20 18; 26 16; Mk 14 10.11; Lk 22
4.6) where it refers to the delivering up of Jesus.
The Revisers’ idea was perhaps to retain “betray”
only in direct references to Judas’ act, but they
have uot strictly followed thatrule. Judas’ act was
more than that of giving a person up to the author-
ities; he did it under circumstances of treachery
which modified its character: (a) he took advan-
tage of his intimate relatiou with Jesus Christ as a
disciple to put Him in the hands of His enemies; (b)
he did it stealthily by night, and (c) by a kiss, an
act which professed affection and friendliness; (d)
he did it for money, and (e) he knew that Jesus
Christ was inuocent of any crime (Mt 27 4).

T. Rees

BETRAYERS, bé-tra/érs (apo8dra1, prodétai,
“betrayers,” “‘traitors”’): Stephen charged the Jews
with being betrayers of the Righteous One (Acts
7 52) i.e. as having made Judas’ act their own;
ef Lk 6 16: “Judas Iscariot, who became a
traitor”; .2 Tim 3 4, “traitors.”


BETROTH, bé-troth’, bé-troth’ (WIN, ’aras):
On betrothal as a social custom see Manrniacs.
Hosea, in his great parable of the prodigal wife,
surpassed only by a greater Teacher’s parable of the
Prodigal Son, uses betrothal as the symbol of Jeh’s
pledge of His love and favor to penitent Israel
(Hos 2 19.20). In Ex 218.9 the RV renders
“espouse” for the “betroth” of AV, the context
implying the actual marriage relation.


455


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bethuel
Between Tests.


BETWEEN THE TESTAMENTS:


. Tae Periop In GENERAL
II. A Guance av Conremporansous History
1. The Egyptian Empire :
Greece
Rome
. Asia
IsTORICAL DEvELOPMENTS
- The Persian Period
. The Alexandrian Period
. The Egyptian Period
. The Syrian Period
. The Maccabean Period
. The Roman Period
NTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS IN THIS PeRiop
. Literary Activity
(a) The Apocrypha
£2} Pseudepigrapha
c) The Septuagint
2. Spiritual Conditions
3. Parties
4. Preparation for Christianity


As the title indicates, the historical period in the
life of Israel extends from the cessation of OT
prophecy to the beginning of the Christian era.

I. The Period in General.—The Exile left its
ineffaceable stamp on Judaism as well as on the
Jews. Their return to the land of their fathers was
marked by the last rays of the declining sun of
prophecy. With Malachi it set. Modern his-
torical] criticism has projected some of the canonical
books of the Bible far into this post-exilic period.
Thus Kent (H/P, 1899), following the lead of
the Wellhausen-Kuenen hypothesis, with all its
later leaders, has charted the period between 600
BC, the date of the first captivity, to 160 BC, the
beginning of the Hasmonean period of Jewish his-
tory, in comparative contemporaneous blocks of
double decades. Following the path of Koster,
the historical position of Ezr and Neh is inverted,
and the former is placed in the period 400-380 BC,
contemporaneously with Artaxerxes II; Joel is as-
signed to the same period; portions of Isa (chs
63-66, 24-27) are placed about 350 BC; Zec is as-
signed to the period 260-240, and Dnl is shot way
down the line into the reign of the Seleucidae, be-
tween 200 and 160BC. Now all thisis very striking
and no doubt very critical, but the ground of this
historical readjustment is wholly subjective, and
has the weight only of a hypothetical conjecture.
Whatever may be our attitude to the critical hypoth-
esis of the late origin of some of the OT lit., it
seems improbable that any portion of it could have
reached far into the post-exilic period. The inter-
val between the Old and the New Testaments is the
dark period in the history of Israel. It stretches
itself out over about four cents., during which there
was neither prophet nor inspired writer in Israel.
All we know of it we owe to Jos, to some of the
apocryphal books, and to scattered references in
Gr and Lat historians. The seat of empire passed
over from the East to the West, from Asia to Europe.
The Pers Empire collapsed, under the fierce attacks
of the Macedonians, and the Gr Empire in turn
gave way to the Rom rule.

I, A Glance at Contemporaneous History.—For
the better understanding of this period in the history
of Israel, it may be well to pause for a moment to
glance at the wider field of the history of the world in
the cents. under contemplation, for the words “ful-
ness of time” deal with the all-embracing history of
mankind, for whose salvation Christ appeared, and
whose every movement led to its realization.

(1) In the four cents. preceding Christ, the
Egyp empire, the oldest and in many respects the

most perfectly developed civilization


PON


II.


mm


mI OUR Gobo


Iv.


Rp


1. The of antiquity, was tottering to its ruins.
Egyptian The 29th or Mendesian Dynasty,
Empire made place, in 384 BC, for the 30th or


Sebennitic Dynasty, which was swal-
lowed up, half a century later, by the Pers Dynasty.


The Macedonian or 32d replaced this in 332 BC,
only to give way, a decade later, to the last or 33d,
the Ptolemaic Dynasty. The whole history of
Egypt in this period was therefore one of endless
and swiftly succeeding changes. In the Ptolemaic
Dynasty there was a faint revival of the old glory
of the past, but the star of empire had set for Egypt,
and the mailed hand of Rome finally smote down
a civilization whose beginnings are lost in the dim
twilight of history. The Caesarian conquest of
47 BC was followed, 17 years later, by the annexa-
tion of Egypt to the new world-power, as a Rom
province. Manetho’s history is the one great
literary monument of Egyp history in this period.
Her priests had been famous for their wisdom, to
which Lycurgus and Solon, the Gr legislators, had
been attracted, as well as Pythagoras and Plato,
the world’s greatest philosophers.

(2) In Greece also the old glory was passing
away. Endless wars sapped the strength of the
national life. The strength of Athens
and Sparta, of Corinth and Thebes
had departed, and when about the
beginning of our period, in 337 BC, the congress
of Gr states had elected Philip of Macedon to the
hegemony of united Greece, the knell of doom
sounded for all Gr liberty. First Philip and after
him Alexander wiped out the last remnants of this
liberty, and Greece became a fighting machine for
the conquest of the world in the meteoric career of
Alexander the Great. But what a galaxy of il-
lustrious names adorn the pages of Gr history, in
this period, so dark for Israel! Think of Aristoph-
anes and Hippocrates, of Xenophon and Democritus,
of Platoand Apelles, of Aeschines and Demosthenes,
of Aristotle and Praxiteles and Archimedes, all figur-
ing, amid the decay of Gr liberty, in the 4th and 3d
cents. before Christ! Surely if the political glory of
Greece had left its mark on the ages, its intellectual
brilliancy is their pride.

(83) Rome meanwhile was strengthening herself,
by interminable wars, for the great task of world-

conquest that lay before her. By the
3. Rome Lat and Samnite and Punic wars she
trained her sons in the art of war, ex-
tended her territorial power and made her name
dreaded everywhere. Italy and north Africa,
Greece and Asia Minor and the northern barbarians
were conquered in turn. Her intellectual brilliancy
was developed only when. the lust of conquest was
sated after a fashion, but in the cent. immediately
preceding the Christian era we find such names as
Lucretius and Hortentius, Cato and Cicero, Sal-
lust and Diodorus Siculus, Virgil and Horace. At
the close of the period between the Testaments,
Rome had become the mistress of the world and
every road led to her capital.

(4) In Asia the Pers empire, heir to the civiliza-
tion and traditions of the great Assyr-Bab world-
power, was fast collapsing and was
ultimately utterly wiped out by the
younger Gr empire and civilization.
In far-away India the old ethnic religion of Brahma
a cent. or more before the beginning of our period
passed through the reformatory crisis inaugurated
by Gatama Buddha or Sakya Mouni, and thus
Buddhism, one of the great ethnic religions, was
born. Another reformer of the Tauistic faith was
Confucius, the sage of China, a contemporary of
Buddha, while Zoroaster in Persia laid the founda-
tions of his dualistic world-view. In every sense
and in every direction, the period between the
Testaments was therefore one of political and intel-
lectual ferment.

If. Historical Developments.—As regards Jew-
ish history, the period between the Testaments
may be divided as follows: (1) the Pers period;


2. Greece


4, Asia


Between Tests. THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


(2) the Alexandrian period; (3) the Egyp period;
(4) the Syrian Benade (5) the Maccabean period;

(6) the Rom period.
(1) The Pers period: extends from the cessation
of prophecy to 334 BC. It was in the main un-
eventful in the history of the Jews, a


1. The breathing spell between great national
Persian crises, and comparatively little is
Period known of it. The land of Pal was a


portion of the Syrian satrapy, while
the true government of the Jewish people was semi-
theocratic, or rather sacerdotal, under the rule of
the high priests, who were responsible to the satrap.
Asa matter of course, the high-priestly office became
the object of all Jewish ambition and it aroused the
darkest passions. Thus John, the son of Judas, son
of Eliashib, through the lust of power, killed his
brother Jesus, who was a favorite of Bagoses, a
general of Artaxerxes in command of the district.
The guilt of the fratricide was enhanced, because the
crime was committed in the temple itself, and be-
fore the very altar. A storm of wrath, the only
notable one of this period, thereupon swept over
Judaea. The Persians occupied Jerus, the temple
was defiled, the city laid waste in part, a heavy fine
was imposed on the people and a general persecution
followed, which lasted for many years (Ant, XI, 7;
Kent, HJP, 231). Then as later on, in the many
persecutions which followed, the Samaritans, ever
pliable and willing to obey the tyrant of the day,
went practically scot free.
(2) The Alexandrian period was very brief, 334-
323 BC. It simply covers the period of the Asiatic
rule of Alexander the Great. In Greece
2. The things had been moving swiftly. The
Alexandrian Spartan hegemony, which had been
Period unbroken since the fall of Athens, was
now destroyed by the Thebans under
Epaminondas, in the great battles of Leuctra and
Mantinea. But the new power was soon crushed
by Philip of Macedon, who was thereupon chosen
general leader by the unwilling Greeks. Persia
was the object of Philip’s ambition and vengeance,
but the dagger of Pausanias (Ant, XI, viii, 1)
forestalled the execution of his plans. His son
Alexander, a youth of 20 years, succeeded him, and
thus the “great he-goat,’”’ of which Daniel had
spoken (Dnl 8 8; 10 20), appeared on the scene.
In the twelve years of his reign (335-323 BC) he
revolutionized the world. Swift as an eagle he
moved. All Greece was laid at his feet. Thence
he moved to Asia, where he defeated Darius in the
memorable battles of Granicus and Issus. Passing
southward, he conquered the Mediterranean coast
and Egypt and then moved eastward again, for the
complete subjugation of Asia, when he was struck
down in the height of his power, at Babylon, in the
33d year of his age. In the Syrian campaign he
had come in contact with the Jews. Unwilling to
leave any stronghold at his back, be reduced Tyre
after a siege of several months, and advancing south-
ward demanded the surrender of Jerus. But the
Jews, taught by bitter experience, desired to remain
loyal to Persia. As Alexander approached the city,
Jaddua the high priest, with a train of priests in
their official dress, went out to meet him, to suppli-
cate mercy. A previous dream of this occurrence
is said to have foreshadowed this event, and Alex-
ander spared the city, sacrificed to Jeh, had the
prophecies of Daniel concerning him rehearsed in
his hearing, and showed the Jews many favors
(Ant, XI, viii, 5) From that day on they became
his favorites; he employed them in his army and
gave them equal rights with the Greeks, as first
citizens of Alexandria, and other cities, which he
founded. Thus the strong Hellenistic spirit of the
Jews was created, which marked so large a portion


456


of the nation, in the subsequent periods of their


history.
(3) The Egyptian period (324-264 BC). The
death of Alexander temporarily turned everything


into chaos. The empire, welded to-
3. The gether. by his towering genius, fell
Egyptian apart under four of his generals—.
Period Ptolemy, Lysimachus, Cassander, and


Selenus (Dnl 8 21.22). Egypt fell to
the share of Ptolemy Soter and Judaea was made
part of it. At first Ptolemy was harsh in his treat-
ment of the Jews, but later on he learned to respect
them and became their patron as Alexander had
been. Hecatacus of Thrace is at this time said to
have studied the Jews, through information re-
ceived from Hezekiah, an Egyp Jewish immigrant,
and to have written a Jewish history from the time of
Abraham till his own day. This book, quoted by
Jos and Origen, is totally lost. Soter was suc-
ceeded by Ptolemy Philadelphus, an enlightened
ruler, famous through the erection of the_light-
house of Pharos, and esp. through the founding of
the celebrated Alexandrian: library. Like his
father he was very friendly to the Jews, and in his
reign the celebrated Gr tr of the OT Scriptures, the
LXX, was made, according to tradition (Ant, XII,
ii). As however the power of the Syrian princes,
the Seleucidae, grew, Pal increasingly became the
battle ground between them and the Ptolemies. In
the decisive battle between Ptolemy Philopator and
Antiochus the Great, at Raphia near Gaza, the
latter was crushed and during Philopator’s reign
Judaea remained an Egyp province. And yet this
battle formed the turning-point of the history
of the Jews in their relation to Egypt. For when
Ptolemy, drunk with victory, came to Jerus, he en-
deavored to enter the holy of holies of the temple,
although he retreated, in confusion, from the holy
place. But he wreaked his vengéance on the Jews,
for opposing his plan, by a cruel persecution. He
was succeeded by his son Ptolemy Epiphanes, a
child of 5 years. The long-planned vengeance of
Antiochus now took form in an invasion of Egypt.
Coele-Syria and Judaea were occupied by the Syrians
and passed over into the possession of the Seleu-
cidae.

(4) The Syrian period (204-165 BC). Israel now
entered into the valley of the shadow of death.

This entire period was an almost un-


4. The interrupted martyrdom. Antiochus
Syrian was succeeded by Seleucis Philopator.
Period But harsh as was their attitude to the


Jews, neither of these two was noto-
rious for his cruelty to them. Their high priests,
as in former periods, were still their nominal rulers.
Bui the aspect of everything changed when Antio-
chus Epiphanes (175-164 BC) came to the throne.
He may fitly be called the Nero of Jewish history.
The nationalists among the Jews were at that time
wrangling with the Hellenists for the control of
affairs. Onias III, a faithful high priest, was ex-
pelled from office through the machinations of his
brother Jesus or Jason (2 Mace 4 7-10). Onias
went to Egypt, where at Heliopolis he built a
temple and officiated as high priest. Meanwhile
Jason in turn was turned out of the holy office by
the bribes of still another brother, Menelaus, worse
by far than Jason, a Jew-hater and an avowed
defender of Gr life and morals. The wrangle
between the brothers gave Antiochus the oppor-
tunity he craved to wreak his bitter hatred on the
Jews, in the spoliation of Jerus, in the wanton and
total defilement of the temple, and in a most hor-
rible persecution of the Jews (1 Macc 1 16-28;
2 Macc 6 11-23; Dnl 11 28; Ani, XII, v, 3.4).
Thousands were slain, women and children were sold
into captivity, the city wall was torn down, all


457


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Between Tests.


sacrifices ceased, and in the temple on the altar
of burnt offering a statue was erected to Jupiter
Olympius (1 Mace 1 43; 2 Macc 6 1-2). Cir-
cumcision was forbidden, on pain of death, and all
the people of Israel were to be forcibly paganized.
As in the Pers persecution, the Samaritans again
played into the hands of the Syrians and implicitly
obeyed the will of the Seleucidae. But the very
rigor of the persecution caused it to fail of its pur-
pose and Israel proved to be made of sterner stuff
than Antiochus imagined. A priestly family
dwelling at Modin, west of Jerus, named Has-
monean, after one of its ancestors, consisting of
Mattathias and his five sons, raised the standard
of revolt, which proved successful after a severe

struggle. See ASMONABAN.
(5) The Maccabean period (165-63 BC). The
slaying of an idolatrous Jew at the very altar
was the signal of revolt. The land of


5. The Judaea, is specially adapted to guerilla
Macca- tactics, and Judas Maccabaeus, who
bean succeeded his father, as leader of the
Period Jewish patriots, was a past master in


; this kind of warfare. All efforts of
Antiochus to quell the rebellion failed most
miserably, in three Syrian campaigns. The king
died of a loathsome disease and peace was at last
concluded with the Jews. Though still nominally
under Syrian control, Judas became governor of Pal.
His first act was the purification and rededication
of the temple, from which the Jews date their festi-
val of purification (see PuriricaTIon). When the
Syrians renewed the war, Judas applied for aid to
the Romans, whose power began to be felt in Asia,
but he died in battle before the promised aid could
reach him (Ant, XII, xi, 2). He was buried by his
father’s side at Modin and was succeeded by his
brother Jonathan. From that time the Maccabean
history becomes one of endless cabals. Jonathan
was acknowledged by the Syrians as meridarch of
Judaea, but was assassinated soon afterward.


Simon succeeded him, and by the help of the
Romans was made hereditary ruler of Pal. He in
turn was followed by John Hyrcanus. The people


were torn by bitter partisan controversies and a
civil war was waged, a generation later, by two
grandsons of John Hyrcanus, Hyrcauus and Aris-
tobulus. In this internecine struggle the Rom
general Pompey participated by siding with Hyr-
canus, while Aristobulus defied Rome and defended
Jerus. Pompey took the city, after a siege of three
months, and entered the holy of holies, thereby
forever estranging from Rome every loyal Jewish

heart. :
(6) The Roman period (63-4 BC). Judaea now
became a Rom province. Hyrcanus, stripped of
the hereditary royal power, retained


6. The only the high-priestly office. Rome
Roman exacted an annual tribute, and Aris-
Period tobulus was sent as a captive to the


capital. He contrived however to
escape and renewed the unequal struggle, in which
he was succeeded by his sons Alexander and Antig-
onus. In the war between Pompey and Caesar,
Judaea was temporarily forgotten, but after Caesar’s
death, under the triumvirate of Octavius, Antony
and Lepidus, Antony, the eastern triumvir, favored
Herod the Great, whose intrigues secured for him at
last the crown of Judaea and enabled him completely
to extinguish the old Maccabean line of Judaean
princes.

IV. Internal Developments in This Period.—
One thing remains, and that is a review of the de-
velopments within the bosom of Judaism itself in
the period under consideration. It is self-evident
that the core of the Jewish people, which remained
loyal to the national traditions and to the national


faith, must have been radically affected by the
terrible cataclysms which mark their history, during
the four cents. before Christ. What, if any, was
the literary activity of the Jews in this period?
What was their spiritual condition? What was
the result of the manifest difference of opinion
within the Jewish economy? What preparation
does this period afford for the ‘fulness of time’?
These and other questions present themselves, as
we study this period of the history of the Jews.

(1) The voice of prophecy was utterly hushed in
this period, but the old literary instinct of the

nation asserted itself; it was part and
1. Literary parcel of the Jewish traditions and
Activity would not be denied. Thus in this

period many writings were produced,
which although they lack canonical authority, among
Protestants at least, still are extremely helpful for a
correct understanding of the life of Israel in the dark
ages before Christ.

(a) The Apocrypha.—First of all among the
fruits of this hterary activity stand the apocryphal
books of the OT. It is enough here to mention
them. They are fourteen in number: 1 and 2
Esdras, Tobit, Judith, 2 Esther, Wisdom of Solo-
mon, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, Song of the Three
Holy Children, History of Susannah, Bel and the
Dragon, Prayer of Manasses, 1 and 2 Maccabees.
As 3 and 4 Maccabees fall presumably within the
Christian era, they are not here enumerated. All
these apocryphal writings are of the utmost impor-
tance for a correct understanding of the Jewish
problem in the day in which they were written.
For fuller information, see APocRYPHA.

(b) Pseudepigrapha.—Thus named from_ the
spurious character of the authors’ names they bear.
Two of these writings very probably belong to our
period, while a host of them evidently belong to a
later date. In this class of writings there is a mute
confession of the conscious poverty of the day.
First of all, we have the Psalter of Solomon, origi-
nally written in Heb and tr4 into Gr—a collection
of songs for worship, touching in their spirit, and
evincing the fact that true faith never died in the
heart of the true believer. The second is the Book
of Enoch, a production of an apocalyptic nature,
named after Enoch the patriarch, and widely
known about the beginning of the Christian era.
This book is quoted in the NT (Jude ver 14). It
was originally written in Heb or Aram. and tr? into
Gr. As there is no trace of a Christian influence
in the book, the presumption is that the greater
part of it was written at an earlier period. Both
Jude and the author of Revelation must have
known it, as a comparative study of both books will
show. The question of these quotations or allusions
is a veritable crux interpretum: how to reconcile the
inspiration of these books with these quotations?

(c) The Septuagint.—The tradition of the LXX
is told by Jos (Ant, XII, ii, 13). Aristeas and
Aristobulus, a Jewish priest in the reign of Ptolemy
Philometor (2 Mace 1 10), are also quoted in sup-

ort of it by Clement of Alexandria and by Euse-

ius. See Smpruacint. The truth of the matter
is most probably that this great tr of the OT Scrip-
tures was begun at the instance of Ptolemy Phila-
delphus 285-247 BC, under the direction of Deme-
trius Phalereus, and was completed somewhere about
the middle of the 2d cent. BC. Internal evidence
abounds that the tr was made by different hands and
at different times. If the tr wasin any way hteral,.
the text of the LXX raises various interesting
questions in regard to the Heb text that was used in
the tr, as compared with the one we now possess.
The LXX was of the utmost missionary value and
contributed perhaps more than any other thing to
prepare the world for the “fulness of time.”


Between Tests.
Bible, The


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


458


The return from Babylon marked a turning-
point in the spiritual history of the Jews. From
that time onward, the lust of idolatry,
2. Spiritual which had marked their whole previous
Conditions history, utterly disappears. In the
place of it came an almost intolerable
spirit of exclusiveness, a striving after legal holiness,
these two in combination forming the very heart
and core of the later Pharisaism. The holy books,
but especially the law, became an object of almost
idolatrous reverence; the spirit was utterly lost in
the form. And as their own tongue, the classic
Heb, gradually gave way to the common Aram.,
the rabbis and their schools strove ever more earnest-
ly to keep the ancient tongue pure, worship and life
each demanding a separate language. Thus the
Jews became in a sense bilingual, the Heb tongue
being used in their synagogues, the Aram. in their
daily life, and later on, in part at least, the Gr
tongue of the conqueror, the lingua franca of the
period. A spiritual aristocracy very largely re-
placed the former rule of their princes and nobles.
As the core of their religion died, the bark of the
tree flourished. Thus tithes were zealously paid by
the believer (cf Mt 23 23), the Sabbath became
a positive burden of sanctity, the simple laws of
God were replaced by cumbersome human inven-
tions, which in later times were to form the bulk
of the Talm, and which crushed down all spiritual
liberty in the days of Christ (Mt 11 28; 23 4.23).
The substitution of the names ‘Elohim’ and
“Adonai” for the old glorious historic name “Jah-
veh” is an eloquent commentary on all that has
been said before and on the spiritual condition of
Israel in this period (Ewald, H of I, V, 198), in which
the change was inaugurated. The old centripetal
force, the old ideal of centralization, gave way to an
almost haughty indifference to the land of promise.
The Jews became, as they are today, a nation with-
out a country. For, for every Jew that came back
to the old national home, a thousand remained
in the land of their adoption. And yet scattered
far and wide, in all sorts of environments, they
remained Jews, and the national consciousness was
never extinguished. It was God’s mark on them
now as then. And thus they became world-wide
missionaries of the knowledge of the true God, of a
gospel of hope for a world that was hopeless, a gospel
which wholly against their own will directed the
eyes of the world to the fulness of time and which
prepared the fallow soil of human hearts for the rapid
spread of Christianity when it ultimately appeared.
During the Gr period the more conservative and
zealous of the Jews were all the time confronted with
a tendency of a very considerable
portion of the people, especially the
younger and wealthier set, to adopt
the manners of life and thought and speech of their
masters, the Greeks. Thus the Hellenistic party
was born, which was bitterly hated by all true-
blooded Jews, but which left its mark on their his-
tory, till the date of the final dispersion 70 AD.
From the day of Mattathias, the Chasids or Hasi-
deans (I Macc 2 42) were the true Jewish patriots.
Thus the party of the Pharisees came into existence
(Ant, XIII, x, 5; XVIII, i, 2; BJ, I, v, 2). See
Puarisees. They were opposed by the more
secular-minded Sadducees (Ant, XIII, x, 6; XVIII,
i, 3; BJ, II, viti, 14), wealthy, of fine social stand-
ing, wholly free from the restraints of tradition,
utterly oblivious of the future life and closely akin
to the Gr Epicureans. See SappucrEs. These
parties bitterly opposed each other till the very
end of the national existence of the Jews in Pal,
and incessantly fought for the mastery, through the
high-priestly office. Common hatred for Christ,
for a while, afforded them a community of interests.


3. Parties


Throughout this entire dark period of Israel’s
history, God was working out His own Divine plan
with them. Their Scriptures were tr?
4, Prepara- into Gr, after the conquest of Alex- .
tion for ander the Great the common language
Christianity in the East. Thus the world was pre~
pared for the word of God, even as the
latter in turn prepared the world for the reception
of the gift of God, in the gospel of His Son. The
LXX thus is a distinct forward movement in the
fulfilment of the Abrahamic promise (Gen 12 3;
18 18). As the sacrificial part of Jewish worship
declined, through their wide separation from _the
temple, the eyes of Israel were more firmly fixed
on their Scriptures, read every Sabbath in their
synagogues, and, as we have seen, these Scriptures,
through the rendering of the LXX, had become the
property of the entire world. Thus the synagogue
everywhere became the great missionary institute,
imparting to the world Israel’s exalted Messianic
hopes. On the other hand, the Jews themselves,
embittered by long-continued martyrdoms and
suffering, utterly carnalized this Messianic expec-
tation in an increasing ratio as the yoke of the
oppressor grew heavier and the hope of deliverance
grew fainter. And thus when their Messiah came,
Israel recognized Him not, while the heart-hungry
heathen, who through the LXX had become familiar
with the promise, humbly received Him (Jn 1 9-14).
The eyes of Israel were blinded for a season, ‘till the
fulness of the Gentiles shall be gathered in’ (Rom
9 32; 11 25). Henry E. Dosker


BEULAH, bila (MD992, betulah, “married”):
A name symbolically applied to Israel: “Thy land
[shall be called] B. . ... thy land shall be married.
; . so shall thy sons marry thee” (Isa 62 4 f).
In this figure, frequently used since Hosea, the
prophet wishes to express the future prosperity
of Israel. The land once desolate shall again be
populated.


BEWAIL, bé-wal’ (kémre, képts): In the middle
voice, this word has the thought of striking on the
breast and of loud lamentation, so common among
oriental people in time of great sorrow. It is used
to express the most intense grief, a sorrow that com-
pels outward demonstration (Lk 8 52; 23 27).
A striking instance of this grief is that of the
daughter of Jephthah (Jgs 11 37; Lev 10 6). See
Buriat, IV, 4, 5, 6; Grier,


BEWITCH, bé-wich’ (¢&lorypt, existémi): There
are two Gr words in the NT tr¢ ‘‘bewitch.” The
one given above (Acts 8 9.11 AV “bewitched,” RV
“‘amazed’’) has reference to the work of Simon Ma-
gus. It means “to be out of one’s mind,” “to aston-
ish,” ‘to overwhelm with wonder.” The other word,
Bacxalyw, baskaind (Gal 3 1), means ‘to fascinate
by false representation.” It is by this means the
apostle complains they have been led to accept a
teaching wholly contrary to the gospel of Christ.
Both these words reveal to us something of the
difficulty the early teachers had to eradicate the
idea so widely held by the Jews and Egyptians
especially, that there were certain powers, dark and
mysterious, which by certain occult forces they
could control. For a long time this had to be con-
tended with as one of the corrupt practices brought
into the church by the converts, both from Judaism
and heathenism. These words have a reference to
the evil eye which for cents. was, and even today is,
an important factor in the life of the people of the
East. 1 Tim 6 20 is a reference to this thought
and explains the word ‘science’ (AV) as there
used. See Divination; Evi. Eye; Sorcery;
SUPERSTITION. Jacop W. Kapp


459


BEWRAY, bé-ra’, BEWRAYER, bé-ra/ér: In its
derivation is entirely different from betray (Lat
tradere), and meant originally ‘‘to disclose,” ‘‘reveal’’
(cfShakspere, Titus Andronicus, II, iv,3: ‘Write down
thy mind, bewray thy meaning so’’); but has been
affected by the former word and is used almost
synonymously. It is the tr of three Heb words:
(1) SOP, kara’, meaning ‘‘to call out” (Prov 27 16),
“the omtment of his right hand which bewrayeth
itself’ (ARV “his right hand encountereth oil,”
ARVm “the oil of his right hand betrayeth itself’);
(2) 732, ndghadh, meaning “‘tofront,”’ “‘toannounce”’
(by word of mouth): Prov 29 24, “heareth cursing
and bewrayeth it not’? (ARV “heareth the adjura-
tion and uttereth nothing”); (3) 733, galah, ‘to
denude,” fig. ‘‘to reveal’ (Isa 16 3), “bewray not
him es wandereth” (ARV “betray not the fugi-
tive’’).

In Sir 27 17 “bewray [RV ‘‘reveal’’] his secrets”
is thetr of dwoxahirrw, apokaliptd, lit. “to uncover’;
so also in Sir 27 21 (RV ‘‘tevealeth”). Bewrayer
of 2 Macc 4 1 (‘“bewrayer of the money and of
his country,’ RV ‘had given information of the
money and had betrayed his country’’) is the tr
of évdelxrns, endetktés, lit. “one who shows.”

In the NT “bewrayeth” is the AV of Mt 26 73;
“thy speech bewrayeth thee” is the tr of the phrase
dHdov wocetv, délon poiein, which tle ARV renders
“maketh thee known.” ArtTuur J. Kinseuia


BEYOND, bé-yond’: Found in the Heb only in
its application to space and time, and for these
ideas three words are employed: myon, hale’ ah
(Gen 36 21)=“‘to the distance’; "39, ‘abhar=
“to go beyond,” “to cross,” derivative 137,
‘ebher (Chald. "22, ‘dbhar)=“‘across,” “beyond”
(Dt 30 13; Josh 18 7; Jgs 3 26; 1S 20 36; 2
Ch 20 2; Ezr 4 17.20; Jer 26 22); and 59, ‘al
(Lev 15 25)=“‘beyond the time.” In the NT
mépav, péran, is used to express ‘‘beyond” in the
spatial sense (Mt 4 15), while other words and
phrases are employed for adverbial ideas of degree:
breprepwods, huperperissds (Mk 7 37); vrép, hupér
(2 Cor 8 3; 10 16); xaGvrepBodryr, kathuperbo-
lén (Gal 1 13). In the AV 1392, be‘ébher, is
occasionally tr? “beyond,’”’ and when this word is
joined to TI, ha-yardén, “Jordan,” as it usually
is, it becomes critically important. In ARV, be‘ébher
ha-yardén is trt “beyond the Jordan,” in Gen 50
10.11; Dt 3 20.25; Josh 9 10; Jgs 6 17; “‘on this
side Jordan” in Dt 1 1.5; Josh 1 14.15; “‘on the
other side Jordan” in Dt 11 30; Josh 12 1; 22 4;
24 2.8 (cf AV and RV, va 14.15; see River, THE),
Jgs 10 8; 1 S 31 7; and “on the side of Jordan”
in Josh 6 1. ARV gives “beyond the Jordan”
thronghout. “227A, mé‘ébher, is used with ha-yardén
in Nu 34 15; 36 14; Josh 13 32; Jgs 7 25; and
“39, ‘ebher, alone in Dt 4 49 (AV “on this side’”’);
Josh 13 27 (AV “on the other side’’). It is clear
that the pbrase may be tr4 “across Jordan”; that
it is used of either side of the Jordan (Dt 3 8
speaks of the eastern, 3 20.25 of the western) ;
that “beyond Jordan” may be used of the side of
the Jordan on which the writer stands (Josh 5 1;
9 1; 12 7); but from the fact that Dt 11.5; 4 41.
46.47.49, where statements are made about Moses,
the reference is to the country E. of the Jordan,
while in Dt 3 20.25; 11 30, where Moses 1s repre-
sented as speaking, the W. is indicated, critics have
concluded that the author (at least of Dt) must
have lived after Moses, being careful to distinguish
between himself and the prophet.

Frank E. Hirsce


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Between Tests.
Bible, The


BEZAANANNIM, bé-z4-an-an’im (Josh 19 33
RVm). See ZAANANNIM.


BEZAI, bé’za-1 (183, bécay, “‘shining’’[?]):

(1) A chief who with Nehemiah sealed the cov-
enant (Neh 10 18).

(2) The descendants of B. returned with Zerub-
babel to Jerus (323, Ezr 2 17; 324, Neh 7 23=
Bassai, 1 Esd 5 16).


BEZALEL, bez’a-lel (ONDER, becal’él, “in the
shadow [protection] of ’El [God]”; Beoedehd, Be-
seleél; AV Bezaleel) :

(1) A master workman under Moses; son of
Uri, son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. Jeh gave
him especial wisdom and skill for his task, which
was, with the aid of Oholiab of the tribe of Dan,
to snperintend the making of the tabernacle and
its furniture (Ex 31 2; 36 30; 36 1.2 (8); 37 1;
38 22; 1 Ch 2 20; 2 Ch 1 5).

(2) An Israelite of the time of Ezra who put
away a foreign wife (Ezr 10 30). ‘F. K. Farr


BEZEK, bé’zek (pT, bezek;
B, ABuéfex, Abiézek):

(1) The city of Adoni-bezek taken by Judah and
Simeon (Jgs 1 4f), in the territory allotted to
Judah. It is somewhat doubtfully identified with
Bezkah, about 3 miles N.E. of Gezer.

(2) The place where Saul marshaled his army
before marching to the relief of Jabesh-gilead
(1 S 11 8). Onom speaks of two villages of this
name 17 Rom miles from Shechem, on the way to
Scythopolis. No doubt Khirbet Ibzik is intended.
Here, or on the neighboring height, Ras Ibztk, a
mountain 2,404 ft. above sea level, the army prob-
ably assembled. W. Ewne


BEZER, bé’zér (1¥3,
“strong”):

(1) A city of refuge, set apart by Moses for the
Reubenites and located in the “plain country’’: (or
table-land, Mishor) E. of the Jordan, later assigned
to this tribe by Joshua (Dt 4 43; Josh 20 8).
The same city was assigned by lot as place of resi-
dence to the children of Merari of the Levite tribe
(Josh 21 36; 1 Ch 6 63.78). Driver, HDB, sug-
gests the identity of B. with Bozrah (LXX Bosor)


Bétex, Bézek,


beger; Bécop, Bésor,


(Jer 48 24). Besheir has been suggested as the
present site. According to the MS it was fortified
by Mesha.


(2) A son of Zophah of the house of Asher (1 Ch
7 37). A. L. Bresiicu


BEZETH, bé’zeth (Bntée, Bezéth): A place in the
neighborhood of Jerus to which Bacchides withdrew
and where he slew several deserters (1 Macc 7 19).
Possibly the same as Bezetha (see J ERUSALEM).


BEZETHA, be-zé’tha: Also called by Jos the “New
City” (BJ, V, iv, 2), certain suburbs of Jerus, N. of
the Temple, which were outside the second but in-
eluded within the third wall. Bszmru (q.v.) may
be the same place. See JERUSALEM.

BIATAS, bi’a-tas (Padtas, Phalias; A, Prabds,
Phiathds): RV ‘‘Phalias,” one of the Levites (1 Esd
9 48) who “taught [the people] the law of the Lord,
making them withal to understand it.” Called
Pelaiah in Neh 8 7.


BIBLE, bi’b’l, THE (BiBAla, bibléa):

I. Tus Names
1. Bible .
2. Other Designations—Scriptures, etc
3. OT and NT

TI, Laneuaces


Bible, The


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


460


III. Compass anp Divisions
1. The Jewish Bible
Josephus, etc
2. The
The Apocrypha
3. The Vulgate (OT)
4. The NT
(1) Acknowledged Books
(2) Disputed Books
LIveERARY GROWTH AND ORIGIN—CANONICITY
1. The OT
(1) Indications of OT Itself
(a) Patriarchal Age
8 Mosaic Age
c) Judges
(d) Monarchy
(e) Wisdom Literature—History
(f) Prophecy
(2) Assyrian Age
i Chaldaean Age
(g) Josiah’s Reformation
(h) Exilian and Post-Exilian
(i) Daniel, etc
(j)_ Preéxilic Bible
(2) Critical Views
(a) The Pentateuch
(b) Histories
(ce) Psalms and Prophets
(3) Formation of Canon
(a) Critical Theory
(b) More Positive View
eo of Canou
2. The NT “
(1) Historical Books
(a) The Synoptics
(b) Fourth Gospel
(c) Acts
(2) The Epistles
(a) Pauline
3 Epistle to Hebrews
ce) Catholic Epistles
(3) Prophecy A
Book of Revelation
(4) NT Canon
V. Unity anp Sprriroat Purrose—INsPIRATION
1. Scripture a Unit
2. The Purpose of
3. Inspiration
4. Historical Influence
ADDENDA
1. Chapters and Verses
2. AV and RV
3. Helps to Study
LiveRATURE


This word designates the collection of the Scrip-
tures of the OT and NT recognized and in use in
the Christian churches. Different re-
General ligions (such as the Zoroastrian, Hindu,
Designation Buddhist, Mohammedan) have their
collections of sacred writings, some-
times spoken of as their “Bibles.” The Jews
acknowledge only the Scriptures of the OT. Chris-
tians add the writings contained in the NT. The
present art. deals with the origin, character, con-
tents and purpose of the Christian Scriptures,
regarded as the depository and authoritative record
of God’s revelations of Himself and of His will to
the fathers by the prophets, and through His Son
to the church of a later age (He 1 1.2). Reference
is made throughout to the arts. in which the several
topics are more fully treated. ;
I. The Names.—The word “‘Bible”’ is the equiva-
lent of the Gr word biblia (dim. from biblos, the
inner bark of the papyrus), meaning
1. Bible originally “books.” The phrase “the
books” (ta biblia) occurs in Dnl 9 2
(LXX) for prophetic writings. In the Prologue to
Sir (‘the rest of the books’’) it designates generally
the OT Scriptures; similarlyin 1 Macc 12 9 (“the
holy books”). The usage passed into the Christian
church for OT (2 Clem 14 2), and by and by (cir
5th cent.) was extended to the whole Scriptures.
Jerome’s name for the Bible (4th cent.) was “the
Divine Library” (Bibliotheca Divina). Afterward
came an important change from pl. to sing. mean-
ing. “In process of time this name, with many
others of Gr origin, passed into the vocabulary of
the western church; and in the 13th cent., by a
happy solecism, the neut. pl. came to be regarded as
afem. sing., and ‘The Books’ became by common


IV.


race


VI.


consent ‘The Book’ (biblia, sing.), in which form
the word was passed into the languages of modern
Europe” (Westcott, Bible in the Church, 5). Its
earliest occurrences in Eng. are in Piers Plowman,

Chaucer and Wycliffe.
There is naturally no name in the NT for the
complete body of Scripture; the only Scriptures
then known being those of the OT.


2. Other In 2 Pet 3.16, however, Paul’s epis-
Designa- _tles seem brought under this category.
tions— The common designations for the
Scriptures, OT books by Our Lord and His apos-
etc tles were ‘the scriptures” (writings)


(Mt 21 42; Mk 14 49; Lk 24 32;

"Jn 5 39; Acts 18 24; Rom 16 4, etc), “the holy
scriptures” (Rom 1 2); once “the sacred writings”

(2 Tim 3 15). The Jewish technical division (see

below) into “the law,” the “prophets,” and the

(holy) writings” is recognized in the expression


“in the law of Moses, and the prophets, and the
psalms” (Lk 24 44). More briefly the whole is
summed up under “the law and the prophets”
(Mt 5 17; 11 13; Acts 13 15). Occasionally even
the term “law” is extended to include the other
divisions (Jn 10 34; 12 34; 15 25; 1 Cor 14 21).
Paul uses the phrase ‘“‘the oracles of God” as a
name for the OT Scriptures (Rom 3 2; cf Acts 7
38; He 6 12; 1 Pet 4 11).

Special interest attaches to the names “Old”

and “New Testament,’ now and since the close
of the 2d cent. in common use to
8. OT and distinguish the Jewish and the Chris-
NT tian Scriptures. ‘“Testament”’ (lit. ‘a
will’) is used in the NT (AV) to repre-
sent the Gr word diathéké, in classical usage also
“a, will,” but in the LXX and NT employed to
translate the Heb word berith, “a covenant.” In
RV, accordingly, “testament” is, with two ex-
ceptions (He 9 16.17), changed to ‘“‘covenant” (Mt
26 28; 2 Cor 36; Gal 315; He 7 22; 9 15,
etc). Applied to the Scriptures, therefore, ‘“Old’’
and “New Testament” mean, strictly, “Old” and
“New Covenant,” though the older usage is now
too firmly fixed to be altered. The name is a con-
tinuation of the OT designation for the law, “the
book of the covenant” (2 K 23 2). In this sense
Paul applies it (2 Cor 3 14) to the OT law; “the
reading of the old testament” (RV ‘“Covenant”’).
When, after the middle of the 2d cent., a definite
collection began to be made of the Christian writ-
ings, these were named “‘the New Testament,” and
were placed as of equal authority alongside the
“Qld.” The name Novum Testamentum (also In-
strumentum) occurs first in Tertullian (190-220 AD),
and soon came into general use. The idea of a
Christian Bible may be then said to be complete.

H, Languages.—The OT, it is well known, is
written mostly in Heb; the NT is written wholly
in Gr. The parts of the OT not in Heb, viz. Ezr
4 8—6 18; 7 12-26; Jer 10 11; Dnl 2 4—7 28,
are in Aram. (the so-called Chaldee), a related
dialect, which, after the Exile, gradually displaced
Heb as the spoken language of the Jews (sce ARraA-
Maric; LanavaGe AnD Text orOT). The ancient
Heb text was ‘“unpointed,” i.e. without the vowel-
marks now in use. These are due to the labors of
the Massoretic scholars (after 6th cent. AD).

The Gr of the NT, on which so much light has
recently been thrown by the labors of Deissmann
and others from the Egyp papyri, showing it to be
a form of the “common” (Hellenistic) speech of the
time (see LANGuaGE oF NT), still remains, from its
penetration by Heb ideas, the influence of the LXX,
peculiarities of training and culture in the writers
above all, the vitalizing and transforming power of
Christian conceptions in vocabulary and expres-
sion, a study by itself. ‘‘We speak,” the apostle


461


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bible, The


says, ‘not in words which man’s wisdom teacheth,
but which the Spirit teacheth” (1 Cor 2 13).
This is not always remembered in the search for
parallels in the papyri. (For tr® into other lan-
guages, see VERSIONS.)

HI, Compass and Divisions.—The story of the
origin, collection, and final stamping with canonical
authority of the books which compose our present
Bible involves many points still keenly in dispute.
Before touching on these debatable matters, certain
more external facts fall to be noticed relating to the
general structure and compass of the Bible, and the
main divisions of its contents.

A first step is to ascertain the character and con-
tents of the Jewish Bible—the Bible in use by

Christ and His apostles. Apart from
1. Jewish references in the NT itself, an impor-
Bible— tant aid is here afforded by a passage
Josephus in Jos (CAp, I, 8), which may be
taken to represent the current belief
of the Jews in the lst cent. AD. After speaking of
the prophets as writing their histories “through
the inspiration of God,” Jossays: ‘For we have not
myriads of discordant and conflicting books, but
22 only, comprising the record of all time, and
justly accredited as Divine. Of these, 5 are books
of Moses, which embrace the laws and the tradi-
tions of mankind until his own death, a period of
almost 3,000 years. From the death of Moses
till the reign of Artaxerxes, the successor of Xer-
xes, king of Persia, the prophets who followed
Moses narrated the events of their time in 13
books. The remaining 4 books consist of bymns
to God, and maxims of conduct for men. From
Artaxerxes to our own age, the history has been
written in detail, but it is not esteemed worthy of
the same credit, on account of the exact succession
of the prophets having been no longer maintained.”
He goes on to declare that, in this long interval, ‘no
one has dared either to add anything to [the writ-
ings], or to take anything from them, or to alter
anything,” and speaks of them as “the decrees
[dégmata] of God,” for which the Jews would will-
ingly die. Philo (20 BC-cir 50 AD) uses similar
atrong language about the law of Moses (in Euse-
bius, Pr. Hv., VIII, 6).

In this enumeration of Jos, it will be seen that the
Jewish sacred books—39 in our Bible—are reckoned
as 22 (after the no. of letters in the Heb alphabet),
viz. 5 of the law, 13 of the prophets and 4 remaining
books. These last are Ps, Prov, Cant and Eccl.
The middle class includes all the historical and
prophetical books, likewise Job, and the reduction
in the no. from 30 to 13 is explained by Jgs—Ruth,
1 and 2S, 1 and 2 K, 1 and 2 Ch, Ezr—Neh, Jer—
Lam and the 12 minor prophets, each being counted
as one book. In his 22 books, therefore, Jos in-
cludes all those in the present Heb canon, and none
besides—not the books known as the APocRYPHa,
though he was acquainted with and used some of
these.

Other lists and divisions—The statement of Jos
as to the 22 books acknowledged by the Jews is
confirmed, with some variation of enumeration,
by the lists preserved by Eusebius (HZ, vi.26)
from Melito of Sardis (cir 172 AD) and Origen
(186-254 AD), and by Jerome (Pref to OT, cir 400)
—all following Jewish authoritics. Jerome knew
also of a rabbinical division into 24 books. The
celebrated passage from the Talm (Babha’ Bathra’,
14b: see Canon or OT; cf Westcott, Bible in
Church, 35; Driver, LOT, vi) counts also 24.
This no. is obtained by separating Ruth from Jgs
and Lam from Jer. The threefold division of the
books, into Law, Prophets, and other sacred
Writings (Hagiographa), is old. It is already im-
plied in the Prologue to Sir (cir 130 BC), “the law,


the prophets, and the rest of the books”; is glanced
at in a work ascribed to Philo (De vita contempl.,
3); is indicated, as formerly seen, in Lk 24 44. It
really reflects stages in the formation of the Heb
canon (see below). The rabbinical division, how-
ever, differed materially from that of Jos in reck-
oning only 8 books of the prophets, and relegating
1 and 2 Ch, Ezr—Neh, Est, Job and Dnl to the
Hagiographa, thus enlarging that group to 9 (West-
cott, op. cit., 28; DB, I, “Canon’”). When Ruth
and Lam were separated, they were added to the
list, raising the no. to 11. Some, however, take
this to be the original arrangement. In printed
Heb Bibles the books in all the divisions are
separate. The Jewish schools further divided the
“Prophets” into “the former prophets” (the his-
torical books—Josh, Jgs, S and K), and “the latter
prophets” (Isa, Jer, Ezk and the 12 minor prophets
as one book).

NT references—It may be concluded that the
above lists, excluding the Apoc, represent the Heb
Bible as it existed in the time of Our Lord (the
opinion, held by some, that the Sadducees received
only the 5 books of the law rests on no sufficient
evidence). This result is borne out by the evidence
of quotations in Jos and Philo (cf Westcott, op.
cit.). Still more is it confirmed by an examination
of OT quotations and referencesin the NT. It was
seen above that the main divisions of the OT are
recognized in the NT, and that, under the name
‘Scriptures,’ a Divine authority is ascribed to
them. It is therefore highly significant that,
although the writers of the NT were familiar with
the LXX, which contained the Apoc (see below),
no quotation from any book of the Apoc occurs in
their pages. One or two allusions, at most, suggest
acquaintance with the Book of Wisdom (e.g. Wisd
6 18-21 || Eph 6 13-17). On the other hand,
“every book in the Heb Bible is distinctly quoted
in the NT with the exception of Josh, Jgs, Ch, Cant,
Eccl, Ezr, Neh, Est, Ob, Zeph and Nah” (West-
cott). Enumerations differ, but about 178 direct
quotations may be reckoned in the Gospels, Acts
and Epistles; if references are included, the no. is
raised to about 700 (see Quotations IN NT). In
four or five places (Lk 11 49-51; Jas 45; 1
Cor 2 9; Eph 5 14; Jn 7 38) apparent references
occur to sources other than the OT; it is doubtful
whether most of them are really so (cf Westcott,
op. cit., 46-48; Eph 6 14 may be from a Christian
hymn). An undeniable influence of Apocalyptic
literature is seen in Jude, where vs 14.15 are a direct
quotation from the Book of Enoch. It does not
follow that Jude regarded this book as a proper
part of Scripture.

Hitherto we have been dealing with the Heb OT;
marked changes are apparent when we turn to the

Septuagint, or Gr version of the LXX
2. The LXX current in the Gr-speaking world at

the commencement of the Christian
era. The importance of this version lies in the
fact that it was practically the OT of the early
church. It was used by the apostles and their
converts, and is freely quoted in the NT, sometimes
even when its renderings vary considerably from
the Heb. Its influence was necessarily, therefore,
very great. .

Origin.—The special problems connected with
origin, text and literary relations of the LXX are
dealt with elsewhere (see SEPTUAGINT). The ver-
sion took its rise, under one of the early Ptolemies,
from the needs of the Jews in Egypt, before the
middle of the 2d cent. BC; was gradually exe-
cuted, and completed hardly later than cir 100
BC; thereafter spread into all parts. Its render-
ings reveal frequent divergence in MSS from the
present MT, but show also that the translators


Bible, The


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


462


permitted themselves considerable liberties in
enlarging, abbreviating, transposing and otherwise
modifying the texts they had, and in the insertion
of materials borrowed from other sources.

The Apocrypha—The most noteworthy differ-
ences are in the departure from Jewish tradition
in the arrangement of the books (this varies greatly;
ef Swete, Intro to OT in Gr, II, ch i), and in the
inclusion in the list of the other books, unknown
to the Heb canon, now grouped as the Apocrypha.
These form an extensive addition. They include
the whole of the existing Apoc, with the exception
of 2 Esd and Pr Man. All are of late date, and
are in Gr, though Sir had a Heb original which has
been partly recovered. They are not collected, but
are interspersed among the OT books in what are
taken to be their appropriate places. The Gr frag-
ments of Est, e.g. are incorporated in that book;
Sus and Bel form part of Dnl; Bar is joined with
Jer, etc. The most important books are Wisd, Sir
and 1 Macc (cir 100 BC). The fact that Sir,
originally in Heb (cir 200 BC), and of high repute,
was not included in the Heb canon, has a weighty
bearing on the period of the closing of the latter.

Ecclesiastical use.—It is, as already remarked,
singular that, notwithstanding this extensive en-
largement of the canon by the LXX, the books
just named obtained no Scriptural recognition
from the writers of the NT. The more scholarly
of the Fathers, likewise (Melito, Origen, Athana-
sius, Cyr, Jerome, etc), adhere to the Heb list, and
most draw a sharp distinction between the canoni-
cal books, and the Gr additions, the reading of
which is, however, admitted for edification (cf
Westcott, op. cit., 185-36, 168, 180, 182-83). Where
slight divergencies occur (e.g. Est is omitted by
Melito and placed by Athanasius among the Apoc;
Origen and Athanasius add Bar to Jer), these are
readily explained by doubts as to canonicity or by
imperfect knowledge. On the other hand, famil-
iarity with the LXX in writers ignorant of Heb could
not but tend to break down the limits of the Jewish
canon, and to lend a Scriptural sanction to the ad-
ditions to that canon. This was aided in the West
by the fact that the Old Lat VSS (2d cent.) based
on the LXX, included these additions (the Syr Pesh
followed the Heb). In many quarters, therefore,
the distinction is found broken down, and ecclesi-
astical writers (Clement, Barnabas, Irenaeus, Ter-
tullian, Clem. Alex., Basil, etc) quote freely from
books like Wisd, Sir, Bar, Tob, 2 Esd, as from
parts of the OT.

An important landmark is reached in the Vulg
or Lat version of Jerome. Jerome, on grounds

explained in his Preface, recognized


8. The only the Heb Scriptures as canonical;
Vulgate, under pressure he executed later a
etc (OT) hasty tr of Tob and Jud. Feeling ran


strong, however, in favor of the other
books, and ere long these were added to Jerome’s
version from the Old Lat (see VuneaTe). It is this
enlarged Vulg which received official recognition,
under anathema, at the Council of Trent (1543),
and, with revision, from Clement VIII (1592),
though, earlier, leading Romish scholars (Ximenes,
Erasmus, Cajetan) had made plain the true state
of the facts. The Gr church vacillated in its
decisions, sometimes approving the limited, some-
times the extended, canon (cf Westcott, op. cit.,
217-29). The churches of the Reformation (Luth-
eran, Swiss), as was to be expected, went back to the
Heb canon, giving only a qualified sanction to the
reading and ecclesiastical use of the Apoc. The
early English VSS (Tyndale, Coverdale, etc) in-
clude, but separate, the apocryphal books (see
Eneuiso Versions). The Anglican Articles ex-
press the gencral estimate of these books: “And the


other books (as Jerome saith) the Church doth read
for example of life and instruction of manners; yet
doth it not apply them to establish any doctrine”
(Art. VIIDT). Modern Protestant Bibles usually ex-
clude the Apoc altogether.

From this survey of the course of opinion on the
compass of the OT, we come to the NT. This

admits of being more briefly treated.
4. The NT It has been seen that a Christian NT

did not, in the strict sense, arise till
after the middle of the 2d century. Gospels and
Epistles had long existed, collections had begun
to be made, the Gospels, at least, were weekly read
in the assemblies of the Christians (Justin, 1 A pol.,
67), before the attempt was made to bring together,
and take formal account of, all the books which
enjoyed apostolic authority (see Canon or NT).
The needs of the church, however, and very specially
controversy with gnostic opponents, made it nec-
essary that this work should be done; collections
also had to be formed for purposes of tr into other
tongues. Genuine gospels had to be distinguished
from spurious; apostolic writings from those of
later date, or falsely bearing apostolic names.
When this task was undertaken, a distinction soon
revealed itself between two classes of books, setting
aside those recognized on all hands as spurious:
(1) books universally acknowledged—those named
afterward by Eusebius the homologotimena; and (2)
books only partially acknowledged,. or on which
some doubt rested—the Ensebian antilegémena (HE,
iii.25). It is on this distinction that differences as
to the precise extent of the NT turned.

(1) “Acknowledged books.”’—The “acknowledged”
books present little difficulty. They are enumer-
ated by Eusebius, whose statements are confirmed
by early lists (e.g. that of Muratori, cir 170 AD),
quotations, VSS and patristic use. At the head
stand the Four Gospels and the Acts, then come
the 13 epistles of Paul, then 1 Pet and 1 Jn.
These, Westcott says, toward the close of the
2d cent., “were universally received in every
church, without doubt or limitation, as part of the
written rule of Christian faith, equal in authority
with the Old Scriptures, and ratified (as it seemed)
by a tradition reaching back to the date of their
composition” (op. cit., 133). With them may
almost be placed Revelation (as by Eusebius) and
He, the doubts regarding the latter relating more to
Pauline authority than to genuineness (e.g. Origen).
' (2) “Disputed books.”—The “disputed” books
were the epistles of Jas, Jude, 2 and 3 Jn and 2 Pet.
These, however, do not all stand in the same rank
as regards authentication. A chief difficulty is the
silence of the western Fathers regarding Jas, 2 Pet
and 3 Jn. On the other hand, Jas is known to
Origen and is included in the Syr Pesh; the Mura-
torian Fragment attests Jude and 2 Jn as “held in
the Catholic church” (Jude also in Tertullian, Clem.
Alex., Origen); none of the books are treated as
spurious. The weakest in attestation is 2 Pet,
which is not distinctly traceable before the 3d cent.
(See Canon or NT; arts.s.v.) It is to be added
that, in a few instances, as in the case of the OT
Apoc, early Fathers cite as Scripture books not
generally accepted as canonical (e.g. Barnabas,
Hermas, Apoc of Pet).

The complete acceptance of all the books in our
present NT canon may be dated from the Councils
of Laodicea (cir 363 AD) and of Carthage (397 AD)
confirming the lists of Cyril of Jerus, Jerome and
Augustine.

IV. Literary Origin and Growth—Canonicity.—
Thus far the books of the OT and NT have been
taken simply as given, and no attempt has been
made to inquire how or when they were written or
compiled, or how they came to acquire the dignity


463


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bible, The


‘and authority implied in their reception into a
sacred canon. The field here entered is one bristling
with controversy, and it is necessary to choose one’s
steps with caution to find a safe way through it.
Details in the survey are left, as before, to the
special articles.

Attention here is naturally directed, first, to the
OT. This, it is obvious, and is on all sides admitted,

has a long literary history prior to its
1. The OT final settlement in a canon. As to the

course of that history traditional and
modern critical views very widely differ. It may
possibly turn out that the truth lies somewhere mid-
way between them.

(1) OT indications.—If the indications furnished
by the OT itself be accepted, the results are some-
thing like the following:

(a) Patriarchal age: No mention is made of
writing in the patriarchal age, though it-is now
known that a high literary culture then prevailed
in Babylonia, Egypt and Palestine, and it is not
improbable, indeed seems likely, that records in
some form came down from that age, and are, in
parts, incorporated in the early history of the Bible.

(6) Mosaic age: In Mosaic times writing was in
use, and Moses himself was trained in the learning
of the Egyptians (Ex 2 10; Acts 7 22). In no
place is the composition of the whole Pent (as
traditionally believed) ascribed to Moses, but no
inconsiderable amount of written matter is directly
attributed to him, creating the presumption that
there was more, even when the fact is not stated.
Moses wrote ‘‘all the words of Jeh” in the “book of
the covenant” (Ex 21-23; 24 4.7). He wrote “the
words of this law” of Dt at Moab, ‘in a book, until
they were finished” (Dt 31 9.24.26). This was
given to the priests to be put by the side of the ark
for preservation (vs 25.26). Other notices occur of
the writing of Moses (Ex 17 14; Nu 33 2; Dt 31
19.22; cf Nu 11 26). Thesongof Miriam, andthe
snatches of song in Nu 21, the first (perhaps all)
quoted from the “book of the Wars of Jeh” (Nu 21
14 ff), plainly belong to Mosaic times. In this con-
nection it should be noticed that the discourses and
law of Dt imply the history and legislation of the
critical JE histories (see below). The priestly laws
(Lev, Nu) bear so entirely the stamp of the wilderness
that they can hardly have originated anywhere else,
and were probably then, or soon after, written
down. Joshua, too, is presumed to be familiar with
writing (Josh 8 380-35; cf Dt 27 8), and is stated
to have written his farewell address ‘‘in the book
of the law of God” (Josh 24 26; cf 1 7.8). These
statements already imply the beginning of a sacred
literature.

(c) The Judges: The song of Deborah (Jgs 5)
is an indubitably authentic monument of the age
of the Judges, and the older parts of Jgs, at least,
must have been nearly contemporary with the
events which they record. A knowledge of writing
among the common people seems implied in Jgs 8
14 (ARVm). Samuel, like Joshua, wrote “in a
book” (1 S 10 25), and laid it up, evidently among
other writings, “before Jehovah.”

(d) The age of David and Solomon was one of
high development in poetical and historical com-
position: witness the elegies of David (2 S 1 17 ff;
3 33.34), and the finely-finished narrative of David's
reign (2 § 9-20), the so-called “Jerusalem-Source,”
admitted to date “from a period very litle later
than that of the events related” (Driver, LOT,
183). There were court scribes and chroniclers. _

David and the Monarchy: David, as befits his
piety: and poetical and musical gifts (cf on this
POT, 440 ff), is credited with laying the foundations
of asacred psalmody (2 S 28 1 ff; see Psaums), and
a whole collection of psalms (1-72, with exclusion


of the distinct collection, 42-50), once forming a
separate book (cf Ps 72 20), are, with others,
ascribed to him by their titles (Pss 1, 2, 10 are
untitled). It is hardly credible that a tradition
like this can be wholly wrong, and a Davidic basis
of the Psalter may safely be assumed. Numerous
psalms, by their mention of the “king” (as Pss 2,
18, 20, 21, 28, 33, 45, 61, 63, 72, 101, 110), are
naturally referred to the period of the monarchy
(some, as Ps 18 certainly, Davidic). Other groups
of psalms are referred to the temple guilds (Sons
of Korah, Asaph).

(e) Wisdom literature: Solomon is renowned as
founder of the Wisdom literature and the author
of Proverbs (tf K 4 32; Prov 1 1; 10 1; Eccl 12
9; Eccl itself appears to be late), and of the Song
(Cant 1 1). The “men of Hezekiah” are said to
have copied out a collection of his proverbs (Prov
25 1; see PRoverss). Here also may be placed the
Book of Job. Hezekiah’s reign appears to have
been one of literary activity: to it, probably, are to
be referred certain of the Pss (e.g. Pss 46, 48; cf
Perowne, Delitzsch). In history, during the mon-
archy, the prophets would seem to have acted as
the “sacred historiographers”' of the nation. From
their memoirs of the successive reigns, as the later
books testify (1 Ch 29 29; 2 Ch 9 29; 12 15, etc)
are compiled most of the narratives in our canonical
writings (hence the name “former prophets’). The
latest date in 2 K is 562 BC, and the body of the
book is probably earlier.

(f) Prophecy: With the rise of written prophecy
a new form of literature enters, called forth by, and
vividly mirroring, the religious and political condi-
tions of the closing periods of the monarchy in
Israel and Judah (see Propuecy). On the older
view, Obadiah and Joel stood at the head of the
series in the pre-Assyr period (9th cent.), and this
seems the preferable view still. On the newer
view, these prophets are late, and written prophecy
begins in the Assyr period with Amos (Jeroboam
II, cir 750 BC) and Hosea (cir 745-735). When
the latter prophet wrote, Samaria was tottering
to its fall (721 BC). A little later, in Judah, come
Isaiah (cir 740-690) and Micah (cir 720-708).
Isaiah, in the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and
Hezekiah, is the greatest of the prophets in the
Assyr age, and his ministry reaches its climax in
the deliverance of Jerus from Sennacherib (2 K 18,
19; Isa 36, 37). It is a question whether some
oracles of an Isaianic school are not mingled with
the prophet’s own writings, and most scholars
now regard the 2d part of the book (chs 40-66)
as exilian or (in part) post-exilian in date. The
standpoint of much in these chs is certainly in the
Exile; whether the composition of the whole can
be placed there is extremely doubtful (see Isarau).
Nahum, who prophesies against Nineveh, belongs to
the very close of this period (cir 660). ,

The prophets Zephanialt (under Josiah, cir 630
BC) and Habakkuk (cir 606) may be regarded as
forming the transition to the next—-the Chaldaean—
period. The Chaldaeans (unnamed in Zeph) are
advancing but are not yet come (Hab 1 6). The
great prophetic figure here, however, is Jeremiah,
whose sorrowful ministry, beginning in the 13th
year of Josiah (626 BC), extended through the suc-
ceeding reigns till after the fall of Jerus (586 BC).
The prophet elected to remain with the remnant
in the land, and shortly after, troubles having arisen,
was forcibly carried into Egypt (Jer 43). Here
also he prophesied (chs 43, 44). From the reign
of Jehoiakim, Jeremiah consistently declared the
success of the Chaldaean arms, and foretold the 70
years’ captivity (26 12-14). Baruch acted as his
secretary in writing out and editing his prophecies
(chs 36, 45).


Bible, The


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


464


(g) Josiah’s reformation: A highly important
event in this period was Josiah’s reformation in his
18th year (621 BC), and the discovery, during
repairs of the temple, of “the book of the law,”
called also ‘‘the book of the covenant” and “the
law of Moses” (2 K 22 8; 23 2.24.25). The find-
ing of this book, identified by most authorities with
the Book of Dt, produced an extraordinary sensa-
tion. Onno side was there the least question that
it was a genuine ancient work. Jeremiah, strangely,
makes no allusion to this discovery, but his proph-
re are deeply saturated with the ideas and style
of Dt.

(kA) Exilian and post-exilian: The bulk of Isa
40-66 belongs, at least in spirit, to the Exile, but
the one prophet of the Exile known to us by name
is the priestly Ezekiel. Carried captive under
Jehoiachin (597 BC), Ezekiel labored among his
fellow-exiles for at least 22 years (Ezk 1 2; 29 17).
A man of the strongest moral courage, his symbolic
visions on the banks of the Chebar alternated with
the most direct expostnlation, exhortation, warn-
ing and promise. In the description of an ideal
temple and its worship with whieh his book closes
(chs 40-48), critics think they discern the suggestion
of the Levitical code.

(t) Daniel: After Ezekiel the voice of prophecy
is silent till it revives in Daniel, in Babylon, under
Nebuchadnezzar and his successors. Deported
in 605 BC, Daniel rose to power, and “continued”
until the lst year of Cyrus (536 BC; Dnl 1 21).
Criticism will have it that his prophecies are a
product of the Maccabean age, but powerful con-
siderations on the other side are ignored (see
DaniEL). Jonah may have been written about this
time, though the prophet’s mission itself was pre-
Assyr (9tb cent.). The rebuilding of the temple
after the return, under Zerubbabel, furnished the
occasion for the prophecies of Haggai and Zechari-
ah (520 BC). Scholars are disposed to regard only
Zec 1-8 as belonging to this period—the remainder
being placed earlier or later. Malachi, nearly a
cent. after (cir 430), brings up the rear of prophecy,
rebuking unfaithfulness, and predicting the advent
of the “messenger of the covenant” (Mal 3 1.2).
To this period, or later, belong, besides post-exilian
psalms (e.g. Pss 124, 126), the books of Ezr, Neh,
Ch, Est and apparently Eccl.

(7) A preéxilic Bible: If, in this rapid sketch,
the facts are correctly represented, it will be ap-
parent that, in opposition to prevalent views, a
large body of sacred lit. existed (laws, histories,
psalms, wisdom-books, prophecies), and was recog-
nized long before the Exile. God’s ancient people
had ‘“Seriptures’”—had a Bible—if not yet in col-
lected form. This is strikingly borne out by the
numerous OT passages referring to what appears
to be a code of sacred writings in the hands of the
pious in Israel. Such are the references to, and
praises of, the “law” and “word” of God in many
of the Pss (e.g. 1, 19, 119, 12 6; 17 4; 18 21.22),
with the references to God’s known “words,”
“ways,” “commandments,” ‘“‘statutes,’’ in other
books of the OT (Job 8 8; Hos 8 12; Dnl 9 2).
In brief, Scriptures, which must have contained
records of God’s dealings with His people, a knowl-
edge of which is constantly presupposed, “laws” of
God for the regulation of the heart and conduct,
“statutes,” “ordinances,” “words” of God, are a
postulate of a great part of the OT.

(2) Critical views-—-The account of the origin
and growth of the OT above presented is in marked
contrast with that given in the textbooks of the
newer critical schools. The main features of these
critical views are sketched in the art. Criticism
(q.v.); here a brief indieation will suffice. Gener-
ally, the books of the OT are brought down to late


dates; are regarded as highly composite; the earlier
books, from their distance from the events recorded,
are deprived of historical worth. . Neither histories
nor laws in the Pent belong to the Mosaic age: Josh
is a “romance”; Jgs may embody ancient frag-
ments, but in bulk is unhistorieal. The earliest
fragments of Israelitish literature are lyric pieces
like those preserved in Gen 4 23.24; 9 25-27; Nu
21; the Song of Deborah (Jgs 5) is probably genu-
ine. Historical writing begins about the age of
David or soon thereafter. The folklore of the He-
brews and traditions of the Mosaic age began to be
reduced to writing about the 9th cent. BC.

(a) The Pentateuch: Our present Pent (en-
larged to a “Hexateuch,” including Josh) eonsists
of 4 main strands (themselves composite), the oldest
of which (called J, from its use of the name Jehovah)
goes back to about 850 BC. This was Judaean.
A parallel history book (ealled E, from its use of
the name Elohim, God) was produced in the North-
ern kingdom about a eentury later (c 750). Later
still these two were united (JE). These histories,
“prophetic” in spirit, were originally attributed to
individual authors, distinguished by minute eri-
teria of style: the more recent fashion is to regard
them as the work of “schools.’’ Hitherto the only
laws known were those of the (post-Mosaie) Book of
the Covenant (Ex 20-23). Later, in Josiah’s
reign, the desire for centralization of worship led
to the composition of the Book of Dt. This,
secreted in the temple, was found by Hilkiah (2 K
22), and brought about the reformation of Josiah
formerly mentioned. Dt (D), thus produeed, is
the third strand in the Pentateuchal compilation.
With the destruction of the city and temple, under
the impulse of Ezekiel, began a new period of law-
construction, now priestly in spirit. Old laws and
usages were codified; new laws were invented; the
history of institutions was reeast; finally, the ex-
tensive eomplex of Levitical legislation was brought
into being, clothed with a wilderness dress, and
ascribed to Moses. This elaborate Priestly Code
(PC), with its accompanying history, was brought
from Babylon by Ezra, and, united with the already
existing JE and D, was given forth by him to the
restored community at Jerus (444 BC; Neh 8) as
“the law of Moses.” Their acceptance of it was
the inauguration of ‘Judaism.”

(0) Histories: In its theory of the Pent the newer
criticism lays down the determinative positions
for its eriticism of all the remaining books of the OT.
The historical books show but a continuation of
the processes of literary construction exemplified
in the books ascribed to Moses. The Deuteronomic
element, e.g. in Josh, Jgs, 1, 28, 1, 2 K, proves
them, in these parts, to be later than Josiah, and
historieally untrustworthy. The Levitical element
in 1, 2 Ch demonstrates its pictures of David and
his suceessors to be distorted and false. The same
canon applies to the prophets. Joel, e.g. must be
post-exilian, because it presupposes the priestly law.
The patriarchal and Mosaic histories being sub-
verted, it is not permitted to assume any high
religious ideas in early Israel. David, therefore,
could not have written the Pss. Most, if not
practically all, of these are post-exilian.

(c) Psalmsand prophets: Monotheism came in—
at least first obtained recognition—through Amos
and Hosea. The prophets could not have the fore-
sight and far-reaching hopes seen in their writings:
these passages, therefore, must be removed. Gen-
erally the tendency is to put dates as low as possi-
ble and very many books, regarded before as pre-
exilian, are carried down in whole or part, to exilian,
post-exilian, and even late Gr times (PC, Psalter,
Job, Prov, Cant, Eccl, 2 Isa, Joel, Lam). Dnl is
Maceabean and unhistorieal (cir 168-167 BC).


465


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


It is not proposed here to discuss this theory,
which is not accepted in the present art., and is con-
aidered elsewhere (see Criticism; PENTATEUCH).
The few points calling for remark relate to canonical
acceptance.

(8) Formation of the canon.—The general lines of

the completed Jewish canon have already been
sketched, and some light has now been thrown on
the process by which the several books obtained a
sacred authority. As to the actual stages in the
formation of the canon opinions again widely diverge
(see CANON OF THE OT),
_ (a) Critical theory: On the theory at present
in favor, no collections of sacred books were made
prior to the return from Babylon. The only books
that had authority before the Exile were, perhaps,
the old Book of the Covenant, and, from Josiah’s
time, the Book of Dt. Both, after the return, were,
on this theory, embodied, with the JE histories, and
the PC, in Ezra’s completed Book of the Law (with
Josh [?}), in which, accordingly, the foundation of a
canon was laid. ‘The fivefold division of the law
was later. Subsequently, answering to the 2d di-
vision of the Jewish canon, a collection was made
of the prophetic writings. As this includes books
which, on the critical view, go down to Gr times
(Jon; Zec 9-14), its completion cannot be earlier
than well down in the 3d cent. BC. Latest of all
came the collection of the ‘“Hagiographa’”’—a division
of the canon, on the theory, kept open to receive
additions certainly till the 2d cent., some think after.
Into it were received such late writings as Eccl,
Maccabean Pss, Dnl.
(Eccl, Est) remained subjects of dispute.

(b) More positive view: It will appear from the
foregoing that this theory is not here accepted with-
out considerable modification. If the question
be asked, What constituted a right to a place in the
canon? the answer can hardly be other than that
suggested by Jos in the passage formerly quoted
-—a real] or supposed inspiration in the author of the
book. Books were received if men had the pro-
phetic spirit (in higher or lower degree: that, e.g.
of wisdom); they ceased to be received when the
succession of prophets was thought to fail (after
Mal). In any case the writings of truly inspired
men (Moses, the prophets, psalmists) were accepted
as of authority. It was sought, however, to be
shown above, that such books, many of them,
already existed from Moses down, long before
the Exile (the law, collections of psalms, of prov-
erbs, written prophecies: to what end did the
prophets write, if they did not mean their prophe-
cies to be circulated and preserved?); and such
writings, to the godly who knew and used them,
had the full value of Scripture. A canon began
with the first laying up of the “book of the law”
before Jeh (Dt 31 25.26; Josh 24 26). The age
of Ezra and Nehemiah, therefore, is not that of the
beginning, but, as Jewish tradition rightly held
(Jos; 2 Mace 2 13; Talm), rather that of the
completion, systematic delimitation, acknowledg-
ment and formal close of the canon. The divisions
of “law, prophets, and holy writings’ would thus
have their place from the beginning, and be nearly
contemporaneous. The Samaritans accepted only
the 5 books of the law, with apparently Josh (see
SAMARITAN PENTATEUCH). ;

(c) Close of the canon: There is no need for
dogmatism as to an absolute date for the close of
the canon. If inspired voices continued to be
heard, their utterances were entitled to recognition.
Books duly authenticated might be added, but the
non-inclusion of such as a book as Sir (Ecclus: in
Heb, cir 200 BC) shows that the limits of the canon
were jealously guarded, and the onus of proof rests
on those who affirm that there were such books.


Even then one or two books


Bible, The


Calvin, e.g. held that there were Maccabean Pss.
Many modern scholars do the same, but it is doubt-
ful if they are right. Eccl is thought on linguistic
grounds to be late, but it and other books need not
be so late as critics make them. Dnl is confidently
declared to be Maccabean, but there are weighty
reasons for maintaining 'a Pers date (see Danizz).
As formerly noticed, the threefold division into “the
law, the prophets, and the rest [td loipd, a definite
number] of the books” is already attested in the
Prologue to Sir.

Critical controversy, long occupied with the OT,

has again keenly attached itself to the NT, with

similar disturbing results (see Crrri-
2. The NT cism). Extremer opinions may be

here neglected, and account be taken
only of those that can claim reasonable support.
The NT writings are conveniently grouped into
the historical books (Gospels and Acts); Epistles
(Pauline and other); and a Prophetic book (Rev).
In order of writing, the Epistles, generally, are
earlier than the Gospels, but in order of subject,
the Gospels naturally claim attention first.

(1) The Gospels and Acts.—The main facts
about the origin of the Gospels can perhaps be dis-
tinguished from the complicated literary theories
which scholars are still discussing (see GosPELs).
The first three Gospels, known as the Synoptics,
evidently embody a common tradition, and draw
from common sources. The Fourth Gospel—that
of John—presents problems by itself.

(a) The Synoptics: The former—the Synoptic
Gospels (Mt, Mk, Lk)—fall in date well within the
apostolic age, and are, in the 2d cent., uniformly
connected with the authors whose names they bear.
Mark is spoken of as “the interpreter of Peter’
(Papias, in H£ iii.89); Luke is the well-known
companion of Paul. A difficulty arises about Mat-
thew, whose Gospel is stated to have been written
in Aram. (Papias, ut supra, etc); while the gospel
bearing his name isin Gr. The Gr gospel seems at
least to have been sufficiently identified with the
apostle to admit of the early church always treat-
ing it as his.

The older theory of origin assumed an oral basis
for all 3 Gospels. The tendency in recent criticism
is to distinguish two main sources: (1) Mk, the
earliest gospel, a record of the preaching of Peter;
(2) a collection of the sayings and discourses of
Jesus, attributed to Matthew (the Eusebian Logia,
now called Q); with (8) a source used by Luke in the
sections peculiar to himself—the result of his own
investigations (Lk 1 1-4). Mt and Lk are sup-
posed to be based on Mk and the Logia (Q); in
Luke’s case with the addition of his special material.
Oral tradition furnished what remains. A simpler
theory may be to substitute for (1) a Petrine
tradition already firmly fixed while yet the apostles
were working together in Jerus. Peter, as fore-
most spokesman, would naturally stamp bis own
type upon the oral narratives of Christ’s sayings
and doings (the Mk type), while Matthew’s stories,
in part written, would be the chief source for the
longer discourses. The instruction imparted by
the apostles and those taught by them would’
every where be made the basis of careful catechetical
teaching, and records of all this, more or_ less
fragmentary, would be early in circulation (Lk 1
1-4). This would explain the Petrine type of
narrative, and the seeming dependence of Mt and
Lk, without the necessity of supposing a direct use
of Mk. So important a gospel could hardly be in-
cluded in the ‘‘attempts” of Lk 1 1.

(b) The Fourth Gospel: The Fourth Gospel
(Jn), the genuineness of which is assumed (sce
Joun, Gospet oF), differs entirely in character and
style. It is less a narrative than a didactic work,


Bible, The


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


466


written to convince its readers that Jesus is “‘the
Son of God” (Jn 20 31). The gospel may be pre-
sumed to have been composed at Ephesus, in the
last years of the apostle’s residence there. With
this its character corresponds. The other gospels
had long been known; John does not therefore
traverse the ground already covered by them. He
confines himself chiefly to matters drawn from his
personal recollections: the Judaean ministry, the
visits of Christ to Jerus, His last private discourses
to His disciples. John had so often retold, and so
long brooded over, the thoughts and words of Jesus,
that they had become, in a manner, part of his own
thought, and, in reproducing them, he necessarily
did so with a subjective tinge, and in a partially
paraphrastic and interpretative manner. Yet it is
truly the words, thoughts and deeds of his beloved
Lord that he narrates. His gospel is the needful
complement to the others—the “spiritual” gospel.

(c) The Acts: The Acts narrates the origin and
early fortunes of the church, with, as its special
motive (cf 1 8), the extension of the gospel to the
Gentiles through the labors of Paul. Its author is
Luke, Paul’s companion, whose gospel it continues
(11). Certain sections—the so-called ‘“‘we-sections”’
(16 10-17; 20 5-15; 21 1-18; 27 1—28 16)—are
transcribed directly from Luke’s journal of Paul’s
travels. The book closes abruptly with Paul’s 2
years’ imprisonment at Rome (28 30.31; 60-61
AD), and not a hint is given of the issue of the
imprisonment—trial, liberation or death. Does
this mean that a 3d “treatise” was contemplated?
Or that the book was written while the imprison-
ment still continued? (thus now Harnack). If the
latter, the Third Gospel must be very early.

(2) The Epistles—(a) Pauline: Doubt never
rested in the early church on the 13 epistles of
Paul. Following upon the rejection by the ‘“Tii-
bingen” school of all the epistles but 4 (Rom 1,
2 Cor, Gal), the tide of opinion has again turned
strongly in favor of their genuineness. An ex-
ception is the Pastoral epistles (1, 2 Tim, Tit),
still questioned by some on insufficient grounds
(see Pastoran Epistins). The epistles, called
forth by actual needs of the churches, are a living
outpouring of the thoughts and feelings of the mind
and heart of the apostle in relation to his converts.
Most are letters to churches he himself had founded
(1, 2 Cor, Gal, Eph[?], Phil, 1, 2 Thess): two are
to churches he had not himself visited, but with
which he stood in affectionate relations (Rom, Col);
one is purely personal (Philem); three are addressed
to individuals, but with official responsibilities (1,
2 Tim, Tit).. The larger number were written
during his missionary labors, and reflect, his personal
situation, anxieties and companionships at the places
of their composition; four are epistles of the lst Rom
imprisonment (Eph, Phil, Col, Philem): 2 Tim is a
voice from the dungeon, in his 2d imprisonment,
shortly before his martyrdom. Doctrine, counsel,
rebuke, admonition, tender solicitude, ethical in-
struction, prayer, thanksgiving, blend in living fusion
in their contents. So marvelous a collection of
letters, on such magnificent themes, was never before
given to the world.

The earliest epistles, in point of date, are generally
held to be those to the Thessalonians, written from
Corinth (52, 53 AD). The church, newly-founded,
had passed through much affliction (1 Thess 1 6;
2 14; 3 3.4, etc), and Paul writes to comfort and
exhort it. His words about the Second Coming
(4 13 ff) led to mistaken expectations and some
disorders. These his 2d epistle was written to
correct (2 Thess 2 1-3; 3 6, etc).

Corinth itself received the next epistles—the
Ist called forth by reports received at Ephesus of
grave divisions and irregularities (1 Cor 1 11;


3 8; 11 18 ff, etc), joined with pride of knowledge,
doctrinal heresy (15 12 ff), and at least one case
of gross immorality (ch 6) in the church; the 2d,
written at Philippi, expressing joy at the repentance
of the offender, and removing the severe sentence
that had been passed upon him (2 Cor 2 1-10;
cf 1 Cor 6 3.4), likewise vindicating Paul’s own
apostleship (chs 10-13). The date of both is 57
AD. 1 Cor contains the beautiful hymn on love
(ch 18), and the noble chapter on resurrection
ch 165). ;
In the following year (58 BC) Paul penned from
Corinth the Epistle to the Romans—the greatest of
his doctrinal epistles. In it he develops his great
theme of the impossibility of justification before
God through works of Jaw (chs 1-8), and of the
Divine provision for human salvation in a “right-
eousness of God” in Christ Jesus, received through
faith. He exhibits first the objective side of this
redemption in the deliverance from condemnation
effected through Christ’s reconciling death (chs
3-5); then the subjective side, in the new life im-
parted by the spirit, giving deliverance from the
power of sin (chs 6-8). A discussion follows of the
Divine sovereignty in God’s dealings with Israel,
and of the end of these dealings (chs 9-11), and
the epistle concludes with practical exhortations,
counsels to forbearance and greetings (chs 12-16).
Closely connected with the Epistle to the Romans
is that to the Galatians, in which the same truths
are handled, but now with a polemical intent in
expostulation and reproach. The Galatian churches


‘had apostatized from the gospel of faith to Jewish


legalism, and the apostle, sorely grieved, writes
this powerful letter to rebuke their faithlessness,
and recall them to their allegiance to the truth. It
is reasonable to suppose that the 2 epistles are
nearly related in place and time. The question is
complicated, however, by the dispute which has
arisen as to whether the churches intended are those
of Northern Galatia (the older view; cf Conybeare
and Howson, Lightfoot) or those of Southern
Galatia (Sir Wm. Ramsay), i.e. the churches of
Derbe, Lystra, Iconium and Antioch, in Paul’s
time embraced in the Rom province of Galatia
(see Ganatia; GatatTians). If the latter view is
adopted, date and place are uncertain; if the former,
the epistle may have been written from Ephesus
(cir 57 AD).

The 4 epistles of the imprisonment all fall within
the years 60, 61 AD. That to the Philippians,
warmly praising the church, and exhorting to unity,
possibly the latest of the group, was sent by the
hand of Epaphroditus, who had come to Rome with
a present from the Philippian church, and had there
been overtaken by a serious illness (Phil 2 25-30;
4 15-18). Theremaining 3 epistles (Eph, Col, and
Philem) were written at one time, and were carried
to their destinations by Epaphras. Eph and Col
are twin epistles, similar in thought and style, ex-
tolling the preéminence of Christ, but it is doubtful
whether the former was not really a “circular”
epistle, or even, perhaps, the lost Epistle to the
Laodiceans (Col 4 16; see Epistte to THE Laopt-
CEANS). The Colossian epistle has in view an early
form of gnostic heresy (cf Lightfoot, Gal). Philem
is a personal letter to a friend of the apostle’s at
Colossae, whose runaway slave, Onesimus, now 4
Christian, is being sent back to him with warm
commendations. See Captivity Erisries.

Latest from Paul’s pen are the Pastoral Epistles
(1, 2 Tim, Tit), implying his liberation from his
1st imprisonment, and a new period of missionary
labor in Ephesus, Macedonia and Crete (see Pas-
ToRAL Epistims). Timothy was left at Ephesus
ad Tim 1 3), Titus at Crete (Tit 1 5), for the
regulation and superintendence of the churches.


467


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bible, The


The epistles, the altered style of which shows the
deep impress of advancing years and changed con-
ditions, contain admonitions to pastoral duty, with
warnings as to perils that had arisen or would arise.
1 Tim and Tit were written while the apostle
was still at liberty (63 AD); 2 Tim is from his
Rom prison, when his case had been partly heard,
and the end was impending (2 Tim 4 6.16.17).

_ (0) Epistle to the Hebrews: These are the Pau-
line Epistles proper. The Epistle to the Hebrews,
though ascribed to Paul in the title of the AV, is
not really his. It is an early writing (probably
before the destruction of Jerus, 70 AD) of some
friend of the apostle’s (in Italy, cf 13 23.24), de-
signed, by a reasoned exhibition of the superiority
of Jesus to Moses and the Levitical priesthood, and
of the fulfilment of OT types and institutions in
His person and sacrifice, to remove the difficulties
of Jewish Christians, who clung with natural affec-
tion to their temple and divinely appointed ritual.
It was mcluded by Eusebius, with others in the
East (not, however, by Origen), among the epistles
of Paul: in the West the Pauline authorship was
not admitted. Many, nevertheless, with Origen,
upheld a connection with Paul (‘‘the thoughts are
Paul’s”). Ideas and style suggest an Alexandrian
training: hence Luther’s conjecture of Apollos as the
writer. There can be no certainty on the subject.
The value of the Epistle is unimpaired, whoever
was the author.

(c) Catholic Epistles: Of the 7 so-called ‘‘Catho-
lic” Epistles, Jas and Jude are by “‘brethren”’ of the
Lord (James, ‘‘the Lord’s brother,” was head of
the church at Jerus, Acts 16 13; 21 18; Gal 1 19,
etc); Peter and John, to whom the others were
ascribed, were apostles. Jas and 1 Pet are addressed
to the Jews of the Dispersion (1 Pet 1 1; Jas 1 1).
The doubts respecting certain of these writings
have already been mentioned. The early date and
acceptance of Jas is attested by numerous allusions
(Clem. of Rome, Barnabas, Hermas, Did). Many
regard it as the earliest of the epistles—before
Paul’s. Its tone is throughout practical. The
seeming conflict with Paul on faith and works,
which led Luther to speak slightingly of it, is only
verbal. Panl, too, held that a dead faith avails
nothing (1 Cor 18 2; Gal 5 6). 1 Jn, like1 Pet,
was undisputed (if the Fourth Gospel is genuine,
1 Jn is), and, on internal grounds, the_shorter
epistles (2, 3 Jn) need not be doubted (see EprsTLEs
or JoHN). Jude, rugged in style, with allusions
to Jewish Apocalypses (vs 9.14), is well attested,
and 2 Pet seems to found on it. The last-named
epistle must rely for acceptance on its own claim
(2 Pet 1 1.18), and on internal evidence of sincerity.
Tt is to be observed that, though late in being noticed,
it never appears to have been treated as spurious.
The style certainly differs from 1 Pet; this may be
due to the use of an amanuensis. If accepted, it
must be placed late in Peter’s life (before 65 AD).
1 Pet and Jude, in that case, must be earlier (see
CaTHoLic Episties). '

(3) Prophecy.—The Book of Revelation: The
one prophetic book of the NT—the apocalyptic
counterpart of Dnl in the OT—is the Book of Rev.
The external evidence for the Johannine authorship
is strong (see APOCALYPSE). Tradition and in-
ternal evidence ascribe it to the reign of Domitian
(cir 95 AD). Its contents were given in vision in
the isle of Patmos (Rev 19). The theory which
connects it with the reign of Nero through the sup-
posed fitness of this name to express the mystic
no, 666 is entirely precarious (cf Salmon, Jniro to
NT, 245-54). The main intent is to exhibit in
symbolic form the approaching conflicts of Christ
and His church with anti-Christian powers—with
secular world-power (Beast), with intellectual anti-


Christianism (False Prophet), with ecclesiastical
anti-Christianism (Woman)—these conflicts issuing
in victory and a period of triumph, preluding, after
a sharp, final struggle, the last scenes (resurrection,
judgment), and the eternal state. When the visions
are taken, not as poetic imaginings, but as true
apocalyptic unveilings, the change in style from
the gospel, which may be regarded as already
written, can readily be understood. These mighty
revelations in Patmos brought about, as by vol-
canic force, a tremendous upheaval in the seer’s
soul, breaking through all previous strata of thought
and fecling, and throwing everything into a new
perspective. On the resultant high keynote:
“Amen: Come, Lord Jesus” (Rev 22 20), the
NT closes.

(4) Canonicity —The principal steps by which the
books now enumerated were gradually formed into
a NT “Canon,” have been indicated in previous sec-
tions. The test of canonicity here, as in the OT,
is the presence of inspiration. Some would pre-
fer the word “apostolic,” which comes to the same
thing. All the writings above reckoned were held
to be the works of apostles or of apostolic men,
and on this ground were admitted into the list of
books having authority in the church. Barnabas
(cir 100-120 AD) already quotes Mt 20 16 with
the formula “it is written.”’ Paul quotes as “‘scrip-
ture” (1 Tim 6 18) a passage found only in Lk
(10 7). Paul’s Epistles are classed with “other
scriptures” in 2 Pet 3 16. Post-apostolic Fathers
draw a clear distinction between their own writings
and those of apostles like Paul and Peter (Poly-
carp, Ignatius, Barnabas). The Fathers of the
close of the 2d cent. treat the NT writings as in the
fullest degree inspired (cf Westcott, Intro to Study
of Gospels, Append. B). An important impulse
to the formation of a definite canon came from the
gnostic Marcion (cir 140 AD), who made a canon
for himself in 2 parts, ‘‘Gospel” and ‘‘Apostolicon,”
consisting of one gospel (a mutilated Lk) and 10
epistles of Paul (excluding Pastorals). A challenge
of this kind had to be taken up, and lists of NT
writings began to be made (Melito, Muratorian
Fragment, etc), with the results previously de-
scribed. By the commencement of the 4th cent.
unanimity had practically been attained as regards
even the Antilegomena. At the Council of Nicaea
(325 AD), Westcott says, ‘the Holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testaments were silently admitted
on all sides to have a final authority’? (Bible in
Church, 155). See Canon or NT.

V. Unity and Spiritual Purpose—Inspiration.—
Holy Scripture is not simply a collection of religious

books: still less does it consist of mere
1. Scrip- fragments of Jewish and Christian
ture a Unity literature. It belongs to the concep-

tion of Scripture that, though origi-
nating “by divers portions and in divers manners”
(He 1 1), it should yet, in its completeness, con-
stitute a unity, evincing, in the spirit and purpose
that bind its parts together, the Divine sonrce from
which its revelation comes. The Bible is the record
of God’s revelations of Himself to men in successive
ages and dispensations (Eph 1 8-10; 3 5-9;
Col 1 25.26), till the revelation culminates in the
advent and work of the Son, and the mission of the
Spirit. It is this aspect of the Bible which consti-
tutes its grand distinction from all collections of
sacred writings—the so-called ‘‘Bibles” of heathen
religions—in the world. These, as the slightest
inspection of them shows, have no unity. They
are accumulations of heterogeneous materials, pre-
senting, in their collocation, no order, progress, or
plan. The reason is, that they embody no historical
revelation working out a purpose in consecutive
stages from germinal beginnings to perfect close.


Bible, The
Biblical Theology


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


468


The Bible, by contrast, is a single book because it
embodies such a revelation, and exhibits such a
purpose. The unity of the book, made up of so
many parts, is the attestation of the reality of the
revelation it contains.

This feature of spiritual purpose in the Bible is
one of the most obvious things about it (ef POT,


30 ff). It gives to the Bible what is
2. The sometimes termed its ‘organic unity.”
Purpose The Bible has a beginning, middle and
of Grace end. The opening chs of Gen have


their counterpart in the ‘new heaven
and new earth” and paradise restored of the clos-
ing chapters of Rev (21, 22). Man’s sin is made
the starting-point for disclosures of God’s grace.
The patriarchal history, with its covenants and
promises, is continued in the story of the Exodus
and the events that follow, in fulfilment of these
promises. Dt recapitulates the lawgiving at Sinai.
Josh sees the people put in possession of the promised
land. Backsliding, rebellion, failure, do not defeat
God’s purpose, but are overruled to carry it on toa
surer completion. The monarchy is made the oe-
casion of new promises to the house of David (2 S
7). The prophets root themselves in the past, but,
at the very hour when the nation seems sinking in
ruin, hold out bright hopes of a greater future in
the extension of God’s kingdom to the Gentiles,
under Messiah’s rule. A critical writer, Kautzsch,
has justly said: ‘The abiding value of the OT lies
above all in this, that it guarantees to us with ab-
solute certainty the fact and the process of a Divine
plan and way of salvation, which found its conelusion
and fulfilment in the new covenant, in the person
and work of Jesus Christ” (Bleibende Bedeutung des
AT, 22, 24, 28-29, 30-31).

Fulfilment in Christ-——How truly all that was
imperfect, transitional, temporary, in the OT was
brought to realization and completion in the redemp-
tion and spiritual kingdom of Christ need not here
be dwelt upon. Christ is the prophet, priest and
king of the New Covenant. His perfeet. sacrifice,
“once for all,’’ supersedes and abolishes the typical
sacrifices of the old economy (He 9, 10). His
gift of the Spirit realizes what the prophets had
foretold of God’s law being written in men’s hearts
(Jer 31 31-34; 32 39.40; Ezk 11 19.20, ete). His
kingdom is established on moveless foundations, and
can have no end (Phil 2 9-11; He 12 28; Rev 5
18, ete). In tracing the lines of this redeeming pur-
pose of God, brought to light in Christ, we gain the
key which unloeks the inmost meaning of the whole
Bible. It is the revelation of a “gospel.”

“Inspiration” is a word round which many de-
bates have gathered. If, however, what has been

said is true of the Bible as the record
8. Inspira- of a progressive revelation, of its con-
tion tents as the discovery of the will of

God for man’s salvation, of the pro-
phetic and apostolic standing of its writers, of
the unity of spirit and purpose that pervades it,
it will be difficult to deny that a quite peculiar pres-
ence, operation, and guidance of the Spirit of God
are manifest in its production. The belief in
inspiration, it has been seen, is implied in the forma-
tion of these books into a sacred canon. The
full discussion of the subject belongs to a special
art. (see INSPIRATION).

Biblical claim —Here it need only be said that
the elaim for inspiration in the Bible is one made
in fullest measure by the Bible itself. It is not
denied by any that Jesus and His apostles regarded
the OT Scriptures as in the fullest sense inspired.
The appeal of Jesus was always to the Seriptures,
and the word of Scripture was final with Him.
“Have ye not read?” (Mt 19 4). “Ye do err, not
knowing the seriptures, nor the power of God”


(Mt 22 29). This because ‘God’ speaks in them
(Mt 19 4). Prophecies and psalms were fulfilled
in Him (Lk 18 31; 22 87; 24 27.44). Paul es-
teemed the Scriptures “the oracles of God” (Rom
3 2). They are ‘God-inspired” (2 Tim 3 16).
That NT prophets and apostles were not placed
on any lower level than those of the OT is mani-
fest from Paul’s explicit words regarding himself
and his fellow-apostles. Paul never faltered in his
claim to be ‘‘an apostle of Christ Jesus through the
will of God” (Eph 1 1, ete)—“‘separated unto the
gospel of God’? (Rom 1 1)—who had received his
message, not from man, but by “revelation’’ from
heaven (Gal 1 11.12). The ‘mystery of Christ’
had ‘now been revealed unto his holy apostles
and prophets in the Spirit,”’ in consequence of which
the church is declared to be “built upon the founda-
tion of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus
himself being the chief corner stone’ (Eph 2 20;
3 5).

Marks of inspiration.—It might be shown that
these claims made by NT writers for the OT and
for themselves are borne out by what the OT itself
teaches of prophetic inspiration, of wisdom as the
gift of God’s spirit, and of the light, holiness, saving
virtue and sanctifying power continually ascribed
to God’s “law,” ‘‘words,” ‘statutes,’ ‘“command-
ments,” “judgments” (see above). This is the
ultimate test of “inspiration’”—that to which Paul
likewise appeals—its power to “make wise unto
salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus”
(2 Tim 3 15)—its profitableness “for teaching,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction which is
in righteousness” (ver 16)—all to the end ‘‘that
the man of God may be complete, furnished com-
pletely unto every good work” (ver 17). Nothing
is here determined as to “inerrancy” in minor his-
torieal, geographical, chronological details, in
whieh some would wrongly put the essence of in-
spiration; but it seems implied that at least there
is no error which can interfere with or nullify the
utility of Scripture for the ends specified. Who
that brings Scripture to its own tests of inspiration,
will deny that, Judged as a whole, it fulfils them?

3. The claim of the Bible to a Divine origin is
justified by its historical influence. Regarded even

as lit., the Bible has an unexampled


4, Histor- place in history. Ten or fifteen MSS
ical Influ-§ are thought a goodly number for an
ence of the ancient classic; the MSS of whole or
Bible parts of the NT are reekoned by thou-

sands, the oldest going back to the
4th or 5th cent. Another test is tr. The books


of the NT had hardly begun to be put together before
we find tr? being made of them in Lat, Syr, Egyp,
later into Gothic and other barbarous tongues
(see Versions). In the Middle Ages, before the
invention of printing, tr® were made into the ver-
nacular of most of the countries of Europe. Today
there is not a language in the civilized world, hardly
a language among uncivilized tribes, wherever mis-
sions have gone, into which this word of God has
not been rendered. Thanks to the labors of Bible
Societies, the circulation of the Bible in the differ-
ent countries of the world in recent years outstrips
all previous records. No book has ever been so
minutely studied, has had so many books written
on it, has founded so vast a lit. of hymns, liturgies,
devotional writings, sermons, has been so keenly
assailed, has evoked such splendid defences, as the
Bible. Its spiritual influence cannot be estimated.
To tell all the Bible has been and done for the world
would be to rewrite in large part the history of
modern civilization. Without it, in heathen lands,
the arm and tongue of the missionary would be
paralyzed. With it, even in the abseuce of the
missionary, wondrous results are often effected,


469


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bible, The


Biblical Theology


In national life the Bible is the source of our highest
social and national aspirations. Professor Huxley,
though an agnostic, argued for the reading of the
Bible in the schools on this very ground. “By the
study of what other book,” he asked, “could chil-
dren be so much humanized, and made to feel that
each figure in that vast historical procession fills,
like themselves, but a momentary space iu the in-
terval between two eternities, and earns the blessings
or the curses of all times, according to its effort to
do good and to hate evil, even as they are also earn-
ing their payment for their work?” (Critiques and
Addresses, 61).

VI. Addenda.—A few notes may be added, in
closing, on special points hot touched in the pre-
ceding sections.

Already in pre-Talm times, for purposes of read-
ing in the synagogues, the Jews had larger divisions

of the law into sections called Para-
1. Chapters shahs, and of the prophets into similar
and Verses sections called Haphtdrahs. They had

also smaller divisions into P*¢sikim,
corresponding nearly with our verses. The division
into chapters is much later (13th ceut.). It is
ascribed to Cardinal Hugo de St Caro (d. 1248); by
others to Stephen Langton, archbishop of Canter-
bury (d. 1227). It was adopted into the Vulg,
and from this was trausferred by R. Nathan (cir
1440) to the Heb Bible (Bleck, Keil). Verses are
marked in the Vulg as early as 1558. They first
appear in the NT in Robert Stephens’ edition
of the Gr Testament in 1551. Henry Stephens,
Robert’s son, reports that they were devised by
his father during a journey on horseback from Paris
to Lyons.

The AV of 1611, based in part on earlier English
VSS, esp. Tyndale’s, justly holds rank as one of
the noblest monuments of the English
language of its own, or any, age.
Necessarily, however, the Gr_ text
used by the translators (‘‘Textus
Receptus’”), resting on a few late MSS, was very
imperfect. With the discovery of more ancient
MSS, and multiplication of appliances for criticism,
the need and call for a revised text and tr became
urgent. Finally, at the instance of the Convocation
of the Province of Canterbury, the task of revision
was undertaken by Committees representing the
best English and American scholarship. ‘Their
labors resulted in the publication, in 1881, of the
Revised NT, and in 1885, of the Revised OT (a
revised edition of the Apoc was published in 1896).
The preferences of the American Revisers were
printed in an appendix, a pledge being given that
no further changes should be made for 14 years.
The English Companies were disbanded shortly
after 1885, but the American Committee, adhering
to its own renderings, and believing that further
improvements on the English RV were possible,
continued its organization and work. This issued,
in 1901, in the production of the ARV, which aims
at greater consistency and accuracy in a number of
importaut respects, and is supplied, also, with care-
fully selected marginal references (see AMERICAN
Revisep Version). Little could be done, in either
ERV or ARV, in the absence of reliable data for
comparison, with the text of the OT, but certain
obvious corrections have been made, or noted in the
margin. .

In recent years abundant helps have been fur-
nished, apart from Commentaries and Dictionaries,

for the intelligent study of the English
8. Helps to Bible. Amoug such works may be
Study mentioned the Oxford Helps to the
Study of the Bible; the valuable Aids
to Bible Students (Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1898);
Dr. Angus’ Bible Handbook (revised by Green);


2, AV and
RV


A. 8. Peake’s Guide to Biblical Study (1897);
W. F. Adeney’s How to Read the Bible (1896);
R. C. Moulton’s The Modern Reader’s Bible (1907) ;
The Sunday School Teachers’ Bible (1875); The
Variorum Reference Bible and Variorum Teachers’
Bible (1880); Weymouth’s NT in Modern Speech
(1909); The Twentieth Cent. NT (Westcott and
Hort’s text, 1904); 8. Lloyd’s The Corrected Eng-
lish NT (Bagster, 1905).

Lirerature.—Ctf arts. in the Bible Dicts., specially
Sanday on *’ Bible,’’ and Dobschiitz on ‘The Bible in the
Church,'' in Hastings’ Enc of Rel. and Ethics, IL: West-
cott, The Bible in the Church (1875); W. H. Bennett, A
Primer of the Bible (1897); A. F. Kirkpatrick, The Divine
Library of the OT (1896); J. Eadie, The English Bible;
works on Introduction (Driver, etc); books mentioued
above under ‘'Helps"; B. B. Warfield in Princeton Theo-
logical Review (October, 1910); C. A. Briggs, General Intro
to the Study of Holy Scripture (Scribners, 1899); W. H.
Green, General Intro to the OT (Scribners, 1899); E. C.
Bissell, The Pent: Its Origin and Structure (Scribners,
1885); Zahn, Intro to the NT.


BIBLICAL CRITICISM. See
BIBLE,


BIBLICAL DISCREPANCIES, bib’'li-kal dis-
krep’an-siz. See Discrpranciss, BrBLicAL.


BIBLICAL THEOLOGY, bib’li-kal thé-ol’6-ji:


I. Brauican THEOLOGY as a ScreNncE

1. Definition

2. Relation to Dogmatics

3. Place and Method of Biblical Theology

4. Relation to Scientific Exegesis
II. Hisrory or Bisuicau Treoiocy
. Its Rise in Scientific Form
Patristic and Scholastic Periods
Biblical Efforts in 17th and 18th Centuries
OT Theology in First Half of 19th Century
NT Theology in the 19th Century
OT Theology in Second Half of 19th Century
Bearings of Criticism on OT Theology
Ivistons oF Bisiicat_ THroLocy
Divergent Views of OT Divisions
. Law and Prophecy
. Primal Prophetism and Final Judaism

4. Place of Mosaism
5. Nature of Israel's Religious Development

LitTeRATURE

I. As a Science.—Bib. theology seems best de-

fined as the doctrine of Bib. religion. As such it
works up the material contained in the
1. Defi- OT and the NT as the product of
nition exegetical study. This is the modern
technical sense of the term, whereby
it signifies a systematic representation of Bib.
religion in its primitive form. ‘

Bib. theology has sometimes been taken to signify
not alone this science of the doctrinal declarations of
the Scriptures, but the whole group of sciences con-
cerned with the interpretation and exposition of the
Scriptures. In that wider view of Bib. theology,
the term exegetical theology has been used to define
and include the group of sciences already referred
to. But the whole weight of preference seems, in
our view, to belong to the narrower use of the term
Bib. theology, as more strictly scientific.

This is not to confound the science of Bib. theology
with that of dogmatics, for their characters are

sharply distinguished. The science of
2. Relation dogmatics is a historico-philosophical
to Dog- one; that of Bib. theology is purely
matics historic. Dogmatics declares what,

for religious faith, must be regarded
as truth; Bib. theology only discovers what the
writers of the OT and the NT adduce as truth.
This latter merely ascertains the contents of the
ideas put forward by the sacred writers, but is not
concerned with their correctness or verification.
Tt is the what of truth, in these documentary
authorities, Bib. theology seeks to attain. The
why, or with what right, it 1s so put forward as truth,
belongs to the other science, that of dogmatics,


JAMES ORR
CRITICISM OF


OAS our etre


III.


COD ie


Biblical Theology THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


470


_ Bib. theology is thus the more objective science;
it has no need of dogmatics; dogmatics, on the
other hand, cannot be without the


3. Place aid of Bib. theology. The Bib. theolo-
and gian should be a Christian philosopher,
Method an exegete, and, above all, a historian.
of Biblical or it is in a manner purely historical
Theology that Bib. theology seeks to investigate


the teaching, in whole, of each of the
sacred writers. Each writing it studies in itself,
in its relation to the others, and in its place in history
taken as a whole. Its method is historical-genetic.
The proper place of Bib. theology is at the head of his-
torical theology, where it shines as a center of light.
Its ideal as a science is to present a clear, complete
and comprehensive survey of the Bib. teachings.
In pursuance of this end, Bib. theology is served
by scientific exegesis, whose results it presents in
ordered form so as to exhibit the or-
4. Relation ganic unity and completeness of Bib.
to Exegesis religion. Theimportance of Bib. theol-
ogy lies in the way it directs, corrects
and fructifies all moral and dogmatic theology by
bringing it to the original founts of truth. Its spirit
is one of impartial historical inquiry.
Il. History of Biblical Theology.—Bib. theology,
in any truly scientific form, dates only from the
18th cent. Offspring as it was of
1. Its Rise German rationalism, it has yet been
in Scientific found deserving of cultivation and
Form scientific study by the most orthodox
theology. Indeed, Pietism, too, urged
its claims as Bib. dogma, over against the too
scholastic dogma of orthodoxy. The Patristic
theology, no doubt, was Bib., and the


2. Patristic Alexandrian School deserves special


and praise. The scholastic theology of the
Scholastic Middle Ages leaned on the Fathers
Periods rather than on the Bible. Bib. the-


ology, in spirit, though not in form,
found a revival at the Reformation. But this was
early followed by a 17th cent. type of scholasticism,
polemical and confessional.
Even in that cent., however, efforts of a more
purely Bib. character were not wanting, as witness
ar those of Schmidt, Witsius and Vit-
3. 17th and ringa. But throughout the entire
18th Cents. 18th cent. there were manifest en-
deavors to throw off the scholastic
yoke and return to Bib. simplicity. Haymann
(1708), Biisching (1756), Zachariae (1772) and
Storr (1793), are examples of the efforts referred to.
But it was from the rationalistic side that the first
vindication of Bib. theology as a science of inde-
pendent rank was made. This merit belonged to
Gabler (1787), who urged a purely historical treat-
ment of the Bible, and was, later, shared by his
colleague, G. L. Bauer, who issued a Bib. Theology of
the NT (Ger) in four parts (1800-1802). More inde-
pendent still was the standpoint assumed by C. F.
Ammon in his Biblische Theologie (2d ed, 1801-2).
Ammon does not fail to apprehend the historical
character of our science, saying that Bib. theology
should deal only with the ‘materials, fundamental
ideas, and results of Bib. teaching, without troubling
itself about the connection of the same, or weaving
them into an artificial system.”
The influence of Schleiermacher was hardly a
fortunate one, the OT being sundered from the NT,
and attention centered on the latter.
4. OT The- Kayser (1813) and, still more, De


ology in Wette, who died in 1850, pursued the
First Half perfecting of our science, particularly
of 19th in matters of method. Continuators
Cent. . of the work were Baumgarten-Crusius


(1828), Cramer (1830) and Célln, whose
work was posthumously presented by D. Schulz in


1836. It was in the second quarter of the 19th
cent. that the Bib. theology of the OT began to
receive the full attention it deserved. It has been
declared the merit of Hegel’s philosophy to have
taught men to see, in the various Bib. systems of
doctrine, a complete development, and Hegel did,
no doubt, exert a fertilizing influence on historical
inquiry. But it must also be said that the Hegelian
philosophy affected Bib. theology in a prejudicial
manner, as may be seen in Vatke’s a priori con-
struction of history and doctrine in his work, Die bib.
Theologie (1835), and in Bruno Bauer’s Die Relzgion
des AT’ (1838-89), which controverted but did not
improve upon Vatke. Steudel (1840), Oehler (1845)
and Havernick (1848) ‘are worthy of particularly
honorable mention in this OT connection. In his
Theology of the OT (3d ed, 1891; Amer. ed, 1883)
G. F. Oehler excellently maintained the close con-
nection between the OT and the NT, which Heng-
stenberg had already emphasized in 1829.

The Bib. theology of the NT was furthered by the
memorable Neander. In 1882, he first issued his

Planting and Training of the Christian
5. NT Church, while his Life of Jesus first
Theology appeared in 1837. In this latter work,
in the 19th he summarized the doctrine of the
Cent. Redeemer, while the former presented

the doctrinal teaching of the apostolic
writers in such wise as to show the different shades
of thought peculiar to each of them, pointing out,
at the same time, ‘how, notwithstanding all differ-
ence, there was an essential unity beneath, unless
one is deceived by the form, and how the form in its
diversity is easily explained.” C. F. Schmid im-
proved in some respects upon Neander’s work in
his excellent Biblical Theology of the NT, issued
(1853) after his death by Weizséicker (new ed, 1864).
In Schmid’s work, the Bib. theology of the NT is
presented with objectivity, clearness and pene-
trating sympathy.

Hahn’s Theology of the NT (1854) came short
of doing justice to the diverse types of doctrinal
development in the NT. The work of G. V. Lech-
ler on the apostolic and post-apostolic age, was, in
its improved form of 1857, much more important.
E. Reuss, in 1852, issued his valuable History of
the Christian Theology of the Apostolic Age, a com-
plete and critical work, but not sufficiently objective
in its treatment. The Prelections on NT The-
ology of F. C. Baur, head of the Tiibingen school,
exemplify both the merits and the defects of the
school. They are critical, independent and sug-
gestive, but lacking in impartiality. They were
published by his son after his death (1864). Anew
ed of these lectures on NT theology was issued by
Pfleiderer in 1893.

Having first dealt with the teachings of Jesus,
Baur then set out the materials of the NT theology
in three periods, making Paul well-nigh the founder
of Christianity. For him only four epistles of Paul
were genuine products of the apostolic age, namely,
Romans, the two Corinthians, Galatians, together
with the Revelation. To the growth and history
of the NT Baur applied the method of the Hegelian
dialectic, and, though powerful and profound, dis-
played a lack of sane, well-balanced judgment. Yet
so conservative a scholar as Weiss gave Baur the
credit of having “first made it the problem of criti-
cism to assign to each book of the NT its place in
the history of the development of primitive Chris-
tianity, to determine the relations to which it owes
its origin, the object at which it aims, and the views
it represents.”” Among Baur’s followers may be
noted Pfleiderer, in his Paulinism (1873).

The Theology of the NT, by J. J. Van Oosterzee
(Eng. ed, 1870), is a serviceable book for students,
and the NT Theology of A. Immer (1878), already


471


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Biblical Theology


famous for his hermeneutical studies, is note-
worthy. Chief among subsequent cultivators of
the Bib. theology of the NT must be reckoned B.
Weiss, whose work in two volumes (Eng. ed,
1882-88) constitutes a most critical and complete,
thorough and accurate treatment of the subject
in all its details: W. Beyschlag, whose NT Theology
(Eng. ed, in 2 vols, 1895) is also valuable; H. Holtz-
mann, whose treatise on NT Theology (1897)
dealt in a critical fashion with the doctrinal con-
tents of the NT. Holtzmann’s learning and ability
are great, but his work is marred by naturalistic
presuppositions. The French work on Theology
of the NT, by J. Bovon (2 vals, 1893-94) is marked
by great independence, skill and fairness. The
Theology of the NT, by W. F. Adeney (1894), and
the yet more recent, and very attractively written,
work with the same title, by G. B. Stevens (1899),
bring us pretty well up to the present state of our

science in respect of the NT.
Coming back to the Bib. theology of the OT in the
second half of the 19th cent., we find A. Kloster-
mann’s Investigations inio the OT


6. OT Theology, which appeared in 1868.
Theology The OT theology, no less than that
in Second of the NT, was set forth by that great
Half of the scholar, H. Ewald, in four vols (1871-—
of the 19th 75; Eng. ed [first part], 1888). His
Cent. interest in NT theology was due to his


strong feeling that the NT is really the
second part of the record of Israel’s revelation.
A. Kuenen dealt with the Religion of Israel in two
volumes (Eng. ed, 1874-75), writing nobly but
with defective insight into, and comprehension of,
the higher religious ideas of Israel. F. Hitzig’s
Prelections (1880) deal with the theology of the OT,
as part of their contents. H. Schultz treated of
the OT Theology in two vols (1st ed, 1869; 5th ed,
1896; Eng. ed, 1892), in a careful, mainly just,
and, by comparison, well-balanced handling of the
development of its religious ideas.

We have not touched upon writers like Smend,
for example, in his History of OT Religion (1893),
and J. Robertson, in his Early Religion of Israel
(2d ed, 1892), who treat of the Bib. theology of the
OT only in a way subsidiary to the consideration
of the historico-critical problems. The Concep-
tion of Revelation in the OT was dealt with by F. E.
Kénig in 1882 in a careful and comprehensive
manner, and with regard to the order and relation
of the documents, revelation in Israel being taken
by him in a supranaturalistic sense. Significant
also for the progress of OT Bib. theology was The
Theological and the Historical View of the OT, by
C. Siegfried (1890), who insisted on the develop-
ment of the higher religion of Israel being studied
from the elder prophets as starting-point, instead
of the law. ha

Mention should be made of ‘Biblical Study: Its
Principles, Methods and History, by C. A. Briggs
(1883; 4th ed, 1891); of the important Compen-
dium of the Bib. Theology of the O and the NT by
K. Schlottmann (1889); of E. Riehm’s valuable OT
Theology (1889); and of G. Dalman’s Studies in Bib.
Theology—the Divine name and _ its history —in
1889. Also, of the OT Theology of A. Duff (1891);
A. Dillmann’s Handbook of OT Theology, edited by
Kittel (1895); and of Marti’s ed of the Theology of
the OT of A. Kayser (3d ed, 1897).

Of Theology of the OT, by A. B. Davidson (1904),
it may be said that it does full justice to the idea
of a progressive development of doctrine in the OT,
and is certainly divergent from the view of those
who, like Cheyne, treat the OT writings as so many
fragments, from which no theology can be ex-
tracted. Biblical Theology of the OT, by B. Stade
(1905), is the work of a distinguished representative


of the modern critical views, already famous for
his work on the history of Israel (1887). The The-
ology of the OT by W.H. Bennett (1906) is a clear
and useful compendium of the subject.

Recent works like The Problem of the OT by
James Orr (1905), OT Critics by Thomas Whitelaw

(1903), and Essays in Pentateuchal Criti-
7, Bearings cism, by Harold M. Wiener (1909),
of Criticism deal with the critical questions, and do
on OT not concern us here, save to remark
Theology that they are not without bearing, in

their results, upon the theology of the
OT. Such results are, e.g. the insistences, in Orr’s
work, on the unity of the OT, the higher than
naturalistic view of Israel’s religious development,
the discriminate use of Divine names like Elohim
and Jehovah, and so forth; and the express con-
tention in Whitelaw’s work, that the critical hypoth-
eses are not such as can yield “‘a philosophically
reasonable theology” (p. 346). Indeed, it must not
be supposed that even works, like that of 8. R.
Driver, Introduction to the Literature of the OT (first
issued in 1891), are without resultant influence on
Bib. theology. :

So far from that, the truth is that there is prob-
ably no result of the readjustment of the history
and lit. of the OT so important as its bearings on
the Bib. theology of theOT. For the order and the
method of revelation are most surely involved in
the order and relation of the books or documents,
and the course of the history. _The progress of the
revelation ran parallel with the work of God in
Nature and in the growth of human society. Hence
the reconstruction of the historical theology of the
OT will take much time and study, that the full
value of the OT may be brought out as that of an
independent and permanent revelation, with char-
acteristic truths of its own. Meantime, the real-
ity of that revelation, and the teleological character
of the OT, have been brought out, in the most
signal manner, by theological scholars like Dorner,
Dillmann, Kittel, Kautsch, Schultz and others, who
feel the inadequacy of natural development or
“human reflection” to account for OT theology, and
the immediacy of God’s contact with man in OT
times to be alone sufficient to account for a revela-
tion so weighty, organically connected, dynamically
bound together, monotheistic and progressive.

Il, Divisions of Biblical Theology.—The di-
visions of OT theology are matters of grave diffi-

culty. For the newer criticism has
1, Diver- practically transformed that mode of
gent Views representing the process of Israel’s re-
on the OT ligious development, which had been

customary or traditional. On this lat-
ter view, the Patriarchal Age was succeeded by the
Mosaic Age, with its law-giving under Moses, fol-
lowed, after an intercalated period of Judges and
monarchy, by the splendid Age of Prophecy. Then
there was the Exile preparing the way, after the
Return, for the new theocracy, wherein the Law of
Moses was sought with more persistent endeavor,
though not without darkly legalistic result. Such
were the historic bases for OT theology, but the
modifications proposed by the new criticism are
sufficiently serious. These it will be necessary to in-
dicate, without going beyond the scope of this art.
and attempting criticism of either the one view or
the other. Itis the more necessary ta do so, that
finality has not been reached by criticism. Weare
only concerned with the difference which these
divergent views make for OT Bib. theology, whose
reconstruction is very far from perfected.

That they do mean serious difference has been
indicated in the historical part of this art. Most
obtrusive of these differences is the proposal to
invert the order of law and prophecy, and speak


Be see 8’ THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


472


rather of the Prophets and the Law. For the Law
is, on the newer view, taken to belong to the post-
prophetic period—in short, to the
2. Law and period of the return from the Exile,
Prophecy whereas, in the traditional scheme of
the order of revelation, the Law was
found in full force both at the Exodus and the
Return, with a dead-letter period between. The
garment of legalism, the newer criticism asserts,
could not have suited the Israelitish nation in its
early and undeveloped stage, as it does after the
teachings of the prophets and the discipline of the
Exile. Against this, the older scheme prefers the
objection that an external and legalistic system is
made the outcome of the lofty spiritual teaching
of the prophets; the letter appears super-imposed
upon the spirit. Criticism, however, postulates for
the ritual codes of the Pent an influence parallel in
time with that of prophetism.
Besides the adjustments of prophecy and law
just referred to, the critical views postulate a
primal period in which the religion
3. Prophet- of the prophets, with their view of
ism and Israel’s vocation, was inculcated; also,
Judaism a final period of Judaism, intercalated
between the Return and the Macca-
bees, in which are seen at work the Levitical law,
and various anti-legal tendencies. It must be
obvious that attempts to integrate the OT theology
amid the prevailing uncertainties of criticism must
be far from easy or final, even if the need and im-
portance be felt of keeping the religious interest
before even the historical in OT study. For the
OT writers, religion was primary, history secondary
and incidental, we may well believe.
We must be content to know less of the remote
beginnings and initial stages of Israel’s religious
development, for, as A. B. Davidson re-
4. Place of marked, ‘‘in matters like this we never
Mosaism can get at the beginning.” J. Robert-
son deems criticism wrong in not allow-
ing “a sufficient starting-point for the develop-
ment,” by which he means that pure prophetic
religion needs “‘a pure pre-prophetic religion’ to
explain its more than “germinal or elementary
character.” It may be noted, too, how much
greater place and importance are attached to
Mosaism or Moses by critics like Renss, Schultz,
Bredenkamp and Strack, than by Wellhausen, who
yet allows a certain substratum of actual and his-
torical fact.
It may be observed, further, that no one is under
any compulsion to account for such a transforma-
tion, as even Wellhausen allows, in the


5. Israel’s slow growth from very low beginnings
Religious of the idea of Jeh up to pure and
Develop- _— perfect monotheism—among a non-
ment metaphysical people—by the simple


supposition of naturalistic theory.
Evolutionary the critical hypothesis of the religious
development of Israel may be, but that develop-
ment was clearly not so exclusively controlled by
human elements or factors as to exclude the pres-
ence of supernatural energy or power of revelation.
It had God within it~had, in Dorner’s phrase,
“teleology as its soul.” Thus, as even Gunkel de-
clares, ‘‘Israel is, and remains, the people of revela-
tion.” This is why Isracl was able to make—
despite all retrograde tendencies—rectilinear prog-
ress toward a predestined goal—the goal of being
what Ewald styled a ‘‘purely immortal and spirit-
ual Israel.” OT theology does not seem to have
sufficiently realized that the OT really presents
us with theologies rather than a theology—with
the progressive development of a religion rather
red with theological ideas resting on one historic
plane.


LiterarvurRe.—I, OT Literature: B. Stade, _Biblische
Theologie des AT, 1905; H. Schultz, 47 Theologie, 5th ed,
1896; Eng. ed, 1892; H. Ewald, Revelation: Its Nature
and Record, Eng. ed, 1884; G F. Oehler, Theology of the
OT, Eng. ed, 1874; A. Kuenen, The Religion of Israel to
the Fall of the Jewish State, Eng. ed, 1875; E. Riehm, AT
Theologie, 1889; 8. R. Driver, An Introduction toth Litera-
ture of the OT, 1st ed, 1891; A. B. Davidson, Theology of
the OT, 1904; J. Orr, The Problem of the OT, 1905; A.
Duff, OT Theology, 1891;_J. Robertson, Early Religion of
Israel, 20 ed, 1892; W. R. Smith, The OT in the Jewish
Church, new ed, 1892; W. H. Bennett, The Theology of
the OT, 1896; T. K. Cheyne, Founders of OT Criticism,
1893; T. Whitelaw, OT Critics, 1903; W.G. Jordan, Bib-
lical Criticism and Modern Thought, 1909, H. M. Wiener,
Essays in Pentateuchal Criticism, 1909; E. C. Bissell, The
Pentateuch: Its Origin and Structure, 1885; D. K.v. rat,


Prophets of Israel, 1882; D
dium der biblischen Theologie des A. u. Testaments,
1889; A. T. Kirkpatrick, The Divine Library of the OT,
1891; J. Lindsay, The Significance of the OT for Modern
es 1896; R. Kittel, Scientific Study of the OT, Eng.
ed, é

II, NT Literature: W. Beyschlag, NT Theology, 2d
ed, 1896; Eng. ed, 1895; H. Holtzmann, Lehrbuch der
NT Theologie, 1897; B. Weiss, Lehrbuch der biblischen
Theologie des NT, 7th ed, 1903; Eng. ed, 1883; J. J. v.
Oosterzee, Die Theologie des NT, 2d ed, 1886; Eng.
ed, 1870; J. Bovon, Théologie du Nouveau Testament,
1893-94; ©. F. Schmid, Biblische Theologie des NT,
new ed, 1864; G. B. Stevens, The Theology of the NT,
1899; F. ©. Baur, Vorlesungen tiber NT Theologie,
1864; W. F. Adeney, The Theology of the NT, 1894;
A. C. McGiffert, A History of Christianity in the Apostolic
Age, 1897; E. Reuss, History of Christian Theology in
the Apostolic Age, Eng. ed, 1872: H. H. Wendt, The
Teaching of Jesus, Eng. ed, 1892; A. B. Bruce, The
Kingdom of God, 1890; J. Moorhouse, The Teaching of
Christ, 1891; O. Pfleiderer, Der Paulinismus, 2d ed, 1890;
2d Eng. ed, 1891; A. Sabatier, The Apostle Paul, Eng. ed,
1891; G. B. Stevens, The Pauline Theology, 2d ed, 1897;
G. Matheson, The Spiritual Development of St. Paul, 1890;
E. Riehm, Der Lehrbegriff des Hebrderbriefs, 1867;
Weiss, Der petrinische Lehrbegrif, 1855; G. B. Stevens,
The Johannine Theology, 1894; B. Weiss, Der johanneische
Lehrbegriff in seinen Grundziigen untersucht, 1862.

: James Linpsay

BICHRI, bik’ri (193, bikhri, “first born’;
cf HPN, 88, 102): Father of Sheba who rebelled
against David. B. is of the house of Benjamin and
the word probably means a ‘‘descendant of Becher”


(28 20 1 ff). Cf Bscuzr 1.


BID: Variously signifying, according to six Heb
and as many Gr originals: (1) “‘to command” (Nu
14.10; Mt 1 24 AV, mpoordrrw, prostdttd); (2) “to
prescribe” or “order” (Jn 2 2); (3) “to consecrate,’’
and so rendered in RV (Zeph 1 7; cf 1S 16 5);
(4) elrov, etpon, “to say” or “tell” (Mt 16 12); (5)
“to call’ i.e. “invite” (kadéw, kaléd), conspicuously
used in this sense in Christ’s parables of the Mar-
riage Feast (Mt 22 3~9) and of the Great Supper
(Lk 14 7-24); (6) “to take leave of,” drordrrw,
apotditd (Lk 9 61).


BIDDEN, bid’n: “Called,” “invited” (1 § 9 13).


BIDE, bid: A variant of ‘abide’ (q.v.); is the
rendering of mepiuévw, periménd, in Wisd 8 12
(RV “they shall wait for me’’). In Acts 1 4 the
same word is tr? “wait for.”


BIDEAR, bid’kar (P75, bidhkar; “son of
Deker’’[?]; ef HPN, 69): A captain in the service
of Jehu, formerly his fellow-officer (2 K 9 25).


BIER, bér:

_(L) Found in the OT only in 2S 3 31, “and
king David followed the bier’; and in the NT in
Lk 7 14, “and he [Jesus] came nigh and touched
the bier. The Heb word rendered “bier” (mittah)
and its Gr equivalent (sords) mean strictly “coffin.”
The so-called “bier” among the ancient Hebrews
was simply an open coffin or a flat wooden frame,
on which the body of the dead was carried from
the house to the grave.


473


Bilgah,


(2) Closed coffins, so universal now in the West,
were unknown to common usage among the He-
brews of olden times, though not unknown to
Egyptians, Greeks and Romans.

At the burial of Abner the people were com-
manded to “rend their clothes” and ‘‘gird themselves
with sackcloth,” and the king himself in token of
his grief and royal regard, ‘followed the bier” in
the procession to the grave (2 S 3 31).

(3) Of Jesus, when He met the procession that
went out of the gate of the city of Nain, bearing
to the grave the only son of the widowed mother,
Luke says, ‘‘When the Lord saw her, he had com-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bi Bie


BILDAD, bil’dad (T192, bildadh, “Bel has
loved”): The second of the three friends of Job
who, coming from distant regions, make an appoint-
ment together to condole with and comfort him in
his affliction (Job 2 11). He is from Shuah, an
unknown place somewhere in the countries E. and
8.E. of Pal (or the designation Shuhite may be
intended to refer to his ancestor Shuah, one of
Abraham’s sons by Keturah, Gen 26 2), and from
his name (compounded with Bel, the name of a Bab
deity) would seem to represent the wisdom of the
distant East. His three speeches are contained in
Job 8, 18 and 25. For substance they are largely


Boriat Procession.


passiononher ... . and he came nigh and touched
the bier,” and commanded the young man to arise,
etc. We should recall that contact with a dead
body was forbidden by the law as a source of de-
filement (Nu 19 111); so Jesus here “came nigh”
and ‘‘touched the bier” only in raising the young
man, thus avoiding any criticism for infraction of
the law. In Jn 11 35, as here, we have a miracle
of Jesus which clearly pointed to a higher law—
the eternal law of compassion which received its
first full expression in the life of Jesus and forms
one of the distinctive features of the gospel.
Gro. B. Eacer

BIGTHA, big’tha (NINA, bigh*tha’; LXX Bapatl,
Barazt; B, Bepath, Barazé; A, ’OapeBwd, Oarebdd):
One of the seven eunuchs or chamberlains having
charge of the harem of King Xerxes (‘‘Ahasuerus’’)
and commanded to bring Vashti to the king’s ban-
quet (Est 1 10).


BIGTHAN, big’than, BIGTHANA, big-tha’na
(JO32, N33, bigh*than, bighthand; LXX omits
name): One of the two chamberlains or eunuchs of
Xerxes (‘‘Ahasuerus’”) who conspired against the
king’s life, the conspiracy being detected by Mor-
decai and the culprits hanged (Est 2 21). Possibly
these men had been partially superseded by the
degradation of Vashti and were thus prompted to
take revenge on Xerxes.


BIGVAI, big’va-iI ("132, bighway; Baoyel, Baoget,
Bayové, Bagoud):

(1) The head of one of the families who returned
from Babylon with Zerubbabel (Ezr 2 2; Neh 7
7), having a large number of his retainers (2,056,
according to Ezr 2 14; 2,067, according to Neh
7 19), besides 72 males later under Ezra (8 14).

(2) One of those who subscribed the covenant
with Nehemiah (10 16).


BIKATH-AVEN, bik-ath-a’ven (JJNMYpa,
bik‘ath ‘awen, “valley of vanity” [Am 1 5 AVm]).
See AvEN; BETH-EDEN.


an echo of what Eliphaz has maintained, but charged
with somewhat increased vehemence (cf 8 2; 18
3.4) because he deems Job’s words so impious and
wrathful. He is the first to attribute Job’s calamity
to actual wickedness; but he gets at it indirectly
by accusing his children (who were destroyed, 1
19) of sin to warrant their punishment (8 4). For
his contribution to the discussion he appeals to
tradition (8 8-10), and taking Eliphaz’ cue of
cause and effect (ver 11) he gives, evidently from
the literary stores of wisdom, a description of the
precarious state of the wicked, to which he con-
trasts, with whatever implication it involves, the
felicitous state of the righteous (8 11-22). His
second speech is an intensified description of the
wicked man’s woes, made as if to match Job’s de-
scription of his own desperate case (cf 18 5-21 with
16 6-22), thus tacitly identifying Job with the
reprobate wicked. His third speech (25), which is
the last utterance of the friends, is brief, subdued
in tone, and for substance is a kind of Parthian
shot, retterating Eliphaz’ depravity idea, the doc-
trine that dies hardest. This speech marks the final
silencing of the friends.
Joun FRANKLIN GENUNG

BILEAM, bil’é-am (O23, bil'am; "IPdadp, Ib-
ladém): A town in the territory of Manasseh as-
signed to the Kohathite Levites (1 Ch 6 70),
probably the same as Ibleam (Josh 17 11, etc),
and identical with the modern Bel‘ameh, half a
mile 8. of Jenin.


BILGAH, bil’ga, BILGAI, bil’gi-i (maa, bil-
gah; "333, bilgay, ‘‘cheerfulness’’): A priest or
priestly family in the time of the Return (Neh 12
5), and (under the form of ‘“‘Bilgai,”’ Neh 10 8)
in the time of Nehemiah. According to 1 Ch 24
14, Bilgah is the 15th of the 24 divisions of the
priests who officiated in the Temple. In the LXX,
the names read Bedydi, Belgdi, Belgé and Balgds.
The traditional explanation of the name is “reju-
venation’; modern exegetes explain it as ‘‘cheer-
fulness.”


Bilhah
Birds


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


474


BILHAH, bil’ha (person) (mm>2, bilhah;
BaodAd, Balld): A slave girl whom Laban gave to
Rachel (Gen 29 29), and whom the latter gave to
Jacob as a concubine (Gen 30 3.4); the mother of
Dan and Naphtali (Gen 30 4.7; 365 25; 46 25;
one 7 18); guilty of incest with Reuben (Gen 35


BILHAKH, bil’ha (place) (mma, bilhah; A, Badad,
Balad; B, ’APeAAG, Abelid): A city in Simeon (1 Ch
4 29)=Baalah (Josh 15 29), Balah (19 3), and
Baalath (19 44). Unidentified.


BILHAN, bil/han (j71?3, bilhan; Badadv, Ba-
ladn):

(1) A Horite chief, son of Ezer (Gen 36 27; 1 Ch
1 42)


(2) A descendant of Benjamin, son of Jediael,
father of seven sons who were heads of houses in
their tribes (1 Ch 7 10).


BILL, BOND, etc:

(1) In the parable of the Unjust Steward (Lk
16 6f) “bill,” AV, better “bond,” RV, is used to
translate the Gr grdmmata, which is the equiva-
lent of the contemporary Heb legal term shar,
“writing.” This “writing,” in the usage of the
times, was an acknowledgment of the taking over
or receiving of goods or money that had to be
written and signed by the debtor himself. (See
Babh@ Bathra’ 10 8.) Edersheim’s averment that
the Gr word was adopted into the Heb (Life and
Times of Jesus the Messiah, II, 272), is based, ac-
cording to competent textual critics, upon a false
reading. The Gr, according to Tisch., Treg. and
WH, is fd grémmata, not t6 grémma (TR). The
word is indefinite, lit. ‘‘the letter,” and determines
nothing involved in controversy. :

(2) A question much discussed is, Was ‘“‘the
bond” (RV) merely an acknowledgment of debt,
or was it an obligation to pay a fixed annual rental
from the produce of a farm? LEdersheim, for in-
stunce, holds the former view, Lightfoot the latter.
That the obligation is stated in the parable in kind
—wheat and oil—and not in money—seems to bear
against the simple debt theory. Edersheim sets
down the remissions spoken of as authorized by
the steward as amounting in money value to only
about £5 and £25 respectively, and thinks they repre-
sented not a single but an annual payment (cf Ken-
nedy, 1-vol HDB, and Fraser, DCG, art. “‘Bill’’).

(3) Still another question has arisen: Was the
old “bond” simply altered, or was a new one sub-
stituted for it? Here again Lightfoot and Eder-
sheim are in the controversy and on opposite sides.
The alteration of the old bond is suggested though
not demanded by the language here, and, more-
over, would be, Edersheim thinks, in accordance
with the probabilities of the case. Such bonds
were usually written, not on vellum or papyrus,
but on wax-covered tablets, and so could be easily
erased or altered by the stylus with its flat, thick
“eraser” (mohék).

(4) It is probably safe to conclude: (a) that the
“bill” or “bond” had to be written and signed by
the person assuming the obligation; (8) that it
was the only formal or legal evidence of the debt
incurred; and (c) that the supervision of the whole
transaction belonged of right to “the steward.”
Should “the steward” conspire with the debtor
against the master, the latter, it would appear, would
have no check against the fraud.


Lrrrraturs.—Lightfoot, Hor. Heb., ed L. and T., IT,
268-73; Edersheim, Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah,
II, 272 ff; crit. comm. in loc.

Gro. B. Hacer

BILL OF DIVORCEMENT, di-vérs’ment. See
Divorce in OT.


BILLOW, hbil’o (D3, gal, “‘a great rolling wave’’):
Figuratively, of trouble, ‘All thy waves and_ thy
billows are gone over me” (Ps 42.7; cf Jon 2 3).


BILSHAN, bil’shan (7H22, bilshan): An
Israelite who returned with Zerubbabel (Hzr 2
2=Neh 7 7). The name may be explained as
“inquirer” (new Heb and Aram.), 252, bdlash,
the 3 (b) being an abbreviation of {2, ben, as in
“P12, bidhkar, and 573, bimhal. Bilshan would
then be a compound of 72, ben, and Fw, lashon.
J. Halévy (Revue études juives, X, 3) translates the
name ‘‘pére de la langue,” Ww AN, ’abh lashon.
In 1 Esd 6 8, he is called ‘‘Beelsarus,” which is
akin to the form “Belshar” =“‘Belshar-ussur” or ‘““O
Bel, protect the king.” Bilshan points to ‘“‘BelSua,”’
‘this lord.” The rabbis take Bilshan as a surname
to the preceding Mordecai. H. J. Wour


BIMHAL, bim’‘hal (2723, bimhal): A descend-
ant of Asher (1 Ch 7 33). :


BIND, bind, BOUND (Sé, déé): There are a
number of Heb words used to express this word in
its various meanings, ’alam (Gen 87 7), ’dsar(42 24),
kashar (Dt 6 8). It sometimes means “‘to attach,”
“to fasten” (Ex 28 28; Deut 14 25). It was used
also with reference to an agreement in a judicial sense
(Nu 80 2.3), or to make one a prisoner (Jgs 16 10;
Ps 149 8). It means also ‘“‘to control” (Job 38 31).

Figurative: In a fig. sense, to bind heavy and
burdensome (extra) so-called religious duties on
men (Mt 23 4). This fig. use of the word in Mt
16 19 and 18 18 has given special interest to it.
Necessarily certain powers for administration must
be conferred on this company of men to carry out
the purpose of Christ. That this power was not
conferred on Peter alone is evident from the fact
that in Mt 18 18 it is conferred on all the apostles.
The use of the word in the NT is to declare a thing
to be binding or obligatory (Jn 20 23). In this
sense this authority is used by some denominations
in the service in preparation for the Lord’s Supper,
in which after the confession of sin by the people
the ministers say, ‘I declare to you who have
sincerely repented of your sins and believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ the entire forgiveness of your
sins.” This statement is followed by the further
declaration that if any have not so repented God
will not forgive them, but will retain them and call
them to account. The claim of the church of
Rome that these statements of Our Lord confer
on the priests and bishops, or primarily on the pope,
the power to retain or forgive sins, is without his-
torical validity and does violence to the Scriptures.
See AuTHoRITY; ForaivENEss; PETER.

Jacop W. Kapp

BINEA, bin’é-a (1933, bin‘ah): A name in the
genealogy of Benjamin (1 Ch 8 37=9 43).


BINNUI, bin’t-i (52, binndy, a proper name,
“a, building up’’):

(1) A_Levite, living in the time of Ezra (Ezr
8 33; Neh 10 9; 12 8).

(2) One of the b¢né Pahath-mo’ abh who had taken
foreign wives (Ezr 10 30—Balnuus of 1 Esd 9 31)
and one of the b'né Bant (Ezr 10 38) who had
also intermarried.

(8) The son of Henadad, who built part of the
wall of Jerus (Neh 3 24), and sealed the covenant
with Nehemiah (Neh 10 9). In all probability
he is identical with ‘‘Bavvai, the son of Henadad”
mentioned in 3 18. ‘‘Bavvai” is either a corrup-
tion of “Binnui,” or is the name of the Levitical
house of which Bavvai was the chief representative.


475


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bilhah
Birds


Binnui is mentioned in 10 9 as a leading Levite,
and, besides, the names in these vs are obviously
those of priests and Levites; so the former theory
is probably correct.

(4) Head of a family who returned with Zerub-
babel (Neh 7 15; Ear 2 10). H. J. Wour


BIRD-CATCHER, bird’kach-ér. See Fow Ler.


BIRDS, birds (O°, ‘ayit; Gr variously ra
werava, id peteind [Mt 13 4], ra Spvea tod
ovpavot, td drnea to% ouranot [Rev 19 17], dpvis,
érnis [Mt 23 37; Lk 13 34); Lat avis; OE “brid”):

I. Meaning of the Word.—Al]l authorities agree
that the exact origin of the word bird, as we apply

it to feathered creatures, is unknown.
1. In Early The Heb ‘ayif means to “tear and
Hebrew scratch the face,” and in its original

form undoubtedly applied to birds
of prey. It is probable that no spot of equal size
on the face of the globe ever collected such numbers
of vultures, eagles and hawks as ancient Pal. The
land was so luxuriant that flocks and herds fed
from the face of Nature. In cities, villages, and
among tent-dwellers incessant slaughter went on
for food, while the heavens must almost have been


obscured by the ascending smoke from the burning ©


of sacrificed animals and birds, required by law
of every man and woman. From all these slain
creatures the offal was thrown to the birds. There
were no guns; the arrows of bowmen or “throw
sticks’ were the only protection against them, and
these arms made no noise to frighten feathered
creatures, and did small damage. So it easily can
be seen that the birds would increase in large num-
bers and become so bold that men were often in
actual conflict with them, and no doubt their faces
and hands were torn and scratched.
Later, as birds of song and those useful for food
came into their lives, the word was stretched to
cover all feathered creatures. In the
2. In Later AV ‘ayit is tr4 ‘fowl,” and occurs
Usage several times: ‘And when the fowls
came down upon the carcases, Abram
drove them away” (Gen 15 11). “They shall be
left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and
to the beasts of the earth; and the fowls shall
summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth
shall winter upon them” (Isa 18 6). ‘There is a
path which no fowl knoweth, and which the vul-
ture’s eye hath not seen” (Job 28 7). The ARV
changes these and all other references to feathered
creatures to “birds,”’ making a long list. The Heb
‘ayit in its final acceptance was used in Pal as
“bird” is with us. .
Our earliest known form of the word is the OE
“brid,” but they applied the term to the young of
any creature. Later its meaning was
8. In Old narrowed to young produced from
English eggs, and the form changed to “bird.”
Il, Natural History of Birds.—The
first known traces of birds appear in the forma-
tion of the Triassic period, and are found in the
shape of footprints on the red sandstone of the
Connecticut valley. :
This must have been an ancient sea bed over
which stalked large birds, leaving deeply imprinted
impressions of their feet. These im-
1. Earliest pressions baked in the sun, and were
Traces and drifted full of fine wind-driven sand
Specimens before the return of the tide. Thus
were preserved to us the traces of 33
species of birds all of which are proven by their
footprints to have been much larger than our birds
of today. The largest impressions ever found
measured 15 in. in length by 10 in width, and were
set from 4 to 6 ft. apart. This evidence would


form the basis for an estimate of a bird at least
four times as large as an ostrich. That a bird of
this size ever existed was not given credence until
the finding of the remains of the dincrnis in New
Zealand. The largest specimen of this bird stood
103 ft. in height. The first complete skeleton of a
bird was found in the limestone of the Jurassic
period. in Solenhofen, Bavaria. This bird had 13
teeth above and 3 below, each set in a separate
socket, wings ending in three-fingered claws much
longer than the claws of the feet, and a tail of 20
vertebrae, as long as the body, having a row of
long feathers down each side of it, the specimen
close to the size of a crow. The first preserved like-


“ness of a bird was found frescoed on the inside of a


tomb of Maydoon, and is supposed to antedate
the time of Moses 3,000 years. It is now carefully
preserved in the museum of Cairo. The painting
represents six geese, four of which can be recog-
nized readily as the ancestors of two species known
today. Scientists now admit that Moses was
right in assigning the origin of birds to the water,
as their structure is closer reptilian than mamma-
lian, and they reproduce by eggs. To us it seems a
long stretch between the reptile with a frame most
nearly bird-like and a feathered creature, but there
is a possibility that forms making closer connection
yet will be found.
The trunk of a bird is compact and in almost
all instances boat-shaped. Without doubt pre-
historic man conceived his idea of
2. Struc- navigation and fashioned his vessel
tural from the body of a water bird, and
Formation then noticed that a soaring bird
steered its course with its tail and so
added the rudder. The structural formation of a
bird is so arranged as to give powerful flight and
perfect respiration. In the ease of a few birds
that do not fly, the wings are beaten to assist in
attaining speed in running, as the ostrich, or to
help in swimming under the water, astheauk. The
skull of a young bird is made up of parts, as is that
of man or animal; but with age these parts join so
evenly that they appear in a seamless formation.
The jaws extend beyond the face, forming a bill
that varies in length and shape with species, and
it is used in securing food, in defence, feather
dressing, nest building—in fact it is a combination
of the mouth and hand of man. The spine is
practically immovable, because of the ribs attached
to the upper half and the bony structure support-
ing the pelvic joints of the lower. In sharp con-
trast with this the neck is formed of from 10 to 23
vertebrae, and is so flexible that a bird can turn its
head completely around, a thing impossible to
man or beast. The breast bone is large, strong,
and provided with a ridge in the middle, largest
in birds of strong flight, smallest in swimmers, and
lacking only in birds that do not fly, as the ostrich.
The wings correspond to the arms of man, and are
now used in flight and swimming only. Such
skeletons as the Archeopteryx prove that the bones
now combined in the tip of the wing were once
claws. This shows that as birds spread over land
and developed wing power in searching longer
distances for food or when driven by varying con-
ditions of climate, the wings were used more in
flight, and the claws gradually joined in a tip and
were given covering that grew feathers, while the
bill became the instrument for taking food and for
defence. At the same time the long tail proving
an incumbrance, it gradually wore away and con-
tracted to the present form. Studied in detail of
bony structure, muscle, and complicated arrange-
ment of feathers of differing sizes, the wing of a
bird proves one of Nature’s marvels. The legs
are used in walking or swimming, the thigh joint


Birds
Birth


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


476


being so enveloped in the body that the true leg
is often mistaken for it. This makes the knee of a
man correspond to the heel of a bird, and in young
birds of prey especially, the shank or tarsus is
used in walking, until the bones harden and the
birds are enabled to bear their weight on the feet
and straighten the shank. The toes vary with
species. Pliny classified birds by them: ‘The
first and principal difference and distinction in
birds is taken from their feet; for they have either
hooked talons, as Hawkes, or long round claws as
Hens, or else they be broad, flat and whole-footed
as Geese.’ Flight is only possible to a bird when
both wings are so nearly full-feathered that it
balances perfectly. In sleep almost every bird
places its head under its wing and stands on one
foot. The arrangement by which this is accom-
plished, without tiring the bird in the least, is little
short of miraculous and can be the result only of
slow ages of evolution. In the most finished degree
this provision for the comfort of the bird is found
among cranes and other long-legged water birds.
The bone of one part of the leg fits into the bone
of the part above, so that it is practically locked
into place with no exertion on the part of the bird.
At the same time the muscles that work the claws,
cross the joints of the leg so that they are stretched
by the weight of the bird, and with no effort, it
stands on earth or perches on a branch. This
explains the question so frequently asked as to why
the feet of a perching bird do not become so cramped

and tired that it falls.
Birds feed according to their nature, some on
prey taken alive, some on the carrion of dead
bodies, some on fish and vegetable


3. Birds’ products of the water, some on fruit
Food, seed, insects and worms of the land.
Blood, etc Almost every bird indulges in a com-


bination of differing foods. Their
blood is from 12° to 16° warmer than that of the
rest of the animal kingdom, and they exhibit a
corresponding exhilaration of spirits. Some in-
dulge in hours of sailing and soaring, some in
bubbling notes of song, while others dart near
earth in playful dashes of flight. Birds are sup-
posed to be rather deficient in the senses of taste
and touch, and to have unusually keen vision.
They reproduce by eggs that they deposit in a
previously selected and prepared spot, and brood
for a length of time varying with the species. The
young of birds of prey, song birds, and some water
birds, remain in the nests for differing lengths of
time and are fed by the old birds; while others of
the water birds and most of the game birds leave
the nest as soon as the down is dry, and find food
as they are taught by their elders, being sheltered
at night so long as needful.

Ul. Birds of the Bible.—The birds of the Bible
were the same species and form as exist in Pal
today. Because of their wonderful coloring, power-
ful flight, joyous song, and their similarity to
humanity in home-making and the business of
raising their young, birds have been given much
attention, and have held conspicuous place since
the dawn of history. When the brain of man was
young and more credulous than today he saw omens,
signs and miracles in the characteristic acts of
birds, and attributed to them various marvelous
powers: some were considered of good omen and
a, blessing, and some were bad and a curse.

The historians of the Bible frequently used
birds in comparison, simile, and metaphor. They
are first mentioned in Gen 7 14.15,
“They, and every beast after its kind,
and all the cattle after their kind,
and every creeping thing that creepeth
upon the earth after its kind, and every bird after


1. Earliest
Mention


its kind, every bird of every sort.” This is the
enumeration of the feathered creatures taken into
the ark to be preserved for the perpetuation of
species after the flood abated. They are next
found in the description of the sacrifice of Abram,
where it was specified that he was to use, with the
animals slaughtered, a turtle dove and a young
pigeon, the birds not to be divided. It is also
recorded that the birds of prey were attracted by
the carcases as described in Gen 16 9-11, ‘‘And
he said unto him, Take me a heifer three years old,
and a she-goat three years old, and a ram three
years old, and a turtle-dove, and a young pigeon.
And he took him all these, and divided them in the
midst, and laid each half over against the other:
but the birds divided he not. And the birds of
prey came down upon the carcasses, and Abram
drove them away.’ Pal abounded in several
varieties of “doves” (q.v.) and their devotion to each
other, and tender, gentle characteristics had marked
them as a loved possession of the land; while the
clay cotes of pigeons were reckoned in establishing
an estimate of a man’s wealth.

In an abandon of gratitude to God these people
offered of their best-loved and most prized posses-

sions as sacrifice; and so it is not sur-
2. Used in prising to find the history of burnt
Sacrifice offerings frequently mentioning these

birds which weré loved and prized
above all others. Their use is first commanded in
Lev 1 14-17, “And if his oblation to Jeh be a
burnt-offering of birds, then he shall offer his
oblation of turtle-doves, or of young pigeons. And
the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring
off its head, and burn it on the altar; and the blood
thereof shall be drained out on the side of the altar;
and he shall take away its crop with the filth
thereof, and cast it beside the altar on the east part,
in the place of the ashes.’ Again in Lev 6 7-10,
we read: ‘‘And if his meaus suffice not for a lamb,
then he shall bring his trespass-offering for that
wherein he hath sinned, two turtle-doves, or two
young pigeons, unto Jeh; one for a sin-offering,
and the other for a burnt-offering.”” Throughout
the Bible these birds figure in the history of sacri-
fice (Lev 12 8; 14 4-8; Nu 6 10, etc).

The custom of weaving cages of willow wands,
in which to confine birds for pets, seems to be
referred to when Job asks (41 5),
“Wilt thou play with him as with a bird?

Or wilt thou bind him for tliy maidens?"
See Job 12 7:

“But ask now the heasts, and they shall teach thee;

And the birds of the heavens, and they shall tell thee.”
David was thinking of the swift homeward flight
of an eagle when he wrote:

‘In Jehovah do I take refuge:
How say ye to my soul,
Flee as a bird to your mountain ?"’ (Ps 11 1).
His early days guarding the flocks of his father no
deube suggested to him the statement found in Ps
li:
“IT know all the birds of the mountains;


And the wild beasts of the field are mine”’
RVm “in my mind").


3. Other
References


In describing Lebanon, the Psalmist wrote of its
waters:
“By them the birds of the heavens have their habitation:
They sing among the branches'' (104 12).
He mentioned its trees:
‘Where the birds make their nests:
As for the stork, the fir-trees are her house’”’ (104 17).
See also 78 27; 148 10.
The origin of the oft-quoted phrase, “A little
bird told me,” can be found in Eccl 10 20: “Revile
not the king, no, not in thy thought; and revile


477


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Birds
Birth


not the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the
heavens shall carry the voice, and that which hath
wings shall tell the matter.” In a poetical de-
scription of spring in the Song of Solomon, we read:
‘*The flowers appear on the earth;
The time of the singing of birds is come,
And the voice of the turtle-dove is heard in our land"!
(Cant 2 12).


In his prophecy concerning Ethiopia, Isaiah
wrote, ‘They shall be left together unto the raven-
ous birds of the mountains, and to the beasts of
the earth; and the ravenous birds shall summer
upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall
winter upon them” (Isa 18 6). In foretelling God’s
judgment upon Babylon, Isaiah (46 11) refers to
Cyrus as “a ravenous bird [called] from the east, the
man of my counsel from a far country”; “probably
in allusion to the fact that the griffon was the em-
blem of Persia; and embroidered on its standard”
(HDB, I, 632); (see Factz). Jer 4 25 describes
the habit of birds, which invariably seek shelter
before an approaching storm. In His denunciation
of Israel, Jeh questions, in Jer 12 9, “Is my
heritage unto me as a speckled bird of prey? are
the birds of prey against her round about?” When
Jeremiah threatened the destruction of Jerus, he
wrote that Jeh would ‘cause them to fall by the
sword before their enemies, and by the hand of them
that seek their life: and their dead bodies will I give
to be food for the birds of the heavens” (19 7): that
is, He would leave them for the carrion eaters. Eze-
kiel threatens the same fate to the inhabitants of Gog
(89 4.17). Hosea (9 11) prophesies of Ephraim,
“Their glory shall fly away like a bird.” In the
’ Sermon on the Mount, Jesus mentions the birds,
as recorded by Mt 6 26: “Behold the birds of the
heaven, that they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barns; and your heavenly Father feedeth
them. Are not ye of much more value than they?”
In the sermon from the boat where He spoke the
parable of the Sower He again mentioned the birds:
“As he sowed, some seeds fell by the way side, and
the birds came and devoured them” (13 4). Mark
describes the same sermon in 4 4, and ver 32 of
the same ch quotes the parable of the Mustard
Seed: “Yet when it is sown, [it] groweth up, and
becometh greater than all the herbs, and putteth
out great branches; so that the birds of the heaven
can lodge under the shadow thereof.” In 8 5,
Luke gives his version of the parable of the Sower,
and in 18 19 of the Mustard Seed. See also Rev
19 17.21. These constitute all the important refer-
ences to birds in the Bible, with the exception of a
few that seem to belong properly under such sub-
jects as Traps; Nets; Caags, etc.

GenE StTraTTON-PoRTER

BIRDS OF ABOMINATION. See Asomina-
TION, BIRDS OF.


BIRDS OF PREY, pra: They were undoubtedly
the first birds noticed by the compilers of Bib. rec-
ords. They were camp followers, swarmed over
villages and perched on the walls of cities. They
were offensive in manner and odor, and of a bold-
ness unknown to us in birds. They flocked in
untold numbers, there was small defence against
them, and the largest and strongest not only
carried away meat prepared for food and sacrifice,
but also preyed upon the much-prized house
pigeons, newly born of the smaller animals, and
even at times attacked young children. See Gen
15 11, “And the birds of prey came down upon the
carcasses, and Abram drove them away.” Be-
cause they were attracted from above the clouds
by anything suitable for food, people recognized
that these were birds of unusual vision. When
Job wanted to tell how perfectly the path to the


gold mine was concealed, he wrote, ‘That path
no bird of prey knoweth” (Job 28 7). The infer-
ence is, that, if it were so perfectly concealed that
it escaped the piercing eyes of these birds, it was
not probable that man would find it. These birds
were so strong, fierce and impudent that everyone
feared them, and when the prophets gave warning
that people would be left for birds of prey to
ravage, they fully understood what was meant, and
they were afraid (Isa 18 6). In His complaint
against His heritage, Jeb questions, ‘“‘Is my heritage
unto me as a speckled bird of prey? are the birds
of pier against her round about?” (Jer 12 9).
And when he prophesied the destruction of Jerus,
Jeremiah painted a dreadful picture, but one no
doubt often seen in that land of pillage and war-
fare: “Their dead bodies will I give to be food for
the birds of the heavens, and for the beasts of the
earth” (19 7). Gene STRATTON-PoRTER


BIRDS, UNCLEAN, un-klén’: The lists of birds
forbidden as food are given in Lev 11 13-19 and
Dt 14 12-18. The names are almost identical,
Dt containing one more than Lev and varying the
order slightly. In Dt 14 13 the first name, hd-
ra@’ah, is almost certainly a corruption of ha-da’ah,
the first name in Lev 11 14. In ARV it is tr
“kite” in Lev, while in Dt it is tr’ “glede.”’ The
additional one in Dt is ha-dayyah, and is tr “kite.”
Doubtless the three words, ha-da@ ah, ha-’ayyah and
ha-dayyah, are generic and refer to different birds
of the kite or perhaps falcon family, so it is impos-
sible to give specific meanings tothem. There are
twenty-one names in all, counting the extra one in
Dt. The tr of many of these words is disputed.
The ARV gives them as follows: eagle, gier eagle,
ospray, kite, faleon, glede, every raven, ostrich,
night-hawk, sea-mew, hawk, little owl, cormorant,
great owl, horned owl, pelican, vulture, stork, heron,
hoopoe and bat. It will be observed that all of
them are either carrion-eaters, birds of prey, or
water fowl. The names of those birds which may
be eaten are not given, the principle of classification
is that of elimination. No principle of separation
is given as is the case with the animals. The reason
for the prohibition doubtless lies in the unsanitary
and repulsive nature of the flesh of these birds, the
Divine command endorsing the instincts which were
repelled by such food. For particulars, see separate
arts. on each of these birds. See also ABOMINATION,
Birps oF. James Jos1Ad REEVE


BIRSHA, bir’sha (W715, birsha‘): King of Go-
morrah (Gen 14 2), who joined the league against
Chedorlaomer. The name is probably corrupt;
some have tried to explain it as YWA, brresha‘,
“with wickedness,’ a name purposely used by the
writer in referring to this king.


BIRTH, birth (yéveors, génesis):

(1) It was said by the angel beforehand of John
the Baptist, ‘(Many shall rejoice at his birth’;
and when he was born Elisabeth said, ‘“Thus hath
the Lord done unto me... . to take away my
reproach among men” (Lk 1 14.25). Among the
ancient Hebrews barrenness was a “‘Teproach,”’
and the birth of a child, of a son esp., an occasion
for rejoicing.

(2) This, no doubt, was due in part to the Mes-
sianic hope inspired and sustained by prophecy
(see Gen 3 15, where it was foretold that the seed
of the woman should bruise the serpent’s head; and
subsequent prophecies too numerous to mention).
Cases in point worth studying are found in Gen 4
1, where Eve rejoices over the birth of her firstborn
and cries, “I have gotten a man with the help of


Birth, New
Bishop


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


478


Say”


Jeh”; and 1S 1 20, where Hannah exults over her


firstborn, calling his name ‘Samuel,’ ‘“‘because,”’ ,


she says, “I have asked him of Jeh.”


(3) The marvelous passage in Isa 7 14, ‘Behold, |


a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall
call his name Immanuel,’”’ must have intensified the
. longing and hope of every devout Jewish maiden to
he a mother, if mayhap, under God, she might be
the mother of Messiah—Immanuel! (Cf Mt 1 22.
23; Lk 1 13f.) See Jesus Curist; Virain Birru.
Gero. B. Eaczr
BIRTH, NEW. See Recenzratron.


BIRTH, VIRGIN. See Virain Birts.


BIRTHDAY, birth’da:

(1) The custom of observing birthdays of great
men, esp. of kings, was widespread in ancient times
(seeGen 40 20f, ‘thethird day, which was Pharaoch’s
birthday,” etc; cf 2-Macc 6 7; and Herod. ix.110;
inthe NT, Mt 146; Mk 6 21, “Herod on his birth-
day made a supper to his lords,” ete, i.e. Herod An-
tipas). Here we see the ancient custom reflected in
two conspicuous instances cents. apart: (a) Pharaoh,
on his birthday ‘made a feast unto all his servants,”
etc, and (b) Herod on his birthday ‘‘made a supper to
his lords, and the high captains,” etc. The AV (Mt
14 6) has it “when Herod’s birthday was kept,” etc.

The correct text here (Tisch., HH) has a very peculiar
construction, but without material difference of meaning.
The locative case gives the time of the principal action,
‘danced on Herod’s birthday, when it occurred.”
The construction is not unexampled (see Jelf, §699).
This need not be called ‘‘a case absolute,’’ though it
corresponds to the Lat ablative (locative) absolute;
and the Gr genitive absolute is itself not really ‘‘ abso-
lute,"’ ie. it is not cut loose from the rest of the con-
struction, but gives some event to which the principal
action is referred, for the indication of its circumstances.

(2) The term “birthday” (ra yevéowa, td genésia)
was applied also to the anniversary of a king’s ac-
cession to the throne (Edersheim); but Wieseler’s
argument that such is the case here is not conclusive.
It is easy to suppose that when Herod’s birthday
approached he was sojourning at the castle of
Machaerus, accompanied by leading military and
civil officials of his dominions (Mk 6 21). Petty
ruler as he was, not properly ‘king’ at all, he
affected kingly ways (cf Est 5 3.6; 7 2).

(8) Genesia, which in Attic Gr means the commem-
oration of the dead, in later Gr is interchangeable
with genéthlia = “birthday celebrations”; and there
isno good reason why the rendering of the AV and RV
here, “birthday,” should not he right. (See Swete
on Mk 6 21, and HDB, s.v.) For date of Christ’s
birth, etc, see Jesus Curist; CaLenpar, etc.

Gzo. B. Eacrr

BIRTHRIGHT, bdrth’rit (W543, bekhorah,
from btkhér, “firstborn”; wpwrordkia, prototékia):
Birthright is the right which naturally belonged to
the firstborn son. Where there were more wives
than one, the firstborn was the son who in point
of time was born before the others, apparently
whether his mother was a wife or a concubine.
Sarah protests against Ishmael being heir along
with Isaac, but it is possible that the bestowal of
the rights of the firstborn on Isaac was not due to
any law, but rather to the influence of a favorite
wife (Gen 21 10). The birthright of the first-
born consisted in the first place of a double portion
of what his father had to leave. This probably
means that he had a double share of such property
as could be divided. We have no certain knowledge
of the manner in which property was inherited in the
patriarchal age, but it seems probable that the lands
and flocks which were the possession of the family
as a whole, remained so after the death of the father.
The firstborn became head of the family and thus suc-
ceeded to the charge of the family property, becoming


responsible for the maintenance of the younger sons,
the widow or widows, and the unmarried daughters.
He also, as head, succeeded to a considerable amount
of authority over the other members. Further, be
generally received the blessing, which placed him
in close and favored covenant-relationship with
Jeh. According to the accounts which have come
down to us, all these gifts and privileges could
be diverted from the firstborn son. This could
happen with his own consent, as in the case of Esau,
who sold his birthright to Jacob (Gen 25 29-34),
or by the decision of the father, as in the case of
Renben (Gen 48 22; 49 3.4; 1 Ch 6 1.2) and of
Shimri (1 Ch 26 10). In the Deuteronomic ver-
sion of the law, a provision is made, prohibiting
the father from making the younger son the pos-
sessor of the birthright, just because his mother
was specially beloved (Dt 21 15-17). The bless-
ing also could be diverted from the eldest son.
This was done when Jacob blessed the children of
Joseph, and deliberately put the younger before
the elder (Gen 48 13.14.17-19); even when the
blessing was obtained by the younger son in a
fraudulent manner, it could not be recalled (Gen 27).
Jacob does not appear to have inherited any of the
property of his father, although he had obtained
both the birthright and the blessing.

In the NT “birthright,” prototokia, is mentioned
only once (He 12 16), where the reference is to
Esau. In various passages where Our Lord is
spoken of as the firstborn, as in Col 1 15-19;
He 1 2, the association of ideas with the OT con-
ception of birthright is easy to trace. See also
First-Born; Famity; Herr; Innerrrance; Law.

; J. Macartney WiILson

BIRTH-STOOL, btrth’stool: Found only in
Ex 1 16, in connection with Heb women in Egypt
when oppressed by Pharaoh. The Heb (’dbhnayim)
here rendered “‘birth-stool” is used in Jer 18 3,
and is there rendered “‘potter’s wheel.” The word
is used in both places in the dual form, which
points, no doubt, to the fact that the potter’s
wheel was composed of two discs, and suggests that
the birth-stool was similarly double. See Stoot.


BIRZAITH, bir-za/ith, AV Birzavith, bdr-z4’vith
(PII, YTD, birzdwith or birzdyith; Bytalé, Be-
zatih, or Beptale, Berzaie): The name of a town in
Asher founded by Malchiel (1 Ch 7 31). It
probably corresponds to the modern Bir ez-Zait,
‘“well of olive oil,” near Tyre.


BISHLAM, bish’lam cobwa, bishlam, “‘peaceful”’
[?]): One of three foreign colonists who wrote
a letter of complaint against the Jews to Artaxerxes
(Ezr 4 7=1 Esd 2 16). In 1 Esd the reading
is “Bélemus.” ‘And iu the days of Artaxerxes
wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest
of his companions, unto Artaxerxes, king of Per-
sia,” etc (Ezr 4 7). The LXX renders Bishlam
en etréné, “in peace,” as though it were a phrase
rather than a proper name; this is clearly an error.


BISHOP, bish’up: The word is evidently an
abbreviation of the Gr émlrxomos, episkopos; Lat
episcopus.

GENERAL
_ The LXX gives it the generic meaning of ‘‘super-
intendency, oversight, searching’ (Nu 4 16; 31 14)
in matters pertaining to the church,


1. Use in the state, and the army (Jgs 9 28;
the LXX 2K 12 11; 2 Ch 34 12.17; 1 Macc
and Classic 1 54; Wisd 1 6). Nor is it unknown
Gr to classical Gr. Thus Homer in the


Iliad applied it to the gods (xxii.255),
also Plutarch, Cam., 5. In Athens the governors
of conquered states were called by this name.


479


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Birth, New
Bishop


The word is once applied to Christ himself, “un-
to the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls” (1 Pet
2 25). It abounds in Pauline lit.,
2. NT Use and is used as an alternative for
presbiiteros or elder (Tit 1 5.7; 1 Tim
31; 414; 6 17.19). The earliest ecclesiastical
offices instituted in the church were those of elders
and deacons, or rather the reverse, inasmuch as
the latter office grew almost immediately out of
the needs of the Christian community at Jerus
(Acts 6 1-6). The presbyteral constitution of
Jerus must have been very old (Acts 11 30) and
was distinct from the apostolate (Acts 16 2.4.6.22.
23; 16 4). As early as 50 AD Paul appointed
“elders” in every church, with prayer and fasting
(Acts 14 23), referring to the Asiatic churches
before established. But in writing to the Philip-
pians (1 1) he speaks of “‘bishops” and ‘‘deacons.”’
In the gentile Christian churches this title evidently
had been adopted; and it is only in the Pastoral
Epistles that we find the name ‘“‘presbyters” ap-
plied. The name “presbyter” or “elder,” familiar
to the Jews, signifies their age and place in the
church; while the other term “bishop” refers
rather to their office. But both evidently have
reference to the same persons. Their office is
defined as “ruling” (Rom 12 8), ‘‘overseeing”’
(Acts 20 17.28; 1 Pet 6 2), caring for the flock
of God (Acts 20 28). But the word archein, ‘‘to
rule,” in the hierarchical sense, is never used.
Moreover each church had a college of presbyter-
bishops (Acts 20 17.28; Phil 11; 1 Tim 4 14).
During Paul’s lifetime the church was evidently
still unaware of the distinction between presbyters
and bishops.

Of a formal ordination, in the later hierarchical
sense, there is no trace as yet. The word “or-
dained” used in the AV (Acts 1 22) is an unwar-
rantable interpolation, rightly emended in the RV.
Neither the word cheirotonésantes (Acts 14 23,
tr? “appointed” ARV) nor katastésés (Tit 1 5,
tr? “appoint” ARV) is capable of this tr. In
rendering these words invariably by “ordain,” the
AV shows a vitium originis. No one doubts that
the idea of ordination is extremely old in the history
of the church, but the laying on of hands, men-
tioned inthe NT (Acts 13 3; 1 Tim 4 14; 2 Tim
16; cf Acts 14 26; 16 403 points to the com-
munication of a spiritual gift or to its invocation,
rather than to the imparting of an official status.

According to Rome, as finally expressed by the
Council of Trent, and to the episcopal idea in general,

the hierarchical organization, which


3. Later originated in the 3d cent., existed
Develop- from the beginning in the NT church.
ment of But besides the NT as above quoted,
the Idea the early testimony of the church


maintains the identity of ‘‘presby-
ters’ and “bishops.” Thus Clement of Rome
(Ep. 1, chs 42, 44, 57), the Did, ch 15; perhaps
the Constitutions, II, 33, 34, in the use of the pl.
form; Irenaeus (Adv. Haer., iii.2, 3), Ambrosiaster
(on 1 Tim 3 10; Eph 4 11), Chrysostom (Hom
9 in Ep. ad Tim), in an unequivocal statement, the
“presbyters of old were called bishops . .. . and
the bishops presbyters,” equally unequivocally
Jerome (Ad Tit, 1, 7), “the same is the presbyter,
who is also the bishop.” Augustine and other
Fathers of the 4th and 5th cents. hold this view,
and even Peter Lombard, who preceded Aquinas
as the great teacher of the church of the Middle
Ages. Hatch of Oxford and Harnack of Berlin,
in the face of all this testimony, maintain a dis-
tinction between the presbyters, as having charge
of the law and discipline of the church, and the
bishops, as being charged with the pastoral care of
the church, preaching and worship. This theory


is built upon the argument of prevailing social
conditions and institutions, as adopted and imitated
by the church, rather than on sound textual proof.
The distinction between presbyters and bishops
can only be maintained by a forced exegesis of the
Scriptures. The later and rapid growth of the
hierarchical idea arose from the accession of the
Ebionite Christian view of the church, as a necessary
continuation of the OT dispensation, which has so
largely influenced the history of the inner develop-
ment of the church in the first six cents. of her
existence. Henry E. Dosker


ANGLICAN VIEW


I. Episcopacy Defined.—Episcopacy is the gov-
ernment in the Christian church by bishops. The
rule of the Orthodox churches in the East, of the
Roman Catholics, and of the Anglicans is that the
consecration of other bishops, and the ordination
of priests and deacons can only be by a bishop;
and with them, a bishop is one who claims historic
descent from apostolic or sub-apostolic times.

I. Offices in the Early Church.—In the NT, the
office of bishop is not clearly defined. Indeed there
appear to have been many degrees of ministry in
the infant church: apostles, prophets, evangelists,
teachers, presbyters or elders, bishops or over-
seers, and deacons.

Due allowance is not generally made for the
mental attitude of the apostles and early Chris-
tians. They were looking for the speedy return of
Christ, and consequently did not organize the church
in its infancy, as it was afterward found necessary
todo. For this reason, while the different persons
who composed the body of Christian ministers did
not overlap or infringe on each other’s work, yet
the relative rank or priority of each minister was
not clearly defined.

The apostles were undoubtedly first, and in them
tested the whole authority, and they were the

depository of the power committed
1. Apostles unto them by Christ.

Next to the apostles in rank, and
first in point of mention (Acts 11 27), came the
prophets. So important were these officers in the

: early church that they were sent from
2. Prophets Jerus to warn the rapidly growing
church at Antioch of an impending
famine. Then it appears that there were resident
prophets at Antioch, men of considerable impor-
tance since their names are recorded, Barnabas,
Symeon, Lucius, Manaen and Saul (Acta 13 1).
These men received a command from the Holy
Spirit to “separate me Barnabas and Saul,” on
whom they laid their hands and sent them forth on
their work. The election is conducted on the same
lines as the election by the eleven apostles of St.
Matthias, and Barnabas and Paul are hereafter
called apostles. It is an ordination to the highest
order in the Christian ministry by ‘‘prophets and
teachers.” Whether “prophets and teachers” refers
to two distinct ministries, or whether they are terms
used for the same one is uncertain. It may be that
of the five men mentioned, some were prophets,
and others teachers.

In Acts 16 32 we have given us the names of
two other prophets, Judas and Silas. St. Paul
tells the Corinthians (1 Cor 12 28) that God hath
set some in his church, first apostles, secondly
prophets, thirdly teachers, and writing to the
Ephesians he places the prophets in the same rank.
“He gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and
gome, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;
for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
ministry” (Eph 4 11.12 AV). And again, he says
that the mystery of Christ is now “revealed unto
his holy apostles and prophets in the Spirit” (Eph


Bishop


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


480


3 5). The same apostle in that wonderful imagery
of Christians being built up for a habitation of God,
says they are “being built upon the foundation of
the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself
being the chief corner stone’ (Eph 2 20).

In the case of the ordination of Timothy, which
St. Paul says distinctly was by his own laying on
of hands and that of the presbytery, it is of great
consequence to note that St. Paul says to Timothy
that his ordination was “according to the prophecies
which went before on thee” (1 Tim 1 18 AV).
From this it would appear that the prophets, as
in the case of St. Paul himself, guided by the Holy
Ghost, chose Timothy for the overseership or bishop-
ric, or it may be, which is just as likely, that Tim-
othy was set apart by the laying on of hands by
some prophets, to the rank of elder or presbyter
which did not carry with it the “overseership.”
It is at any rate evident that in the selection of
Timothy St. Paul is insistent on pointing out that
it was through the prophets (cf 1 Tim 1 18; 4 14;
2 Tim 1 6).

In Revelation, the term prophet constantly occurs
as a term denoting rank equivalent to that of
apostle: “‘ye saints, and ye apostles, and ye proph-
ets’ (Rev 18 20); “blood of prophets and of
saints’ (Rev 16 6; 18 24). The angel calls him-
self ‘‘thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the
prophets’ (Rev 22 9 AV). The words prophesy
and prophesying are used in a general sense, and
it does not mean that they were in every case the
formal utterances of prophets.

The ministry of the elders of the Christian
church was modeled after that of the synagogue in

which there were elders and teachers.
3. Elders or The Christian elders or presbyters were
Presbyters most likely a council of advice in each

local Christian ecclesia. They appear
to act conjointly and not separately (Acts 15 4.6.22;
16 4; 20 17; Jas 6 14).

Teachers were the equivalent of those teachers

or catechists of the synagogue before whom Our
Lord was found in the temple. Evan-

4. Teachers gelists were persons who probably
had the gift of oratory and whose

function it was to preach the glad tidings. Philip

was one of them (Acts 21 8). In the instructions
to Timothy he is bidden to do the

6. Evangel- work of an evangelist, that is to say,

ists to preach the gospel. This was to be
part of his work in the ministry.

In writing to Timothy, St. Paul twice says that
he himself was ordained preacher, and apostle and
teacher. This does not mean that he held three
grades of the ministry, but that his duties as an
apostle were to preach and to teach. The fact
that the apostles called themselves elders does not
thereby confirm the view that the bishops men-
tioned by them were not superior to elders, any
more than the fact that the apostles called them-
selves teachers, or preachers, makes for the view
that teachers, or preachers, were the equals of
apostles.

Bishops or overseers were probably certain
elders chosen out of the body of local elders. Under

the Jewish dispensation, the elders
6. Bishops stayed at home, that is, they did no

ministerial visiting, but it was soon
found necessary as the Christian church grew to
have someone to attend to outside work to win
over by persuasion and exposition of the Scriptures
those inclined to embrace Christianity. This neces-
sitated visiting familiesin their own homes. Then,
it became necessary to shepherd the sheep. Someone
had to oversee or superintend the general work. The
Jewish elders always had a head and in a large
synagogue the conditions laid down for its head, or


legatus, were almost identical with those laid down
by St. Paul to Timothy. He was to be a father of
a family, not rich or engaged in business, possessing
a good voice, apt to teach, etc.

The term episkopos was one with which the
Hellenistic Jews and Gentiles were well acquainted;
and it became thus a fitting term by which to desig-
nate the men called out of the body of elders to this
special work of oversight. Then, again, the term
episkopos was endeared to the early Christians as the
one applied to Our Lord—‘‘the Shepherd and Bishop
of your souls” (1 Pet 2 25). The duties of elders,
or presbyters, are not clearly defined in the NT.

In the Acts, the term is found only twice, one
in reference to Judas, ‘“‘his bishopric [or overseer-
ship] let another take’ (Acts 1 20AV), and in
St. Paul’s address to the elders of Ephesus, he warns
them to feed the church over which they have been
made overseers or bishops (Acts 20 28). It is
impossible to say whether this ‘‘overseership”
refers to all the elders addressed, or to such of those
elders as had been made “overseers,” or ‘‘bishops.’’

In the epistles, we find the church more clearly
organized, and in these writings we find more
definite allusions to bishops and their duties (Phil
11; 1 Tim 3 1.2; Tit 17; 1 Pet 2 25).

St. Paul tells Timothy, “If a man desire the office
of a bishop [or overseer] he desireth a good work.’’
‘““A bishop [or overseer] must be blameless’ (1 Tim
31.2 AV). He tells Titus that “he is to ordain
elders in every city’ and that a “bishop must be
blameless, as the steward of God” (Tit 1 5.7 AV).

On the other hand, there are numerous texts
where elders and their duties are mentioned and
where there is no reference whatever to bishopric
or oversight. The epistles show that of necessity
there had grown to be a more distinct organiza-
tion of the ministry, and that following the custom
of the synagogue to some of the elders had been
committed a bishopric or oversight. At the same
time the rank of a bishop, or overseer, was not yet
one of the highest. St. Paul does not enumerate
it in the order of ministry which he gives to the
Ephesians—apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors
and teachers.

That Timothy had an oversight over the elders
or presbyters is evident from the fact that St. Paul
enjoins him to rebuke those that sin: ‘‘Against an
elder receive not an accusation, except at the mouth
of two or three witnesses. Them that sin reprove
in the sight of all” (1 Tim 6 19.20). This, of
course, refers to a formal trial by one in authority
of persons inferior to him in rank.

It has been asserted that the terms elder and
bishop in the NT were equivalent and denoted the
same office or grade in the ministry. This asser-
tion seems unwarranted. They do not naturally
denote the same grade any more than do apostle
and teacher, or angel and prophet.

The deacons were the seven appointed to take
charge of the temporal affairs of the church. Their

appomtment was perhaps suggested
7. Deacons by the alms-collectors of the synagogue.

In the NT they do not appear as
deacons to have had any part in the sacred ministry,
except, in the case of Philip the evangelist, if it
be assumed that he was a deacon, which is uncer-
tain. Nowhere is it recorded that they laid hands
on anyone, or were considered as capable of be-
stowing any grace. In the epistles they are men-
tioned with the bishops—“bishops and deacons”
(Phil 1 1}, thus showing the nature of their in-
fluence as the helpers of the “‘bishops”’ in the manage-
ment of the growing funds, or properties of the
church.

II, Episcopacy according to the NT.—The
passages where the Gr word occurs which has been


481 : THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bishop


tr? either as bishops, or overseers, are so few that
they are enumerated: Acts 20 17.28: the Ephesian
elders are stated to be bishops [or overseers] to
feed the church; Phil 1 1: the salutation of Paul
and Timothy to bishops [or overseers] and deacons
at Philippi; 1 Tim 3 1.2 and Tit 1 7 give the
exhortation to Timothy and Titus as holding the
office of a bishop; 1 Pet 2 25, where the apostle
referring to Christ says, ‘unto the Shepherd and
Bishop of your souls.”

IV. The ‘‘Didache.’’—Passing out of the NT,
we come to the early Christian writing, the so-
called Teaching of the Twelve Apostles. Setting
aside the question for what class of Christians this
document was intended, the clear fact stands out
that at the date of its writing the two highest
grades in the Christian ministry were still called
apostles and prophets. Various dates have been
een to this document ranging from 80 to 160

At the end of ch 10, which deals with the thanks-
giving or eucharist, the remark is made, ‘But
permit the prophets to make thanksgiving as much
as they desire.”” Chs 11 and 13 deal with apostles
and prophets. They were to be treated ‘‘according
to the ordinance of the gospel.” An apostle was
not to be allowed to stay more than a couple of
days at the utmost, and in no case was he to receive
any money, else he was to be considered ‘‘a false
prophet.” A prophet could beg on behalf of
others, but not for himself; but a prophet could
settle among a congregation, and in that case he
was to receive the same first-fruits “of money and
raiment and of every possession” as the chief
priest did under the old dispensation. It is to be
noted that in reality the prophets, though placed
second in order, were to be treated with the greater
respect. If the prophet settles down, he becomes
the man of the first rank in that Christian com-
munity.

Ch 15 deals with bishops and deacons, and we are
told that if appointed they rendered the ministry
of prophets and teachers, but the warning is given,
“Despise them not, therefore, for they are your
honoured ones, together with the prophets and
teachers.” This shows that bishops were localized ;
and that while they could be appointed over a
community, they were not considered as of equal
rank with the prophets.

V. Clement of Rome.—Clement of Rome in his
Epistle to the Corinthians says that the apostles
preaching through countries and cities appointed
the first-fruits of their labors to be bishops and
deacons (ch 42). It is usually.said that Clement
meant elders by the term “bishops,” but it is much
more likely that he meant what he said, that
according to the tradition received by him, the
apostles appointed bishops, that is, appointed
bishops out of the elders—mentioned in the Acts.
In ch 44 Clement warns against the sin of ejecting
from the episcopate those who have presented the
offerings, and says, ‘‘Blessed are those presbyters
who have finished their course.”’

The reason why the terms apostles and prophets
fell into desuetude was, as regards the first, not so
much out of respect to the original apostles, but
because the apostles in the sub-apostolic age became
apparently only wandering evangelists of little
standing; while the prophets lowered their great
office by descending to be soothsayers, as the
Shepherd of Hermas plainly intimates. With the
fall of the apostles and the prophets, there rose
into prominence the bishops and_deacons.

VI. Bishops and Deacons.—The deacons acted
as secretaries and treasurers to the bishops. They
were their right-hand men, representing them in all
secular matters. As the numbers of Christians


increased, it was found absolutely necessary for the
bishops to delegate some of their spiritual authority
to a second order.

VII. Bishops and Presbyters (Priests).—Thus
very slowly emerged out of the body of elders the
official presbyters or priests. To them the bishop
delegated the power to teach, to preach, to bap-
tize, to celebrate the Holy Eucharist; but how
slowly is evidenced by the fact that so late as 755
AD the Council of Vern forbade priests to baptize,
except by distinct permission of their bishop.

Vill. Ignatian Epistles on the Three Orders.—
When we come to the Ignatian epistles written
between 110-17 AD, we find a distinct threefold
order. We have given us the names of Damas,
for bishop, Bassus and Apollonius for presbyters,
Zotion for deacon. Thronghont these epistles
there is no question that the bishop is supreme.
Apostles and prophets are not even mentioned.
The bishop succeeds to all the powers the apostles
and prophets had. On the other hand, as with the
Jewish elders, so -with the Christian presbyters,
they form a council with the bishop. Here we
see in clear day what we had all along suspected
to be the case in apostolic times: a council of
presbyters with a ruler at their head and deacons
to attend to money matters.

It is quite immaterial as to whether a bishop had
ten or a hundred presbyter-elders under him,
whether he was bishop in a small town or in a large
city. The question of numbers under him would
not affect his authority as has been claimed. The
greatness of the city in which he exercised this rule
would add dignity to his position, but nothing to
his inherent authority.

From this time on it is admitted by all that
bishops, priests and deacons have been contin-
nously in existence. Their powers and duties
have varied, have been curtailed as one order has
encroached on the power of the other, but still
there the three orders have been. Gradually the
presbyters or priests encroached on the power of
the bishop, till now, according to Anglican usage,
only the power of ordaining, confirming and con-
secrating churches is left to them.

IX. Views of Reformers.—At the time of the
Reformation there was a great outcry against
bishops. This was caused by the fact that under
feudalism the bishops had come to be great tem-
poral lords immersed in schemes of political and
material aggrandizement, and often actually lead-
ing their armies in times of war. Many of the
bishops were proud and arrogant, forgetful that their
duties as fathers of the children of Christ were to
look after those committed to them with fatherly
kindness and charity or that as pastors they had
to tend the erring sheep with Divine patience and
infinite love.

The bulk of the adherents to the Reformed
religion, looking upon the bishops as they were
and as their fathers had known them, recoiled from
retaining the office, although their principal men,
like Calvin, deplored the loss of bishops, and hoped
that bishops of the primitive order would some
day be restored. The present modern Anglican
bishop seems to sum up in his person and office
the requirements laid down by Calvin.

Thus the claim put forth by the Anglicans in
the preface to the Ordinal may be considered as

sound: “It is evident unto all men,
Conclusion diligently reading Holy Scripture and
ancient Authors, that from the Apos-
ties’ time there have been these Orders of Ministers
in Christ’s Church—Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.”
Lireraturs.—tTeaching of the Twelve Apostles;


Clement of Rome; Shepherd of Hermas; Ignatian
epistles; Muratorian Fragment; Works of John Light-


Bishop
Bitter, Bitterness


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


482


foot; Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien; FPellicia,
Polity of the Christian Church; Bishop MacLean, Ancient
Church Orders; Cheetham, Hist of the Christian Church
during the First Siz Cents.; Salmon, Introto NT; Elwin,
The Minister of Baptism; Cruttwell, Literary Hist of Early
Christianity; Potter, Church Government; Lowndes, Vin-
dication of Anglican Orders; E. Hatch, The Organization
of the Early Christian Churches; C. Gore, The Church and
the Ministry; Thompson, Historic Episcopate (Presby-
terian); Baird, Huguenots.
ARTHUR LOWNDES


CONGREGATIONAL VIEW


As a spiritual and social democracy, Congrega-
tionalism finds no warrant or precedent in the NT
for the episcopal conception of the
1. The NT words “bishop,” “presbyter,” and
Churcha ‘‘elder.” It interprets ériexoros, epi-
Spiritual skopos, lit. as overseer—not an ecclesi-
Democracy astical dignitary but a spiritual min-
ister. It finds the Romanist view
of Peter’s primacy, founded alone on Mt 16 18,
contradicted by the entire trend of Christ’s teach-
ing, as e.g. when referring to the Gentiles exercising
lordship and authority Christ says, ‘“‘Not so shall it
be among you” (Mt 20 26 ff). He set the prec-
edent of official greatness when He said “the Son
of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister,’”’ and that ‘whosoever would become great
among you shall be your minister [servant].”
Paul’s testimony confirms this in suggesting no pri-
macy amoug the apostles and prophets, but making
“Christ .... himself... . the chief corner stone”
(Eph 2 20). The organization and history of the
early Christian church establish this view of its
simplicity and democracy. In Acts 1 20 the RV
corrects the rendering ‘“‘bishopric”’ (given by the
King James translators, who were officers in the
Episcopal church) to “office,” thus relieving the
verse of possible ecclesiastical pretensions.

The church formed on the day of Pentecost was
the spontaneous coming together of the original
120 disciples and the 3,000 Christian converts, for
fellowship, worship and work, under the inspiration
and guidance of the Holy Spirit. Its only creed
was belief in the risen Christ and the renewing
power of the Holy Spirit; its only condition of
membership, repentance and baptism.

The apostles naturally took leadership but,
abrogating all authority, committed to the church
as a whole the choice of its officers
and the conduct of its temporal and
spiritual affairs. Judas’ place in the
apostolate was not filled by succession
Vote or episcopal appointment (Acts 1

23-26). The seven deacons were
elected by popular vote (Acts 6 1-6). One of
the seven—Philip—preached and, without protest,
administered the rite of baptism (Acts 8 12.13).

The churches in the apostolic era were inde-
pendent and self-governing, and the absence of
anything like a centralized ecclesiastical authority
is seen by the fact that the council at Jerus, called
to consider whether the church at Antioch should
receive the uncircumcised into membership, was a
delegated body, composed in part of lay members,
and having only advisory power (Acts 15 1-29).

The apostolic letters, forming so large a part of
the NT, are not official documents but letters of

loving pastoral instruction and coun-
3. The sel. The terms bishops, elders, pas-
Epistles not tors and teachers are used synony-
Official mously and interchangeably, thus
Documents limiting the officers of the early church

to two orders: pastors and deacons.
See also CpurcH GovernMENT; D1pacHE.

Under the spiritual tyrannies of the Church of
England, during the reigns of Henry VIII, Edward
VI, “bloody” Mary and Queen Elizabeth, the


2. Election
of Officers
by Popular


Dissenting bodies, chiefly the Congregationalists,
returned to the simplicity and spiritual freedom

of the primitive church. The issue
4. Restora- was forced by two arbitrary acts of


tion of Parliament under Elizabeth: the Act
Primitive of Supremacy and the Act of Uniform-
Ideals ity. Emancipation from the intellect-


ual and religious tyranny of these

acts was wou at the cost of many martyrdoms.
These struggles and persecutions wrought into the
successors of Robert Browne, the father of modern
Congregationalism, a deep-seated and permanent
resentment against all forms of autocratic power
in church and state. They challenged, at the
cost of life, both the Divine Right of kings, and
of bishops. They believed that in Christ Jesus all
believers are literally and inalienably made “kings
and priests unto God” (Rev 1 6 AV), actual spirit-
ual sovereigns, independent of all human dictation
and control in matters of belief and worship. The
Pilgrims expatriated themselves to secure this
spiritual liberty; and to their inherent antagonism
to inherited and self-perpetuated power, whether
civil or ecclesiastical, must be credited the religious
freedom and civil democracy of America.

Lirerature.—For further study see Henry M. Dexter,
Congregationalism, ch ti; Dunning’s Congregationalists in
America, chsi,ii: Rainy, The Ancient Catholic Church.

Dwicut M. Pratt

BISHOPRICK, bish’up-rik (érurxorn, episkopé;
Acts 1 20 AV, quoted from Ps 109 8): RV “of-
fice,’ m, ‘‘overseership.”” See Bisuor.


BISHOPS’ BIBLE. See ENGLISH VERSIONS.


BIT AND BRIDLE, bri’d’] (JO7)"30'9 , methegh
wéa-resen): The two words occur in conjunction (Ps
32 9 AV, “Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule,
which have no understanding; whose mouth
must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come
near unto thee’; RV “else they will not come
near unto thee,” m, “that they come not near.”
Methegh, tr’ “bit”? above, is properly a bridle
or halter in which the bit was a loop passed
round the under jaw of the animal; regen has a


my 5. eae,
Bit and Bridle.


similar meaning. The counsel in the ver is that
men should render a willing obedience to God and
not be like the animals that man has to bridle and
curb in order to get them to do his will. Cf Jas
3 3, where we have “bit” as tr of chalinés, “a
bit” or “curb,” “We put bits [RV “bridles”
in the horses’ mouths that they may obey us.”
“Bridle” occurs separately as tr of methegh (2 8
8 1), “David took Metheg-ammah,’ AVm “the
bridle of Ammah,” RV “the bridle of the mother


483


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Bishop


Bitter, Bitterness


city,” m, as AV; the meaning may be that he took
the control or dominion of it; “I will put ....
my bridle in thy lips’ (2 K 19 28; Isa 37 29);
“a bridle for the ass’’ (Prov 26 3); of regen
(Job 30 11), “They have also let loose the bridle
before me,”’ RV “and they have cast off the bridle
before me” (acted in an unbridled [unrestrained]
manner); 41 13, said of “leviathan” (RV “the
hippopotamus”), “Who can come to him with
his double bridle?” ARV “within his jaws?” ERV
“within his double bridle,” others, “into the double
row of his teeth”; Isa 30 28, ‘“‘a bridle in the jaws
of the people causing them to err,” RV “a bridle
that causeth to err’; of mahsém, which means
“a muzzle” (Ps 39 1), “I will keep my mouth
with a bridle,” AVm ‘Heb, a bridle, or muzzle for
my mouth”; so RVm.

To “bridle” occurs (Jas 1 26, “bridleth not his
tongue”; 3 2 “able to bridle the whole body”;
chalinagogéd, “to lead” or “guide with a bit’).
In 1 Esd 3 6, and 2 Macc 10 29, we have “bridles
of gold” (chrusochalinés). W. L. WaLKER


BITHIAH, bi-thi’a (W903, bithyah; Beda, Beth-
thid; B, Tew, Gelid, “daughter of Jeh’’): The
daughter of a Pharaoh who married Mered, a
descendant of Judah (1 Ch 4 18). Whether this
Pharaoh was an Egyp king, or whether it was in
this case a Heb name, it is difficult to say. The
name Bithiah seems to designate one who had
become converted to the worship of Jeh, and this
would favor the first supposition. If, as the RV
reads, the other wife of Mered is distinguished as
“the Jewess” (instead of AV “‘Jehudijah’’), this
supposition would receive further support.

. Frank E. Hrrscw

BITHRON, bith’ron (JN30, ha-bithron; brnv
Thy waparelvoucay, hélén tén paraleinousan, lit. ‘the
entire [land] extending”; 2 S 2 29, “the Bith-
ron,” i.e. the gorge or groove): Does not seem to
be a proper name; rather it indicates the gorge
by which Abner approached Mahanaim. Buhl
(GAP, 121) favors identification with Wady
‘Ajlin, along which in later times a Rom road con-
nected ‘Ajlan and Mahanaim. Others (Guthe,
Kurz. bib. Wérterbuch, s.v.) incline to Wady esh
Sha'‘vb.


BITHYNIA, bi-thin’i-a (Bivvia, Bithunia):
A coast province in northwestern Asia Minor on
the Propontis and the Euxine. Its narrowest
compass included the districts on both sides of the
Sangarius, its one large river, but in prosperous
times its boundaries reached from the Rhyndacus
on the west to and beyond the Parthenius on the
east. The Mysian Olympus rose in grandeur to a
height of 6,400 ft. in the southwest, and in general
the face of Nature was wrinkled with rugged moun-
tains and seamed with fertile valleys sloping toward
the Black Sea. . : ea

Hittites may have occupied Bithynia in the
remote past, for Priam of Troy found some of his
stoutest enemies among the Amazons on the upper
Sangarius in Phrygia, and these may have been
Hittite, and may easily have settled along the river
to its mouth. The earliest discernible Bithyn-
ians, however, were Thracian immigrants from the
European side of the Hellespont. The country
was overcome by Croesus, and passed with Lydia
under Pers control, 546 BC. After Alexander
the Great, Bithynia became independent, and
Nicomedes I, Prusias I and II, and Nicomedes IT
and III, ruled from 278 to 74 BC. The last king,
weary of the incessant strife among the peoples of
Asia Minor, especially as provoked by the aggres-
sive Mithridates, bequeathed his country to Rome.
Nicomedia and Prusa, or Brousa, were founded


by kings whose names they bear; the other chief
cities, Nicaea and Chalcedon, had been built by
Gr enterprise earlier. There were highways lead-
ing from Nicomedia and Nicaea to Dorylaeum and
to Angora (see Ramsay, Historical Geography of
Asia Minor, and The Church in the Rom Empire
before A.D. 170). Under Rome the Black Sea lit-
toral as far as Amisus was more or less closely
joined with Bithynia in administration.


Ships Drawn up on Coast of Black Sea.


Paul and Silas essayed to go into Bithynia, but
the Spirit suffered them not (Acts 16 7). Other
evangelists, however, must have labored there
early and with marked success. Bithynia is one
of the provinces addressed in 1 Pet 1 1.

Internal difficulties and disorders led to the
sending of Pliny, the lawyer and literary man, as
governor, 111 to 113 AD. He found Christians
under his jurisdiction in such numbers that the
heathen temples were almost deserted, and the
trade in sacrificial animals languished. A memor-
able correspondence followed between the Rom
governor and the emperor Trajan, in which the
moral character of the Christians was completely
vindicated, and the repressive measures required
of officials were interpreted with leniency (see
E. G. Hardy, Pliny’s Correspondence with Trajan,
and Christianity and the Rom Government). Un-
der this Rom policy Christianity was confirmed
in strength and in public position. Subsequently
the first Ecumenical Council of the church was
held in Nicaea, and two later councils convened
in Chalcedon, a suburb of what is now Constanti-
nople. The emperor Diocletian had fixed his resi-
dence and the seat of government for the eastern
Roman Empire in Nicomedia.

Bithynia was for a thousand years part of the
Byzantine Empire, and shared the fortunes and
misfortunes of that state. On the advent of the
Turks its territory was quickly overrun, and Or-
chan, sultan in 1326, selected Brousa as his capital,
since which time this has been one of the chief
Ottoman cities. G. E. Waite


BITTER, bit’ér, BITTERNESS, bit’ér-nes (72,
mar, or NA, marah=“bitter’”’ [lit. or fig.]; also
(noun] “bitterness” or [adv.] “bitterly”; “angry,”
“chafed,” “discontented,” “heavy” [Gen 27 34;
Ex 15 23; Nu 6 18.19.23.24.27; Est 41; Job
3 20; Ps 643; Prov6 4; 27 7; Eccl 7 26;
Isa 8 20; Jer 2°19; 4 18; Iizk 27 31; Am 8.10:
Hab 1 6]; the derivatives V1"2, 7779, and 1779,
marar, m*ror, m*rérah, used with the same signifi-
cance according to the context, are found in Ex
114; 128; Nu911; Job 13 26; Isa 24 9.
The derivatives m*rt and mérirt occur in Dt 32
24; Job 23 2m; and VAN, tamrur, is found in
Jer 6 26; 3115. In the NT the verb mipalvw,
pikraind=“‘to embitter”; the adj. mixpés, pikrés


Bitter Herbs
Blasphemy


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


484


= “bitter,” and the noun expla, pikria, “‘bitter-
ness,” supply the same ideas in Col 3 19; Jas
3 11.14; Rev 8 11; 10 9.10): It will be noted
that the word is employed with three principal
spheres of application: (1) the physical sense of
taste; (2) a fig. meaning in the objective sense of
cruel, biting words; intense misery resulting from
forsaking God, from a life of sin and impurity; the
misery of servitude; the misfortunes of bereave-
ment; (3) more subjectively, bitter and bitterness
describe emotions of sympathy; the sorrow of
childlessness and of penitence, of disappointment;
the feeling of misery and wretchedness, giving rise
to the expression “bitter tears’; (4) the ethical
sense, characterizing untruth and immorality as the
bitter thing in opposition to the sweetness of truth
and the gospel; (5) Nu 5 18 RV speaks of ‘“‘the
water of bitterness that causeth the curse.” Here
it is employed as a technical term.
Frank E. Hirscu

BITTER HERBS, hirbs, or idrbs (275,
mérortm): Originally in the primitive Passover
(Ex 12 8; Nu 9 11) these were probably merely
salads, the simplest and quickest prepared form of
vegetable accompaniment to the roasted lamb.
Such salads have always been favorites in the
Orient. Cucumbers, lettuce, water-cress, parsley
and endive are some of those commonly used.
Later on the Passover ritual (as it does today) laid
emphasis on the idea of “bitterness” as symbolical
of Israel’s lot in Egypt. In modern Pal the Jews
use chiefly lettuce and endive for the “bitter herbs”
of their Passover. In Lam 3 15 the same word is
used: “He hath filled me with bitterness [m°rdrim],
he hath sated me with wormwood.” Here the
parallelism with “wormwood” suggests some plant
more distinctly bitter than the mild salads men-
tioned above, such, for example, as the colocynth
(Citrullus colocynthus) or the violently irritating
squirting cucumber (Lcballium elatertum).

_ E. W. G. MasTerman

BITTERN, bit’érn (SEP, kippddh; Lat Botaurus
stellaris; Gyr éxivos, echinos): A nocturnal mem-
ber of the heron family, frequenting swamps and
marshy places. Its Heb name means a creature
of waste and desert places. The bittern is the most
individual branch of the heron (ardeidae) family
on account of being partially a bird of night.
There are observable differences from the heron
in proportion, and it differs widely in coloration.
It is one of the birds of most ancient history, and
as far back as records extend is known to have
inhabited Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia and
America. The African bird that Bible historians
were familiar with was 2} ft. in length. It had a
4-in. bill, bright eyes and plumage of buff and
chestnut, mottled with black. It lived around
swamps and marshes, hunting mostly at night, and
its food was much the same as that of all members
of the heron family, frogs being its staple article
of diet. Its meat has not the fishy taste of most
members of the heron family, and in former times
was considered a great delicacy of food. In the
days of falconry it was protected in England be-
cause of the sport afforded in huntingit. Aristotle
mentions that previous to his time the bittern was
called éknos, which name indicates ‘‘an idle dis-
position.” It was probably bestowed by people
who found the bird hiding in swamps during the
daytime, and saw that it would almost allow itself
to be stepped upon before it would fly. They did
not understand that it fed and mated at night.
Pliny wrote of it as a bird that ‘‘bellowed like
oxen,” for which reason it was called Taurus.
Other mediaeval writers called it botaurus, from
which our term bittern is derived. There seems to


be much confusion as to the early form of the
name; but all authorities agree that it was bestowed
on the bird on account of its voice. Turner states
that in 1544 the British called it “miredromble,”
and “botley bump,” from its voice. Rolland says
the French called it Beuf d’eau. In later days
“bog-bull,” “stake-driver”’ and “thunder-pumper”’
have attached themselves to it as terms fitly de-
scriptive of its voice. Nuttall says its cry is ‘ike
the interrupted bellowing of a bull, but hollower
and louder, and is heard at a mile’s distance, as if
issuing from some formidable being that resided
at the bottom of the waters.” Tristram says, “Its


en! oz Yee ee
Bittern (Botaurus stellaris).


strange booming note, disturbing the stillness of
night, gives an idea of desolation which nothing
but the wail of a hyena can equal.’”? Thoreau
thought its voice like the stroke of an ax on the
head of a deeply driven stake. In ancient times
it was believed the bird thrust its sharp beak into
areed to produce this sound. Later it was supposed
to be made by pushing the bill into muck and
water while it cried. Now the membrane by which
the sound is produced has been located in the lungs
of the bird. In all time it has been the voice that
attracted attention to the bittern, and it was solely
upon the ground of its vocal attainments that it
entered the Bible. There are three references, all
of which originated in its cry. Isaiah in prophesy-
ing the destruction of Babylon (14 23 AV) wrote:
“T will also make it a possession for the bittern,
and pools of water”; in other words he would make
of it a desolate and lonely swamp. Again in 34 11
AV, in pronouncing judgment against Idumaea,
he wrote, ‘But the cormorant and the bittern shall
possess it.”” In the RV, “cormorant” and ‘“‘bittern’’
are changed to “pelican” and ‘‘porcupine.” The
change from the cormorant to pelican makes less
difference, as both arc water birds, and the Heb
shdlakh, which means “a plunging bird,’ would
apply equally to cither of them. If they were used
to bear out the idea that they would fill the ruins
with terrifying sound, then it is well to remember
that the cormorant had something of a voice, while
the pelican is notoriously the most silent of birds.


485


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bitter Herbs
Blasphemy


The change from bittern to porcupine is one with
which no ornithologist would agree. About 620
BC, the prophet Zephaniah (2 14) clearly indi-
cates this bird: “And herds shall he down in the
midst of her, all the beasts of the nations: both
the pelican and the porcupine shall lodge in the
capitals thereof; their voice shall sing in the win-
dows; desolation shall be in the thresholds: for
he hath laid bare the cedar work.’’ This should
forever settle the question raised by some modern
commentators as to whether a bird or beast is
intended by the word kippadh. In some instances
it, seems to have been confounded with kunfudh,
the hedgehog or porcupine. No natural historian
ever would agree to this, because these animals are
not at home in the conditions that were known
to exist here. Even granting that Nineveh was
to be made dry, it must be remembered that the
marshes of the Tigris lay very close, and the bird
is of night, with a voice easily carrying over a mile.
Also it was to “sing” and to “lodge” on the ‘upper
lintels” which were the top timbers of the doors
and windows. These formed just the location a
bittern would probably perch upon when it left
its marshy home and went booming through the
night in search of a mate. It was without doubt
the love song of the bittern that Isaiah and Zeph-
aniah used in completing prophecies of desola-
tion and horror, because with the exception of
mating time it is a very quiet bird. For these
reasons the change from bittern to porcupine in the
RV, of the paragraph quoted, is a great mistake,
as is also that of cormorant to pelican.
Grne STRaTTON-PORTER
BITTERNESS, bit’ér-ness. See BITTER.


BITTERNESS, WATER OF. See ADULTERY (2).
BITTER WATER. See ApuLtery (2); Maran.
BITUMEN, bi-ti’men.


BIZIOTHIAH, biz-yo-thi’a (WINN Ta, bizyotheyah;
LXX ai kdpar adrav, hai kémai auton, lit. “their
villages”; AV Bizjothjah, biz-joth’ja, ‘place of Jah’s
olives’ [Young], or “contempt of Jah’ [Strong]):
According to MT, a townin the south of Judah,
near Beersheba (Josh 15 28). LXX reads ‘“‘and
her daughters,” only one consonant of MT being
read differently; and so We, Hollenberg, Di et al.
The LXX has probably preserved the original text
(ef Neh 11 27).


BIZTHA, biz’tha (LXX Matav, Mazdn; also
Bozén and Bazed): One of the seven eunuchs
or chamberlains of King Ahasuerus (Xerxes). It
is possible that the name is derived from the Pers
besieh, “bound,” hence “eunuch” (Est 1 10).


BLACK. See Cotors.


BLACKNESS (2°82, kimririm, “obscura-
tions’; MAW, kadhrith, “darkness”; -yvédos,
gnophos, “darkness,” tédos, zéphos, “blackness’’):
Terms rarely used but of special significance in
picturing the fearful gloom and blackness of moral
darkness and calamity. Job, cursing the day of
his birth, wishes that it, a dies ater (“dead black
day’’), might be swallowed up in darkness (Job 3 5).
Because of Israel’s spiritual infidelity Jeh clothes
the heavens with the blackness of sackcloth (Isa
50 3), the figure being that of the inky blackness
of ominous, terrifying thunder clouds. The fear-
ful judgment against sin under the old dispensation
is illustrated by the appalling blackness that en-
veloped smoking, burning, quaking Sinai at the
giving of the law (He 12 18; cf Ex 19 16-19;
20 18). The horror of darkness culminates in the


See SuiME.


impenetrable blackness of the under-world, the
eternal abode of fallen angels and riotously immoral
and ungodly men (Jude ver 13; see also ver 6
and 2 Pet 24.17). Human language is here
too feeble to picture the moral gloom and rayless
night of the lost: ‘Pits [AV ‘“chains’’] of darkness’
(cf the ninth plague of Egypt, “darkness which
may be felt”? [Ex 10 21]). Wicked men are “‘wan-
dering stars,” comets that disappear in “blackness
of darkness . . . . reserved for ever.” In art this
fig. Jangnage has found majestic and awe-inspiring
expression in Doré’s illustrations of Dante’s Pur-
gatory and Milton’s Paradise Lost.
; Dwicut M. Pratr

BLAINS, blanz ((Y2I38, ’dbha‘bu‘ah: only in
Ex 9 9.10): Pustules containing fluid around a
boil or inflamed sore. It is an OE word “bleyen,’’
used sometimes as a synonym for boil. Wyclif
(1382) uses the expression “‘stinkende bleyne” for
Job’s sores. The Heb word is from a root which
means that which bubbles up. See Bort.


BLASPHEMY, blas’fé-mi (BrAacdnpla, blasphé-
ma): In classical Gr meant primarily ‘‘defamation”
or “evil-speaking”’ in general; ‘‘a word of evil omen,”
hence “impious, and irreverent speech against God.”

(1) In the OT as subst. and vb.: (a) (7713,
barakh) ““(Naboth did blaspheme God and the king”
(1 K 21 10.13 AV); (8) (714, gadhaph) of Senna-
cherib defying Jeh (2 K 19 6.22=Isa 37 6.23;
also Ps 44 16; Ezk 20 27; cf Nu 16 30), ‘But
the soul that doeth aught with a high hand [i.e.
knowingly and defiantly], .... the same_ blas-
phemeth [so RV, but AV “reproacheth’’] Jehovah;
and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.”
Blasphemy is always in word or deed, injury, dis-
honour and defiance offered to God, and its penalty
is death by stoning; (c) (10, hdraph) of idolatry
as blasphemy against Jeh (Isa 66 7); (d) (AR,
nakabh) “And he that blasphemeth the name of
Jeh, he shall surely be put to death” (Lev 24 11.16);
(e) (P82, na@ag) David’s sin is an occasion to the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme (2 § 12 14;
also Ps 74 10.18; Isa 52 5; cf Ezk 36 12; 2K
19 3 AV; Isa 37 3).

(2) In the NT blasphemy, subst. and vb., may
be (a) of evil-speaking generally (Acts 13 45; 18 6).
The Jews contradicted Paul ‘and blasphemed,”
RVm “railed.” (Soin AV of Mt 15 19=Mk 7 22;
Col 3 8, but in RV “railings”; Rev 2 9 RVm “‘re-
viling’”’; so perhaps in 1 Tim 1 20; or Hymenaeus
and Alexander may have blasphemed Christ by

rofessing faith and living unworthily of it.) (6)
Bpaaking against a heathen goddess: the town clerk
of Ephesus repels the charge that Paul and his
companions were blasphemers of Diana (Acts 19
37). (ce) Against God: (a) uttering impious words
(Rev 13 1.5.6; 16 9.11.21; 17 3); (8) unworthy
conduct of Jews (Rom 2 24) and Christians (1 Tim
61; Tit 25, and perhaps 1 Tim 1 20); (vy) of
Jesus Christ, alleged to be usurping the authority
of God (Mt 9 3=Mk 2 7=Lk 6 21), claiming to
be the Messiah, the son of God (Mt 26 65=Mk
14 64), or making Himself God (Jn 10 33.36).
(d) Against Jesus Christ: Saul strove to make the
Christians he persecuted blaspheme their Lord (Acts
26 11). So was he himself a blasphemer (1 Tim
1 13; cf Jas 2 7). ie:

(3) Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit: “Every
gin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but

the blasphemy against the Spirit


The Un- shall not be forgiven. And whosoever
pardonable shall speak a word against the Son of
Sin man, it shall be forgiven him; but


whosoever shall speak against the
Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in


Blast
Blindness


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


486


this world, nor in that which is to come” (Mt 12
31.82=Mk 3 28.29; Lk 12 10). As in the OT
“to sin with a high hand” and to blaspheme the
name of God incurred the death penalty, so the
blasphemy against the Holy Spirit remains the one
unpardonable sin. These passages at least imply
beyond cavil the personality of the Holy Spirit,
for sin and blasphemy can only be committed
against persons. In Mt and Mk a particular case
of this blasphemy is the allegation of the Pharisees
that Jesus Christ casts out devils by Beelzebub.
The general idea is that to attribute to an evil
source acts which are clearly those of the Holy
Spirit, to call good evil, is blasphemy against the
Spirit, and sin that will not be pardoned. “A
distinction is made between Christ’s other acts
and those which manifestly reveal the Holy Spirit
in Him, and between slander directed against Him
personally as He appears in His ordinary acts, and
that which is aimed at those acts in which the
Spirit is manifest” (Gould, Mark ad loc.). Luke
does not refer to any particular instance, and seems
to connect it with the denial of Christ, although he,
too, gives the saying that “who shall speak a word
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven.” But
which of Christ’s acts are not acts of the Holy
Spirit, and how therefore is a word spoken against
Him not also blasphemy against the Holy Spirit?
John identifies the Holy Spirit with the exalted
Christ (Jn 14 16-18.26.28). The solution gen-
erally offered of this most difficult problem is con-
cisely put by Plummer (Luke ad loc.): “Constant
and consummate opposition to the influence of
the Holy Spirit, because of a deliberate preference
of darkness to light, render repentance and there-
fore forgiveness morally impossible.’ <A similar
idea is taught in He 6 4-6, and 1 Jn 5 16: “A sin
unto death.” But the natural meaning of Christ’s
words implies an inability or unwillingness to for-
give on the Divine side rather than inability to
repent in man. Anyhow the abandonment of
man to eternal condemnation involves the inability
and defeat of God. The only alternative seems to
be to call the kenotie theory into service, and
to put this idea among the human limitations which
Christ assumed when He became flesh. It is less
difficult to ascribe a limit to Jesus Christ’s knowl-
edge than to God’s saving grace (Mk 13 32;
cf Jn 16 12.13). Itis also noteworthy that in other
respects, at least, Christ acquiesced in the view of
the Holy Spirit which He found among His contem-
poraries. See Hoty Sprait. RgEs


BLAST (MAW}, nshamah, TI, rah):

(1) The blowing of the breath of Jeh, expressive
of the manifestation of God’s power in Nature and
Providence. ‘‘With the blast of thy nostrils the
waters were piled up” (Ex 15 8), referring to the east
wind (14 21; ef 2 5 22 16 and Ps 18 15). “I will
send a blast upon him” (2 K 19 7 AV; RV “put a
spirit in him,’’ i.e. ‘‘an impulse of fear” [Dummelow
in loc.]; cf Isa 37 7). “By the blast of his anger
are they consumed” (Job 4 9; cf Isa 37 36).

(2) The word rah is used with reference to the
tyranny and violence of the wicked (Isa 25 4).

(3) The blowing of a wind instrument: ‘When
they make a long blast with the ram’s horn”
(Josh 6 5). M. O. Evans


BLAST, BLASTING, blast’ing (DTW, shidda-
phon—root, UW, shddkaph, lit. ‘“scorching’’):
This is the effect produced upon grain or other
plants by the hot east winds which blow from the
desert of Arabia. They usually continue to blow
for two or three days at a time. If they occur in
the spring near ripening time, the grain is often
turned yellow and does not properly mature. The


farmers dread this wind. In some localities, if
they suspect that the east wind is coming, they set
up a great shouting and beating of pans, hoping to
drive it off. Sometimes this wind is a double
pestilence, when it brings with it a cloud of locusts
(2 Ch 6 28). The writer, while journeying in the
northern part of the Arabian desert, the source of
these winds, witnessed such a cloud of locusts on
their way toward habitable regions. It did not
call for a very vivid imagination on the part of the
children of Israel to realize the meaning of the
curses and all manner of evil which would befall
those who would not hearken to the voice of Jeh.
Dt 28 22-24 could easily be considered a poetic
description of the east winds (Arab. howa sharkt’yeh)
which visit Pal and Syria at irregular intervals
today. The heat is fiery: it dries up the vegeta-
tion and blasts the grain; the sky is hazy and there
is a glare as if the sun were reflected from a huge
brass tray. Woodwork cracks and warps; the
covers of books curl up. Instead of rain, the wind


brings dust and sand which penetrate into the inner-


most corners of the dwellings. This dust fills the
eyes and inflames them. The skin becomes hot
and dry. To one first experiencing this storm it
seems as though some volcano must be belching
forth heat and ashes. No other condition of the
weather can cause such depression. Such a pesti-
lence, only prolonged beyond endurance, was to
be the fate of the disobedient. This word should
not be confused with mildew. Since the words
blasting and mildew occur together it may be in-
ferred that mildew (lit. ‘a paleness’’) must mean
the sickly color which plants assume for other causes
than the blasting of the east wind, such, as for in-
stance, fungus diseases or parasites (1 K 8 37; Am
49; Hag 2 17). James A. Parc


BLASTUS, blas’tus (BAderos, Bldsios, ‘“‘shoot’’):
The chamberlain of Herod Agrippa I, whose serv-
ices as an intermediary between them and the king
were gained by the people of Tyre and Sidon.
These cities were dependent on Pal for corn and
other provisions, and when Herod, on the occasion
of some commercial dispute, forbade the export of
foodstuffs to Tyre and Sidon, they were at his
mercy and were compelled to ask for peace. ‘“Hav-
ing made Blastus the king’s chamberlain their
friend,” probably by means of a bribe, the Phoen
embassy was given an opportunity of setting their
case before Herod (Acts 12 20 ff).

S. F. Hunter

BLAZE, blaz (“to publish”): Found only in
AV of Mk 1 45, for Gr diaphémizein, tr4 by
RV “spread abroad,” as in Mt 9 31; 28 15.


BLEMISH, blem’‘ish:

(1) B12, mim, DAN, m’dm; papos, mdmos:
This word signifies no particular skin disease, as
has been supposed; but is used generally for any
and all disfiguring affections of the skin, such as
eczema, herpes, scabies, etc, even for scratches and
scars, as in Lev 24 19.20; and thence for moral
defects, as in Eph 6 27. The existence of a blem-
ish in a person of priestly descent prevented him
from the execution of the priestly office; similarly
an animal fit for sacrifice was to be without blemish.
In the NT Christ is presented as the antitype of a
pure and ritually acceptable sacrifice ‘as a -lamb
without blemish and without spot” (He 9 14;
1 Pet 119), and the disciples are admonished
to be blameless, “without blemish” (Eph 5 27).
Rarely the word is used to designate a reprobate
person (2 Pet 2 13).

(2) Blemish in the eye, >D2M, é’bhallul (from a


root 522, balal, “to overflow”; Arab. 1s balla,


487


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Blast
Blindness


dds, balal, ‘‘to moisten’’), cataract, white spots
in the eye (Lev 21 20). H. L. E. Lurerme


BLESS (7113, bérakh): This word is found more
frequently in the OT than in the NT, and is used
in different relations.

(1) Itis first met in Gen 1 22 at the introduction
of animal life upon the earth, where it is written,
“And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and
multiply,’ etc. The context furnishes the key
to its meaning, which is the bestowal of good, and
in this particular place the pleasure and power of
increase in kind. Thus it is generally employed
in both Testaments, the context always determining
the character of the bestowal; for instance (where
man is the recipient), whether the good is temporal
or spiritual, or both.

Occasionally, however, a different turn is given
to it as in Gen 2 3 AV, where it is written, “And
God blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.”
Here the good consists in the setting apart and
consecrating of that day for His use.

(2) In the foregoing instances the Creator is
regarded as the source of blessing and the creature
the recipient, but the order is sometimes reversed,
and the creature (man) is the source and the
Creator the recipient. In Gen 24 48, for ex-
ample, Abraham’s servant says, “I bowed my
head, and worshipped Jeh, and blessed Jeh, the
God of my master Abraham,” where the word evi-
dently means to worship God, to exalt and praise


im.

(3) There is a third use where men only are
considered. In Gen 24 60, her relatives “‘blessed
Rebekah, and said unto her, Our sister, be thou
the mother of thousands of ten thousands” (AV
“millions’”’), where the word expresses the wish or
hope for the bestowal of the good designated.
There are also instances where such a blessing of
man by man may be taken in the prophetic sense,
as when Isaac blessed Jacob (Gen 27 4.27), putting
himself as it were in God’s place, and with a sense
of the Divine concurrence, pronouncing the good
named. Here the word becomes in part a prayer
for, and in part a prediction of, the good intended.
Balaam’s utterances are simply prophetic of
Jsrael’s destiny (Nu 23 9.10.11.23m.24).


Although these illustrations are from the OT


the word is used scarcely differently in the NT;
“The blessing of bread, of which we read in the
Gospels, is equivalent to giving thanks for it, the
thought being that good received gratefully comes
as a blessing’; cf Mt 14 19 and 15 36 with 1 Cor
11 24 (Adeney, HDB, I, 307). See also BENE-
DICTION. James M. Gray


BLESSED, bles’ed (77973, barakh): Where God
is referred to, this word has the sense of “praise,”
as in 1 § 26 32, “Blessed be Jeh, the God of
Israel.” But where man is in mind it is used in
the sense of “happy” or “favored,” and most fre-
quently so in the Psalms and the Gospels, as for
example, ‘Blessed is the man that walketh not in
the counsel of the wicked” (Ps 1 1); ‘Blessed art
thou among women” (Lk 1 42); “Blessed are the
poor in spirit” (Mt 6 3). See Beatrrupzs.


BLESSEDNESS, bles’ed-nes: This tr of paxa-
piopés, makarismés (a word signifying ‘“‘beati-
fication” or “the ascription of blessing’), is used
but three times, in Rom 4 6.9, and Gal 4 15, in
AV only. In the first two instances it refers to the
happy state or condition of a man to whom Christ’s
righteousness is imputed by faith, and in the last
to a man’s experience of that condition. See
HAppPINEss.


BLESSING (F393, brrakhah; ebdoyla, eulogia):
Sometimes means the form of words used in in-
voking the bestowal of good, as in Dt 33 1; Josh
8 34; and Jas 310. Sometimes it means the
good or the benefit itself which has been conferred,
as in Gen 27 36, ‘Hast thou not reserved a bless-
ing for me?” and Prov 10 22, ‘‘The blessing of
Jeh, it maketh rich.” ‘The cup of blessing’ (7
moTypiov THs evroylas, 16 potérion tés eulogias, a
special use of the word in1 Cor 10 16), means the
cup for which we bless God, or which represents
to us so much blessing from God.

James M. Gray

BLESSING, CUP OF (1d qrorfpuov ris ebdoylas,
“the consecrated cup,’’ 1 Cor 10 16): A technical
term from the Jewish liturgy transferred to the
Lord’s Supper, and signifying the cup of wine upon
which a blessing was pronounced. The suggestion
that it carries with it a higher significance, as a cup
that brings blessing, is not without force. The suc-
ceeding words, ‘‘we bless,” are equivalent to “for
which we give thanks.” It was consecrated by
thanksgiving and prayer. See also Cup.


BLESSING, VALLEY OF. See Bzracau.


BLINDFOLD, blind’fold (aepixadtara, peri-
kalipts): A sport common among the children of
ancient times, in which the blindfolded were struck
on the cheek, then asked who had struck them, and
not let go until they had correctly guessed. This
treatment was accorded Christ by his persecutors
(Lk 22 64).


BLINDING, blind’ing. See PunisamMeEnrts.


BLINDNESS, blind’ness ("1Y, ‘dwar, and vari-
ants; tvpdds, tuphids): The word blind is used
as a vb., as Jn 12 40, usually in the sense of ob-
scuring spiritual perception. In reference to physi-
cal blindness it is used as a noun frequently or else
as an adj. with the noun man. There are 54 refer-
ences to this condition, and there is no reason to
believe, as has been surmised, that blindness was
any less rife in ancient times than it is now, when
defective eyes and bleared, inflamed lids are among
the commonest and most disgusting sights in a
Pal crowd. In the Papyrus Ebers (1500 BC) there
are enumerated a number of diseases of the eye
and a hundred prescriptions are given for their
treatment. That the disease occurred in children
and caused destruction and atrophy of the eyeball
is testified to by the occurrence of a considerable
number of mummy heads, in which there is marked
diminution in size of one orbit. The commonest
disease is a purulent ophthalmia, a highly infectious
condition propagated largely by the flies which
can be seen infesting the crusts of dried secretion
undisturbed even on the eyes of infants. (In
Egypt there is a superstition that it is unlucky to
disturb them.) This almost always leaves the
eyes damaged with bleared lids, opacities of the
cornea, and sometimes extensive internal injury as
well. Like other plagues, this disease was thought
to be a Divine infliction (Ex 4 11). Minor forms
of the disease destroy the eyelashes and produce
the unsightly tender-eyes (in Gen 29 17 the word
rakh may mean simply ‘“‘weak’’).

Blindness from birth is the result of a form of this
disease known as ophthalmia neonatorum which
sets in a few days aftcr birth. I have seen cases
of this disease in Pal. Sometimes ophthalmia
accompanies malarial fever (Lev 26 16). All these
diseases are aggravated by sand, and the sun glare,
to which the unprotected inflamed eyes are exposed.
Most of the extreme cases which one sees are
beyond remedy—and hence the giving of sight to


Blindness, Jud.


Blood and Water -HE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


488


the blind is generally put in the front of the mighty
works of healing by Our Lord. The methods used
by Him in these miracles varied probably accord-
ing to the degree of faith in the blind man; all were
merely tokens, not intended as remedies. The
case of the man in Mk 8 22 whose healing seemed
gradual is an instance of the phenomenon met with
in cases where, by operation, sight has been given
to one congenitally blind, where it takes some time
before he can interpret his new sensations.

The blindness of old age, probably from senile
cataract, is described in the cases of Eli at 98 years
of age (1 S 3 2; 4 15), Ahijah (1 K 14 4), and
isaac (Gen 27 1). The smiting of Elymas (Acts
13 11) and the Syrian soldiers (2 K 6 18) was either
a miraculous intervention or more probably a tem-
porary hypnotism; that of Paul (Acts 9 8) was
doubtless a temporary paralysis of the retinal cells
from the bright light. The “scales” mentioned
were not material but in the restoration of his
sight it seemed as if scales had fallen from his eyes.
Jt probably left behind a weakness of the eyes (see
THORN IN THE FLESH). That blindness of Tobit
(Tob 2 10), from the irritation of sparrows’ dung,
may have been some form of conjunctivitis, and the
cure by the gall of the fish is paralleled by the
account given in Pliny (xxxii.24) where the gall of
the fish Callionymus Lyra is recommended as an
application in some cases of blindness. The hy-
pothesis that the gall was used as a pigment to
obscure the whiteness of an opaque cornea (for
which Indian ink tattooing has been recommended,
not as a cure but to remove the unsightliness of
a white spot) has nothing in its favor for thereby

_ the sight would not be restored. The only other
reference to medicaments is the fig. mention of
eyesalve in Rev 3 18.

Blindness unfitted a man for the priesthood
(Lev 21 18); but care of the blind was specially
enjoined in the Law (Lev 19 14), and _ offences
Pas them are regarded as breaches of Law (Dt
27 18).

Figuratively, blindness is used to represent want
of mental perception, want of prevision, reckless-
ness, and incapacity to perceive moral distinctions
(sa 42 16.18.19; Mt 28 16 ff; Jn 9 39 ff).

ALEX. MACALISTER

BLINDNESS, JUDICIAL, ji-dish’al, j06-dish’al:
Among the ancient Israelites in the pre-Can. period
disputes within the family or clan or tribe would
be settled by the natural head of the family or clan
or tribe. According to Ex 18 Moses, as the leader
of the tribes, settled all disputes. But he was com-
pelled to appoint a body of magistrates—heads of
families—to act in conjunction with himself, and
under his judicial oversight. These magistrates
settled ordinary disputes while he reserved for
himself the more difficult cases. After the con-
quest of Canaan, the conditions of life became so
complex, and questions of a difficult nature so con-
stantly arose, that steps were taken (1) to appoint
official judges—elders of the city (Josh 8 33;
Jgs 8 3; 1 IX 21 8); (2) to codify ancient cus-
tom, and (3) to place the administration of justice
on an organized basis. It is significant that in one
of the oldest documents in the Pent—viz. in the
Book of the Covenant (Ex 20 20—23 33) —the
miscarriage of justice was of such frequent occur-
rence as to require special mention (23 1-3.6-8).
In fact the OT abounds with allusions to the cor-
ruption and venality of the magisterial bench
(Dt 1619; Lev 19 15; Am 5 12; Mic 3 11;
73; Isa 123; 5 23; Zeph 3 3; Ps 15 5; Prov
17 23). According to the Book of the Covenant
(Ex 23 8) ‘a bribe blindeth the eyes of the open-
eyed.’ This descriptive phrase indicates a prolific
cause of the miscarriage of justice—an exceedingly


common thing in the East, in the present no less
than in the past. The prohibition in ver 3, ‘Neither
shalt thou favor a poor man in his cause,” is
rather remarkable and many scholars are of
opinion that ‘a great man’’ should be read for ‘a
poor man” as, according to ver 6 AV, the common
fault was “wresting the judgment of the poor.”
The rich alone could offer a satisfactory bribe. But
it should be pointed out that Lev (19 15) legis-
lates in view of both tendencies—“‘respecting the
person of the poor” and ‘‘honoring the person of the
mighty.’ Sympathy with the poor no less than a
bribe from the well-to-do might affect the judgment
of the bench. Dt (16 19) reproduces the words
of the Book of the Covenant with a slight altera-
tion—viz. “eyes of the wise”’ for ‘‘eyes of the open-
eyed” (‘them that have sight”). Both phrases
vividly bring out the baneful effect of bribery—
a magistrate otherwise upright and honest—open-
eyed and wise—may be unconsciously yet effect-
ively influenced in his judicial decisions by a gift
sufficiently large. A similar phrase is found in the
story of Abraham’s life (Gen 20 16). A gift of
a thousand shekels to Abraham was intended to be
a “covering of the eyes” for Sarah, i.e. compensa-
tion or reparation for the wrong which had been
done. For a gift of such magnitude she ought to
wink at the injury. Job (9 24) declares in his
bitterness that God “covereth the faces of the
judges” —inflicts judicial blindness on them so that
justice in this world is out of the question. Judi-
cial corruption was the burden of the prophets’
preaching—“‘judges loved bribes, and followed after
rewards,” with the result that “the fatherless” and
“the widow” were helpless to have their grievances
redressed (Isa 1 23). A satisfactory reward would
always secure the acquittal of the offender (Isa 5
23). Micah combines judges, priests and prophets
under a similar charge; they are all guilty of gross
venality (3 11). Prov (17 23) defines the wicked
person as one whois always prepared to take a “‘bribe
out of the bosom, to pervert the ways of justice’;
on the other hand the good man is he who will not
take a reward against the innocent (Ps 15 5) or
“shaketh his hands from taking a bribe” (Isa 33
15). In regard to Jeh alone is absolute incorrupt-
ibility affirmed—he ‘‘regardeth not persons, nor
taketh reward” (Dt 10 17). T. Lewis


BLOOD, blud (0%, dam, probably from DUR,
’adham, “to be red”; atpa, haima): Used in the
OT to designate the life principle in either animal
or vegetable, as the blood of man or the juice of the
grape (Lev 17 11, et al.); in the NT for the blood
of an animal, the atoning blood of Christ, and in
both OT and NT in a fig. sense for bloodshed or
murder (Gen 37 26; Hos 4 2; Rev 16 6).

Although the real function of the blood in the
human system was not fully known until the fact

of its circulation was established by
1. Primitive William Harvey in 1615, nevertheless


Ideas from the earliest times a singular
mystery has been attached to it by all
peoples. Blood rites, blood ceremonies and blood


feuds are common among primitive tribes. It
came to be recognized as the life principle long
before it was scientifically proved to be. Natur-
ally a feeling of fear, awe and reverence would be
attached to the shedding of blood. With many
uncivilized peoples scarification of the body until
blood flows is practised. Blood brotherhood or
blood friendship is established by African tribes by
the mutual shedding of blood and either drinking
it or rubbing it on one another’s bodies. Thus and
by the inter-transfusion of blood by other means it
was thought that a community of life and interest
could be established.


489


Notwithstanding the ignorance and superstition
surrounding this suggestively beautiful idea, it grew
to have more than a merely human
2. Heb and significance and application. For this
OT crude practice of inter-transference of
human blood there came to be a sym-
bolic substitution of animal blood in
sprinkling or anointing. The first reference in the
OT to blood (Gen 4 10) is fig., but highly illustrative
of the reverential fear manifested upon the shedding
of blood and the first teaching regarding it.

The rite of circumcision is an OT form of blood
ceremony, Apart from the probable sanitary
importance of the act is the deeper meaning in the
establishment of a bond of friendship between the
one upon whom the act is performed and Jeh Him-
self. In order that Abraham might become “the
friend of God” he was commanded that he should be
circumcised as a token of the covenant between
him and God (Gen 17 10-11; see Circumcision).

It is significant that the eating of blood was pro-
hibited in earliest Bible times (Gen 9 4). The
custom probably prevailed among heathen nations
as a religious rite (cf Ps 16 4). This and its un-
hygienic influence together doubtless led to its
becoming taboo. The same prohibition was made
under the Mosaic code (Lev 7 26; see SACRIFICE).

Blood was commanded to be used also for purifi-
cation or for ceremonial cleansing (Lev 14 5-7.
51.52; Nu 19 4), provided, however, that it be
taken from a clean animal (see PURIFICATION).

In all probability there is no trace of the super-
stitious use of blood in the OT, unless perchance
in 1 K 22 38 (see Baruine); but everywhere it is
vested with cleansing, expiatory, and reverently
symbolic qualities.

As in the transition from ancient to Heb practice,
so from the OT to the NT we see an exaltation of the

conception of blood and blood cere-
3. NT monies. In Abraham’s covenant his
Teachings own blood had to be shed. Later an
expiatory animal was to shed blood
(Lev 5 6; see ATONEMENT), but there must always
be a shedding of blood. ‘Apart from shedding of
blood there is no remission’ (He 9 22). The
exaltation and dignifying of this idea finds its
highest development then in the vicarious shedding
of blood by Christ Himself (1 Jn 1 7). Asin the
OT “blood” was also used to signify the juice of
grapes, the most natural substitute for the drinking
of blood would be the use of wine. Jesus takes ad-
vantage of this, and introduces the beautiful and
significant custom (Mt 26 28) of drinking wine and
eating bread as symbolic of the primitive inter-
transfusion of blood and flesh in a pledge of eternal
friendship (cf Ex 24 6.7; Jn 6 53-56). This is
the climactic observance of blood rites recorded in
the Bible.

Literarorys.—Trumbull, The Blood Covenant and The
Threshold Covenant; Westermarck, The Origin and De-
velopment of the Moral Ideas; Robertson Smith, Lectures
on the Religion of the Semites.

Water G. CLIPPINGER

BLOOD AND WATER (aipa kal t8wp, haima
kai hidor): The remarkable passage (Jn 19 34)
from which this expression is taken refers to the
piercing of the Saviour’s side by the soldier. The
evangelist notes here what he, as an eyewitness
of the crucifixion, had seen as a surprising fact.
Whereon this surprise was founded cannot now be
more than guessed at. Nor is it necessary here to
discuss the reason or reasons why the apostle men-
tions the fact at all in his report, whether merely
for historical accuracy and completeness, or as a
possible proof of the actual death of Christ, which
at an early date became a subject of doubt among
certain Christian sects, or whether by it he wished


Customs


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Blindness, Jud.


Blood and Water


torefer to the mystical relation of baptismal cleans-
ing (‘‘water’”) and the atonement (“blood”) as sig-
nified thereby. Let it suffice to state that a refer-
ence often made to 1 Jn 5 6.8 is here quite out of
place. This passage, though used by certain
Fathers of the church as a proof of the last-named
doctrine, does not indeed refer to this wonderful
incident of the crucifixion story. The argument
of 1 Jn 5 8 concerns the Messiahship of Jesus,
which is proved by a threefold witness, for He is the
one whom at the baptism of John (“water”) God
attested as the Messiah by the heavenly voice,
“This is my beloved Son,” who at the crucifixion
(“blood”) had the testimony that the Father had
accepted His atoning sacrifice, and whose promise
of sending the Comforter fulfilled on Pentecost
(“spirit”) presented us with the final proof of the
completed Messianic task. The same expression
in 1 Jn 5 6 refers probably to the same argument
with the implied meaning that Jesus came not
only by the merely ceremonial water of baptism,
but also by the more important, because vivifying,
blood of atonement.

The physiological aspect of this incident of the
crucifixion has been first discussed by Gruner
(Commentatio de morte Jesu Christi vera, Halle,
1805), who has shown that the blood released by
the spear-thrust of the soldier must have been
extravasated before the opening of the side took
place, for only so could it have been poured forth
in the described manner. While a number of com-
mentators have opposed this view as a fanciful
explanation, and have preferred to give the state-
ment of the evangelist a symbolical meaning in the
sense of the doctrines of baptism and eucharist
(so Baur, Strauss, Reuss and others), some modern
physiologists are convinced that in this passage a
wonderful phenomenon is reported to us, which,
inexplicable to the sacred historian, contains for
us an almost certain clue to the real cause of the
Saviour’s death. Dr. Stroud (On the Physiological
Cause of the Death of Christ, London, 1847) basing
his remarks on numerous postmortems, pronounced
the opinion that here we had a proof of the death of
Christ being due not to the effects of crucifixion
but to “laceration or rupture of the heart” as a
consequence of supreme mental agony and sorrow.
It is well attested that usually the suffering on the
cross was very prolonged. It often lasted two or
three days, when death would supervene from
exhaustion. There were no physical reasons why
Christ should not have lived very much longer on
the cross than He did. On the other hand, death
caused by laceration of the heart in consequence
of great mental suffering would be almost instan-
taneous. In such a case the phrase ‘“‘of a broken
heart,” becomes lit. true. The life blood flowing
through the aperture or laceration into the peri-
cardium or caul of the heart, being extravasated,
soon coagulates into the red clot (blood) and the
limpid serum (water). This accumulation in the
heart-sac was released by the spear-thrust of the
soldier (which here takes providentially the place
of a postmorten without which it would have been
impossible to determine the real cause of death),
and from the gaping wound there flow the two com-
ponent parts of blood distinctly visible.

Several distinguished physicians have accepted
Dr. Stroud’s argument, and some have strengthened
it by the observation of additional symptoms. We
may mention Dr. James Begbie, fellow and late

resident of the Royal College of Physicians of
dinburgh, Sir J. Y. Simpson, professor at the
University of Edinburgh, and others (see Dr. Hanna,
Our Lord’s Life on Earth, Appendix 1). The latter
refers to the loud cry, mentioned by the Synoptists
(Mt 27 50; Mk 15 37; Lk 23 46), which pre-


Bene Avenger of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


490


ceded the actual death of Jesus, as a symptom char-
acteristic of cases of “broken heart.’ He adds
that Dr. Walshe, professor of medicine in Univer-
sity College, London, one of the greatest authori-
ties on the diseases of the heart, says that. a ‘“pierc-
ing shriek’ is always uttered in such cases imme-
diately before the end.

While we may never reach a state of absolute
certainty on this subject, there is no valid reason
to deny the probability of this view of the death
of Christ. It certainly gives a more solemn insight
into Christ’s spiritual anguish, ‘‘the travail of his
soul” on our behalf, which weighed upon Him so
heavily that long before the usual term of bodily
and therefore endurable suffering of crucified
persons Christ’s loving heart broke, achieving the
great atoning sacrifice for all mankind.

H. L. E. Luerine

BLOOD, AVENGER OF. Sce AVENGER.


BLOOD, ISSUE, ish’i, OF. See BLoopy Fivux.


BLOODGUILTINESS, blud-gilt’i-nes: Found in
the AV only in Ps 61 14. RV adds Ex 22 2.3;
1S 26 26.33. Ezk 18 13 seems to indicate that
the phrase does not necessarily signify bloodshed,
but any grievous sin which, if it remains, will block
God’s favor to His land and people (ef Dt 21:8;
Isa 115). Ps 61 is to be interpreted in this
light.


BLOOD-REVENGE, blud-ré-venj’:
AVENGER.


BLOODSHEDDING, blud’shed-ing (aiparer-
xvola, haimatekchusia, He 9 22): In this passage
the indispensability of expiating sacrifice is posi-
tively set forth.


BLOODTHIRSTY, blud’thirs-ti (O27 "DIN,
’anshé damim, ‘men of blood’): This occurs in the
AV only in Prov 29 10; in RV, Ps 5 6; 55 23;
59 2; 139 19. Sec Bioopy.


BLOODY, blud’i (0%, dam= “blood” of man or
an animal; and where the King James translators
have rendered with the adj. “bloody,’’ the Heb
employs the noun in the construct case, ‘‘of blood’’):
“A bridegroom of blood” (Ex 4 25.26, AV bloody
husband). Zipporah, not being an Israelite, prob-
ably objected to the circumcision of infants, if not
to the rite altogether; apprehending, however, that
her husband’s life was imperiled possibly through
some grievous sickness (4 24) because of their
disobedience in this particular, she performed the
ceremony hersclf upon her son, saying, ‘‘A bride-
groom of blood art thou to me.’

In RY the expression (AV “‘bloody”) is variously
rendered, ‘‘man of blood” (2 § 16 7.8); ‘men of
blood” (Ps 26 9); “bloodthirsty” (65 6; 59 2;
139 19). In 28 211, “lt is for Saul, and for
his bloody house,” might be rendered ‘Upon Saul
and his house rests bloodshed.”

Ezekiel calls Jerus “the bloody city’ (Ezk 22 2;
24 6; cf 7 23), referring to those unjustly put to
death by the wicked rulers of Jerus. Nineveh also
is called ‘the bloody city’ (Nah 31). The
capital here virtually stands for the kingdom, and
history bears witness to the enormous cruelties
perpetrated by the Assyr rulers. It is siege on
siege, pools of blood everywhere, the flaying of men
alive, “great baskets stuffed with the salted heads
of their foes.” For two hundred years it is the
story of brute force and ruthless cruelty. ‘The
prey departeth not.” And now every cruelty
which they have visited upon others is to be turned
upon themselves (3 19). M. O. Evans


See


BLOODY FLUX, fluks (mvperés kal Sucevrepla,
puretés kat dusenteria, lit. ‘fever and dysentery’):
The disease by which the father of Publius was
afflicted in Malta (Acts 28 8). RV calls it “dys-
entery’’; a common and dangerous disease which
in Malta is often fatal to soldiers of the garrison
even at the present day (Aitken, Pract. of Medicine,
II, 841). Itis also prevalent in Pal at certain sea-
sons, and in Egypt its mortality was formerly about
36 per cent. Its older name was due to the dis-
charge of blood from the intestine. Sometimes por-
tions of the bowel become gangrenous and slough,
the condition described as affecting Jehoram (2 Ch
2119). There seems to have been an epidemic of
the disease at the time of his seizure (2 Ch 21 14,
15), and in the case of the king it left behind it a
chronic ulcerated condition, ending in gangrene.
Somewhat similar conditions of chronic intestinal
ulceration following epidemic dysentery I have seen
in persons who had suffered from this disease in
India. ALEX. MACALISTER


BLOODY SWEAT, swet (aoel OpépBor aiparos,
hose thrémbot hatmatos): Described in Lk 22 44
as a physical accompaniment of Our Lord’s agony
at Gethsemane (on the passage, which is absent in
some MSS, see WH). Many old writers take this
to mean that the perspiration dropped in the same
manner as clots of blood drop from a wound, regard-
ing the Gr word prefixed as expressing merely a
comparison as in Mt 28 3, where leukén his chin
means ‘‘white as snow.’ Cases of actual exuda-
tion of blood are described in several of the me-
diaeval accounts of stigmatization, and Lefébvre
describes the occurrence of something similar in his
account of Louise Lateau in 1870. For references
to these cases see art. “Stigmatization” in Ene Brit,
XXII, 550. It is perhaps in favor of the older in-
terpretation that the word used by Aeschylus for
drops of blood is stagén (Agam. 1122) and by En-
ripides stalagmés, not thromboi. None of the in-
stances given by Tissot (Traité des nerfs, 279), or
Schenck (Observ. méd., III, 455), can be said to be
unimpeachable; but as the agony of Our Lord was
unexampled in human experience, it is conceivable
that it may have been attended with physical condi-
tions of a unique nature. ALEX. MACALISTER


BLOOM, bloom, BLOSSOM, blos’um. See
FLoWERs.


BLOT, blot (052, mim, contracted from BANA,
mim, “spot’’): Occurs in the sense of scorn (Prov
9 7). In Job 31 7 (AV) it is used fig. of a moral
defect; RV has “spot.” Blot out (2, mahah,
“to wipe out,’’ éfadrelga, exaletphd, ‘to smear out’),
to obliterate or destroy: ‘‘That a tribe be not blotted
out” (AV “destroyed,” Jgs 21 17). To blot men
out of God’s book is to cut them off by an untimely
death (Ex 32 32).

Figuratively: ‘‘To blot out sin” is to forgive sin
fully (Ps 611.9; Acts 3 19; Col 2 14). Not
to blot out sin is to reserve for punishment (Neh
4 5). The names of those who inherit eternal life
are not blotted out of the “book of life’ (Rev 3 5).
See Boox or Lirz; Book or REMEMBRANCE;
ForGIvENEss. L. Kaiser


BLOW, blo ([W2, nashaph): Used with refer-
ence to the wind (Ex 15 10; Ps 78 26; 147 18;
mvéw, pnéd, “to breathe,” Lk 12 55; Jn 3 8; Rev
7 1); 3PM, taka‘, with reference to trumpet sound
(Nu 10 3.4-10; 81 6 AV; Jgs 7 18.20; 1 K 1 34;
1 Ch 16 24; Ps 81 3; Ezk 38 3.6; Hos & 8; Joel
21.15); D8, path, with reference to the strong
expulsion of the breath (Ezk 21 31; 22 20/21; Hag


491


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA i004 Avenger of


19; Isa 40 7; 54 16; Job 20 26); SDD, nashaph,
with reference to a forcible slap or stroke with a
band or an instrument (Ps 39 10; Isa 40 24; Jer
14 17 AV). Frank E. Hirscu

BLUE, blo6. Sce Coors.

BOANERGES, bé-a-ntr’jéz (Boavnpyés, Boanér-
gés; WY) "32, bene reghesh, “sons of thunder’):
The surname bestowed by Jesus upon James and
John, the sons of Zebedee, when they were ordained
to the apostleship (Mk 3 17). See James, Son
oF ZEBEDEE. It has also been regarded ag an
equivalent of the ‘Heavenly Twins,” the Sons of
Zeus or Thunder. According to this interpreta-
tion, the name Boanerges would represent the
Dioscuri in some form or other of their varied
presentation in the cults of the Mediterranean
(cf Professor J. Rendel Harris in Expos, ser. vii, III,
146). C Kerr


BOAR, bor (""I, hdzir): In lamenting the
troubled state of the Jewish nation the Psalmist
(80 13) says: ‘‘The boar out of the wood doth
ravage it, and the wild beasts of the field feed on
it,” with evident reference to Israel’s enemies,
the Assyrians, etc. The wild boar is abundant in
certain parts of Pal and Syria, esp. in the thickets
which border the lakes and rivers, as about the
Hileh, the sea of Galilee, the Jordan, and in the
deltas of streams flowing into the Dead Sea, as
Ghaur-us-Sdfiyeh. Several fountains in Lebanon
bear the name, ‘Ain-ul-Hazir, though hazir is
not an Arab. word, khanztr being the Arab. for
“swine.” See Swine. ALFRED ELy Day


BOARD, bord (WP, keresh, “a slab or plank,”
“deck of a ship,” “bench,” “board”): This word
is found in Ex 26 16-21; 86 21 ff; its pl. occurs
in Ex 26 15.17-29; 35 11; 36 20-34; 39 33; 40
18; Nu 8 36; 4 31. This word also is used in
tr of 139, la¢h (Ex 27 8; 887; Cant 89; Ezk
27 5 AV)=“‘a tablet” (of stone, wood or metal),
“board,” “plate,” ‘table’; also of gé@a‘=‘‘tib,”
hence a “side,” “timber,” ‘‘plank” (1 K 6 15f).
In 1 K 6 9, AVI, sdhérah=“a rank,” “a row,”
hence, ‘a range” or “board” is used. In the NT
we find the expression ‘‘on board” in Acts 27 44
AY, in tr of émi caviow, epi sanisin= “planks.”

Frank HE. Hirscu

BOAST, bist Gia; halal, ‘‘to praise’; xavxdopa:,
kauchdomai, “to vaunt oneself,” used both in a good
and a bad sense): To praise God: “ln God have
we made our boast all the day long” (Ps 44 8); to
praise oneself, to vaunt (Ps 10 3). In the NT the
RV frequently translates “glory,’”’ where the AV
has “boast,” in a good sense (2 Cor 7 14). In the
sense of self-righteousness (Eph 2 9; Rom 2 17.
23). Boaster (ddagdv, alazén, ‘a braggart’’) occurs
in AV (Rom 1 30; 2 Tim 3 2); RV has “‘boastful.”’


BOAT, bat. ‘See Sures.


BOAZ, bd’az (193, bd‘az; Béot, Booz; “quick-
ness”[?] Ruth 2-4; 1 Ch 2 11.12; Mt 15; Lk
3 32):

a A resident of Bethlehem and kinsman of
Elimelech, Naomi’s husband. In Ruth 2 1 he
is described as a gibbér hayil, a phrase which can
mean either ‘‘a mighty man of valor” or else “a
man of position and wealth.” The latter is prob-
ably the sense in which the phrase is applied to
Boaz (cf 1 8 9 1). He had fields outside the town
and to them Ruth went to glean. Boaz noticed
her and extended special kindness and protection
to her, bidding ber remain with his female workers,


and charging the men not to illtreat her, and also
giving her of the reapers’ food at mealtime. Boaz
awoke one night and found Ruth lying at his feet.
He praised her virtue, and promised to take charge
of her if her dead husband’s next-of-kin failed to
doso. He laid her case before the next-of-kin, and
finally redeemed the family property himself and
bought as well the right to take Ruth in marriage.


Field of Boaz.


The son of Boaz and Ruth was Obed, father of Jesse,


and grandfather of David. 1 Ch 2 11.12 makes
Boaz a descendant of Hezron, and so probably a
chief of the Hezronite clan in Bethlehem. Jewish
tradition identifies Boaz with Ibzan (Jgs 12 8-10).

Boaz “‘is set before us as a model of piety, gener-
osity and chastity’ (H. P. Smith, OT History,
398). He found virtue and rewarded it. HPM,
§§ 501-8, gives a picture of the life of “a well-to-
do landed proprietor of central Pal,”’ much of which
could aptly be taken as a description of Boaz.

(2) The name of one of the two bronze pillars
erected in front of Solomon’s temple, the other being
Jachin (1 K 7 21; 2 Ch 3 17). Sec JacHin AND
Boaz; TEMpie. Davin Francis Rosperts


BOCCAS, bok’as (Boxkds, Bokkds): A priest in
the line of Ezra (1 Esd 8 2) called Bukkiin Ezr 7 4
and Borith in2 Esd 1 2.


BOCHERIU, bo’ké-roo cnpa, bokhera): A son of
Azrikam, Saul’s descendant (1 Ch 8 88=9 34).
For the ending " (@), cf the forms OW3, gashmi


(Neh 6 1.6) and 1>°5%9, m*likhu (12 14 AV and
RVm).


BOCHIM, béd’kim (8339, ha-bokhim): A
place on the mountain W. of Gilgal said to have
been so named (lit. ‘‘the weepers’’) because Israel
wept there at the remonstrance of the angel (Jgs
21.5). No name resembling this has been dis-
covered. Given on the occasion mentioned, it may
not have endured. Many, following LXX, iden-
tify it with Bethel.


BODY, bod’i:
" PHILOLOGICAL

(1) Generally speaking, the OT language em-
ploys no fixed term for the human body as an
entire organism in exact opposition to ‘‘soul” or
“snirit.”’ Various terms were employed, each of
which denotes only one part or element of the
physical nature, such as “trunk,” “bones,” “belly,”
“bowels,” “reins,” “flesh,” these parts being used,
by synecdoche, for the whole: BLY, ‘egem=“‘bone,”
or “skeleton,’’ hence “body,” is found in Ex 24
10 AV; Lam 47; WD}, nephesh =“‘living or-
ganism” (Lev 21 11; Nu 6 6.7.11; 19 11.13.16;
Hag 213); M33}, nbhélah=“a flabby thing,”
“carcass’ (Dt 21 23; Isa 26 19; Jer 26 23; 36


Body
Body, Spiritual


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


492


30); 122, beten=“womb” (Dt 28 4.11.18.53; 30
9; Job 19 17AV; Ps 132 11; Mic 67); J,
yarékh = “thigh,” “generative parts,” “body” (Jgs
8 30); A, g*wiyah = “a body, whether alive or
dead” (1 S 31 10.12; 2K 85 AV; Dnl 10 6);
DPA, méim, “body” (Cant 5 14); MDW, guphah
=“‘corpse” (1 Ch 10 12); 113, géwah=“‘the back,”
Le. (by extension) “person” (Job 20 25); "NU,
sh’ ér="‘flesh, as living or for food,” “body” (Ezk
10 12); OWA, geshen=“a hard shower of rain,”
hence “a body” (Dnl 4 33; 5 21; 7 11); 3,
nidhneh=“a sheath,” hence the receptacle of the
soul, “body” (Dnl 7 15).

The Gr word which is used almost exclusively
for “body” in the NT is c&pa, séma, Lat corpus
(Mt 5 29.30; 6 22.23.25: 26 36; Jn 221; Acts
§ 40; 1 Cor 15 35.37.38.44; Eph 1 23; 216; 4
4.12.16; 5 23.30). xpos, chrés, signifying primarily
the “surface” or ‘‘skin,” occurs in Acts 19 12. A
compound word with sdma, as its base, cl’ccwpos,
stissOmos=‘‘a, member of the same body,” occurs
in Eph 3 6. From the above, it appears that the
NT places the body as a whole into opposition to
the spirit or the invisible nature. Paul, of course,
employs the term also to designate the sublimated
substance with which we are to be clothed after
the resurrection when he speaks of the “spiritual
body” (1 Cor 15 44). Frank E. Hirscu


GENERAL

(2) v&pa, séma, Lat corpus: The term “body”
is not found in the Heb of the OT in the sense in
which it occurs in the Gr. ‘The Heb
1. Inthe word for ‘body’ is M4, g*wiyah,
OT which is sometimes used for the ‘liv-
ing’ body (Ezk 1 11), ‘bodies of the
cherubim’ (Gen 47 18; Neh 9-37), but usually
for the dead body or carcass. Properly speaking
the Heb has no term for ‘body.’ The Heb term
around which questions relating to the body must
gather is flesh” (Davidson, OT Theol., 188). Various
terms are used in the OT to indicate certain ele-
ments or component parts of the body, such as
“flesh,” “bones,’”’ “bowels,” “belly,’’ etc, some of
which have received a new meaning in the NT.
Thus the OT “belly” (Heb beten, Gr kotlia), “Our
soul is bowed down to the dust; our belly cleaveth
unto the earth” (Ps 44 25 AV)—as the seat of car-
nal appetite—has its counterpart in the NT:
“They serve .... their own belly” (Rom 16 18).
So also the word tr@ “bowels” (mé‘tm, rahdmim) in
the sense of compassion, as in Jer 31 20 AV:
“Therefore my bowels are troubled for him,” is
found in more than one place in the NT. Thus in
Phil 1 8 AV, “I long after you all in the bowels
spldgchna] of Christ,’’ and again, ‘if there be any

bowels [splagchna] and mercies” (Phil 2 1 AV).
“Body” in the NT is largely used in a fig. sense,


either as indicating the ‘“‘whole man” (Rom 6 12;.


He 10 5), or as that which is morally
corrupt — ‘the body of this death”
(Rom 6 6; 7 24). Hence the expres-
sion, “buffet my body’ (1 Cor 9 27,
hupdpidzd, a word adopted from the prize-ring,
palaestra), the body being considered as the lurking-
place and instrument of evil. (Cf Rom 8 13 AV
“Mortify the deeds of the body.’’)
Between these two the various other meanings
seem torange. On the one hand we find the church
called ‘“‘the body of Christ’? (Eph 4
3. Other 16; 1 Cor 12 13), with diversity of
Meanings _ gifts, enjoying the ‘unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace.’ On the other
we read of a spiritual, incorruptible body, a resur-
rection-body as opposed to the natural body, which


2. In the
NT


is doomed to corruption in death (1 Cor 16 44).
Not only do we find these meanings in the word
itself, but also in some of its combinations. On the
one hand we read in Eph 8 6 of the Gentiles as
“partakers of the promise in Christ” as “fellow-
heirs,’”’ and “of the same body” (stisséma) in cor-
porate union with all who put their trust in the
Redeemer of mankind; on the other, we read of
mere “bodily [somatic] exercises,”’ which are not
profitable (1 Tim 4 8)—-where ‘‘body’’ evidently
is contrasted with “spirit.” And again, we read
of the Holy Ghost descending in ‘‘bodily” (somatic)
shape upon the ‘‘Son of God”’ (Lk 3 22), in whom
dwelt the ‘fulness of the Godhead bodily” (somati-
cally) (Col 2 9). So, too, the “body” is called a
temple of the Holy Ghost: ‘Know ye not that your
body is a temple of the Holy Spirit?” (1 Cor 6 19).
From all this it is apparent that the body in
itself is not necessarily evil, a doctrine which is
taught in Gr philosophy, but nowhere


4, The in the OT and NT. The rigid and
Body and harsh dualism met with in Plato is
Sin absent from St. Paul’s writings, and

is utterly foreign to the whole of
Scripture. Here we are distinctly taught, on the


one hand, that the body is subordinated to the soul,
but on the other, with equal clearness, that the
human body has a dignity, originally conferred
upon it by the Creator, who shaped it out of earth,
and glorified it by the incarnation of Christ, the
sinless One, though born of a woman. Julius
Miiller has well said: ‘‘Paul denies the presence of
evil in Christ, who was partaker of our fleshly nature
(Gal 4 4), and he recognizes it in spirits who are
not partakers thereof (Eph 6 12 AV, ‘spiritual
wickedness in high places’). Is it not therefore
in the highest degree probable that according to
him evil does not necessarily pertain to man’s
sensuous nature, and that sdrx (say body) denotes
something different from this?” (The Christian
Doctrine of Sin, I, 321, Eng.ed). He further shows
that the derivation of sin from sense is utterly
irreconcilable with the central principle of the
apostle’s doctrine as to the perfect holiness of the
Redeemer, and that ‘the doctrine of the future
resurrection—even taking into account the distinc-
tion between the séma psuchikén and the sdma
pneumatikén (1 Cor 15 44)—is clearly at variance
with the doctrine that sin springs from the corporal
nature as its source”’ (318).
The very first sin was spiritual in its origin—an
act of rebellion against God—the will of the crea-
ture in opposition to the will of the
5. The Creator (Gen 3). It was conceived
First Sin in doubt—“Hath God said?”; it was
born in desire—‘‘The tree was good for
food’’; it was stimulated by a rebellious hankering
after equality with God: “Ye shall be as God,
knowing good and evil’; it was introduced from
without, from the spiritual world, through the
agency of a mysterious, supernatural being, em-
ploying “‘a beast of the field more subtle than any
which Jehovah God had made.” That the ser-
pent in the OT is not identified with Satan, and
that the clearest utterance in pre-Christian times
on the subject is to be found in the Book of Wisd
2 24 (“by the envy of the devil death entered into
the world”), may be true. That the narrative of the
Fall is fig. or symbolical may also be granted. But
the whole tendency of the early narrative is to
connect the first human sin with a superhuman
being, employing an agent known to man, and
making that agent its representative in the “‘sub-
tlety” of the great temptation as a prelude to the
mighty fall. The NT is clear on this point (Jn 8
44; 16 11; 2 Cor 11 3; 1 Tim 2 14; He 2 14;
Rev 12 9). Great historic truths are imbedded in


493


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Body
Body, Spiritual


that narrative, whatever we may think of the form
which that narrative has assumed. There can be
no doubt that the oldest and truest traditions of
the human race are to be found there. It is not
denied that sin has desecrated the temple of the
living God, which is the body. That body indeed
has become defiled and polluted by sin. Paul
recognizes ‘‘an abnormal development of the sen-
suous in fallen man, and regards sin as having in a
special manner entrenched itself in the Thatls,
which becomes liable to death on this very account
(Rom 6 23; 7 24)” (Enc of Rel. and Ethics, 1, 761).
But we may safely say that the theory which con-
nects sin with the physical body, and givesit a purely
sensuous origin, is alien to the whole spirit and letter
of revelation. J. I. Marais


FIGURATIVE


(3) In the NT (capa, séma, “the body” both of
men and animals) the word has a rich fig. and spir-
itual use: (1) the temporary home of the soul (2 Cor
5 6); (2) “the temple of the Holy Spirit” (1 Cor
6 19); (3) “temple” (Jn 2 21); (4) “the old man,”
the flesh as the servant of sin or the sphere in which
moral evil comes to outward expression (Rom 6 6;
7 7; cf Paul’s use of sdrz, ‘‘flesh”’); (5) the “‘church”’
as Christ’s body, the organism through which He
manifests His life and in which His spirit dwells
(Eph 1 23; Col 1 24); (6) the spiritual “unity”
of believers, one redeemed society or organism
(Eph 2 16; a corpus mysticum, Eph 4 4); (7)
“substance” (spiritual reality or life in Christ) v.
“shadow” (Col 2 17); (8) the ascended and glori-
fied body of Jesus (Phil 3 21); (9) the resurrection
or “spiritual”? (v. natural) body of the redeemed
in heaven (1 Cor 15 44); (10) the whole person-
ality, e.g. the spiritual presence, power and sacri-
ficial work of Christ, the mystical meaning of “the
body and the blood” symbolized in the bread and cup
of the sacrament (1 Cor 11 27). The term body
is exceptionally rich in connection with the self-
giving, sacrificial, atoning work of Christ. It was
the outward sphere or manifestation of His suffer-
ing. Through the physical He revealed the extent
of His redeeming and sacrificial love. He “bare
our sins in his body upon the tree” (1 Pet 2 24),
thus forever displacing all the ceaseless and costly
sacrifices of the old dispensation (He 9 24-28).
Special terms “body of his flesh” (Col 1 22); “body
of sin” (Rom 6 6); “‘body of this death’’ (Rom 7
24); “body of his glory” (Phil 3 21). é

mwrdpa, ptéma, used only of fallen, ie. dead bodies
(Rev 11 8.9). Dwicut M. Pratt


BODY-GUARD, bod‘i-gird: The expression
occurs in Apoc (1 Esd 3 4), ‘‘the body-guard that
kept the king’s person.”


BODY OF DEATH, deth (cdpa rod Oavérov,
séma tot thandtou): These words are found in
Paul’s impassioned argument on the reign of the
law, which dooms man to continuous disappoint-
ment and convinces him of the terrible power of
indwelling sin. “O wretched man that I am! who
shall deliver me from the body of this death?”
(Rom 7 24 AV). Itis the “picture of the still unre-
deemed man in his relation to the law” (Meyer).
The tr, “this body of death,” though grammati-
cally possible, is logically impermissible. The
picture here before the mind of the apostle is not
physical but ethical. Death points to the dominion
of sin, to the reign of the law, as revealed in his
physical life, from which he is delivered only
through regeneration, by faith in Christ. it
points to the “I must” and to the “I cannot.
It is therefore the bondage under the law of sin,
the body as the seat of this conscious and bitter


struggle, that the figure points at. And yet the
ethical may have a physical background. There
may be a distant reference here to the dreadful
eee of the ancients of chaining the living
ody to a corpse, that the constant corruption of
death might extinguish the life of the victim of this
exquisite torture. Henry E. Dosxrr


BODY OF HEAVEN: The AV translates the
Heb idiom, PYAWM DEY, ‘ecem ha-shamayim, by
“the body of heaven” (Ex 24 10). A more correct
rendering is given in the RV, “the very heaven,”
taking the word ‘ecem in its idiomatic use as an
intensive, which is derived from its lit. meaning,
“bone,” as “strength,” “substance,” and then as
“self” (cf Job 21 23); the substance of the blue,
unclouded sky, hence the clear sky itself.


BODY, SPIRITUAL, spir’it-t-al: Paul describes
the body after the resurrection as a spiritual
body (séma psuchikén) and contrasts it with the
natural (psychical body, séma pneumatikén, 1 Cor
15 44). Our present natural body has for its
life-principle the soul (psuché) but the resur-
rection body is adapted and subordinated to the
spirit (pnedima). See Psycaotocy. The apostle
does not argue for a literal and material identity
of that future body with the present one, but thinks
of it as the counterpart of the present animal
organism so conditioned as to be adapted to a
state of existence which lies wholly within the
sphere of the spirit. Against his Corinthian read-
ers he argues that the resurrection cannot be suc-
ceeded by a state of non-existence, nor is he willing
to admit a mere etherealized state. There must
be a body, but between it and our present body
there is a similar difference to that between the
first and second Adam. The present body and the
first Adam were alike dominated by the soul
(psuché); but as the second Adam became a life-
giving spirit, so will the resurrection body be a
spiritual one. Christ became a life-giving spirit
through the resurrection (Meyer on 1 Cor 15 45);
and since we are to bear His image (ver 49), it be-
comes evident that Christ’s resurrection-body is
the nearest possible approach to a sensible repre-
sentation of the spiritual body. For this Paul
argues more directly when he affirms that our
resurrection-body shall be transformed according
to the body of His glory (Phil 3 21; cf1 Jn 3 2).


-The body of Christ after the resurrection was con-


formed in many respects to the body of His earthly
life, yet with some marked differences. He ate
(Lk 24 42.48); He breathed (Jn 20 22);  pos-
sessed flesh and bones (Lk 24 39), and could be
apprehended by the bodily senses (Lk 24 40;
Jn 20 27). His body possessed characteristics
which differentiated it entirely from the popular
fancy of ghosts or apparitions (Lk 24 36-43).
Yet. His body was superior to the usual barriers
which restrict human movements. Barred doors
and distances did not impede His going (Jn 20
19-26; Lk 24 31-36). The context shows that
the purpose of His eating was to convince the
disciples that it was really He (Lk 24 41-43),
and not to sustain life which His body was probably
capable of maintaining in other ways. John
speaks of His appearances after His resurrection
as ‘manifestations’ (Jn 21 1-21). A change in
His person and appearance had certainly taken
place, for those who knew Him best did not at
once recognize Him (Lk 24 16; Jn 20 14). It is
evident therefore that the post-resurrection-body
of Jesus was one that had the power of material-
izing itself to natural senses, or withdrawing itself
at will. It was this same body which was taken
into the heavens at the ascension, and which


Bohan
Book


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


404


remains in heaven (Acts 111; 3 21). There is
no hint that it underwent any change in its removal
fromearth. Hence the spiritual body of which Paul
speaks is not to be unlike the body which Jesus
possessed after His resurrection. There is to be an
absence of the desires and passions which belong
naturally to the present bodily existence (Mt 22 30;
Lk 20 35.36). Wm. Cuas. Morro


BOHAN, bdhan (702, bédhan, “thumb,”
“stumpy”’): A son of Reuben according to Josh
15 6; 18 17. No mention is made of B. in the
genealogies of Reuben. “The stone of Bohan”
(ebhen bohan) was a boundary mark on the N.E.
frontier of Judah, separating it from Benjamin.
Site unidentified.


BOIL (noun) (PNW, shhin; exos, hélkos):
A localized inflamed swelling. The Heb word is
derived from a root probably meaning “to burn,”’
and is used as a generic term for the sores in the
sixth plague of Egypt (Ex 9 9-11); for a sore
which might be confounded with leprosy (Lev 13
18-23); for Job’s malady (2 7) and Hezekiah’s
disease (2 K 20 1; Isa 38 21). Our Eng. word
is derived from the vb. ‘‘to beal,” i.e. to suppurate,
now obsolete except as a dialect word in Scotland
and Ireland. Wyclif uses the name for Lazarus’
sores (Lk 16 20), ‘“thoundis lickeden his bylis.”
The Egyp word shin is the name of an abscess, and
occurs in the reduplicated form Anhnt in Papyr.
Ebers, CV. The plague of boils in Egypt came
without warning immediately after the insect
plagues of kinnt?m (sandflies) and that of ‘ardbA or
flies, and followed the epizoétic murrain, which
is suggestive in the light of the transmission of
toxic germs by insects. It has been supposed by
some to be elephantiasis, as Pliny says that this
disease was peculiar to Egypt (xxvi.5). A stronger
case has been made out for its identity with con-
fluent smallpox; but as it is not described as being
a fatal disease, 11 may more probably have been an
ageravated form of the ordinary gregarious furuncles
or boils, due to the microbe streptococcus pyogenes.

Job’s body is said to have been covered with itchy,
irritating sores which made his face unrecognizable
(2 12), caused continual burning pain (3 24; 6 4),
and which were infested with maggots (7 5) and
exhaled a nauseous fetor (19 17). His sleep was
destroyed and his nervous system enfeebled
(3 26) so that he required assistance to move, as
he sat in the ashes (2 8). Various diagnoses have
been made of his malady, but it is most probable
that it was a form of the disease known as “oriental
sore,’ or ‘Bagdad boil,” called in Algeria ‘‘Biskra
batton,” in which the intensely itchy sores are often
multiple, affecting the face, hands, and other ex-
posed parts. The cases which I have seen have
been very intractable and disfiguring.

Hezekiah’s boil was apparently more localized,
and the indefinite description would accord with
that of a carbuncle. It seems to have rendered
him unclean (Isa 38 22), though the reference
may be to the practice referred to in Lev 13 18f.
The ‘“botch” of Egypt (Dt 28 27.35 AV) is a tr
of the same word, as is “boil’ in RV. Botch is
an old Eng. name for boil and occurs in Piers
Plowman, and the adj. “botchy” is used in Troilus
and Cressida (II, 1, 6). The word is cognate to
the old French boche or poche, a form of our later
word “pock.’”’ The sores of Lazarus (Lk 16 20)
were probably old varicose ulcers, such as are as
common on the legs of the old and poor in the
East as they are in the West.

4 ALEX. MACALISTER

BOIL (verb) (Owa, bashal, TN}, rathah): “Boil”
is the tr of bdshal, ‘‘to bubble up,” “to boil,” “to


be cooked,” Piél, ‘to cause to boil,” ‘‘to cook”
(Lev 8 31; 1K 19 21; 2K 6 29; Ezk 46 20.
24 bis); of rathah, “‘to be hot,” ‘to boil,” “to be
made to boil,” “to be greatly moved” under strong
emotion (the bowels), Hiph. ‘to cause to boil’
(Job 30 27 AV “My bowels boiled, and rested
not,” ERV “My bowels boil.”” ARV ‘My heart is
troubled”; 41 31, “He maketh the deep to boil
like a pot”; Ezk 24 5, “make it boil well’; of
ba‘ah, “to bubble” or ‘‘well up” (Isa 64 2 [1, in
Heb] ‘‘The fire causeth the waters to boil”); in
AVm of Ps 45 1 (“My heart is inditing a good
matter’) we have Heb “boileth” or ‘‘bubbleth up”
(rahash, ‘‘to boil” or “bubble up,’ RV text, “My
heart overfloweth with a goodly matter’).
“Boiling-places,” occurs in Ezk 46 23 as the
tr of mbhashshléth, “hearths,” ‘‘boiling-places.”
ARV has “boiling-houses’” for “places of them
that boil” (Ezk 46 24), ‘boil well’ for ‘‘consume”
(24 10); ARV has “boiling over” for ‘‘unstable”
(Gen 49 4; ERVm ‘‘bubbling over’’).
W. L. WaLKER
BOLDNESS, bdld’nes (wappycla, parrésia,
“confidence,”’ ‘fearlessness,”’ ‘freedom of speech’’):
This was one of the results of discipleship (Acts
4 13.29.31; Eph 3 12; Phil 1 20; 1 Tim 3 13;
1 Jn 417). It was a necessary qualification for
the work assigned them. They were not only
subject to violent persecutions, but also were the
constant subject of ridicule and contempt. Paul
uses the word in the sense of plainness in 2 Cor 3
12. In He 10 19; 1 Jn 2 28; 4 17, it has the
sense of freeness resulting from confidence. In
Philem ver 8, the reference is to the authority
which Paul claims in this case. Jacop W. Kapp


BOLLED, bdld Avas, gibh‘al, ‘the calyx of
flowers’): Hence ‘‘in bloom,” and so rendered, in
RV, of flowering flax (Ex 9 31).


BOLSTER, bdl’stér: Found in AV only in 15
19 13.16, ‘Behold, the teraphim was in the bed,
with the pillow of goat's hair at the head thereof”’
(AV “for his bolster”), and 26 7.11.12.16, ‘‘Saul
lay sleeping... . with his spear stuck in the
ground at hishead.” ‘Bolster’ in these passages in
AV was used to translate a Heb word whose true
significance is ‘‘the place of the head,” or ‘the
head-place.” It will be noted that it has disap-
peared from the RV, which rightly has throughout
‘thead,”’ instead of ‘“‘bolster.’””? See CusHIon.


BOLT, bolt (293, na‘al, “to bind up”): The
ancient Hebrews had fastenings of wood or iron
for the doors of houses (2 S 13 17.18; Cant 6 5),
city gates (Neh 3 3.6.13-15), prison doors, etc
(Isa 45 2), which were in the form of bolts. These
were sometimes pushed back from within; but
there were others which, by means of a key, could
be unfastened and pushed back from without
(Jgs 8 23 ff). These were almost the only form
of locks known. See Bar; Lock.

In Hab 3 5, resheph (a poetic word for “‘flame’’)
is rendered “fiery bolts’ (AV “burning coals’). It
seems to denote ‘‘the fiery bolts, by which Jeh was
imagined to produce pestilence or fever’ (Driver,
Dt, 367). M. O. Evans


BOND. See Bann; Bit; Caarn.


BONDAGE, bon’daj: Used in two senses in
Scripture, a literal and a metaphorical sense.

(1) In the former sense it refers (a) to the con-
dition of the Hebrews (WAY, ‘dbhddhah) in
Egypt (Ex 114 AV; 2 23 and often) which is
frequently called ‘‘the house of bondage” (‘‘slaves,”


495


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bohan
Book


DAY, ‘dbhadhim), Ex 13 3.14; 20 2; Dt 5 6 and
often. Italso refers to the condition of the Hebrews
in Babylonia (Isa 14 3 AV) andin Persia (Ear 9 8f),
where a slightly different form of the same root
(FTA , ‘abh*dhith) is used in the original. In both
these cases the bondage was not so much personal as
national. Asa rule individuals were not subject to
individuals, but the whole Heb people were subject
to the Egyp, Bab and the Pers states. They were
forced to labor on public works, and otherwise, and
were denied their own freedom when the exigencies
of state seemed to demand it. The former word
‘dbhddhah is also used in Neh 5 18 as descriptive
of the subject and depressed conditions of the
Hebrews in Pal during the earlier years after their
return from captivity, when they were still living
under Pers suzerainty. (b) The word bondage
(‘adbhddhim) is also used to describe the slavery
into which the poor Jews were being forced by
their more prosperous brethren in the earlier years
under the Persians in Pal (Neh 5 5). Here true
personal, though temporary, slavery is meant. (c)
Marriage is once referred to as a bondage (1 Cor
7 15) (vb. dovAdw, douldd).

(2) It is used in the metaphorical sense only
in NT. 4% dovdela, hé douleia, “bondage,” is the
power of physical corruption as against the freedom
of life (Rom 8 21), the power of fear as over against
the confidence of Christian faith (Rom 8 15;
He 2 15), and esp. is it the bondage of the letter,
of the elements, of a ceremonial and institutional
salvation which must be scrupulously and painfully
observed, as contrasted with the freedom of the
sons of God, emancipated by faith in Jesus Christ.
This bondage is a peculiarly Pauline idea since he
was fighting for Christian freedom (Gal 2 4; 4 3.9.
24.25; 6 1). In2 Pet 2 19 the idea is essentially
different. Libertinism, masquerading under the
name of freedom, is branded as bondage, in contrast
with the true freedom of righteous living. See
SLAVERY. WituiamM JosepH McGuiorauin


BONDMAID, bond’mad: Occurs but three
times in AV (Lev 19 20; 25 44; Gal 4 22[RV
“handmaid”]). The first instance is that of a
Heb girl who has by birth, purchase or otherwise
eome into temporary slavery. The word here is
MDW, shiphhah. It occurs often in the OT, but
is elsewhere tr’ “maid,” “handmaid,” “woman
servant,” ‘‘maidservant,” etc. The other instance
(Lev 25 44) refers to foreign slave girls and has a
different word, TDN, ’émah, which also oceurs a
number of times, but is elsewhere tr? “handmaid,”’
etc. The NT instance (Gal 4 22) refers to Hagar,
Abraham’s Egyp slave girl. The original word
matdloxn, paidiské, occurs several other times, but
in AV is elsewhere tr? “maid,’’ “damsel,’’ ete.
It means a slave girl. See SLaveRyY.

Wituiam Josepa McGuoTHuin

BONDMAN, bond’man: One of the tr* of the
word. 139, ‘ebhedh, very common in the OT. It
refers to the ordinary slave, either foreign (Gen
43 18; 44 9.33; Lev 25 44.46) or Heb (Lev 25
42: 2K 41). Hebrews were forbidden to enslave
Hebrews, but did it nevertheless. It also refers to
the Israelites in the bondage of Egypt (Dt 15 15,
and often), and in the exile of Babylonia (Ezr 9 9).
The intended treatment of the men of Judah in
Samaria (2 Ch 28 10) was apparently to sell them
into ordinary slavery or bondage. The word is
used once in the NT (Rev 6 15) to translate dofAos,
doulos, where it evidently means a slave in contrast
with a freeman. See SLAVERY.

Wiiiiam Josepa McGLoTauin


BONDSERVANT, bond’stir-vant: Appears only


once in AV (Lev 25 39) where it translates 737,


‘ebhedh, “a slave’: ‘‘Thou shalt not cause him to
render the service of a bondservant”’ or slave. RV
frequently uses bondservant (d00d0s, dovilos) instead
of the word ‘‘servant” of AV (Jn 8 34.35; 1 Cor
7 21; Gal 4 7). See Stavery.


BONE, bin, BONES (DYY, ‘ecem, DEY, ‘dcem;
Aram. 073, gerem, by extension used for “bony
frame,” “body,” “strength,” Ps 35 10; “the whole
man’; Lk 24 39, ‘“‘flesh and bones’ =the solid
and tangible framework of the body; fig. the sub-
stance, the idea of a thing, the thing, per se): Fig-
urative: Very often we find the use of these words
in metaphorical phrases, in which a disease or a
discomfort of the body denotes certain emotions or
mental attitudes. Thus the expression “rotten-
ness of the bones” (Prov 12 4; 14 30) signifies
the feelings of a man whose wife eauses him
shame and confusion, or is equivalent to “envy,”
‘Sealousy.” The tr of the LXX in these passages
by ckéd7t, skéléx, “worm,” and cjs, sés, “maggot,”
“moth,” 1s incorrect. The same phrase is used
in Hab 3 16 for utter dejectedness through the
anticipation of approaching evil. Similarly the
“shaking of the bones” (Job 4 14) is expressive
of fear, and denotes dejection and sadness in Jer
23 9. The “burning of the bones’ is found as a
symptom of Job’s disease (Job 30 30), and stands
for grief, depression of spirits in Ps 102 3 and Lam
1 13, and also for the feeling of Jeremiah, when he
attempted to hold back the Divine message (Jer
20 9), while “dryness of bones” (Prov 17 22) is
the opposite of “good health.’ Other similar
expressions of mental distress are the “piercing of
the bones’ (Job 30 17), the bones are “‘troubled”’
(Ps 6 2), “out of joint” (Ps 22 14), “consumed”
(Ps 31 10 AV), ‘‘wasted away” or “waxed old’
(Ps 82 3), “broken” (Ps 518; Lam 3 4), ‘‘il
at rest’”’ (Ps 38 3), ‘‘bone of my bones,” etc (Gen
2 23), having the same nature, and the nearest
relation (2 8 6 1) and affection (Eph 5 30). In
the last-mentioned passage, RV omits “‘of his flesh,
and of his bones’? as an interpolation from Gen
2 23. The figs. in Mic 3 2.3 are expressive of the
most cruel oppression and murder.

H. L. E. Luzrine

BONNET, bon’et: In AV the designation of the
special headdress of the rank and file of the priest-
hood, RV “‘head-tire”’ (Ex 28 40). It consisted of
a long swath of fine white linen wound around the
head in oriental fashion. The Heb word found in
Ex 29 9 RV, “‘to bind head-tires,” lit. “to wind
head-tires,” means, in the light of usage, “to form
an egg-shaped turban.” Cf Jos, Ant, III, vii, 3;
and see Rich, Dict. Rom and Gr Ant, s.v. pileus, for
illustration of the egg-shaped cap of Ulysses, with
which Jerome compared the priestly turban. See
Dress; MITRE, etc.


BOOK, book (DO, sépher; 4 BlBdos, hé biblos):
. Definition

. Inward Books

. Publication

2) Mechanical Copies


Ne


2) Personal Copies
ral Transmission
. MSS
(1) Epigraphy
2 Sphragistics
3) Numismatics
43 Oe eee da
Pa coprapny
6. Printed Boo
7. Variations
8. Textual Criticism
9. Higher Criticism
10. Literary Criticism
11. Origin of New Forms
12, Survival
13. Book Collections : ,
14, Early History of Books in Bible Lands
LITERATURE


oP


Book


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


496


A book is any record of thought in words. It
consists of a fixed form of words embodied in some
kind of substance. The form of words
1. Defini- is the main factor, but it has no ex-
tion istence without the record. The kind
of record is indifferent; it may be carved
on stone, stamped on clay, written or printed on vel-
lum, papyrus or paper, or only stamped on the mind
of author or hearer, if so be it keeps the words in
fixedform. Looked onasaform of words the book
is called a work, and looked on as a record it is called
a volume, document, inscription, ete, as the case
may be; but neither volume nor work has any real
existence as book save as united.

The Bib. words for book, both Gr and Heb, os-
cillate in meaning (as they do in all languages)
between the two elements, the form of words and
the material form. The common words for book
in the NT, from which too the word “Bible” comes,
refer back to the papyrus plant or the material on
which the book is written, just as the Eng. word
“book”’ was long supposed to be derived from the
beech tree, on whose bark the book was written.
The usual word in the Heb of the OT (sépher) may
possibly refer to the act of writing, just as the Gr
word grémmata and the Eng. ‘‘writings” do, but


A Writer, His Palette, and a Papyrus Leaf.


more likely, as its other meanings of ‘numbering’
and “narration” or even ‘‘missive” indicate, it refers
neither to the material nor to the writing process
but to the literary work itself. It suggests at least
the fact that the earliest books were, indeed, books
of tallies. The knot-books and various notch-
book tallies are true books. In the King James’
version the “word” (ddébhdr) is sometimes tr? book
and, although changed in these places in the RV
to ‘‘acts” or “deeds,” it was nevertheless quite
properly tr? a book, just as the ‘‘word” in Gr is
used for book, and indeed in Eng. when the Bible is
called the Word. Besides these terms commonly
tr? book in the EV, various book forms are referred
to in the Bible as roll or volume (which is the same
in origin), tablet, and perhaps rock inscription
(Job 19 23.24).

The fact that the Bible is a book, or indeed a
library of many kinds of books, makes necessary
that to approach its study one should have some
systematic idea of the nature of the book; the
origin of new forms and their survival, oral and
manuscript transmission, the nature of the inward
book and the various kinds of inward books. Apart
from the matter of general archaeological use for
historical interpretation, the questions of inspira-
tion, the incarnate, creative, and indwelling word
and many other doctrines are wholly bound up
with this question of the nature of the book, and
many phrases, such as the Book of Life, can hardly
be understood without knowing with some degree
of clearness what a book is.


. be done by the author himself.


The archaeology, text criticism and higher criti-
cism of the past few years have revolutionized book
history and theory in their respective fields. Above
all the young science of experimental psychology
has, in its short life, contributed more even than
the others to an understanding of the book and
The Book, the word of God and the Word of God,
the Bible and Jesus Christ.

Modern experimental psychology by its study of
inward images, inward speech, inward writings and
other kinds of inward book forms has,
in particular, thrown on Bib. inspira-
tion, higher criticism and text criticism
and the various aspects of the doctrine
of the word, an unexpected light. Inward books,
it appears, are not only real, but of many kinds,
visual and auditory, oral and written, sensory and
motor, and these different kinds have perhaps a
material basis and local habitation in different
parts of the brain. At least they have real exis-
tence; they are real records which preserve a fixed
form of words, to be brought out of the recesses of
the mind from time to time for re-shaping, re-study
or utterance. (See Dittrich, Sprachpsychologie,
1903; LeRoy, Le langage, Paris, 1905; Van Gin-
neken, Principes de linguistique psychol., 1907;
A. Marty, Untersuch. Sprachphilosophie, 1908;
Macnamara, Human Speech, 1909; the classical
work is Wundt, Vélkerpsychologie: Die Sprache,
Leipzig, 1900.)

Inward books may be originals or copies. Every
book is, to begin with, inward. Men sometimes
speak of an autograph as the “original,” but it is
in fact only a first-hand copy of the original, which
is inward, and never by any chance becomes or
ean become outward. Besides these. originals
there are also inward copies of the books of others.
The fact that a book may be memorized is no new
thing, but the analysis of the process is. It seems
that a book may be inwardly copied through eye
or ear or touch or any sense from some outward
book; or again it may be copied back and forth
within, from sense copy to motor copy, from visual
to oral, auditory to inward writing. In reading
aloud the visual image is copied over into oral; in
taking dictation the auditory image is copied over
into inward writing. Many men, even in reading
from print, cannot understand unless they trans-
late as they go into oral images or even move their
lips. Many others either hearing or reading a
French book, e.g. have to translate inwardly into


2. Inward
Books


.English and have in the end two memory copies,


one French and one English, both of which may be
recalled. In whatever way they are recorded, these
memory impressions are real copies of outward
books, and in the case of tribal medicine men,
Vedic priests, the ancient minstrels, village gossips
and professional story-tellers of all kinds, the inwar
collection of books may become a, veritable library.
The end for which a book is created is in general
to reach another mind. This means the utterance
or copying into some outward material
3. Publi- and the re-copying by another into
cation memory. The commonest modes of
utterance are oral speech and writing;
but there are many others, some appealing to eye,
some to ear, some to touch: e.g. gesture language
of the Indian and the deaf mute, pressure signs for
the blind and deaf, signal codes, drum language,
the telegraph click, etc. If the persons to be
reached are few, a single oral speech or manu-
script may be enough to supply all needs of publica-
tion, but if there are very many the speech or
writing must somehow be multiplied. This may
Blind Homer, it
is alleged, repeated the Iliad in many cities; and the
modern political orator may repeat the same speech


497


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Book


several times in the same evening to different
audiences. So too the author may, as many Lat
writers did, copy out several autographs. If the
audience is still too great to be reached by authors’
utterances, the aid of heralds, minstrels, scribes
and the printing-press must be called in to copy
from the autographs or other author’s utterances;
and in case of need more help yet is called in, copies


made from these copies, and copies again, and so
on to perhaps hundreds of copyings. ‘This process
may be represented as 2-+a'+2?+2'+2" where
z=an original, x! a first-hand copy of author’s
utterance, x? a second-hand copy, 2° a third-hand,
etc.

Books may thus be divided into originals, first-
hand or authors’ copies and re-copies. Re-copies
in turn whether at second-, third-, fourth- or
nth-hand, may be either mechanical or personal,
according as the copy is direct from outward ma-
terial to outward material or from the outward
material to a human memory. ‘ ;

(1) Mechanical copies include photographic copies
of MSS, or of the lips in speaking, or of gesture,
or any other form of utterance which may be


* means.


photographed. They include also phonographic
records, telegraph records, and any other mechanical
records of sound or other forms of utterance. Be-
sides photographic and phonograhic processes,
mechanical copies include founding, stamping by
seal or die, stereographic, electrotype, stencil,
gelatine pad and printing-press processes, any
processes, in short, which do not pass via the human
mind, but direct from copy to copy by material
They do not include composition in mov-
able types or by type-setting machines, typewriting
machines and the like, which, like writing, require
the interposition of a human mind. These me-
chanical copies are subject to defects of material,
but are free from psychological defects and error,
and defect of material is practically negligible.

(2) Personal copies include inward copies, or
memory books, and the re-uttered copies from these
copies, to which latter class belong all copied MSS.
The memory copy may be by eye from writing, or
from the lips of a speaker in the case of the deaf.
Or it may be by ear from oral speech, telegraph key,
drum or other sound utterances. Or it may be
again from touch, as in the case of finger-tip lip-
reading or the reading of raised characters by the
blind. Each of these kinds may perhaps be lo-
cated in a different part of the mind or brain, and
its molecular substratum may be as different from
other kinds of inward record as a wave of light is
different from a wave of sound, or a photograph
from the wax roll of a phonograph; but whatever
the form or nature, it somehow records a certain
fixed form of words which is substantially equiva-
lent to the original. This memory copy, unlike
the mechanical copy, is liable to substantial error.
This may arise from defects of sense or of the in-
ward processes of record and it is nearly always
present. Why this need be so is one of the mys-
teries of human nature, but that it is, is one of the
obvious facts; and when memory copies are re-
uttered there is still another crop of errors, “slips
of tongue and pen,” equally mysterious but equally
inevitable. It comes to pass, therefore, that where
oral or manuscript transmission exists, there is sure
to be a double crop of errors between the successive
outward copies. When thus a form of words is
frequently re-copied or reprinted via the human
mind the resulting book becomes more and more
unlike the original as to its form of words, until
in the late manuscript copies of early works there
may often be thousands of variations from the
original. Even an inspired revelation would- thus
be subject to at least one and perhaps two or three
sets of errors from copying before it reached even
the autograph stage.

Before the knowledge of handwriting became
general, oral publication was usual, and itis still not

uncommon. The king’s laws and proc-


4. Oral lamations, the works of poets and
Trans- historians, and the sacred books were
mission anciently published orally by heralds


and minstrels and prophets; and these
primitive publishers are survived still by town
criers, actors, reciters, and Scripture readers.

Up to the point of the first impression on another
mind, oral publication has many advantages. The
impression is generally more vivid, and the voice
conveys many nice shades of feeling through inflec-
tion, stress, and the delicate variations in tone
quality which cannot be expressed in writing.
When it comes to transmission, however, oral tradi-
tion tends to rapid deterioration with each re-copy.
It is true that such transmission may be quite
exact with enough painstaking and repetition;
thus the modern stage affords many examples of
actors with large and exact repertories, and the
Vedas were, it 1s alleged, handed down for cents.


Book


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


498


by a rigidly trained body of memorizers. The
memorizing of Confucian books by Chinese stu-
dents and of the Koran by Moslem students is very
exact. Nevertheless exact transmission orally is
rare, and exists only under strictly artificial condi-
tions. Ear impressions, to begin with, tend to be
less exact than eye impressions, in any event,
because they depend on a brief sense impression,
while in reading the eye lingers until the matter
is understood. Moreover, the memory copy is
not fixed and tends to fade away rapidly; unless
very rigidly guarded and frequently repeated it
soon breaks up its verbal form. ‘This is readily
seen by the great variety in the related legends of
closely related tribes; and in modern times in the
tales of village gossips and after-dinner stories,
which soon lose their fixed verbal form, save as to the
maiu point.

There is great difference of opinion as to the part
which oral transmission played in the composition
of the OT. The prevailing theory of the higher
critics of the 19th cent. made this the prime factor
of transmission to at earliest the 8th cent. BC, but
the recent remarkable revelations of archaeology
regarding the use of written documents in Pal at
the time of the Exodus and before has changed the
situation somewhat. The still more recent de-
velopments as to the Sem character of Pal before the
invasion of the Israelites, together with the growing
evidence of the prevailing use of handwriting all
over Pal by not later than the 9th cent., point in
the same direction. It is now even asserted (Clay,
Amorites) that the Sem wave was from the north
rather than the south, in which case the only possi-
ble ground for ascribing illiteracy to the Hebrews
at the time of the conquest, and therefore exclusive
oral tradition, would be removed.

Whatever may be the facts, it may be said with
some definiteness that the theory which implies two
sets of traditions, handed down for several cents.
and retaining a considerable amount of verbal like-
ness, implies written tradition, not oral, for no
popular tradition keeps identical verbal forms for so
long a time, and there is little ground for supposing
artificial transmission by professional memorizers.
The schools of the prophets might, indeed, have
served as such, but there is no evidence that they
did; and it would have been curious if, writing being
within easy reach, this should have been done. As
in almost all literatures, it is far more likely that the
popular traditions are derived from and refreshed
by literary sources, than that lit. was compiled from
traditions with long oral transmission.

Bib. references to oral publication are found inthe
references to heralds (see s.v.), to Solomon’s wis-
dom as “spoken” (1 K 4 32-34), proclamations
and edicts, the public reading of the law in the OT,
and the reading in the synagogue in the NT. All
the oracles, ‘‘thus saith the Lord’ and “the word
of Jeh,’”’ to Moses, etc, and all allusions to preach-
ing the word, belong to this class of oral publica-
tion and transmission. A direct allusion to oral
transmission is found in Ps 44 1, “We have heard
with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us.”

The distinction of handwriting as against oral
utteranice lies first in the permanence of the record,

but it has also a curious psychological
5. MSS advantage over speech. The latter
reaches the mind through hearing one
letter at a time as uttered. With writing, on the
other hand, the eye grasps three to six letters at a
time, and takes in words as wholes instead of spell-
ing them out. The ear always lags, therefore, the
eye anticipates, although it may also linger if it
needs to. While therefore impressions from hearing
may perhaps be deeper, one may gather many more
in the same time from reading.


When it comes to transmission, the advantage of
handwriting is obvious. In the first place, even
the poorest ink hardly fades as rapidly as memory.
Then at best few men reach a hundred years, and
therefore no memory copy, while on the other
hand the limit to the life of writing has never been
reached. We have writings that have lasted 6,000
years, at least; while if the Palermo stone, e.g. had
been orally transmitted it must needs have passed
through some 200 copyists at least, each producing
two sets of errors. The advantage of manuscript
transmission over oral tradition in its permanence
is thus very great. It is true, of course, that in the
case of fragile material like papyrus, paper, or
even leather, transmission ordinarily implies many
re-copyings and corresponding corruption, but even
at worst these will be very much better than the
best popular oral tradition.

In the broad sense MSS include all kinds of
written books without regard to material, form or
instruments used. In the narrowest sense they are
limited to rolls and codices, i.e. to literary manu-
scripts. Inscriptions are properly written matter
engraved or inscribed on hard material. Documents,
whether private letters or official records, are char-
acteristically folded in pliable material. Literary
works again are usually rolls or else codices, which
latter is the usual form of the printed books as
well. These three classes of written books have
their corresponding sciences in epigraphy, diplo-
matics and paleography.

(1) Epigraphy has to do primarily with in-
scriptions set up for record in public places. These
include published laws, inscriptions, biographical
memorials like the modern gravestone inscriptions
and those on memorial statues, battle monuments
and the like. It includes also votive inscriptions,
inscriptions on gems, jewels, weights and meas-
ures, weapons, utensils, etc. Seals and coins from
all points of view belong here and form another
division under printing. These have their own
sciences in numismatics and sphragistics. The chief
Bib. reference is to the “tables of stone’? (Ex 24
12). See Taste; ALPHABET; WeIGcHT; WRITING,


etc.

(See Lidzbarski, Handb. nordsemit. Epigr., 1898-.)

(2) Sphragistics is the science of seals. Scrip-
ture references to the seal or signet (Gen 38 18;
Job 38 14; Rev 5 1; etc) are many. See SEAL;
SIGNET.

(3) Numismatics has to do with inscriptions on _
coins and medals, and is becoming one of the greatest
sources of our knowledge of ancient history, esp. on
account of the aid derived from coins in the matter
of dating, and because of the vast quantity of them
discovered. See Money. :

(4) Diplomatics, or the science of documents,
has to do with contracts of sale and purchase (Jer
3 8; 32 14), bills of divorce (Dt 24 1) and cer-
tificates of all sorts of the nature of those registered
in the modern public records. These may be on
clay tablets, as in Babylonia and the neighboring
regions, or on ostraca as found esp. in Egypt, but
everywhere in the ancient Mediterranean world, and
notably for Bib. history, in Samaria, as discovered
by the Harvard expedition. Multitudes of the Egyp
papyri discovered in modern times are of this char-
acter as well as the Italian papyri until papyrus was
succeeded by vellum. Many are also found on wax,
gold, silver, brass, lead tablets, etc. See Letters;
OstrRaca; Papyrt.

(5) Paleography has to do with volumes or books
of considerable bulk, chiefly. It has, therefore, to
do mainly with literary works of all sorts, but it
shades into diplomatics when official documents,
such as collections of laws (e.g. Deuteronomy),
treatises, such as the famous treaty between the


499


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Book


Hittites and Egypt, and modern leases are of such
bulk as to be best transmitted in volume form. It
has to do chiefly with the clay tablets, papyrus,
leather, vellum and paper volumes. The clay tablet
is mentioned in the OT at various points (see
TaBLet), the roll in both OT and NT (see Rott).
The leather roll is the traditional form for the Heb
Scriptures up to the present day, although the
codex or modern volume form had been invented
before the conclusion of the NT, and the earliest
extant copies are in this form. The books of the
OT and NT were all probably first written on rolls.
For the different methods of producing these vari-
ous forms—graving, casting, pressing, pen and ink,
etc, see WRITING.


A Reader with a Roll (from a Fresco at Pompeii).


Printing differs from writing chiefly in being exe-
cuted in two dimensions. In writing, a chisel or
brush or pen follows a continuous or
interrupted line, while printing stamps
a letter or a part of a letter, a line,

- @ page, or many pages at a stroke.
The die, the wedge for clay tablets, seals, molds,
xylographic plates, as well as the typewriter, mov-
able type or electrotype plates, etc, belong properly
to printing rather than writing. The wedge stamp,
or single-letter die, the typewriter, the matrix and
movable type form, however, a sort of transition
between the pen point and the printing-press in
that they follow letter after letter. Coins and seals,
on the other hand, differ little from true printing
save in the lengths of the writings; Bab seals and
the rotary press are one in principle. Sphragistics,
or the science of seals, and numismatics, or the
science of coins, medals, etc, belong thus with print-
ing from this point of view, but are more commonly
and conveniently classed with epigraphy, on the
principle that they depend on the light and shade
of incision or relief in one color as distinguished
from the color contrasts of ink or paint. Printed
books include the xylographic process of Chinese
and early European printing, page and form print-
ing from movable type, and all electrotype, stencil,
gelatine pad, etc, processes.

The advantage of printing over writing is in the
more rapid multiplication of copies, and still more
in the accuracy of the copies. The first setting in
movable type is as liable to error as any written
copy, but all impressions from this are wholly
without textual variations. For printed editions
of the Bible see TexT; VERSIONS, etc. ;

In the natural process of transmission all reprints
in movable type, manuscripts or oral repetitions
accumulate variations with each re-copying. These


6. Printed
Books


are, in general, errors, and the process is one of de-


generation. In oral transmission the average error

with each generation is very great, and
7. Vari- it is only with incredible pains that
ations the best copies are made equal to even


the average manuscript, which in turn
at its best only equals the first type-set copy.
The same expenditure of care on this type-set copy
produces thousands of copies in printing where
it produces one in manuscript. The phonograph,
the typewriter, type-bar composition, photographic
and electrotype methods have pated the average
error in modern books to a very low point. But
even after incredible pains on the part of the authors
and professional proofreaders, the offered reward
of a guinea for each detected error in the Oxford
revised version of the Bible brought several errors
to light. This version is however about as nearly
free from textual error as any large book ever made,
and millions of copies of it are now printed wholly
without textual variation.

But textual errors are not the only variations. It
often happens that the author or someone else
undertakes to correct the errors and makes substi-
tutions or additions of one sort or another. The
result is a revised edition, which is, in general, an
improvement, or evolution upward. Variations are
thus of two kinds: involuntary and intentional,
corresponding pretty well with the words “copies”
and “editions” of a work.

Strictly speaking, every book with intentional
changes is a new work, but colloquially it is counted
the “same work” until the changes become so
great that the resemblance of the form of words to
the original is hard to recognize. It is a common
thing for a work to be edited and reédited under
a certain author’s name (Herzog), then become
known by the joint name of the author and editor
(Herzog-Plitt or Schaff-Herzog), and finally become
known under the name of the latest editor (Hauck).
In this case it is often described for a time on a
title-page as “founded” on its predecessor, but
generally the original author’s name is dropped
from the title-page altogether when no great por-
tions retain the original verbal form. All editions
of a work are recognized in common use in some
sense as new works; and in the bookshop or library
a man is careful to specify the latest ed of Smith,
or Brown’s ed of Smith, to avoid getting the older
and outdated original work.

Sometimes the original work and the additions,
corrections, explanations, etc, are kept quite sep-
arate and distinct—additional matter being given
in MSS in the margins, or between lines, and
in printed books as footnotes or in brackets or
parentheses. This is commonly the case with the
text-and-comment eds of Bib. books and great
writers. Sometimes, as often in ancient MSS, it
happens in copying that what were marginal and
interlinear notes become run in as an _ undistin-
guished part of the text and, still more often, what
was indicated as quotation in an original work loses
its indications and becomes an undistinguished
part of the work. In the case of the paraphrase the
comment is intentionally run in with the words of
the text; and most editors of scientific works like-
wise make no attempt to distinguish between the
original matter and additions by another hand, the
whole responsibility being thrown forward on the
editor. Sometimes the original work itself to begin
with is largely made up of quotation, or is a mere
compilation or collection of works in which the
“originality” is confined to title-page or preface or
even a mere title, as in the case of the OT, the NT,
and the Bible, and the order of arrangement of parts.

Almost all books are thus composite. Even in a
manuscript copy of a manuscript, or an oral repe-


Book


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


500


tition of an oral tale, two human minds have con-
tributed to the net result, and the work of each may
perhaps be distinguished from that of theother. In
the case of a new ed by the same author, the result
is still composite—a new work composed of old and
new material. With all new eds by other authors
the compositeness increases until, eg. an ed of
the Bible with textual variants and select comments
from various writers becomes the combined work
of thousands of writers, each distinguished as to
ie work from all the rest by his name or some sym-

ol.

_ The work proper or work unchanged, save for
involuntary error, includes thus copies, tr*, abridg-
ments, selections and quotations; the revised work
or work with voluntary changes includes eds and
paraphrases (which are simply texts with commen-
tary run into the text), digests, redactions, etc,
and perhaps compilations.

These two kinds of variations give rise to the
two sciences of text-criticism and higher or histor-
ical criticism. The former distinguishes all acci-
dental errors of transmission, the latter all the
voluntary changes; the former aims to reconstruct
the original, the latter to separate in any given
book between the work of the original and each
editor.

In this connection it must not be forgotten that
the original itself may be a composite work—con-
taining long quotations, made up wholly of selec-
tions or even made up of whole works bound to-
gether by a mere title. In these cases textual
criticism restores. not the original of each, but the
original text of the whole, while higher criticism
takes up the task of separating out the elements
first. of later eds and redactions of this original, then
of the original itself.

The involuntary variations of MSS or oral tradi-
tion give rise to the science of text-criticism. The
point of the science is to reconstruct
exactly the original form of words or
text. Formerly the method for this
was a mere balancing of probabilities,
but since Tregelles it has become a rigid logical
process which traces copies to their near ancestors,
and these in turn farther back, until a genealogical
tree has been formed of actual descent. .The law
of this is in effect that “like variations point to a
common ancestor,’”’ the biological law of ‘“homol-
ogy,’’ and if the groupings reveal as many as three
independent lines of copies from the original, the
correct text can be constructed with mathematical
precision, since the readings of two lines will
always be right against the third—granting a very
small margin of error in the psychological tendency
of habit in a scribe to repeat the same error. The
method proceeds (1) to describe all variations of
each MS (or equally of each oral or printed copy)
from the standard text; (2) to group the MSS which
have the most pronounced variations; (3) to unite
these groups on the principle of homology into larger
and larger groups until authors’ utterances have
been reached and through these the inward original.
The results are expressed in a text and variants——
the text being a corrected copy of the original, and
the variants showing the exact contribution of
each copyist to the MSS which he produced.

It is carefully to be remembered that text-
criticism proper has only to do with a particular
form of words. Every tr or ed is a separate prob-
lem complete in itself when the very words used by
translator and the editor have been reconstructed.
These may in turn be useful in reconstructing the
original, but care must be had not to amend, tr or
ed from the original, and the original in turn, when
it contains quotations from other writers, must not
be amended from the originals of these writers.


8. Textual
Criticism


The task of textual criticism is to set forth each
man’s words—each original author, each copyist,
each translator, each editor, just as his words were--
aoe and no less. (See Taxtor OT; Text or


Higher criticism has to do with voluntary varia-


tions or variations in subject-matter. Like

text-criticism it has to do with dis-
9. Higher tinguishing the share of each of
Criticism several coGperators in a composite


work; and like it higher criticism traces
the contributions of various authors each to its
source. It differs, however, in dealing with original
matter. While the variations by officious scribes,
or intelligent scribes who correct spelling, grammar,
wrong dates and the like, come pretty closely into
the region of editing, and on the other hand the
redactor is sometimes little more than an officious
copyist, still the line of involuntary and voluntary
change holds good, whether it be the grafting into
an original work by the author of many quotations,
or the grafting onto the work by others of the work
of themselves or of other authors. It is not the
business of the textual critic to separate out either of
these (it is expressly his business not to), although
his work may greatly help and even furnish results
which can be used automatically. The whole of
this double field of composite authorship belongs to
higher criticism.

In the case of most modern works the task of
the higher critic is a simple one. Quotation marks,
a growing ethical feeling against plagiarism, the
mechanical conveniences of typographical dis-
play, and the like, all contribute to a careful separa-
tion of the work of each contributor. Neverthe-
less, in many cases as, for example, in the editing
of textbooks and newspapers, this is not regarded.
While the signed article in the encyclopaedia is
now nearly universal, the signed review more and
more common, the signed editorial is still rare, and
the others by no means universal. It is still a
matter of interest to many to pick out by his “‘style”
the author of an unsigned article, review or editorial
—which is higher criticism.

In ancient lit., where there were few such mechani-
cal conveniences in discriminating, and little or no
conscience had been developed about incorporating
anything which suited the purpose of the writer
in part or as a whole, the result was often a complete
patchwork of verbal forms of many writers. The
task of higher criticism is to sort out the original and
each of its literary variants, and to trace these
variants to their originals. The net result in the
case of any work does not differ much from an
ordinary modern work with quotation marks and
footnotes referring to the sources of the quotations.
It restores, so to speak, the punctuation and foot-
notes which the author omitted or later copyists
lost. Itincludes many nice questions of discrimina-
tion through style and the historical connection
of the fragments with the works from which they
were taken; and after these have been analyzed
out, many nice questions also of tracing their
authorship or at least the time, place and environ-
ment of their composition. It includes thus the
Guesdens of superhuman authorship and inspira-

ion.

Literary criticism has to do with originals as
originals, or, in composite works, the original parts

: of onginals. An original work may

10. Literary include quotations from others or be
Criticism mainly quotations, and its “original-
: ity” consists in part in the way these
quotations are introduced and used. By “original,”
however, is meant in the main new verbal forms.
The original work must not plagiarize nor even use
stereotyped phrases, although it may introduce


501


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Book


proverbs or idiomatic phrases. In general, how-
ever, Originality means that literary food has been
digested—reduced to its chemical elements of word
or briefest. phrase and rebuilt into a wholly new
structure in the mind. The building in of old
doorways and ornaments may be a part of the
literary architect’s originality, but they themselves
were not “original” with him.

The literary critic has thus to do with a man’s
originality—the contribution that he has made to
the subject, the peculiar quality of this in its fitness
to influence other minds which is effected by the
“reaction of the whole personality,” all his learning
and emotioned experience, on every part of his
material—what in short we call style. This in-
volves a judgment or comparison with all other
works on the same subject as to its contribution of
new matter and its readability.

The chief problems of book science may be de-
scribed in the words of biological science as (1) the

origin of new forms, (2) survival.


11. Origin The question of the origin of a new
of New literary work and its survival is so
Forms like that of the origin of a new species


and its survival that it may be re-
garded less as analogy than as falling under the
same laws of variations, multiplication, heredity and
natural selection. The origin of variant forms of
the same original through involuntary and voluntary
changes has been traced above up to the point where
editorial variants overwhelm the original and a new
author’s name takes the place of the old. After
this step has been taken it is a new work, and at
bottom the origin of all new works is much the same.
The process is most clearly seen in treatises of some
branch of science, say physics. A general treatise,
say on Heat, is published, giving the state of knowl-
edge on the subject at that time. Then mono-
graphs begin to be produced. The monograph
may and generally does include, in bibliographical
or historical outline, the substance of previous works,
and in every event it implies the previous total.
The point of the monograph itself is, however, not
the summary of common knowledge but the con-
tribution that it makes, or, in the language of natu-
ral science, the ‘‘useful variant” of the subject which
it produces. After some accumulation of these
monographs, or useful variants of previous treatises,
some author gathers them together and unites them
with previous. treatises into a new general treatise
or textbook, which is in effect the latest. previous
treatise with all variants developed in the mean-
time.

In either case a permanent new form has been
produced—the old common knowledge with a
difference, and the process goes on again: the new
work is multiplied by publication into many like
individuals; these like individuals develop each its
variations; the variations in the same direction
unite in some new accepted fact, idea or law, ex-
pressed in a monograph; common knowledge with
this new variation forms a new general work which
again is multiplied, and so on. a

And what is true of scientific monographs is just
as true in substance of literature, of oral tradition
and of the whole history of ideas. It is the per-
petual putting together of variations experienced
two or more times by one individual or one or more
times each by two or more individuals, with the
common body of our ideas, and producing thus a new
fixed form. ‘Popular proverbs, for example, and all
poetry, fiction and the like, come thus to sum up a
long human experience. :

And carrying the matter still farther back, what
is true of the scientific book and of poetry and of
folk-literature, is true also of the inward evolution
of every. thought, even those phrased for conversa-


tion or indeed for self-communion—it is the result
of a series of variations and integrations. The
workings of the scientist’s mind in producing a con-
tribution and the workings of the farmer’s mind in
evolving a shrewd maxim, are alike the result of a
long series of these observations, variations and
integrations. Repeated observations and the union
of observations which vary in the same direction is
the history of the thought process all the way along
from the simplest perception of the infant, up
through the ordinary thinking of the average man,
to the most complex concept of the philosopher.

Through all the processes of inward thought and
outward expression thus the same process of evolu-
tion in the production of a new form holds good:
it is the synthesis of all works on a given subject
(i.e. any more or less narrow field of reality), the
multiplication of this synthetic work, the develop-
ment of new variations in it and the reunion again of
all these variations in a more comprehensive work.

When it comes to the matter of the survival of a
new work when it has been produced, the problem

is a double one: (1) the survival of
12. Survival the individual book, and (2) the sur-

vival of the work, i.e. any copy of
the original whose text does not vary so far that it
may not be recognized as the ‘‘same” work. The
original book is in a man’s mind and survives only
so long as its author survives. In the same sense
that the author dies, the individual hook dies. No
new book, therefore, survives its author. If, how-
ever, by survival is meant the existence of any copy,
or copy of a copy of this original, containing much
(but never quite) the same form of words, then the
book survives in this world, in the same sense that
the author survives, i.e. in its descendants; it is the
difference between personal immortality and race im-
mortality. At the same time, however, the survival
of species depends on the individual. A work ora
species is no metaphysical reality, but a sum total
of individuals with, of course, their relations to one
another.

On the average, the chance of long survival for
any individual copy of a book issmall. Every new
book enters into a struggle for existence; wind and
weather, wear and tear conspire to destroy it. On
the whole they succeed sooner or later. Some books
live longer than others, but however durable the
material, and however carefully treated they may
be, an autograph rarely lasts a thousand years. If
survival depended on permanence of the individual,
there would be no Bible and no classics.

The average chance of an individual book for
long life depends (1) on the intrinsic durability of
its material, or its ability to resist hostile environ-
ment, (2) on isolation.

The enemies to which books are exposed are
various: wind, fire, moisture, mold, human negli-
gence and vandalism, and human use. Some ma-
terials are naturally more durable than others.
Stone and metal inscriptions survive better than
wood or clay, vellum than papyrus or paper.

On the other hand, however, if isolated or pro-
tected from hostile environment, very fragile ma-
terial may outlast more substantial. Papyrus has
survived in the mounds of Egypt, and unbaked
clay tablets in the mounds of Babylonia, while
millions of stone and metal inscriptions written
thousands of years later have already perished.
Here the factor of isolation comes in. Fire and
pillage, moth and rust and the bookworm destroy
for the most part without respect of persons. It is
only those books which are out of the way of de-
structive agencies which survive. An unbaked tab-
let which has survived 5,000 years under rubbish
may crumble to dust in 5 years after it has been
dug up and exposed to the air. This isolation may


Book
Border, Borders


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


502


be accidental or ‘“‘natural,’’ as when tablets and
papyri are preserved under ruins, but it may also
be artificial and the result of human care. A third
factor of survival is therefore the ability of a work
to procure for itself human protection, or artificial
isolation. In brief this ability is the ‘‘value’’
of a book to its owner. This value may lie in the
material, artistic excellence, association or rarity.
Any variation in the direction of value which may
be expressed financially tends to preserve. In fire
or shipwreck, these are the ones saved, in pillage
the ones spared. They are the ones for whom fire~
proof buildings and special guardians are provided.
An exception to this rule is when the material is
more valuable for other than book purposes. In
times of war the book engraved on gold or lead or
paper may be melted down for coin or bullets or
torn up for cartridges, while stone and vellum books
arespared. The general law is, however, that value
tends to preserve, and it has been remarked that
all the oldest. codices which have survived in free
environment are sumptuous copies.

Literary value on the other hand is, on the whole,
a factor of destruction for the individual rather
than of survival. The better a book is the more it
is read, and the more it is read, the faster it wears
out. The worthless book on the top shelf outlasts
all the rest. In cases of fire or shipwreck an owner
will save books which cannot be replaced and the
books most easily replaced are those with literary
value. A man will sometimes save his favorite
books, and does treat them often with a certain
reverent care, which tends to preservation but, on
the whole, literary value tends to destruction.

When it comes to the survival of the work or
race survival, matters are reversed. Literary value
is the prime factor. It is the ability of a book to
get itself multiplied or re-copied which counts—
the quality, whatever it may be, which tends to
make a man wish to replace his copy when it is
wo out, and to make many men wish to read the
work.

This literary interest operates first to produce a
large number of copies in order to meet the demand,
each of which copies has its chance of survival. It
operates also by inducing men to use the very best
material, paper, ink, binding, etc, which results
in giving each individual book a longer time to
produce a new copy.

The modern newspaper published in a million
copies is ephemeral, in the first place, because it is
printed upon paper which cannot last, save in very
favorable conditions of isolation, for more than forty
or fifty years. In the second place, it is very rarely
reprinted save for an occasional memorial copy.
Books like the Bible or Virgil, Dante or Shakespeare,
on the other hand, are reprinted in multitudes of
editions and in many instances in the most perma-
nent material that art can devise.

It often happens that a book is popular for a
short time, but will not survive a changed en-
vironment. The newspaper is popular for a few
hours, but the time environment changes and in-
terest is gone. It sometimes happens that a book
is very popular in one country and wholly fails to
interest in another. Millions of copies of Uncle
Tom's Cabin and Ben Hur were required to fill
the demand of one generation where a few hundreds
may suffice for the next.

All the time popular taste, which is only another
name for average human experience, is judging a
book. A book survives because it is popular—
not necessarily because it is popular with the un-
educated majority, but because it appeals con-
tinually to the average human experience of some
considerable class, good or bad. Survival is, there-
fore, natural. Skilled critics help popular judg-


ment, and select lists aid, but in the long run the
test 18 simply of its correspondence with human
experience; in short, it is because men “‘like’’ it
that a book survives.

There is thus going on all the time a process of
struggle and ‘natural selection” which in the end
is a survival of the fittest in the true evolutionary
sense, i.e. books survive because fitted to their
environment of human experience or taste.’ There
grows up, therefore, continually in every country a
certain class of books which are counted classics.
These are those which have survived their tests,
and are being still further tested. Some have been
tested from remote antiquity, and it is the books
which survive the test of many periods of time, many
kinds of geographical environment, and many vari-
eties of intellectual environment, 1.e. which appeal
to many classes of readers, which are the true classics
and which, on the other hand, show that they do
correspond with the fundamental facts of human
experience, simply because they have survived. In
general it is the religious books which have survived
in all nations, and the only books which have been
tested in all lands and ages and appeal to Oriental
and Western, ancient and modern alike, are those
of the Christian Bible.

It has been noticed above that the process of
forming a new work is the bringing together of all

works on the same subject in order
13. Book to unite all their variations in the new
Collections work. It is for this purpose that

every student brings together the work-
ing library on his specialty; it is what the librarian
does when he brings together all the books on a
subject for the use of students. Every man who
reads up on a subject is performing the same task
for himself, and likewise every man who does general
reading.

There are few libraries, however, which attempt
to get together all the books on a subject. Most
libraries are select libraries containing the best
books on the subject: by this is meant all books
which have anything new or in short have a usec-
ful variation. This is an artificial process of the
critical human mind, but in humanity in general it
is going on all the time as a natural process. Men
are perpetually at work choosing their ‘“‘five-foot
shelves,” the collections of the very “best of best
books.”” The reason for this lies in the fact that
the average human mind can read and hold only
a limited number of books; an unconscious proc-
ess is all the time going on tending to pick out the
smal] number of books which on the whole contain
the greatest amount of human experience to the
average page. The mass of world’s books, however
enormous, 1s thus boiled down by a natural selection
to a few books, which contain the essence of all
the rest. The process tends to go on in every
country and every language. The most universal
example is the Bible, which represents a long proc-
ess of natural selection through many periods of
time and considerable variety of geographical in-
fluence. It unites the quintessence of Sem ideas
with the corresponding quintessence of Indo-Euro-
pean ideas, each embodied in a correspondingly
perfect language—for language itself is in the last
analysis the quintessence of the experience of any
people in its likeness and unlikeness to other peoples.
It is therefore by the mere fact of “survival” and
“natural selection” proved to be the “fittest” to
survive, i.e. that which corresponds most nearly
to universal human experience. Councils do not
form the canon of Seripture: they simply set a seal
upon a natural process. The Bible is thus the
climax of evolution among books as man is among
animals. It is as unique among books as man is
unique among all living things. See Liprariss.


503


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Book
Border, Borders


The history of books begins at least with the
history of writing. Some of the pictures on the
cave walls of the neolithic age (Déche-
14. Early  lette, Man: Archaeol., Prehist. [1908],
History of 201-37) seem to have the essential
Books in characteristics of books and certainly
Bible Lands the earliest clay tablets and inscrip-
tions do. These seem to carry back
with certainty to at least 4,200 years BC. By a
thousand years later, tablet books and inscriptions
were common and papyrus books seem to have been
well begun. Another thousand years, or some time
before Hammurabi, books of many sorts were numer-
ous. At the time of Abraham, books were common
all over Egypt, Babylonia, Pal, and the eastern Med-
iterranean as far at least as Crete and Asia Minor.
In the time of Moses, whenever that may have been,
the alphabet had perhaps been invented, books were
common among all priestly and official classes, not
only in Babylonia, Assyria and Egypt, but at jeast
in two or three scores of places in Pal, north Syria
and Cyprus. In the time of David not only was
historical, official and religious lit. common in Egypt
and Assyria, but poetry and fiction had been a good
deal developed in the countries round about Pal; and
very soon after, if not long before, as the Moabitiec,
Siloam, Zkr, Zenjirli, Baal-Lebanon, Gezer and Sa-
maritan inscriptions show, Sem writing was common
all over Pal and its neighborhood.


Lirrrature.—Articles by Dziatzko on ‘‘Buch"” and
“Bibliotheken,"" in Pauly-Wissowa, Real-encyclopddie
d. class. Altertumsw., V, 5, and his Antikes Buchwesen,
Leipzig, 1900, are mines of material, and the _biblio-
graphical reference thorough. The rapid develop-
ments in the history of most ancient books may he
followed in Hortzschansky'’s admirable annual volume,
Bibliographie des Bibliotheks- und Buchwesens, rape iat
1904 ff. For a first orientation the little book of O,
Wiese, Schrift und Buchwesen_in alter u. neuer Zeit
(3d ed, Leipzig, 1910), or in English, the respective
articles in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, are perhaps
best. On the scientific side the hest introductions are
Vol I of Iwan Miller's Handb. d. klass. Altertumsw.
and T. Birt'’s D. antike Buchwesen (Berlin, 1882). For
Bib. aspects of the Book, the best of all, and_very ade-
quate indeed, is the long article of E. von Dobschiitz
on the ‘‘ Bible in the Church” in the Hastings’ Encyclo-
paedia of Religion, II, 579-615, and esp. on account of the
bibliographical apparatus at the end of each section.
These little bibliographies give a complete apparatus on
many of the above subjects. Paragraphs with bibliog-
raphies on others of above topics will be found in the
‘W. Sanday article on ‘* Bible,’’ Just preceding.

E. C. RicHarpson

BOOK OF ABRAHAM. See Apoca.yptic Lit-


ERATURE.
BOOK OF ENOCH. See Enocu, Book or.


BOOK OF JUBILEES. See Arocanyptic Lit-
ERATURE; APOCRYPHA.


BOOK OF LIFE (0° 150, sépher hayytm;
4 BlBdos rhs tots, hé biblos tés 208s, “book of
life’): The phrase is derived from the custom of
the ancients of keeping genealogical records (Neh
7 5.64; 12 22.23) and ‘of enrolling citizens for
various purposes (Jer 22 30; Ezk 13 9). So God
is represented as having a record of all who are
under His special care and guardianship. To be
blotted out of the Book of Life is to be cut off from
God’s favor, to suffer an untimely death, as when
Moses pleads that he be blotted out of God’s
book—that he might die, rather than that Israel
should be destroyed (Ex 32 32; Ps 69 28). In
the N'T it is the record of the righteous who are to
inherit eternal life (Phil 4 3; Rev 3 5; 13 8; 17
8; 21 27). In the apocalyptic writings there is the
conception of a book or of books, that are in God’s
keeping, and upon which the final judgment is to be
based (Dnl 7 10; 12 1; Rev 20 12.15; ef Bk Jub
39 6; 19 9). See APOCALYPSE; Biot; Boox or
REMEMBRANCE; JUDGMENT, Last. L. Kaiser


BOOK OF NOAH. SeeApocatyptic LITERATURE.


BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE, ré-mem’brans
(JIDT ADO, sépher zikkardn, “book of record’’):
Is related in meaning to the ‘Book of Life.” It
refers to a list of the righteous, recorded in a book
that lies before God (Mal 3 16; cf Dnl 7 10). See
Book or Lire.


BOOKS OF ADAM. See Apocatyptic LiTsRaA-
TURE; ApDAM, Books oF.


BOOT, boot (J8O, 3’6n; AV battle; ARV
“armor’; ARVm “boot’’): The word s°’6n, found
only in Isa 9 5 (He 9 4), is probably a loanword
from the Assyr 3énu, meaning “shoe,” “sandal.” The
root has the same meaning in Aram. and Ethiopic.
The passage should be tr “every boot of the booted
warrior.”


BOOTH, booth, booth: The Heb word sukkah
(rendered in the AV “booth” or “booths,” eleven
times; “tabernacle” or ‘“‘tabernacles,” ten times;
“pavilion” or “pavilions,” five times; “cottage”
once) means a hut made of wattled twigs or branches
(Lev 23 42; Neh 8 15). In countries where trees
are abundant such wattled structures are common
as temporary buildings as they can be constructed
in a very short time. Cattle were probably housed
in them (Gen 33 17). Such hurriedly-made huts
were used by soldiers (2 8 11 11; 1 K 20 12) and
by harvesters—hence the name feast of “‘booths’’ or
“tabernacles” (see TABERNACLES, Feast or). Job
(27 18) uses booth (|| moth’s house) as a symbol of
impermanence. Similar huts were erected in vine-
yards, etc, to protect them from robbers and beasts
of prey. The isolated condition of Jerus in the
time of the prophet Isaiah is compared to a “booth
in a vineyard” (Isa 1 8). T. Lewis


: parte: FEAST OF. See Feasts anp Fasts,


BOOTY, boot’i (T2 and 12, baz, baz): “Booty”
is the tr of baz or baz, usually rendered “prey”
and “spoil” (Jer 49 32); of malk6h, “prey,” “booty”
(Nn 81 32, “the booty—the rest of the prey,’’ RV
“the prey, over and above the booty,’ bdz); of
méshissah, “spoil” (Hab 27; Zeph 113; RV
“gpoil’’); of phéleia, “gain” (2 Macc 8 20). “Booty
respects what is of personal service to the captor;
spoils whatever serves to designate his triumph;
prey includes whatever gratifies the appetite and
is to be consumed” (Crabb, English Synonymes).
Persons (for slaves, etc) might be part of the booty.
See also Spo!t. W. L. WaLkrer


BOOZ, bo’oz (TR, Bost, Bodz; WH, Boés, Boés):
AV, Gr form of Boaz (thus RV) (Mt 1 5; Lk 3 82).


BOR-ASHAN, bor-ash’an: A correction of the
MT in ARV in 1 S 80 30 for AV “Chor-ashan”
and ERV “Cor-ashan.” Probably the same as
AsHan (Josh 15 42; 1 Ch 4 32; 6 59), which
see,


BORDER, bor'dér, BORDERS: Indicating in
both sing. and pl. the outlines or territory of a
country. In the sense of “limits,” ‘boundaries”
or “territory,” it occurs as a tr of dana, g*bhal
(and its fem. T2723, g*bhilah, in Ps 74 17) in
numerous passages in OT, esp. in Josh. 397,
yrékhah=“the flank,” ‘‘the side,” “the coast,”
hence “the border’ occurs in Gen 49 13; MXp,
kaceh=“an extremity,” “brim,” “brink,” “edge”
(Ex 16 35; 19 12; Josh 4 19); MADD, misgereth
=something inclosing, i.e. “a margin” (Ex 87 12.14;


Borderer
Botany


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


504


1K 7 28£.31£.35f AV; 2 K 16 17 AV); MDW or
MDW, sdphah, or sepheth="‘the lip” (as a natural
boundary) hence ‘“‘a margin,” “brim,” “brink,”
“edge” (Ex 28 26; 39 19 AV); VP, kég=“an ex-
tremity,” “end” (2 K 19 23 AV); MRYNM, taea@ah
= “exit,” hence “boundary” (1 Ch 5 16); MA, tor
= “a succession,” ‘“‘a string,” ‘‘row,’’ hence “‘border”’
(Cant 111 AV); 73, yadh=“hand,” used in a
great variety of applications, both lit. and fig.,
proximate and remote; but how it should be tr
with “border” in 1 Ch 7 29 is not clear; better
would be: “in the hands of the children of Manas-
seh.” Three Gr words occur for the idea: xpdo-
wedov, krdspedon=“‘a margin,’ “fringe” (Mt 23 5;
Mk 6 56; Lk 8 44); Spor, hérion=“a limit,” “a
boundary line’ (Mt 4 13); meObpws, methérios =
“contiguous’’ (neuter pl. as noun, “frontier,” ‘‘bor-
der” in Mk 7 24). Frank E, Hirsca


BORDERER, bor’dér-ér (wapaxerpévous, parakei-
ménous): One who dwells on the borders or confines
of acountry. Only in 2 Macc 9 285, ‘The princes
that are borderers and neighbors unto my kingdom.”


BORE, bir: According to the Book of the Cove-
nant (Ex 20 20—23 33) a slave whom his master
had purchased was to be released after six years.
Should he choose to remain in his master’s service
a religious ceremony was necessary to ratify his
decision. ‘‘Then his master shall bring him unto
God’ (better than ‘‘unto the judges” of the AV),
“and shall bring him to the door, or unto the door-
post; and his master shall bore his ear through with
an awl” (Ex 21 6). It is highly improbable that
‘unto God” means ‘‘to a sanctuary”’; for there was
no special reason for performing this ceremony near
the door of asanctuary. On the other hand the en-
trance to a private house wasasacred spot. Accord-
ing to primitive thinking near the door dwelt the
household gods whose function it was to guard the
house and its occupants, e.g. against the entry of
disease. It was natural that the ceremony of attach-
ing the slave permanently to the master’s household
should be performed in the presence of the household
gods. “The boring of the ear of slaves was a com-
mon practice in antiquity, possibly to symbolize the
duty of obedience, as the ear was the organ of hear-
ing” (Bennett). The Deuteronomist (Dt 15 17) re-
jects the religious aspect of the ceremony—probably
as a relic of Can. religion—and looks upon it as a
secular and symbolical operation. According to his
view, the awl was thrust through the ear of the
slave to the door. The slave in question was per-
manently attached to the household. T. Lewis


BORITH, bd’rith: Mentioned in the genealogical
table which traces the descent of Esdras (Ezra) from
Aaron (2 Esd 1 2). In 1 Esd 8 2, his name ap-
pears as Boccas (q.v.), and in 1 Ch 6 5.51; Ear
7 4, BUKKI (q.v.).


BORN. See Baar, Born.
BORN AGAIN. See REGENERATION.
BORNE. See Bear, Borne.


BORROWING, bor’s-ing:

(1) In the OT period loans were not of a commer-
cial nature, i.e. they were not granted to enable a
man to start or run a business. They were really a
form of charity, and were made by the lender only
to meet the pressure of poverty. To the borrower
they were esteemed a form of misfortune (Dt 28
12f), and by the lender a form of beneficence.
Hence the tone of the Mosaic legislation on the
subject.


(2) Laying interest upon the poor of Israel was
forbidden in all the codes (see Ex 22 25 [JE]; Dt
23 19; Lev 25 36 H), because it was looked upon
as making unwarranted profit out of a brother’s
distress: “If thou lend money to any of my people
with thee that is poor, thou shalt not be to him as
a creditor; neither shall ye lay upon him interest

. and it shall come to pass, when he crieth
unto me, that I will hear; for J am gracious.”

(3) The Law, however, allowed interest to be
taken of a foreigner, or non-Jew (Dt 23 20: “Unto
a foreigner thou mayest lend upon interest”; ef
Dt 15 3); and even among Jews pledges were
allowed under limitations, or taken against the
law (Dt 24 10; cf Job 24 2.3: ‘There are that
remove the landmarks . . . . they take the widow’s
ox for a pledge”). In Dt 15 1 ff there is a remark-
able law providing a “‘release’’ by the creditor every
“seven years,” a “letting drop of loans’’ (see Driver
inloc.). In Ex 3 22, AV “shall borrow” is rendered
“shall ask” in RV. Gro. B. Eacrer


BOSCATH, bos’kath. See BozKaTu.


BOSOM, boéz’um: In the ordinary signification
of the anterior upper portion of the trunk of the
body, PI, PUI, kok or Aék, “inlet, “lap”? (Ex 4
6.7; Nu 11 12; Dt 18 6; 28 54.56; Ruth 4 16;
Ps 74 11; Isa 65 6.7; Lam 2 12). ‘‘A present in the
bosom” (Prov 21 14): bribes carried ready for use
in the fold of the robe. 2M, hécen=“bosom”
(with special reference to that portion of the body
which is between the arms), occurs in Ps 129 7;
an, 26bh=“‘a cherisher,” hence ‘the bosom” (Job
31 33); mobs , ¢allahath=something advanced or
deep, ‘‘a bowl’’; fig. ‘‘the bosom” (Prov 19 24 AV;
2615 AV). The Gr employs xéAmos, kélpos (Lk
6 38; Jn 13 23). For Abraham’s bosom, see sepa-
rate art.

Figurative: In a fig. sense it denotes intimacy
and unrestrained intercourse (Gen 16 5; 2S 12
8); tender care and watchfulness (Isa 40 11);
closest intimacy and most perfect knowledge (Jn 1
18); “into their bosom” (Ps 79 12) indicates the
bosom as the seat of thought and reflection.

F. E. Hirsca

BOSOM, ABRAHAM’S. See Apranam’s Bos-
oM,.


BOSOR, b3d’sor (Bowsp, Bosér):

(1) Acity named among those taken by Judas
Maccabaeus ‘‘in the land of Gilead’? (1 Macc 6
26.36). From the towns named it is evident that
this phrase is elastic, covering territory beyond
what is usually called the land of Gilead. Possibly
therefore Bosor may be identical with Busr el-
Hariri, in the Luhf, S.E. of el-Leja’.

GF In 2 Pet 2 15 AV, the Gr form of Bror
q.v.).


BOSORA, bos’é-ra (Booopd, Bosord): One of
the strong cities of Gilead taken by Judas Macca-
baeus (1 Macc 5 26.28). It is identical with the
Rom Bostra, the city whose extensive ruins lie
on the S.E. border of the Haurdn, on the old Rom
road that runs.between Der‘ah and Salkhad. The
modern name is Bosra eski-Sham. It cannot be
identified with Bozrag either (1) or (2), as it lies
much too far north. It appears for the first time in
history in the passage noted above. The ruins
show it to have been a place of great strength and
importance. In the time of Herod the Great, it
was in the hands of the Nabataeans. When Aulus
Cornelius Palma conquered these regions, Bostra
was made capital of the province under the name of
Nova Trajana Bostra, in honor of the emperor


‘


505


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Borderer
Botany


Trajan. This was in 105 AD, from which year
the Bostrian era was reckoned. It was taken by
the Moslems under Khalid—‘“‘the sword of God.”
It resisted the attack of Baldwin III. Later it fell
on evil days. Now, if it be true, as the proverb
says, that ‘‘the prosperity of Bosra is the prosperity
of the Haurdn,” the case of the latter is sad indeed.
. Ewine

BOSS, bos: Occurs only in the pl. as a tr of
34, gabh=“arch,” or “protuberance,” referring to
the curved ornaments of a shield (Job 15 26), the
central knob of the buckler.


BOTANY, bot’a-ni: On account of the great
diversity in the climatic and topographical condi-
tions Pal is peculiarly’ rich in the

1. General variety of its flora—the best authority,
Character- Post, distinguishes 3,500 species. The
istics of land as a whole belongs to the botani-
Palestinian cal area known as the ‘Mediterranean
Flora region,” a region characterized climati-

’ .,. cally by very dry, hot summers and
fairly mild winters. Plants here grow in spring,
rest in the hot, dry season and grow again in autumn;
the long-continued, scorching sunlight and the
absence of water for five or six months at a time,
lead to the destruction of vast quantities of seeds

‘and young plants imported by various natural
means and by human agency. Among these
xerophile or drought-resisting plants, some of the
most characteristic features are a thick, leathery
rind admitting of little transpiration, e.g. cactus,
stonecrops, etc, and the presence of bulbs, rigid
stalks, or fleshy leaves, of which the flora of Pal
abounds with examples. Equally characteristic
are dry, much-branched spiny trees or shrubs with
scanty foliage and small leaves, such as the acacias
and the thorny burnet. In connection with this last,
it may be mentioned that, next to the strong sun-
light and drought, the great enemy of vegetation
over a great part of the ‘Mediterranean region”’—
emphatically so in Pal—is the goat. He is one of
the most destructive of animals, and as he has for
long ages been allowed to graze freely all over the
hillsides, it is not wonderful that in many spots it is
only plants like the thorny burnet with its powerful
spines which have survived.

The common plants of Pal will be referred to in
order shortly, but among those esp. characteristic of
the whole region are the olive and the fig, the ilex
oak and the bay laurel, the arbutus and the sumach.

A number of trees and shrubs which have been
imported into this region within comparatively re-

cent times have become so acclima-

2. Plants tized as to be today among the most
Introduced noticeable plants. Prominent among
Since Bible these is the well-known opuntia or
Times prickly pear, an introduction from the
continent of America; so_character-

istic is this of modern Pal scenery that it is a

common feature in pictures by artists who have
painted Scripture scenes in the Holy Land. The
common variety, Opuntia ficus-Indica with its in-
numerable sharp prickles makes impenetrable hedges
round many of the village gardens, while the

Opuntia cochinillifera, cultivated specially round

Nablas and introduced from tropical America with

the cochineal insect, is almost unarmed. The

American aloe (Argave Americana)—quite a dif-

ferent plant be it noted from either the ALoEs

(which see) of the Bible or the well-known medicinal

aloes—has established itself in many parts as a

garden ornament and will doubtless in time be-
come thoroughly indigenous. More important and
more recent of introduction is the group of eucalypti
or gum trees, of which some half-dozen varieties
have been imported. As is well known, they all


come from Australia, where they flourish in climatic
conditions somewhat similar to those of the Medi-
terranean region. Seeds of eucalypti were first
introduced into Europe in 1854, having been sent
from Melbourne to Paris, and from that center they
have found their way to all parts. The most com-
mon variety is the Eucalyptus globulus which is
now to be found everywhere in the Mediterranean
region. It was introduced into Pal through the
late Baron E. de Rothschild of Paris, and great
plantations of it have been made specially in the
neighborhood of the Jewish colonies. In the marshy
plains between Sammarin and Caesarea over a
million have been planted, and here, and also on
the marshy shores of Lake Hileh, this tree has
attained magnificent proportions. Many specimens
will be found with trunks two or three feet in
circumference and of a height of upward of 100
feet. This size is nothing for a eucalyptus, many of
these trees attaining in their native habitat a height
of 300, or even 400 ft., but time is required, and it
may be that eventually many of the eucalypti of
the Holy Land will also acquire giant proportions.
That this group of trees has come to stay is evident.
Not only in small forests such as those mentioned,
but also in isolated groups all over the land they may
be found. Their quick growth, fresh, evergreen
foliage and their reputed health-giving properties
account for their wide cultivation. Concerning this
last it may be said that the virtues of the eucalyptus
as a prophylactic against malaria have been much
exaggerated. The most malignant cases of malaria
may sometimes be found in houses shaded by
eucalyptus boughs, and the Anopheles, or malarial-
bearing mosquito, in such situations will be found
swarming among its leaves. Probably the bene-
ficial action of the eucalyptus is simply one of drying
up marshy lands by absorbing great quantities of
water into its deecp-running roots.

Other trees which have been recently introduced
but now flourish even better than the indigenous
trees are the locust tree (Robinia pseudo-acacia),
from America, the ‘Pride of India” (Melia Aze-
daracht) called in Arab. zinzilukt, a stranger from
India, very extensively grown, the so-called “Spanish

epper tree” (Schinus molle), the Casuarina stricta
rom Australia, the very_common ailanthus (A.
glandulosus), a native of China, and many others.
Of fruit trees the apricot, mulberry, orange, citron,
lemon and prickly pear have all been introduced
into Syria within historic times; as have almost all
the best varieties of the indigenous fruits.

A question of great interest to Bible students is,
How far has the fertility of the land altered in historic

times? Two facts are important in
3. Fertility answering this:
and Climate (1) The general features of the
in Modern climate have been the same since the
and Ancient days of the patriarchs, probably since
Palestine the dawn of history. We may gather

this from the many Bib. references to
the seasonal rain (Lev 26 4)—the “‘early” and the
“latter” (e.g. Dt 1114; Jer 5 24; Hos 6 3); to
the frequent droughts (e.g. 1 K 17; Am 4 6.7);
to the grateful mention of the “dew” (Dt 32 2;
28121; 17 12; Mic 6 7, etc); to the repeated
mention of the most characteristic products of
modern Pal—the olive and fig, the vine and almond,
the oak and the terebinth. It is further confirmed
by the presence everywhere of the ruins of ancient
terraces on the hillsides and of the “broken cisterns”
which are found at every site where once cultiva-
tion flourished. ;

(2) It is undeniable that the destruction of forest
and thicket all over the land has been immense dur-
ing the past fifty years. The increasing demands for
fires by resident Europeans and the development


Botany


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


506


of steam mills, the result of European enterprise,
are largely responsible. The firewood brought to
Jerus comes from ever-increasing distances, as the
wood in the neighborhood is consumed, and the
destruction has been increasingly ruthless. First
the branches are cut, then the trunks are leveled,
and finally the very roots are dug out of the soil.
At a greater distance, as for example in the once
extensive forests E. of the Jordan, a terrible de-
struction is being wrought by the charcoal burners.
Thousands of sacks of charcoal arrive in Jerus during
the autumn mouths, chiefly in the care of Circassian
settlers in the E. Jordan lands; but a similar work
is pursued by other charcoal burners in the northern
parts of upper Galilee. All the tree trunks are
soon destroyed and then the rising branchesare
cut as soon as they reach any size, so that miles
of country which, within the memory of many now
living, were forest are now either entirely treeless or
covered with nothing but brushwood. This last
consists of dwarf oak, carob, terebinth, arbutus,
wild olive and hawthorn—all capable of develop-
ment into noble trees. The process having been
commenced by the hand of man is assisted by the
goats who crop the tender leaves and shoots, and
thus keep stunted many of the bushes. Older
inhabitants can remember that between Bethlehem
and Hebron, where today scarcely a twig is visible,
there were trees and brushwood all the way, and in
the 7th cent. the pilgrim Arculphus writes of a
pine wood as existing S. of Bethlehem. This
destruction is common all over the land. The
only trees which have any chance of surviving
are those which from their near proximity to some
sacred Wely or grave, or in some case from their
own traditional sanctity, have been left uninjured
from motives of superstition. Such “holy” trees
occur all over the land, sometimes singly, at others
in groves; they may be any species of tree. Com-
monly they are oaks, terebinths, caroh, meis (nettle
tree), sidr (zizyphus) or hawthorn.

Besides the wilful destruction of trees for firewood
or charcoal another agent has in places been in
operation. It is acommon thing for the fellahin
to clear a large area for ploughing by burning all the
vegetation; such fires sometimes extend far beyond
the area intended (cf Ps 83 14). There is a large
and almost entirely sterile district, chiefly of bare
rock, between Safed and Jebel Jermuk in Galilee
which was swept a few years ago by a raging fire
which eyewitnesses state blazed for a week. The
destruction of all this vegetation has led to the
washing away of almost all the soil, so that now
great labor would be required to make this area
productive. Theremoval of the natural vegetation
produces sterility in two ways. Firstly, whereas
the deep roots of trees and shrubs support the soil
even on hillsides of considerable slope, and slowly
but surely cause the disintegration of the under-
lying rocks, while their stems and branches by
accumulating decaying leaves and twigs ever make
more and richer soil, so the destruction of these
plants leads to the washing away of the soil by the
torrential winter’s rain, until the bare rock—never
on the hillslopes very far from the surface—is laid
open to the sky. Secondly, the rainfall, which was
once largely ahsorbed by this soil, now rapidly
rushes off the denuded rocks and flows away to the
valleys. The consequent result of this—combined
with the destruction of many miles of the artificial
soil-surfaces of terraces—is that a large proportion
of the rainfall which once found its way slowly
through the soil to the sources of the springs—never
very deep in Pal—now rapidly runs down the
valley bottoms to the lower grounds. The whole
mountain region thus suffers from drought. It is
a common saying that “trees bring rain.” Prob-


ably the truth is simply that vegetation modifies
the climate almost entirely by retaining moisture in
the soil, and in the surface air near the soil; by
preventing rapid evaporation for the surface through
the shade they afford, and by increasing the output
of the springs in the way described above. Remove
the vegetation, and the soil gradually leaves the
hillsides and the rainfall is largely wasted. This
is what has happened over large districts in the
Holy Land, and the consequent diminution of some
of the springs even within half a cent. has been
scientifically noted. :

While therefore, from the permanent climatic
conditions, Pal could never have been a land of
verdure such, for example, as England, yet we know
with certainty that its native vegetation has much
diminished within the memory of many now living.
But besides this, we have abundant historical evi-
dence that at several periods it was much more
productive. This isshown, for example, abundantly
in the writings of Jos, and, for later periods, in the
accounts of many pilgrims. But indeed the mere
fact that for many cents. Pal had a population far
greater than today is in itself a proof; for as things
are, modern Pal is not able to support a much greater
population than at present. Great expenditure
of capital and labor on the restoring of ancient
terraces, the construction of dams and systems of -
irrigation and the planting of trees is one essential
preparation for any considerable development of
the land. For any of these things to be possible a
radical change in the attitude of the Turkish govern-
ment is an essential preliminary.

With regard to Bible evidence it is clear from very
many references in the historical books of the OT
that “forest’”’ or “‘woodland” was very plentiful in
those days. In a large proportion where the
word ya‘ar (tr? “forest’’) occurs it is definitely as-
sociated with trees. (For references see Forest.)
Whether these references are always to tall trees or
also to the brushwood such as is plentiful in parts
of Galilee today, is immaterial, as the latter con-
sists of the same elements as the former, only stunted
through the interference of man. It would cer-
tainly appear probable that at the time of the arriv-
al of the Hebrews there were considerable forests
of trees—oaks, terebinths, pines, etc—over a great
part of the higher mountains. In Josh 17 14-18
we have reference to Joshua’s twice-repeated com-
mand to the people to cut down the “forest,” as
the inhabited areas were too narrow for them. In
later ages, e.g. in NT times, the cultivation of the
land must have been so thorough that, to the W.
of the Jordan especially, the area left for forest
trees must necessarily have been much circum-
scribed; but the land then with its millions of olive
trees and countless vineyards in the mountains and
its great palm groves at Jericho and the coast, not
to mention all kinds of imported fruit trees, must
have presented a very different appearance from
its present comparative barrenness. As a single
example we may compare the glowing description
by Jos of the extraordinary fertility of Gennesaret
with its present condition (Jos, BJ, ITI, x, 8). Two
periods in history stand out preéminent in the his-
tory of Pa] as times of prosperity and fertility: that
about and immediately succeeding the rise of Chris-
tianity and that of the Lat kingdom of Jerus (see
Conder, The Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, 239-41:
“The present culture of Pal does not, perhaps, attain
to a tenth of that which enriched the Latins in the
ist cent. of their rule”). In both these periods the
land was highly cultivated and the population large,
in the former more so than the latter. That the
blight of the Ottoman Turks is largely responsible
for the decay of agriculture and progressive defor-
estation in recent centuries is undoubted, but it is


507


TUE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Botany


more than possible that at one if not at both these
periods another factor was at work. It is difficult
to believe that in the days when Palmyra was a
vast city and Petra a great emporium, the home of
a highly developed civilization, these sites were
not better supplied by springs than at present;
at those times great tracts of country E. of the Jor-
dan, now swallowed up by the desert, were sites
of flourishing cities whose melancholy and lonely
ruins are the wonder of all. No afforestation and
no increased cultivation will account for the supplies
of water which must have sustained such a develop-
ment; and it is only reasonable to suppose, and
there is much to support such a view, that there
must have been then a rainfall somewhat greater
or more prolonged than today. It must be remem-
bered the increased rainfall of, say, only one inch
per annum over a long series of years, or a sustained
extension of the rainfall to two or three inches later
in the season, or even a few degrees of greater cold
producing heavy snow instead of rain, would, any
of them, greatly improve the fertility of the soil
and the output of the springs. All the evidence
seems to confirm the theory that there have been
cycles of greater and of lesser rainfall extending over
cents., and that the periods we have mentioned,
certainly the Rom period, coincided with one of the
former cycles. At the present time there is some
evidence that the rainfall has, on the whole, been
increasing during the last 50 years and the culti-
vated area of the land, as contrasted with the natu-

ral “forest” land, is also slowly extending.
In dealing briefly with some of the more char-
acteristic and remarkable of the plants of the. Holy
Land we must recognize at least


4. Plant four distinct plant zones: (1) The
Zones in coast plains and the western moun-
the Holy tains, with a distinctly ‘Mediterranean
Land flora’; (2) The Jordan valley or


Ghor, with a very peculiar semi-trop-
ical flora in which a considerable number of African
forms occur; (3) The steppe or desert zones,
specially those E. of the Jordan and to the south.
The higher western slopes to the E. of the Jordan
also have a very similar flora; (4) The Lebanon and
Anti-Lebanon above 4,000 ft. in which Alpine forms
occur, and in the higher regions of which there is a
flora entirely distinct from the three other zones.
These divisions are necessarily somewhat artificial.
Everywhere the western slopes are more fertile than
the eastern, so that the land to the E. of the water-
parting in western Pal partakes more of the desert
flora than that opposite to it on the east. Vege-
tation in all parts is more abundant on the hill
slopes with a northern aspect, as it gets more shade;
this is particularly noticeable in the drier areas.

(1) The coast-plains and western mountains.—
(a) In the maritime plain there is a rich red alluvial
soil with abundance of water deep under the surface.
The annual mean temperature is 70° F.; frost is
extremely rare, and the atmosphere is distinctly
humid, though the rainfall is less than in the higher
hills. Citrons, oranges and lemons here flourish,
palms grow in places on the coast, melons and
pomegranates reach perfection. Vines have been
extensively planted by Jewish colonists in the neigh-
borhood of Jaffa. Cereals—wheat, barley and
Egyp maize (Sorghum annuum)—are extensively
grown. The wild flora is similar to that of the
mountains. The sycamore fig (Arab. jummeiz)
flourishes around Jaffa—it is a tree which requires
a warm climate; it was in Talmudic writings one
of the distinctions between “lower” and “‘upper’’
Galilee that the sycamore fig flourished in the
former and not in the latter. It is evident it was
far more plentiful in olden times (see SycamMorg).
A closely allied tree, the mulberry, is common every-


where, though not really indigenous. Two varieties
occur, the Morus nigra (Arab. tit-shdémi) a native
of central Asia, cultivated for its delicious fruit,
and the M. alba (Arab. tat beledi) a native of
China introduced as food for silk worms. See
Sycaming. Another tree which reaches perfection
only in the warmer regions of the plain—and that
too in the Jordan valley—is the tamarisk (Arab.
athl) of which Post recognizes 9 species. It is
characterized by its brittle feathery branches
covered by minute scale-like leaves; a bedraggled,
wind-torn tamarisk half buried in sea-sand is a
characteristic sight all along the Syrian coast.
Under favorable conditions some species attain
considerable size. See TAMARISK.

(b) In the higher mountain regions there is an aver-
age temperature of 62° F. and extreme variations
between a maximum of 100° or 80° in the shade in
the summer and a few degrees of frost in the winter.
Here the fig, vine and olive do admirably, their
late fruiting corresponding with the ‘dew’’—or
clouds of fine mist—which settle over the moun-
tains after sunset, particularly in the north. Apri-
cots, mulberries, quince, apples and pears (chiefly
from imported grafts), peaches and plums, almonds
and walnuts do well in sheltered spots. Wheat
and barley are grown on hill slopes or in valley
hottoms all over the mountain region.

In the valleys where there is running water the
oleander (Nertum oleander; Arab. dijleh) abounds
—a plant beautiful in foliage and flower but poison-
ous and not uncommonly imparting its poison to the
water in which it grows. In similar situations
occurs the Vitex (V. Agnus Castris), a variety
of verbena whose lilac or purple flowers are, where-
ever they occur, a sure sign of the presence of water
on or near the surface.

In similar situations flourishes the oriental plane
(Platanus orientalis; Arab. dilb), a tree which often
attains great size (see PLANE TREE), and also the
alder (Alnus orientalis; Arab. naght), a tree of
humbler growth. There are some 8 varieties of
willow (Arab. sifsaf), a tree very common along
the water courses (see WILLow). Poplars (Arab.
haur) are plentiful in places, esp. near water. Three
native varieties are known, but the cylindrical
Lombardy poplar, an imported variety, is most
widely cultivated (see Popiar). The southern
hackberry or nettle tree (Celtis australis; Arab.
mais) a member of the Urticaceae closely allied to
the elm, is an indigenous tree which is widely planted;
it is not uncommonly seen beside Moslem shrines.
It grows to a height of 20 to 30 ft., and yields a
close-grained timber taking a high polish. The
walnut (Juglans regia; Arab. jauz) is a valuable
timber tree and grows to noble proportions. It
flourishes around Damascus, heing a water-loving
tree: some of the most magnificent specimens occur
at Sheba‘, a village in the lower slopes of Hermon.
The walnut is really an imported tree, its native
home being Persia and the Himalayas, but it has
been long naturalized.

The carob (Ceratonia siliqua; Arab. kharrab)
is a handsome evergreen tree whose dense, dark
glistening foliage renders it everywhere conspicuous.
It is widely distributed, esp. in the lower mountain
regions. Its pods are the Husxs (which see) of
Lk 15 16. Oaks are among the most important
and characteristic of all the trees and shrubs of
Pa]: the evergreen oak which forms, it is estimated,
two-thirds of all the shrubby vegetation of Carmel
and attains noble proportions at some of the Moslem
shrines, the Valonica oak, plentiful on the hills
E. of Nazareth, and the ilex or holm oak, commonest
near the coast, are among the more important.
The recent destruction of timber in the Holy Land
has esp. fallen upon the oaks, which afford the best


Botany
Bottle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


508


of all fucl; as their growth is very slow and there
is no attempt to plant young trees this is most
regrettable. (For fuller account see Oak.) Closely
allied to the oak both in the OT and with the modern
inhabitant—though botanically very distinct—is
the terebinth or turpentine tree (Pistacia terebin-
thus; Arab. butm), one of the finest trees in Pal.
Although from a distance superficially like an oak,
the foliage is very different. In many spots in Pal
where terebinths are for various reasons regarded
as “sacred” they have obtained splendid propor-
tions. See TEREBINTH.

Pines, although they flourish on the coast and
lower mountain slopes, are, together with cypresses,
junipers and cedars, reserved to the discussion of
the flora of the fourth division of the country—the
Alpine regions.

The hawthorn (Crataegus; Arab. za‘rir), of
which there are 4 varieties, occurs as a shrub or
small tree everywhere, its sweet-scented white or
pink blossom being much in evidence in the spring.

Among the more important shrubs which make
up the thickets over the limestone hills the following
may be briefly enumerated:

The sumach (Rhus conarta), usually a shrub but
occasionally a small tree, grows in considerable
quantities in fertile spots in the mountains; from
its fruit an acid drink is concocted and the fruit,
bark and young leaves are used in tanning.

A plant closely allied to this, and: also to the
terebinth, is the lentesk (Pistacia lentiscus; Arab.
serrés), a common shrub in the lower mountain
region, e.g. on Carmel, which yields mastich, a
white gum, thought by many to be the Bato of the
OT (which see).

The bay laurel (Laurus nobilis; Arab. el ghar)
occurs in clumps in many places. It is the Daphne
of the Greeks and was sacred to Apollo. From its
large, leathery, shining leaves were made the laurel
crowns of victory in classical times. This, it may
be mentioned in passing, is quite a distinct plant
from our familiar “cherry laurel,’’ which is allied to
the cherry.

The butchers’ broom (Ruscus aculeatus) is very
plentiful. It is a plant peculiar in having its leaf-
petioles flattened out like a leaf (phillodia), so that
the flower and berry appear to arise from the middle
of the midrib of the leaf.

The myrtle (Myrtus communis; Arab. rihadn or
ads) is exceedingly common, esp. in northern Pal,
and when it grows near water it attains a good size.
See Myrruz. ;

A showy shrub, which sometimes attains to the
dimensions of a tree 20-or 30 ft. high, is the arbutus
(Arab. kotltb) or strawberry tree. Two kinds occur,
the less common Arbutus unedo or true “straw-
berry tree” which has a rough, warty fruit of a
scarlet color, and Arbutus andrachne with a smooth,
red bark, which when peeled off leaves a reddish
inner surface. It has small orange-colored, non-
edible berries. The red stems of this arbutus may
be seen conspicuous in thickets all over the land,
but very few are allowed to come to full growth.

Among some of the more showy shrubs we may
mention the oleastcr (Hleagnus hortensis; Arab.
zaizafan) with its beautiful silvery leaves and white
blossom (see O1n TREE); the styrax (Styrax officinale;
Arab. haz or ‘abhar), a shrub or small tree, with
beautiful white flowers, somewhat resembling orange
blossoms, the dried juice from whose bark is the
officinal Storax (which see); the Judas tree (Cercis
stliquaesirum; Arab. zemzarik), a straggling shrub or
tree with very showy pink flowers, and the caper
(Capparis spinosa; Arab. el dséf), which is very
common on old walls and about ruins (see Caper
Berry). The beautiful rockrose or Cistus (Arab.
ghibrah) is found on many shrubby hillsides, even


on the bare mountain tops. The C. villosus
has pink and the C. salviaefolus white blossoms,
the petals being curiously crumpled and falling
off almost at once when the flower is picked. From
the Cistus is obtained the gum called Ladanum
(Arab. ladhanun; Heb lét) for which see Myrru.
Many of the hill tops near the watershed, which
should be clothed by forests of oaks and pines, are
now almost bare and support upon the dry and
scanty soil nothing but low bushes of thorny
burnet, mingled with wild thyme and mint, with,
in places, small bushes of the Cistus. This thorny
burnet (Potertum Spinosum; Arab. balldn) is al-
most ubiquitous; its long thorns and tiny leaves
enable it to survive the goats. It is of considerable
economic importance, as from masses of this plant
the fellahin fire almost all the limekilns in the land;
and they use it extensively too for their ovens. Itig
a common sight in the late summer, after the har-
vest is gathered in, to see companies of peasants
gathering this plant into clumps all over the hill-
sides, and conveying it on the women’s heads in
huge masses to the kilns. They pile around the
kilns enormous heaps, enough to keep the furnace
continually burning for several days. They may
well be the “thorns under the pot”’ of Eccl 7 6. See
THORNS.

Of the myriad spring flowers which make such a
brilliant annual display it is impossible here to
write in any detail. Earliest after the rains appear
the crocuses and the cyclamen, then the narcissi,
anemones—scarlet, white and purple—the scarlet
ranunculi, gladioli, irises, dwarf orchids, pink and
yellow flax, mountain lilies, borage and bugloss,
the primrose-colored Pal scabious, and vast numbers
of small Compositae all appear in quick succession.
When these fade many brilliant thistles continue to
add some color to the otherwise dry roadsides, and
last of all, in the late summer, numbers of tall stalks
of squill, shot from the now leafless bulbs, remain
scattered in groups over the dry and leafless ground
as last survivors of the season’s display. The va-
rieties of flowers are enormous, but those mentioned
are almost universally present.

Of cultivated vegetables mention may be made
of CucumBers (q.v.), lettuce, onions, GARLIC
(q.v.), MELons (q.v.), cauliflower and cabbage, po-
tatoes (a fairly recent introduction), sweet potatoes,
the egg plant (Melongena badinjdn), artichokes
(which also grow wild) and the bamieh ( Hibiscus
esculentus) .

(2) The Jordan valley—The flora of this region
is of a very special kind, and has affinities to Africa.
Several trees and shrubs are of great interest.
Firstly, mention may be made of the group of
true acacias. One variety, the ’anbar (Acacia
Farnesiana), is by no means peculiar to the Ghor,
but is used for making hedges in many parts of the
land; its little yellow, fluffy, scented flowers are a
great favorite with the natives; it is usually a
shrub rather than a tree. The remaining acacias
are desert inhabitants and in many places are the
only trees. The seyyal, which includes A. tortilis
and A. seyal, flourishes on the west shores of the
Dead Sca, at ‘Ain Jidy and southward; from it is
obtained the gum arabic of commerce; it probably
yielded the wood known in the OT as Sarr
Woop (q.v.).

The semitropical Ghor is the home of many
other thorny trees. Extremely characteristic of
the whole region are the jujube trees of which the
nabk or sidr tree (Zizyphus spina-Christi), is the
most common. It has rounded yellowish fruit;
under favorable conditions it develops into a tall
and handsome tree. Somewhat less common is the
‘ennabh (Z. vulgaris) which bears an edible fruit
of the shape and size of an olive. A third kind,


509


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Botany
Bottle


the dém (Z. lotus), is merely a shrub and has
small pea-sized fruit. These various kinds of
jujube trees are found in every part of the Jordan
depression and of the valleys approaching it.
Closely allied botanically to these thorny shrubs
is the samd@r (Paliurus aculeatus) or “Christ thorn,”
widely used for the making of hedges (see Brizrs).
Another common shrub, or small tree, in the hotter
parts of the Ghor near Jericho and the Dead Sea, is
the zakkim (Balanites Aigyptiaca) from whose oval
berries the monks of Jericho extract a resinous sub-
stance which they term ‘‘Balm of Gilead.”

The dibk (Cordia myzxa), a giant borage, which
grows to a tree of 7 or 8 ft. high is widely cultivated
but grows in the Ghor spontaneously. The fruit,
which is edible, is used principally for making
bird lime.

A very striking tree near Jericho and the Dead
Sea is the ‘oshr (Calotropis procera), a member of
the N.O. Asclepiadeae. ft has large obovate leaves,
cabbage-like in consistence—a great contrast to the
small, dry, dull-colored leaves of most of its neigh-
bors. The trunk has a cork-like bark and white,
milky juice and the fruit consists of queer apple-
like follicles which, though solid looking, are only
inflated with air and contain but silk threads and
seeds. These have been supposed to be the apples
of Sodom of Jos, which he describes as looking like
tempting fruit but which on examination prove to
contain but dust. A much more likely theory is
that he refers to the equally common colocynth
(Citrullus colocynthus). See Witp Gourp.

Another abundant herb is the Solanum coagulans
(Arab. khadak), whose apple-like fruit has also
received (without serious claim) the name of
“apple of Sodom.”

Then there are in the immediate neighborhood of
the Dead Sea a whole group of salt-loving plants
which grow in the saline marshes such, for example,
as the samphire or glasswort (Salicornia fructosa and
S. herbacea). The latter of these is called the kalt
plant, because it is burnt in order to obtain potash
(el kali). Another group is included under the
name of sea blite or sueda (Arab. suweid) of which
there are several varieties.

Along the banks of the Jordan willows (Silex
safsaf) and tamarisks (especially Tamarix Jordanis)
abound.

At various parts of the Jordan valley, but par-
ticularly to the north of Lake Huleh, flourishes the
papyrus reed (Cyperus papyrus), known in Arab.
as babir, the source of the earliest paper. .

Of cultivated plants, palms, as we know from his-
tory, grow here well, though their cultivation bas
been neglected; sterile wild palms still occur in some
of the warmer valleys, esp. to the E. of the Dead
Sea. Many dead palm-tree trunks lie scattered
along the shores of the Dead Sea.

In situatious well supplied with water, bananas
flourish—thcy are cultivated both near Jericho and
near the Lake of Galilee. Oranges, lemons and
citrons also grow well. All kinds of ordinary
vegetables are grown in various parts of this region.
Wheat and barley yield an early and an abundant
crop in irrigated regions on both sides of the Jordan,
rice and Indian maize are cultivated in irrigated
fields N. of Lake Huleh, and cotton at several spots.
With scientific irrigation this region might be one
of the most productive upon earth. i

(3) The Steppe or ‘Desert’? Zones are chiefly
noticeable for the absence of trees and the stunted
condition of the small shrubs and herbs which grow
there. Thorny plants like Poterium, Astragalus
(the most characteristic order) and Cousinea
thistles flourish. With the early rains a rapid
growth of dwarf flowers appears which dries up
soon after the rainy season ends. Botanically the


region stands somewhat distinct by the occurrence
of Pers and Indian plant-forms. This region in-
cludes the great corn land of the Hauran and Nukra
—some of the richest of their kind.

(4) The flora of the Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon
consists, in the lower slopes, of similar plants to those
mentioned under (1). The Conifera are specially
characteristic of this northern region, the destruc-
tion of these trees in Pal proper being in many
parts complete. Of the indigenous cypress (Arab.
Saru) we have one species, the Cypressus semper-
virens, a handsomer tree than the cylindrical kind
—a cultivated variety—planted so frequently in
Turkish cemeteries (see Cypress). There are
6 varieties of juniper known, and one species of
yew. Of pines the two important kinds are—
the Aleppo pine (Pinus Halepensis), which grows
with considerable rapidity and is widely planted,
and the bandsomer stone pine (Pinus pinia the
true snobar of the Arabs), probably more truly the
native tree (see Pine Tren). The most important
and characteristic member of this order of trees is the
cedar which still flourishes in a very few spots
(see Cenar). On the Lebanon occurs a single
species of rhododendron (R. Ponticum) and one
of heather (Erica verticillata). Above the height
of 7,000 ft. trees and shrubs disappear and vegeta-
tion is chiefly represented by low, rounded, thorny
bushes, chiefly varieties of Astragalus; by clumps
of Acantholimon Lebanottcum; by small procumbent
bushes of Cerasus prostata—a member of the cherry
family—and the Coloneaster nummularia with scar-
let berries. Even on the summit of Hermon it is
astonishing how many tiny flowers are in bloom in
the late summer after the snow has melted. The
most curious feature of this region is the almost
complete absence of Arctic forms such as are found
in the Alps and even in the Himalayas.


Lirsraturs.—Prof. Elsworth Huntington, Pal and Its
Transformation; J. Glaisher (PEF); Meteorological Obser-
vations at Jerus; Rev. G. E. Post, M.D., Flora of Syria,
Pal and Sinai; Mrs. Hannah Zeller, Wild Flowers of the
Holy Land; Augusta A. Temple, Flowers and Trees of Pal;
Tristram, The Fauna and Flora of Pal (PEF Memoirs);
also articles in recent Bible Dictionaries, particularly
those by Dr. Post in HDB, and by Sir W. T. Thiselton-
Dyer, director of Kew Gardens, in 2


E. W. G. MastermMan
BOTCH. See Bor.


BOTRYS, bot’ris (Bérpus, Bétrus; mod. Batriin):
A town of Phoenicia on the coast some miles N. of
Gebal (Byblus) on the southern side of the bold
promontory called in classic times Theoprosopon.
Itissaid to have been founded by Ithobal (Ethbaal),
king of Tyre, whose daughter married Ahab (Jos,
Ant, VIII, xili, 2). The town is not mentioned in
Scripture.


BOTTLE, bot’’l (MAM, hemeth, 82, na’dh, 33,
nébhel, P2p2, bakbuk, AWW, Gbh; donés, askds):
The most lit. rendering of all the words for b. in
EV is “skin,” or ‘“wine-skin,” RV. The primitive
b. among eastern peoples was really a bag made
from skins, tanned or untanned, of kid, goat,
cow, camel or buffalo—in most cases drawn off
of the animal entire, after the legs and head were
cut off, and, when filled, grotesquely retaining the
shape of the animal. The skins in common use
today, as anciently no doubt, for holding water,
milk, buttcr and cheese, have the hair left on and
are far from cleanly-looking. Those used for wine
and oil are tanned by means of oak bark and season-
ing in smoke, a process that gives a peculiar as-
tringency of flavor to the wine kept in them, and
gave rise to the parable of Jesus about putting new
wine into old wine-skins (Mt 917; Mk 2 22;
Lk 5 37). The fact that the leather underwent


Bottle
Bowl


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


510


distension once and only once under fermentation,
and the further faet that the wine-skins became
dried and liable to crack from the smoke and dry
heat of the tents and houses, gave point to the


Bottles of Skins.


parable: ‘No man putteth new wine into old wine-
skins; else the wine will burst the skins, and the
wine perisheth, and the skins: but they put new
wine into fresh wine-skins.” All such “bottles”
today are liable to crack and become worthless.
Pliny Fisk used fresh goat-skins to carry water,
but he says this gave the water a reddish color and
an exceedingly loathsome taste. Harmer tells of
carrying liquids in smoked skin-bottles, which
when rent ‘‘were mended by putting in a new piece,
or by gathering up the piece, or by inserting a flat
bit of wood.” Burckhardt says he saw Arabs
keeping water for their horses on journeys in “large
bags made of tanned camel-skin.” They would
sew the skins up well on four sides, but would leave
two openings, one to admit the air, one to let out
the water. Two such bags made a good load fora
camel. Edwin Wilbur Rice says the leather or
skin-bottles are of different sizes and kinds, usually
made from the skin of the goat, rarely ever from
that of the sheep, as it is not considered strong
enough. But sometimes they are made from the
skin of the camel, or the ox, which is then prepared
by tanning. When leather bags are sewed up the


Water Carriers with Skin Bottles.


joinings are smeared with grease, as the skin-bottles
of all sorts are, as they grow older, lest the water,
or other liquid, ooze through.

Such bottles, being more portable and less break-
able than earthenware, were peculiarly well suited
to the use of primitive and nomad peoples, as they


are to the roving Bedouin of today. The mention
of them, however, in such various accounts and con-
nections as those for instance of the story of Hagar
(Gen 21 19), of the Gibeonites (Josh 9 4), and
of David (1 8 25 18) shows that they were in
eommon use among ancient Orientals, pastoral
and peasant alike. Tourists still find that they
are admirably suited to travelers in waterless dis-
tricts, or districts where the water is brackish and
bad. One of the characteristic figures even in
oriental centers like Damascus today is the water-
man who sells from his dripping goat-skin water
cooled with the snow of Hermon, flavored with
lemon, rose, or licorice, temptingly offered up and
down the streets by his clapping his brass cups and
crying in the most pleading but pleasing tones,
“Drink, drink, thirsty one’ (cf Isa 55 1). But,
as Dr. Mackie, of Beirfit, says, ‘‘While the bottle
is thus highly prized, and the water thus kept in
it is a grateful necessity, the luxury of the East
belongs to the spring itself, to the draught from the
fountain of living waters. Hence the comparison
Jesus made at Jacob’s well (Jn 4 14), and the one
blessed terminus of all, the Shepherd’s leading (Rev
717). See HDB, s.v.

Of course in the settled life of the Orient water,
milk, wine and other liquids are often kept in
earthen jars or other receptacles. For such “bot-
tles’’ see Pircuer; VEsseL. Glass bottles are not


Assyrian Glass Bottles (from the British Museum
Collectiou).


mentioned in the Bible; but those now found in
tombs, for keeping perfume in, may have been
known in OT times.

Figurative: (1) For the clouds (Job 38 37).
(2) For intoxication, through which, because of
their headstrong continuance in sin, Israel shall be
helpless to resist the enemy’s attack (Jer 13 12).
(3) For sorrow: “Put thou my tears into thy bottle”
(Ps 56 8). “The Psalmist’s sorrows were so
many that they would need a great wine-skin to
hold them all. There is no allusion to the little
lachrymatories of fashionable and fanciful Romans:
it isa robuster metaphor by far; such floods of tears
had the Psalmist wept that a leathern bottle would
searce hold them” (Treasury of David, III, 39).
“God treasures His servants’ tears as if they were
water or wine.” St. Bernard says, ‘The tears of
penitents are the wine of angels’ (Dummelow’s
Comm., 351). Guo. B, Eaczr


BOTTOM, bot’um: Rendered by several Heb
words: (1) WW, sheresh, “root”; Chald, WW,
shoresh (Job 86 30, ‘the b. of the sea”). (2)
IPIAP, karka', “soil,” “pavement of tesserae” (Am
9 3). (3) ABP, kecebh, “cutting,” “chop,” “extrem-
ity” (Jon 2 6, “the bottoms of the mountains’).
(4) TPE, rephidhah, “railing,” “couch” (Cant
3 10, “the b. thereof of gold”). (5) Pp, hék,
“bosom,” “lap” (Ezk 43 13.14.17, RVm “hollow’).
(6) mexe , mcullah, “to be dark,” “shadowy place,”
from prim. root g¢dlal, “to tumble down,”’ i.e.
“settle”; hence the idea of a valley (“the myrtle-


511


trees that were in the bottom,’ Zec 1 8 RVm
“shady place’). The prophet may have been wont
to frequent the myrtle grove in the glen or bottoms,
in the neighborhood of Jerus, for meditation and
prayer (B7'P, II, 283). M. O. Evans


BOTTOMLESS, bot’um-les, PIT (ré dpéap ris
GBiooov, 16 phréar tés abtissou, ‘the pit of the
abyss,” Rev 9 1.2 AV): In RV, hé abussos (always
an adj. in classical authors=‘‘bottomless’’) is uni-
formly rendered ‘‘the abyss” (q.v.) (Lk 8 31;
Rom 10 7; Rev 9 11; 117; 17 8; 20 1.3).


BOUGH, bou. See Branca.


BOUGHT, bout (JJM , tawekh, “bisection,” ‘mid-
dle”): The best part of a sling that contains the
stone, “‘in the midst of the bought of a sling” (1 8
25 29 AVm, AV “out of the middle,” RV “from the
hollow’’).


BOUGHT, bét (adj. and vb.).
BOUND. See Brnp.


BOUNDS, boundz: bas , gabhal = “to twist” (as a
rope), ‘to make an enclosure”’ (as by a line) occurs
in Ex 19 12.23; Ps 104.9. 5923, g*bhul=“a cord,”
hence ‘‘a boundary,” “territory” (Ex 23 31 AY),
with its fem. form moana , gbhalah (Dt 32 8; Isa
10 13); PM, hok=“‘enactment,” “appointment” (of
time, space, quantity, labor, or usage), hence ‘‘com-
mandment,” “decree,” ‘ordinance’ (Job 14 5; 26
10 AV); in the Gr, dpodecia, horothesia, in the sense
of “a limit,” ‘boundary line,” occursin Acts 17 26,


BOUNTIFULNESS, boun’ti-fo6l-nes, BOUNTY,
boun’ti (@mAérns, haplétés, ‘‘singleness,’’ ‘“benevo-
lence,” 2 Cor 9 11 AV; 35D, fabh, “to be good”
[Prov 22 9]; etAoyia, eulogia, “good speech,” “‘bless-
ing’ [2 Cor 9 6]; SH, gamal, “to treat well’ [Ps
119 17]; JW, sho', “to be liberal” [Isa 32 5]; 7,
yadh, “hand,” “power”): Paul speaks of the church
at Corinth “being enriched in everything unto all
liberality” (AV “‘bountifulness,”’ 2 Cor 9 11). The
offering of the church at Corinth for the Christians
of Judaea is termed a “‘bounty,” a blessing, liberally
given: “and not of extortion” (AV “of covetous-
ness,’ 2 Cor 9 5.6). The word occurs also in 1 K
10 13: “Besides that which Solomon gave her of
his royal bounty,” lit. “according to_the hand of
King Solomon.” L. Karspr


BOW, bo.


BOW, bou, BOWING, bou’ing. See ADoRaTION;
ATTITUDES.


BOW, bo, IN THE CLOUD: Reference to the
promise made to Noah (Gen 9 18) preserved in the
the Constellation figures. See Astronomy, II, 4.


BOWELS, bou'elz ("'A, mé‘ah, pl. °3"2, me'tm,
DI, rehem, pl. OMAN, rahdmim; owhéyxvov,
spldgchnon) : . ’ :

(1) Literal: The lit. meaning of these words is
intestines, then the abdomen, the womb (matnx
and uterus).


See Burine.


See ARCHERY.


As will be seen there is not much
definiteness in the use of these expressions from the
standpoint of physiology; but not less so than in
modern oriental languages and even in many occi-
dental languages, as popularly used. The remark-
able phrases used in 2 Ch 21 18.19, Jeh smote
him in his bowels” and ‘His bowels fell out by
reason of his sickness,’ refer to a severe and fatal
case of hemorrhoids.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


(2) Figurative: In fig. language these words
denote deep emotions of various kinds. As in
physiology we speak of the “nervus sympathicus,”
the ancients expressed by these terms ‘‘affection,”
“sympathy” and “mercy,” feelings of distress and
sorrow, as in Job 30 27 AV; Lam 1 20 AV; 2 11
AV. In one passage we have to translate mé‘im by
“heart,” being the seat of affection and devotion
(Ps 71 6): ‘Thy law is within my heart” (40 8).
In the NT (RV) the word is only given in Acts
1 18. H. L. E. Lurrine


BOWING, bou’ing (123, natch, ‘to incline,”
“bulge’’): The Psalmist’s assailants expected that
he would be “like a leaning [AV ‘“bowing’’] wall’
(Ps 62 3) before their united attack, as when an
ill-built, bulging wall gives way under a sudden
and heavy fall of rain (ef Ezk 13 11; 38 22).


BOWL, bal:

(1) The primitive Hebrews, like the wandering
Bedouin of today, probably used bowls of waod,
as less breakable than earthenware. Some hollow
dish of the sort would be indispensable, even in the
lowest stage of nomad life, to receive the milk of
the flock, and as the common dish in which to serve
the family meal. We have abundant proof, how-
ever, that vessels of earthenware of various sorts
were in_ use by the settled peoples of Canaan in
the earliest times. Many interesting specimens,
characteristic of different peoples and ages, have
been found by excavators of the PHF, esp. re-
cently by Flinders Petrie and Fred. Bliss at Tell
el-Hesy (see Tell el-Hesy [Lachish], by Petrie, and
A Mound of Many Cities, by Bliss) and by Macalister
and others at Gezer, Taanach, Megiddo, ete (see
PEFS).

It was probably in some such dish—‘‘a b. fit for
lords’ (EV ‘a lordly dish’’)—that Jael offered
Sisera a draught of sour milk (Jgs 5 25; ef Arab.
leben), and the b. into which Gideon wrung the
water from his fleece (Jgs 6 38) is denoted by the
same word (Od , séphel; LXX lekdné), though this
may have been of earthenware instead of wood.
Certainly the séphel was a dish of goodly size.

(2) Another word rendered sometimes ‘‘bowl”
and sometimes “basin” is PITA, mizrak. It is
used of the large silver bowls presented by ‘‘the
princes of the congregation” (Nu 7 13f). See
Basin. It is also applied by Amos (6 6) to the
costly bowls used by the nobles of Samaria in their
debaucheries.

(3) A still larger b. is mentioned by Jer (35 5),
AV “pot”? (9933, gabhi#"). This same word is used
of Joseph’s cup (Gen 44 2f): “Put my cup, the
silver cup, in the sack’s mouth.” As used at
banquets it corresponds to the crater, from which
the drinking cups (105 , késdth) were replenished,
The material seems to have been uniformly silver.
But see (4).

(4) B. is used in AV to tr 2°33, gabhi', “the
bowls made like almonds” (Ex 26 33 AV), as
applied to the “cups” (RV), or calyxes, used to
ornament the golden candlestick (see TaBERNACLE).
It seems to have been an elastic term.

(5) The b. of Zec 4 3 (M3, gullah, found also
in 5 2 correct text), is represented as the receptacle
for oil in the candlestick of the prophet’s vision. It
is likewise used of “‘the lamp of life’? (Ecel 12 6)
and to designate the bowl-shaped capitals of
Jachin and Boaz (1 K 7 41.42; 2 Ch 4 12.18).

(6) B. is found in Isa 51 17.22 RV, “‘b. of the
cup” (AV “dregs of the cup”). Some think the
second word here (01) MYA, kubba‘ath kos) is a
gloss to explain the unusual preceding word.


Bowman
Branch


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


512


(7) In Rev where AV has “vial” (phidlé) RV
has “‘bowl.’”’ See Basin. Gro. B. Eacer


BOWMAN, bo’man: Israel seems not to have
been equal to the surrounding peoples in the use
of the bow. The battle of Gilboa was clearly lost
through the superior skill of the Phili bowmen.
This seems to have moved David to encourage
archery practice in Judah (2 8 1 18; ef Driver
in loc.). It is thought probable that the revival
of Israel’s military power under Jeroboam, son of
Joash, was due to improvement in archery. Hosea,
a contemporary, speaks of the bow as the national
weapon of Israel (1 5.7). The most skilled bow-
men of antiquity were the Assyrians (cf Isa 5 28;
37 33). From Assyr reliefsit seems that it was their
practice to overwhelm their enemies with the bow,
and to use sword and spear only when the foe had
been demoralized and put to flight. See ARCHERY.

Gro. B. Eaczur

BOWSHOT, bd’shot: Found only in Gen 21 16
in the account of Hagar and her child: ‘And she
went, and sat her down over against him a good
way off, as it were a bowshot,” lit. ‘“‘stretchings of a
bow,” a typical oriental way of indicating distance.


BOX: The passages in which this word occurs are
2K 9 1.3 (Heb pakh, “cruet,’’ “flask,”’ RV vial)
and the synoptic passages Mt 26 7 AV; Mk 14 3
AV; Lk 7 87 AV (Gr aldbastron). ‘Perfume-
boxes” are mentioned in Isa 3 20; in the NT pas-


Alabaster Boxes.


sages RV renders “‘alabaster cruse.’”’? ‘‘Alabaster”’
was a white stone much used in ornamentation;
and out of it small vessels were made for holding
precious ointment. “She brake the cruse’ (Mk
14 3), ie. the seal, not the vessel.

In Isa 41 19 and 60 13, ‘‘box” is found in con-
nection with ‘‘tree,” as “box-tree” (q.v.).


BOXING. See Games.


BOX-TREE, box’tré (WASP, ¢t’ashshir; Isa
41 19; 60 13, “boxwood” Ezk 27 6): A tree of
uncertain identity, which must once have been
common in the forests of Lebanon. According to
Post (HDB, I, 313), ‘The only species of box
found in Bible lands is Buxus longifolia, which is a
shrub from 2 to 3 ft. high. It does not grow S. of
Mt. Cassius and it is unlikely that it did in historical
times.”

As an alternative to the box the cypress, Cupres-
sus sempervirens—known in Arab. as Sherbin—has
been suggested. It is a fine tree and was probably
once plentiful, but as it seems to answer to the


bérosh (see Fir), it cannot well be the ¢’ashshir.
There is nothing certain to go upon.
. W. G. MasterMan

BOY (feirue yeledh, “child,” Wi, na‘ar, “lad,”
“youth”; ats, 6, 4, ho and hé pais): Refers to a
child of any age, and is sometimes used of either
sex: Joel 33; Zec 8 5; Mt17 18; Lk 2 48;
8 51.54 fem.; 9 42. In the East the word applies
also to an adult who is a servant (Mt 8 6 RVm).
The boy occupied a place of special importance in
the family life of all ancient people. In Syria the
father even was called by the name of his son.
He was. known as the father of Joseph, or whatever
the name might be. Asis true among all oriental
people, while the father had absolute control in his
case as well as in the case of the rest of the house-
hold, yet the boy received a consideration and
advantages not accorded to the daughter. In the
Jewish family his religious life began at the fourth
year. He was expected to learn the Scriptures at
five, the Mish at ten, and to fulfil the whole law at
thirteen. At twelve years he was expected to learn
a trade, and attained to something of independence
at that age, though he did not come into full rights
as a citizen until he was twenty. Among many
nations there was special rejoicing at the birth of
the boy, and sometimes a feast. One of the most
ancient customs was the planting of a cedar tree on
this occasion. See Cuitp; Famity; Son.


Jacosp W. Kapp
BOZCATH, boz‘kath (Mp3, bockath). See
BozkatTu.
BOZEZ, bd’zez (yzia, bégéc; Batés, Bazés,


probably from an obsolete root bécag, correspond-
ing to the Arab. bagsa, ‘‘to shine” or ‘“‘to ooze’):
The name of the northern of the two cliffs that
stand one on each side of the gorge of Michmash
(1 8 14 4). It catches the sun during most of the
day, while the southern cliff isin the shade. To this
circumstance it may owe its name, “shining.”
“The contrast is surprising and picturesque be-
tween the dark coal color of the south side, and the
ruddy or tawny tints of the northern cliff, crowned
with the gleaming white of the upper chalky strata.
The picture is unchanged since the day when
Jonathan looked over to the white camping ground
of the Philis, and Bozez must have then shone as
brightly as it does now, in the full light of an eastern
sun” (Conder, Tent Work, 256). W. Ewine


BOZKATH, boz’kath (NPE3, bockath, “stony”;
LXX Baondé0, Basédéth): A town in the Sheph-
elah of Judah named between Lachish and Egion
(Josh 15 39). ‘It was the birthplace of Adaiah the
mother of King Josiah (2 K 22 1; AV “Boscath”).
The site is not identified.


BOZRAH, boz’ra (RR, bograh, “sheepfold”;
Booséppa, Bosérrha, Boodp, Bosér):

(1) The capital of Edom, a city of great antiquity

(Gen 36 33; 1 Ch 144; Isa 346; 631: Jer
49 13; Am 1 12). It may be identical with Bu-
seirah, which lies about 7 miles 8.W. of Tufileh, on
the main road to Petra.
_ (2) _A city in Moab mentioned in Jer 48 24. It
is probably identical with Bezer, the city of refuge.
It may be represented today by Kustr Bashair,
which towers lie some 15 miles S.E. of Dibon. In
this case Beth-gamul would be identical with
Jemail, 8 miles E. of Dibon, and Beth-meon with
Matin, 8.W. of Medebah. W. Ewina


BRACELET, bris‘let (WIDRN, ‘ec'adhah, OM, hah,


TAY, camidh, MB, pathil, MAW, sheroth): Used
to translate a number of Heb words, only one of


513


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bowman
Branch


which means a band for the arm (’e¢c‘@dhah), as in
258 1 10, ‘the bracelet that was on his arm.” In
Ex 36 22, where both men and women are said to
have brought as offerings among other “jewels of
gold” “bracelets” (RV “brooches’’), another word
(hadh) is used, meaning most likely nose-rings
(see Rines). The b. asked of Judah by Tamar as
a pledge (‘Thy signet, and thy b., and thy staff that
is in thy hand,” Gen 38 18.25 AV) was probably
the cord of softly-twisted wool for the shepherd’s
headdress (pathil; RV “cord’). The bracelets
(“two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight
of gold’’) which Abraham’s servant gave to Rebekah
stand for still another word (¢@midh). These
“bracelets” are always spoken of as “bracelets for


Egyptian and Assyrian Bracelets.


1, Egyptian Silver Bracelet (British Museum}. 2. Egyptian Iron Bracelet Set
with Cornelian (British Museum). 3. Egyptian Gold Bracelet. 4. Egyp-
tian Inlaid Work (British Museum). 5. Egyptian Bracelet Made of Cowries
(British Museum). 8, 7, 8. Assyrian Bracelets from the Sculptures (British
Museum). 9, 10, 11. Assyrian Bracelets (from Botta).


the hands,” or as “put upon the hands” (Gen 24
47; cf Ezk 16 11; 23 42). Isaiah, predicting the
day when Jeh will smite the haughty daughters of
Zion, who ‘walk with outstretched necks and wanton
eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a
tinkling with their feet,” says, ‘In that day the Lord
will take away the beauty of theiranklets ... . the
bracelets’ (3 19, shérdth) etc, where some translate
“twisted ornaments,” leaving it uncertain as to just
what is specifically meant. In 2S 1 10 the b.
appears with the crown as one of the royal insignia.
In 2 K 11 12, according to Wellhausen, W. R.
Smith (OTJC?, 311n.) and others, we should read,
“Then he brought out the king’s son, and put the
crown upon him and gave him bracelets” [PATIEF)}
for “‘testmony”? [NIIIN]. See DB. :

Today, as of old, the bracelet is multiform and a
favorite ornament in the East. It is made of gold,
silver, copper, brass, glass and even enameled
earthenware, and in many designs: flat band, plain
ring, interlinked rings, as well as of twisted wires,
connected squares, solid or perforated, with or
without pendants (Mackie). f

When owned by women, bracelets had the special
recommendation, along with other jewelry, of being
inalienable—not to be taken by the husband in case
of divorce, nor seized and sold for his debts. “Even
now,” says Rice (Orientalisms, ete, 41), ‘Gn Moslem
lands a woman may be divorced without legal proc-
ess, at the freak of her husband, but she can carry
away undisputed any amount of gold, silver, jewels,
precious stones, or apparel that she has loaded on
her person; so she usually wears all her treasures
on her person, not knowing when the fateful word
may be spoken.” Gro. B. Eacrr


BRAG (peyadauy dw, megalauchéd, “proud brags”):
Occurs only in the Apoc (2 Macc 15 32), not being
sufficiently dignified to be given a place in the ca-
novical Scriptures by the King James translators (cf
Jth 16 5),


BRAIDED, brad’ed, BRAIDING, brid’ing (ré
whéypa, <6 plégma, “that which is plaited,” 1 Tim
29; 7H eurdoxh, hé emploké, “a plaiting,’ 1 Pet
3 3): Used with reference to Christian women in
two passages where the apostles emphasized the
superiority of good works and spiritual grace over
outward adornment. See Emproipery.


BRAMBLE, bram‘b’1.


BRAN (ra wlrupa, té pitura): The women of
Babylon are described as burning “bran for in-
cense”’ in their unchaste idolatrous worship (Bar
6 43).


BRANCH, bransh, and BOUGH: Represented
by very many words in the Heb.

(1) MAT, zméorah, used esp. of a vine branch.
The spies ‘‘cut down from thence a branch with one
cluster of grapes’ (Nu 13 23). See also Ezk 16 2;
Nah 2 2. “They put the branch to their nose”’
(Ezk 8 17), refers to some unknown idolatrous
practice, as does also Isa 17 10, ‘“‘thou plantest
pleasant plants, and settest it with strange slips,”’
or “vine slips of a strange [god]” RVm.

(2) Mp3, ydneketh, lit. “a sucker.” ‘The
tender branch thereof will not cease’? (Job 14 7).
Used fig. of Isracl, Ps 80 11 (RV “‘shoots’’); Ezk
17 22 AV; Hos 14 6, and of the wicked, Job 8 16


See THORNS.


“(RV ‘“shoots’’), 15 30.


(3) MED, kippah, Job 16 32. Isa9 14; 19 15,
RV has ‘palm-branch,” ‘Therefore Jeh will cut
off from Israel head and tail, palm-branch and rush,
in one day” (9 14).

(4) (%2, nécer (of the same Heb root, according
to many commentators, as Nazareth), lit. “a little
shoot springing from the root” (‘out of a shoot from
her roots,” Dnl 11 7), which may be planted out
to grow (Isa 11 1; 60 21), or may be rooted out
and thrown away (Isa 14 19).

(5) MAX, cemah. The “branch” of Messianic
prophecy. See Propuecy. ‘In that day shall the
branch [m “shoot” or ‘‘sprout’’}] of Jeh be beauti-
ful and glorious” (Isa 4 2); “a shoot out of the
stock of Jesse’ (Isa 11 1); “a righteous branch”
(Jer 23 5; 33 15): “my servant the Branch” (Zec
3 8); “the man whose name is the Branch” (Zec
6 12).

(6) “2p, bandh, is used for the “branches” of
the golden candlesticks (Ex 25 32; 37 18 ff). Lit.
kanah means a “reed.”

There are a number of words, less frequently
used, meaning ‘‘branch’’:

(7) D712, baddim (pl. only used; Ezk 17 6; 19


14).

(3) mS, dalith (pl. only used; Jer 11 16).

(9) tO, matteh (E2k 19 11).

(10) EVO, sa'iph (Isa 18 5; MELO, s“appah
(pL) (Ezk 81 6); MEIN, sarappah (Ezk 31 5).

(11) BEY, ‘andph (Mal 41; Ps 80 11); 532,
‘anaph (Dnl 4 14.21); 537, ‘eneph (Ezk 36 8).

(12) FVINR, pu’rah, “a bough” (Isa 10 33);
PHAN, pd’rath (pl. only) (Ezk 31 5.8).

(13) MVOE, cammereth, “foliage” or “boughs of
trees,” lit. “locks” or “fleece” of trees (Ezk 17 3;


Bork “XP, kactr (collective) Job 14 9), “boughs”
(Ps 80 11), “branches.”

(15) nbat , shibbeleth, the two olive branches of
Zec 4 12.

(16) JW, sdkk, root meaning ‘‘to interweave”
(Jgs 9 49); MQW, sokhah Ggs 9 48), ‘‘boughs.”

(17) PW, sarigh (pl. only, MIW, séraghtm),
“branches” (of the vine) (Gen 40 10; Joel 1 7).


Brand
Bread


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


514


Represented in Gr in the NT:

(1) Batov, bation (Jn 12 13), “a palm branch.”

(2) KAGB80s, kiddos (Mt 18'32; 218; 24 32;
sas 32; 13 28; Lk 1319; Rom 1116.17.18.

(3) «Aijpa, kléma, a slip or cutting of the vine,
esp. one cut off to be grafted into another plant
(Jn 15 2.4.5.6).

(4) on Bas, stibds (=ororBds, stoibds), a “twig” or
“bough” (Mk 11 8). E. W. G. MastrermMan


BRAND: In the double signification of an object
on fire and of objects used to feed a fire. The first
meaning is expressed by IN, ‘adh, “a bent stick”
for stirring fire (Am 4 11; Zec 8 2; cf Isa 7 4);
the second by “7B, lappidh, in Jgs 15 4.5. A
third meaning is found in Mp7, zikah, indicating
the brand as a spreader of fire (Prov 26 18).


BRANDING. See PunisuMents.
BRASEN, bra’z’n.


BRASS, bras, BRAZEN (WM), n*hdsheth): The
use of the word brass has always been more or less
indefinite in its application. At the present time the
term brass is applied to an alloy of copper and zine
or of copper, zinc and tin. The word tr‘ ‘brass’
in the AV would be more correctly rendered bronze,


See Brass.


since the alloy used was copper and tin (Ex 27 4)..


_In some passages however copper is meant (Dt 8 9),
as bronze is an artificial product. This alloy was
known in Egypt in at least 1600 BC. It was
probably known in Europe still earlier (2000 BC),
which helps to answer the question as to the source of
the tin. Bronze was probably of European origin
and was carried to Egypt. At a later period the
Egyptians made the alloy themselves, bringing
their copper from Sinai, Cyprus or northern Syria
(see CopPER), and their tin from the Balkan regions
or from Spain or the British Isles (see Tix). When
the Children of Israel came into the promised land,
they found the Canaanites already skilled in the
making and use of bronze instruments. This
period marked the transition from the bronze age
to the iron age in Pal. Museums possessing an-
tiqnities from Bible lands have among their collec-
lections many and varied bronze objects. Among
the most common are nails, lamps, hand mirrors,
locks, cutting instruments, etc. Within compara-
tively recent times brass, meaning an alloy of copper
and zinc, has been introduced into Syria. The
alloy is made by the native workmen (see Crarts).
Sheet brass is now being extensively imported for
the making of bowls, vases, etc. Bronze is prac-
tically unknown in the modern native arts.

Figurative: “Brass,” naturally, is used in Scrip-
ture as the symbol of what is firm, strong, lasting;
hence “gates of brass’ (Ps 107 16), “hoofs of
brass” (Mic 4 13), ‘“‘walls of brass’? (Jeremiah is
made as a “brazen wall,” 1 18; 15 20), “mountains
of brass” (Dnl 2 35, the Macedonian empire; the
arms of ancient times were mostly of bronze). It
becomes a symbol, therefore, of hardness, obstinacy,
insensibility, in sin, as ‘‘brow of brass” (Isa 48 4);
“they are brass and iron” (Jer 6 28, of the wicked);
“all of them are brass” (Ezk 22 18, of Israel).

James A. Parc

BRAVERY, brav’ér-i: ‘VND, tiph’arah, or
OVROM, tph’ereth = “beauty,” “glory,” “honor”
and ‘‘majesty,’’ hence “splendor of bravery.” ‘The
bravery of their tinkling ornaments” (Isa 3 18 AV),
“the beauty of their anklets” (ARV). Cf bravado,
bravura.


BRAWLER, brél’ér (Keré DTW, midhyanim;
K°thibh B°772 , midhwanim, ‘“quarrelsomeness”’;


apaxos, dmachos, “not fighting’): Spoken of the
quarrelsome woman; ‘‘a contentious [AV “‘brawl-
ing’’] woman” (Prov 21 9). He who seeks the office
of a bishop should be “no brawler’ (zdpowvos, pdroi-
nos, AV “given to wine,” Tit 1 7); “not conten-
tious” (AV “not a brawler,” 1 Tim 3 3; Tit 3 2).


_ BRAY, bra (pl, nahak, “to bray,” of the ass;
Wd, kathash, ‘to pound in a mortar’): This word
occurs with two distinct meanings: (a) The harsh
ery of the ass (Job 6 5). Job argued that as the
sounds instinctively uttered by animals denote
their wants, even so his words were but the natural
expression of his longing for some adequate ex-
planation of his sufferings, or, failing this, for death
itself. Used fig. of Job’s mockers (Job 30 7).
(b) “To beat. small in a mortar,” “to chastise.”
Prov 27 22 refers to a more elaborate process than
threshing for separating grain (ERV “‘corn’’) from
its husk and impurities; used fig. of a thorough but
useless course of discipline; or still more probably
with reference to the Syrian custom of braying meat
and bruised corn together in a mortar with a pestle,
“till the meat and grain become a uniform indis-
tinguishable pulp” (see Expos T, VIII, 521).


M. O. Evans
BRAZEN, bra’z’n. See Brass.


BRAZEN SEA. See Sea, Toe Motren.
BRAZEN SERPENT. See NewusHran.


BREACH, bréch: Represented by (1) 775, pere¢
=“a tear,” ‘a rending asunder,” ‘a break,”’ hence
fig. “enmity,” “disruption,” ‘“‘strife’’ (Gen 38 29;
Jgs 21 15; 28 5 20; 1 Ch 15 13; Neh 6 1; Job
16 14; Ps 106 23; Isa 30 13; 58 12); (2) "AW,
shebher = “fracture,” ‘‘affliction,” “bruise,” “destruc-
tion” (Lev 24 20; Jer 14 17; Lam 2 13; Ps 60 2);
(3) P73, bedhek=“'a gap” or “leak” (in a building or
ship) occurring in 2 K 12 5-8.12; 22 5; (4) ANN,
ni’ ah= “alienation,” “breach of promise’ (Nu 14
34 AV); (5) 718%, miphrag=“a break” (in the
shore), and hence “a haven” (Jgs 5 17, RV “creeks’’).

Frank E. Hirsca

BREACH, bréch, OF COVENANT, kuv’e-nant,

kuv’é-nant. See CrImMEs.


BREACH OF RITUAL, ritt-al.
BREACH OF TRUST. See Crimes.


BREAD, bred (om, lehem; pros, drios):
1


. Drerary PREEMINENCE
Wl. Mareriars
1. Barley
2. Wheat
3. Three Kinds of Flour
III. Breav-Maxine
. Grinding
. Kneading
. Baking
(1) Hot Stones
(2) Baking Pans
4. Ovens
(1) The Bowl-Oven
{2) The Jar-Oven
(3) The Pit-Oven
5. Forms of Baked Bread
6. Work for Women
TV. Sanetrry anp Symsouism or Breap
I. Sanctity
2. Symbolism
LITERATURE


The art of bread-making is very ancient. It was
even known to the Egyptians at a very early day
(Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians), to the Hebrews of
the Exodus (Nowack, Lehrbuch der hebr. Archdologie)
and, of course, to the Greeks and Romans of a later
day. Bread played a large part in the vocabulary
and in the life of the ancient. Hebrews.


See Crimes.


whe


515


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Brand
Bread


_ & Dietary Preeminence.—(1) In the East bread
is primary, other articles of food merely accessory;
while in the West meat and other things chiefly
constitute the meal, and bread is merely secondary.
Accordingly ‘‘bread”’ in the OT, from Gen 3 19 on-
ward, stands for food in general. (2) Moreover in
ancient times, as now, most probably, when the
peasant, carpenter, blacksmith or mason left home
for the day’s work, or when the muleteer or messen-
ger set out on a journey, he wrapped other articles
of food, if there were any, in the thin loaves of
bread, and thus kept them ready for his use as
needed. (3) Often the thin, glutinous loaf, puffed
out with air, is seen today, opened on one side and
used so as to form a natural pouch, in which meat,
cheese, raisins and olives are inclosed to be eaten
with the bread (see Mackie in DCG, art. ‘““Bread’’).
The loaf of bread is thus made to include every-
thing and, for this reason also, it may fitly be
spoken of as synonymous with food in general. To
the disciples of Jesus, no doubt, “Give us this day
our daily bread”? would naturally be a petition for
all needed food, and in the case of the miraculous
feeding of the multitude it was enough to provide
them with “bread” (Mt 14 15 ff).

H. Materials.— Barley was in early times, as it
is today, the main bread-stuff of the Pal peasantry
(see Jgs 7 13, where “the cake of
barley bread” is said to be ‘‘the sword
of Gideon’’), and of the poorer classes
of the East in general (see Jn 6 13, where the mul-
titude were fed on the miraculous increase of the
“five barley loaves,” and cf Jos, BJ, V, x, 2).

But wheat, also, was widely used as a bread-
stuff then, as it is now, the wheat of the Syrian
plains and uplands being remarkable
for its nutritious and keeping qual-
ities.

Three kinds, or qualities, of flour, are distin-
guished, according to the way of making: (1) a

coarser sort, rudely made by the use


1. Barley


2. Wheat


3. Three of pestle and mortar, the “beaten
Kinds of corn” of Lev 2 14.16 (RV “bruised”);
Flour (2) the “flour” or ‘“‘meal” of ordinary


use (Ex 29 2; Lev 2 2; 6 15), and
(3) the “fine meal” for honored guests (see Gen 18
6, where Abraham commands Sarah to ‘make
ready .... three measures of fine meal’) with
which we may compare the “fine flour” for the king’s
kitchen.(1 K 4 22) and the “fine flour” required
for the ritual meal offering, as in Lev 2 1; 56 11;
7 12; 14 10; 23 13; 24 5; etc. cA
IL Bread-Making.— After thoroughly sifting
and cleaning the grain, the first step in the process
was to reduce it to “meal” or “flour”
1. Grinding by rubbing, pounding, or grinding. (In
Nu 11 8 it is said of the manna ‘The
people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in
mills, or beat it
in mortars.”’) It
has been shown
that by a proc-
ess, which is
not yet extinct
in Egypt, it was
customary to
rub the grain
between two
stones, called
the “‘corn-rub-
bers” or “corn
grinders,” of
which many
specimens have :
been found by Petrie, Bliss, Macalister and others,
at Lachish, Gezer and elsewhere (PEFS, 1902, 326;
1903, 118; cf Erman, Egypt, 180, for illustrations


E tians Kneading Dough with
i Their Hands.


of actual use). For detailed descriptions of the
other processes, see Mortar; MIL...
‘The “flour” was then ordinarily mixed simply
with water, kneaded in a wooden basin or kneading-
trough (Ex


2. Knead- 8 3) and, in
ing case of ur-
gency, at


once made into “cakes’’
and baked. (See Ex 12
34, “‘And the people took
their dough before it was
leavened.”) The He-
brews called such cakes
maccoth, and they were
the only kind allowed for
use on the altar during
Passover, and immedi-
ately following the Feast :
of Unleavened Bread(also Egyptians Kneading Dough
called Maggéth). Com- with Their Feet.
monly however the proc-

ess was as follows: a lump of leavened dough of
yesterday’s baking, preserved for the Purpose, was
broken up and mixed with the day’s “batch,”’ and
the whole was then set aside and left standing until
it was thoroughly leavened (see LEAVEN).

We find in the OT, as in the practice of the East
today, three modes of firing or baking bread:

(1) that represented by Elijah’s cake
3. Baking baked on the hot stones (1 K 19 6

RVm; ef “the cakes upon the hearth,”’
Gen 18 6 AV, and see Robinson, Researches, II,
406). The stones were laid together and a fire was
lighted upon them. When the stones were well heated
the cinders were raked off, and the cakes laid on the
stones and covered with ashes. After a while the
ashes were again removed and the cake was turned
(see Hos 7 8) and once more covered with the
glowing ashes. It was thus cooked on both sides
evenly and made ‘ready for eating (cf Vulg, Panis
subcineraris, and DeLagarde, Symmicta, lI, 188,
where ¢yxov@la, egkouthta, is referred to as ‘the
hiding” of the eakes under the ashes). Out of these
primitive usages of the pastoral tribes and peasants
grew other improved forms of baking. (2) An
ancient method of baking, prevalent still among the
Bedouin of Syria and Arabia, is to employ a heated
convex iron plate, or griddle, what we would call
a frying pan, in lieu of the heated sand or stones.
The Heb “baking-pan” (M312, mahdbhath, Lev
25; 79; cf Eck 4 3) must have been of this
species of “griddle.” The reference in 1 Ch _9 31
is probably to bread baked in this way. There
it is said that one of the sons of the priests “had
the office of trust over the things that were baked
in pans.”

“30, tannir (cf Arab.), no doubt were used by
the Hebrews, when they settled in Pal, as they were
used by the settled populations of the
Orient in general, more and more as
they approached civilized conditions.
These “ovens” were of various kinds: (1) The
simplest used by the ancients were hardly more
primitive than the kind quite commonly used in
Pal today. It may be called the “bowl-oven.” It
consists of a large clay-bow], which is provided with
a movable lid. This bow] is placed inverted upon
small stones and then heated with a fuel distinctly
oriental, consisting of dried dung heaped over and
around it. The bread is baked on the stones, then
covered by the inverted oven, which is heated by
the firing of the fuel of dung on the outside of the
cover. (2) The jar-oven is another form of oven
found in use there today. This is a large earthen-
ware jar that is heated by fuel of grass (Mt 6 30),


4, Ovens


Bread
Breastplate, etc


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


516


stubble (Mal 4 1), dry twigs or thorns (1 K 17 12)
and the like, which are placed within the jar for
firing, When the jar is thus heated the cakes are
stuck upon the hot inside walls. (3) The pit-oven
was doubtless a development from this type. It
was formed partly in the ground and partly built
up of clay and plastered throughout, narrowing
toward the top. The ancient Egyptians, as the
monuments and mural paintings show, laid the
cakes upon the outside of the oven (Wilkinson,
Ancient Egyptians); but in Pal, in general, if the
customs of today are conclusive, the fire was kindled
in the inside of the pit-oven. Great numbers of
such ovens have been unearthed in recent excava-
tions, and we may well believe them to be exact
counterparts of the oven of the professional bakers
in the street named after them in Jerus “the
bakers’ street”? (Jer 37 21). The largest and most
developed form of oven is still the public oven of
the town or city of this sort; but the primitive rural
types still survive, and the fuel of thorns, and of
the grass, ‘‘which today is, and tomorrow is cast
into the oven,” are still in evidence.
(1)_The large pone or thick, light loaf of the Weat
ig unknown in the East. The common oriental
cake or loaf is proverbially thin. The


5. Forms thin home-made bread is really named
of Baked both in Heb and Arab. from its thin-
Bread ness as is reflected in the tr ‘‘wafer’’

in Ex 16 31; 29 23; Lev 8 26; Nu
6 19; 1 Ch 23 29. Such bread was called in


Heb rakik (P"P'), rakik; cf modern Arab. warkak,
from warak= “foliage,” ‘‘paper’’).

(2) It is still significantly customary at a Syrian
meal to take a piece of such bread and, with the
ease and skill of long habit, to fold it over at the
end held in the hand so as to make a sort of spoon
of it, which then is eaten along with whatever is
lifted by it out of the common dish (cf Mt 26 23).
But this ‘dipping in the common dish” is so accom-
plished as not to allow the contents of the dish to
be touched by the fingers, or by anything that has
been in contact with the lips of those who sit at
meat (cf Mackie, DCG, art. ‘‘Bread’’).

(3) Such “loaves” are generally today about 7
in. in diameter and from half an inch to an inch
thick. Such, probably, were the lad’s “barley
loaves” brought to Christ at the time of the feeding
of the 5,000 (Jn 6 9.13). Even thinner cakes, of
both leavened and unleavened bread, are sometimes
made now, as of old, esp. at times of religious fes-
tivals. Often they are coated on the upper sur-


Egyptian Cakes or Loaves of Bread (from Specimens
in the British Museum).


face with olive oil and take on a glossy brown color
in cookiug; and sometimes they are sprinkled over
with aromatic seeds, which adhere and impart a
spicy flavor. They may well recall to us the “oiled
bread” of Lev 8 26 and “the wafers anointed with
oil” of Ex 29 2 and Lev 2 4.

(4) Sometimes large discs of dough about 1 in.
thick and 8 in. in diameter are prepared and laid
in rows on long, thin boards like canoe paddles,
and thus inserted into the oven; then, by a quick,


deft jerk of the hand, they are slipped off upon the
hot pavement and baked. These are so made and
baked that when done they are soft and flexible,
and for this reason are preferred by many to the
thinner cakes which are cooked stiff and brown.


(5) The precise nature of the cracknels of 1 K
14 3 (ARV “‘cakes’”’) is not known. A variety of
bakemeats (Gen 40 17, lit. “food, the work of
the baker’) are met with in the OT, but only ina
few cases is it possible or important to identify
their nature or forms (see Enc Bibl, coll. 460f). A
cake used for ritual purposes (Ex 29 2 and often)
seems, from its name, to have been pierced with
holes, like the modern Passover cakes (cf Kennedy,
l-vol HDB, art. “Bread”’).

(a) Every oriental household. of importance
seems to have had its own oven, and bread-making

for the most part was in the hands of
6. Work the women. Even when and where
for Women baking, as under advancing civiliza-

tion, became a recognized public in-
dustry, and men were the professional bakers, a
large part of the baker’s work, as is true today, was
to fire the bread prepared and in a sense pre-baked
by the women at home. (b) The women of the
East are often now seen taking a hand in sowing,
harvesting and winnowing the grain, as well as in
the processes of ‘‘grinding” (Eccl 12 3; Mt 24 41;
Lk 17 35), “kneading” (Gen 18 6; 1 8S 28 24;
2813 8; Jer 718) and “baking” (1S 8 13),
and doubtless it was so in ancient times to an equal
extent.

IV. Sanctity and Symbolism of Bread.—It would
seem that the sanctity of bread remains as un-

changed in the Orient as the sanctity of
1. Sanctity shrines and graves (cf Mackie, DCG,

art. “Bread,’’ and Robinson’s Re-
searches). Asin Egypt everything depended for life
on the Nile, and as the Nile was considered “sacred,”’
so in Pal, as everything depended upon the wheat
and barley harvest, “bread” was in a peculiar sense
“sacred.” The psychology of the matter seems to
be about this: all life was seen to be dependent upon
the grain harvest, this in turn dependsd upon rain
in its season, and so bread, the product at bottom of
these Divine processes, was regarded as peculiarly
“a, gift of God,” a daily reminder of his continual
and often undeserved care (Mt 5 45 ff; consider
in this connection the Lord’s Prayer, “Give us this
day our daily bread,” Mt 6 11; cf Lk 11 11).
Travelers generally note as a special characteristic
of the Oriental of today that, seeing a scrap of


517


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bread
Breastplate, etc


bread on the roadside, he will pick it up and throw it
to a street dog, or place it in a crevice of the wall,
or on a tree-branch where the birds may get it.
One thing is settled with him, it must not be trodden
under foot in the eommon dust, for, in the estima-
tion of all, it has in it an element of mystery and
sacredness as coming from the Giver of all good.
(a) In partaking of the hospitality of the primi-
tive peasants of Pal today, east and west of the
Jordan, one sees what a sign and
2. Symbol- symbo! of hospitality and friendship
ism the giving and receiving of bread is.
Among the Arabs, indeed, it has
become a proverb, which may be put into English
thus: ‘Hat salt together, be friends forever.’
Once let the Arab break bread with you and you
are safe. You may find the bread the poorest
barley loaf, still marked by the indentations of the
pebbles, with small patches of the gray ash of the
hearth, and here and there an inlaid bit of singed
grass or charred thorn, the result of their primitive
process of baking; but it is bread, the best that the
poor man can give you, “a gift of God,” indeed,
and it is offered by the wildest Arab, with some
sense of its sacredness and with somewhat of the
gladness and dignity of the high duty of hospitality.
No wonder, therefore, that it is considered the
height of discourtesy, yea, a violation of the sacred
law of hospitality, to decline it or to set it aside as
unfit for use. (6) Christ must have been influenced
by His knowledge of some such feeling and law
as this when, on sending forth His disciples, He
charged them to “take no bread with them” (Mk
6 8). Not to have expected such hospitality, and
not to have used what would thus be freely offered
to them by the people, would have been a rudeness,
not to say an offence, on the part of the disciples,
which would have hindered the reception of the good
tidings of the Kingdom. (c) It has well been
pointed out that God’s gift of natural food to His
people enters in for the praises of the Magnificat
(Lk 1 53), and that when Christ called Himself
“the bread of life’ (Jn 6 35) He really appealed
to all these endeared and indissoluble associations
connected in the eastern mind with the meaning
and use of bread. Most naturally and appro-
priately in the inauguration of the New Covenant
Christ adopted as His memorial, not a monument of
stone or brass, but this humble yet sacred article
of food, familiar and accessible to all, to become,
with the “wine” of common use, in the Lord’s
Supper, the perpetual symbol among His disciples
of the communion of saints.
LirERaturs.—Wilkinson, Ancient Egypt, 1878, II,
34: Erman, Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben, 1885, 191 ff;
Nowack, Lehrbuch der hebr. Archdologie, 1894, Maimon-
ides, Yadh, Temidhin U-Musaphin, v, 6-8; Bacher, Monats-
schrift, 1901, 299; Mishnah B.M., ITI, 1, 2; Robinson,
Biblical Researches in Palestine, II, 416; Doughty, Travels
in Arabia Deserta, I, 131; Jos, BJ; and Bible Dicts. on
“Bread,” ‘Dietary Laws’’: '' Maccoth,"' ‘'Halldh,” etc.
: zo. B, Hacer
BREADTH, bredth (2M, réhabh, the root idea
being to make wide, spacious): A term of expanse
or measurement used of the ark (Gen 6 15); of
the tabernacle (Ex 27 13); of Solomon’s temple
(1 K 6 2). wAdros, pldtos, “breadth,” as of the
celestial city (Rev 21 16). Figuratively, of the
comprehensiveness of God’s law (Ps 119 96); of
the heart (1 K 4 29, rendered “‘largeness of heart”’
EV); of God’s immeasurable love (Eph 3 18).


BREAK, brak: (2@, shabhar=“break’” (down,
off, in pieces, up), “destroy,” “quench” (Isa 14 25;
Jer 19 10.11; Ezk 4 16; Am 15); PUB, parak=
“to break off” or “craunch”; fig. ‘‘to deliver” (Gen
27 40 AV); DIY, ‘araph=‘‘to break the neck,”
hence “to destroy” (Ex 13 13); O17, haras=“to


break through” (19 21.24); PO , parag =“‘to break”
(forth, away), occurs in 19 22.24; 1 8S 25 10;
“breaking faith,’ Hos 4 2; TN), parah=“‘to break
forth as a bud” (Lev 13 12);7M}) or pi}, nathag,
or ndthak = “destroy” (Ezk 23 34 AV, RV “gnaw”;
see Breast); on , fidlal= “profane,” “defile,”
“stain” (Nu 30 2; Ps 89 31.34); Jpa, baka't=“tip
open” (2 K 3 26; Isa 58 8); JF, ra‘a‘'=“‘to spoil
by breaking to pieces,” “‘to make good for nothing”
(Job 34 24; Ps 29; Jer 16 12, AV “Shall iron
break northern iron?”); MXB, pagah=‘“‘to break
out” (in joyful sound), “break forth,’ “make a
noise” (Isa 14 7, the nations rejoice in the peace
which follows the fall of the oppressor); 12, nir
=“‘to glisten,’”’ “gleam” (as of a fresh furrew) (Jer
4 3; Hos 10 12); NOD, pathah=“to open wide,”
“loosen,” “have vent” (Jer 1 14); PB], ndphag=
“to dash to pieces or scatter,’ ‘‘overspread,”
“scatter” (Jer 48 12, the work usually done care-
fully shall be done roughly; 51 20-23, descriptive
of the terrible fate appointed for Babylon); ON},
na’aph=“‘to break wedlock” (Ezk 16 38); mz,
2x , cdlah or ¢alé*h= “break out,” ‘come mighti-
ly” (Am 5 6). The NT employs dw, hid=“to
loosen,” ‘dissolve’ (Mt 5 19); dptcow, dioriissd
=“to penetrate burglariously,”’ “break through”
(Mt 6 19.20, Gr “dig through”); pyyvume or pjocw,
rhégnumi or rhésso=“to disrupt,” ‘burst,’ ‘to
utter with a loud voice” (Gal 4 27); «dw, kléda=
“to break” (Acts 20 7, “to break bread,” i.e. to
celebrate the Lord’s Supper; 1 Cor 10 16). See
also BREACH. Frank E. Hirscu


BREAK OF DAY: “SX, ’dr, “to be light,” “the
light breaks” (28 2 32); atyvy, augé, “bright
light,” “radiance” (Acts 20 11). See Dawn.


BREAST, brest: Signifying the front view of the
bust in humans and the corresponding portion of
the body in animals. ‘MJ, hdzeh, occurs in Ex
29 26.27; Lev 7 30.31.34; 8 29; 10 14.15; Nu
6 20; 18 18; and "30, hddhi, in Dnl 2 32. “0
or %W, shadh, or, shidh=“breast’”’ in the sense of
pap of a woman or animal (Job 24 9; Cant 8
1.8.10; Isa 60 16; Lam 4 3). Only one word
occurs with this signification in the NT: o7#éos,
stéthos=“‘bosom,”’ ‘‘chest” (Lk 18 13; 23 48;
Jn 18 25; 21 20). See WAvE-oFFERING.

Figurative: ‘‘The breasts of virginity,’’ pressed
and bruised (Ezk 23 3.8 AV), indicative of Ezekiel’s
belief that Israel practiced idolatry in Egypt (cf
20 8). ‘To tear [pluck off] thy breasts” (23 34) de-
notes the anguish of the people in parting with their
beloved sin (cf Hos 2 2). ‘Its breast of silver’’
(Dnl 2 32) is possibly expressive of the humanity
and wealth of the Medo-Pers empire.

Frank E. Hirsca

BREASTPLATE, brest’plat. See Armor.


BREASTPLATE OF ,THE HIGH PRIEST,
prést: The Heb word JWT, héshen, rendered in AV
“breastplate, means really a “pouch” or “bag.”
The references to it are found exclusively in the
PC (Ex 26 7; 28; 29 5; 36 9.27; 39; Lev 8 8).
The descriptions of its composition and particularly
the directions with regard to wearing it are exceed-
ingly obscure. According to Ezr 2 63 and Neh 7
65 the Urim and Thummim, which were carried in
the priestly pouch, were lost during the Bab exile.
The actual pouch wasa “span in length and a span in
breadth,”’ i.e. about 9 in. square. It was made, like
the ephod, of ‘‘gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine twined linen” (Ex 28 15f). In it were
twelve precious stones, in rows of four, representing


Breath, Breathing. opr INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Brethren, etc


518


the twelve tribes of Israel. Apparently the pouch
had two rings (perhaps four) through which passed
two gold chains by which it was fastened to the
ephod supplied for the purpose with ouches or clasps.
The pouch was worn by the high priest over his
heart when he entered the “holy place” “for a me-
morial before Jeh.”” The presence of the high priest,
the representative of the people, with the names of
the separate tribes on his person, brought each
tribe before the notice of Jeh and thereby directed
His attention to them. The full designation was
hoshen mishpat, ‘‘pouch of judgment” or “decision.”
It was the distinctive symbol of the priest in his
capacity as the giver of oracles. As already sug-
gested the priestly pouch contained the Urim and
Thummim which were probably precious stones
nsed as ‘ots in giving decisions. In all probability
the restored text of 1 S 14 41 preserves the true
custom. On one side stood Saul and Jonathan,
and the people on the other side. If the result was
Urim, Saul and Jonathan would be the guilty parties.
Tf the result was Thummin, the guilt would fasten
on the people. T. Lewis


BREATH, breth, BREATHE, bréth, BREATH-
ING, bréth’ing: In the EV of the OT “breath” is
the rendering of MDW}, n°shamah, and of 19, rach.
These words differ but slightly in meaning, both sig-
nifying primarily “wind,” then “breath,” though the
former suggests a gentler blowing, the latter often
ablast. As Sopled to persons there is no very clear
distinction between the words. Yet in general
one may say that of the two n*shaémah is employed
preferably of breath regarded physiologically:
“vital breath,’ hence the vital principle, ‘soul
[animal] life’ (cf Gen 2 7; 7 22; Job 27 8, where
both words occur; Isa 42 52; Dnl 5 23); while
ruth (though it, too, sometimes signifies ‘‘vital
breath’’) is the word generally employed where the
breath is regarded physically—breath or blast as
an act or force—and so is related to the will or the
emotions, whence the meaning “spirit,” also some-
times “thought,” “purpose” (cf Job 49; 9 18;
Ps 18 15; 1464; Ezk 875.6.8.9.10). The ex-
amples cited, however, and other passages reveal
a lack of uniformity of usage. Yet generally
rith is the expression, n°shamah, the principle, of
life. Yet when employed of God they of course
signify the principle, not of His own life, but of that
imparted to His creatures. ‘Breathe’ in EV ofthe
OT requires no remark except at Ps 27 12 (“such
as breathe out cruelty’’), from ya@phah, “to breathe
hard,” “to snort” (cf Acts 9 1). In the NT
“breath” (avo#, pnoé) occurs once Acts 17 25
in the plain sense of vital principle, the gift of God.
“Breathed” is employed in Jn 20 22 of Our Lord’s
concrete symbolism of the giving of the Spirit.
In Acts 91 Saul’s “breathing threatening and
slaughter” is lit. ‘snorting,’ etc, and the nouns
are partitive genitives, being the element of which
he breathed. Seealso Sprrrr. J. R. Van Petr


BREECHES, brich’iz, bréch’iz: A garment, ex-
tending from the waist to or just below the knee
or to the ankle, and covering each leg separately.
Breeches are not listed among the garments of an
ordinary wardrobe, but the priests in later times
(Ex 20 26) wore a garment resembling modern
trousers. These priestly linen breeches, T2 70737,
mikhn‘sé bhadh, were worn along with the linen
coat, the linen girdle and the linen turban by Aaron
on the Day of Atonement, when he entered the
“holy place.” (The word "9)2%, mikhnesé is
derived from a root, 033, kanas=T25, ganaz, “to
cover up,” “hide.’’) Ordinary priests also wore
them on sacrificial occasions (Ex 28 42; 89 28;
Lev 6 10; Ezk 44 18). Apart from the breeches


just referred to, the only reference to a similar
garment among the Israelites is found in Dnl 3 21,
where the slate) , sarbal, RV “hosen,”’ is mentioned.
(The AV translates ‘‘coats.””) The rendering of the
AV is the more likely, though the meaning of the
Aram. sarbal is obscure (cf the thorough discussion
in Ges., Thesaurus). In Tg and Talm (cf Levy,
NHWB, s.v.), and is so taken
by the rabbinical commenta-
tors. Still, Aq. and Theod.
(capdéBapa, sardbara), LXX in
ver 27, Symm (anarurides),
Pesh, express the meaning
“trousers” (of a looser kind
than those worn by us), a
garment known (from Herod-
otus and other sources) to
have been worn by the an-
cient Scythians and Persians,
and to have been called by
them sarabara. The word,
with the same connotation,
was brought into the Arab. in the form sirwai.
In both these senses the word may be originally
Pers: in that of mantle, meaning properly (ac-
cording to Andreas) a ‘‘head-covering”’ (sarabara),
for which in Persia the peasants often use their
mantle; in that of ‘‘trousers,”’ corresponding to the
mod. Pers shalwar, “under-breeches.” Cook has
pointed out that ‘mantles, long-llowing robes, and
therefore extremely liable to catch the flames,” are
more likely to be esp. mentioned in this ch than
trousers, or (RV) “‘hosen.”

The word WEB, patish (Dnl 8 21), is also uncer-
tain. The LXX and Theod. render tidrai, ‘‘turbans”’;
Pesh has the same word, which is variously taken
by Syrian lexicographers as ‘‘tunic,”’ “trousers,” or
a kind of “gaiter’ (Payne Smith, Thes. Syr., col.
3098). (For further discussion of these words, cf
commentaries on Dnl of Jour. Phil., X XVI, 307 ff.)

In general, we must remember that a thorough
discussion of Israelitish ‘dress’”’ is impossible, be-
cause of the limitations of our sources.

H. J. Wour

BREED, bréd: Found in the past tense in Ex 16
20 as a tr of DI, rém=“‘to bring up,” “to rise.”
In this ver, the manna is said to have arisen, i.e.
“become alive’ (with worms), to indicate that
God’s gifts are spoiled by selfish and miserly hoard-
ing. The pres. act. occurs in Gen 8 17 for YW,
sharag=“‘to wriggle,” “swarm,” “abound,” hence
“breed abundantly”; andin Dt 32 14 for 3, bén=
“son,” “descendant,” “child,” “colt,” “calf,”
“breed.”” The pres. part. is found in Zeph 2 9 AV
for PPA, mimshak, a derivative of PWD, meshek
= “possession,” “territory,” ‘field.’ The passage
in question should therefore be tr? “field of nettles”
(RV “possession of nettles”). Frank E. Hirscu


BRETHREN, breth’ren. See BROTHER.


BRETHREN OF THE LORD: In Mt 12 46
ff; Mk 3 31 ff; Lk 8 19 ff, while Jesus was in the
midst of an earnest argument with scribes and
Pharisees, His mother and brothers sent a message
evidently intended to end the discussion. In
order to indicate that no ties of the flesh should
interfere with the discharge of the duties of His
Messianic office, He stretched His hands toward
His disciples, and said: ‘Whosoever shall do
the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is
my brother, and sister, and mother.” In Mt 13
54 ff; Mk 6 2 ff, while He was teaching in His
own town, Nazareth, His neighbors, who, since
they had watched His natural growth among them,
could not comprehend the extraordinary claims


Breeches of the High
Priest.


519


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Breath, Breathing


Brethren, etc


that He was making, declare in an interrogative
form, that they know all about the entire family,
mother, brothers and sisters. They name the
brothers. Bengel suggests that there is a tone of
contempt in the omission of the names of the sisters,
as though not worth mentioning. In Jn 2 12,
they are said to have accompanied Jesus and His
mother and disciples from the wedding at Cana.
In Jn 7 3ff, they are deseribed as unbelieving,
and ridiculing His claims with bitter sarcasm.
This attitude of hostility has disappeared, when, at
Jerus, after the resurrection and ascension (Acts
1 14), in the company of Mary and the Eleven,
and the faithful group of women, they “continued
steadfastly in prayer,” awaiting the promise of the
gift of the Holy Spirit. Their subsequent par-
tieipation in the missionary activity of the apostolic
church appears in 1 Cor 9 5: “Have we no
right to lead about a wife that is a believer, even
as the rest of the apostles, and the brethren of the
Lord, and Cephas?” In Gal 1 19, James, bisho
of the church at Jerus, is designated ‘the Lord’s
brother,” thus harmonizing with Mt 13 55, where
their names are recorded as James, Joseph, Simon
and Judas. When, then, “Jude, .... brother of
James” is mentioned (Jude ver 1), the immediate
inference is that Jude is another brother of the Lord.
In reading these passages, the natural inference is
that these ‘‘brethren’’ were the sons of Joseph and
Mary, born after Jesus, living with Mary and her
daughters, in the home at Nazareth, accompanying
the mother on her journeys, and called the ‘“breth-
ren” of the Lord in a sense similar to that. in which
Joseph was called His father. They were brethren
because of their common relationship to Mary.
This impression is strengthened by the faet that
Jesus is called her prététokos, “first-born son’’
(Lk 2 7), as well as by the very decided implication
of Mt 1 25. Even though each particular, taken
separately, might, with some difficulty, be explained
otherwise, the force of the argument is cumulative.
There are too many items to be explained away,
in order to establish any other inference. This
view is not the most ancient. It has been traced
to Tertullian, and has been more fully developed
by Belvidius, an obscure writer of the 4th cent.
Two other views have been advocated with
much learning and earnestness. The earlier, which
seems to have been prevalent in the first three cents.
and is supported by Origen, Eusebius, Gregory of
Nyssa and Ambrose, Epiphanius being its chief ad-
vocate, regards these ‘‘brethren” as the children
of Joseph by a former marriage, and Mary as his
second wife. Joseph disappears from sight when
Jesus is twelve years old. We know nothing of
him after the narrative of the child Jesus in the
temple. That there is’ no allusion to him in the
aceount of the family in Mk 6 3 indicates that
Mary bad been a widow long before she stood by the
Cross without the support of any member of her
immediate family. In the Apocryphal Gospels,
the attempt is made to supply what the canonical
Gospels omit. They report that Joseph was over
eighty years of age at his second marriage, and the
names of both sons and daughters by his first mar-
riage are given. As Lightfoot (comm. on Galatians)
has remarked, ‘“‘they are pure fabrications.” Theo-
phylact even advanced the theory that they were
the children of Joseph by a levirate marriage, with
the widow of his brother, Clopas. Others regard
them as the nephews of Joseph whom, after the
death of his brother Clopas, he had taken into his
own home, and who thus became members of his
family, and were accounted as though they were the
children of Joseph and Mary. According to this
view, Mary excepted, the whole family at Nazareth
were no blood relatives of Jesus. It is a Docetic


conception in the interest of the dogma of the per-
petual virginity of Mary. All its details, even that
of the advanced age and decrepitude of Joseph, start
from that premise. :

Another view, first propounded by Jerome when
a very young man, in antagonizing Belvidius, but
afterward qualified by its author, was followed by
Augustine, the Roman Catholic writers generally,
and carried over into Protestantism at the Reforma-
tion, and accepted, even though not urged, by
Luther, Chemnitz, Bengel, etc, understands the
word ‘‘brother’’ in the general sense of “kinsman,”’
and interprets it here as equivalent to ‘“‘cousin.”
According to this, these brethren were actually
blood-relatives of Jesus, and not of Joseph. They
were the children of Alphaeus, otherwise known as
Clopas (Jn 19 25), and the sister of Mary. This
Mary, in Mt 27 56, is described as “the mother of
James and Joses,” and in Mk 15 40, “the mother
of James the less and of Joses, and Salome.” This
theory as completely developed points to the three
names, James, Judas and Simon found both in the
list of the apostles and of the “brethren,” and
argues that it would be a remarkable coincidence
if they referred to different persons, and the two
sisters, both named Mary, had found the very
same names for their sons. The advocates of this
theory argue also that the expression ‘James the
less” shows that there were only two persons of the
name James in the circle of those who were most
closely connected with Jesus. They say, further,
that, after the death of Joseph, Mary became an
inmate of the home of her sister, and the families
being combined, the presence and attendance of
her nephews and nieces upon her can be explained
without much difficulty, and the words of the people
at Nazareth be understood. But this complicated
theory labors under many difficulties. The identity
of Clopas and Alphaeus cannot be established,
resting, as it does, upon obscure philological re-
semblances of the Aram. form of the two names
(see ALpHAEUs). The most that such argument
affords is a mere possibility. Nor is the identity
of ‘Mary the wife of Clopas’” with the sister of
Mary, the mother of Jesus, established beyond a
doubt. Jn 19 25, upon which it rests, can with
equal correctness be interpreted as teaching that
four women stood by the cross, of whom ‘‘Mary
of Clopas’’ was one, and His mother’s sister was
another. The decision depends upon the question
as to whether ‘‘Mary” be in apposition to ‘‘sister.”’
If the ver be read so as to present two pairs, it
would not be a construction without precedent in
the NT, and would avoid the difficulty of finding
two sisters with the same name—a difficulty
greater yet than that of three cousins with the same
name. Nor is the identity of “James the less’
with the son of Alphaeus beyond a doubt. Any
argument concerning the comparative “less,” as
above explained, fails when it is found that in the
Gr there is no comparative, but only “James the
little,”’ the implication being probably that of his
stature as considerably below the average, so as to
occasion remark. Nor is the difficulty less when
it ig proposed to identify three of these brethren
of Jesus with apostles of the same name. For the
“brethren” and the apostles are repeatedly dis-
tinguished. In Mt 12 49, while the former stood
without, the latter are gathered around Jesus. In
Jn 2 12, we read: “his mother, and his brethren,
and his disciples.” In Acts 118 the Eleven,
including James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon,
and Judas of James, and then it is said that they
were accompanied by ‘“‘his brethren.’ But the
erowning difficulty of this hypothesis of Jerome is
the reeord of the unbelief of the brethren and of
their derision of His claims in Jn 7 3-5.


Brethren, etc
Brick


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


520


On the other hand, the arguments against regard-
ing them as sons of Mary and Joseph are not for-
midahle. When it is urged that their attempts
to interfere with Jesus indicate a superiority which,
according to Jewish custom, is in¢onsistent with
the position of younger brothers, it may be an-
swered that those who pursue an unjustifiable
course are not models of consistency. When an
argument is sought from the fact that Jesus on the
cross commended His mother to John, the implica-
tion is immediate that she had no sons of her own
to whom to turn in her grief and desolation; the
answer need not be restricted to the consideration
that unknown domestic circumstances may explain
the omission of her sons. A more patent explana-
tion is that as they did not understand their brother,
they could not understand their mother, whose
whole life and interests were bound up in her first-
born. But, on the other hand, no one of the dis-
ciples understood Jesus and appreciated His work
and treasured up His words as did John. A bond
of fellowship had thus been established between
John and Mary that was closer than her nearer
blood relationship with her own sons, who, up to
this time, had regarded the course of Jesus with
disapproval, and had no sympathy with His mission.
In the home of John she would find consolation for
her loss, as the memories of the wonderful life of her
son would be recalled, and she would converse with
him who had rested on the bosom of Jesus and whom
Jesus loved. Even with the conversion of these
brethren within a few days into faithful confessors,
before the view of Jesus, provision was made for her
deeper spiritual communion with her risen and as-
cended Son through the testimony of Jesus which
John treasured in his deeply contemplative spirit.
There was much that was alike in the characters of
Mary and John. This may have had its ground in
relationship, as many regard Salome his mother, the
sister of the mother of Jesus mentioned in Jn 19 25.

Underneath both the stepbrother (Epiphanian)
and the cousin (Hieronymian) theories, which
coincide in denying that Mary was the actual
mother of these brethren, lies the idea of the per-
petual virginity of Mary. This theory which has
as its watchword the stereotyped expression in
liturgy and hymn, “Maria semper Virgo,” although
without any support from Holy Scripture, per-
vades the theology and the worship of the ancient
and the mediaeval churches. From the Gr and
Rom churches it has passed into Protestantism in
a modified form. Its plea is that it is repugnant
to Christian feeling to think of the womb of Mary,
in which the Word, made flesh, had dwelt in a
peculiar way, as the habitation of other babes. In
this idea there lies the further thought, most promi-
nent in mediaeval theology, of a sinfulness of the
act in itself whereby new human lives come inta
existence, and of the inclination implanted from the
creation, upon which all family ties depend. Tim
4 3.4; He 13 4 are sufficient answer. The taint of
sin lies not in marriage, and the use of that which
is included in its institution, and which God has
blessed (cf Acts 10 15), but in its perversion and
abuse. It is by an inconsistency that Protestants
have conceded this much to the theory of Rome,
that celibacy is a holier estate than matrimony,
and that virginity in marriage is better than mar-
riage itself. The theory also is connected with
the removal of Mary from the sphere of ordinary
life and duties as too commonplace for one who is
to be surrounded with the halo of a demi-god, and
to be idealized in order to be worshipped. The
interpretation that they are the Lord’s real brethren
ennobles and glorifies family life in all its relations
and duties, and sanctifies motherhood with all its
cares and trials as holier than a selfish isolation


from the world, in order to evade the annoyances
and humiliations inseparable from fidelity to our
callings. Not only Mary, but Jesus with her,
knew what it was to grieve over a house divided
concerning religion (Mt 10 35ff). But that this
unbelief and indifference gave way before the
clearer light of the resurrection of Jesus is shown
by the presence of these brethren in the company
of the disciples in Jerus (Acts 1 14). The refer-
ence to His post-resurrection appearance to James
(1 Cor 15 7) is probably connected with this
change in their attitude. 1 Cor 9 5 shows that
at least two of these brothers were active as mis-
sionaries, undoubtedly within the Holy Land, and
to Jews, according to the agreement into which
James entered in Gal 2, and his well-known attitude
on questions pertaining to the Gentiles. Zahn
regards James as an ascetic and celibate not in-
cluded in 1 Cor 9 5, which is limited then to Jude
and Simon. Their marriage indicates “the absence
in the Holy Family of that pseudo-asceticism which
has so much confused the tradition concerning
them” (Alford). See also JamMEs; JUDE. ;
For fuller discussions, see the extensive argu-
ments of Eadie and Lightfoot, in their commen-
taries on Gal, the former in favor of the Helvidian,
and the latter, with his exhaustive scholarship, of
the Epiphanian views; also, on the side of the
former, Mayor, The Ep. of St. James; Alford, Gr
Test.; Farrar, Early Days of Christianity; Zahn,
Intro to the NT. H. E. Jacoss


BRIBERY, brib’ér-i (I3W, shodhadh, “a gift,” in
a corrupt sense, ‘‘a bribe’): The Heb law condemns
everything that would tend to impair the impartial
administration of justice, particularly the giving
and receiving of gifts or bribes, in order to pervert
judgment (Ex 23 8). Allusions are frequent to
the prevailing corruption of oriental judges and
rulers. ‘And fire shall consume the tents of
bribery” (Job 15 34; 1883; Ps 2610; Isa
1 23; 33 15; Ezk 22 12). Samucl spcaks of a
“yansom”’ in the sense of a bribe: “Of whose hand
have I taken a ransom ["22, képher, “covering,”
AV “bribe’’] to blind mine eyes therewith?” (15
12 3; Am 5 12; cf Am 2 6). See Crimes; Jus-
TICE; PUNISHMENTS. L. Katszr


BRICK (7232, l*bhéngh): The ancient Egyp
word appears in the mod. Egyp Arab. toob. In
Syria the sun-baked bricks are commonly called
libn or lebin, from the same Sem root as the Heb
word.

Bricks are mentioned only a few times in the
Bible. The story of how the Children of Israel,
while in bondage in Egypt, had their task of brick-
making made more irksome by being required to
collect their own straw is one of the most familiar
of Bible narratives (Ex 1 14; 5 7.10-19).

Modern excavations at Pithom in Egypt (Ex
1 11) show that most of the bricks of which that
store-city was built were made of mud and straw
baked in the sun. These ruins are chosen as an
example from among the many ancient brick struc-
tures because they probably represent the work of
the very Heb slaves who complained so bitterly of
their royal taskmaster. In some of the upper
courses rushes had been substituted for straw, and
still other bricks had no fibrous material. These
variations could be explained by a scarcity of straw
at that time, since, when there was a shortage in
the crops, all the straw (Arab. tibn) was needed for
feeding the animals. It may be that when the
order came for the workmen to provide their own
straw they found it impossible to gather sufficient
and still furnish the required number of bricks


521 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA _ Brethren, ete
(Ex 5 8). However, the quality of clay of which | earth. The outer coating of plaster must be


some of the bricks were made was such that no
straw was needed. ;

Brickmaking in early Egyp history was a govern-
ment monopoly. The fact that the government
pressed into service her Asiatic captives, among
whom were the Children of Israel, made it impos-
sible for independent makers to compete. The
early bricks usually bore the government stamp or
the stamp of some temple authorized to use the
captives for brick manufacture. The methods
employed by the ancient Egyptians differ in no
respect from the modern procedure in that country.
The Nile mud is thoroughly slipped or mixed and
then rendered more cohesive by the addition of


Z2Agzz, Aca EZZE


renewed from year to year. In some of the villages
of northern Syria the brick houses are dome-shaped,
looking much like beehives. In the defiant asser-
tion of Isa 9 10 the superiority of hewn stone over
bricks implied a greater difference in cost and
stability than exists between a frame house and a
stone house in western lands today.

In the buildings of ancient Babylonia burnt
bricks were used. These have been found by
modern excavators, which confirms the description
of Gen 11 3. Burnt bricks were rarely used in
Egypt before the Rom period and in Pal their use
for building purposes was unknown. Specimens
of partially burnt, glazed bricks have been found in


Ofc GSA call «


&


Foreren Captives EmMpLorep in Maxino Bricss av THEBES.


1, 2, Men returning after carrying the bricks.


8, 6, Task-masters. 4,5. Mencarrying bricks. 9, 13. Digging or mixing the mud or clay. 8, 14. Making


bricks with wooden moulds, d,h. 15, Fetching water from tank, k, At ¢ the bricks (tobi) are said to be made at Thebes.


chopped straw or stubble. The pasty mass is next
worked into a mould made in the shape of a box
without a bottom. If the sides of the mould
have been dusted with dry earth it will easily slip
off and the brick is allowed to dry in the sun until
it becomes so hard that the blow of a hammer is
often necessary to break it.

When the children of Israel emigrated to their
new country they found the same methods of
brickmaking employed by the inhabitants, methods
which are still in vogue throughout the greater part
of Pal and Syria. In the interior of the country,
esp. where the building stone is scarce or of poor

uality, the houses are made of sun-baked_ brick

libn). Frequently the west and south walls,
which are exposed most to the winter storms, are
made of hewn stone and the rest of the structure
of bricks. When the brick-laying is finished the
house is plastered inside and outside with the same
material of which the bricks are made and finally
whitewashed or painted with grey- or yellow-colored


Babylonia and recently in one of the Hittite mounds
of northern Syria. These were probably used for
decorative purposes only. If burnt bricks had been
generally used in Pal, traces of them would have
been found with the pottery which is so abundant
in the ruins (see Porrrry).

The fact that unburnt bricks were so commonly
used explains how the sites of such cities as ancient
Jericho could have become lost for so many cents.
When the houses and, walls fell they formed a heap
of earth not distinguishable from the surrounding
soil. The wood rotted and the iron rusted away,
leaving for the excavator a few bronze and stone
implements and the fragments of pottery which
are so precious as a means of identification. The
“tls” or mounds of Pal and Syria often represent
the ruins of several such cities one above the other.


Literaturs.—H. A. Harper, The Bible and Modern Dis-
coveries; Wilkinson, Manners and Customs of the Ancient
Egyptians; Erman, Life in Ancient Egypt; Hilprecht,
Recent Research in Bible Lands.

James A. Parca


Brick-kiln
Brook of Egypt


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


522


BRICK-KILN, brik’kil, -kiln (jae, malbén) :
The Heb word is better tr? by “brickmould.” In
Syria the brickmould is still called milben. In Jer
43 9 the ARV rendering is ‘‘brickwork” and the
ARVm “pavement.” 28 12 31 becomes much
clearer if the ARVm is incorporated. Being put
to work at the brickmould was considered the task
of those taken as slaves. The ancestors of the new
taskmasters had themselves been put to similar toil.


BRIDE, brid. See Marriage.


BRIDE-CHAMBER, _ brid’cham-bér  (vupodyv,
numphén): The room in which the marriage cere-
monies were held (Mt 9 15; Mk 2 19; Lk 5 34;
ef Mt 22 10). See CHamper; Marriace.


BRIDE-CHAMBER, SONS (CHILDREN) OF
THE (ot viol rod vupddvos, hoi huioi tot num-
phénos): These were friends or companions of the
bridegroom and were usually very numerous (Mt
915; Mk 219; Lk 6 34). Any wedding guest
might be included in the expression, or anyone who
took part in the bridal procession and remained for
the wedding-feast (see Marriace). In the above
passages ‘‘the sons of the bride-chamber” are the
disciples of Christ.


BRIDEGROOM, brid’grd6m; BRIDEGROOM,
FRIEND OF. See Marriage.


BRIDGE, brij (yébupa, géphura, 2 Macc 12 13
AV; RV GEPHYRUN): Does not occur in the
canonical Scriptures, unless it be indirectly in the
proper name Geshur (M"W3, g*shtr, 28 3 3; 18
37; 15 8; 1 Ch 2 23, and others). The so-called
Jacob’s bridge is said to mark the site where
Jacob crossed the upper Jordan on his return from
Paddan-aram, but, of course, does not date from
the time of the patriarch. There are traces of
ancient bridges across the Jordan in the vicinity
of the Lake of Gennesaret, over the Arnon and
over other rivers which enter the Jordan from the
east; but none of them seem to date farther back
than the Rom period. Nah 2 6, in which the
Chaldaic paraphrase renders “‘bridges,’’ evidently
refers to dikes or weirs. Judas Maccabaeus is said
to have planted a bridge in order to besiege the
town of Casphor (2 Macc 12 13). Jos (Ani, V,
i, 3) tells us that the Jordan, before the passage of
the Israelites, had never been bridged, evidently
implying that in his own time bridges had been
constructed over it, which was the case, under the
Romans. The bridge connecting the temple with
the upper part of the city of which Jos speaks
(War, VI, vi, 2; Ant, XV, xi, 5) probably was a


viaduct. Frank E. Hirsca
BRIDLE, bri’d’l. See Brr.
BRIER, bri’ér. See THorns.


BRIGANDINE, brig’an-dén.
fensive, 5); Coat or Maun.


BRIGHTNESS, brit’nes: Used by AV in He 1 3
for ‘“effulgence of his glory,” as in RV and ARV.
The Gr apatigasma may mean either “reflection”
or “radiation.” Patristic usage favors the latter; cf
Wisd 7 26; also the Nicene Creed: “Light of Light,”
i.e. the Son not only manifests the Father, but is of
the same substance. ‘‘What emanates from light,
must have the nature of light” (Delitzsch).


BRIM: MXP, kageh or MEP , kéeeh= “an extremi-
ty” (in a variety of applications and idioms),
“border,” “edge,” ‘“‘side,” “shore” (Josh 3 15 AV;
RV “brink”’); also MDW or MDW, saphah or sepheth=


See Arms (De-


“edge,” “lip’ (1 IX 7 23.24.26; 2 Ch 4 2.5). In
Jn 2 7, the adv. dvw, dna, is used to emphasize
the vb. éyéucav, egémisan=“‘to fill,” thus giving
the idea of “‘fillmg to the top.”


BRIMSTONE, brim’stdn, brim’stun (23,
gophrith; 76 Getov, td theton): The word tr? “brim-
stone” probably referred originally to the pitch of
trees, like the cypress. By analogy it has been
rendered ‘‘brimstone”’ because of the inflammability
of both substances. Sulphur existed in Pal in
early times and was known by most of the ancient
nations as a combustible substance. In the vicinity
of the Dead Sea, even at the present time,
deposits of sulphur are being formed. Blancken-
horn (ZDPV, 1896) believes that this formation
is due to the action of bituminous matter upon
gypsum, as these two substances are found asso-
ciated with each other in this district. Travelers
going from Jericho to the Dead Sea may pick up
lumps of sulphur, which are usually incrusted with
crystals of gypsum. Dt 29 23 well describes the
present aspect of this region. That the inhabi-
tants of the land had experienced the terrors of
burning sulphur is very probable. Once one of
these deposits took fire it would melt and run in
burning streams down the ravines spreading every-
where suffocating fumes such as come from the
ordinary brimstone match. No more realistic
figure could be chosen to depict terrible suffering
and destruction. Itis not at all unlikely that during
some of the disastrous earthquakes which took place
in this part of the world, the hot lava sent forth
ignited not only the sulphur, but also the bitumen,
and added to the horrors of the earthquake the
destruction caused by burning pitch and brimstone.

The figurative use of the word brimstone to denote
punishment and destruction is illustrated by such
passages as Dt 29 23; Job 18 15; Ps 11 6; Isa
30 33; Ezk 38 22; Lk 17 29; Rev 9 17.

, JAMES A. Patcu

BRING: NU, dasha’=“to sprout,” “spring”
(Gen 1 11 AV); YU, sharag=“to wriggle,”
“swarm” (Gen 120f; 97; Ex 8 3); 73,
yaladh=“‘to bear,” “beget” (Gen 3 16; 2 K 19
3; Job 15 35; 391.2; ‘what a day may bring
forth,” Prov 27 1; “before the decree bring forth,”
Zeph 2 2); 729 , ‘énan= ‘to cloud over,” “to darken”
(Gen 9 14); Mow, shalah =“‘to send on,” ‘‘to escort”
(18 16); ANW, shabh=‘‘to turn back,” “bring”
(again, back, home again), “fetch,” “establish”
(24 5.6.8; Job 10 9; Ps 68 22; “bring him back
to see,” Eccl 3 22; Zec 10 6.10); W323, naghash=
“present,” “‘adduce” (an argument) (1 S 18 9; 16
32; 23 9; 30 7; “bring forth your strong reasons,”
Isa 41 21.22); MWY , ‘asah = “to do,” “cause to be,”
“accomplish” (Ps 37 5); my, ‘alah=“‘to carry
up,” “exalt,” “restore” (Gen 46 4; Ex 3 8.17; 33
12; Ps 71 20; Hos 12 13); 932, négha‘=“‘to touch,”
“lay hand upon,” ‘reach to” (Lev 6 7); TAD, ka-
bhadh, or "33, kabhédh=‘‘to be heavy” (causat. “to
make weighty”), ‘‘to be glorious’ (Prov 4 8);
322 , kana‘ =“to bend the knee,” hence “humiliate,”
“bring” (down, into subjection, under), ‘‘subdue”
(Dt 9 3; Isa 26 5); 739, zakhar=‘‘to mark,” “call
to, put (put in) remembrance” (Ps 38 title; 70
title); Das, yabhal = “‘to flow,” “bring” (esp. with
pomp) (60 9; 68 29; 76 11; Zeph 3 10); Sar, hal,
or 2], hil=“‘to writhe in pain,” “to bein travail”
(Isa 66 8); “WPL, ¢a'adh=“to step regularly,”
“march,” “hurl” (Job 18 14); 725, hdlakh= “to
walk,” “get” (Hos 214); 553, gadhal=“bring
up,” “increase” (9 12).


523


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Brick-kiln
Brook of Egypt


The NT employs redeegopéw, telesphoréd = ‘‘to
bring to maturity,” ‘“‘to ripen” (Lk 8 14); tro
pywyoKa, hupomimnésko = ‘to bring to mind,” “sug-
gest,” “bring to remembrance’”’ (In 14 26); dovdéw,
doulé6=“‘to enslave” (Acts 7 6); abvrpodes, stin-
irophos=“‘brought up with” (13 1 RV, ‘‘the foster-
brother of’); dtacdfw, diaséz6 = ‘to save,” “to care,”
“rescue” (23 24); déeréw, athetéO=“‘to set aside,”
“east off,” “bring to naught” (1 Cor 1 19); xarap-
yéw, katargéd=‘‘to abolish,” “destroy,” “do away,”
“put away,” “make void’ (1 28); mpordurw, pro-
pémpo =“‘to send forward,’ “bring forward’’ (1 Cor
16 6 AV; Tit 313 AV; 3 Jn ver 6 AV); éxrpédw,
ektrépho=“‘to rear up to maturity,” ‘to cherish,”
“nourish” (Eph 6 4 AV). Frank E. Hirsce


BRINE, brink: MDW, sdphah, or MEW, sepheth
=the lip,” “margin,” “bank,” “edge” (Gen 41
3; Ex 23; 7 15); ARP, kageh, or NEP, keceh=
“an extremity,” “border,” “brim” (Josh 3 8.15;
Isa 19 7; Dn] 12 5). See Brim.


BROAD, bréd (AM, réhabh, “width”; AM,
rehobh, “a broadway,” “street,” ‘‘court’”’; évptxwpos,
eurtichéros, “‘spacious’’): Occurs frequently as
a term of dimension (Ex 27 1; 1 K 6 6; Ezk 40
6.43 RV, “handbreadth long’) and as indicative
of strength (Neh 3 8; Jer 61 58). The centers
of communal life are called the ‘broad places,”
often rendered ‘streets’ (Jer 6 1; Cant 3 2;
Nah 2 4). A court before the temple: ‘‘the broad
place on the east” (AV “the east street,’ 2 Ch 29
4); “hroad plates” (Nu 16 38.39, RV “beaten’’).

Figurative: Relief from distress: ‘Yea, he would
have allured thee out of [Heb “the mouth of’’]
distress into a broad place’ (Job 36 16); the
liberty of obedience or liberty within the law (Ps
119 96, “broad,” “roomy,” “at liberty”); the all-
sufficiency of God for His people (Isa 33 21).
Jerus could not boast of a river or navy—Jdeh’s
presence with and within her would more than
supply these deficiencies; the road to destruction:
“Broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction”
(Mt 7 18); the ostentatious piety of the Pharisees:
“They make broad [marivw, platind, “widen’]
their phylacteries” (Mt 23 5). See Crry; Garr.
L. Karser


BROAD PLACE. See Cry.


BROIDERED, broid’érd: (1) WAP, rikmah,
“variegation of color’ (Ezk 16 10.13.18; 26 16;
27 7.16.24); (2) DWM, tashbé, “checkered stuff”’
(as reticulated). The high priest’s garments con-
sisted of “a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe,
and a broidered coat [Ex 28 4 AV; RV “a coat of
checker work’’], a miter, and a girdle”; (3) wAéyua,
plégma, “twined or plaited work” (1 Tim 2 9 AV).
See Brarpep; EMBROIDERY.


BROKEN: bro’k’n: Occurs both as past part. of
the vb. tr? “to break” and as an adj. The former
use will be dealt with here only so far as vbs. occur
which are thus tr’ but do not present the non-
participial forms. Such are: T1WA, m*rdh=
“bruised,” ‘‘emasculated” (Lev 21 20); Mn,
hathath=“‘to frustrate,” hence ‘to break down’
either by violence or by confusion and fear (1 8
2 10; Jer 48 20.39); M27, dakhah=“‘to collapse”
(Ps 4419; 618); PEI, ragag=“to crack in
pieces,” “crush” (Eccl 12 6); ND, kathath=“to
bruise or violently strike,” “break in pieces’ (Isa
30 14); Jer 2 16 should evidently be rendered:
“have grazed on the crown of thy head,” instead
of AV “have broken,” etc, for HI], ra‘ah=“‘to
tend a flock,” “pasture,” “graze,” but gives no hint


of the meaning “‘to break”’; mby, ‘alah =“‘to arise,”
“depart” (Jer 37 11); cvrOAdw, sunthidd="to dash
together,” “shatter” (Mt 21 44); optcow, exorisso
=“to dig through,” “to extract,” “remove” (Mk 2
4). See Break. Franx E. Hirscu


BROKENFOOTED, brd‘k’n-foot-ed (3 AAW,
shebher reghel): In Lev 21 19, one of the blemishes
which prevented a man of priestly descent from the
execution of the priestly office.


BROKENHANDED, bré’k’n-hand-ed (77 “QW,
shebher yadh): In Lev 21 19 one of the blemishes
which prevented a man of priestly descent from the
execution of the priestly office.


BROKENHEARTED, bré’k’n-har-ted (29 "28,
shdbhar lébh; ovvretpippévo. thy KapSlav, sun-
tetrimménoi tén kardian; Ps 69 20.21; Isa 61 1;
Lk 4 18 AV; ‘‘of a broken heart,” Ps 34 18;
“broken in heart,’ 147 3): People who feel their
spiritual bankruptcy and helplessness, and who long
for the help and salvation of God. Such people are
in the right condition to be met and blessed by God.
Cf “of contrite spirit” (Ps 34 18; Isa 66 2).


BROOCH, brich (MS, hak): Used in pl. by
RV (AV “bracelets”) for a class of ‘jewels of gold”’
brought as offerings by both men and women of
Israel (Ex 36 22). ‘Brooches,’ as Mackie says,
is unoriental. The Heb word means most, likely
nose-rings. See BRaceLetT; Rune.


BROOK, brook (032, nahal, PPS, *aphik,
IN), yr, 3°, mikhal; xelpappos, chetmar-
rhos): In Pal there are few large streams. Of the
smaller ones many flow only during the winter, or
after a heavy rain. The commonest Heb word for
brook is nahal, which is also used for river and for
valley, and it is not always clear whether the valley
or the stream in the valley is meant (Nu 13 23; Dt
2138; 2S 16 23). The Arab. wadi, which is some-
times referred to in this connection, is not an
exact ||, for while it may be used of a dry valley
or of a valley containing a stream, it means the
valley and not the stream. ’Aphik and yor are
tré both “brook” and “river,” y®’6r being generally
used of the Nile (Ex 1 22, etc), though in Dn] 12
5-7, of the Tigris. Cheimarrhos, “winter-flowing,”
is applied in Jn 18 1 tothe Kidron. Many of the
streams of Pal which are commonly called rivers
would in other countries be called brooks, but in
such a dry country any perennial stream assumes
a peculiar importance. Atrrep Evy Day


BROOK OF EGYPT, THE (92, nahal=“a
flowing stream,” ‘‘a valley”; best tr? by the oriental
word wady, which means, as the Heb
word does, both a stream and its
valley): The Brook of Egypt is men-
tioned six times in the OT (Nu 34 5; Josh 16
4.47; 1K 8 65; Isa 27 12); once, Gen 16 18,
by another word, 4), nadhdr. The Brook of E.
was not an Egyp stream at all, but a little desert
stream near the borderland of Egypt, a wady of
the desert, and, perhaps, the dividing line between
Canaan and Egypt. It is usually identified with
the Wady el ’Arish of modern geography.

The Brook of E. comes down from the plateau et
Tih in the Sinai peninsula and falls into the Mediter-

ranean Sea at lat. 31 5 N., long. 33
2. Descrip- 42 E. Its source is at the foot of the
tion central mountain group of the penin-
sula. The upper portion of the wady
is some 400 ft. above the sea. Its course, with one


1. Name


Brook of Egypt
Brotherly, etc


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


524


sharp bend to the W. in the upper part, runs nearly
due N. along the western slope of the plateau. Its
whole course of 140 miles lies through the desert.
These streams in the Sinai peninsula are usually
dry water-courses, which at times become raging
rivers, but are very seldom babbling “‘brooks.”’ The
floods are apt to come with little or no warning when
cloudbursts occur in the mountain region drained.


patible with such discriminating use of these words.
And even if the elimination of all mistakes be at-
tributed to one person, a final R, the difficulty is
scarcely lessened. For as no purpose is served by
this discriminating use of words, it is evidently
a natural phenomenon. In every instance of the
use of yr, one or other of the usual Heb words,
nahal or nahar would have served the purpose of


The use of the Heb word nehal for this wady
points to a curious and most interesting and impor-
tant piece of archaeological evidence

3. Archae- on the critical question of the origin
ology of the Pent. In the Pent, the streams
of Egypt are designated by an Egyp

word ("S8", y’dr) which belongs to Egypt, as the
word bayou does to the lower Mississippi valley,
while every other stream mentioned, not excepting
this desert stream, “the Brook of E.,”’ is designated
by one or other of two Heb words, nahal and nahar.
Each of these words occurs 13 times in the Pent,
but never of the streams of Egypt. The use of
nahar in Ex 7 19 in the account of the plagues is
not really an exception for the word is then used
generically in contrast with y*’dr to distinguish
between the “flowing streams,” n°hdrath, and the
sluggish irrigation branches of the Nile, y°’drim,
“canals” (cf Canats) (Isa 19 6; 33 21), while y’or
occurs 30 times but never of any other than the
streams of Egypt. There is thus a most exact
discrimination in the use of these various words, a
discrimination which is found alike in P, J, and E
of the documentary theory, and also where R is
supposed to have altered the documents. Such
discrimination is scarcely credible on the hypothesis
that the Pent is by more than one author, in later
than Mosaic times, or that it is by any author
without Egyp training. The documentary theory
which requires these instances of the use of these
various words for “river” to have been recorded
by several different authors or redactors, in differ-
ent ages and all several cents. after the Exodus,
far away from Egypt and opportunities for accurate
knowledge of its language, seems utterly incom-


the author, just as any foreign religious writer
might with propriety speak of the “streams of
Louisiana,” though a Louisianian would certainly
call them “‘bayous.’’ How does the author come to
use y’dr even where his native Heb words might
have been used appropriately? Why never, where
its appropriateness is even doubtful, not even saying
yor for nahal of the “Brook of E.”? It is not art,
but experience, in the use of a language which gives
such skill as to attend to so small a thing in so’


Dry Wady in Edom.


extensive use without a single mistake. The only
time and place at which such experience in the use
of Egyp words is to be expected in Israel is among
the people of the Exodus not long subsequent to
that event. M. G. Kya


525


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Brook of Egypt


Brotherly, etc


BROOM, brdom: Occurs in 1 K 19 4m (“broom-
tree’); Job 30 4, and Ps 120 4m as the tr of the
Heb OD, rathem, where AV employed “juniper”
which is retained in RV text in 1 K 19 4 and Job
30 4. Juniper is certainly incorrect and broom
is not a particularly happy rendering. The rdthem
was doubtless the shrub called by the Arabs ratam,
a shrub which casts so little shadow that it would
he used for shade only when there was no other
refuge from the desert sun, and would be eaten only
in case of the direst necessity, but which could be
burned and used for the making of charcoal. See
JUNIPER. Davin Foster Estes


BROTH, broth (p'"2, marak): Equivalent to our
“soup.” When Gideon (Jgs 6 19) made ready a
kid, ‘‘the flesh he put in a basket,” but, it is added,
“he put the broth in a pot”; and he is told by the
angel to “pour out the broth’ (ver 20). Isaiah
(65 4) makes Jeh speak of rebellious Israel as “a
people that provoke me to my face continually
sacrificing in gardens,” and adds in description
“that eat swine’s flesh, and broth of abominable
wanes is in their vessels” (mdrak, parak). See

‘oop.


BROTHER, bruth’ér (18, ’éh; abedods, adelphés
=kin by birth, from the same parents or parent):
Used extensively in both OT and NT of other rela-
tions and relationships, and expanding under
Christ’s teaching to include the universal brother-
hood of man. Chiefly employed in the natural
sense, as of Cain and Abel (Gen 4 8); of Joseph
and his brethren (Gen 42 3); of Peter and An-
drew, of James and John (Mt 10 2). Of other
relationships: (1) Abram’s nephew, Lot, is termed
“brother” (Gen 14 14); (2) Moses’ fellow-country-
“brethren” (Ex 211; Acts 3 22; cf

); (8) a member of the same tribe (28
19 12); (4) an ally (Am 19), or an allied or
cognate people (Nu 20 14); (5) used of common
discipleship or the kinship of humanity (Mt 23 8);
(6) of moral likeness or kinship (Prov 18 9);
(7) of friends (Job 6 15); (8) an equal in rank or
office (1 K 9 13); (9) one of the same faith (Acts
11 29; 1 Cor 5 11); (10) a favorite oriental meta-
phor used to express likeness or similarity (Job 30
29, “I am a brother to jackals’); (11) a fellow-
priest or office-bearer (Ezr 3 2); Paul called
Sosthenes ‘‘brother” (1 Cor 1 1) and Timothy his
spiritual son and associate (2 Cor 11); (12) a
brother-man, any member of the human family
(Mt 7 3-5; He 217; 811; 1Jn29; 4 20);
(13) signifies spiritual kinship (Matt 12 50);
(14) a term adopted by the early disciples and
Christians to express their fraternal love for each
other in Christ, and universally adopted as the
language of love and brotherhood in His kingdom in
all subsequent time (2 Pet 3 15; Col 4 7.9.15).
The growing conception of mankind as a brother-
hood is the outcome of this Christian view of be-
lievers as a household, a family (Eph 2 19; 3 15;
ef Acts 17 26). Jesus has made “‘neighbor’’ equiva-
lent to “brother,” and the sense of fraternal affection
and obligation essential to vital Christianity, and
coextensive with the world. The rabbis distin-
guished between “brother” and “neighbor,’’ apply-
ing “brother” to Israelites by blood, “neighbor” to
proselytes, but allowing neither title to the Gentiles.
Christ and the apostles gave the name “brother”’
to all Christians, and ‘neighbor’ to all the world
(1 Cor 6 11; Lk 10 29 ff). The missionary pas-
sion and aggressiveness of the Christian church is
the natural product of this Christian conception
of man’s true relation to man. See also Famiy
RELATIONSHIPS. Dwiecut M. Pratr


BROTHERHOOD, bruth’ér-hodd: The rare oc-
currence of the term (only Zec 11 14 and 1 Pet
2 17) in contrast with the abundant use of “‘brother,”’
“brethren,” seems to indicate that the sense of the
vital relation naturally called for the most concrete
expression: ‘‘the brethren.’ But in 1 Pet 2 17
the abstract is used for the concrete. In the OT
the brotherhood of all Israelites was emphasized;
but in the NT the brotherhood in Christ is a rela-
tion so much deeper and stronger as to eclipse the
other. See also Brorurr; BRETHREN.


BROTHER-IN-LAW.
FaMILy.


BROTHERLY, bruth’ér-li (TN, ’ah, “brother’’;
durrabeaAdla, philadelphia, ‘brotherly love”): Like
a brother in all the large human relationships
indicated above; e.g. the early friendly and fra-
ternal alliance between Tyre and Israel as illus-
trated by “brotherly covenant” between David
and Solomon, and Hiram, king of Tyre (2S 6 11;
1 K 6 12), and repudiated in a Jater generation
by the treachery of Tyre (Am 1 9). See Broru-
BRLY Kinpness (Love).


BROTHERLY KINDNESS, kind’nes (AV 2 Pet
1 7), or LOVE (AV Rom 12 10; 1 Thess 4 9; He
13 1; radeApla, philadelphia): In
1. As Moral RV, “love of the brethren” in all
Ideal places, and so in AV of 1 Pet 1 22,
thus defining the disposition as love,
and its objects as brethren. Since God is Father
and men are His sons, they are therefore brethren of
one another. As sonship is the most essential factor
in man’s right relation to God, so is brotherhood in
his relation to his fellow-man. Brotherhood is
first known as the relation between sons of the same
parent, a relation of tender affection and benevo-
lence. It becomes gradually extended to kindred,
and to members of the same tribe or nation. And the
Christian ideal of society is that a similar relation
should exist between all men without limit or dis-
tinction. Agdpé, “love’’ (sec CHARITY), is the word in
the NT that generally denotes this ideal. ‘Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself” is the whole law
of conduct as between man and man (Mt 22 39.40);
and neighbor includes every man within one’s
reach (Lk 10 29ff), even enemies (Mt 5 44;
Lk 6 35). Without the love of man, the love of
God is impossible, but “he that abideth in love
abideth in God” (1 Jn 4 16.20).
But man’s sonship to God may be potential or
actual. He may not respond to God’s love or
know His Fatherhood. Likewise love


See RELATIONSHIPS,


2. AS to man may not be reciprocated, and
Actual therefore may be incomplete. Yet
Between it is the Christian’s duty, like God, to
Christians maintain his disposition of love and


benevolence to those that hate and
gurse him (Lk 6 27.28). But within the Christian
community, love should respond to love, and find
its fulfilment, for there all men are, or should be,
God’s sons actually, “because the love of God hath
been shed abroad in our hearts, through the Holy
Spirit which was given unto us’ (Rom 6 5). And
this mutual love within the Christian brotherhood
(1 Pet 6 9) is called philadelphia. ;
This twofold ideal of social morality as universal
benevolence and mutual affection had been fore-
shadowed by the Sroics (q.v.). Men
3. Stoic as citizens of the world should adopt
Teaching an attitude of justice and mercy
toward all men, even slaves; but
within the community of the “wise” there should
be the mutual affection of friendship. Christianity
succeeded in organizing and realizing in intense


Brother’s Wife
Builder


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


526


and practical fellowship the ideal that remained
vague and abstract in the Gr schools: “See how
these Christians love one another.” It was their
Master’s example followed, and His commandment
and promise fulfilled: “Loveone another ... . as
have loved you ....; by this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples” (Jn 13 14.34.35). Paulin
his earliest epistle bears witness that the Thessalo-
nians practise love “toward all the brethren that
are in all Macedonia,” even as they had been taught
of God, but urges them to ‘abound more and
more” (1 Thess 4 9.10). For the healing of differ-
ences, and to build up the church in
4, Christian order and unity, he urges the Romans
Advance on “‘in love of the brethren (to) be tenderly
Heathen affectioned one to another’ (Rom 12
Thought 10). Christians must even ‘forbear
one another in love” (Eph 4 2) and
‘walk in love, even as Christ also loved you” (Eph
5 2; Phil 2 1.2). It involves some suffering and
sacrifice. The author of the Epistle to the He recog-
nizes the presence of “love of the brethren” and urges
that it may continue (He 13 1). It is the direct
result of regeneration, of purity and obedience to the
truth (1 Pet 1 22.23). It proceeds from godli-
ness and issues in love (2 Pet 1 7). “Love of the
brethren” (agapé) is the one practical topic of
John’s epistles. It is the message heard from the
beginning, “that we should love one another”
(1 Jn 3 11.23). It is the test of light and dark-
ness (2 10); life and death (3 14); children of God
or children of the devil (3 10; 4 7-12). Without
it there can be no knowledge or love of God (4 20),
but when men love God and obey Him, they neces-
sarily love His children (5 2). No man can be of
God’s family, unless his love extends to all its
members. REEs


BROTHER’S WIFE: (M'A3°, y'bhemeth=“a
sister-in-law,” “brother’s wife” [Dt 25 7.9]; TDN,
ishshah=“‘a woman,” ‘wife’; TIN NWN, ’esheth ah
=“brother’s wife” [Gen 38 8.9; Lev 18 16;20 21];
h yovh, rot abeAdod, he guné tou adelphoi=“‘the
brother’s wife” [Mk 6 18]): A brother’s wife oc-
cupies a unique position in Heb custom and law,
by virtue of the institution of the Levirate. The
widow had no hereditary rights in her husband’s
property, but was considered a part of the estate,
and the surviving brother of the deceased was con-
sidered the natural heir. The right to inherit the
widow soon became a duty to marry her if the de-
ceased had left no sons, and in case there was no
brother-in-law, the duty of marriage devolved on the
father-in-law or the agnate who inherited, whoever
this might be. The first son of the Levirate mar-
riage was regarded as the son of the deceased. This
institution is found chiefly among people who hold
to ancestral worship (Indians, Persians, Afghans,
etc), from which circumstances Benzinger (New
Sch- Herz, 1V, 276) derives the explanation of this
institution in Israel. The Levirate marriage un-
doubtedly existed as a custom before the Israelitish
settlement in Canaan, but after this received special
significance because of the succession to the property
of the first son of the marriage, since he was reck-
oned to the deceased, inherited from his putative, not
from his real father, thus preventing the disintegra-
tion of property and its acquirement by strangers, at
the same time perpetuating the family to which it
belonged. While the law limited the matrimonial
duty to the brother and permitted him to decline to
marry the widow, such a course was attended by
public disgrace (Dt 26 5 ff). By the law of Nu 27 8,
daughters were given the right to inherit, in order
that the family estate might be preserved, and the
Levirate became limited to cases where the deceased
had left no children at all. Frank E. Hirscu


BROW, brou: Is found in Isa 48 4, “thy brow
brass” as the tr of M2, mécah, meaning ‘‘to be
clear,” i.e. conspicuous. In Lk 4 29 “led him unto
the brow of the hill” is the rendering of é¢pus, oph-
rus, lit. “the eyebrow,” but used throughout Gr
lit. as any prominent point or projection of land (cf
use of supercilium in Verg. Georg. 1.108).


BROWN. See Cotrors.


BRUISE, brdoz, BRUISED, brodzd: The noun
occurs in Isa 1 6 AV, “bruises and putrifying sores,”
as the tr of M10, habbirdh. The vb. tr?a number
of Heb words, the principal ones being (1) S70,
shiiph (Gen 3 15 [bis]); (2) PeI, ddkak (Isa 28
28 [bis] [ARV “ground,” “and though the wheel
of his cart and his horses scatter it, he doth not
grind it” for the AV ‘nor break it with the wheels
of his cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen’’]);
(8) NDT, dakha’, in the classical passage, Isa 53 5,
“He was bruised for our iniquities,”’ ver 10, “Yet
it pleased Jeh to bruise him”; (4) (ET, rdcag, “A
bruised reed shall he not break,’’ Isa 42 3 (quoted
in Mt 12 20).

In the NT bruise is the tr of crapdéocw, spardssé,
“to rend” (ARV “bruising him sorely’) Lk 9 39;
of currplBw, suntribd, “to break to pieces” (Mt
12 20); “shall bruise Satan under your feet short-
ly” (Rom 16 20); of Opavw, thravd, in Lk 4 18
in the quotation from Isa 58 6, “‘to set at liberty
them that are bruised” (WH omits the verse).

ARTHUR J. KINSELLA

BRUIT, broot (VAW, shea‘): A word no longer
in common use (marked ‘‘archaic’”’ and “obsolete”
by Murray), signifying a rumor or report. The
word occurs in AV Jer 10 22 (RV “rumour”;
ARV “tidings’”) and AV Nah 3 19 (RV “bruit,”
app. “report”; ARV “report’’).


BRUTE, broot, BRUTISH, brootish (APB, ba'ar,
“stupid”; G@Aoyos, dlogos, “ without speech,’’ hence
irrational, unreasonable [Acts 25 27;.2 Pet 2 12;
Jude ver 10 AV]): The man who denies God acts
in an irrational way. Such persons are described
as brutish (Ps 49 10; 92 6; 94 8; Jer 10 14.21;
5117). These are stupid, unteachable. This is a
graphic description of the atheist. The proverb,
“No fool like the learned fool,” is esp. true of the
ignorance of the unbelievers of the Scriptures.
Their objections to the Bible, as a rule, are utterly
ridiculous. The word is occasionally used in the
sense of thoughtless ignorance. Brutish counsel is
counsel that is foolish, unreasonable (Isa 19 11).
The term is used by Agur (Prov 30 2) to express
the low estimate he has of himself and his conscious
lack of knowledge. Jacosp W. Kapp


BUBASTIS, bii-bas’tis. See Pi-sesera.


BUCKET, buk’et cbt, dit): The word is found
only in Isa 40 15; Nu 24 7, in the latter passage
in a fig. use. The bucket was doubtless a water-
skin with two cross-pieces at the top to fit it for
use in drawing water, like those now in use in Pal.
ceaiauaes word for water-skin is a different one

no'dh).


BUCKLE, buk’’! (wéprn, pérpé): As a mark of
favor Jonathan Maccabaeus was presented by
Alexander Balas with a buckle of gold (1 Macc 10
89), the wearing of which was restricted to the blood
royal. The buckle was used for fastening the mantle
or outer robe on the shoulder or chest.


BUCKLER, buk’lér: God is called a “buckler”
(RV “shield’’) to them that trust Him (Ps 18 2.30;
2 8 22 31; Prov 2 7). See Armor.


527


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA  Brother’s Wife


Builder


BUD. See FLowEr.
BUFFALO, buf’a-l6. See Carris.


BUFFET, buf’et (koAabi{w, kolaphizd, “to beat
with the fist’’): Refers to bodily maltreatment and
violence: ‘“Then did they spit in his face and buffet
him” (Mt 26 67; Mk 14 65; 1 Cor 4 11; 1 Pet
2 20). Paul speaks of ‘a thorn in the flesh, a
messenger of Satan to buffet me’’ (2 Cor 12 7).
Used fig. of self-control: “I buffet [AV keep under,
RVm “‘bruise’’] my body, and bring it into bondage”
(1 Cor 9 27). The Grin this passage reads tramidfa,
hupdpidz6, lit. “‘to give a blow beneath the eye.” In
Lk 18 5 the same word is rendered “‘wear out”: ‘‘Lest
shewear meout by her continual coming” (AV “weary
me,” RVm “bruise me’’) (see Pape’s Lez., s.v.).

L. Katszr

BUGEAN, bi-jé’an, bi’jé-an (Bovyatos, Bou-
gatos): An epithet given to Haman in Apoc, Ad
Est (12 6, RV; AV has ‘“‘Agagite”).


BUILD, bild, BUILDING, bild’ing (7123, bandh,
M32, binyah, once [Ezk 41 13]; olxoSopéw, oi-
kodoméd): The building conditions ex-
1. Building isting at the time of the Heb con-
Conditions quest were rude and untutored, and,
with the exception of the work of the
Solomonic period, there was still little or no effort
made to introduce a higher state, until the time
when Gr influence began to be felt (cir 3d_cent.
BC). In localities where stone was not available,
mud bricks were used, and their perishable nature
being realized, stone slab facing came into use.
These slabs were a protection against the weather
and had no constructive value. Probably the hand
of the “jerry’”’ builder can be seen in an attempt to
make such bad construction appear to be solid stone.
In stone localities buildings were of stone, but
the class of building was only that of the rude stone
waller. Random rubble masonry,
2. Masonry unskilfully laid, was the prevailing
characteristic. Occasionally a piece
of carefully dressed masonry is found, but it is
the exception and is often a re-use of an earlier
type akin to “sawed stone” (1 K 7 9). The re-
mains of Jewish walls of the period of the early
kings in Jerus show skill which does not appear
to have existed elsewhere. The boss and margin
stones, with wide mud joint, were, in part, the
actual masonry of the early fortifications, and
were re-used and imitated over and over again.
The type crops up in feeble imitation at different
sites throughout the country, but hammer-picked
and rough hammer-dressed stones are also common.
The fine comb pick and marginal dressing of the
walls of the Temple area belong to the Herodian
period (see Bliss and Dickie, “Excavations at Jeru-
salem,” 273 ff, PEFS, 1898). ‘The absence of lime
is a striking characteristic. There is no distinctive
type which can be named exclusively Jewish, al-
though there is good reason for believing that
the boss and margin type has a Jewish origin.
Wilson (Golgotha, 124) points out that the project-
ing bosses had a defensive value, in breaking the
force of the battering-ram, and here again the ne-
cessity of defense shows its vitality in the exist-
ence of such a well-engineered detail. The absence
Of the finer qualities of building craft can be traced
to the same source.
Foundations of fortifications were usually on rock
which was sometimes squared for a bed, but more
often leveled up with small stones.
3. Founda- A portion of the 8. wall of Jerus,
tions certainly late (5th cent. AD), was laid
; on a foundation of small rubble rest-
ing on débris, accumulated over an earlier wall.


(See Plate IV, Excavations at Jerusalem, p. 29.) In
smaller buildings, the foundations were usually laid
on the débris of earlier structures. At Lachish mud
brick walls were laid on a foundation of stone. A
peculiar method of spreading a layer of sand under
the foundations was also noted (see A Mound of
Many Cities, 125-26).

The native wall of today is less rudely built and
is bedded in lime mortar. It is a broad wall usually

about 3 ft. thick, with inner and outer
4. Modern faces of large stones, filled in between
Methods = with small rubble without proper bond,

somewhat in the manner of ancient
building. To make up for the want of bond, it isa
common habit to insert a piece of steel joint across
the return angle (see Bram). The building and
hewing methods, in all probability, are the same as
they were in early Jewish times. Hewers sit at their
work, with the plane of the stone on which they
operate, lying obliquely from them. Stones are
conveyed from the quarry, if at a distance from the
building site, on donkeys, thence on men’s backs
to the top of the wall, by rude gangways. Every
man digs his ‘own cistern’ (Isa 36 16), which is
sunk in the rock under the site of the house, and
used as a quarry from which stones for the building
are supplied. If water is scarce, the cistern is sunk
first, and the winter rains are allowed to collect and
provide the necessary water for the building.

To build up is often used in the sense of giving
increase and prosperity, or of stablishing and
strengthening. Thus in Job 22 23;
Ps 69 35; Jer 18 9. A kindred sense
is to restore what was decayed, as in
Isa 68 12. To “build an house” for
a person is to grant him children or a numerous
posterity (Ruth 4 11; of David, 2 S 7 27; 1 Ch
17 10). Spiritually, the word is used of one’s
work in life, or of the formation of character and
habits. The main thing here is the foundation.
Those who build on Christ’s word build on rock;
those who reject this word build on sand (Mt 7
24-27). Christ is the sole true foundation; the
work which a man builds on this will be tried by
fire (1 Cor 3 9-15). The church is compared to a
building (1 Cor 3 9; 1 Pet 2 4-6) reared on the
foundation of apostles and prophets (their truths
or teaching), Jesus Christ Himself being the chief
corner-stone (Eph 2 20-22). Believers are ‘‘build-
ed up” in Christ (Col 2 7), and are exhorted to
build themselves up on their most holy faith (Jude
ver 20). See ArcuiTecrurE; House; Fortt-
FICATION. Dicxis


BUILDER, bild’ér (M23, bandh; olkoBopea, oikodo-
més, texvirys, technités): ‘To build,” “builder,”
ete, are in the OT commonly the tr of bandh, “to
build,” occurring very frequently; see Burp, Burip-
inc. The lit. significance leads also to several fig.
applications, esp. to God as Divine Builder (1) as
establishing, e.g. the nation (Ps 69 35; 102 16; Jer
12 16), the throne of David (Ps 89 4), Jerus (147
2); (2) in restoration—rebuilding (lsa 68 12; 61 4;
66 21; Jer 31 4.28; 42 10; Ezk 36 36; Am 9 11;
cf Acts 16 16); (3) as establishing in prosperity
(Job 22 23; 18 2 35; Jer 24 6; cf Gen 16 2.
RVm, Heb, “be builded by her’); (4) the firm es-
tablishment of the Divine attributes (Ps 89 2);
(5) Divine opposition (Lam 3 5, “He hath builded
against me”); ef Job 19 8; (6) the choosing of
a corner-stone which the builders rejected (Ps 118
22.23; quoted by Christ [Mt 21 42; Mk 12 10;
Lk 20 17]; by Peter [Acts 4 11; 1 Pet 2 7)).

In the NT Christians are represented as being
(1) built by God (1 Cor 3 9.16) on Christ as the
one foundation (Mt 16 18, on Jesus as the Christ;
1 Pet 2 5f; Acts 9 31 RVm; Rom 15 20; 1.Cor


5. Figura-
tive


Bukki
Burial


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


528


3 10.12.14 [epotkodoméa]; Eph 2 20); (2) as being
continuously and progressively built up in their faith
and life (Acts 20 32; 1 Cor 8 1 RVm, “‘buildeth
up”; 10 23m, Gr “build up”; 14 4.17m; 1 Thess
5 11; ef Jude ver 20); (3) they are ‘builded to-
gether” (sunoikodoméd) in Christ (Eph 2 22; Col
27 [epoikodomed]; cf 1 Cor 3 9); (4) “builded up”’
is used in a bad sense (1 Cor 8 10AV and RV,
“emboldened,”’” RVm “be builded up”); (6) in
He 3 4 God is represented as the Builder (estab-
lisher) of all things, RVm “established,” and in
11 10 as the Builder (technités), of the New Jerus;
in 9 11 for “building” RV has “creation” (ktists);
(7) in 1 Cor 3 10-14; Gal 2 18, building represents
constructing a system of teaching; Paul speaks of
himself as “a wise master-builder” (sophés_architék-
t6n). W. L. WALKER


BUKKI, buk’i (PB, bukki, “mouth of Jah”):

(1) A Danite, son of the tribal prince Jogli
(Nu 34 22); he was one of the representative
chiefs who assisted in the division of the land.

(2) Son of Abishua and father of Izzi, a priest,
fourth in descent from Aaron, in the line of Eleazar
(1 Ch 6 5.51), and ancestor of Ezra (Ezr 7 4).
In 2 Esd 1 2 the name appears as Borith, and in
1 Esd 8 2 as Boceas.


BUKKIAH, buk-i’a (W0"P2, bukkiyaha, “proved
of God”): A Levite, son of Heman (1 Ch 26 4.18).
See BakpukKiag.


BUL, bul O73, bal): Name of the 8th month of
the Jewish year (1 K 6 38). It is of Phoen origin
and signifies the month of rain, the beginning of
the rainy season. See CaLENDAR.


BULL, bdél, BULLOCK, bddl’ok. See Carries.
BULL, WILD. See AnreLops; CaTT Le.
BULLS, JEROBOAM’S. See Car (GoLpEN).
BULRUSH, bddl’rush. See Rzexzp.


BULRUSHES, ARK OF. See Ark oF BUL-
RUSHES.


BULWARK, bodl’wark: The word represents
several Heb terms (571, hal, Isa 26 1; 9°, halah,
Ps 48 13; “ME, macodh, Eccl 914; “HBA,
magor, Dt 20 20). In 2 Ch 26 15 the word is
tr? in RV “battlements.” See Forriricarion.


BUNAH, bi’na (7973, bunah); A son of Jerah-
meel (1 Ch 2 25).


BUNCH, bunsh: Is used of (1) a “bunch of
hyssop” (Ex 12 22, ‘VIAN, ‘dghuddah); (2) a
“cluster of raisins’ (2 8 16 1 AV; 1 Ch 12 40 AV
prQ% , gimmak=“something dried or shriveled”);
(3) a “camel’s hump” (Isa 30 6 AV MWa‘t, dabbe-
sheth): of obscure etymology.


BUNDLE, bun’d’l: Represents in EV the words
¢¢ror, from a vb. meaning “cramp,” “bind,” etc (Gen
42 35; 1 S 26 29; Cant 1 13); ¢cebheth, from a vb.
probably meaning “to grasp’ (Ruth 2 16); and
déoun, désmé, from déw, déé, “‘to tie up,” “bind,”
hence lit. “bundle,” just asthe Eng. word is derived
from “bind” (Mt 13 30); and 7900s, pléthos, prop-
erly ‘multitude.’ The custom of binding up pre-
cious things in bundles (cf Cant 1 13) is the basis
of the very interesting metaphor in 1 8 25 29: “The
soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life
with Jeh thy God,” or perhaps better, “in the bundle
of the living in the care of Jeh”—an assurance of
perfect safety. J. R. Van Petr


BUNNI, bun’ (33, bunnit, 373, bunt, "D3,
bunni; ef Bani):

(1) A Levite (Neh 9 4). The repetition of
Bani’s name in this passage is probably a scribal
error. The Syr version for the second “Bani”
reads “Binnui”; but as, in 10 9 and 12 8, Binnui’s
name comes, as here, between those of Jeshua and
Kadmiel, we should substitute Binnui here for the
first Bani. The LXX renders all three names as
if the Heb in each case had been "33, bené, “sons
of,” reducing the proper names in the ver to five.
The names probably stand for chief Levitical
houses rather than individuals.

(2) Another Levite, one of the overseers of the
temple, father of Hashabiah, according to Neh
11 15; but, according to 1 Ch 9 14, Hashabiah
is “of the sons of Merari.”’ The reading in Neh
is a corruption of the one in Ch. H. J. Wor


BURDEN, bir’d’n: In the OT more than one
word is rendered “burden.” ;
(1) NW, massa’, from a root NW}, nasa’, “he


lifted up.” Thus lit. any load is called mass@ (Ex
93.5; Nu 4 15.24.27ff; 2 K 6 17;
1. Inthe 8 9). Figuratively, people are a burden


OT (Nu 11 11.17; Dt 1 12; 2S 16 33;

19 35). A man may be a burden to
himself (Job 7 20). Iniquities are a burden (Ps 38
4). Taxes may be a burden (Hos 8 10).

(2) In both AV and RV massa’ is tr’ “burden,”
as applied to certain prophetic utterances; but both
ARVm and RVm have “oracle.” Examples are
Isa 13 1; 14 28, and often; Jer 23 33.36.38, no
marginal reading; Ezk 12 10; Nah 1 1; Hab 1 1;
Zec 91; 121; Mali. As was natural under
the circumstances, such oracles usually denounced
judgment upon place or people. Hence probably the
tr “burden.” But some of these prophetic utterances
do not contain denunciation or threat (Zec 12). The
passage in Jer, moreover, implies that the prophet
used the term in the sense of “‘oracle,”’ for scoffers
are reproved for perverting the word and giving it
the meaning “burden.” Massa’, therefore, means
something taken up with solemnity upon the lips,
whether threatening or not, and the rendering,
“burden,” ought most likely to be given up.

The word FNW'A, mas’ eth, of the same derivation
as mass@’, is applied to foolish oracles (Lam 2 14
AV, oracles ARV, burdens ARVm, burdens RV,
oracles RVm; Am 5 11, burdens AV, exactions
ARV and RY).

Mass@’ is used also in Prov 30 1 and 31 1, and
is variously rendered prophecy (AV), oracle (ARV),
burden, or the name of the speaker’s country
(RVm, ARVm), oracle (RV). The reading is doubt-
ful, but probably the reference is to the speaker’s
country—“Jakeh, of Massa” (cf Gen 26 14),
“Lemuel king of Massa.”

(3) Other words tr? ‘‘burden” are from the root
520, sabhal, “to bear a load” (Neh 4 17; Ps 81
6; 1 K 11 28; AVnm, charge AV, labor ARV and
RV, burden ARVm and RVm, Ex 6 4.5; 6 6.7;
Isa 10 27; Isa 14 25).

In the NT several Gr words mean “burden.”

(1) Bdpos, bdros, “something heavy.” Burdens
of the day (Mt 20 12), the burden of duty to be

borne, a difficult requirement (Acts


2. Inthe 16 28; Rev 2 24). The burden of
NT one’s moral infirmities (Gal 6 2).

(2) ¢oprlov, phortion, “something to
be borne.”


The obligation which Christ imposes
(Mt 11 30); the Teese ordinances of the Pharisees
(Lk 11 46); a man’s individual responsibility (Gal
6 5). Whether any clear and consistent distinction
can be made between these two words ia doubtful.
Probably, however, phortion refers to the load as


529


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Bukki
Burial


something to be borne, whether heavy or light, whilst
baros may bean oppressiveload. According to Light-
foot baros may suggest a load of which a man may
rightly rid himself should occasion serve, but phortion
a burden which he is expected to bear, as every soldier
carries his own pack. But most hkely too much
weight should not be given to these distinctions.

(3) There is also the word yéues, gémos, “the
freight”’ of a ship (Acts 21 3); cf dyxos, dgkos,
weight or encumbrance which impedes the runner’s
progress to the goal (He 12 1), with particular
reference to the superfluous flesh which an athlete
seeks to get rid of in training (cf 1 Cor 9 24-27),
and fig. whatever hinders the full development of
Christian manhood. Grorce Henry TREVER


BURGLARY, bir’gla-ri. See Crimes.


BURIAL, ber’i-al (WAP, kebhurah; cf NT +d
évradbidoas, (6 entaphidsat) :
I. Immepiate Buriat ConsipzReD URGENT
1. Reasons for This-
2. The Burial of Jesus
3. The Usual Time
4. Duties of Next of Kin
II. Preparations FoR Buriat
1. Often Informal and Hasty
2. Usually with More Ceremony
3. Contrasts between Jewish Customs and Other
Peoples’
(1) Cremation
(2) Embalming
Ill. Own tHe Way To TRE GRAVE
1. Coffins Unknown :
2. Professional Mourners
IV. At tHe GRave
. Graves Dug in the Earth
. Family Tombs. Later Customs
. Sealed Stones
. Stated Times of Mourning
. Excessive Mourning
. Dirge-Songs
V. Fairurs to Receive Buriat A
JUDGMENT
VI. Puaces or Burtat: How Marxkep
LITERATURE
It is well to recall at the outset that there are
points of likeness and of marked contrast between
oriental and occidental burial customs in general,
as well as between the burial customs of ancient
Israel and those of other ancient peoples. These
will be brought out, or suggested later in this art.
L Immediate Burial Considered Urgent.—The
burial of the dead in the East in general was and
is often effected in such a way as to
1. Reasons suggest to the westerner indecent
haste. Dr. Post says that burial
among the people of Syria today seldom takes place
later than ten hours after death, often earlier; but,
he adds, “the rapidity of decomposition, the ex-
cessive violence of grief, the reluctance of Orientals
to allow the dead to remain long in the houses of the
living, explain what seems to us the indecency of
haste.’ This still requires the survivors, as in the
case of Abraham on the death of Sarah, to bury
their dead out of their sight (Gen 23 1-4); and
it in part explains the quickness with which the
bodies of Nadab and Abihu were carried out of the
camp (Lev 10 4), and those of Ananias and Sap-
phira were hastened off to burial (Acts 5 1-11).
Then, of course, the defilement to which contact
with a dead body gave occasion, and the judgment
that might come upon a house for harboring the
body of one dying under a Divine judgment, further
explain such urgency and haste. _
_ It was in strict accordance with such customs
and the provision of the Mosaic law (Dt 21 23;
ef Gal 3 13), as well as in compliance


OUR 08 doe


CALAMITY OR


2. The with the impulses of true humanity,
Burial of that Joseph of Arimathea went to
Jesus Pilate and begged the body of Jesus


for burial on the very day of the
crucifixion (Mt 27 39 ff).


The dead are often in their graves, according to
present custom, within two or three hours after
death. Among oriental Jews burial

3. The takes place, if possible, within twenty-
Usual Time four hours after death, and frequently
on the day of death. Likewise Mo-
hammedans bury their dead on the day of death,
if death takes place in the morning; but if in the
afternoon or at night, not until the following day.
As soon as the breath is gone the oldest son, or
failing him, the nearest of kin present, closes the
eyes of the dead (cf Gen 46 4, “and


4. Duties Joseph shall put his hand upon thine
of Next of eyes”). The mouth, too, is closed and
Kin the jaws are bound up (cf Jn 11 44,

“and his face was bound about with a
napkin”). The death is announced, as it was of


old, by a tumult of lamentation preceded by a shrill
ery, and: the weeping and wailing of professional

mourners (ef Mk 5 38 ff). See Mournina.
II. Preparations for Burial.—These are often
informal and hasty. Under the tyranny of such
customs as those noted, it is often


1. Often impossible to make them elaborate.
Informal Canon Tristram says: “As interments
and Hasty take place at latest on the evening of

the day of death, and frequently at


night, there can be no elaborate preparations. The
corpse, dressed in such clothes as were worn in life,
is stretched on a bier with a cloth thrown over it,
until carried forth for burial” (Eastern Customs,
94). In Acts 5 6 we read of Ananias, ‘‘The young
men... . wrapped him round, and they carried
him out and buried him.” ‘What they did,” as
Dr. Nicol says, ‘‘was likely this: they unfastened
his girdle, and then taking the loose under-garment
and the wide cloak which was worn above it, used
them as a winding-sheet to cover the corpse from
head to foot.” In other words, there was little
ceremony and much haste.
Usually, however, there was more ceremony and
more time taken. Missionaries and natives of
Syria tell us that it is still customary
2. Usually to wash the body (cf Acts 9 37),
with More anoint it with aromatic ointments
Ceremony (cf Jn 127; 19 39; Mk 161; Lk
24 1), swathe hands and feet in grave-
bands, usually of linen (Jn 11 44a), and cover
the face or bind it about with a napkin or
handkerchief (Jn 11 446). It is still common to
place in the wrappings of the body aromatic spices
and other preparations to retard decomposition.
Thus the friends at Bethany prepared the body of
Lazarus, and he came forth wrapped in grave-bands
and with a napkin bound about his face. And, we
are further told that after the burial of Jesus,
Nicodemus brought “a mixture of myrrh and
aloes, about a hundred pounds,” and that they
“took the body of Jesus, and bound it in linen
cloths with the spices, as the custom of the Jews
is to bury,” and that Mary Magdalene and two
other women brought spices for the same purpose
(Jn 19 39.40; Mk 161; Lk 241). That this
was a very old custom is witnessed by such pas-
sages as 2 Ch 16 14, where it is said that Asa, the
king, was laid ‘in the bed which was filled with
sweet odors and divers kinds of spices prepared
by the perfumers’ art” (cf Jn 12 3.7; Sir 38 16).
From Acts 6 6; 8 2 it appears that there was in
later times a confraternity of young men whose
business it was to attend to these propricties and
preparations on behalf of the dead; but it was
probably only in exceptional cases that they were
called upon to act. Certainly such ministries or-
dinarily devolved, as they do now, upon loving
relatives and friends, and mostly women, among the
Jews as well as among the Greeks. The practice


Burial


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


530


among the Greeks, both by similarity and contrast,
affords an interesting illustration. The following
instance is aptly cited in DB (art. “Burial’’):
Electra believing Orestes to be dead and his ashes
placed in the sepulchral urn (Soph. Electra 1136-
52), addresses him thus: ‘‘Woeis me! These lov-
ing hands have not washed or decked thy corpse,
nor taken, as was meet, their sad burden from the
flaming pyre. At the hands of strangers, hapless
one, thou hast had those rites, and so art come to
us, a little dust in a, narrow urn.”
This brings us to note two marked contrasts
between customs in Israel and among other peoples.
(1) With the Greeks it was cus-
8. Contrasts tomary to cremate the dead (see


between CREMATION); but there was nothing
Jewish in Jewish practice exactly correspond-
Customs ing to this. Tacitus (Hist. v.5) ex-
and Other pressly says, in noting the contrast
Peoples’ with Rom custom, that it was a matter


of piety with the Jews “to bury rather
than to burn dead bodies.” The burning of the bodies
of Saul and his sons by the men of Jabesh-Gilead
(1 S 31 11-13) seems to have been rather a case
of emergency, than of conformity to any such cus-
tom, as the charred bones were buried by the same
men under the tamarisk at Jabesh, and later, by
David’s order, removed and laid to rest in the
sepulcher of Kish (2 S 21 12-14). According to
the Mosaic law burning was reserved, either for
the living who had been found guilty of unnatural
sins (Lev 20 4; 21 9), or for those who died under
a curse, as in the case of Achan and his family, who
after they had been stoned to death were, with all
their belongings, burned with fire (Josh 7 25).

(2) As the burning practised by the Greeks
found no place in Jewish law and custom, so em-
balming, as practised by the Egyptians, was un-
known in Israel, the cases of Jacob and Joseph
being clearly special, and in conformity to Egyp
custom under justifying circumstances. When Jacob
died it was Joseph, the Egyp official, who ‘com-
manded his servants the physicians to embalm his
father” (Gen 50 2), and it was conventionally the
fit thing that when Joseph himself died his body was
embalmed and “‘put in a coffin [sarcophagus] in
Egypt” (50 26).

II. On the Way to the Grave.—When the prep-
arations were made and the time came, the corpse

was carried to the grave on a bier, or
1. Coffins litter (MMA, mittah). Coffins were
Unknown unknown in ancient Israel, as they are
among the Jews of the East to this
day. The only one mentioned in the Bible is the
sarcophagus in which the embalmed body of Joseph
was preserved, unless Asa’s bed (2 Ch 16 14) be
another, as some think. Moslems, like eastern
Jews, never use coffins. The bier sometimes has
a pole at each corner by means of which it is carried
on the shoulders to the tomb. See Bier.

The procession of mourners is made up largely,
of course, of relatives and friends of the deceased,

but is led by professional mourning


2. Profes- women, who make the air resound
sional with their shrieks and lamentations
Mourners (cf Eccl 12 5; Jer 9 17; Am 65 16).


See Mournine. Am 6 16 alludes
to this custom in describing the mourning that
shall be over the desolations of Israel: ‘Wailing
shall be in all the broad ways; and they shall say
in all the streets, Alas! alas! and they shall
call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are
skilful in lamentation to wailing.” Jer (9 17.18)
breaks out: “Call for the mourning women, that
they may come; .... and let them make haste,
and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may


* thing so wild and plaintive.”


run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with
waters.” Dr. Fred. Bliss tells of a mourning dele-
gation at the mahal, or mourning house, of a great
man. “No matter how gaily they may be chatting


as they approach, when they reach the house they


rush forward, handkerchiefs to face, sobbing, weep-
ing, with utmost demonstrations of grief, going
through them time after time as occasion requires.”
Amelia B. Edwards gives a vivid account of her first
experience with such mourning: “It rose like the
far-off wavering sound of many owls. It shrilled,
swelled, wavered, dropt, and then died away, like the
moaning of the wind at sea. We never heard any-
Among some Jews of
today, it is said, the funeral procession moves swiftly,
because there are supposed to be innumerable evil
spirits (shédhim) hovering about, desirous to attack
the soul, which is thought to be in the body until
interment takes place and the corpse is actually
covered (see DB, art. “Burial’’).
IV. At the Grave.—When the grave, or place of
entombment, is reached ceremonies more or less
characteristic and peculiar to the
1. Graves Orient take place. When the body
Dug in the is let down into the ground, the bier,
Earth of course, is set aside, and at first
a heap of stones only is piled over the
shallow grave—to preserve the dead from the
dreaded depredations of hyaenas, jackals or thieves.


Bee thse eS _—
Tombs of the Kings.


Beyond question graves among ancient Jews were
often simply dug in the earth, as they are with us,
and as they are with Jews at Jerus and elsewhere

in the East today.
But originally, it would seem to have been cus-
tomary for each family to have a family tomb:
either a natural cave, prepared with


2. Family stone shelves to receive the bodies, or
Tombs. else hewn out of rock in the hillside, each
Later tomb, or sepulcher, having many niches
Customs or loculi, in each one of which a body


could be placed (see Gen 25 10; 49 31;
50 13; 35 19; Josh 24 32). AsDr. Nicolsays, “All
among the Israelites who possessed any land, or who
could afford it, had their family tombs, hewn out of
the rock, each sepulchre containing many niches.
Many generations of a family could thus be placed
in the ancestral tomb.” Countless numbers of
such tombs are to be found all over Pal, but Mach-
pelah, of course, is the chief example (Gen 23).
Compare the cases of Joshua buried in his inherit-
ance at Timnath-serah (Josh 24 30), Samuel in
his house at Ramah (1 8 26 1), Joab in his house
in the wilderness (1 K 2 34), Manasseh in the
garden of his house (2 K 21 18), Josiah in the same
tomb, it would seem, as his father and grandfather
(2 K 23 30), and Asa, singled out for special men-
tion (2 Ch 16 14). According to custom, too,
the Jew was not to sell his burying-place, if it was
possible for him to hold it. Today in the Orient it


531


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Burial


is quite different—burying-places of Moslem, Jewish
and Christian peoples, while distinct from each other,
are community rather than family burying-places.


f
f
i
Wi
H
4
i


SR


Interior of Tombs of the Kings.


When the tomb was a cave, or was dug out from
some rock, the entrance was often closed with a
large circular stone set up on its edge
3. Sealed or rim and rolled in its groove to the
Stones front of the mouth of the tomb, so as
to close it securely. This stone was
then often further secured by a strap, or by sealing.
In such case it could easily be seen or known if the
tomb had been disturbed. Pilate, it will be recalled,
directed that the tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, in
which the body of Jesus was laid, should be care-
fully sealed and made as secure as the officials could
make it. ‘So they went, and made the sepulchre
sure, sealing the stone, the guard being with them”
(Mt 27 66).
In Syria, as elsewhere in the East, it is customary
to have stated times after the burial for mourning
at the tomb—for example on the third,


4, Stated seventh, and fortieth days, and again
Times of | on the anniversary of the burial. The
Mourning relatives or friends then go to the


tomb without ornaments, often with
hair disheveled; sometimes with head covered and
faces blackened with soot, or ashes, or earth, in
their oldest and poorest clothing, which is sometimes
violently rent, and, sitting or moving in a circle
around or near to the tomb, they break out in spells
into weird, dirge-like singing or wailing.


Exterior of Garden Tomb.


The violence of grief at times leads to lacerations
of the body and the shedding of blood. Morier
(Second Journey through Persia), de-


5. Excess- scribing a celebration which takes place
ive annually to commemorate the death
Mourning of the grandson of Mohammed, says:


“J have seen the most violent of them,
as they vociferated Ya Hosein! walk the streets
with their bodies streaming with blood by the
voluntary cuts they had given themselves. Such


| 6 Dirge-


cutting of the flesh in mourning for the dead was
specifically forbidden by the Mosaic law (Lev 19
28; 215; Dt 14 1). But excessive mourning for
the dead is often alluded to in Scripture (see 2 S
4 ae Ps 6 6; 119 136; Lam 1 16; 3 48; Jer

The custom of dirge-songs seems to be alluded
to (Mt 9 28; Mk 5 88) in the narrative of the
healing of the ruler’s daughter: ‘Jesus
came into the ruler’s house, and saw the
flute-players, and the crowd making
a tumult.” <A characteristic oriental
funeral procession and burial are vividly pictured in
the narrative of the burial of Jacob (Gen 60 6-18).

V. Failure ta Receive Burial Counted a Calam-
ity er a Judgment.—Any lack of proper burial is
still regarded in the East, as it was in ancient times,
as a great indignity or a judgment from God. It
is esteemed the greatest calamity that can befall a
person. It gives men still untold distress to think
they shall not receive suitable burial, according to
the customs of their respective race, or family, or
rcligion—a fact or sentiment that is often alluded
or appealed to by way of illustration in the


Songs


ny whet


Interior of Garden Tomb.


Scriptures. For a corpse to remain unburied and
become food for beasts of prey was the climax of
indignity or judgment (2 8 21 10.11; 1 K 13 22;
14.11; 16 4; 21 24; 2K 937; Jer 733; 81:
Ezk 29 5; Ps 79 3; Rev 11 9), and uncovered
blood cried for vengeance (Ezk 24 6f; 39 11-16),
the idea being the same as among other oriental
peoples, that the unburied dead would not only
inflict trouble upon his family, but bring defilement
also and a curse upon the whole land. It was,
therefore, an obligation resting upon all to bury
even the dead found by the way (Tob 1 18; 2 8).
Even malefactors were to be allowed burial (Dt
21 22.23), and the exceptional denial of it to the
sons of Rizpah gave occasion for the touching story
of her self-denying care of the dead found in 2 8
21 10.11.

VI. Places of Burial: How Marked.—Ordinary
graves were marked by the heaping of crude stones,
but hewn stones and sometimes costly pillars were
set up as memorials of the dead (Ezk 39 15;
2 K 23 17 RV, “What monument is that which
I see?” the reference being to a sepulchral pillar).
Jacob set up a pillar over Rachel’s grave (Gen 35
20), and her tomb is marked by a monument to
this day. Absalom’s grave in the wood of Ephraim
had a heap of stones raised over it (2 8 18 17),
but in this case, as in the case of Achan, it was not
for honor but for dishonor. In NT times the place
of burial was uniformly outside the cities and vil-
lages (see Lk 7 12; Jn 11 30). There was public
provision made for the burial of strangers (Mt 27
7), as in the closing days of the monarchy there was
a public burying-ground at Jerus (Jer 26 23),
probably where it is to this day between the city


Burier
Buying


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


532


wall and the Kidron Valley. Thousands of Jewish
graves on the sloping sides of the Valley of Jehosha-
phat, where the Jews have come from all lands to
be buried, bear witness today to the belief that
associates the coming of Messiah with a blessed
resurrection. Many Jews hold that Messiah, when
He comes, will descend upon the Mount of Olives,
and will pass through these resting-places of the
dead as He enters the Holy City in glory.

Literature.—HDB, art. ‘Burial’; Keil, Bib. Arch.,
II, 199f; Nowack, Heb Arch., I, 187 ff; “Burial” and
‘“Tombs’' in Kitto, Cycl.; Thomson, LB (see ‘‘ Funerals"
in Index); Tristram, Eastern Customs in Bible Lands;
Mackie, Bible Manners and Customs.

Gro. B. Eacer

BURIER, ber'i-ér (3P, kabhar): “Set up a sign
by it, till the buriers have buried it” (Ezk 39 15).
“When the searchers found any human remains
as they passed through the land, they were to set
up a mark to attract the attention of the buriers,
who followed them” (Dummelow’s Comm., in loc.).
See Burra.


BURN, barn, BURNING, birn’ing: Figurative:
In addition to the ordinary meaning, burn is used
metaphorically in the following passages of the
NT: r


(1) xalw, katé (Lk 24 32), “Was not our heart
burning within us,” i.e. greatly moved.

(2) mupéw, purdd, used twice, once in the sense
of inflamed with sexual desire (1 Cor 7 9), “For
it is better to marry than to burn,” and in 2 Cor
11 29 of the heat of the passions, here of grief, or
anger, ‘“Who is offended [ARV “caused to stumble’’]
and I burn not?” See also PunisHMEnrts.


BURNT OFFERING. See SacRiIFICe IN THE
OT ann NT.


BURNT SACRIFICE. See Sacriricz IN THE
OT anp NT.


BUSH, boésh:

(1) (42D, seneh, Ex 3 2-4; Dt 33 16; Badros,
bdtos, Mk 12 26; Lk 6 44, “bramble bush”; 20
37; Acts 7 30.35. All the OT references and the
NT references, except Lk 6 44, are to the same
“bush,” viz. Moses’ “burning bush”). From its
etymology s’neh clearly denotes a “thorny” plant,
as does the corresponding batos in the LXX and NT.
In the Lat VSS rubus, i.e. “bramble,” is used as
equivalent. Several varieties of bramble flourish in
Pal, of which the most common is Rubus discolor,
but this is not an indigenous plant in Sinai. It is
stated by Post that a bush of this plant has been
planted by the monks of the Convent of St. Cath-
erine at Sinai to the rear of the “Chapel of the
Burning Bush.” In spite of tradition there is but
little doubt that Moses’ “burning bush” must actu-
ally have been a shrub of one of the various thorny
penelas or allied plants, indigenous in the Sin penin-
sula.

(2) (7"W, sith, “plant,” Gen 25; “shrub,”
Gen 2115; “bush,” Job 30 4.7). In the first
reference any kind of plant may be meant, but in
the other passages the reference is to the low bushes
or scrub, such as are found in the desert.

(3) (Som, nahdlolim, AV bushes, RV PAS-
TURES, m_ “bushes,” Isa 7 19). The meaning
appears to be rather a place for watering flocks,


the corresponding Arab. root Keo, nahal, having

the meaning “to quench one’s thirst,” and the
amg

corresponding noun of place, heio, manhal,


meaning a watering-place in the desert.
E. W. G. MasterMan


BUSH, THE BURNING, birn’ing: The scene at
the burning bush (7130, s¢neh, “a bush,” LXX bdtos,
“blackberry bush’’) reveals God to the world in one

of the theophanies with fire, of which
1. Meaning there are four mentioned in the Bible
and Use (Ex 3 2; 18 21; 19 18; also 2 Thess

18 AV, yet to be fulfilled). Many
other Divine manifestations were associated with fire.
The Burning Bush is mentioned elsewhere in Dt 33
16; Mk 12 26; Lk 20 37; Acts 7 30.31.

Exact identification of the particular kind of

bush in which God appeared to Moses is impossible.
Attempts have been made to identify
2. Identifi- it with the blackberry bush, as by the
cation LXX and also by the monks of the
Convent of St. Catharine on Mount
Sinai who grow the blackberry there in token of
their tradition. The cassia has also been suggested.
Both identifications are failures, the former because
the blackberry does not grow in that region unless im-
ported and tended, the latter for philological reasons.
Nothing in the language used gives any clue to the
species of the bush. The generally accepted view
that it was some kind of thorn bush is an assumption
with scarcely other ground than that there are so
many thorny bushes in that region. This fact does,
however, give to the assumption much probability.

The old Jewish commentators have many things
to say in explanation of this theophany (cf Jew

Enc). That one thing which will
3. Interpre- meet with much response from the
tation Christian heart is that the unconsumed

bush with the fire in the midst of it
indicated that the Israelites would not be consumed
by the afflictions in Egypt. The application of
this view to God’s people under affliction in all ages
is often made by Christian homilists. But this
cannot have been the primary meaning of the
theophany. Of the many theophanies and other
Divine manifestations with fire, the specific sig-
nification must be learned from a careful study of
the circumstances in each ease. The fire does not
seem to have any one fundamental meaning running
through them all. In addition to the references
already given, cf Ps 18 8-12; 50 3; Ezk 1 4; Mic
1 1-4; Hab 3 3-6; He 12 29.

The exact meaning of the Burning Bush as a
method or medium of revelation may appear as
follows: (1) The flame in this bush was not the
flame of persecution by God’s enemies without, but
the flame of God’s presence or the presence of His
angel within. (2) The idea of burning and yet not
being consumed is brought into the narrative by
Moses’ wonderment in the moment of his ignorance,
before he knew that God was in the bush. (3) The
real significance of the flame in this case seems to
be light and glory and preservation where God
manifests Himself graciously. This is the univer-
sal idea of revealed religion. The prevailing idea
of God in the religions round about was that God
dwelt in darkness. The approach to the gods in
Egyp temples was through ever-deepening gloom.
It was thought that God was very dangerous and
apt to be a destroyer, so that a priest must always
intervene. God as a gracious Saviour was the new
idea revelation was bringing to the world. This
was now first clearly announced, but was not to
be fully revealed throughout the time of the long
line of priests until the Great High Priest should
come and make a “way of approach” that we may
come “with boldness unto the throne of grace.”

M. G. Kytr

BUSHEL, bodsh’el (p68t0s, médios): A dry meas-
ure containing about a peck, but as it is used in
the NT (Mt 6 15; Mk 4 21; Lk 11 33) it does
not refer to capacity but is used only to indicate a
covering to conceal the light.


533


BUSHY, boésh’i: Found in Cant 5 11 asthe tr
of Smom, talial, meaning trailing, pendulous (LXX
érdrat, eldtat, lit. “ductile’’); RVm reads “curly.”


BUSINESS, biz’nes: Is the rendering of four Heb
words: (1) moron, mila’ khah, in Gen 39 11 (ARV
“work”); 1 Ch 26 29.30; 2 Ch 13 10 (ARV “in
their work’); 17 138 (ARV “many works’); Neh
11 16.22; 13 30 (ARV “in his work”); Est 3 9; Ps
107 23; Prov 22 29; Dnl 8 27. (2) "DJ, dabhar,
lit. “a word,” is so tr! in Dt 24 5; Josh 2 14.20;
Jgs 18 7 (ARV ‘dealings’); 18 28 (ARV “deal-
ings’); 1S 212.8. (3) WWI, ma'dseh, “an ac-
tion” (18 2019). (4) [92%, ‘inyan, “employment”
(Eccl 5 3; 8 16).

In the NT “‘business”’ in Lk 2 49 is the rendering
of the phrase év rots ro? warpés pov, en tois tot
patrés mou, lit. “in the things of my Father,” which
ARV renders “in my Father’s house,” with ‘about
my Father’s business’ as the marginal reading.
“Business” is also used in the tr of xpela, chreta,
lit. “need,” of Acts 6 3; as the tr of omovdy,
spoudé, lit. “haste” of Rom 12 11 (ARV ‘dili-
gence’); of mpdyua, prdgma, lit. ‘thing done,” of
Rom 16 2 (ARV ‘“matter’); of mpdocew rd tdta,
prdssein td idia, lit. “tend to one’s own business,”
of 1 Thess 4 11. In Acts 19 24.25 in Paul’s ac-
count of the riot in Ephesus, épyacla, ergasia, lit.
“working,” “performing,” is tr’ ‘‘little business’’ in
ver 24 (AV “small gain”), and “by this business”
in ver 25 (AV “by this craft’).

Artuur J. KINSELLA

BUSYBODY, biz’i-bod-i (weplepyos, periergos, ah-
Aorpwenloxones, allotrioepiskopos): The word is
found twice in Paulinic lit.: 1 Tim 6 13, “not only
idle, but tattlers also and busybodies,” and 2 Thess
3 11, “work not at all, but are busybodies.” It is
also found in 1 Pet 4 15 AV (RV ‘“meddler”) ‘or
as a busybody in other men’s matters.”’ If these
passages be coupled with such others as Jas 3 2-10;
411; Eph 4 29.31; Tit 3 2, it becomes evident
that sins against the eighth commandment were as
common in the apostolic church as they are today.
To this day backbiting is a common trait of oriental
peoples. And it is this sin which is so repeatedly
warned against by the apostles, as in direct conflict
with the ethics of Christianity, and in violation of
that spirit of brotherly love and mutual trust which
Christ has enjoined on His followers, and which is
the very marrow of the outward revelation of the
Christian faith (1 Cor 18). Henry E. Dosker


BUTLER, but’lér: An officer in households of
kings, or other dignitaries, having charge of wines
and other potables. “pW, mashkeh, “one who
gives drink” (Gen 40 1-23; 41 9), rendered “cup-
bearer” in 1 K 10 5; 2 Ch 94; Neh 111. The
office was one of considerable importance in oriental
courts, because of the danger to the king’s life through
plots of poison, etc. Nehemiah held this position to
King Artaxerxes. Wealthy courts, as that of Solo-
mon, usually had more than one (1 K 10 5); over
these cupbearers or butlers was the sar ha-mash-
kim, or chief butler (Gen 40 9).

Epwarp BacBy PoLLARD


BUTTER. Sce Foon.


BUYING, bi’ing (72, karah, mp, lakah, 83p,
kena’, OP, kanah, 20 , shabhar; ayopate, agordzo,
dvéopar, Gnéomai, epropebopat, emporeiiomat):


I. In roe Earuiest PeRiops AND AMONG Nomapbs
1. The Primitive Stage (the ‘'Shop’’)
2. In OT Times
3. In NT Times

Il. Oxienrat Boyino a Tepious Process


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Burier
Buying


TI. Swops anp Bazaars
1. Oriental Shops
2. The Market-Place
IV. Bouyine on Crepir
Paying Cash (Money)
V. Opey-Ain Markers anp Fairs
I. Inthe Earliest Periods and among Nomads.
—Among primitive races and nomads there can


be, of course, no organized commerce.


1. The Yet they buy and sell, by barter and
Primitive exchange, in rude and simple ways.
Stage; the When tribes become settled and live
“Shop” in villages the “shop” is established


—usually at first the simple “stall” of
the grocer (bakkal) where one can buy bread, cheese,
salt and dried fish, olives, oil, bundles of wood or
charcoal, and even earthenware vessels for the pass-
ing traveler. At a later stage the village will have
also, according to demand, other shops, as, for in-
stance, those of the baker, the blacksmith, the cob-
bler, and, today, will be found in many obscure
pee in the East the butcher’s shop, and the coffee

ouse.

These gradations and the gradual rise to the more
organized commerce of the Gr-Rom period are
indicated in a way by the succession of

2.In OT words for ‘‘bnying” used in the Bible
Times and the conditions and circumstances
pictured and implied in the various
accounts of buying and selling. Even as early as
Abraham’s time, however, there were buying and
weighing of silver in exchange. ‘Hear me,”
pleads Abraham with the children of Heth, “and
entreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar, that
he may give me the cave of Machpelah....
which is in the end of his field; for the full price
let him give it to me.” And Ephron said, “Nay,
my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the
cave that is therein.’ But Abraham said, “If
thou wilt . . . . I will give the price of the field;
take it of me, and I will bury my dead there. And
Ephron answered . .» My lord, hearken unto
me: apiece of land worth four hundred shekels of
silver, what is that betwixt me and thee? bury there-
fore thy dead..... And Abraham weighed to
Ephron the silver .. .. four hundred shekels of
silver, current money withthe merchant. So....
the field, and the cave, and all the trees that were in
the field, . . . . were made sure unto Abraham for
a possession” (Gen 238 8-18). Other examples of
primitive buying are found in Josh 24 32 (‘the parcel


of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor
the father of Shechem for a hundred pieces of
money”); in Ruth 4 5-9, where Boaz is repre-
sented as buying ‘“‘the parcel of land which was
Elimelech’s .... of the hand of Naomi....
and of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the dead

. all that was Elimelech’s’; and in 28 24


Buying
Byword


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


584


21-24, where David is said to have “bought the
threshing-floor” of A. at ‘a price.” Such cases,
however, are in a sense exceptional; trade in gen-
eral at that time was by barter and exchange, with-
out intermediary or market-place. :

In NT times things have so changed that the
word most commonly used for buying (agoraz6)

means “to use the market-place,”’ and
38.In NI another (emporeuomai) points to a
Times class of traders or merchants who go
on, from city to city—‘‘continue” here
or there ‘‘and buy and sell” (Jas 4 13 AV).

I. Oriental Buying often a Tedious Process.—
Something of this is seen even in the fine examples
given above. Doubtless, however, eastern buyers
and sellers of
old haggled
over prices
with contro-
versy and
heat, even as
such buyers
do today.
Everywhere
you findthem
now keen for
bargains, but
“striking a
bargain” is a
tedious proc-
ess. They
grow warm
and then cool
off; they are
swept into
a frenzy by
some new
turn of the
strife and
then calm
down; but


the keeper sits in true oriental fashion—cross-
legged. He is never too busy with his accounts to
let the passerby escape his keen eye. He will give
up his nargileh any time to hail the stranger, dis-
play his goods, and coaxingly invite him to look at

the special beauty and quality of his articles.
All the shops or storerooms of the oriental village
line the “market,”’ which as a rule, is in the center
of the village, or on the chief street.


2. The This the Arabs call suk, sookh (cf
Market- Mt 20 3). Here the peasant is found
Place with his donkeys or camels laden with


food-stufis and country produce. The
gardener is there with his small fruits, and_ the
fisherman with his latest ‘catch.’ All the shop-
keepers, too,
are on or near
to this street
or market
center. ‘‘The
sookh in a
country vil-
lage,” says
J. Garrow
Duncan, “‘is
one of the
most inter-
esting sights
of modern
Egypt. For-
merly the
cattle and
dry - goods
markets were
uniformly
held in an
open space in
the center of
each village.
Now the gov-
ernmentcom-


soon the hag- pels them to
gling and ar- goto afenced
guing begin Gorne to Marger. enclosure out-
over again, side of the


becoming more heated and seemingly more hopeless
than ever, and often they become so excited as to
threaten to come to blows. But they don’t mean
it all, and at last they find a common basis; the
sale Js made with flattering compliments to one
another, and, if we may believe appearances, to the
rapturous delght of both parties to the bargain.
The native Oriental clearly takes pleasure in
such exercise, and sees great possibilities before
him. He graciously assures you at the outset that
the bargain shall be “just as you like it—just as
you like ii!’’ Is he not a servant of God? What
cares he for money? What he most wants is your
happiness and good will—that is the sweetest thing


in life—the love and favor of brothers. After a
while you offer a price. He says, ‘What is such a
trifle between us? Take it for nothing!” But he


is far from meaning it, and so the haggling begins
and the fire and heat of controversy follow—per-
haps for hours.
I. Shops and Bazaars.—Oriental shops are all
of a pattern—the workshop and the place to store
and sell goods is one and the same.
1. Oriental It is on the street, of course, and a
Shops platform, usually about 2 ft. high,
extends along the whole front. A
small door opens to a room back, which, as far as
such a thing is possible in the Orient, is private.
The goods, particularly the best articles, are dis-
played in front, somewhat as they are in the win-
dows of our department stores. In the center of
the platform is a sejadeh, a rug or mat. Upon this


town. At Belbeys the ordinary market is still held
in the center of the town, but the cattle market is
a mile away, across the canal. Asin a bazaar, such
as the traveler sees in Cairo, the merchants of the
various trades dispose themselves here in lanes, all
easily accessible from the main street, which is thus
left clear. On the left are the dealers in copper
utensils, busily plying their trade; next to them the
makers of sieves and riddles; then comes a large
space filled with pottery ware, and, close by, the
vegetable venders. There, jammed in between the
pottery space and the coppersmiths, is a lane of
gold- and silversmiths—the greatest sharks in the
market, their chief prey being the women. On the
other side of the main street are the shoemakers’
lane, the drapers’ lane, the grocers, the seed men, the
sweetmeat-sellers, fruit-merchants, dealers in glass
and carnelian jewelry and, lastly, the butchers’ stalls,
all arranged in lanes, and all equally ready to trade
or to enjoy a joke at each other's expense. There
is apparently little eagerness to trade—except when
a tourist appears.’ To one who is ignorant of the
value of his wares, the oriental dealer has no fixed
price. This is really regulated by the supposed
ignorance of the purchaser. If you choose, you
may give him what he asks, and be laughed at all
round the sookh. If you are wise, you will offer
something near to the real value and firmly refuse
to vary or haggle, and he will come to terms.
Professor Ehhu Grant tells of a shop in a Syrian
village—“a small room, 6 to 12 ft. square, with a
door, but no window, a counter or bench, and


535


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Buying
Byword


shelves and bins along the sides, where sugar, flour,
oil, matches, candies, spice, starch, coffee, rice,
dried figs, etc, were found, but no wrapping-paper.
The buyer must bring his own dish for liquids;
other things he carries away in the ample folds of
his skirt or in a handkerchief.” ‘Every consider-
able Turkish town,” says Van Lennep, “has a
bazaar, bezesten, or ‘arcade’: a stone structure,
open at both ends, a narrow alley or street running
through it, covered with an arched roof, the sides
pierced with openings or windows. This covered
street is lined on both sides with shops, narrow and
shallow. Dealers in similar goods and articles
flock together here, as do the artisans of like trades
in all oriental cities.” Such shops can yet be seen
in quite characteristic form in Damascus, Bagdad,
Cairo and Constantinople, as in ancient days they
were found in Babylon, Jerus and Noph (see Ezk
27 13-24).

IV. Buying on Credit.—The shop-keeper does
not always get cash from the native buyer. Dr.
Post found that debt was well-nigh universal in
Syria. The peasant sows “borrowed” seed, in
“borrowed” soil, plants and reaps with “‘borrowed”’
tools, and lives in a “borrowed” house. Even in
case of an abundant harvest the proportion of the
crop left by the landlord and the tax-gatherer
leaves the man and his family but the barest living
at best; at times he can barely pay the debt accu-
mulated in making and gathering in the crop, and
sometimes fails in doing this. In the rare cases
when the buyer pays cash for his purchases, he makes

payment, after a true oriental fashion,


Paying in coin of the most various or varying
Cash values, or in rings of copper, silver or
(Money) gold, such as are now common in the


market-places of China. This throws
light upon some Scriptural passages, as, for exam-
ple, Gen 43 21.22, where the language implies that
the “rings” or “strings of money” were weighed:
“Behold, every man’s money was in the mouth of
his sack, our money in full weight . .. . and other
moncy have we brought down in our hand to buy
food.” In Ezr 2 69, three kinds of currency are
mentioned, “darics of gold,”’ “pounds of silver,” and
“priests’ garments,” as having been given into the
treasury for the house of God. The term rendered
“daries of gold,’ ’édharkénim, stands for Pers coins,
which were similar to the Gr ‘“darics.’”’ The Persians
are said to have got the idea of coining from Lydia,
at the capture of Sardis, 564 BC. Early Lydian
coins were of electrum, but Croesus changed this to
coins of gold and silver, probably about 568 BC.
Examples of these ancient coins are now known
(Rice, Orientalisms in Bible Lands, 234). :

V. Open-Air Markets and Fairs.—In inland
towns and cities, markets and market-places are
often found in the open air, as well as under cover.
Great fairs are held thus on certain days of the
week. Several towns will agree upon different
days as market days and will offer in turn what-
ever they have for sale: lambs, sheep, cattle, horses,
mules, chickens, eggs, butter, cheese, vegetables,
fruits, and even jewelry and garments. In such a
case it is as if the whole town for the day was turned
into a market or exhibition, where everything is
for sale. On such days peasants and townspeople
come together in much larger numbers than is
ordinary, and mingle freely together. The day
thus chosen now, as in olden times, is often a holy
day—Friday, which is the Moslem Sabbath, or the
Christian Sunday, where Christians abound. Such


instances form a side-light on such passages as
Neh 13 15-22: “In those days saw I in Judah
some men treading winepresses on the sabbath,
and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses there-
with; as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner
of burdens, which they brought into Jerus on the
sabbath day: and I testified against them.” Morier
testifies that he attended similar fairs in Persia,
where were gathered sellers of all sorts of goods in
temporary shops or tents, such as sellers of barley
and flour, as it was at the gate of Samaria after the
famine (2 K 7). Layard also speaks of having
seen at the gate of the modern town of Mosul,
opposite the site of ancient Nineveh, shops for the
sale of wheat, barley, bread-stuffs, and drinks for
the thirsty. It will be recalled that it was “at the
gate’ that Boaz (Ruth 4 1-3) called the elders and
people to witness that he had bought all that was
Elimelech’s. For similar allusions see Job 6 4;
Prov 31 23; Ps 127 5; Lam 5 14. See Money;
TraDg, etc; also DB, DCG, ete.
Gro. B. Eacer

: BU, buz, BUZI, bi’zi, BUZITE, buz'it (12,
az):

(1) Second son of Nahor (Gen 22 21). The
word occurs again in Jer 25 23, by the side of
Dedan (Gen 10 7) and Tema (Gen 26 15), and
is probably, therefore, the name of a people living
in the neighborhood of Edom. Bitz and Hazo
(Gen 22 22) are probably the countries of Bdzu
and HazQ (the former described as full of snakes
cae ore which Esarhaddon invaded (KB,

aly :

(2) A Gadite (1 Ch 5 14) (TN, baz7), “an
inhabitant of Buz’), a title given to Elihu, the
fourth speaker in the Book of Job (Job 32 2).

Horace J. Wor

BY: In the sense of “against”? which survives
only in dialectal English (cf Wright, Dialect Dict.,
I, 470, for examples) is the AV rendering of the
dative éuav7$, emauté of 1 Cor 4 4 (ARV renders
this “against”). In classical Gr the same idiom
sunoida with dative=“‘be conscious” or ‘‘be cogni-
zant of” a thing.


BY AND BY: In the sense of ‘‘immediately”’ is the
AV tr of ééaurfs, exautés, of Mk 6 25 (ARV “‘forth-
with”); of ed@us, cuthis, Mt 13 21 (ARV “‘straight-
way’); of edédws, euthéds, Lk 17 7 (ARV “straight-
way’); 21 9 (ARV “immediately”). In Eng. lit.
this meaning is obsolete (cf ‘‘After you have dyned
and supte, laboure not by and by after, but make a
pause—the space of an howre or more with some
pastyme” (Babees Book, EETS, 247).


BYBLUS, bib’lus. See GEBAL.
BYPATHS, bi’pathz.
BYSSUS, bis’us. See Linen.


BYWAY, bi’wa (MD N, nethibhoth): Only in
Jes 6 6. Cf Jer 18 15; AV “paths” (RV “by-
paths’’).


BYWORD, bi’wird: MAW, shammah=“con-
sternation,” “astonishment,’”’ “waste,” ‘‘wonder-
ful language,” “object of remark” (Dt 28 37;
1K 97; 2Ch7 20); >WA, mashal, or D0,
mshél=“asatire,” “byword” (Job 17 6; Ps 44 14);
md, millah, or M22, millzh=“a topic,” “object
of talk,” “byword” (Job 30 9).


See Byway.


ee stousehold THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


536


CAB. See Kas.


CABBON, kab’on (7139, kabbon; XaBp4, Chabrd):
An unidentified place in the Shephelah of Judah
near Eglon (Josh 15 40). It is possibly the same
as Macupegna, which see.


CABIN, kab‘in (M30, hdnuyydth, “vaults”;
Jer 87 16 RV, “‘cells’): In the East the prison
often consisted of a pit (cf ‘‘dungeon-house’ RV
and ‘house of the pit”)? RVm) with vaulted cells
around it for the confinement of prisoners. The
word is probably a gloss. The phrase ‘and into the
Se seems superfluous after ‘into the dungeon-

ouse.


CABUL, ka’bul (2723, kabhal; B, XwBapacoper,
Chobamasomél; A, XaBorA awd aporepdv, Chabél
apo aristerén):

(1) A city on the boundary between Asher and
Zebulun (Josh 19 27). It corresponds to the
Chabolo of Jos ( Vita, 43, etc), and is represented
by the modern village Aa@bdal, about nine miles
S.E. of Acre.

(2) A district probably connected with (1), con-
taining 20 cities, given by Solomon to Hiram king
of Tyre (1 K 9 10 ff).


CADDIS, kad’is.
CADES, ka’déz.


CADES-BARNE, ka’déz bar’né.
BARNEA (Apoc).


See Ganvpis.
See Kepvusu (Apoc).


See Kanrsu~


CADHE, tsi-tha’ (X 7): The eighteenth letter
of the Heb alphabet, and as such employed in Ps
119 to designate the 18th part, every verse of
which begins with this letter. It is transliterated
in this Encyclopaedia as ¢ (almost is). It came
also to be used for the number 90. For name, etc,
see ALPHABET; TSADHE.


CAESAR, sézar (Kaicap, Kaisar): Originally
the surname of the Julian gens (thus, Caius Julius
Caesar); afterward a name borne by the Rom
emperors. In the NT the name is definitely ap-
plied to Augustus (Lk 2 1, ‘Caesar Augustus’),
to whom it belonged by adoption, and to Tiberius
(Lk 31, ‘Tiberius Caesar”; cf Mt 22 17.21).
The ‘‘Caesar’” to whom Paul appealed (Acts 25
11.12.21) was Nero. The form is perpetuated in
“Kaiser” and “Czar.”


CAESAREA,
Kaisareia):

(1) Caesarea Palestina (pal-es-ti’na). The an-
cient name in the Arab. form Kazsariyeh still clings
to the ruins on the sea shore, about 30 miles N. of
Jaffa. It was built by Herod the Great on the site
of Strato’s Tower (Ant, XIII, xi, 2; XV, ix, 6),
and the name Caesarea Sebaste was given it in
honor of Augustus (ib, XVI, v, 1). With his usual
magnificence Herod lavished adornments on the
city. He erected sumptuous palaces and_ public
buildings, a theater, and amphitheater with pros-
pect to the sea; while a spacious system of sewers
under the city secured cleanliness and_ health.
But ‘the greatest and most laborious work of all”
was a magnificent harbor “always free from the
waves of the sea,”’ which Jos says was not less than
the Piraeus: this however is an exaggeration. It


ses-a-ré’a, sé-za-ré’a (Kawrapela,


was of excellent workmanship, and all the more
remarkable because the place itself was not suit-
able for such noble structures. The whole coast
line, indeed, is singularly ill-fitted for the formation
of harbors. The mighty breakwater was constructed
by letting down stones 50X18X9 ft. in size into
twenty fathoms deep. The mole was 200 ft. wide.
Part was surmounted by a wall and towers. A
promenade and dwellings for mariners were also
provided. The work was done in ten or twelve
years. It became the residence of the Rom proc-
urator. It passed into the hands of Agrippa I;
and here he miserably died (Acts 12 19.23).
Here dwelt Philip the Evangelist (Acts 8 40;
21 8). To Caesarea Peter was sent to minister
to the Rom centurion Cornelius (Acts 10). Thrice
Paul passed through Caesarea (Acts 9 30; 18 22;
21 8); hither he was sent under guard from Jerus
to escape danger from the Jews (23 23); and
here he was imprisoned till his final departure for
Rome.

Riots between Gentiles and Jews in Caesarea
gave rise to the war (BJ, II, xiii, 7; xiv, 4f).
Terrible cruelties were practised on the Jews under
Felix and Florus. Here Vespasian was hailed
emperor by his soldiers. Titus here celebrated the
birthday of his brother Domitian by setting 2,500
Jews to fight with beasts in the amphitheater.
Eusebius was bishop of Caesarea (313-40 AD).
In 548 AD a massacre of the Christians was or-
ganized and carried out by the Jews and Samaritans.
The city passed into Moslem hands in 638. In the
time of the Crusades it fell, now to the Christians
and now to the Moslems; and was finally over-
thrown by Sultan Bibars in 1265 AD.

The cathedral stood on the site of a temple built
by Herod, where the ruins are seen today; as are
also those of two aqueducts which conveyed water
from Nahr ez-Zerka. The landward wall of the
Rom city was nearly 3 miles in length.

(2) Caesarea Philippi (fi-lip’I) (Ka:capela 4 bidir-
mov, Kaisareta hé Philippou). At the S.W. base of
Mt. Hermon, on a rocky terrace, 1,150 ft. above
sea-level, between Wady Khashabeh and Waddy
Za‘areh, lie the ruins of the ancient city. It was
a center for the worship of Pan: whence the name
Paneas, applied not only to the city, but to the
whole district (Ant, XV, x, 8). It is possible
that this may have been the site of ancient Baal-
hermon; while Principal G. A. Smith would place
Dan here (HGHL, 480). The district was given
by Augustus to Herod the Great 20 BC, by whom
a temple of white marble was built in honor of the
emperor. Paneas formed part of the tetrarchy of
Philip. He rebuilt and beautified the town, calling
it Caesarea as a compliment to Augustus, and
adding his own name to distinguish it from Caesarea
on the coast of Sharon (Ant, XVIII, ii, 1; BJ, II,
ix, 1). From Bethsaida Jesus and His disciples
came hither, and on the way Peter made his famous
confession, after which Jesus began to tell them of
His coming passion (Mt 16 13 ff; Mk 8 27 ff).
Some think that on a height near Caesarea Philippi
Jesus was transfigured. See TRANSFIGURATION,
Mount oF. Agrippa II renamed the town Ne-
ronias (Ani, XX, ix, 4). The ancient name how-
ever outlived both Caesarea and Neronias, and sur-
vives in the Arab. form Banids. The modern vil-
lage, built among the ruins, contains 350 imhabit-
ants. The walls and towers of which the remains
are seen date from Crusading times. The castle,
es-Subeibeh, crowns the hill behind the town, and
must have been a place of strength from the earliest


NICHES AND TABLETS AT BANIAS (CAESAREA PHILIPPI)


537


-times. Its possession must always have been
essential to the holding of the valley to the west.
Immediately to the north of the town, at the foot
of a steep crag, the fountain of the Jordan rises.
Formerly the waters issued from a cave, Maghdret
rds en-Neba‘, “‘cave of the fountain head,” now
filed up with débris. Two niches cut in the face
of the rock recall the idolatries practised here in
olden times. A shrine of el-Khudr stands on the
west of the spring. With the rich soil and plenti-
ful supplies of water, in a comparatively temperate
climate, average industry might turn the whole
district into a garden. As it is, the surroundings
are wonderfully beautiful. Ewina


CAESAR’S HOUSEHOLD, hous’hold (oi é
wis Kalcapos olklas, hoi ek tés Kaisaros oikias,
‘they that are of Caesar’s household,” Phil 4 22):
These words occur in the epistle which Paul wrote
from Rome near the end of his first imprisonment
there, probably in the end of 61 AD, to the church
in Philippi. They give us most interesting infor-
mation in regard to the progress made in the propa-
gation of the gospel in Rome.

It is necessary to ask, in the first place, What is
meant by the words “Caesar’s household’? and
when the meaning of that phrase is known, then
it is needful to discuss the question which rises
at once, In what way did the gospel enter Caesar’s
household? How is it that the gospel, which at
the first chiefly advanced among the poorer classes
in the Empire, made its way at a bound into the
very palace of the Caesars?

“Caesar's household’? meant the whole of the
persons, slaves and freemen alike, composing the

establishment of the emperor in his
1. What palace on the Palatine Hill at Rome.
Exactly Was The slaves of the imperial household
Caesar's formed a host in themselves. At a
Household? time when many a private citizen in

Rome owned several hundreds of
slaves, it need not surprise anyone to kuow that
there was a vastly larger number of such persons in
the palace of the emperor. This was a period
when the city of Rome and the court of the Caesars
swarmed with Asiatics, many of whom were Jews,
and many of them would bein slavery, or in employ-
ment, in the imperial court. It cannot be forgotten
that Poppaea, Nero’s shameless consort, was 2
proselyte to Judaism and that she continued to
advocate successfully the cause of the Jews before
the emperor as occasion arose.

These persons in the emperor’s palace would be
employed in every conceivable capacity as house-
hold servants, cooks, bathmen, gardeners, grooms,
kennel-keepers, porters, doorkeepers, messengers,
secretaries, amanuenses, teachers, librarians, archi-
tects, carpenters, shoemakers, and in all other
forms of service. Of course they were not all
slaves: there was a very large number of freemen.
The domus or familia Caesaris (represented by the
Gr otkia Kaisaros) included the whole of the impe-
rial household, the meanest slaves as well as the
most powerful courtiers. On the character and
constitution of this household we happen to possess
more information than perhaps on any other
department of social life in Rome. “In Rome
itself, if we may judge by these inscriptions, the
domus Augusta must have formed no inconsiderable
fraction of the whole population; but it comprised
likewise all persons in the emperor's service,
whether slaves or freemen, in Italy and even in the
provinces” (Lightfoot, Comm. on Phil, 171). In
the list of offices filled by members of the imperial
household were also such functions as those of
keepers of the wardrobe or of the plate-chest; even
the “tasters” formed a separate class of servants


fq . 7 i Cab
THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Cs Household


under a chief of their own. To belong to Caesar’s
household would secure even to the lowest grade
of slaves substantial privileges and immunities,
and would give a certain social importance, which
made this position a valued one. An office in the
emperor’s household, however mean, was thought
of so highly, that in the monumental inscriptions
such a fact is recorded with scrupulous care.
The next inquiry is, How did the gospel win its
way into Caesar’s household? And, first, there
is no need at all to suppose that the
2. How Did gospel was unknown, even in the
the Gospel palace, previous to the arrival of Paul
Enter into in Rome. For in that numerous house-
Caesar’s hold of the emperor there would be
Household? Jews, perhaps many of them; and all
the Jews were at that time filled with
Messianic hopes, and thus were ready to listen to


the gospel. As soon therefore as the gospel entered

* Rome, as soon as it was proclaimed
3. The in the many synagogues there, these
Gospel members of Caesar's household could
Known not fail, equally with the other mem-
There bers of the synagogue, to hear the
before story of Jesus Christ and of His cross
Paul’s and resurrection. A fact such as this,
Arrival that the gospel was known in Rome


previous to Paul’s arrival there, is quite
sufficient to account for the other fact, that the
gospel was known in Caesar’s palace.
But the propagation of the gospel received a
great impetus and help forward, when Paul arrived
in the city. For although he was a
4. The “bound prisoner,” his wrist fastened
Gospel Ad- by an iron chain, day and night, to the
vances in soldier who guarded him, he was able
the Palace to “preach the kingdom of God and
to teach those things which concern
the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man
forbidding him” (Acts 28 31. AV). And in this
way the gospel would again reach members of the
emperor’s household. Immediately after his arrival
in Rome, Paul had put himself in communication
with “the chief of the Jews’’—probably the rulers
of the synagogues in Rome—and many of them
came to him in his lodging and conferred with him.
Those chief men of the Jews expressed their great
desire to hear from him what his thoughts were in
regard to the hope of Israel (ver 22); and
naturally all the Jews in Rome would be equally
desirous to gain this information from a man of the
outstanding position and character of Paul. The
Jewish community in Rome had for years past
been permeated with the hope of the coming of
the Messiah; indeed successive rumors of false
Christs had kept them in a fever of excitement,
which, on one occasion at least, had broken out in
tumult, so strong was their hope of His speedy
appearing. Thus it would come about, as a matter
of course, that the gospel would reach all the Jews
in Rome, and from this knowledge of Jesus, whom
Paul proclaimed, the Jews who were in the service
of the emperor could not possibly be excluded.
But besides this, the fact that Paul was in daily
contact and intercourse with the soldiers who
guarded him could not fail to lead to
5. The the introduction of the gospel into
Gospel the regiment. And as part of the
Carried by Praetorian Guard was quartered in
Paul’s Sol- buildings on the Palatine Hill, attached
dier-Guard to the emperor’s palace there, there
was thus one other channel through
which the gospel would be made known to some of
those who resided in the palace of Caesar. Itis thus
seen that there is nothing at all surprising in the
fact that there were Christians in Caesar’s house-
hold.


Cage
Calah


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


538


Some of Lightfoot’s suggestions and conjectures
on this subject are exceedingly interesting. He
reviews the names of the persons to


6. Light- whom Paul seuds greeting in Rom 16
foot’s Con- and compares them with the names
jecture of persons who lived at that time, and


which have been found in monumental
inscriptions on the columbaria or places of sepulture
exhumed on the Appian Way. Many of the
occupants of those columbaria were freedmen or
slaves of the emperors, and were contemporaries
of Paul. The result of Lightfoot’s review of the
names is that he claims to have established a fair
presumption that among the salutations in Rom 16
some members at least of the imperial household
are included (Phil, 177).

In the household of the emperor there were neces-
sarily many persons of high rank. Perhaps we
may find a hint that the gospel had been embraced
by some in the higher grades of society, in such
strange facts as the execution of Titus Flavius
Clemens, a man of consular rank and cousin to the
emperor, and also in the fact that Flavia Domi-
tilla, the wife of Flavius Clemens, was banished by
Domitian, notwithstanding her near relationship
to him, for she was the emperor’s niece. Her
daughter Portia also shared in the same punish-
ment of exile. The charges brought against all
three were atheism and inclination to Jewish cus-
toms: surely such charges were sufficiently vague
and even self-contradictory. The opinion has
been suggested that probably these three persons
in the inner circle of the emperor’s kinsmen were
Christians.

Ramsay (St. Paul the Traveller, etc, 353), speak-
ing of Lightfoot’s conjectures, already referred to,

writes, ‘In all probability he is right in
7. Aristo- thinking that all the slaves of Aristo-
bulus and bulus (son of Herod the Great) and of
Narcissus Narcissus (Claudius’ favorite freed-

man) had passed into the imperial
household, and that members of their two familiae
are saluted as Christians by Paul (Rom 16 10 ff).”

The fact of greatest interest in the whole subject
is, that in society so profligate and corrupt as the
court of Nero, there were “saints,” Christian men
whose garments were clean and who kept themselves
unspotted from the world amid surroundings so
dreadful and in temptation so unceasing; that the
gospel was known and obeyed and loved, and
that hearts and lives were loyal to Christ even in the
palace of Nero Caesar. Joun RurHERFURD


CAGE, kaj candp, kelabh; vdaxh, phulaké):
The earliest known form of cage made to confine
a bird, for the pleasure of its song or the beauty of
its coloring, was a crude affair of willows or other
pliable twigs. Later cages were made of pottery,
and now they are mostly made of wire. References
in the Bible make it very clear that people were ac-
customed to confine in cages such birds as they
esp. prized for pets, or to detain them for market
purposes. James indicated that cages were common
when he wrote (3 7): “For every kind of beasts
and birds . . . . is tamed, and hath been tamed by
mankind.” In Job (41 5) we find these lines

“Wilt thou play with him as with a bird ?

Or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens ?’’
The only way to play with a bird is to confine it so
that it grows accustomed to you and thus loses
fear. Jeremiah compared the civil state of Judah
to a “cage [crate] full of birds” (6 27), “the houses
of the rich being stuffed with craftily-obtained
wealth and articles of luxury” (HDB). The sale
of sparrows as an article of food still continues in
the eastern markets. Jesus referred to this (Mt


10 29) and it was He who entered the temple and
overthrew ‘‘the seats of them that sold the doves”
(Mt 21 12). In Rev 18 2 we find a reference to
“a hold [AV “cage”] of every unclean and hateful
bird.” See also Ecclus 11 30.

Gene Srratton-PorTER

CAIAPHAS, ka’a-fas, ki/a-fas (Kaiadas, Kai-
dphas; Caiaphas=Kephas [cf Dods in Exposi-
tor’s Gr Test, I, 803], and has also been interpreted
as meaning ‘“‘depression”’): Caiaphas was the sur-
name of Joseph, a son-in-law of Annas (cf Jn 18 13),
who filled the post of high priest from about 18-86
AD, when he was deposed by Vitellius (cf Jos,
Ani, XVI, ii, 2; iv, 3). He is mentioned by Lk
as holding office at the time of John the Baptist’s
preaching in the wilderness (Lk 3 2).

Caiaphas took a leading part in the trial and
condemnation of Jesus. It was in his court or
palace that the chief priests (Sadducees) and Phari-
sees, who together constituted the Sanhedrin, as-
sembled “that they might take Jesus by subtlety,
and |all him” (cf Mt 26 3.4; Jn 11 49). The
regal claims of the new Messiah and the growing
fame of His works had made them to dread both the
vengeance of imperial Rome upon their nation,
and the loss of their own personal authority and
prestige (cf Jn 11 48). But Caiaphas pointed a
way out of their dilemma: let them bide their time
till the momentary enthusiasm of the populace was
spent (cf Mt 26 5), and then by the single sacrifice
of Jesus they could at once get rid of a dangerous
rival and propitiate the frowns of Rome (cf Jn
11 49.50; 18 14). The commentary of St. John
upon this (Jn 11 51.52) indicates how the death
of Jesus was indeed to prove a blessing not only for
Israel but also for all the children of God; but not
in the manner which the cold-blooded statecraft
of Caiaphas intended. The advice of the high
priest was accepted by the Sanhedrin (ver 53), and
they succeeded in arresting Jesus. After being led
“to Annas first’? (18 13), Jesus was conducted
thence in bonds to Caiaphas (ver 24). According to
Mt He was led immediately upon His arrest to
Caiaphas (Mt 26 57). Mk and Lk do not refer to
Caiaphas by name. His conduct at this preliminary
trial of Jesus (vs 57-68), its time and its procedure,
were almost entirely illegal from the standpoint of
the then existing Jewish law (cf Jesus Curis,
TriaAL or; and A. Taylor Innes, The Trial of
Jesus Christ). False witnesses were first called,
and when Jesus refused to reply to their charges,
Caiaphas asked of Him if He were “the Christ,
the Son of God” (ver 63). Upon Our Lord’s
answering ‘Thou hast said” (ver 64), Caiaphas
“rent his garments, saying, He hath spoken blas-
phemy: what further need have we of witnesses?
behold, now ye have heard the blasphemy” (ver
65). Upon this charge was Jesus found “worthy
of death” (ver 66). Caiaphas is also mentioned in
Acts 4 6 as being among those who presided over
the trial of Peter and John. Kerr


CAIN, kan (jp, kayin, “spear” or “smith,”
resembling in sound the root kanah, “get,” “ac-
quire,”’ Gen 4 1 RVm, but not necessarily derived
from that root; LXX Kaiv, Kdin):

(1) In Gen 4 1-24 Cain is the first son of Adam
and Eve. His birth is hailed as a manifestation of

Jeh’s help. He becomes “a tiller of


1. The the ground,” and brings to Jeh an
Scripture offering of the produce of the soil, his
Narrative brother Abel, the shepherd, bringing


_ at the same time the fat of the first-
born of his own flock. From Cain and from his
offering Jeh withholds the sign of acceptance which
he grants to Abel. That the ground of this differ-
ence of treatment is to be found (so He 11 4) in


539


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Cage
Calah


Cain’s lack of right disposition toward Jeh is shown
by his behavior (see AseL). Instead of humbling
himself he gives signs of strong indignation at Jeh’s
refusal to favor him. Under the just rebuke of Jeh
he hardens his heart and is further confirmed in
impenitence. His jealousy of Abel, unrepented
of, increases until it culminates in deliberate murder.
Deliberate, for in Gen 4 8 we must restore a clause
to the Heb text, all the ancient VSS bearing witness,
and read “And Cain said unto Abel his brother,
Let us go into the field,” ete. In the vain attempt
to conceal his crime Cain adds falsehood to his
other sins. He is cursed “from,” i.e. away from,
that soil upon which he poured out his brother’s
blood, and must become a fugitive and a wander-
er, far from the immediate presence of Jeh. Al-
though his remonstrance against the severity of his
sentence displays no genuine contrition, still Jeh
in pity appoints a “sign” for his protection. Cain
takes up his abode in the land of Nod (‘‘wander-
ing”), and there builds a city and becomes the
ancestor of a line which includes Jabal, forefather
of tent-dwelling cattle-keepers; Jubal, forefather
of musicians; Tubal-cain, forefather of smiths;
and Lamech, like Cain, a man of violence. In
Cain’s character we see “‘a terrible outburst of self-
will, pride, and jealousy, leading to a total and
relentless renunciation of all human ties and affec-
tion.” ‘Among the lessons or truths which the
narrative teaches may be instanced: the nature of
temptation, and the manner in which it should be
resisted; the consequences to which an unsubdued
temper may lead a man; the gradual steps by which
in the end a deadly crime may be committed; the
need of sincerity of purpose lest our offering should
be rejected; God’s care for the guilty sinner after
he has been punished; the interdependence upon
one another of members of the human race; and
the duties and obligations which we all owe to each
other” (Driver). In He 114 Cain’s spiritual
deficiency is pointed out; 1 Jn 3 12 observes his
envy and jealousy, as “of the wicked one,” and
Jude ver 11 makes him a very type of the ungodly.
With few and bold strokes the story of Cain as it
stands paints for us the character of the first of
murderers and the scene of his detec-

2. Difficul- tion and condemnation. To the re-
ties ligious purpose of the narrative _all
other things are made tributary. But

if we cannot refrain from putting the familiar
question, Who was Cain’s wife? it is also impossible
upon close study of Gen 4, as it stands, to avoid
asking what was the nature of the sign of Jeh’s
acceptance (ver 4), or of the “sign’’ appointed
for Cain (ver 15); or what we are to think of the
introduction in the midst of the narrative, without
explanation, of such important institutions as sac-
rifice (vs 3.4) and blood-revenge (ver 14); who
were the persons of whom Cain stood in fear (ver
14); who inhabited the city he built (ver 17);
how the wanderer and fugitive could become the
city-builder; and why the shepherd life should be
represented as beginning with Abel (ver 2) and
again with Jabal (ver 20); also whether the narrator
means that not only the collection of men in cities
(ver 17), but also animal husbandry, music and
metal-working (ver 20-22) are to be looked upon
with disfavor as having sprung from Cain or from
his descendants? Most of these questions find
their answers in one consideration: the narrative Is
not exhaustively complete and is not intended to
beso. That a large body of racial traditions existed,
from which, with the severest condensation, the
author of Gen selected his material, is the conclu-
sion forced by close examination of the Gen narra-
tive and comparison of it with the most ancient
extant traditions. “In Gen 4 these old stories


are not told for their own sakes. The incomplete-

ness and the difficulties left unsolved do not allow

this assumption to be made. They form simply the

material foundation, to which higher

3. Critical ideas and doctrines are attached”
Theories (Dillmann).

Without going outside the Scripture


text we may find strong evidence that the narrative
under consideration is founded in part upon ancient


sources. Let the line of Cain (4 17-24) be compared
with that of Seth (§ 1-29):
CAINITE SETHITE


Adam (‘'man’’) eau (*man’’)


e
Enosh (‘‘man"’)


Cain enan
Enoch Mahalalel
Irad Jared
Mehujael Enoch
Methushael Methuselah
Lamech Lamech
Jahal, Jubal, Tubai-cain Noah


Shem, Ham, Japhet


The Heh forms of the names show even more clearly
that Cain =Kenan, Irad=Jared, Methushael =Methuse-
lah; a single transposition, that of the first and third.
names after Cain, brings the two, Enochs together,
and likewise the similar names Mehujael and Mahalalel.
Thus we have six names nearly or quite identical; seven
ancestors in one list and ten in the other, ending in both
cases with a hranchiug into three important characters.
Resemhlances equally certain, though not by any means
so obvious, exist between the names in this double list
and the names of the ten kings of Bahylonia who reigned
before the Flood, as the latter are given_by Berosus,
the Bahylonian historian of the 3d cent. BC (see Skin-
ner, Driver, Sayce as helow). Thus one source of which
the author in Gen 4 made use appears to have been an
ancient list in genealogical form, hy which the first
of mankind was linked with the heginnings of civilized
institutions and arts. Another part of his material
was the story of a brother’s murder of a hrother (4
1-16). Many maintain at this point that the narrative
must be based upon the doings of tribes, rather than of
individuals. It is true that not seldom in the OT
tribal history is related under individval names (cf
Gen 49; Jgs 1, and the tables of trihes in Gen 25 1-4;
36); yet the trihe referred to can hardly be the Kenites
of the OT, who appear as the close allies of Israel, not
esp. hloodthirsty or revengeful, and haunted by no
shadow of early crime against a hrother tribe (see
Kenitses). The indications in 4 1-16 of a developed
state of society and a considerable population may
go to show that the narrative of the murder was not
originally associated with the sons of the first man.
Thus there is room to suppose that in the process of
condensation and arrangement Cain, son of Adam;
Cain, the murderer; and Cain, city-huilder and head
of a line of patriarchs, have been made one. The
critical conclusions here epitomized are indeed reached
by a delicate and difficult process; but it is asserted in
their favor that they make possible the removal of
difficulties which could be explained in no other manner.
The question which will arise with many, What theory
of inspiration can he held consistently with the applica-
tion of such critical processes? is dealt with at length
by Bor modern commentators (see Criticism; INsPIRA-
TION).


Lrrzratrurs.—A. Dillmann, Genesis (ET); 8. R. Driver,
Genesis (‘‘Westminster Commentaries’’); H. E. Ryle,
Early Narratives of Genesis; J. Skinner, Genests (ICC);
A. H. Sayce, ‘‘ Archaeology of the Book of Genesis,'” Expos
T, August, 1910, June, 1911.

(2) In Josh 15 57, RV Karn, which see. See
also KEnrIrTEs. F. K. Farr


CAINAN, ka’nan, ké-I’nan (Kaivav, Kaindn):

(1) Gr form of Kenan (Lk 3 37): also AV form
in OT (except 1 Ch 1 2).

(2) A son of Arphaxad (Lk 3 36), omitted in
Gen 10 24; 11 12.


CAKE. See Breap.


CALAH, kala (M23, kalah; Xédax, Chdlach, also
Chdlak or Kdlach; in Assyr Kalhu, Kalha, Kalhi,
Kalah): The name of one of the great cities of
Nimrod (Gen 10 11), or rather, Asshur (text),
which formed, with Nineveh, Resen between Calah
and Nineveh, and Rehoboth-Ir (probably lying
more to the N.), Asshur’s great fourfold capital.
The meaning of the name is unknown, but if a
Sumerian etymology be accepted, some such sig-


Calah
Calendar


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


540


nification as ‘Holy Gate’’ (Ka-lah) or the like—
a parallel to Ka-dingira= Bab-ili, “Gate of God”
(see Baset, Basyton)—might be regarded as
possible.

As Nineveh is mentioned by Hammurabi, who
reigned about 2000 BC, it is clear that that city

was already, in his time, an important
1. Date of place; and the passage in Gen 10
the City’s 11 implies, though it does not actually
Foundation prove, that Calah was of about the

same period. The Assyr king ASssur-
nasir-Apli (cir 885 BC) states that Calah was made
(probably =founded) by Shalmaneser (i) cir 1800
BC, but this is possibly simply an indication that
he rebuilt it. Later on, the site seems to have
become neglected, for ASSur-nagir-Apli states that,
. the city having fallen into ruin, he
2. Early rebuilt it, and it thereafter became
References practically the capital of the country,
to the City for he not only reérected or restored

its shrines and temples—the temple of
Ninip, with the god’s image; the temple of “the
Lady of the Land,” and the temples of Sin, Gula,
and Enlil—but he also received tribute there.
Among his other works may be mentioned the
water-channel Pati-hengala, and the plantations,
whose fruits, apparently, he offered to the god
ASéur (Asshur), and the temples of the city. It also
became a favorite place of residence for the later
kings of Assyria, who built palaces, and restored
the city’s temples from time to time.

Calah occupied the roughly triangular tract
formed by the junction of the Greater Zab (r.)
with the Tigris (1.), which latter
stream auciently flowed rather closer
to the western wall than it does now,
and would seem to have separated the
small town represented by Selamiyeh from the
extensive ruins of Calah, which now bear the name
of Nimroud. The main ruins are situated on a
large, rectangular platform on the bank of the old
bed of the Tigris. The most prominent edifice

was the great Temple-tower at the


3. Its
Position


4. The N.W. corner—a_ step-pyramid (zigq-
Temple- qurat) like the Bab towers, constructed
Tower of brick faced with stone, and rising,


in stages, to a height of cir 126 ft.,
probably with a sanctuary at the top (see BaBEL,
Tower or). A long vault occupies the basement-
stage of this structure, and caused Sir A. H. Layard,
its discoverer, to regard it as the probable traditional
tomb of Ninus, under whose shadow the tragedy
of Pyramis and Thisbe took place. Ovid (Metam.
iv.98) describes the tomb of Ninus as having been
situated “at the entrance of Nineveh,” and, if this
be correct, Calah must have been regarded as the
southern portion of that great city, which, on a
preaching journey, may well have taken three days
(Jon 8 3) to traverse, provided Khorsabad was
in reality its northern extremity.
The platform upon which the temple-tower of
Calah was situated measures cir 700400 yds.,
and the portion not occupied by that
5. The erection afforded space for temples
Temples and palaces. In the center of the E.
and Palaces side of this platform lie the remains
of the palace of ASSur-nasir-Apli, the
chambers and halls of which were paneled with
sculptured and inscribed slabs, the principal door-
ways being flanked with finely carved winged and
human-headed lions and bulls. In the S.E. corner
are the remains of the palace of Esarhaddon, built,
at least in part, with material taken from the palace
of Tiglath-pileser IV, which was situated in the
8. portion of the platform. The remains of this
last are, as a result of this spoliation, exceedingly
meager. The S.W. corner of the platform contains


the remains of the last palace built on the site—a
very inferior erection constructed for Asgur-étil-
flani (cir 626 BC). One of the temples on this
platform was that dedicated to Ninip, situated at
the §.W. corner of the temple-tower. The left-
hand entrance was flanked by man-headed lions,
while the sides of the right-hand entrance were
decorated with slabs showing the expulsion of the
evil spirit from the temple—a spirited sculpture
now in the Nimroud Gallery of the British Museum.

On the right-hand side of the entrance


6. The was an arch-headed slab with a repre-
Temple of sentation of King ASSur-nasir-Apli in
Ninip low relief, standing in the usual con-


ventional attitude. Before it stood a
stone tripod altar, implying that Divine honors were
paid to this king. (Both these are now in the
British Museum.) The remains of another temple
were found to the E. of this, and there are traces of
further buildings at other points of the platform.

The slabs from A&Sur-nasir-Apli’s palace show
this king’s warlike expeditions, but as descriptive
lettering is wanting, the campaigns cannot be
identified. Notwithstanding this disadvantage,
however, they are of considerable importance,
showing, as they do, incidents of his various
campaigns—the crossing of rivers, the march of his
armies, the besieging of cities, the reception of
tribute, the life of the camp and hunting the lion
and the wild bull. The reliefs from the temples,
which are much larger and finer, show the king


engaged in various religious cere-
7. The monies and ritual acts, and are among
Sculptures the most striking examples of Assyr
of ASSur- sculpture. When looking at these
nasir-Apli works of art, the student’s thoughts


go back with thankfulness to those
Assyrians who, through the generations, cared for
and preserved these monuments, though the van-
dalism of Esarhaddon in dressing off the slabs of
Tiglath-pileser IV to carve his own bas-reliefs
thereon will ever be regretted.

The site is described as being 14 miles 8. of Kou-
yunjik (Nineveh) and consists of an inclosure

formed of narrow mounds still having
8. The City the appearance of walls. Traces of
Walls no less than 108 towers, the city’s

ancient defences, are said to be visible
even now on the N. and E., where the walls were
further protected by moats. The area which the
walls inclose—about 2,3312,095 yds.—would con-
tain about 1,000 acres.

Layard, Nineveh and Its Remains, and Nineveh
and Babylon, still remain the standard works upon
the subject, and his Monuments of Ninevch gives
the most complete collection of the sculptures
found. See also George Smith, Assyrian Dis-
coveries, and Rassam, Asshur and the Land of Nim-
rod. T. G. Pincues


CALAMITY, ka-lam‘i-ti (TS, 'adh, “a load’ or
“purden” under which one is crushed, hence ‘“mis-
fortune’; M50, hayyadh, TI, hawwah, “fall,”
“ruin,” the latter word used only in pl.; 97, ra‘,
“evil in essence,” hence “adversity,”’ once only,
Ps 141 5, RV “wickedness”): Purely an OT term,
signifying adversities—natural, but more often
those that result from wickedness or moral evil.
Various kinds: (1) folly, “a foolish son” (Prov 19
13); (2) disease, poverty, bereavement, as in Job’s
experience (Job 6 2; 3013); (3) persecution
(2 8 22 19; Ps 18 18); (4) Divine retribution and
judgment (Dt 32 35); cf ruin of the wicked (Prov
1 26, also 27 RV for “destruction” AV); (5) the
devastation of war (Jer 46 21); (6) adversities of any
kind (Prov 27 10). Dwicut M. Prarr


541


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Calah
Calendar


CALAMOLALUS, kal-a-mol’a-lus, -mol-d’lus (A,
Kadapwddros, Kalamdéldlos, B, Kadapwxdados, Kala-
mokdlos): This name is corrupt (1 Esd 6& 22).
It has evidently arisen through combining the
two names Lod and Hadid, in the lists of Eazr
(2 33) and Neh (7 37).


CALAMUS, kal’a-mus. See Resp.


CALCOL, kal’kol, CHALKOL, kal’kol (5393,
kalkol): Mentioned in 1 K 4 381 as one of the wise
men with whom Solomon was compared. The better
orthography is Calcol which AV gives for the same
name in 1 Ch 2 6. In the former passage, Calcol
is the son of Mahol, while in the latter he is called
the son of Zerah of the tribe of Judah, and a brother
of Heman and Ethan.


CALDRON, kél‘drun (the rendering of MTP,
kallahath, WO, sir, TI, dadh, JOIX, ’aghméin):
Kallahath is found only in 18 214; Mic 8 3.
It is a pot for cooking, of undefined size and char-
acteristics, in the former passage for sanctuary use,
in the latter for domestic. Sir is tr’ caldron in
Jer 1 13(RV); 562 18f(AV); Ezk 11 3.7.11. It
was distinctly a large pot, employed both for do-
mestic use and in the sanctuary. Ddédh is tr?
caldron only in 2 Ch 35 13. It was also a pot
for cooking. ’Aghmén is tr4 caldron by AV in Job
41 20, but it is a mistranslation; RV correctly has
“rushes,’” Grorce Ricker BERRY


CALEB, ka’leb (aS>, kalébh; in the light of the
cognate Syr and Arab. words, the meaning is not
“dog,” which is 239, kelebh,in Heb, but “raging
with canine madness”; XadéB, Chaléb): As a person,
Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, occurs in the story
of the spies (Nu 18 ff). He represents the tribe
of Judah as its prince (Nu 13 6; cf ver 2). While
the majority of the men sent out by Moses bring
back evil report, Caleb and Hoshea, or Joshna, the
son of Nun, are the only ones to counsel the inva-
sion of the promised land (ib, 30; 14 6ff). Ac-
cordingly, these two alone are permitted to survive
(14 38; 32 12). Upon the conquest and dis-
tribution of the land by Joshua, Caleb reminds the
leader of the promise made by God through Moses,
and so he receives Hebron as an inheritance for
himself and his descendants (Josh 14 6-15), after
driving out from thence the Anakim who were in
possession of the city (15 14). In the || account in
Jgs 1 8 ff, the dispossession of the Can inhabitants
of Hebron is ascribed to Judah (ver 10). Both
accounts agree in mentioning Othniel, a younger
brother of Caleb, as the conqueror of Kiriath-
sepher or Debir; as his reward he receives the hand
of Achsah, Caleb’s daughter. Achsah is given by
her father a portion of the Southland; but, upon
request, she obtains a more fruitful locality with
upper and nether springs (Josh 165 15-19; Jgs
1 12-15).

In 1 y 30 14 Caleb is undoubtedly the name of
a clan which is, moreover, differentiated from Judah.
Modern scholars therefore assume that Caleb was
originally an independent clan which in historical
times merged with Judah. + As Caleb is called the
son of Kenaz (Jgs 1 13) or the Kenizzite (Nu 32
12), it is further believed that the Calebites were
originally associated with an Edomite clan named
Keuaz (Gen 36 11), and that they entered their
future homes in the southern part of Pal from the
south. Their migration up north would then be
reflected in the story of the spies. ;

In the genealogical tables (1 Ch 2), Caleb is
made a descendant of Judah through his father
Hezron. He is the brother of Jerahmeel, and the


“father” of Hebron and of other towns in Judah.
(Chelubai, ver 9, is apparently identical with Caleb.)
Nabal, with whom David had an encounter, is
called a Calebite, i.e. one belonging to the house of
Caleb (1 S 26 8). Max L. Marconis


CALEB-EPHRATHAH, ka'leb ef’ra-thi (AV
Caleb-ephratah, -cf’ra-ti, MMIPR 33D, kalebh
’ephrathah): The place where Hezron died (1 Ch
2 24). Many scholars, however, read with the
LXX “after the death of Hezron, Caleb came unto
Ephrath, the wife of Hezron, his father.’”’ The name
does not occur elsewhere, and none resembling it
has been recovered.


CALENDAR, kal’en-dar (Lat calendarium, ‘an
account book,” from calendae, “day on which ac-
counts were due’): The Heb or Jewish calendar
had three stages of development: the preéxilic, or
Bib.; the postexilic, or Talmudic; and the post-
Talmudic. The first rested on observation merely,
the second on observation coupled with calculation,
and the third on calculation only. In the first
period the priests determined the beginning of each
month by the appearance of the new moon and
the recurrence of the prescribed feasts from the
vernal and autumnal equinoxes. Thus the month
Abib (abhibh), the first month of the year accord-
ing to the Levitical law, in which the Passover was
to be celebrated, was determined by observation
(Ex 12 2; Dt 16). After the exile more accurate
methods of determining the months and seasons
came into vogue, and calculation was employed to
supplement and correct observations and the
calendar was regulated according to the Bab system,
as is evidenced by the names of the months which
are derived from it. In later times the calendar
was fixed by mathematical methods (see art.
“Calendar” in Jew Enc). The difficulty of ascer-
taining the first day of the new moon by observa-
tion, in the early period, led to the celebration of
two days, as seems to be indicated in 1 S 20 27.
We have only four names of months belonging to
the preéxilic period, and they are Phoen. Of these
Abib (abhibh) was the first month, as already indi-
cated, and it corresponded to Nisan (nisdn) in the
later calendar. It was the month in which the
Exodus occurred and the month of the Passover
(Ex 18 4; 23 15; 34 18; Dt 16 1).

The 2d month of this calendar was Ziv (z7w)
(1 K 6 1.37); Ethanim (éthdnim) was the 7th
(1 K 8 2), corresponding to TJishri of the later
calendar, and Bul (bul) the 8th, corresponded to
Marhesvan (marheshwan) (1 K 6 38). There were
of course other month names in this old calendar,
but they have not come down to us. These names
refer to the aspects of the seasons: thus Abib (’a-
bhibh) means grain in the ear, just ripening (Lev 2
14; Ex 9 31); Ziv (ziw) refers to the beauty and
splendor of the flowers in the spring; Eithanim
(éhantm) means perennial, probably referring to
living fountains; and Bal (bul) means rain or
showers, being the month when the rainy season
commenced. The full calendar of months used
in the postexilic period is given in a table accom-
panying this art. The names given in the table
are not all found in the Bible, as the months are
usually referred to by number, but we find Nisan
in Neh 21 and Est 37; Sitwan in Est 8 9;
Tammaz in Ezk 8 14, although the term as here
used refers to a Phoen god after whom the month
was named; ‘#ldl occurs in Neh 6 15; Kisléw
(ARV “chislev”) in Neh 1 1 and Zec 7 1; | Teb-
héth in Est 2 16; Shebhat in Zec 1 7 and ’Adhar
in Ezr 6 15 and several times in Est. These
months were lunar and began with the new moon,
but their position in regard to the seasons varied


Calf
Calf, Golden


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


542


somewhat because of the intercalary month about
every three years.

The year (17, shdnah) originally began in the
autumn, as appears from Ex 23 16 and 34 22, where
it is stated that the feast of Ingathering should be
at the end of the year; the Sabbatic year began,
also, in the 7th month of the calendar year (Lev
25 8-10), indicating that this had been the begin-
ning of the year. This seems to have been a reck-
oning for civil purposes, while the year beginning
with Nisén was for ritual and sacred purposes.
This resulted from the fact that the great feast of
the Passover occurred in this month and the other
feasts were regulated by this, as we see from such
passages as Ex 23 14-16 and Dt 16 1-17. Jos (Ant,
I, iii, 8) says: ‘Moses appointed that Nisan, which


is the same with Xanthieus, should be the first


Hesrew
NGSON seta cata he ces 30% XAanthikés ....
AYER hose Soe ae “EN Artemisios ....
StWGEN 00s eee ee a) Datsios........
TAMMUZ .. ccc cece Tan Pdnemos......
MA DIS Dt aX L608... 6.6.04.
UTI Nc et eee DION Gorpiatos.....
Tishtt. oo cece “on Huperberetatos
Marheshwan....... VOT Dios decp ucts
Rigleins sit tos fe 1209 Apellatos......
Tébhéth... 0. cece ee man Audunatos....
SRBREE s cinder ntewes roa) Perttios.......
AdhGar. oc eee IN Dusiros.......


words is uncertain, but the former has a close || in
the Arab. ‘ijl, “calf.” Par is generally used of
animals for sacrifice, ‘@ghel, in that and other senses.
‘Eghel is used of the golden calves and frequently
in,the expression, ‘éghel marbek, “fatted calf,” or
“calf of the stall,” the latter being the literal mean-
ing (1 S 28 24; Jer 46 21; Am 6 4; Mal 4 2).

At the present day heef is not highly esteemed by the
people of the country, but mutton is much prized. In
the houses of the peasantry itis common to see a young
ram being literally stuffed with food, mulberry or other
leaves being forced into its mouth by one of the women,
who then works the sheep’s jaw with one hand. The
animal has a daily hath of cold water. The result is de-
liciously fat and tender mutton. Suchan animal is called
ama‘laf. From the same root we have ma'‘laf, ‘‘manger,"’
suggestive of the Heb marbék, ‘‘stall.’’


The calf for sacrifice was usually a male of a year
old. Other references to calves are: “to skip like


GREEK

hes Bavdicds March-April

hia *Apreplovos April-May

eaten’ Aaleios May-June

ianataites Tidvenos June-July

dagen AGos July-August
RABAT Topmiatos August-September
wea: ‘YrepBeperaios September—October

ee Aios October-November

eee )AmedAaios November- December
vines s -Adduvaios December-January

oS. ota Tlepirios January-February
a ea Avborpos February-March


Cauenpar or Montas Usep 1n THE Postexitic PERIOD.


month of their festivals, because he brought them
out of Egypt in that month; so that this month
began the year as to all solemnities they observed
to the honor of God, although he preserved the
original order of the months as to selling and buying
and other ordinary affairs.” A similar custom is
still followed in Turkey, where the Mohammedan
year is observed for feasts, the pilgrimage to Mecca
and other sacred purposes, while the civil year
begins in March O:5.

The year was composed of 12 or 13 months ac-
cording as to whether it was ordinary or leap year.
Intercalation is not mentioned in Scripture, but it
was employed to make the lunar correspond ap-
proximately to the solar year, a month being added
whenever the discrepancy of the seasons rendered
it necessary. This was regulated by the priests,


who had to see that the feasts were duly observed
at the proper season. The intercalary month was
added after the month of ’Adhar and was called
the second ’Adhar (130, shéni, VIN), wa-ddhar,
“and Adar’’), and, as already indicated, was added
about once in 3 years. More exactly, 4 years out
of every 11 were leap years of 13 months (Jew
Enc, art. ‘‘Calendar’’), this being derived from the
Bab calendar. If, on the 16th of the month
Nisan, the sun had not reached the vernal equinox,
that month was declared to be the second ’Adhkar
and the following one Nisan. This method, of
course, was not exact and about the 4th cent. of
our era the mathematical method was adopted.
The number of days in each month was fixed, seven
having 80 days, and the rest 29. When the inter-
calary month was added, the first "Adhar had 30
and the second 29 days. H. Porter


CALF, kif (539, ‘éghel; 1B, par, or "8, par,
often rendered ‘“‘bullock’’): The etymology of both


a calf” (Ps 29 6); “the calf and the young lion and
the fatling together” (Isa 11 6); “a habitation
deserted . . . . there shall the calf feed, and there
shall he lie down, and consume the branches there-
of” (Isa 27 10). See Carrie.

LFRED Exy Day


A

CALF, kaf, GOLDEN, gol’d’n:
I. Tue Name

II. Ancient Catr Worsurp

1. Narrative of_Aaron's Golden Calf

2. Jeroboam’s Golden Calves


III. Arrivvpe oF Evisan to rar Butt SymBous

IV. ArtivvupE or Amos anv Hosra To tar BULL
SYMBOLS

Lirerature


I. The Name.—The term 5}¥, ‘aghel, is the or-
dinary Heb name for a male calf and is as flexible
as the Eng. name, applying to any animal from one
a year old (Mic 6 6) or perhaps younger (Lev 9 3;
12 6) to one three years old (Gen 16 9; ef Jer 34
18.19). It has been thought that the habitual use
of this diminutive term for the golden bulls which
Aaron and Jeroboam set up—esp. as it is twice
made feminine (Hos 10 5; 18 2)—was intended
to indicate their small size and thus to express con-
tempt for them. This however, though plausible,
is by no means certain. It was not their size which
made these bulls contemptible in the eyes of the
prophets, and besides there were no life-size bulls
of molten gold in any surrounding countries so far
as known. The reference to female calves that were
kissed (13 2), presumably at Bethel, may refer not
to the worship of the bulls, but to their female
counterparts, since in all other countries such
female deities invariably accompanied the bull gods.
Bethel may be esp. mentioned because it was the
“king’s sanctuary” (Am 7 18) or because of the
multitude of altars and high places found there
(Hos 10 8; ef 8 11; Am 5 26). False worship
is also mentioned in connection with Jeroboam’s
apostasy, at Gilgal and Gilead (Hos 4 15; 12 11;


543


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Calf
Calf, Golden


Am 4 4; 5 5), Samaria (Hos 8 6; 10 5; 13 2.16);
and Beersheba (Am 6 5; 8 14) where no bulls had
been set up by Jeroboam so far as stated. That
these places receive more condemnation than Dan
—which is explicitly mentioned in only one passage
(8 14) though it was a chicf center of the bull
worship (1 K 12 30)—may be due to the fact that
the worship of the female deity was the more popu-
lar. This was certainly true in neighboring coun-
tries and also in other cities in Pal, as has recently
been proved by the excavations (see below).

Il. Ancient Calf Worship.—The origin of animal
worship is hidden in obscurity, but reverence for
the bull and cow is found widespread among the
most ancient historic cults. Even in the prehis-
toric age the influence of the bull symbol was so
powerful that it gave its name to one of the most
important signs of the Zodiac, and from early his-
toric times the horns of the bull were the familiar
emblem of the rays of the sun, and solar gods were
very commonly represented as bull-gods (Jensen,
Kosmologie, 62-90; Winckler, Altorientalische For-
schungen, 1901-5, passim; Jeremias, Das Alter der
bab. Astronomie, 1909, passim). The Egyptians,
close neighbors of the Hebrews, in all eras from that
of the Exodus onward, worshipped living bulls at
Memphis (not Mendes, as #B) and Heliopolis as
incarnations of Ptah and Ra, while one of the most
elaborate rituals was connected with the life-size
image of the Hathor-cow (Naville, Deir el Bahari,
Part I [1907], 163-67), while the sun was revered as
the “valiant bull” and the reigning Pharaoh as “Bull
of Bulls.’ But far more important in this connec-
tion is the fact that ‘calf’ worship was almost if
not quite universal among all the ancient Sem
peoples. If the immediate ancestors of Abraham
did not revere this deity, they were certainly quite
unlike their relatives, the Babylonians, among
whom, according to all tradition, they lived before
they migrated to Pal (Gen 11 28.30; Jos, Ant,
I, vi, 5), for the Babylonians revered the bull as
the symbol of their greatest gods, Anu and Sin and
Marduk—the ideograph of a young bullock forming
a part of the latter’s name—while Hadadrimmon,
an important Amorite deity, whose attributes re-
markably resemble those of Jeh (see Ward, AJSL,
XXV, 175-85; Clay, Amurru [1909], 87-89), is pic-
tured standing on the back of a bull. In Phoenicia
also the bull was a sacred animal, as well as in
northern Syria where it ranked as one of the chief
Hittite deities, its images receiving devout worship
(see further, Sayce, Enc of Rel. and Ethics, s.v.
“Bull’), Among all these peoples the cow goddess
was given at least equal honor. In Babylonia the
goddess Ishtar has the cow for her symbol on very
ancient seal cylinders, and when this nude or hali-
nude goddess appears in Pal she often stands on a
bull or cow (see William Hayes Ward, Cylinders and
Other Ancient Oriental Seals), and under slightly dif-
ferent forms this same goddess is revered in Arabia,
Moab, Phoenicia, Syria and elsewhere, while among
the Sem Canaanites the bull was the symbol of Baal,
and the cow of Astarte (see particularly Barton,
Hebraica, IX, 133-63; X, 1-74, and Semitic Ori-
gins, ch vii; Driver, “Astarte’” in DB). Recent
excavations in Pal have shown that during all eras
no heathen worship was as popular as that of
Astarte in her various forms (see 8. A. Cook, Rel.
of Ancient Pal, 1909). That she once is found
wearing ram’s horns (PEFS [1903], 227) only
reveals her nature more clearly as the goddess of
fertility. Her relation to the sacred fish at Car-
nion in Gilead and to the doves of Ascalon, as well
as to female prostitution and to Nature’s “resur-
rection” and fruitage, had been previously well
known, as also her relation to the moon which
governs the seasons. Is there any rational motif


which can account for this widespread ‘‘calf’’ wor-
ship? Is it conceivable that this cult could so
powerfully influence such intelligent and rather
spiritually- minded nations as the Egyptians and
Babylonians if it were wholly irrational and con-
tained no spiritual content? And is there no rational
explanation behind this constant fusion of the deity
which controls the breeding of cattle with the deity
which controls vegetation? How did the bull
come to represent the “corn spirit,” so that the
running of a bull through the corn (the most de-
structive act) came to presage good crops; and how
did the rending of a bull, spilling his life blood on the
soil, increase fertility? (See Fraser, Golden Bough,
II, 291-93, 344.) The one real controlling motif of all
these various representations and functions of the
“calf”? god may be found in the ancient awe, esp.
among the Semites, for the Mystery of Life. This
seems to offer a sufficient reason why the bull,
which is a most conspicuous example of life-giving
power, should be so closely connected with the
reproductive rocesses of the animal and vegetable
kingdoms and also with the sun, which from earliest
historic times was considered as preéminently the
“giver of life.’ Bull worship was not always an
exhibition of gross animalism, but, certainly in
Bible times, often represented a concept which was
the product of reflection upon one of the deepest
mysteries of Nature. Few hymns in Egypt or
Babylon express higher spiritual knowledge and
aspiration than those addressed to the bull gods or
to others honored with this title, e.g. this one to the
god Sin of Ur, the “heifer of Anu,” “Strong young
bull, with strong horns,... . with beard of lapis-
lazuli color... . self-created, full of developed
fruit . . . . Mother-womb who has taken up his
abode, begetter of all things, exalted habitation
among living creatures; O merciful gracious father,
in whose hand rests the life of the whole world; O
Lord, thy divinity is full of awe like the far-off
heaven and the broad ocean!’ (Rogers, Religion of
Babylonia and Assyria [1908], 164). Many mod-
ern scholars believe that the primitive Egyptians and
Babylonians really thought of their earthly and
heavenly gods as animals (see esp. Maspero, Bulletin
critique, 1886; Revue de Uhistoire des religions,
1888), but it seems certain that at least as early as
the date of the Exodus these stars and beasts were
not regarded by all as being themselves deities, but
rather as symbols or representations of deity (Davis
and Cobern, Ancient Egypt, 281-89; Brugsch, Die
Aegyptologie, I, 135; Chwolsohn, Die Ssabier w. der

Ssabismus, II, 134).
The text of Ex 82 is certainly composite (see
e.g. Bacon’s “Exodus” in loc. and DB), and some
words and phrases are a verbal dupli-


41, Narra- cate of the narrative of Jeroboam’s
tive of calf worship (cf Ex 32 4 with 1K
Aaron’s 12 28, and see || columns in Driver’s
Golden Deuteronomy). Some Bible critics so
Calf analyze the text as to make the entire


calf story a later element, without
ancient basis, added to some short original state-
ment like Ex 32 7-11, for the sake of satirizing
Jeroboam’s bull worship and its non-Levitical priest-
hood (see e.g. Kuenen, Hexateuch). Most recent
critics have however accepted the incident as an
ancient memory or historic fact attested by the
oldest sources, and used thus by the Deuterono-
mist (Dt 9), though the verbal form may have
been affected by the later editor’s scorn of the
northern apostasy. It seems clearly unreasonable
to suppose that a Heb writer at any era would so
fiercely abuse his own ancestors, without any tra-
ditional basis for his statements, merely for the sake
of adding a little more which cast reproach upon his
northern neighbors, and it seems equally unlikely


Calf, Golden
Callisthenes


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


544


that any such baseless charges would have been
accepted as true by the slandered nation. The
old expositors, accepting the essential historicity
of the account, generally followed Philo and the
early Fathers in supposing this calf of gold was an
image of the Apis or Mnevis bulls of Egypt, and
this is occasionally yet advocated by some Egyp-
tologists (e.g. Steindorf, Ancient Egypt [1903], 167;
cf also Jeremias, OT in Light of Ancient Fast [1911],
II, 138). The objections made to this view by the
skeptics of the 18th cent., based on the supposed
impossibility of such chemical and mechanical skill
being possessed at that era, have mostly been made
obsolete by recent discovery. The common modern
objection that this could not have been Apis wor-
ship because the Apis was a living bull, is by no
means conclusive, since images of Apis are not
uncommon and were probably worshipped in the
temple itself. It may be added that a renaissance
of this worship occurred at this very era. So Erman,
Handbook of Egyp Rel. (1907), 23-79. Modern Bible
scholars, however, are practically unanimous in the
opinion that the Golden Calf, if worshipped at all,
must have been a representation of a Sem, not an
Egyp, deity. In favor of this it may be suggested:
(1) It was an era when each deity was considered
as the god of a particular country and it would seem
impossible that a native Egyp god should be thought
of as joining with Egypt’s enemies and assisting
them to reach a land over which he had no control.
(2) The Israelitish religion shows little influence
from Egypt, but was immensely influenced from
Canaan and Babylon, Apis only being mentioned
once (Jer 46 20 [tr? “‘theifer’’]; cf Ezk 20 7.8, and
see Brugsch, Steininschrift und Bibelwort, passim, and
Robertson, Early Religion of Israel, 217). (3) The
bull and cow are now known to have been ordinary
symbols for the most popular deities which were
worshipped by all the race-relatives of the Hebrews
and nowhere more devoutly than in Canaan and in
the adjoining districts (see above). (4) Some of the
chief gods of the pasture land of Goshen, where the
Hebrews had resided for centuries (Gen 47 6;
60 8), were Sem gods which were worshipped not
only by the Edomitic Bedawin and other foreigners
living there by the ‘pools of Pithom” (cf Ex 1 11)
but by the native Egyptians, Ramses II even
naming a daughter after one of these. The special
god of this district had as its symbol a bull calf, and
one inscription actually speaks of the statue of a
“golden calf of 600 pounds weight” which it was
the custom to dedicate annually to one of these
Sem gods, while another inscription mentions a
statue of gold “a cubit in height”? (Breasted, An-
cient Records of Egypt [1905], II, 630-38; Naville,
Goshen, Store City of Pithom; Erman, Handbook,
1738-74; Brugsch, op. cit.). (5) The chief proof,
however, is the statement of the text that the feast
in conuection with this worship was a “feast to
Jehovah” (Ex 82 5). When Moses disappeared for
forty days in the Mount, it was not unnatural that
the people should turn back to the visible symbols
worshipped by their ancestors, and should give to
them the new name or new attributes which had
been attached to deity by Moses. The worship
was condemned for much the same reason as that

of Jeroboam’s calves (see next section).
Though this passage (1 K 12 26-33; cf 2 Ch
10 14.15) may have been reédited later, “there is
no reason to infer that any detail of


2. Jero- fact is underived from the olden time”
boam’s (Burney, Heb Text of Kings [1902],
Golden and DB). These calves which Jero-
Calves boam set up were doubtless bulls


(1 K 12 28, Heb) but at least as early
as Hosea’s time it seems probable (see above) that
the more licentious worship of the feminine prin-


ciple had been added to the official worship (Hos
10 5; 13 2, Heb). This which elsewhere naturally
and universally accompanied the bull worship could
most truly be called “the sin of Samaria” (Am
8 14) and be classed as the “sin of Jeroboam”
(1 K 14 9.16; 16 26; 2 K 10 29). There is no
sufficient reason for explaining the term “molten”
in any other than its most natural and usual sense
(Ex 32 8.24; 2 Kk 17 16; Dt 9 16), for molded
metal idols were common in all eras in Pal and the
surrounding countries, though the core of the image
might be molten or graven of some inferior metal
overlaid with gold (Isa 30 22; 4019, Heb;
Dt 7 25; Ex 32 4). These bull images were un-
doubtedly intended to represent Jeh (yet cf
Robertson, op. cit., and Orr, Problem of OT [1906],
145). The text explicitly identifies these images
with Aaron’s calf (1 K 12 28), so that nearly all
the reasons given above to prove that Aaron’s
image represented hot an Egyp but an ancient Sem
deity are equally valid here. To these various
other arguments may be added: (1) The text itself
states that it is Jeh who brought them from
Egypt (Hos 2 15; 12 13; 13 4), whom they call
“My lord,’ and to whom they swear (Hos 2 16
AVm; 4 15); and to whom they present their wine
offerings, sacrifices and feasts (Hos 8 13; 9 4.5,
Heb; cf Am 6 8). (2) Jehu, though he destroyed
all Baal idols, never touched these bulls (2 K 10
28.29). (3) The ritual, though freer, was essen-
tially that of the Jerus temple (1 K 12 32; Hos
56; Am 45; 5 22.23; see, Oettli, Greifswalder
Studien [1895], quoted in DB, I, 342). (4) Even
the southern prophets recognized that it was Jeh
who had given Jeroboam the kingdom (1 K 11
31; 12 15.24) and only Jeh worship could have
realized Jeroboam’s purpose of attaching to the
throne by this cult such devout citizens as would
otherwise be drawn to Jerus to worship. It was to
guard against this appeal which the national sanc-
tuary made to devout souls that this counter wor-
ship had been established. As Budde says, ‘A
foreign cult would only have driven the devout
Ephraimites the more surely over to Jerusalem”
(del. of Israel [1899], 113). Jeroboam was not
attempting to shock the conscience of his religious
adherents by making heathenism the state religion,
but rather to win these pious worshippers of Jeh
to his cause. (5) The places selected for the bull
worship were places already sacred to Jeh. This
was preéminently true of Bethel which, cents.
before Jerus had been captured from the Jebusites,
had been identified with special revelations of Jeho-
vah’s presence (Gen 13 3.4; 28 19; 31 13; 35 15;
187 16; Hos 12 4). (6) The history shows
that the allegiance of his most pious subjects was
retained (1 K 12 20) and that not even Elijah fled
to the Southern, supposing that the Northern King-
dom had accepted the worship of heathen gods as
its state religion. Instead of this, Elijah, though
the boldest opponent of the worship of Baal, is
never reported as uttering one word against the
bull worship at Dan and Bethel.

IH, Attitude of Elijah to the Bull Symbols.—This
surprising silence is variously explained. A few
scholars, though without any historic or textual
evidence for the charge, are sure that the Bible
narratives (though written by southern men) are
fundamentally defective at this point, otherwise
they would report Elijah’s antagonism to this cult.
Other few, equally without evidence, are com-
fortably sure that he fully approved the ancient
ancestral calf cult. Others, with more probability,
explain his position on the ground that, though he
may not have favored the bull symbol—which was
never used by the Patriarchs so far as known, and
certainly was not used as a symbol of Jeh in the


545


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Calf, Golden
Callisthenes


Southern Kingdom, or Hosea the northern prophet
would have spoken of it—yet being himself a north-
ern man of old ideals and simple habits, Elijah may
have believed that, even with this handicap, the
freer and more democratic worship carried on at
the ancient holy places in the N. was less dangerous
than the elaborate and luxurious ritual of the aris-
tocratic and exclusive priesthood of the S., which
insisted upon political and religious centralization,
and was dependent upon such enormous revenues
for its support (cf 1 K 12 10.14). At any rate
it is self-evident that if Elijah had turned against
Jeroboam and the state religion, it would have
divided seriously the forces which needed to unite,
in order to oppose with all energy the much fouler
worship of Baal which just at this crisis, as never
before or afterward, threatened completely to over-
whelm the worship of Jeh.

IV. Attitude of Amos and Hosea to the Bull
Symbols.—It is easy to see why Hosea might fiercely
condemn a ritual which Elijah might rightly tolerate.
(1) This calf worship may have deteriorated. Elijab
lived closer to the time when the new state ritual
was inaugurated and would naturally be at its best.
Hosea lived at an era when he could trace the his-
tory of this experiment for nearly two cents., and
could see clearly that these images had not helped
but greatly hindered the development of the ethical
and spiritual religion of Jeh. Even if at first recog-
nized as symbols, these images had become common
idols (Hos 12 11; 13 2, and passim). ‘This
thing became a sin’ (1 K 12 30; 13 34). The
history of religion shows many such instances
where the visible or verbal symbol which in one era
had been a real aid to devotion at a later time
became positively antagonistic to it (see ImacEs).
As Baal was also worshipped under the form of a
calf and as Jeh himself was at times called ‘‘Baal”’
(Isa 54 5; Jer 31 32; Hos 2 16 Heb) this uneth-
ical tendency would be accelerated, as also by the
political antagonism hetween Judah and Ephraim
and the bitter hatred between the two rival priest-
hoods (cf 2 Ch 11 15; 13 9). Certain it is that
by the middle of the 8th cent. the worship at Dan
and Bethel had extended itself to many other points
and had become so closely affiliated with the heathen
worship as to be practically indistinguishahle—at
least when viewed from the later prophetic stand-
point. But (2) it cannot be doubted that the
prophetic standpoint had changed in 200 years.
‘As the influence of the northern worship had tended
toward heathenism, so the influence of the southern
worship of an imageless god had tended toward
higher spiritual ideals. Elijah could not have
recognized the epoch-making importance of an
imageless temple. The constant pressure of this
jdea—God is Spirit—had developed a new spiritual
conscience, which by the 8th cent. was so. keen that
the worship of Jeh under the form of an image was
not improperly considered as almost if not quite
as bad as out-and-out heathenism, just as the Re-
formers of the 16th cent. regarded the Roman
Catholic images as little better than idols (Hos
856; 112; 132; cf 2K 17 16.17). The in-
fluence of this new conscience is also seen in the
fact that it is not simply or perhaps chiefly the
“ealves” which are condemned, but the spirit of
ungodliness and unkindness which also made the or-
thodox worship in Jerus little if any better than that
at Bethel (Hos 6 4; 6 12.14). The influence of
this theology—God is Spirit—had so filled the souls
of these prophets that even the sacrifices had lost
their importance when unaccompanied by kind-
ness and spiritual knowledge (Hos 6 6; 7 1), and
it is the absence of this essential spirit, rather than
the form of worship, which Amos and Hosea con-
demn in the Northern Kingdom (Am 2 6-8; 3 10;


41; 6 7.12-15.21-24; 6 12; 8 4-6; Hos 4 2.3;
9 1, 10 12-14). These later prophets could also
see, as Elijah could not possibly have seen, that
unity of worship was imperatively needed, and that
sacrifices in the old sacred “high places” must be
discontinued. Only thus could superstitious fanati-
cism and religious disintegration be avoided. A
miscellaneous and unregulated Jeh cult might be-
come almost as bad as heathenism. Indeedit might
be worse if it gave the Baal spirit and interpretation
to Jeh worship. See also Astroxoey, II, 2.


LiTERATURE.—Besldes references above, see esp. com-
mentaries of Dillmann and Driver on Exodus; Kuenen,
Religion of Israel; W. R. Smith, Religion of Semites, 93-
113 and index; Konig, HWauptprobleme der altisraelitischen
Religionsgeschichte; Baethgen, Bettr. zur semit. Religions-
geschichte; Kittel, History of Hebrews; ‘‘Baal'’ and ‘‘Ash-
toreth” in Enc of Rel. and Ethics (full lit.); ‘‘Golden Calf"
in Jew Enc for Rabbinical and Mohammedan lit.


CampEN M. CoBEeRN
CALF IMAGE. See Imaczs.


CALITAS, kal’i-tas (Kadurds, Kalitds, or Ka-
Aerals, Kaleitais): One of the Levites who put
away their foreign wives at the request of Esdras
(Ezra), 1 Esd 9 23, ‘“Colius, who was_ called
Calitas.” It is the Gr form of Heb Kelita (cf
|| passage, Ezr 10 23, ‘‘Kelaiah, the same is Kelita’’).
He is also named with those who explained the law
when read to the people by Esdras (1 Esd 9 48;
ef Neh 8 7). It is not certain whether he is to be
identified with the Kelita of Neh 10 10 (one of the
Levites who signed the covenant made by Nehe-
miah). The word probably means ‘‘dwarf.”

D. Miatu Epwarps


CALKER, kék’ér. See Snips anp Boats.


CALLING, kél’ing (kAfjots, klésis, from kaléo, “TI
call’): Is a NT expression. The word is used chiefly
by Paul, though the idea and term are found also else-
where. lt has a definite, technical sense, the invi-
tation given to men by God to accept salvation in
His kingdom through Jesus Christ. This invita-
tion is given outwardly by the preaching of the
gospel, inwardly by the work of the Holy Spirit.
With reference to Israel, it is on the part of God
irrevocable, not repented of. Having in His eter-
nal counsel called this people, He intrusted them
with great gifts, and because He did thus enrich
them, He also, in the course of time, summoned
them to fulfil the task of initiating the world into
the way of salvation, and of preparing salvation
for the world. Therefore He will not desert His
people, for He will not revoke that call (Rom 11
29). This calling is high or upward, in Christ,
that is, made in heaven by God on account of Christ
and calling man to heaven (Phil 3 14). Similarly
it is a heavenly calling (He 3 1); also a holy calling,
holy in aim, means, and end (2 Tim 1 9). Chris-
tians are urged to walk worthy of this calling
(Eph 4 1) (ARV and RV, but AV has “‘vocation”’).
In it there is hope; it is the inspirer of hope, and
furnishes for hope its supreme object (Eph 4 4).
Men are exhorted so to live that God will count
them worthy of their calling (2 Thess 1 11).
They are also urged to make their calling and elec-
tion sure (2 Pet 110). See Execrion. There
ig a somewhat peculiar use of the word in 1 Cor
1 26 and 7 20, namely, that condition of life in
which men were when God called them, not many
of them wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble, some circumcised, some uncircum-
cised, some bond, some free, some male, some female,
some married, some unmarried.

Grorce Henry TREVER

CALLISTHENES, ka-lis’the-néz (Kaddwodévas,
Kallisthénés): An officer of Nicanor who was
charged with the burning of the sacred portals of
the temple at the time of the desecration under


Calneh
Camel


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


546


Antiochus Epiphanes (168 BC). After the decisive

defeat of Nicanor’s army at Emmaus (165 BC)

the Jews celebrated the victory in the city of their

fathers and burned C. who had fled into an out-

house with others who had set the sacred gates on

ae a meet reward of their impiety” (2 Macc
33).


CALNEH, kal’ne (353, kalnzh; Xadavvf,
Chalanné): The name of the fourth city of Nim-
rod’s kingdom (Gen 10 10), the three
1. Identified preceding it being Babel, Erech, and
with Accad, i.e. the capital of the realm of
Nippur Babylonia and the chief cities of three
of the principal states. The meaning
of the name is unknown, and many regard the
identification as uncertain. G. Rawlinson thought
it to be the modern Niffer (or Noufar), comparing
the Talmudic (cf Yoma’) Nopher, which is said
to bethesameasCalneh. What place-name Calneh
corresponds with in cuneiform is doubtful. Fried.
Delitzsch (Wo lag das Paradies?) compared it with
Kul-unu, but as we are told to pronounce this group
as Kullaba, it seems unlikely that there is any con-
nection between the two. The identification pro-~
posed by G. Rawlinson, however, may be regarded
as being supported by the bilingual Creation-legend,
in which Merodach (= Nimrod) is made the founder
of Babylon, Erech and Nippur, which would in that
case be three of the four cities mentioned in Gen
10 10.
The inscriptions reveal to us Nippur as a city
with a glorious past. Sargon of Agadé, Sur-Engur,
Dungi and all the more prominent
2. Nippur’s kings of Babylonia in its larger sense
Importance interested themselves in the rebuilding
and restoration of its renowned tem-
ples, so as to gain the favor of their great divini-
ties. The city’s earlier divine patrons were Enlil
and Ninlil, the older Bel and Beltis, whose shrines
were at the great temple-tower called E-kura, “the
house of the land,” and a poetical
3. Its legend in Sumerian (dialectical) re-
Deities and cording their visit to the city, and
Their enumerating its sacred places, still
Legends exists (PSBA, March, 1911, 85 ff).
Later, the chief deities of the city
seem to have been Ninip, the son of Enlil, and his
spouse Nin-Nipri, “the lady of Nippur.” These
two divine beings likewise evoked the muse of the
city-scribes, who dealt with the glories of the god
in a composition extending over several tablets,
in which his favor to his spouse Nin-Nipri is ex-
tolled; and to whom a career very similar to that
of Merodach, the head of the Bab pantheon, is
attributed (PSBA, December, 1906, 270 ff).
The great temple-tower of Niffer, which was dedi-
cated to the god Enlil, was a very striking object
among the buildings and temples of the city, and the
lower stages are still in an extremely


4. Its perfect condition. Most interesting,
Ruins also, are the remains of streets and
Today houses which enable the general con-


ditions of life in ancient Babylonia to
be estimated, and suggest that they are similar
to those subsisting even at the present day. Our
knowledge of the city is almost entirely due to the
American excavations at Niffer, inaugurated b
Rev. J. P. Peters, which have been most fruitful,
and have shed quite a new light on the city’s his-
tory. Sce Peters’ Nippur (2 vols, 1887); the
many volumes written or edited by Professor H.
V. Hilprecht under the general title The Baby-
lonian Expedition of the University of Pennsylvania;
and Professor A. T. Clay’s Light on the OT from
Babel (Philadelphia, 1907). T. G. Pincaes


CALNEH, kal’ne, CALNO, kal’no (71332, kalneh
[Am 6 2], 253, kalno [Isa 10 9]): ‘Probably the
Kulnia (Kullani) associated with Arpad and Had-
rach, Syrian cities, in the Assyr ‘tribute’ list (Western
Asiatic Inscriptions, II, 58, no. 3); Kullanhu about
six miles from Arpad” (HDB, I, 344, and 1-vol
HDB, 109).


CALPHI, kal’fi.
CALVARY, kal’va-ri.


CALVES, kiivz, OF THE LIPS (LXX_ kaprév
xeréwov, karpén cheiléon): This is the AV render-
ing of a dubions Heb text in Hos 14 2 (OMB
AMY, parim s*phathénd). The RV runs ‘‘So will
we render as bullocks the offering of our lips.”
Strange as the text is, it may be retained, and it
admits of at least a possible explanation. The
prophet calls on his contemporaries to return in
penitence to Jeh. Their worship should consist
not of meaningless dumb ritual, but of ‘‘words’—
hymns and prayers, expressive of real gratitude
and of actual needs—or perhaps pledges of repent-
ance and reform. The people respond and under-
take that their worship shall consist of “calves or
bullocks of lips,” i.e. not of animal offerings, but
of promises of reform or vows of obedience. But
this explanation is forced and most modern com-
mentators follow the LXX, which presupposes
a slightly different Hebrew text, and renders
AMM_W MB, pri s*phathénd, “fruit of our lips,”
i.e. adoring gratitude or, as the author of the
Epistle to the He, who quotes this verse from the
LXX, explains it, ‘sacrifice of praise” (He 13 15).
The same phrase occurs in Isa 57 19, where it
signifies gladsome gratitude. T. Lewis


CAMBYSES, kam-bi'séz (Aram., "T3333; Pers,
Kambujiya; Assyr, Kambuzia; Egyp, Kambythet;
Susian, Kanpuziya): The older son of Cyrus, king of
Persia. Some have thought that heis the Ahasnerus
of Ezr 4 6. This seems to be most improbable, in-
asmuch as the Heb form of Ahasuerus is the exact
equivalent of the Old Pers form of Xerxes, and we
have no evidence that Cambyses was ever called
Xerxes.

Ancient authorities differ as to who was the
mother of Cambyses. It is variously said that she
was Cassandane, a Pers princess, Amytis, a Median
princess, or Nititis, a daughter of Apries king of
Egypt. He had one brother, Bardes or Smerdes,
whom he put to death secretly shortly after his ac-
cession, probably because of an attempted rebellion.
Cambyses organized an expedition for the con-
quest of Egypt, which was rendered successful by
internal treachery and by the aid of the Phoen,
Cyprian and Gr fleets. During this campaign
Cambyses seems to have acted with good general-
ship and with clemency toward the conquered.
After the subjugation of Egypt, Cyrene and Barca,
the modern Tripoli, submitted to his sway. He
then desired to undertake the conquest of Carthage,
but was compelled to give it up, because his Phoen
allies, without whose ships it was impossible for him
to conduct his army in safety, refused to join in an
attack upon a country that had been colonized by
them. He is said to have sent an army of 50,000
men against the oasis of Jupiter Ammon. This
army is said to have perished in the sands. A little
less unsuccessful expedition was made against
Ethiopia. After some initial successes, Cambyses
was forced to return to Egypt with the shattered
remains of hisarmy. He found that the Egyptians
were in revolt, led by their king Psammetichus III,
whose life he had formerly spared. This revolt


See CHALPHI.


See GoLGoraHa.


547


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Calneh
Camel


was put down with great harshness, the Egyp king.


being taken and executed, and many of the temples
being destroyed. Shortly after this, Cambyses
heard that a certain Magian, who claimed to be his
brother Smerdes whom he had secretly put to death,
had set himself up as king of Persia, and that almost
the whole of his Asiatic dominions had acknowledged
him as king. With the fragments of his army he
started toward Persia to attack the usurper, but on
the way was killed by a wound inflicted by himself,
it is uncertain whether by accident or with intention.
His general and cousin, Darius Hystaspis, soon put
down the false Smerdis and reigned in his stead.

For two or more years Cambyses was king of
Babylon, while his father was king of the lands.
The son was a drunkard and subject to fits of un-
bridled passion, but seems to have been of good
capacity as a general and as an administrator.
Many of the tales that have been told against him
were doubtless invented by his enemies, and he has
left us no records of his own. That he married his
own sisters is probable; but it must be remembered
that this was the custom of the Egyp kings of that
time and may have been of the Pers kings as well.
As to his conduct in Egypt, the only contemporary
Egyp authority says that he worshipped before the
holiness of Neit as all the pious kings had done,
that he ordered that the temple of Neit should be
purified, and that its revenues should be restored as
they had been before they had been confiscated by
Akhmes for his Gr troops. He adds also that not
merely were the strangers who had taken up their
abode in the temple of Neit ejected from her sanc-
tuary, but that their goods were taken away and
their houses destroyed. Darius Hystaspis, the only
other contemporary source of information, says of
him simply that he was the son of Cyrus, of the same
father and motherasBardes, whom he slewsecretly at
some time before he set out on his Egyp campaign;
and that he died by suicide shortly after he had heard
of the rebellion of Persia, Media and the other prov-
inces against him, and of the establishment of Gau-
mata the Magian as king under the claim that he was
“Barzia, the son of Cyrus and brother of Cambyses.”’

The name of Cumbyses is found in three of the
Elephantine papyri recently published (September,
1911) by Professor Sachau of Berlin. The frag-
ment numbered 59 1 is so broken that it is impos-
sible to make out the connection or the sense. In
papyrus I, we are told that when Cambyses came
to Egypt he found in the fortress of Yeb (Elephan-
tine) a temple or synagogue _(’agora’), which had
been built in the days of the Egyp kings; and that
although he had torn down the pls of the Egyp
gods, he had allowed no harm to be done to that
of Jeh. The third papyrus is so interesting, be-
cause of its mention of Bagoas, the Pers governor
of Jerus in 407 BC, who had hitherto been known
only from Jos, and of Dalayah the son of the San-
ballat who opposed the rebuilding of the wall of
Jerus in the time of Ezra-Nehemiah, that we shall
now give a tr ofitin full: “A memorial of that which
Bagoas and Dalayah said to me: Thou shalt say
in Egypt unto Arsames with regard to the house of
the altar of the God of heaven that was built in the
fortress of Yeb before the time of Cambyses and
which the accursed(?) Waidrang destroyed in the
14th year of Darius the king, that it shall be built
again upon its place as it was before, and that meal-
offerings and incense-offerings shall be offered upon
that altar as they used to be.”

Literature.—For further information as to the history
of Cambyses see Rawlinson, Ancient Monarchies; Prasek,
Geschichte der Meder und Paras) ie Eolas ea,
Weebeon: fhemson, and King; Herodotus, Josephus;


the Sachau papyri; and Petrie, History of Egypt, III.
: R. Dick WILson


CAMEL, kam’el (53, gamal; wépndos, kdme-
los; “DBD, bekher, and M23, bikhrah [Isa 60 6;
Jer 2 23: “dromedary,” ARVm “young camel”),
Ww, rekhesh [1 K 4 28; see Horsz], NMI,
kirka@roth [Isa 66 20, “swift beasts,” ARV ‘drome-
daries”); BID@IW 22, bené haé-rammakhim [Est
8 10, “young dromedaries,” ARV “bred of the
stud”); DISUAWIN , 'dhashteranim [Est 8 10.14, AV
“camels,” ARV “that were used in the king’s serv-
ice’”]): There are two species of camel, the Arab.
or one-humped camel or dromedary, Camelus drome-
darius, and the Bactrian or two-humped camel,
Camelus bactrianus. The latter inhabits the tem-
perate and cold parts of central Asia and is not
likely to have been known to Bib. writers. The
Arab. camel inhabits southwestern Asia and north-


‘ern Africa and has recently been introduced into


parts of America and Australia. Its hoofs are not
typical of ungulates but are rather like great claws.


Young Camels Grazing.


The toes are not completely separated and the main
part of the foot which is applied to the ground is a
large pad which underlies the proximal joints of
the digits. It may be that this incomplete sepa-
ration of the two toes is a sufficient explanation
of the words “parteth not the hoof,” in Lev 11 4
and Dt 14 7. Otherwise these words present a
difficulty, because the hoofs are completely separated
though the toes are not. The camel is a ruminant
and chews the cud like a sheep or ox, but the stomach
possesses only three compartments instead of four,
as in other ruminants. The first two compart-
ments contain in their walls small pouches, each
of which can be closed by a sphincter muscle. The
fluid retained in these pouches may account in part
for the power of the camel to go for a relatively
long time without drinking.

The Arab. camel is often compared with justice
to the reindeer of the Esquimaux. It furnishes
hair for spinning and weaving, milk, flesh and
leather, as well as being an invaluable means of
transportation in the arid desert. There are many
Arab. names for the camel, the commonest of which
is jamal (in Egypt gamal), the root being common
to Arab., Heb and other Sem languages. From
it the names in Lat, Gr, Eng. and various Euro-

ean languages are derived. There are various
Bresde of camels, as there are of horses. The riding
camels or dromedaries, commonly called hajin,
can go, even at a walk, much faster than the pack
camels. The males are mostly used for carrying
burdens, the females being kept with the herds.
Camels are used to a surprising extent on the rough
roads of the mountains, and one finds in the posses-
sion of fellahin in the mountains and on the littoral
plain larger and stronger pack camels than are often
found among the Bedawin. Camels were appar-
ently not much used by the Israelites after the time
of the patriarchs. They were taken as spoil of
war from the Amalekites and other tribes, but


Camel's Hair
Canaan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


548


nearly the only reference to their use by the later
Israelites was when David was made king over all
Israel at Hebron, when camels are mentioned among
the animals used for bringing food for the celebra-
tion (1 Ch 12 40). David had a herd of camels,
but the herdsman was Obil, an Ishmaelite (1 Ch
27 30). Nearly all the other Bib. references to


Camels at the Sea of Galilee.


camels are to those possessed by Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, Ishmaelites, Amalekites, Midianites,
Hagrites and the “children of the East” (see East).
Two references to camels (Gen 12 16; Ex 9 8)
are regarded as puzzling because the testimony of
the Egyp monuments is said to be against the
presence of camels in ancient Egypt. For this
reason, Gen 12 16, in connection with Abram’s
visit to Egypt, is turned to account by Canon
Cheyne to substantiate his theory that the Israel-
ites were not in Egypt but in a north Arab. land of
Musri (EB s.v. “Camel,” 4). While the flesh of
the camel was forbidden to the Israelites, it is
freely eaten by the Arabs.

There are three references to the camel in NT:
(1) to John’s raiment of camel’s hair (Mt 3 4; Mk
1 6); (2) the words of Jesus that “‘it is casier for a
camel to go through a needle’s eye, than for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of God” (Mt 19 24;
Mk 10 25; Lk 18 25); (8) the proverb applied to
the Pharisees as blind guides, “that strain out the
gnat, and swallow the camel” (Mt 23 24). Some
MSS read ha kdmilos, “‘a cable,” in Mt 19 24 and
Lk 18 25.

There are a few unusual words which have been
tr’ “camel” in text or margin of one or the other
version. (See list of words at beginning of art.)
Bekher and bikhrah clearly mean a young animal,
and the Arab. root word and derivatives are used
similarly to the Heb. Rakhash, the root of rekhesh,
is compared with the Arab. rakad, “‘to run,” and, in
RV, rekhesh is trd “swift steeds.” Kirkarath, ram-


makhim and ’dhasht*ranim must be admitted to be |


of doubtful etymology and uncertain meaning.
ALFRED Ety Day
CAMEL’S HAIR (roplxes xapqdov, triches kamé-
lou): In Mt 3 4 and Mk 1 6 the description of
John’s raiment is explicit to the extent of telling the
kind of hair of which his raiment was made. It is
probable that his garment was made of a tawed camel
skin, for the more expensive woven camel’s hair
garment would not be in keeping with the rest of
the description. It is still common among the poor
in some parts of Syria, when a camel or other
animal dies, to remove its skin and, after treating
the inner surface to stop decomposition, to make
it up into various domestic articles. The writer
once saw a peasant dragging a skin along the road
which proved to be that of a donkey which had
just died on the route. His intention was probably
to make it up into a cloak. Some believe that
Elijah’s mantle was of camel’s hair (2 K 1 8;
ef Zec 13 4). Of that we cannot be sure, for in
the East today the hairy garment is usually goat’s
hair or wool either woven or still clinging to the


‘of these latter.


It was much more likely to have been one
See Surerrp Raisinc. Camel’s
hair, when woven into fabrics, as in rugs, makes
an article of even softer and more glossy texture
than wool. See WrEavinc. James A. Patcu


skin.


CAMON, ka’mon (Pap, kamon, “standing-
place,” Jgs 10 5AV). See IXamon.


CAMP. See War.
CAMPHIRE, kam’fir.


CANA, ka’na, OF GALILEE (Kava ris PadtAvalas,
Kandé tés Galilaias): This was the scene of Christ’s
earliest miracle, when, at the marriage feast, He
turned water into wine (Jn 2 1ff). It wasthehome
of Nathanael (21 2). From Cana, after the marriage,
Jesus “went down” to Capernaum (2 12), and re-
turned at the request of the centurion (4 46.51).
These are the only notices of Cana in Scripture, and
from them we learn merely that it was in Galilee, and
in the uplands W. of the lake. Other villages of the
same name are mentioned by Jos, but probably this
one is intended by the Cana wherefor a time he dwelt
(Vita, 16) which he locates in the plain of Asochis
(ib, 41). The Gr kana probably transliterates an old
Heb kandh, “place of reeds.” This ancient name
survives in Khirbet Kaéné, a ruined site with rock-
hewn tombs, cisterns and a pool, on the northern
edge of Sahl el-Battauf, the plain of Asochis.
Near by are marshy stretches where reeds still
abound: the name therefore is entirely appropriate.
The name K4ané el-Jelil, the exact Arab. equivalent
of Kana tés Galilazas, is also heard among the natives.
This, however, may have arisen from the suggested
identification with Cana of the Gospel. The posi-
tion agrees well enough with the Gospel data.

Kefr Kennah, a thriving village about 32 miles
from Nazareth, on the southern edge of Sahl
Toran, the plain 8. of the range of that name,
through which the road from Nazareth to Tibe-
rias passes, has also many advocates. ‘This identi-
fication is accepted by the Gr and Lat churches,
which have both built extensively in the village;
the Greeks showing stone jars said to have been
used in the miracle, and the traditional house of


See Henna.


Cana of Galilee.


Nathanael being pointed out. A copious spring of
excellent water rises W. of the village; and the
pomegranates grown here are greatly prized. The
change of name, however, from Kdné to Kennah—
(note the doubled n), is not easy; and there are no
reeds in the neighborhood to give the name any
appropriateness.

Onam locates Cana in the tribe of Asher toward
Great Sidon, probably thinking of Kanda, a village
about 8 miles §. of Tyre. The pilgrims of the


549


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Camel’s Hair
Canaan


Middle Ages seem to be fairly divided as to the
two sites. Saewulf (1102), Brocardius (1183),
Marinus Sanutus (1321), Breydenbach (1483) and
Anselm (1507) favor the northern site; while on
the side of Kefr Kennah may be reckoned St.
Paula (383), St. Willibald (720), Isaac Chelo (1334)
and Quaresimus (1616). It seems pretty certain
that the Crusaders adopted the identification with
Khirbet Kanad (Conder, Tent Work, 691). While
no absolute decision is possible, on the available
evidence probability points to the northern site.
Col. Conder puts in a claim for a third site, that
of ‘Ain Kana on the road from er-Reineh (a village
about 13 mile from Nazareth on the Tiberias road)
to Tabor (Tent Work, 81). W. Ewine


CANAAN, ka’nan, CANAANITES, ka’nan-its
(J¥22, kena‘an; Xavadv, Chanadn):


. Geography
. Meaning ef the Name
. The Results of Recent Excavations
. History
(1) Stone Age
(2) Brenze Age x
@) A Babylonian Prevince


pode


4) Jerusalem Founded

5) The Hykses

(6) Egyptian Conauest

(7) Tell el-Amarna Tablets
5. The Israelitish Invasion

6. Culture

7. Art

8. Commerce

9. Art of Writing
LirERATURE

Canaan is stated in Gen 10 6 to have been a son
of Ham and brother of Mizraim, or Egypt. This
indicates the Mosaic period when the conquerors of
the XVIIIth and XIXth Egyp Dynasties made
Canaan for a time a province of the Egyp empire.
Under the Pharaoh Meneptah, at the time of the
Exodus, it ceased to be connected with Egypt, and
the Egyp garrisons in the S. of the country were
expelled by the Philis, who probably made them-
selves masters of the larger portion of it, thus caus-
ing the name of Philistia or Pal to become synony-
mous with that of Canaan (see Zeph 2 5). In the
Am Tab, Canaan is written Kinakhna and Kinakh-
khi. The latter form corresponds with the Gr Xv@
(Chnd), a name given to Phoenicia (Hecat. Frag-
menis 254; Eusebius, Praep. Ev., i.10; ix.17).

In Nu 183 29 the Canaanites are described as
dwelling “by the sea, and along by the side of the

Jordan,” i.e. in the lowlands of Pal.
The name was confined to the country
W. of the Jordan (Nu 33 51; Josh 22
9), and was esp. applied to Phoenicia
(Isa 28 11; cf Mt 15 22). Hence Sidon is called
the “firstborn” of Canaan (Gen 10 15, though cf
Jgs 3 3), and the LXX translates “Canaanites”
by “Phoenicians” and ‘‘Canaan” by the ‘and of
the Phoenicians” (Ex 16 35; Josh 5 12). Kinakh-
khi is used in the same restricted sense in the
Am Tab, but it is also extended so as to include
Pal generally. On the other hand, on the Egyp
monuments Seti I calls a town in the extreme S. of
Pal “the city of Pa-Kana’na” or “the Canaan,”
which Conder identifies with the modern Khurbet
Kenan near Hebron.

As in the Am Tab, so in the OT, Canaan is used
in an extended sense to denote the whole of Pal W.
of the Jordan (Gen 12 5; 23 2.19; 28 1; 31 18;
35 6; 362; 871; 487; Ex 16 15; Nu 13 2;
Josh 14 1; 21 2; Ps 185 11). Thus Jerus which
had Amorite and Hittite founders is stated to be of
“the land of the Canaanite” (Ezk 16 3), and Isa
(19 18) terms Hebrew, which was shared by the
Israelites with the Phoenicians and, apparently, also
the Amorites, “the language of Canaan.” Jabin is
called “the king of Canaan” in Jgs 4 2.23.24; but


1. Geog-
raphy


whether the name is employed here in a restricted
or extended sense is uncertain.
As the Phoenicians were famous as traders, it
has been supposed that the name “Canaanite” is
a synonym of ‘‘merchant’”’ in certain
2. Meaning passages of the OT. The pursuit of
of the trade, however, was characteristic only
Name of the maritime cities of Phoenicia, not
of the Canaanitish towns conquered by
the Israelites. In Isa 23 11 weshould tr “Canaan”
(as LXX) instead of ‘merchant city’ (AV); in
Hos 12 7 (8), ‘‘as for Canaan” (LXX), instead of
“he is a merchant” (AV); in Zeph 1 11, “people
of Canaan” (LX.X), instead of “merchant people”
(AV); on the other hand, ‘“‘Canaanite” seems to
have acquired the sense of “merchant,” as ‘‘Chal-
dean” did of “astrologer,” in Isa 23 8, and Prov
31 24, though probably not in Zec 14 21, and Job
41 6 (Heb 40 30).
Much light has been thrown upon the history of
Canaan prior to the Israelitish occupation by recent
excavation, supplemented by the mon-


3. The uments of Babylonia and Egypt. The
Results of Pal Exploration led the way by its
Recent excavations in 1890-92 at Tell el-
Excavation Hesy, which turned out to be the site


of Lachish, first under Professor
Flinders Petrie and then under Dr. Bliss. Pro-
fessor Petrie laid the foundations of Pal archaeology
by fixing the chronological sequence of the Lachish
pottery, and tracing the remains of six successive
cities, the fourth of which was that founded by the
Israelites. Between it and the preceding city, was
a layer of ashes, marking the period when the town
lay desolate and uninhabited. The excavations
at Lachish were followed by others at Tell es-Safi,
the supposed site of Gath; at Tell Sandahanna, the
ancient Marissa, a mile 8. of Bét Jibrin, where inter-
esting relics of the Gr period were found, and at
Jerus, where an attempt was made to trace the city
walls. Next to Lachish, the most fruitful exca-
vations have been at Gezer, which has been ex-
plored by Mr. Macalister with scientific thorough-
ness and skill, and where a large necropolis has been
discovered as well as the remains of seven successive
settlements, the last of which comes down to the
Seleucid era, the third corresponding with the first
settlement at Lachish. The two first settlements
o back to the neolithic age. With the third the
em or “Amorite” period of Canaan begins; bronze
makes its appearance; high-places formed of mono-
liths are erected, and inhumation of the dead is
introduced, while the cities are surrounded with
great walls of stone. While Mr. Macalister has
been working at Gezer, German and Austrian expe-
ditions under Dr. Schumacher have been excavat-
ing at Tell em-Mutesellim, the site of Megiddo, and
under Dr. Sellin first at Tell Taanak, the ancient
Taanach, and then at Jericho. At Taanach cunei-
form tablets of the Mosaic age were found in the
house of the governor of the town; at Samaria and
Gezer cuneiform tablets have also been found, but
they belong to the late Assyr and Bab periods. At
Jericho, on the flat roof of a house adjoining the wall
of the Canaanitish city, destroyed by the Israelites,
a number of clay tablets were discovered laid out to
dry before being inscribed with cuneiform charac-
ters. Before the letters were written and des-
patched, however, the town, it seems, was captured
and burnt. An American expedition, under Dr.
Reisner, is now exploring Sebastiyeh (Samaria),
where the rnins of Ahab’s palace, with early He-
brew inscriptions, have been brought to light, as
well as a great city wall built in the age of Nebu-
chadrezzar.
(1) The stone age.-—The history of Canaan begins
with the palaeolithic age, palaeolithic implements


Canaan


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


550


having been found in the lowlands. Our first
knowledge of its population dates from the neolithic

period. The neolithic inhabitants of
4. History Gezer were of short stature (about 5 ft.

4 in. in height), and lived in caves—
at least in the time of the first prehistoric settle-
ment—and burned their dead. Their sacred place
was a double cave with which cup-marks in the
rock were connected, and their pottery was rude;
some of it was ornamented with streaks of red or
black on a yellow or red wash. In the time of the
second settlement a rude stone wall was built around |
the town. The débris of the two neolithic settle-
ments is as much as 12 ft. in depth, implying a long
period of accumulation. ;


Foundation Sacrifice Found at Gezer.


(2) The bronze age—The neolithic population
was succeeded by one of Sem type, which intro-
duced the use of metal, and buried its dead. The
name of Amorite has been given to it, this being the
name under which the Sem population of Canaan
was known to the Babylonians. Gezer was sur-
rounded by a great wall of stone intersected by
brick towers; at Lachish the Amorite wall was of
crude brick, nearly 29 ft. in thickness (cf Dt 1 28).
A “high-place” was erected at Gezer consisting of
9 monoliths, running from N. to 8., and surrounded
by a platform of large stones. The second mono-
lith has been polished by the kisses of the wor-
shippers; the seventh was brought from a distance.
Under the pavement of the sanctuary lay the bones
of children, more rarely of adults, who had been
sacrificed and sometimes burnt, and the remains
deposited in jars. Similar evidences of human
sacrifice were met with under the walls of houses
both here and at Taanach and Megiddo. In the
Israelitish strata the food-bowl and lamp for light-
ing the dead in the other world are retained, but all
trace of human sacrifice is gone. At Lachish in
Israelitish times the bowl and lamp were filled with


sand. The second ‘‘Amorite” city at Gezer had a
long existence. The high-place was enlarged, and
an Egyptian of the age of the XIIth Dynasty was
buried within its precincts. Egyp scarabs of the
XIIth and XIJIth Dynasties are now met with;
these give place to scarabs of the Hyksos period,
and finally to those of the XVIIIth Dynasty (1600
BC). Hittite painted pottery of Cappadocian type
is also found in the later débris of the city as well
as seal-cylinders of the Bab pattern.

(3) A Babylonian province —Meanwhile Canaan
had for a time formed part of the Bab empire.
Gudea, viceroy of Lagas under the kings of the
Dynasty of Ur (2500 BC), had brought ‘‘imestone”’
from the “land of the Amorites,” alabaster from
Mt. Lebanon, cedar-beams from Amanus, and gold-
dust from the desert between Pal and Egypt. A
cadastral survey was drawn up about the same
time by Uru-malik, “the governor of the land of the
Amorites,” the name by which Syria and Canaan
were known to the Babylonians, and colonies of
‘“‘Amorites” engaged in trade were settled in the
cities of Babylonia. After the fall of the Dynasty
of Ur, Babylonia was itself conquered by the Amor-
ites who founded the dynasty to which Khammu-
rabi, the Amraphel of Gen 14 1, belonged (see
Hammourasi). In an inscription found near Diar-
bekir the only title given to Khammu-rabi is “king
of the land of the Amorites.” Bab now became the
official, literary and commercial language of Canaan,
and schools were established there in which the
cuneiform script was taught. Canaanitish culture
became wholly Bab; even its theology and gods were
derived from Babylonia. The famous legal code
of Khammu-rabi (see HamMMuRaBI, CopEz oF) was
enforced in Canaan as in other parts of the empire,
and traces of its provisions are found in Gen.
Abram’s adoption of his slave Eliezer, Sarai’s con-
duct to Hagar, and Rebekah’s receipt of a dowry
from the father of the bridegroom are examples of
this. So, too, the sale of the cave of Machpelah
was in accordance with the Bab legal forms of the
Khammu-rabi age. The petty kings of Canaan
paid tribute to their Bab suzerain, and Bab offi-
cials and ‘‘commerical travelers’? (damgari) fre-
quented the country.

(4) Jerusalem founded—We must ascribe to
this period the foundation of Jerus, which bears
a Bab name (Uru-Salim, “the city of Salim’’), and
commanded the road to the naphtha springs of the
Dead Sea. Bitumen was one of the most impor-
tant articles of Bab trade on account of its em-
ployment for building and lighting purposes, and
seems to have been a government monopoly. Hence
the rebellion of the Canaanitish princes in the
naphtha district (Gen 14) was sufficiently serious to
require a considerable force for its suppression.

45) The Hyksos.—The Amorite dynasty in Baby-
lonia was overthrown by a Hittite invasion, and Bab
authority in Canaan came to an end, though the
influence of Bab culture continued undiminished.
In the N. the Hittites were dominant; in the S.,
where Egyp influence had been powerful since the
age of the RUith Dynasty, the Hyksos conquest of
Egypt united Pal with the Delta. The Hyksos kings
bear Canaanitish names, and their invasion of Egypt
probably formed part of that general movement
which led to the establishment of an ‘Amorite”’
dynasty in Babylonia. Egypt now became an
appanage of Canaan, with its capital, accordingly,
near its Asiatic frontier. One of the Hyksos kings
bears the characteristically Canaanitish name of
Jacob-el, written in the same way as on Bab tablets
of the age of Khammu-rabi, and a place of the same
name is mentioned by Thothmes ITI as existing in
southern Pal.

(6) Egyptian conquest—The Pharaohs of the


551


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Canaan


XVIiIth Dynasty expelled the Hyksos and con-
quered Pal and Syria. For about 200 years Canaan
was an Egyp province. With the Egyp conquest
the history of the second Amorite city at Gezer
comes to an end. The old wall was partially de-
stroyed, doubtless by Thothmes III (about 1480
BC). A third Amorite city now grew up, with a
larger and stronger wall, 14 ft. thick. The houses
built on the site of the towers of the first wall were
filled with scarabs and other relics of the reign of
Amon-hotep III (1440 BC). At Lachish the ruins
of the third city were full of similar remains, and
among them was a cuneiform tablet referring to a
governor of Lachish mentioned in the Am Tah.
At Taanach cuneiform tablets of tle same age have
been discovered, written by Canaanites to one an-
other but all in the Bab script and language.

(7) Tell el-Amarna tablets.—In the Am Tab we
have a picture of Canaan at the moment when the
Asiatic empire of Egypt was breaking up through
the religious and social troubles that marked the
reign of Amon-hotep IV. The Hittites were at-
tacking it in the N.; in the 8S. of Canaan the Kha-
biri or ‘confederate’ bands of free-lances were
acquiring principalities for themselves. The petty
kings and governors had foreign troops in their pay
with which they fought one against the other; and
their mercenaries readily transferred their alle-
giance from one paymaster to another, or seized
the city they were engaged to defend. Hittites,
Mitannians from Mesopotamia, and other for-
eigners appear as governors of the towns; the
Egyp government was too weak to depose them
and was content if they professed themselves loyal.
At times the Canaanitish princes intrigued with
the Assyrians against their Egyp masters; at other
times with the Mitannians of ‘Aram-Naharaim”
or the Hittites of Cappadocia. The troops sent
by the Egyp Pharaoh were insufficient to suppress
the rebellion, and the authority of the Egyp com-
missioners grew less and less. Eventually the king
of the Amorites was compelled to pass openly over
to the Hittite king, and Canaan was lost to the
Pharaohs. é

Gaza and the neighboring towns, however, still
remained in their hands, and with the recovery of

Egyptian power under the XIXth


5. The Dynasty allowed Seti I to march once
Israelitish more into Canaan and reduce it again
Invasion to subjection. In spite of Hittite


attacks the country on both sides of
the Jordan acknowledged the rule of Seti and his
son Ramses II, and in the 21st year of the latter
Pharaoh the long war with the Hittites came to an
end, a treaty being made which fixed the Egyp
frontier pretty much where the Israelitish frontier
afterward ran. A work, known as The Travels of
the Mohar, which satirizes the misadventures of a
tourist in Canaan, gives a picture of Canaan in the
days of Ramses II. With the death of Ramses II
Egyp rule in Pal came finally to an end. The
Philis drove the Egyp garrisons from the cities
which commanded the military road through
Canaan, and the long war with the Hittites ex-
hansted the inland towns, so that they made but a
feeble resistance to the Israelites who assailed them
shortly afterward. The Egyptians, however, never
relinquished their claim to be masters of Canaan,
and when the Philis power had been overthrown by
David we find the Egyp king again marching
northward and capturing Gezer (1 K 9 16).
Meanwhile the country had become to a large
extent Israelite. In the earlier days of the Israelitish
invasion the Canaanitish towns had been destroyed
and the people massacred; later the two peoples
intermarried, and a mixed race was the result.
The portraits accompanying the names of the places


taken by Shishak in southern Pal have Amorite
features, and the modern fellahin of Pal are Canaan-

ite rather than Jewish in type.
Canaanitish culture was based on that of Baby-
lonia, and begins with the introduction of the use
of copper and bronze. When Canaan


6. Culture became a Bab province, it naturally
shared in the civilization of the ruling
power. The religious beliefs and deities of Baby-


lonia were superimposed upon those of the primitive
Canaanite. The local Baal or “lord” of the soil
made way for the “lord of heaven,” the Sun-god of
the Babylonians. The “high-place” gradually be-
came a temple built after a Bab fashion. The sacred
stone, once the supreme object of Canaanitish wor-
ship, was transformed into a Beth-el or shrine of an
indwelling god. The gods and goddesses of Baby-
lonia migrated to Canaan; places received their
names from Nebo or Nin-ip; Hadad became Amurrft
“the Amorite god”; Istar passed into Ashtoreth, and
Asirtu, the female counterpart of Asir, the national
god of Assyria, became Ashérah, while her sanc-
tuary, which in Assyria was a temple, was identified
in Canaan with the old fetish of an upright stone or
log. But human sacrifice, and more esp. the sac-
rifice of the firstborn son, of which we find few
traces in Babylonia, continued to be practised with
undiminished frequency until, as we learn from the
excavations, the Israelitish conquest brought about
its suppression. The human victim is also absent,
from the later sacrificial tariffs of Carthage and
Marseilles, its place being taken in them by the
ram. According to these tariffs the sacrifices and
offerings were of two kinds, the zaw‘at or sin offering
and the shelem or thank-offering. The sin offering
was given wholly to the god; part of the thank-
offering would be taken by the offerer. Birds which
were not allowed as a sin offering might constitute
a thank-offering. Besides the sacrifices, there were
also offerings of corn, wine, fruit and oil.

What primitive Canaanitish art was like may be
seen from the rude sculptures in the Wadi el-Qana

near Tyre. Under Bab influence it
7. Art rapidly developed. Among the Can
spoil captured by Thothmes III were
tables, chairs and staves of cedar and ebony inlaid
with gold or simply gilded, richly embroidered
robes, chariots chased with silver, iron tent poles
studded with precious stones, “bowls with goats’
heads on them, and one with a lion’s head, the
workmanship of the land of Zahi’’ (the Phoen coast),
iron armor with gold inlay, and rings of gold and
silver that were used as money. At Taanach, gold
and silver ornaments have been found of high ar-
tistic merit. To the Israelites, fresh from the
desert, the life of the wealthy Canaanite would
have appeared luxurious in the extreme.

The position of Canaan made it the meeting-
place of the commercial routes of the ancient world.
The fleets of the Phoen cities are cele-
brated in the Am Tab, and it is prob-
able that they were already engaged
in the purple trade. The inland towns
of Canaan depended not only on agriculture but
also on a carrying trade: caravans as well as ‘‘com-
mercial travelers’ (damgari) came to them from
Cappadocia, Babylonia and Egypt. Bronze, silver,
lead, and painted ware were brought from Asia
Minor, together with horses; naphtha was exported
to Babylonia in return for embroidered stuffs;
copper came from Cyprus, richly chased vessels of
the precious metals from Crete and corn from Egypt.
Baltic amber has been found at Lachish, where a
furnace with iron slag, discovered in the third
Amorite city, shows that the native iron was worked
before the age of the Israelitish conquest. The
manufacture of glass goes back to the same epoch.


8. Com-
merce


Canaanitess
Canneh


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


552


As far back as 2500 BC, alabaster and limestone
had been sent to Babylonia from the quarries of the
Lebanon.

Long before the age of Abraham the Bab seal-
cylinder had become known and been imitated in
Syria and Canaan. But it was not
until Canaan had been made a Bab
province under the Khammu-rabi
dynasty that the cuneiform system of
writing was introduced together with the Bab lan-
guage and literature. Henceforward schools were
established and libraries or archive-chambers formed
where the foreign language and its complicated
syllabary could be taught and stored. In the
Mosaic age the Taanach tablets show that the
inhabitants of a small country town could corre-
spond with one another on local matters in the
foreign language and script, and two of the Tell
el-Amarna letters are from a Canaanitish lady. The


9. Art of
Writing


naturally to convey the idea of sluggishness. In
the account of the plagues (Ex 7 19), names are
used descriptively to designate the different waters
of Egypt: n*héroth, “flowing streams,” for the main
channels of the river, and y*’Grim for other streams,
which by contrast must mean, as it should accord-
ing to its use by the Egyptians, “the sluggish
streams,”’ i.e. ‘‘canals,’ as it is rendered by the
Revisers. This meaning of the word being thus
clearly established, it is appropriately used in the
RVm in the other instances of its occurrence in like
circumstances. Kye


CANANAEAN, k4-na-né’an, CANAANITE, ka’-
nan-it. See Stmon (CANANAEAN).


CANDACE, kan’ da-sé (Kav8axn, Kanddéke): Queen
of the Ethiopians (Acts 8 27). Pliny states that the
name Candace had already been borne for many


official notices of the name by which each year was
known in Babylonia were sent to Canaan as to
other provinces of the Bab empire in the cuneiform
script; one of these, dated in the reign of Khammu-
rabi’s successor, has been found in the Lebanon.


LireraTurse.—H. Vincent, Canaan d'aprés I’ explora-
tion récente, 1907; G. A. Smith, Historical Geography
of the Holy Land, 1894; Publications of the Palestina
Exploration Fund; E. Sellin, Tell Ta'annek and Eine
Nachlese auf dem Tell Ta‘'annek, 1904-5; Schumacher,
Tell Mutesellim, 1909; Thiersch, Die neueren Ausgra-
bungen in Paldstina, 1908.

See, further, Arxitz; ARvADITE; Baa; GIRGASHITE;
Hittite; Hivirz; Jepusire; KapmMonire; KeEnizzits:
Pavestine; Perizzire; Repuaim; SInire; TEMANITE.

A. H. Sayce

CANAANITESS, ka’nan-it-es. See Saua; Baru-


SHUA.


CANALS, kasnala’ (DYS", y°’drim): The word
“canals” occurs in several places in the RVm (Ex
719; 85; Isa 19 6; Nah 3 8). y*’dris an Egyp
word, the designation of the Nile (Brugsch, Geogr,
1, 8, 78). The proper name of the Nile as a god
was Hapi. There were several common designa-
tions of the Nile, but the usual one was y°’dr, Heb
pl. y’drim. The primary meaning of y*’dr in Egyp
is not certain, but its significance in use for the
Nile is plain enough. All the waters in Egypt
were of the Nile and this word y’’dr was used to
denote all of them, the Nile and all its ramifications
through the whole irrigating system. Thus y’drtm,
Niles, came to be used. As only the main channels
of the Nile had much current, the y’érim came


Cannas in Eorrt.


years by the queens of Ethiopia (vi.29). See Erxsro-
pia. Her treasurer, ‘‘a eunuch of great authority,”
was baptized by Philip the Evangelist on his return
from worshipping in Jerus.


CANDLE, kan‘d’l, CANDLESTICK, kan’d’1-stik
CR, nér; Abxvos, hichnos; WIND, mendrah; dwyxvie,
luchnia):

(1) “Candle” is found in the OT, AV, as the
rendering of nér, and in the NT for luchnos. In all
places except Jer 25 10 and Zeph 1 12 (see m) RV
gives the more exact rendering ‘lamp.’ See Lamp.
Candle, in our sense of the term, was unknown to
antiquity.

(2) “Candlestick” stands for what was a common
and indispensable article of ancient house furniture,
a lamp-stand (m*ndrdh). Accordingly we find it
mentioned in a case thoroughly representative of
the furnishings of an oriental room of the plainer
sort, in the account of ‘the prophet’s chamber”
given in 2K 410. Here we find that the furniture
consisted of a “bed,” a “table,” a “seat,” and a
“candlestick,” or lamp-stand. The excavations of
Petrie and Bliss at Lachish (Tell el-Hesy, 104), not
to mention others, help to make it clear that a lamp-
stand is meant _in passages where the Heb word,
ménorah, or its Gr equivalent luchnia, is used. Ac-
cordingly throughout the NT, RV has consistently
rendered luchnia by “stand” (Mt 6 15; Mk 4 21;
Lk 8 16; 11 33).

(3) The ‘candlestick’? of Dnl 5 5 is rather the
candelabrum (nebhrashia’) of Belshazzar’s ban-


553


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Canaanitess
Canneh


queting-hall. The “golden candlestick” of the
tabernacle and the temple requires special treat-


ment. See CanpLesticK (GOLDEN); TABERNA-
CLE.
(4) Certain figurative uses of “candle” and


“candlestick” in the Bible demand attention. The
ancient and still common custom of the East of
keeping a house lamp burning night and day gave
rise to the figure of speech so universally found in
oriental languages by which the continued pros-
perity of the individual or the family is set forth
by the perennially burning lamp (see Job 29 3:
‘““vhen his lamp shined upon my head’’; Ps 18 28:
“Thou wilt light my lamp”). The converse in
usage is seen in many passages—(see Job 18 6:
“His lamp above him shall be put out”; 21 17:
“How oft is it that the lamp of the wicked is put
out’; Prov 24 20: ‘The lamp of the wicked shall
be put out”; Jer 25 10: “Takefromthem ... . the
light of the lamp’’). The same metaphor is used in
Rev 2 5 to indicate the judgment with which the
church of Ephesus was threatened: ‘‘I will move
thy candlestick out of its place.” ‘The seven golden
candlesticks’ (Rev 1 20) which John saw were ‘“‘the
seven churches,” the appointed light-bearers and
dispensers of the religion of the risen Christ. Hence
the significance of such a threat.
Gro. B. Eacer
CANDLESTICK, kan’d’l-stik, THE GOLDEN,
gold’'n (WV, menorah, lit. “lamp-stand”): An
important part of the furniture of the tabernacle
and temples. See TABERNACLE; TEMPLE; Lamp.
The candlestick is first met with in the descrip-
tions of the tabernacle (Ex 25 31-39; 37 17-24).
It was, with the utensils connected with
1, The it (snuffers, snuff dishes), to be made
Tabernacle of pure beaten gold, of one piece, a
talent in weight (Ex 25 39). It con-
sisted of a pedestal or base, of a central stem (the
name “candlestick” is specially given to this), of
six curving branches—three on each side—and of
seven lamps resting on the tops of the branches
and stem. Stem and branches were ornamented


es . eee ‘


Pers : . «|
Fic. 1.—Golden Candlestick (from Arch of Titus).


a


with cups like almond-blossoms, knops and flowers
—four of this series on the stem, and three on each
of the branches. Some, however, understand the
“cup” to embrace the “knop” and “flower” (calyx
and corolla), The shape of the pedestal is uncer-
tain. Jewish tradition suggests three small feet;
the representation of the candlestick on the Arch
of Titus has a solid, hexagonal base (see Fig. 1).


The position of the candlestick was on the 8. side
of the holy place (Ex 40 24).
In Solomon’s temple the single golden candlestick
was multiplied to ten, and the position was altered.
The candlesticks were now placed in
2. Temple front of the Holy of Holies, five on one
of Solomon side, five on the other (1 K 7 49; 2 Ch
47). Further details are not given in
the texts, from which it may be presumed that the
model of the tabernacle candlestick was followed.
The second temple reverted to the single golden


candlestick. When the temple was plundered by

Antiochus Epiphanes, the candle-
3. Temple stick was taken away (1 Macc 1 21);
of Zerub- after the cleansing, a new one was
babel made by Judas Maccabaeus (4 49.50).


The same arrangement of a single
golden candlestick, placed on the S. side of the holy
place, was continued in Herod’s Temple (Jos, BJ, V,


v, 5). It was this which, carried away
4. Temple by Titus, was represented on his Arch
of Herod at Rome.


: The immediate object of the candle-
stick was to give light in the holy place. The lamps
were lighted in the
evening and burned

till the
6. Use and morning
Symbolism (Ex 30 7.

8; Lev 24
3; 18 3 3; 2 Ch 13
11), light being ad-
mitted into the temple
during the day by the upper windows. Jos in his
cosmical speculations (BJ, V, v, 5) takes the seven
lamps to signify the seven planets. In Zechariah’s
vision of the golden candlestick (4 2 ff), the seven
lamps are fed by two olive trees which are inter-
preted to be “the two anointed ones,” Zerubbabel
and Joshua—the civil and spiritual representatives
of the theocracy. The candlestick here, like the
seven candlesticks in Rev 1 20.21, symbolizes the
church of God, then in its OT form, the idea con-
veyed being that God’s church is set to be a light-
giver in the world. Cf Christ’s words (Mt 5 14.16;
Lk 12 35), and Paul’s (Phil 2 15).

The oldest known representation of the seven-
branched candlestick is on a coin of Antigonus,


Fic. 2.—Coin of Antigonus
(40-37 BC).


’ cir 40 BC (see Madden’s Coins of the Jews, 102).
' For literature see TABERNACLE; TEMPLE.


J ORR
CANE, kan. oes


CANKER, kan’kér.
CANKERED, kan‘kérd (Jas 5 3 RV, “‘rusted’’).


CANKER-WORM, kan’kér-wirm (P27, yelek,
[Joel 1 4; 2 25; Nah 3 15.16]): The name given
to a larval stage of the Locust (q.v.). See also
CATERPILLAR.


CANNEH, kan’e (132, kannéh; Xavaa, Chanda):
Mentioned in Ezk 27 23 in connection with Haran
and Eden as one of the places with which Tyre had
commercial relations. This is the only reference
to the place and the site is unknown. Gesenius
and others think it is probably the same as Calneh
of Am 6 2 or of Gen 10 10, and Calno of Isa 10
9. According to the Tgs, Eusebius, and Jerome,
this place is identical with Ctesiphon, which was
situated on the Tigris. One codex of De Rossi has
made this identification in the passage in Ezk 27
93. Cornill thinks Canneh is the Calnch of Am
6 2, but Cheyne thinks the name is really non-
existent. He says the words rendered ‘“‘and Can-
neh and Eden” should rather be ‘‘and the sons of
Eden.” A. W. Forrune


See REED.


See GANGRENE.


Canon of the OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


554


CANON, kan‘un, OF THE OLD TESTAMENT,
THE:


I. Inrropucrory
1. The Christian Term ‘‘Canon”
. The Corresponding Hebrew Expression
The ‘‘ Hidden Books”' of the Jews A
. The Determining Principle in the Formation of
the Canon
The Tripartite Division of the OT
How Account for the Tripartite Division ?
IL ExaMINaTION OF THE WITNESSES
The OT’s Witness to Itself
The Samaritan Pentateuch
The LXX Version
Ecclus, or the Wisdom of Jesus ben Sirach
. The Prologue to Ecclesiasticus
1 and 2 Maccabees
Philo
The NT as a Witness
. 4 Esdras
10. Josephus .
11. The Councils of Jamnia
12. The Talmud
13. Jewish Doubts in the 2d Cent. AD
14. Summary and Conclusion
III. Tur Canon IN THE CuRrisTIAN CHURCH
1. In the Eastern or Onental Church
2. In the Western Church
LivERATURE


I. Introductory.—The problem of how we came
by 39 books known as OT “Scripture” is a purely
historical investigation. The question involved
is, not who wrote the several books, but who made
them into a collection, not their origin or contents,
but their history; not God’s part, but man’s. Our
present aim, accordingly, must be to trace the process
by which the various writings became “‘Scripture.”’

The word “‘canon”’ is of Christian origin, from the
Gr word xavév, kanén, which in turn is probably

borrowed from the Heb word, “3p,


Per obo


6 OO 8 Cr ec RO ES


1. The kdneh, moeaning a reed or measuring
Christian rod, hence norm or rule. Later it
Term came to mean a rule of faith, and
“Canon” eventually a catalogue or list. In


present usage it signifies a collection
of religious writings Divinely inspired and hence
authoritative, normative, sacred and _ binding.
The term occurs in Gal 6 16; 2 Cor 10 13-16;
but it is first employed of the books of Scripture
in the technical sense of a standard collection or
body of sacred writings, by the church Fathers of
the 4th cent.; e.g. in the 59th canon of the Council
of Laodicea (363 AD); in the Festal Epistle of
Athanasius (865 AD); and by Amphilochius,
archbishop of Iconium (395 AD).
How the ancient Hebrews expressed the concep-
tion of canonicity is not known; but it is safe to
say that the idea, as an idea, existed
2. The long before there was any special
Correspond- phrase invented to express it. In the
ing Heb NT the word “Scriptures’’ conveys
Expression unquestionably the notion of sacred~
ness (Mt 21 42; Jn 5 39; Acts 18
24). From the Ist cent. AD and following, however,
according to the Talm, the Jews employed the
phrase ‘defile the hands.’”” Writings which were
suitable to be read in the synagogue were designated
as books which “defile the hands.” What this
very peculiar oriental expression may have origi-
nally signified no one definitely knows. Probably
Lev 16 24 gives a hint of the true interpretation.
According to this passage the high priest on the
great Day of Atonement washed not only when
he put on the holy garments of his office, but also
when he put them off. Quite possibly, therefore,
the expression “defile the hands’ signified that the
hands which had touched the sacred writings must
first be washed before touching aught else. The
idea expressed, accordingly, was one akin to that
of taboo, That is to say, just as certain garments
worn by worshippers in encircling the sacred Kaaba
at Mecca are taboo to the Mohammedans of today,
i.c. cannot be worn outside the mosque, but must


be left at the door as the worshippers quit the
sanctuary, so the Heb writings which were fit to be
read in the synagogue rendered the hands of those
who touched them taboo, defiling their hands, as
they were wont to say, so that they must first be
washed before engaging in any secular business.
This seems to be the best explanation of this enig-
matical phrase. Various other and somewhat fanci-
ful explanations of it, however, have been given:
for example, to prevent profane uses of worn-out
synagogue rolls (Buhl); or to prevent placing con-
secrated grain alongside of the sacred rolls in the
synagogues that it might become holy, as the grain
would attract the mice and the mice would gnaw
the rolls (Strack, Wildeboer and others); or to pre-
vent the sacred, worn-out parchments from being
used as coverings for animals (Graetz); or to ‘“de-
clare the hands to be unclean unless previously
washed” (Fiirst, Green). But no one of these ex-
planations satisfies. The idea of taboo is more

likely imbedded in the phrase. :
The rabbins invented a special phrase to desig-
nate rolls that were worn-out or disputed. These
they called g*ndzim, meaning “‘hidden


3. The away.’ Cemeteries filled with Heb
“Hidden manuscripts which have long been
Books” of buried are frequently found today
the Jews in Egypt in connection with Jewish


synagogues. Such rolls might first
be placed in the genizdh or rubbish chamber of the
sanctuary. They were not, however, apocryphal
or uncanonical in the sense of being extraneous or
outside the regular collection. For such the Jews
had a special term s*pharim hiconim, “books that
are outside.” These could not be read in the
synagogues. ‘Hidden books” were rather worn-
out parchments, or canonical rolls which might
by some be temporarily disputed. See APocRYPHA.
Who had the right to declare a writing canonical?
To this question widely divergent answers have
been given. According to a certain
4. The De- class of theologians the several books
termining of the OT were composed by authors
Principle in who were conscious not only of their
the Forma- inspiration but also that their writings
tion of the were destined to be handed down to
Canon the church of future generations as
( sacred. In other words each writer
canonized, as it were, his own writings. For
example, Dr. W. H. Green (Canon, 35f, 106, 110)
says: “No formal declaration of their canonicity
was needed to give them sanction. They were
from the first not only eagerly read by the devout
but believed to be Divinely obligatory... . . Each
individual book of an acknowledged prophet of
Jeh, or of anyone accredited as inspired by Him to
make known His will, was accepted as the word
of God immediately upon its appearance... ..
Those books and those only were accepted as the
Divine standards of their faith and regulative of
their conduct which were written for this definite
purpose by those whom they believed to be inspired
of God. It was this which made them canonical.
The spiritual profit found in them corresponded
with and confirmed the belief in their heavenly
origin. And the public official action which further
attested, though it did not initiate, their canonicity,
followed in the wake of the popular recognition
of their Divine authority. .... The writings of
the prophets, delivered to the people as a declara-
tion of the Divine will, possessed canonical author-
ity from the moment of their appearance... ..
The canon does not derive its authority from the
church, whether Jewish or Christian; the office
of the church is merely that of a custodian and a
witness.” So likewise Dr. J. Davis (Pres.
and Ref. Review, April, 1902, 182).


555


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Canon of the OT


On the contrary, Dillmann (Jahrb, fir deutsche
Theol., III, 420) more scientifically claims that ‘“‘his-
tory knows nothing of the individual books having
been designed to be sacred from their origin. ... .
These books bore indeed in themselves from the
first those characteristics on account of which they
were subsequently admitted into the sacred col-
lection, but yet always had first to pass through a
shorter or longer period of verification, and make
trial of the Divine power resident within them upon
the hearts of the church before they were outwardly
and formally acknowledged by it as Divine books.”
As a matter of fact, the books of the OT are still
on trial, and ever will be. So far as is known, the
great majority of the writers of Holy Scripture did
not arbitrarily hand over their productions to the
church and expect them to be regarded as canon
Scripture. Two parties are involved in the ere
of canonical Scripture—the original authors an
the church—both of whom were inspired by the
same Spirit. The authors wrote inspired by the
Divine Spirit, and the church ever since—Jewish
and Christian alike—has been inspired to recog-
nize the authoritative character of their writings.
And so it will be to the end of time. ‘‘We cannot
be certain that anything comes from God_unless
it. bring us personally something evidently Divine”
(Briggs, The Study of Holy Scripture, 162).

The Jews early divided the OT writings into three
classes: (1) the Térah, or Law; (2) the N*bhi’im,

or Prophets; and (3) the K*thabhim, or


5. The Writings, called in Gr the Hagiographa.
Tripartite © The Térdah included the 5 books of the
Division Pentateuch (Gen, Ex, Lev, Nu, Dt),
of the OT which were called ‘the Five-fifths of


the Law.” The N¢bhi7’tm embraced
(a) the four so-called’ Former Prophets, Josh, Jgs,
1 and 2 8, counted as one book, J and 2 K, also
counted as one book; and (b) the four so-called
Latter Prophets, Isa, Jer, Ezk, and the Twelve
Minor Prophets, counted as one book; a total of 8
books. The K‘thubhim, or Writings, were 11 in all,
including Ps, Prov, and Job, the five Meghillath or
Rolls (Cant, Ruth, Lam, Eccl, Est), Dnl, Ezr-Neh,
counted as one book, and 1 and 2 Ch, also counted
as one book; in all 24 books, exactly the same as
those of the Protestant canon, This was the original
count of the Jews as far as we can trace it back.
Later certain Jewish authorities appended Ruth to
Jgs, and Lam to Jer, and thereby obtained the
number 22, which corresponded to the number of
letters in the Heb alphabet; but this manner of
counting was secondary and fanciful. Still later
others divided 8, K, Ch, Ezr-Neh and Jer-Lam into
two books each respectively and thereby obtained
27, which they fancifully regarded as equivalent to
the 22 letters of the Heb alphabet plus 5, the num-
ber of letters having a peculiar final form when
standing at the end of a word. Jerome states that
22 is the correct. reckoning, but he adds, “Some
count both Ruth and Lam among the Hagiographa,
and so get 24.” 4 Esd, which is the oldest (85-96
AD) witness to the number of books in the OT,
gives 24,
The answer to the question of how to account for
the tripartite division involves the most careful
investigation of the whole process
6. How Ac- by which the canon actually took
count for shape. If the entire canon of the OT
the Tripar- were formed, as some allege, by one
tite Divi- man, or by one set of men, in a single
sion? age, then it is obvious that the books
must have been separated into three
groups on the basis of some material differences
in their contents. If, on the other hand, the proc-
ess of canonization was gradual and extended over
several generations, then the various books were


separated from one another probably because one
section of the canon was closed before certain other
books of similar character were written. At any
rate it is difficult to see why K and Ch are not
included in the same division, and especially strange
that Dnl does not stand among the prophets. ‘To
explain this mystery, mediaeval Jews were wont to
say that “the Prophets were inspired by the spirit
of prophecy, whereas the Writings by the Holy
Spirit,” implying different degrees of inspiration.
But this is a distinction without a difference, the
Holy Spirit and the spirit of prophecy are one and
the same. Modern Protestants distinguish be-
tween the donum propheticum and the munus
propheticum, i.e. between the gift and the office of
prophecy. They allow that Daniel possessed the
gift of prophecy, but they deny that he was Divinely
appointed to the office of prophet. But compare
Mt 24 15, which speaks of ‘Daniel the prophet,”
and on the other hand, Am 7 14, in which Amos
resents being considered a prophet. Oehler modi-
fies this explanation, claiming that the threefold
division of the canon corresponds to the three stages
of development in the religion of Israel, namely,
Mosaism, Prophetism, and Hebraism. According
to Oehler, the Law was the foundation of the entire
canon. From it there were two lines of develop-
ment, one objective, the Prophets, the other sub-
jective, the Writings. But Oehler’s theory does
not satisfactorily account for Ezr and Neh and Ch,
being in the third division; for in what sense can
they be said to be more subjective than Jgs, 8, and
K? The LXX version (250-150 BC) takes no notice
of the tripartite division. The true solution proba-
bly is that the process was gradnal. When all the
witnesses have been examined, we shall probably
discover that the Law was canonized first, the Proph-
ets considerably later, and the Writings last of all.
And it may further become evident that the two
last divisions were collected synchronously, and
hence that the tripartite divisions of the canon are
due to material differences in their,contents as well

as to chronology.
Il. Examination of the Witnesses.—Though the
OT does not tell us anything about the processes
of its own canonization, it does fur-


1. The nish valuable hints as to how the
OT’s Wit- ancient Hebrews preserved their writ-
ness toIt- ings. Thus in Ex 40 20 it is stated
self (cir that the “testimony,” by which is
1450-444 meant the two tables of the Law
BC) containing the Ten Commandments,


was put into the Ark of the Covenant
for safe-keeping. In Dt 31 9.24-26, the laws of
Dt are said to have been delivered to the sons of
Levi, and by them deposited “by the side of the ark
.... that it may be there for a witness against
thee.” Such language indicates that the new law-
book is regarded ‘as a standard of faith and action”
(Driver, Dt, 343). According to 1 K 8 9, when
Solomon brought the Ark up from the city of David
to the Temple, the two tables were still its only
contents, which continued to be carefully preserved.
According to 2 K 11 12, when Joash was crowned
king, Jehoiada the high priest is said to have given
(lit. “put upon”) him “the testimony,’ which
doubtless contained “the substance of the funda-
mental laws of the covenant,” and was regarded as
“the fundamental charter of the constitution”
(ef H. E. Ryle, Canon of the OT, 45). Likewise
in Prov 26 1, it is stated that a large number of
proverbs were copied out by Hezekiah’s men.
Now all these, and still other passages which might
be summoned, witness to the preservation of cer-
tain portions of the OT. But preservation is not
synonymous with canonization. A writing might
easily be preserved without being made a standard


Canon of the OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


556


of faith and conduct. Nevertheless the two ideas
are closely related; for, when religious writings
are sedulously preserved it is but natural to infer
that their intrinsic value was regarded as correspond-
ingly precious.

Two other passages of paramount importance
remain to be considered. The first is 2 K 22 8 ff,
describing the finding of the “Book of the Law,’’
and how Josiah the king on the basis of it instituted
a religious reformation and bound the people to
obey its precepts. Here is an instance in which
the Law, or some portion of it (how much no one
can say), is regarded as of normative and authori-
tative character. The king and his coadjutators
recognize at once that it is ancient and that it con-
tains the words of Jeh (2 K 22 13.18.19). Its
authority is undisputed. Yet nothing is said of
its ‘‘canonicity,” or that it would ‘‘defile the hands”’;
consequently there is no real ground for speaking
of it as ‘the beginnings of the canon,’ for in the
same historic sense the beginnings of the canon are
to be found in Ex 24 7. The other passage of
paramount importance is Neh 8 8f, according to
which Ezra is said to have “read in the book, in
the law of God, distinctly.” Not only did Ezra
read the Law; he accompanied it with an interpre-
tation. This seems to imply, almost beyond ques-
tion, that in Ezra’s time (444 BC) the Law, i.e. the
Pent, was regarded as canonical Scripture. This
is practically all that the OT says about itself,
though other passages, such as Zec 7 12 and Dnl
9 2 might be brought forward to show the deep
regard which the later prophets had for the writ-
ings of their predecessors. The former of these
is the locus classicus in the OT, teaching the in-
spiration of the Prophets; it is the OT | to 2 Tim
3 16.

Chronologically the OT is of course our most
ancient witness. It brings us down to 444 BC.

The next in order is the Samaritan


2. The Pent, the history of which is as follows:
Samaritan About 432 BC, as we know from Neh
Pentateuch 138 28 and Jos (Ant, XI, vii, 2—viii,
(cir 432 4), Nehemiah expelled from the Jewish
BC) colony in Jerus Manasseh, the polyg-


amous grandson of Eliashib the high
priest and son-in-law of Sanballat. Manasseh
founded the schismatic community of the Samari-
tans, and instituted on Mt. Gerizim a rival temple-
worship to that at Jerus. Of the Samaritans there
still survive today some 170 souls; they reside in
Shechem and are known as “the smallest religious
sect in the world.” It is true that Jos, speaking of
this event, confuses chronology somewhat, making
Nehemiah and Alexander the Great contemporaries,
whereas a cent. separated them, but the time ele-
ment is of little moment. The bearing of the whole
matter upon the history of the formation of the
canon is this: the Samaritans possess the Pent
only; hence it is inferred that at the time of Manas-
seh’s expulsion the Jewish canon included the Pent
and the Pent only. Budde (#B col. 659) says:
“Tf alongside of the Law there had been other
sacred writings, it would be inexplicable why these
last also did not pass into currency with the Samari-
tans.’ Such a conclusion, however, is not fully
warranted. It is an argument from silence. There
are patent reasons on the other hand why the Samar-
itans should have rejected the Prophets, even though
they were already canonized. For the Samaritans
would hardly adopt into their canon books that
glorified the temple at Jerus. It cannot, accord-
ingly, be inferred with certainty from the fact that
the Samaritans accept the Pent only, that there-
fore the Pent at the time of Manasseh’s expulsion
was alone canonical, though it may be considered
a reasonable presumption.


The LXX version in Gr is the first tr of the OT
ever made; indeed the OT is the first book of any
note in all lit. to receive the honor of


3. The being tr? into another tongue. This
Septuagint fact in itself is indicative of the esteem
Version in which it was held at the time. The
(cir 250- —- work of tr was inaugurated by Ptolemy
150 BC) Philadelphus (285-247 BC) and prob-


ably continued for well-mgh a cent.

(cir 250-150 BC). Aristeas, a distinguished officer
of Ptolemy, records how it came about. It appears
that Ptolemy was exceedingly fond of books, and
set his heart on adding to his famous collection in
Alexandria a tr of the Heb Pent. In order to ob-
tain it, so the story goes, the king set free 198,000
Jewish slaves, and sent them with presents to Jerus
to ask Eleazar the high priest for their Law and
Jewish scholars capable of translating it. Six
learned rabbis from each tribe (6X12=72) were
sent. They were royally feasted; 70 questions
were asked them to test their wisdom, and after
72 days of coéperation and conference they gave
the world the OT in the Gr language, which is
known as the LXX version. To this fabulous
story, Christian tradition adds that the rabbis
did the work of translating in 72 (some say 36)
separate cells on the island of Pharos, all working
independently of each other, and that it was found
at the expiration of their seclusion that each had
produced a tr exactly word for word alike, hence
supernaturally inspired. Justin Martyr of the
2d cent. AD says that he was actually shown by
his Alexandrian guide the ruins of these LXX cells.
The story is obviously a fable. The kernel of real
truth at the bottom of it is probably that Ptolemy
Philadelphus about the middle of the 3d cent. BC
succeeded in obtaining a tr of the Law. The other
books were tr? subsequently, perhaps for private
use. The lack of unity of plan in the books outside
the Law indicates that probably many different
hands at different times were engaged upon them.
There is a subscription, moreover, at the close of
the tr of Est which states that Lysimachus, the
son of Ptolemy in Jerus, tr? it. But the whole was
apparently completed before Jesus ben Sirach the
younger wrote his Prologue to Ecclus (cir 132 BC).
Now the LXX version, which was the Bible of
Our Lord and His apostles, is supposed to have
included originally many of the Apocrypha! books.
Furthermore, in our present LXX, the canonical
and Apocryphal books stand intermingled and in an
order which shows that the translators knew noth-
ing of the tripartite division of later Judaism, or if
they did they quite ignored it. The order of the
books in our English OT is of course derived from
the LXX through the Vulg of St. Jerome. The
books in the LXX are arranged as follows: Pent,
Josh, Jgs, Ruth, 1 and 28, 1 and 2 K, 1 and 2 Ch,
1 and 2 Esd, Neh, Tob, Jth, Est, Job, Ps, Prov,
Eccl, Wisd, Ecclus, Hos, Am, Mic, Joel, Ob, Jon,
Nah, Hab, Zeph, Hag, Zec, Mal, Isa, Jer, Bar,
Lam, Ep. Jer, Ezk, Dnl, 1, 2 and 3 Macc. On
the basis of the LXX, Catholics advocate what is
known as the “larger”? canon of the Jews in Alex-
andria; Protestants, on the other hand, deny the
existence of an independent canon in Alexandria
in view of the “smaller” canon of the Jews in Pal.
The actual difference between the Catholic and
Protestant OTs is a matter of 7 complete books and
portions of two others: viz. Tob, Jth, Wisd, Ecclus,
Bar, 1 and 2 Mace, together with certain additions
to Est (10 4—-16 24) and to Dnl (3 24-90; Three;
Sus ver 13 and Bel ver 14). These Protestants
reject as apocryphal because there is no sufficient
evidence that they were ever reckoned as canonical
by the Jews anywhere. The fact that the present
LXX includes them is far from conclusive that the


557


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Canon of the OT


original LXX did, for the following reasons: (1) The
design of the LXX was purely literary; Ptolemy
and the Alexandrians were interested in building up
a library. (2) All the extant MSS of the LXX are
of Christian not Jewish origin. Between the actual
tr of the LXX (cir 250-150 BC) and the oldest
MSS of the LXX extant (cir 350 AD) there is a
chasm of fully 500 years, during which it is highly
possible that the so-called Apocryphal books
crept in. (8) In the various extant MSS of the
; the Apocryphal books vary in number
and name. For example, the great Vatican MS,
which is probably ‘the truest representative which
remains of the Alexandrian Bible,” and which
comes down to us from the 4th cent. AD, contains
no Book of Mace whatever, but does include i Esd,
which St. Jerome and Catholics generally treat
as apocryphal. On the other hand, the Alexandrian
MS, another of the great MSS of the LXX, dat-
ing from the 5th cent. AD, contains not only the
extra-canonical book of 1 Esd, but 3 and 4 Mace,
and in the NT the Ist and 2d Epistles of Clement,
none of which, however, is considered canonical
by Rome. Likewise the great Sinaitic MS, hardly
less important than the Vatican as a witness to the
LXX and like it dating from the 4th cent. AD,
omits Bar (which Catholics consider canonical),
but includes 4 Macc, and in the NT the Epistle of
Barnabas and the Shepherd of Hermas; all of
which are excluded from the canon by Catholics.
In other MSS, 3 Macc, 3 Esd and Pr Man are
occasionally included. The problem as to how
many books the original LXX version actually
included is a very complicated one. The probabil-
ity is that it included no one of these variants.
(4) Still another reason for thinking that there never
existed in Egypt a separate or “larger’’ canon is
the fact that during the 2d cent. AD, the Alexan-
drian Jews adopted Aquila’s Gr version of the OT
in lieu of their own, and it is known that Aquila’s
text excluded all Apocryphal books. Add to all
this the fact that Philo, who lived in Alexandria
from cir 20 BC till 50 AD, never quotes from one of
these Apocryphal books though he often does from
the canonical, and that Origen, who also resided in
Alexandria (cir 200 AD), never set his imprimatur
upon them, and it becomes reasonably convincing
that there was no “larger” canon in Alexandria.
The value of the evidence derived from the LXX,
accordingly, is largely negative. It only indicates
that when the tr of the OT into Gr was made in
Alexandria, the process of canonization was still
incomplete. For had it been actually complete,
it is reasonable to suppose that the work of tr
would have proceeded according to some well-
defined plan, and would have been executed with
greater accuracy. As it is, the translators seem to
have taken all sorts of liberties with the text, adding
to the books of Est and Dnl and omitting fully
one-cighth of the text of Jer. Such work also
indicates that they were not executing a public
or ecclesiastical trust, but rather a private enter-
prise. Our necessary conclusion, therefore, is that
the work of canonization was probably going on in
Pal while the work of tr was proceeding in Alexan-
dria. r
Our next witness is Jesus ben Sirach who (cir
170 BC) wrote a formidable work entitled Ecclus,
otherwise known as Sir. The author
4. Ecclus, lived in Jerus and wrote in Heb. His
or the Wis- book is a book of Wisdom resembling
dom of Prov; some of his precepts approach
Jesus ben the high level of the Gospel. In many
Sirach (cir respects Ecclus is the most important
170 BC) of all the Apocryphal books; theo-
logically it is the chief monument of
primitive Sadduceeism. In chs 44-60, the author


sings a “hymn to the Fathers,” eulogizing the
mighty heroes of Israel from Enoch to Nehemiah,
in fact from Adam to Simon, including the most
famous men described in the OT, and making ex-
plicit mention of the Twelve Prophets. These
facts would indicate that the whole or, at least,
the most of the OT was known to him, and that
already in his day (180 BC) the so-called Minor
Prophets were regarded as a special group of writ-
ings by themselves. What the value of Ecclus
is as a witness, however, depends upon the inter-
pretation one places on 24 33, which reads: “I
will yet pour out doctrine as prophecy and leave
it unto generations of ages.” From this it is in-
ferred by some that he feels himself inspired and
capable of adding to the canon already in existence,
and that, though he knew the full prophetie canon,
he did not draw any very definite line of demarka-
tion between his own work and the inspired writ-
ings of the prophets. For example, he passes over
from the patriarchs and prophets of Israel to Simon
the son of Onias, who was probably the high priest
in his own time, making no distinction between
them. But this may have bcen partly due to
personal conceit; ef 39 12, “Yet more will I utter,
which I have thought upon; and I am filled as the
moon at the full.” Yet, perhaps, in his day still
only the Law and the Prophets were actually
canonized, but alongside of these a body of lit.
was being gathered and gradually augmented
of a nature not foreign to his own writings, and
therefore not clearly marked off from literary com-
positions like his own. Yet to Sirach the Law
is everything. He identifies it with the highest
wisdom; indeed, all wisdom in his judgment is
derived from a study of the Law (cf 19 20-24;

15 1-18; 24 23; 2 16; 39 1).
The Prologue or Preface to Ecclus is our next
witness to the formation of the canon. It was
written by the grandson of Jesus ben


5. The Sirach, who bore his grandfather’s
Prologue name (cir 132 BC). Jesus ben Sirach
toEcclus the younger tr? in Egypt his grand-
(cir 132 father’s proverbs into Gr, and in doing
BC) so added a Preface or Prologue of his


own. In this Prologue, he thrice
refers to the tripartite division of the OT. In
fact the Prologue to Ecclus is the oldest witness we
have to the threefold division of the OT books.
He says: “Whereas many and great things have
been delivered unto us by the Law and the Prophets,
and by others, ... . my grandfather, Jesus, when
he had given himself to the reading of the Law,
and the Prophets, and other books of our Fathers,
and had gotten therein good judgment (RV “having
gained great familiarity therein’’), was drawn on also
himself to write something pertaining to learning
and wisdom..... For the same things uttered
in Heb and tr? into another tongue, have not the
same force in them; and not only these things, but
the Law itself, and the Prophets, and the rest of the
books, have no small difference, when they are
spoken in their own language.” ‘These are explicit
and definite allusions to the threefold division of the
OT writings, yet only the titles of the first and second
divisions are the technical names usually employed;
the third is especially vague because of his use of
the terms, “the other books of the Fathers,” and
“the rest of the books.’”” However, he evidently
refers to writings with religious contents; and,
by “the other books of the Fathers,” he can hardly
be supposed to have meant an indefinite number,
though he has not told us which they were or what
was their number. From his further statement
that his grandfather, having immersed himself
in the Law and the Prophets, and other books of the
Fathers, felt drawn on also himself to write some-


Canon of the OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


558


thing for the profit of others, it may be inferred that
in his time there was as yet no definite gulf fixed
between canonical writings and those of other
men, and that the sifting process was still going

on (cf W. R. Smith, OT JC, 178-79).
1 Macc was written originally in Heb; 2 Macc
in Gr, somewhere between 125 and 70 BC. The
author of 1 Macc is acquainted, on the


6. Land2 one hand, with the deeds of John
Mace (be- Hyrcanus (135 to 105 BC), and knows
tween 125 nothing on the other of the conquest
and 70 BC) of Pal by Pompey (63 BC). The value


of this book as a witness to the history
of the canon centers about his allusions to Daniel
and the Psalms. In 1 Macc 1 54, he tells how
Antiochus Epiphanes “set up the abomination of
desolation” upon the altar at Jerus, referring most
likely to Dnl 9 24-27; and in 1 Macc 2 59.60
he speaks of Ananias, Azarias and Misael, who by
believing were saved from the fiery furnace, and of
Daniel, who was delivered from the mouths of the
lions (cf Dnl 1 7; 3 26; 6 23). From these allu-
sions, it would seem as though the Book of Dnl was


at that time regarded as normative or canonical.’


This is confirmed by 1 Macc 7 16.17, which intro-
duces a quotation from Ps 79 2, with the solemn
formula, “‘According to the words which he wrote’;
which would suggest that the Ps also were already
canonical,

2 Mace, written cir 124 BC, also contains a
couple of passages of considerable importance to
us in this investigation. Both, however, are found
in a spurious letter purporting to have been sent
by the inhabitants of Judaea to their fellow-country-
men residing in Egypt. The first passage (2 Mace
2 13) tells how Nehemiah, “founding a library,
gathered together the acts of the kings, and the
prophets, and of David, and the epistles of the kings
concerning holy gifts.”’ These words throw no
special light upon the formation of the canon,
but they do connect with the name of Nehemiah
the preservation of public documents and historical
records of national interest, and how he, as a lover
of books, founded a library. This is in perfect
agreement with what we know of Nehemiah’s
character, for he compiled the genealogy of Neh
7; besides, collection precedes selection. The
other passage (2 Macc 2 14) reads: ‘In like manner
also Judas gathered together all things that were
lost by reason of the war we had, and they remain
with us.” Though found in a letter, supposed to be
spurious, there is every reason for believing this
statement to be true. For when Antiochus, the
arch enemy of the nation, sought to stamp out the
religion of the Jews by destroying their books (cf
1 Macc 1 56.57), what would have been more
natural for a true patriot like Judas than to attempt
to re-collect their sacred writings? ‘‘Thisstatement,
therefore,” as Wildeboer says, ‘‘may well be worthy
of credence” (The Origin of the Canon of the OT, 40).
Though it yields nothing definite as to the number
of the books recovered, it is obvious that the books
collected were the most precious documents which
the nation possessed. They were doubtless re-
ligious, as was the age.

Philo is our next witness. He flourished in
Alexandria between cir 20 BC and 50 AD, leaving be-

hind him a voluminousliterature. Un-
7. Philo fortunately, he does not yield us much
(cir 20 BC- of positive value for our present
60 AD) purpose. His evidence is largely nega-

tive. True, he nowhere mentions
the tripartite division of the OT, which is known
to have existed in his day. Nor does he quote
from Ezk, the Five Megilloth (Cant, Ruth, Lam,
Eccl, Est), Dnl, Ch, or from the Twelve Minor
Prophets, except Hos, Jon, and Zec. Moreover


he held a loose view of inspiration. According
to Philo, inspiration was by no means confined to
the sacred Scriptures; all truly wise and virtuous
men are inspired and capable of expressing the
hidden things of God. But as Dr. Green (Canon, ‘
130) rightfully contends, ‘“Philo’s loose views of
inspiration cannot be declared irreconcilable with
the acceptance of a fixed canon, unless it is first
shown that he places others whom he thinks in-
spired on a level with the writers of Scripture.
This he never does.” Philo’s reverence for the
“Law” was unbounded. In this respect he is the
type of other Alexandrians. He quotes predom-
inatingly from the Law. Moses was to him the
source of all wisdom, even the wisdom of the Gen-
tiles. Concerning the laws of Moses, he is reported
by Eusebius as saying: ‘“‘They have not changed
so much as a single word in them. They would
rather die a thousand deaths than detract anything
from these laws and statutes.’ On the other
hand, Philo never quotes any of the Apocryphal
books. Hence it may safely be assumed that his
canon was essentially ours.

The evidence furnished by the NT is of the
highest importance. When summed up, it gives

the unmistakable impression that
8. The NT when the NT was written (cir 50-
asa Wit- 100 AD) there was a definite and
ness (cir 50 fixed canon of OT Scripture, to which
-100 AD) authoritative appeal could be made.

And first, too much importance can
scarcely be attached to the names or titles ascribed
to the OT writings by the authors of the NT:
thus, “the scripture’ (Jn 10 35; 19 36; 2 Pet
1 20), ‘the scriptures” (Mt 22 29; Acts 18 24)
“holy scriptures’ (Rom 1 2), “sacred writings’
(2 Tim 3 15), “the law” (Jn 10 34; 12 34;
15 25; 1 Cor 14 21), “law and prophets’? (Mt
5 17; 712; 2240; Lk 1616; 24 44; Acts
13 15; 28 23). Such names or titles, though they
do not define the limits of the canon, certainly
assume the existence of a complete and sacred
collection of Jewish writings which are alread
marked off from all other lit. as separate and fixed.
One passage (Jn 10 35) in which the term “serip-
ture,” is employed seems to refer to the OT canon
as a whole; “and the scripture cannot be broken.”
In like manner the expression “law and prophets”
is often used in a generic sense, referring to much
more than merely the lst and 2d divisions of the
OT; it seems rather to refer to the old dispensation
as a whole; but the term “the law” is the most
general of all. It is frequently applied to the
entire OT, and apparently held in Christ’s time
among the Jews a place akin to that which the
term “the Bible” does with us. For example,
in Jn 10 34; 12 34; 16 25, texts from the prophets
or even from the Ps are quoted as part of “the
Law”; in 1 Cor 14 21 also, Paul speaks of Isa
28 11 as a part of “the law.” These names and
titles, accordingly, are exceedingly important;
Nose are never applied by NT writers to the Apoc-
rypha.

.One passage (Lk 24 44) furnishes clear evidence
of the threefold division of the canon. But here
again, as in the Prologue of Sir, there is great un-
certainty as to the limits of the 3d division. Instead
of saying “the law, the prophets and the writ-
ings,”’ Luke says, “the law, the prophets and the
psalms.” But it is obvious enough why the Pss
should have been adduced by Jesus in support of
His resurrection. It is because they especially
testify of Christ; they were, therefore, the most
important part of the 3d division for His immediate
purpose, and it may be that they are meant to
stand a _potiori for the whole of the 3d division
(cf Budde, #B, col. 669).


559


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Canon of the OT


Another passage ae 23 35; ef Lk 11 51) seems
to point to the final order and arrangement of the
books in the OT canon. It reads: ‘That upon
you may come all the righteous blood shed on the
earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous unto the
blood of Zachariah son of Barachiah, whom ye
slew between the sanctuary and the altar.”” Now,
in order to grasp the bearing of this ver upon the
matter in hand, it must be remembered that in the
modern arrangement of the OT books in Heb,
Ch stands last; and that the murder of Zachariah
is the last recorded instance in this arrangement,
being found in 2 Ch 24 20.21. But this murder
took place under Joash king of Judah, in the 9th
cent. BC. Theré is another which is chronologi-
eally later, namely, that of Uriah son of Shemaiah
who was murdered in Jehoiakim’s reign in the 7th
cent. BC (Jer 26 23). Accordingly, the argu-
ment is this, unless Ch already stood last in Christ’s
OT, why did He not say, “from the blood of Abel
unto the blood of Uriah”? He would then have
been speaking chronologically and would have
included all the martyrs whose martyrdom is
recordedinthe OT. But He rather says, “from the
blood of Abel unto the blood of Zachariah,” as
though He were including the whole range of OT
Scripture, just as we would say “from Genesis to
Malachi.” Hence it is inferred, with some degree
of justification also, that Ch stood in Christ’s time,
as 1t does today in the Heb Bible of the Massorets,
the last book of an already closed canon. Of
course, in answer to this, there is the possible ob-
jection that in those early days the Scriptures were
still written by the Jews on separate rolls.

Another ground for thinking that the OT canon
was closed before the NT was written is the numer-
ous citations made in the NT from the OT. Every
book is quoted except Est, Eccl, Cant, Ezr, Neh,
Ob, Nah, and Zcph. But these exceptions are not
serious. The Twelve Minor Prophets were always
treated by the Jews en bloc as one canonical work;
hence if one of the twelve were quoted all were
recognized. And the fact that 2 Ch 24 20.21
is quoted in Mt 23 35 and Lk 11 51 presupposes
also the canonicity of Ezr-Neh, as originally these
books were one with Ch, though they may possibly
have already been divided in Jesus’ day. As for
Est, Eccl, and Cant, it is easy to see why they
are not quoted: they probably failed to furnish
NT writers material for quotation. The NT
writers simply had no occasion to make citations
from them. What is much more noteworthy, they
never quote from the Apocryphal books, though
they show an acquaintance with them. Professor
Gigot, one of the greatest of Roman Catholic author-
ities, frankly admits this. In his General Intro-
duction to the Study of the Scriptures, 43, he says:


“They never quote them explicitly, it is true, but -


time and again they borrow expressions and ideas
from them.” Asa matter of fact, NT writers felt
free to quote from any source; for example, Paul
on Mars’ Hill cites to the learned Athenians an
astronomical work of the Stoic Aratus of Cilicia,
or perhaps from a Hymn to Jupiter by Cleanthes
of Lycia, when he says, “For we are also his off-
spring” (Acts 17 28). And Jude vs 14.15 almost
undeniably quotes from En (1 9; 60 8)—a work
which is not recognized as canonical by any except
the church of Abyssinia. But in any case, the mere
quoting of a book does not canonize it; nor, on
the other hand, does failure to quote a book ex-
clude it. Quotation does not necessarily imply
sanction; no more than reference to contemporary
lit. is incompatible with strict views of the canon.
Everything depends upon the manner in which the
quotation is made. In no case is an Apocryphal
book cited by NT authors as “Scripture,” or as the


work of the Holy Spirit. And the force of this
statement is not weakened by the fact that the
authors of NT writings cited the LXX instead of
the original Heb; for, “they are responsible only
for the inherent truthfulness of each passage in
the form which they actually adopt” (Green, Canon,
145). As a witness, therefore, the NT is of para-
mount importance. For, though it nowhere tells
us the exact number of books contained in the OT
canon, it gives abundant evidence of the existence
already in the lst cent. AD of a definite and fixed

canon.
4 Esd in Lat (2 Esd in Eng.) is a Jewish apoca-
lypse which was written originally in Greek toward
the close of the Ist cent. (cir 81-96


9. 4 Esd AD). The passage of special interest
(cir 81-96 to us is 14 19-48 which relates in
AD) most fabulous style how Ezra is given


spiritual illumination to reproduce
the Law which had been burned, and how, at the
Divine command, he secludes himself for a period
of 40 days, after which he betakes himself with
five skilled scribes to the open country. There, a
cup of water is offered him; he drinks, and then
dictates to his five amanuenses continuously for 40
days and nights, producing 94 books of which 70
are kept secret and 24 published. The section of
supreme importance reads as follows: “And it
came to pass, when the forty days were fulfilled,
that the Most High spake, saying, ‘The first that
thou hast written, publish openly, that the worthy
may read it; but keep the seventy last, that thou
mayest deliver them only to such as be wise among
the people; for in them is the spring of understand-
ing, the fountain of wisdom, and the stream of
knowledge.’ And I did so” (4 Esd 14 45-48).
The story is obviously pure fiction. No wonder
that a new version of it arose in the 16th cent.,


according to which the canon was completed, not


by Ezra alone, but by a company of men known
as the Great Synagogue. From the legend of 4
Esd it is commonly inferred that the 24 books which
remain after subtracting 70 from 94 are the ca-
nonical books of the OT. If so, then this legend is
the first witness we have to the number of books
contained in the OT canon. This number corre-
sponds exactly with the usual number of: sacred
books according to Jewish count, as we saw in §5
above. The legend, accordingly, is not without
value. Even as legend it witnesses to a tradition
which existed as early as the 1st Christian cent.,
to the effect that the Jews possessed 24 specially
sacred books. It also points to Ezra as the chief
factor in the making of Scripture and intimates that
the OT canon has long since been virtually closed.
Flavius Josephus, the celebrated Jewish his-
torian, was born 37 AD. He was a priest and a


Pharisee. About 100 AD, he wrote
10. Jos’ a controversial treatise, known as
Contra Contra Apionem, in defence of the
Apionem” Jews against their assailants, of whom
(cir 100 Apion is taken as a leading repre-
AD) sentative. Now Apion was a famous


grammarian, who in his life had been
hostile to the Jews. He had died some 50 years
before Contra Apionem was written. Jos wrote
in Gr to Greeks. The important passage in his
treatise (I, 8) reads as follows: “For it is not the
case with us to have vast numbers of books dis-
agreeing and conflicting with one another. We
have but twenty-two, containmg the_ history
of all time, books that are justly believed in. And
of these, five are the books of Moses, which com-
prise the laws and the earliest traditions from the
creation of mankind down to the time of his (Moses’)
death. This period falls short but by a little of
three thousand years. From the death of Moses


Canon of the OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


560


to the reign of Artaxerxes, king of Persia, the suc-
cessor of Xerxes, the prophets who succeeded Moses
wrote the history of the events that occurred in
their own time; Im thirteen books. The remaining
four documents comprise hymns to God and prac-
tical precepts tomen. From the days of Artaxerxes
to our own time every event has indeed been
recorded. But these recent records have not been
deemed worthy of equal credit with those which
preceded them, because the exact succession of
the prophets ceased. But what faith we have
placed in our own writings is evident by our con-
duct; for though so great an interval of time (1.e.
since they were written) has now passed, not a
soul has ventured either to add, or to remove, or
to alter a syllable. But it is instinctive in all
Jews at once from their very birth to regard them
as commands of God, and to abide by them, and,
if need be, willingly to die for them.”

The value of this remarkable passage for our
study is obviously very great. In the first place
Jos fixes the number of Jewish writings which are
recognized as sacred at .22, joiniug probably Ruth
to Jgs and Lam to Jer. He also classifies them
according to a threefold division, which is quite
peculiar to himself: 5 of Moses, 13 of the prophets,
and 4 hymns and maxims for human life. The 5
of Moses were of course the Pent; the 13 of the
prophets probably included the 8 regular N«bh?’tm
plus Dnl, Job, Ch, Ezr-Neh, and Est; the ‘4
hymns and maxims” would most naturally consist
of Ps, Prov, Cant and Eccl. There is little doubt
that his 22 books are those of our present Heb
canon.

Another very remarkable fact about Jos’ state-
ment is the standard he gives of canonicity, namely,
antiquity; because, as he says, since Artaxerxes’ age
the succession of prophets had ceased. It was the
uniform tradition of Jos’ time that prophetic inspira-
tion had ceased with Malachi (cir 445-482 BC):
Hence, according to him, the canon was closed in
the reign of Artaxerxes (465-425 BC). He does not
pause to give any account of the closing of the canon;
he simply assumes it, treating it as uunecessary.
Prophecy had ceased, and the canon was according-
ly closed; the fact did not require to be officially
proclaimed. As remarked above. the value of
Jos as a witness is very great. But just here an
important question arises: How literally must we
interpret his language? Was the OT canon actually
closed before 425 BC? Were not there books and
parts of books composed and added to the canon
subsequent to bis reign? Dr. Green seems to take
Jos literally (Canon, 40, 78). But Jos is not always
reliable in his chronology. For example, in his
Antiquities (XI, vi, 13) he dates the story of Esther
as occurring in the reign of Artaxerxes I (whereas
it belongs to Xerxes’ reigu), while in the same work
CXI, v, 1) he puts Ezra and Nehemiah under Xerxes
(whereas they belong to the time of Artaxerxes).
On the whole, it seems safer on internal grounds to
regard Jos’ statements concerning the antiquity of
the Jewish canon as the language not of a careful
historian, but of a partisan in debate. Instead of
expressing absolute fact in this case, he was reflect-
ing the popular belief of his age. Reduced to its
lowest terms, the element of real truth in what he
says was simply this, that he voiced a tradition
which was at that time universal and undisputed;
one, however, which had required a long period, per-
haps hundreds of years, to develop. Hence we
conclude that the complete OT canon, numbering
22 books, was no new thing 100 AD.

According to the traditions preserved in the Mish,
two councils of Jewish rabbis were beld (90 and 118
AD respectively) at Jabne, or Jamnia, not far S. of
Joppa, on the Mediterranean coast, at which the


books of the OT, notably Eccl and Cant, were dis-
cussed and their canonicity ratified. Rabbi Gamaliel
IL probably presided. Rabbi Akiba
11. The was the chief spirit of the council.
Councils of What was actually determined by these
Jamnia (90 synods has not been preserved to us
and 118 accurately, but by many authorities
AD) it is thought that the great controversy
which had been going on for over a
cent. between the rival Jewish schools of Hillel and
Shammai was now brought to a close, and that the
canon was formally restricted to our 39 books. Per-
haps it is within reason to say that at Jamnia the
limits of the Heb canon were officially and finally
determined by Jewish authority. Not that official
sanction created public opinion, however, but rather
confirmed it.
The Talm consists of two parts: (1) The Mish
(compiled cir 200 AD), a collection of systematized
tradition; and (2) the Gemara, G°mdra
12. The (completed about 500 AD), a ‘vast and
Talm (200— desultory commentary on the Mish.”
500 AD) A Baraitha’, or unauthorized gloss,
known as the Babha’ Bathr@ 14b, a
Talmudic tractate, relates the “‘order’’ of the various
books of the OT and who ‘‘wrote” or edited them.
But it says nothing of the formation of the canon.
To write is not the same as to canonize; though to
the later Jews the two ideas were closely akin.
As a witness, therefore, this tractate is of little
value, except that it confirms the tripartite division
and is a good specimen of rabbinic speculation.
For the full text of the passage, see Ryle, Canon
of the OT, 273 ff.
During the 2d cent. AD, doubts arose in Jewish
minds concerning four books, Prov, Cant, Eccl,


and Est. In a certain Talmudic
13. Jewish tractate it is related that an attempt
Doubts in was made to withdraw (génaz, ‘‘con-
the 2d ceal,” ‘“‘hide’”’) the Book of Prov on
Cent. AD account of contradictions which were


found in it (cf 26 4.5), but on deeper
investigation it was not withdrawn. In another
section of the Talmud, Rabbi Akiba is represented
as saying concerning Cant: ‘‘God forbid that any
man of Israel should deny that the Song of Songs
defileth the bands, for the whole world is not equal
to the day in which the Song of Songs was given
to Israel. For all Scriptures are holy, but the
Song of Songs is the holiest of the holy.’’ Such
extravagant language inclines one to feel that
real doubt must have existed in the minds of some
concerning the book. But the protestations were
much stronger against Eccl. In one tractate it is
stated: ‘“‘The wise men desired to hide it because
its language was often self-contradictory (cf Eccl
7 3 and 2 2; 4 2 and 9 4), but they did not hide
it because the beginning and the end of it consist
of words from the Torah (ef 1 8; 12 13.14).”
Likewise Est was vigorously disputed by both the
Jerus and Bab Gemaras, because the name of God
was not found in it; but a Rabbi Simeon ben
Lakkish (cir 300 AD) defended its canonicity, put-
ting Esther on an equality with the Law and above
the Prophets and the other Writings. Other
books, for example, Ezekiel and Jonah, were dis-
cussed in post-Talmudic writings, but no serious
objections were ever raised by the Jews against
either. Jonah was really never doubted till the
12th cent. AD. In the case of no one of these
disputed books were there serious doubts; nor did
scholastic controversies affect public opinion.

This brings us to the end of our examination of
the witnesses. In our survey we bave discovered
(1) that the OT says nothing about its canoniza-
tion, but does empiasiie the manner in which the
Law was preserved and recognized as authoritative;


561


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Canon of the OT


(2) that to conclude that the Jews possessed the
Law only, when the renegade Manasseh was ex-
pelled by Nehemiah from Jerus, because


14. Sum-_—_— the Samaritans admit of the Law alone
mary and as the true canon, is unwarrantable;
Conclusion (3) that the LXX version as we know


it from the Christian MSS extant is by
no means a sufficient proof that the Alexandrians
possessed a “larger” canon which included the Apoc;
(4) that Jesus ben Sirach is a witness to the fact
that the Prophets in his day (180 BC) were not yet
acknowledged as canonical; (5) that his grandson
in his Prologue is the first. witness to the customary
tripartite division of OT writings, but does not
speak of the 3d division as though it were already
closed; (6) that the Books of Macc seem to indicate
that the Ps and Dnl are already included in the
canon of the Jews; (7) that Philo’s testimony is
negative, in that he witnesses against the Apocryphal
books as an integral part of Holy Scripture; (8)
that the NT is the most explicit witness of the series,
because of the names and titles it ascribes to the
OT books which it quotes; (9) that 4 Esd is the
first witness to the number of books in the OT can-
on—24; (10) that Jos also fixes the number of books,
but in arguing for the antiquity of the canon speaks
as an advocate, voicing popular tradition, rather than
as a scientific historian; (11) that the Councils of
Jamnia may, with some ground, be considered the
official occasion on which the Jews pronounced upon
the limits of their canon; but that (12) doubts existed
in the 2d cent. concerning certain books; which
books, however, were not seriously questioned.
From all this we conclude, that the Law was
canonized, or as we would better say, was recog-
nized as authoritative, first, cir 444 BC; that the
Prophets were set on an even footing with the Law
considerably later, cir 200 BC; and that the Writ-
ings received authoritative sanction still later, cir
100 BC. There probably never were three separate
canons, but there were three separate classes of writ-
ings, which between 450 and 100 BC_ doubtless
stood on different bases, and only gradually became
authoritative. There is, therefore, ground for
thinking, as suggested above (§ 6), that the trip-
artite division of the OT canon is due to material
differences in the contents as well as to chronology.
Il, The Canon in the Christian Charch.—In
making the transition from the Jewish to the
Christian church, we find the same


1. Inthe canon cherished by all. Christians
Eastern or of all sects have always been disposed
Oriental to accept without question the canon
Church of the Jews. For cents. all branches


of the Christian church were prac-
tically agreed on the limits set by the Jews, but
eventually the western church became divided,
some alleging that Christ sanctioned the ‘larger’
canon of Alexandria, including the Apocrypha,
while others adhered, as the Jews have always done,
to the canon of the Jewsin Pal. Taking the eastern
or oriental church first, the evidence they furnish
is as follows: The Pesh, or Syr version, dating
from cir 150 AD, omits Ch; Justin Martyr (164
AD) held to a canon identical with that of the Jews;
the Canon of Melito, bishop of Sardis, who (cir
170 AD) made a journey to Pal in order carefully
to investigate the matter, omits Est. His list,
which is the first Christian list we have, has been
preserved to us by Eusebius in his Eccl. Hist.,
IV, 26; Origen (d. 254 AD), who was educated in
Alexandria, and was one of the most learned of
the Gr Fathers, also set himself the task of know-
ing the “Heb verity” of the OT text, and gives us a
list (also preserved to us by Eusebius, Eccl. Hist.,
VI, 5) in which he reckons the number of books as
22 (thus agreeing with Jos). Inadvertently he


omits the Twelve Minor Prophets, but this is
manifestly an oversight on the part of either a
scribe or of Eusebius, as he states the number of
books is 22 and then names but 21. The so-called
Canon of Laodicea (cir 363 AD) included the
canonical books only, rejecting the Apocrypha.
Athanasius (d.365 AD) gives a list in which Est is
classed as among the non-canonical books, but he
elsewhere admits that ‘Est is considered canonical
by the Hebrews.” However, he included Bar and
the Epistle of Jeremiah with Jeremiah. Amphiloch-
ius, bishop of Iconium (cir 380 AD), speaks of Est
as received by some only. Cyril, bishop of Jerus
(d. 386 AD), gives a list corresponding with the Heb
canon, except that he includes Bar and the Epistle
of Jeremiah. Gregory of Nazianzus in Cappadocia
(d. 390 AD) omits Est. But Anastasius, patriarch
of Antioch (560 AD), and Leontius of Byzantium
(580 AD) both held to the strict Jewish canon of
22 books. The Nestorians generally doubted
Est. This was due doubtless to the influence of
Theodore of Mopsuestia (cir 390-457 AD) who
disputed the authority of Ch, Ezr, Neh, Est and
Job. The oriental churches as a whole, however,

never canonized the Apocrypha.
Between 100 and 400 AD, the NT writings
became canonical, occupying in the Christian
church a place of authority and sacred-


2. Inthe ness equal to those of the OT. The
Western tendency of the period was to receive
‘Church everything which had been tradition-


ally read in the churches. But the
transference of this principle to the OT writings
produced great confusion. Usage and theory were
often in conflict. A church Father might declare
that the Apocryphal books were uninspired and yet
quote them as “Scripture,” and even introduce
them with the accepted formula, “‘As the Holy
Ghost saith.” Theologically they held to a strict
canon, homiletically they used a larger one. But
even usage was not uniform. 3 and 4 Esd and the
Book of En are sometimes quoted as “Holy Writ,”
yet the western church never received these books
as canonical. The criterion of usage, therefore,
is too broad. The theory of the Fathers was grad-
ually forgotten, and the prevalent use of the LXX
and other versions led to the obliteration of the
distinction between the undisputed books of the
Heb canon and the most popular Apocryphal
books; and being often publicly read in the churches
they finally received a quasi-canonization.
Tertullian of Carthage (cir 150-230 AD) is the
first of the Lat Fathers whose writings have been
preserved. He gives the number of OT books
as 24, the same as in the Talm. Hilary, bishop of
Poitiers in France (350-368 AD), gives a catalogue
in which he speaks of “Jeremiah and his epistle,”’
yet his list numbers only 22. Rufinus of Aquileia
in Italy (d. 410 AD) likewise gives a complete list
of 22 books. Jerome also, the learned monk of
Bethlehem (d. 420 AD), gives the number of ca-
nonical books as 22, corresponding to the 22 letters
of the Heb alphabet, and explains that the five
double books (1 and 2 8, 1 and 2 K, 1 and 2 Ch,
Ezr-Neh, Jer-Lam) correspond to the five final
letters of the Heb alphabet. In his famous Pro-
logus Galeatus or “Helmed Preface” to the books of
8 and K, he declares himself for the strict canon of
the Jews; rejecting the authority of the deutero-
canonical books in the most outspoken manner,
even distinguishing carefully the apocryphal ad-
ditions to Est and to Dnl. As the celebrated Cath-
olic writer, Dr. Gigot, very frankly allows, “Time
and again this illustrious doctor [Jerome] of the
Lat church rejects the authority of the deutero-
canonical books in the most explicit manner”
(General Intro, 56).


Canon of the OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Canon of the NT


562


Contemporaneous with Jerome in Bethlehem lived
Augustine in North Africa (353-480 AD). He was
the bishop of Hippo; renowned as thinker, theo-
logian and saint. In the three great Councils of
Hippo (393) and Carthage (897 and 419 AD), of
which he was the leading spirit, he closed, as it were,
the great debate of the previous generations on the
subject of how large shall be the Bible. In his
essay on Christian Doctrine, he catalogues the books
of Scripture, which had been transmitted by the
Fathers for public reading in the church, giving
their number as 44, with which he says “the author-
ity of the OT is ended.” These probably corre-
spond with the present canon of Catholics. But
it is not to be supposed that Augustine made no
distinction between the proto- and deutero-canon-
ical books. On the contrary, he limited the term
“canonical” in its strict sense to the books which
are inspired and received by the Jews, and denied
that in the support of doctrine the books of Wisd
and Ecclus were of unquestioned authority, though
long custom had entitled them to respect. And
when a passage from 2 Macc was urged by his
opponents in defence of suicide, he rejected their
proof by showing that the book was not received
into the Heb canon to which Christ was witness.
At the third Council of Carthage (397 AD), however,
a decree was ratified, most‘ probably with his ap-
proval, which in effect placed all the canonical and
deutero-canonical books on the same level, and in
the course of time they actually became considered
by some as of equal authority (see DsuTsero-
CanonicAL Booxs). A few years later, another
council at Carthage (419 AD) took the additional
step of voting that their own decision concerning the
canon should be confirmed by Boniface, the bishop
of Rome; accordingly, thereafter, the question of
how large the Bible should be became a matter to be
settled by authority rather than by criticism.

From the 4th to the 16th cent. AD the process
of gradually widening the limits of the canon con-
tiaued. Pope Gelasius (492-496 AD) issued a
decretal or list in which he included the OT apoc-
rypha. Yet even after this official act of the papacy
the sentiment in the western church was divided.
Some followed the strict canon of Jerome, while
others favored the larger canon of Augustine,
without noting his cautions and the distinctions he
made between inspired and uninspired writings.
Cassiodorus (556 AD) and Isidore of Seville (636
AD) place the lists of Jerome and Augustine side
by side without deciding between them. Two
bishops of North Africa, Primasius and Junilius (cir
550 AD) reckon 24 books as strictly canonical and
explicitly state that the others are not of the same
grade. Popular usage, however, was indiscrimi-
nate. Outside the Jews there was no sound Heb
tradition. Accordingly, at the Council of Florence
(1442 AD), ‘“Eugenius IV, with the approval of
the Fathers of that assembly, declared all the
books found in the Lat Bibles then in use to be
inspired by the same Holy Spirit, without distin-
guishing them into two classes or categories’
(cf Gigot, General Intro, 71). Though this bull of
Eugenius IV did not deal with the canonicity of
the Apocryphal books, it did proclaim their in-
spiration. Nevertheless, down to the Council of
Trent (1546 AD), the Apocryphal books possessed
only inferior authority; and when men spoke of
canonical Scripture in the strict sense, these were
not included.

Luther, the great Saxon Reformer of the 16th
cent., marks an epoch in the history of the Christian
OT canon. In translating the Scriptures into
German, he gave the deutero-canonical books an
intermediate position between the OT and the NT.
The Lutheran church, also, while it does not ex-


pressly define the limits of the canon, yet places the
Apocryphal writings by themselves as distinct and
separate from Holy Scripture. This indeed was the
attitude of all the early Reformers. In the Ziirich
Bible of 1529, as in the Genevan version in English
of 1560, the Apocryphal books were placed apart
with special headings by themselves. Thus the
early Reformers did not entirely reject the Apoc-
ryphal writings, for it was not an easy task to do
so in view of the usage and traditions of centuries.

Rome had vacillated long enough. She realized
that something must be done. The Reformers
had sided with those who stood by Jerome. She
therefore resolved to settle the matter in an ecclesi-
astical and dogmatic manner. Accordingly the
Council of Trent decreed at their fourth sitting
(April 8, 1546), that the Apocryphal books were
equal in authority and canonical value to the other
books of sacred Scripture; and to make this decree
effective they added: “If, however, anyone receive
not as sacred and canonical the said books entire
with all their facts, and as they have been used to
be read in the Catholic church, and as they are
contained in the Old Lat Vulg ed... . let him
be anathema.” The decree was the logical out-
come of the ever-accumulating snowball tendency
in the western church. The historical effect of it
upon the church is obvious. It closed forever
the field of Bib. study against all free research.
Naturally, therefore, the Vatican Council of 1870
not only reiterated the decree but found it easy to
take still another step and canonize tradition.

Repeated endeavors were made during the 16th
and 17th cents. to have the Apocryphal books
removed from the Scriptures. The Synod of Dort
(1618-19), Gomarus, Deodatus and others, sought
to accomplish it, but failed. The only success
achieved was in getting them separated from the
truly canonical writings and grouped by themselves,
as in the Gallican Confession of 1559, the Anglican
Confession of 1562, and the Second Helvetic Con-
fession of 1566. The Puritan Confession went
farther, and declared that they were of a purely
secular character. The various continental and
Eng. versions of the Bible then being made like-
wise placed them by themselves, apart from the
acknowledged books, as a kind of appendix. For
example, the Ziirich Bible of 1529, the French
Bible of 1535, Coverdale’s English tr of 1536,
Matthew’s of 1537, the second ed of the Great
Bible, 1540, the Bishops’ of 1568, and the AV
of 1611. The first Eng. version to omit them al-
together was an ed of King James’s Version pub-
lished in 1629; but the custom of printing them
by themselves, between the OT and the N’T, con-
tinued until 1825, when the Edinburgh Committee
of the British and Foreign Bible Society protested
that the Society should no longer translate these
Apocryphal writings and send them to the heathen.
The Society finally yielded and decided to exclude
them (May 3, 1827). Since then, Protestants in
Great Britain and America have given up the prac-
tice of publishing the Apoc as a part of sacred
Scripture. In Europe, also, since 1850, the ten-
dency has been in the same direction. The Church
of England, however, and the American Episcopal
church, do not wholly exclude them; certain “read-
ings” being selected from Wisd, Ecclus and Bar,
and read on week days between October 27 and
November 17. Yet, when the ERV appeared in
1885, though it was a special product of the Church
of England, there was not so much as a reference
to the Apocryphal writings. The Irish church
likewise removed them; and the ARV ignores them
altogether.


Literaturr.—G. Wildeboer, The Origin of the Canon
of the OT, tr4 by B. W. Bacon, London, Luzac & Co.,


563


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Canon of the OT
Canon of the NT


1895; H. E. Ryle, The Canon of the OT, London and
New York, Macmillan, 1892; F. Buhl, Canon and Text
of the OT, tr4 by John MacPherson, Edinburgh, T. & T.
Clark, 1892; W. H. Green, General Intro to the OT,
The Canon, New York, Scribner, 1898; W. Rohertson
Smith, The OT in the Jewish Church, 24 ed, London,
A. & C. Black, 1895; F. E. Gigot, General Intro to the
Holy Scriptures, 3d ed, New York, Cincinnati and Chi-
cago, Benziger Bros., 1903; B. F. Westcott, The Bible in
the Christian Church, London and New York, Macmillan,
1901; C. A. Briges, General Intro to the Study of Holy
Scripture, New York, Scribner, 1899; A. F. Kirkpatrick,
The Divine Library of the OT, London and New York,
Macmillan, 1892; Hastings, DB, III, 1900, art. “OT
Canon"’ by F. H. Woods; Cheney and Black's EB, I,
1899, art. ‘‘Canon'’ by K. Budde; The New Schaf-
Herzog Enc of relprour Knowledge, II, 1908, art. ‘Canon
of Scripture” by H. L. Strack; Jour. of Bib. Lit., 1896,
118-28, art. ‘‘ The Alleged Triple Canon of the OT,” by W.
J. Beecher; Abbé A. Loisy, Histoire du canon del’ ancien
testament, Paris, 1890; J. Fiirst, Der Kanon des AT,
Leipzig, 1868; E. Reuss, Histoire du canon des saintes
éeritures dans U'église chrétienne, Strassburg, 1864, Eng.
tr, Edinburgh , 1891.


Grorcse L. Rosinson
CANON, kan’un, OF THE NEW TESTAMENT,
I. Two Preiiminary ConsipERATIONS
1. Early Christians Had the OT
TI. Taree Staoces or THe Process
1. From the Apostles to 170 AD
Forces Increasing Value of Writings
a) Apologists. Justin Martyr
2. From 170 AD to 220 AD
1) Irenaeus
3. 3d and 4th Cents.
@ Origen
3) Cyprian
Be usahius
tes Council of Carthage. Jerome; Augustine
LitzRATURB
is the collection of 27 books which the church (gener-
ally) receives as its NT Scriptures. The his


THE:
2. No Intention of Writing the NT
3 Clement of Rome; Ignatius; Polycarp
b) Gnostics. Marcion
2) Muratorian Fragment -
Dionysius
(3 Athanasius
I. Two Preliminary Considerations.—The canon
istory


of the canon is the history of the process by which
these books were brought together and their value
as sacred Scriptures officially recognized. That
process was gradual, furthered by definite needs,
and, though unquestionably continuous, is in its
earlier stages difficult to trace. It is always well
in turning to the study of it to have in mind two
considerations which bear upon the earliest phases
of the whole movement. These are:
(1) The early Christians had in their hands
what was a Bible to them, viz. the OT Scriptures.
These were used to a surprising extent
1. Early in Christian instruction. For a whole
Christians cent. after the death of Jesus this
Had the OT was the case. These Scriptures were
read in the churches, and there could
be at first no idea of placing beside them new
books which could for a moment rank with them in
honor and authority. It has been once and again
discussed whether Christianity from the first was
a “book-religion.” The decision of the matter
depends upon what is referred to by the word
“book.”’ Christianity certainly did have from the
very beginning a book which it reverenced—the OT
—but years passed before it had even the begin-
nings of a book of its own. What has been called
“the wealth of living canonical material,’ namely,
prophets and teachers, made written words of sub-
ordinate value. In this very teaching, however,
with its oral traditions lay the begin-


2. NoIn- nings of that movement which was
tention of ultimately to issue in a canon of writ-
Writing ings. (2) When the actual work of
the NT writing began no one who sent forth


an epistle or framed a gospel had before
him the definite purpose of contributing toward the
formation of what we call “the Bible.” All the NT


writers looked for ‘‘the end” as near. Their words,
therefore, were to meet definite needs in the lives of
those with whom they were associated. They had
no thought of creating a new sacred lit. And yet
these incidental occasional writings have come to
be our choicest Scripture. The circumstances and
influences which brought about this result are here
briefly set forth.

HU. Three Stages of the Process.—F or convenience
of arrangement and definiteness of impression the
whole process may be marked off in three stages:
(1) that from the time of the apostles until about
170 AD; (2) that of the closing years of the 2d cent.
and the opening of the 3d (170-220 AD); (8) that
of the 3d and 4th cents. In the first we seek for
the evidences of the growth in appreciation of the
peculiar value of the NT writings; in the second
we discover the clear, full recognition of a large
part of these writings as sacred and authoritative;
in the third the acceptance of the complete canon
in the East and in the West.

(1) The first period extending to 170 AD.—It
does not lie within the scope of this art. to recount

the origin of the several books of the
1. From the NT. This belongs properly to NT
Aposties to Introduction (q.v.). By the end of
170 AD the Ist cent. all of the books of the

NT were in existence. They were, ag
treasures of given churches, widely separated and
honored as containing the word of Jesus or the
teaching of the apostles. From the very first the
authority of Jesus had full recognition in all the
Christian world. The whole work of the apostles
was in interpreting Him to the growing church.
His sayings and His life were in part for the illumina-
tion of the OT; wholly for the understanding of
life and its issues. In every assembly of Christians
from the earliest days He was taught as well as the
OT. In each church to which an epistle was
written that epistle was likewise read. Paul
asked that his letters be read in this way (1 Thess
5 27; Col 4 16). In this attentive listening to
the exposition of some event in the life of Jesus
or to the reading of the epistle of an apostle began
the “authorization” of the traditions concerning
Jesus and the apostolic writings. The widening
of the area of the church and the departure of the
apostles from earth emphasized increasingly the
value of that which the writers of the NT left
behind them. Quite early the desire to have the
benefit of all possible instruction led to the inter-
change of Christian writings. Polycarp (110
AD ?) writes to the Philippians, “I have received
letters from you and from Ignatius. You recom-
mend me to send on yours to Syria; I shall do so
either personally or by some other means. In
return I send you the letter of Ignatius as well as
others which J have in my hands and for which you
made request. I add them to the present one;
they will serve to edify your faith and perseverance’
(Epistle to Phil, XIII). This is an illustration of
what must have happened toward furthering a
knowledge of the writings of the apostles. Just
when and to what extent “collections” of our NT
books began to be made it is impossible to say,
but it is fair to infer that a collection of the Pauline
epistles existed at the time Polycarp wrote to the
Phil and when Ignatius wrote his seven letters to
the churches of Asia Minor, i.e. about 115 AD.
There is good reason to think also that the four
Gospels were brought together in some places as
early as this. A clear distinction, however, is to be
kept in mind between ‘“‘collections’’ and such rec-
ognition as we imply in the word “canonical.” The
gathering of books was one of the steps preliminary
to this. Examination of the testimony to the NT
in this early time indicates also that it 1s given with


Canon of the NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


564


no intention of framing the canonicity of NT books.
In numerous instances only ‘echoes’ of the thought
of the epistles appear; again quotations are incom-
plete; both showing that Scripture words are used
as the natural expression of Christian thought.
In the same way the Apostolic Fathers refer to the
teachings and deeds of Jesus. They witness “to
the substance and not to the authenticity of the
Gospels.” That this all may be more evident
let us note in more detail the witness of the sub-
apostolic age. :

Clemeni of Rome, in 95 AD, wrote a letter in the
name of the Christians of Rome to those in Corinth.
In this letter he uses material found in Mt, Lk,
giving it a free rendering (see chs 46 and 13);
he has been much influenced by the Epistle to the
He (see chs 9, 10, 17, 19, 36). He knows Rom,
Cor, and there are found echoes of 1 Tim, Tit,
1 Pet and Eph.

The Epistles of Ignatius (115 AD) have corre-
spondences with our gospels in several places
(Eph 6; Rom 6, 7) and incorporate language from
nearly all of the Pauline epistles. The Epistle to
Polycarp makes large use of Phil, and besides this
cites nine of the other Pauline epistles. Ignatius
quotes from Mt, apparently from memory; also
from 1 Pet and 1 Jn. In regard to all these three
writers—Clement, Polycarp, Ignatius—it is not
enough to say that they bring us reminiscences or
quotations from this or that book. Their thought
is tinctured all through with NT truth. As we
move a little farther down the years we come to
“The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles” (cir 120
AD in its present form; see Dipacue); the Epistle
of Barnabas (cir 130 AD) and the Shepherd of
Hermas (cir 130 AD). These exhibit the same
phenomena as appear in the writings of Clement,
Ignatius and Polycarp as far as references to the

T are concerned. Some books are quoted, and
the thought of the three writings echoes again and
again the teachings of the NT. They bear distinct
witness to the value of ‘‘the gospel” and the doc-
trine of the apostles, so much so as to place these
clearly above their own words. It is in the Epistle
of Barnabas that we first come upon the phrase
‘Gt is written,” referring to a NT book (Mt) (see
Epis., iv.14). In this deepening sense of value
was enfolded the feeling of authoritativeness,
which slowly was to find expression. It is well to
add that what we have so far discovered was true
in widely separated parts of the Christian world
as e.g. Rome and Asia Minor.

The lit. of the period we are examining was not,
however, wholly of the kind of which we have been
speaking. Two forces were calling out other
expressions of the singular value of the writings
of the apostles, whether gospels or epistles. These
were (a) the attention of the civil government in view
of the rapid growth of the Christian church and
(b) heresy. The first brought to the defence or
commendation of Christianity the Apologists,
among whom were Justin Martyr, Aristides,
Melito of Sardis and Theophilus of Antioch. By
far the most important of these was Justin Martyr,
and his work may be taken as representative. He
was born about 100 AD at Shechem, and died as
a martyr at Rome in 165 AD. His two Apologies
and the Dialogue with Trypho are the sources for
the study of his testimony. He speaks of the
“Memoirs of the Apostles, called Gospels” (Ap.,
1.66) which were read on Sunday interchangeably
with the prophets (i.67). Here emerges that
equivalence in value of these “Gospels” with the
OT Scriptures which may really mark the beginning
of canonization. That these Gospels were our
four Gospels as we now have them is yet a disputed
question; but the evidence is weighty that they


were. (See Purves, Testimony of Justin Martyr
to Early Christianity, Lect V.) The fact that
Tatian, his pupil, made a harmony of the Gospels,
ie. of our four Gospels, also bears upon our inter-
pretation of Justin’s “Memoirs.” (See Hemphill,
The Diatessaron of Tatian.) The only other NT
book which Justin mentions is the Apocalypse;
but he appears to have known the Acts, six epistles
of Paul, He and 1 Jn, and echoes of still other
epistles are perceptible. When he speaks of the
apostles it is after this fashion: “By the power
of God they proclaimed to every race of men that
they were sent by Christ to teach to all the Word
of God” (Ap., 1.39). It is debatable, however,
whether this refers to more than the actual preach-
ing of the apostles. The beginning of the forma-
tion of the canon is in the position and authority
given to the Gospels.

While the Apologists were busy commending or
defending Christianity, heresy in the form of
Gnosticism was also compelling attention to the
matter of the writings of the apostles. From the
beginning gnostic teachers claimed that Jesus had
favored chosen ones of His apostles with a body
of esoteric truth which had been handed down by
secret tradition. This the church denied, and in the
controversy that went on through years the question
of what were authoritative writings became more
and more pronounced. Basilidese.g., who taught in
Alexandria during the reign of Hadrian (AD 117-38),
had for his secret authority the secret tradition of
the apostle Matthias and of Glaucias, an alleged in-
terpreter of Peter, but he bears witness to Mt, Lk,
Jn, Rom, 1 Cor, Eph, and Col in the effort to rec-
ommend his doctrines, and, what is more, gives
them the value of Scripture in order to support more
securely his teachings. (See Philosophoumena of
Hippolytus, VII, 17). Valentinus, tracing his au-
thority through Theodas to Paul, makes the same
general use of NT books, and Tertullian tells us that
he appeared to use the whole NT as then known.

The most noted of the Gnostics was Marcion, a
native of Pontus. He went to Rome (cir 140 AD),
there broke with the church and became a danger-
ous heretic. In support of his peculiar views, he
formed a canon of his own which consisted of Luke’s
Gospel and ten of the Pauline epistles. Herejected
the Pastoral Epistles, He, Mt, Mk, Jn, the Acts,
the Catholic epistles and the Apocalypse, and made
a recension of both the gospel of Lk and the Pauline
epistles which he accepted. His importance, for
us, however, is in the fact that he gives us the first
clear evidence of the canonization of the Pauline
epistles. Such use of the Scriptures inevitably called
forth both criticism and a clearer marking off of
those books which were to be used in the churches
opposed to heresy, and so “in the struggle with
Gnosticism the canon was made.” We are thus
brought to the end of the first. period in which we
have marked the collection of NT books in greater
or smaller compass, the increasing valuation of them
as depositions of the truth of Jesus and His apos-
tles, and finally the movement toward the claim of
their authoritativeness as over against perverted
teaching. No sharp line as to a given year can be
drawn between the first stage of the process and the
second. Forces working in the first go on into the
second, but results are accomplished in the second
which give it its right to separate consideration.

(2) The period from 170 AD to 220 AD —This is
the age of a voluminous theological literature busy

with the great issues of church canon


2. From and creed. It is the period of the
170 AD to great names of Irenaeus, Clement of
220 AD Alexandria, and Tertullian, repre-


senting respectively Asia Minor, Egypt
and North Africa. In passing into it we come into


565 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Canon of the NT


the clear light of Christian history. There is no
longer any question as to a NT canon; the only
difference of judgment is as to its extent. What
has been slowly but surely shaping itself in the
consciousness of the church now comes to clear
expression,

frenaeus.—That expression we may study in
Irenaeus as representative of the period. He was
born in Asia Minor, lived and taught in Rome and
became afterward bishop of Lyons. He had,
therefore, a wide acquaintance with the churches,
and was peculiarly competent to speak concerning
the general judgment of the Christian world. As
a pupil of Polycarp, who was a disciple of John, he
is connected with the apostles themselves. An
earnest defender of the truth, he makes the NT
in great part his authority, and often appeals to it.
The four Gospels, the Acts, the epistles of Paul,
several of the Catholic epistles and the Apocalypse
are to him Scripture in the fullest sense. They
are genuine and authoritative, as much so as the
OT ever was. He dwells upon the fact that there
are four gospels, the very number being prefigured
in the four winds and the four quarters of the earth.
Every attempt to increase or diminish the number
is heresy. Tertullian takes virtually the same posi-
tion (Adv. Marc., iv.2), while Clement of Alexan-
dria quotes all four gospels as “Scripture.” By
the end of the 2d cent. the canon of the gospels
was settled. The same is true also of the Pauline
epistles. Irenaeus makes more than two hundred
citations from Paul, and looks upon his epistles
as Scripture (Adv. Haer., iii.12, 12). Indeed, at
this time it may be said that the new canon was
known under the designation ‘“‘The Gospel and the
Apostles” in contradistinction to the old as “the
Law and the Prophets.” The title ““New Testa-
ment’”’ appears to have been first used by an un-
known writer against Montanism (cir 198 AD).
It occurs frequently after this in Origen and later
writers. In considering all this testimony two
facts should have emphasis: (1) its wide extent:
Clement and Irenaeus represent parts of Christen-
dom which are widely separated; (2) the relation
of these men to those who have gone before them.
Their lives together with those before them spanned
nearly the whole time from the apostles. They
but voiced the judgment which silently, gradually
had been selecting the “Scripture” which they
freely and fully acknowledged and to which they
made appeal.

The Muratorian Fragment.—Just here we come
upon the Muratorian Fragment, so called because
discovered in 1740 by the librarian of Milan,
Muratori. It dates from some time near the end
of the 2d cent., is of vital interest in the study of
the history of the canon, since it gives us a list of
NT books and is concerned with the question
of the canon itself. The document comes from
Rome, and Lightfoot assigns it to Hippolytus.
Its list contains the Gospels (the first line of the
fragment is incomplete, beginning with Mk, but
Mt is clearly implied), the Acts, the Pauline epistles,
the Apocalypse, 1 and 2 Jn (perhaps by implication
the third) and Jude. It does not mention He,
1 and 2 Pet, Jas. In this list we have virtually
the real position of the canon at the close of the
2d cent. Complete unanimity had not been
attained in reference to all the books which are now
between the covers of our NT. Seven books had
not yet found a secure place beside the gospel and
Paul in all parts of the church. The Palestinian
and Syrian churches for a long time rejected the
Apocalypse, while some of the Catholic epistles
were in Egypt considered doubtful. The history
of the final acceptance of these belongs to the third


period.


(8) The period included by the 3d and 4th cents. —
It has been said that ‘the question of the canon
did not make much progress in the
8. 8rd and course of the 3d cent.’’ (Reuss, History
4th Cents. of the Canon of Holy Scripture, 125).
We have the testimony of a few not-
able teachers mostly from one center, Alexandria.
Their consideration of the question of the disputed
book serves just here one purpose. By far the most
distinguished name of the 3d cent. is Origen. He
was born in Alexandria about 185 AD, and be-
fore he was seventeen became an instructor in the
school for catechumens. In 203 he was appointed
bishop, experienced various fortunes, and died in
254. His fame rests upon his ability as an exegete,
though he worked laboriously and successfully in
other fields. His testimony is of high value, not
simply because of his own studies, but also because
of his wide knowledge of what was thought in other
Christian centers in the world of his time. Space
permits us only to give in summary form his
conclusions, esp. in regard to the books still in
doubt. The Gospels, the Pauline epistles, the
Acts, he accepts without question. He discusses
at some length the authorship of He, believes that
“God alone knows who wrote it,” and accepts it as
Scripture. His testimony to the Apocalypse is
given in the sentence, ‘Therefore John the son of
Zebedee says in the Revelation.” He also gives
sure witness to Jude, but wavers in regard to Jas,
2 Pet, 2 and 3 Jn.

Another noted name of this cent. is Dionysius
of Alexandria, a pupil of Origen (d. 265). His
most interesting discussion is regarding the Apoc-
alypse, which he attributes to an unknown John,
but he does not dispute its iuspiration. It is
a singular fact that the western church accepted
this book from the first, while its position in the
East was variable. Conversely the Epistle to
the He was more insecure in the West than in the
East. In regard to the Catholic epistles Dionysius
supports Jas, 2 and 3 Jn, but not 2 Pet or Jude.

In the West the name of Cyprian, bishop of
Carthage (248-58 AD), was most influential. He
was much engaged in controversy, but a man of
great personal force. The Apocalypse he highly
honored, but he was silent about the Epistle to
the He. He refers to only two of the Catholic
epistles, 1 Pet and 1 Jn.

These testimonies confirm what was said above,
viz. that the end of the 3d cent. leaves the question
of the full canon about where it was at the begin-
ning. 1 Pet and 1 Jn seem to have been everywhere
known and accepted. In the West the five Catholic
epistles gained recognition more slowly than in
the East.

In the early part of the 4th cent. Husebius (270-
340 AD), bishop of Caesarea before 315, sets before
us in his Church History (III, chs _lii-xxv) his
estimate of the canon in his time. He does not
of course use the word canon, but he “conducts
an historical inquiry into the belief and practice of
earlier generations.” He lived through the last
great persecution in the early part of the 4th cent.,
when not only places of worship were razed to the
ground, but also the sacred Scriptures were in
the public market-places consigned to the flames
(H#, VIII, 2). It was, therefore, no idle question
what book a loyal Christian must stand for as his
Scripture. The question of the canon had an ear-
nest, practical significance. Despite some obscurity
and apparent contradictions, his classification o
the NT books was as follows: (1) The acknow!l-
edged books. His criteria for each of these was
authenticity and apostolicity and he placed in this
list the Gospels, Acts, and Paul’s epistles, including
He. (2) The disputed books, i.e. those which had


Canopy
Capharsalama


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


566


obtained only partial recognition, to which he
assigned Jas, Jude, 2 Pet and 2 Jn. About the
Apocalypse also he was not sure. In this testimony
there is not much advance over that of the 3d
cent. It is virtually the canon of Origen. All
this makes evident the fact that as yet no official
decision nor uniformity of usage in the church
gave a completed canon. The time, however, was
drawing on when various forces at work were to
bring much nearer this unanimity and enlarge
the list of acknowledged books. In the second
half of the 4th cent. repeated efforts were made to
put an end to uncertainty. Athanasius in one of
his pastoral letters in connection with the publishing
of the ecclesiastical calendar gives a list of the books
comprising Scripture, and in the NT portion are
included all the 27 books which we now recognize.
“These are the wells of salvation,” he writes, “so
that he who thirsts may be satisfied with the say-
ings in these. Let no one add to these. Let
nothing be taken away.’’ Gregory of Nazianzen
(d. 390 AD) also published a list omitting Rev, as
did Cyril of Jerus (d. 386), and quite at the end
of the cent. (4th) Isidore of Pelusium speaks of the
“canon of truth, the Divine Scriptures.” For a con-
siderable time the Apocalypse was not accepted
in the Palestinian or Syrian churches. Athanasius
helped toward its acceptance in the church of
Alexandria. Some differences of opinion, however,
continued. The Syrian church did not accept all
of the Catholic epistles until much later.

The Council of Carthage in 397, in connection
with its decree “that aside from the canonical
Scriptures nothing is to be read in church under
the name of Divine Scriptures,” gives a list of the
books of the NT. After this fashion there was an
endeavor to secure unanimity, while at the same
time differences of judgment and practice continued.
The books which had varied treatment through
these early cents. were He, the Apocalypse and the
five minor Catholic epistles. The advance of
Christianity under Constantine had much to do
with the reception of the whole group of books
in the East. The task which the emperor gave
to Eusebius to prepare “fifty copies of the Divine
Scriptures” established a standard which in time
gave recognition to all doubtful books. In the
West, Jerome and Augustine were the controlling
factors in its settlement of the canon. The publi-
cation of the Vulg virtually determined the matter.

In conclusion let it be noted how much the human
element was involved in the whole process of
forming our NT. No one would wish to dispute a
providential overruling of it all. Also it is well to
bear in mind that all the books have not the same
clear title to their places in the canon as far as the
history of their attestation is concerned. Clear
and full and unanimous, however, has been the
judgment from the beginning upon the Gospels,
the Acts, the Pauline epistles, 1 Pet and 1 Jn.

Lirpraturs.—Reuss, History of the Canon of Holy
Scriptures; E.C. Moore, The NT in the Christian Church;
Gregory, Canon and Text of the NT; Introductions to
NT of Jiilicher, Weiss, Reuss; Zahn, Geschichte des
Neutest. Kanons; Harnack, Das NT um das Jahr 200;
Chronologie der altchristlichen Literatur; Westcott,


The Canon of the NT; Zabn, Forschungen zur Gesch.
des neutest. Kanons.
J. S. Riees


CANOPY, kan’é-pi (MBM, huppah, from a root
meaning ‘to inclose’ or “‘cover’): Isa 45 AV
has “defence,” ERV “canopy,” ARV “covering,”
the last being best, though ‘canopy’ has much
in its favor. In Ps 195 (He 19 6) huppah is
used of the bridegroom’s chamber and in Joel 2 16
of the bride’s. Among the Hebrews the huppah
was originally the chamber in which the_bride
awaited the groom for the marital union. In Jth


10 21; 13 9.15; 16 19 the word canopy occurs as
the Eng. equivalent of the Gr xwvwreior, kénd-
peion, which was primarily a mosquito-net and then
a canopy over a bed, whether for useful or for
decorative purposes. Joun Riczarp SaMPEY


CANTICLES, kan’ti-k’lz.


CAPERBERRY, ka’pér-ber-i (PAN, ’dbhi-
yonah; Kamwapis, kdpparis; Eccl 12 6 RVm):
The tr “the caperberry shall fail” (RV “burst’”’)
instead of ‘desire shall fail” (AV) has the support
of the LXX and of some Talmudic writers (see
G. F. Moore, JBL, X, 55-64), but it is doubtful.

The caperberry is the fruit of the thorny caper,
Capparis spinosa (N.O. Capparidaceae), a common
Pal plant with pretty white flowers and brightly
colored stamens. Largely on account of its habit
of growing out of crevasses in old walls it has been
identified by some with the Hyssop (q.v.). The
familiar “capers” of commerce are the young
buds, but the berries were the parts most used in
ancient times; their repute as excitants of sexual
desire is ancient and widespread. Various parts
of this plant are still used for medical purposes
by the modern peasants of Pal.

E. W. G. Masterman

CAPERNAUM, ka-pér’na-um (Karepvaotp [TR],
Kapapvacty [BND, etc], Kapernaotim, Kaphar-
naotim): The woe spoken by the Master against
this great city has been fulfilled to the uttermost
(Mt 11 23; Lk 10 15). So completely has it
perished that the very site is a matter of dispute
today. In Scripture Capernaum is not mentioned
outside the Gospels. When Jesus finally departed
from Nazareth, He dwelt in Capernaum (Mt 4 13)
and made it the main center of His activity during
a large part of His public ministry. Near by He
called the fishermen to follow Him (Mk 1 16), and
the publican from the receipt of custom (Mt 9 9,
etc). It was the scene of many “mighty works”
(Mt 11 23; Mk 1 34). Here Jesus healed the
centurion’s son (Mt 8 5, etc), the nobleman’s son
(Jn 4 46), Simon Peter’s mother-in-law (Mk 1
31, etc), and the paralytic (Mt 9 1, etc); cast
out the unclean spirit (Mk 1 23, etc); and here
also, probably, He raised Jairus’ daughter to life
(Mk 5 22, etc). In Capernaum the little child
was used to teach the disciples humility, while in
the synagogue Jesus delivered His ever-memorable
discourse on the bread of life (Jn 6).

From the notices in the Gospels we gather that
Capernaum was a city of considerable importance.
Some think that the words “shalt thou be exalted,”
ete (Mt 11 23; Lk 10 15), mean that it stood on
an elevated site. Perhaps more naturally they
refer to the excessive pride of the inhabitants in
their city. It was a customs station, and the resi-
dence of a high officer of the king (Mt 9 9; Jn
4 46, etc). It was occupied by a detachment of
Rom soldiers, whose commander thought the good
will of the people worth securing at the expense of
building for them a synagogue (Mt 8 5; Lk 7 5).
It stood by the sea (Mt 4 13) and from Jn 6 17 ff
(cf Mt 14 34; Mk 6 53), we see that it was either
in or near the plain of Gennesaret.

Jos twice mentions Capernaum. It played no
great part in the history of his time, and seems to
have declined in importance, as he refers to it as a
“village.” In battle in el-Bateihah his horse fell
into a quagmire, and he suffered injury which dis-
abled him for further fighting. His soldiers carried
him to the village of Capernaum (this reference is
however doubtful; the name as it stands is Kephar-
nomon which Niese corrects to Kepharnadkon),
whence he was removed to Tarichaea (Vita, 72).
Again he eulogizes the plain of Gennesaret for its


See Sone or Songs.


TELL HUM—TRADITIONAL CAPERNAUM


567


wonderful fruits, and says it is watered by a most
fertile fountain which the people of the country
call Capharnaum. In the water of this fountain
the Coracinus is found (BJ, III, x, 8). Jos there-
fore corroborates the Bib. data, and adds the infor-
mation as to the fountain and the Coracinus fish.
The fish however is found in other fountains near the
lake, and is therefore no help toward identification.


The Fountain at Khan Minyeh.


The two chief rivals for the honor of representing
Capernaum are Tell Ham, a ruined site on the lake
shore, nearly 2! miles W. of the mouth of the
Jordan; and Khan Minyeh, fully 2} miles farther
west, at the N.E. corner of the plain of Gennesaret.
Dr. Tristram suggested ‘Ain El-Madowwerah, a
large spring inclosed by a circular wall, on the
western edge of the plain. But it stands about a
mile from the sea; there are no ruins to indicate
that any considerable village ever stood here; and
the water is available for only a small part of the


lain.

ei In favor of Tell Him is Onom, which places Cho-
razin 2 miles from Capernaum. If Kerdzeh is Cho-
razin, this suits Tell Ham better than Khan Minyeh.
To this may be added the testimony of Theodosius
(cir 530), Antoninus Martyr (600), and John of
Wirtzburg (1100). Jewish tradition speaks of
Tankhum, in which are the graves of Nahum and
Rabbi Tankhum. Identifying Kefr Nahum with
Tankhum, and then deriving Tell Him from Tan-
khum, some have sought to vindicate the claims of
this site. But every link in that chain of argument
is extremely precarious. A highway ran through
Tell Ham along which passed the caravans to and
from the E.; but the place was not in touch with
the great north-and-south traffic.

There is also no fountain near Tell Him answer-
ing the description of Jos. Of recent advocates of
Tell Ham, it is sufficient to name Schirer (HJP,
IV, 71) and Buhl (GAP, 224f). In this connection
it may be interesting to note that the present writer,
when visiting the place recently (1911), drew his
boatman’s attention to a bit of ruined wall rising
above the greenery W. of the lagoon, and asked what
it was called. Kaniset el Kufry, was the reply,
which may be freely rendered, “church of the
infidels.” “This is just the Arab. equivalent of the
Jewish “church of the minim.”

For Khan Minyeh it may be noted that, Gennesa-
ret corresponds to el-Ghuweir, the plain lying on the
N.W. shore, and that Khan Minyeh stands at the
NE. extremity of the plain; thus answering, as
Tell Him cannot do, the description of the Gospels.
The copious fountains at et-J’abigha, half a mile
to the E., supplied water which was conducted round
the face of the rock toward Khén Minyeh at a
height which made it possible to water_a large
portion of the plain. If it be said that Jos must
Eas been carried to Tell Hum as being nearer the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Canopy
Capharsalama


scene of his accident—see however, the comment
above—it does not at all follow that he was taken
to the nearest place. Arculf (1670) described
Capernaum as on a “narrow piece of ground between
the mountain and the lake.” This does not apply to
Tell Him; but it accurately fits Khan Muinyeh.
Isaac Chelo (1334) says that Capernanm, then in
ruins, had been inhabited by Minim, that is, Jewish
converts to Christianity. The name Minyeh
may have been derived from them. Quaresimus
(1620-26) notes a Khan called Menieh which stood
by the site of Capernaum. Between the ruined
Khan and the sea there are traces of ancient build-
ings. Here the road from the E. united with that
which came down from the N. by way of Khan
Jubb Yusif, so that this must have been an impor-
tant center, alike from the military point of view,
and for customs. This is the site favored by,
among others, G. A. Smith (HGHL, 456f; EB,
s.v.) and Conder. Sanday argued in favor of
Khan Minyeh in his book, The Sacred Sites of
the Gospel, but later, owing to what the present
writer thinks a mistaken view of the relation
between Tell Ham and the fountain at et-Tabigha,
changed his mind (Expos T, XV, 100ff). There
is no instance of a fountain 2 miles distant being
called by the name of atown. Tell Hum, standing
on the sea shore, was independent of this fountain,
whose strength also was spent in a westward direc-
tion, away from Tell Him.

The balance of evidence was therefore heavily
in favor of Khan Minyeh until Professor R. A. 8.
Macalister published the results of his researches.
He seems to be wrong in rejecting the name Tell
Him in favor of Talhum; and he falls into a curious
error regarding the use of the word tell. No one
who speaks Arab., he says, ‘‘would ever think of
applying the word Tell, ‘mound,’ to this flat
widespread ruin.” In Egyp Arab., however, tell
means “ruin”; and Rev. Asad Mansur, a man of
education whose native language is Arab., writes:
“T do not understand what the objectors mean by
the word ‘tell.’ In Arab. ‘tell’ is used for any heap
of ruins, or mound. So that the ruins of Tell Him
themselves are today a ‘tell’” (Expos, April, 1907,
370). Professor Macalister is on surer ground in
discussing the pottery found on the rival sites. At
Khan Minyeh he found nothing older than the
Arab. period, while at Tell Hum pottery of the
Rom period abounds—‘exactly the period of the
glory of Capernaum” (PEFS, April and July,
1907). If this be confirmed by further examination,
it disposes of the claim of Khan Minyeh. Im-
portant Rom remains have now been found between
the ruined Khan and the sea. It is no longer open
to doubt that this was the site of a great Rom city.
The Rom period however covers a long space. The
buildings at Tell Ham are by many assigned to the
days of the Antonines. Is it possible from the
remains of pottery to make certain that the city
flourished in the time of the Herods? If the city
at Tell Him had not yet arisen in the days of Christ,
those who dispute its claim to be Capernaum are
under no obligation to show which city the ruins
represent. They are not the only extensive ruins
in the country of whose history we are in ignorance.


EwIne
CAPH. See Kara.


CAPHARSALAMA, kaf-ar-sal’a-ma, kaf-ar-sa-
la’ma (Xadaporadapa, Chapharsalamd): The site
of an indecisive skirmish between Judas Maccabaeus
and Nicanor, an officer of the king of Syria and
governor of Judaea. The situation cannot be
precisely fixed but it must have been in the neigh-
borhood of Jerus, for Nicanor, after losing 5,000
men, retired with the remainder to “‘the city of


Caphenatha
Captivity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


568


David” (1 Macc 7 26-32). The first part of the
word, “Caphar,”’ means village or hamlet; the
last part has been identified with Siloam and also
ie Khirbet Deir Sellém, about 124 miles W. of
erus.


CAPHENATHA, ka-fen’a-tha.
ATHA.


CAPHIRA, ka-fi’ra (A, Kadipa, Kaphird, B,
Tlepé, Peird): A town whose inhabitants returned
from Babylon with Zerubbabel (1 Esd 5 19). It
corresponds to CHepHiray (Ezr 2 25), which see.


CAPHTHORIM, kaf’thé-rim (DIMDD, kaphts-
rim). See CapHtorim.
CAPHTOR, kaf’tor, CAPHTORIM, kaf’tor-im
(MIMDD, kaphtor, OVIMDD, kaphtorim; Kawraboxia,
Kappadokia, Tadroprety, Gaphtori-


See CHAPHEN-


1. First eim, Kacroprely, Kaphtorietm): The
Theory: country and people whence came the
Crete Philis (Gen 10 14=1 Ch 1 12 [here


the clause “whence went forth the
Philis” should probably come after Caphtorim];
Dt 2 23; Jer 47 4; Am 9 7). Jer (loc. cit.) calls
it an “island”; there is evidence of ancient con-
nection between Crete and Philistia; and the
Philis are called Cherethites, which may mean
Cretans (see CHERETHITES). These considerations
have led many to identify Caphtor with the impor-
tant island of Crete. It should be noted, however,
that the word °&, ’2, used by Jeremiah, denotes not
only “‘isle,” but also ‘‘coastland.”
Ebers (Aegypten und die Buicher Moses, 130 ff)
thought that Caphtor represented the Egyp Kaft-ur,
holding that Kaft was the Egyp name
2. Second for the colonies of Phoenicians in the
Theory: Delta, extended to cover the Phoe-
Phoenicia _nicians in the north and their colonies.
Kaft-ur, therefore, would mean
“Greater Phoenicia.” But.the discovery of Kaptar
among the names of countries conquered by Ptol-
emy Auletes in an inscription on the Temple of Kom
Ombo is fatal to this theory.
A third theory would identify Caphtor with the
Kafto of the Egyp inscriptions. As early as the
time of Thotmes III the inhabitants


3. Third of this land, the Kafti, are mentioned
Theory: in the records. In the trilingual in-
Cilicia scription of Canopus the name is ren-


dered in Gr by Phointké, “Phoenicia.”
This seems to be an error, as the Kaft1 portrayed on
the monuments have no features in common with the
Semites. They certainly represent a western type.
It is held that the Egyp Kafto is a district in
Asia Minor, probably Cilicia. The sea-pirates, the
purasati, whom Rameses III subdued (cir 1200 BC),
entered Syria from the north. The r in the name


is the Egyp equivalent of the Semitic ?. Therefore
Purasati= Pilishti, “Philistines.” And go it is pro-
posed to identify Caphtor with Cilicia. A serious


objection to this theory is the absence of the final ‘‘r’’
in Kafto. McCurdy’s suggestion (HDB) that it
represents a Heb waw, written as a vowel-letter in
an original Kafto, does not carry conviction.

It is impossible to give a certain decision; but
the balance of probability seems still inclined to the
first theory. W. Ewina


CAPPADOCIA, kap-a-di’shi-a (4 KamwaSoxla,
he Kappadokia): An extensive province in eastern
Asia Minor, bounded by the Taurus mountains on
the §., the Anti-Taurus and the Euphrates on the E.,
and, less definitely, by Pontus and Galatia on the
N. and W. Highest mountain, Argaeus, over
13,000 ft. above sea-level; chief rivers, the Pyramus


now Jihan, Sarus now Sihon, and Halys now the
Kuzul; most important cities, Caesarea Mazaca,
Comana, Miletene now Malatia, and Tyana now
Bor. At Malatia the country unrolls itself as a
fertile plain; elsewhere the province is for the most
part composed of billowy and rather barren up-
lands, and bleak mountain peaks and pastures.


TK a“ q aa


Foca CRS Sere Se ceed?


> - OE


Coin of Ariarathes V, Philometer, King of Cappadocia,
163-130 BC.


The Gr geographers called Cappodax the son
of Ninyas, thereby tracing the origin of Cappadocian
culture to Assyria. Cuneiform tablets from Kul
Tepe (Kara Eyuk), deciphered by Professors
Pinches and Sayce, show that in the era of Kham-
murabi (see HammurasBl) this extensive ruin on
the ox-bow of the Halys and near Caesarea Mazaca,
was an outpost of the Assyr-Bab Empire. A
Hittite civilization followed, from about 2000 BC
onward. Malatia, Gurun, Tyana and other old
sites contain important and undoubted Hittite
remains, while sporadic examples of Hittite art,
architecture and inscriptions are found in many
places, and the number is being steadily increased
by fresh discovery. After the Hittites fade from
sight, following the fall of Carchemish, about 718
BC, Cappadocia emerges as a satrapy of Persia.
At the time of Alexander the Great it received a
top-dressing of Gr culture, and a line of native
kings established an independent throne, which
lasted until Cappadocia was incorporated in the
Rom Empire, 17 AD. Nine rulers bore the name
of Ariarathes (RV Arathes) the founder of the
dynasty, and two were named Ariobarzanes.
One of these kings is referred to in 1 Macc 15 22.
The history of this Cappadocian kingdom is in-
volved, obscure and bloody.

Pagan religion had a deep hold upon the popu-
lation prior to the advent of Christianity. Comana
was famous for its worship of the great goddess
Ma, who was served, according to Strabo, by 6,000
priestesses, and only second to this was the worship
paid to Zeus at Venasa.

Representatives from Cappadocia were present
at Pentecost (Acts 2 9), and Peter includes the
converts in this province in the address of his
letter (1 Pet 11). Caesarea became one of the
most important early centers of Christianity.
Here the Armenian youth of noble blood, Krikore,
or Gregory the Illuminator, was instructed in the
faith to which he afterward won the formal assent of
his whole nation. Here Basil governed the churches
of his wide diocese and organized monasticism. His
brother, Gregory of Nyssa, and Gregory Nazianzen,
lived and labored not far away. Cappadocia passed
with the rest of Asia Minor into the Byzantine
Empire, but from its exposed position early fell under
the domination of the Turks, having been conquered
by the Seljukians in 1074. G. E, Waite


CAPTAIN, kap’tin: In AV there are no fewer
than 13 Heb words, and 4 different Gr words,
which are rendered by this one Eng. word. In the
RV some of these are rendered by other Eng. words,
and so we find for “captain”: “marshal” (Jer 61
27; Nah 3 17), “prince” (1 8S 9 16), “governor”
(Jer 61 23.28), while in the case of one of these


569


Heb words a different construction is found al-
together (Jer 13 21).
Of Heb words in the OT rendered by “captain”
(1) the most frequent is WW, sar, which denotes
“a, military commander,” whether of
1. Inthe thousands or hundreds or fifties
OT (Nu 31 48; 18 8 12 and many other
places). Sar is the chief officer of
any department, civil and religious, as well as
military—captain of the guard AV and RV,
chief of the executioners RVm (Gen 37 36);
chief butler (Gen 40 9); chief baker (Gen 40 16);
chief of a district (Neh 3 15); chiefs of tribes
(Naphtali; Zebulun, Ps 68 27); chiefs over gangs
of slaves (Ex 111); chiefs of the priests and
the Levites (Ezr 8 29). (2) AN, rabh, later Heb
for chief of the executioners or captain of the
guard, a title always given to Nebuzar-adan (2 K
26 8ff; Jer 39 9ff) and to Arioch (Dnl 2 14).
Compare also Rab-mag, chief of the magicians (Jer
39 13), and Ashpenaz, chief of the eunuchs (Dnl 1
3). (3) WN, ré’sh, “head” over a host (Israel
in the wilderness, Nu 14 4), over tribes (Dt 29 10,
where RV renders ‘‘heads’’), over thousands (1 Ch
12 20). Abijah, king of Judah, before joining
battle against Jeroboam, claimed “God himself is
with us for our captain” AV, “with us at our
head” RV (2 Ch 13 12), (4) ww, shalish,
originally the third man in the chariot, who, when
the chief occupant was the king, or commander-
in-chief, was of the rank of captain (2 K 7 2;
9 25), the term “third man” being generalized
to mean ‘‘a captain” in 2 K 10 25; 2 Ch 8 9,
where “chief of his captains’? combines (1) and
(4). (5) M32, naghidh, leader by Divine appoint-
ment: of Saul (1 S 9 16, “captain,” AV, “prince”
RV 10 1); of David (2 S 5 2); of Hezekiah (2 K
20 5); with a charge in connection with the temple
(2 Ch 31 13). It is the word used of Messiah
“the prince” (Dnl 9 25), who is also Prince of the
Covenant (11 22). (6) N°W), nds?’, rendered
“captain” in AV Nu 2 3.5.7 only, there in RV and
in other places, both AV and RV, rendered ‘“‘prince.”
In 1 Ch 7 40 “chief of the princes” combines (3)
and (6). (7) MB, pehah, is found almost entirely
in a foreign title denoting “governor,” and belongs
to the later bistory of Israel (Neh 2 7.9; Ezr
8 36; Hag 1 1), rendered ‘‘captain” in exclusively
foreign associations (1 K 20 24; 2 K 18 24; Dnl
327f). (8) PEP, kacin (from root of kadi,
Arab. for “judge”), denotes ‘‘dictator,’”’ almost
“asurper,” and is found in “rulers of Sodom”
AV and RV, “judges of Sodom” RVm (Isa 1 10),
used of Jephthah in sense of ‘‘captain” AV, ‘ ‘chief”’
RV (Jgs 11 6), found combined with (3), ‘head and
captain” (AV, “head and chief” RV Jgs 11 11).
In Josh 10 24 it denotes commanders of troops,
AV “captains of the men of war,” RV ‘‘chiefs of the
men of war.” (9) 2, kar, in Ezk 21 22 “‘to set
captains” AV, is tri “to set battering rams” RV.
(10) 593, ba‘al, only once in “captain of the ward”
(Jer 37.13). (11) “OD, tiphsar, a dignitary
belonging to an oriental court, in AV rendered
“captam,” in RV “marshal” (Nah 317; Jer 51


27). (12) bw, shalltt, in Dnl 2 15 of Arioch, the
king’s captain; in Eccl 8 8 “having power over,”
and in 7 19 used of “mighty men” (RV “rulers’’).
Of Gr words rendered by “captain” in NT there
are the following: (1) épxvvés, archégés, rendered
“captain”? in He 2 10 AV but relegated
2. Inthe to the margin in RV, where “author”
NT


(of their salvation) 1s preferred, this
being the rendering of He 12 2 AV
and RV, “author” (and finisher of our faith),


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Caphenatha
Captivity


“captain” being still retained in RVm. Cf Acts
3 15 and 6 31, where the same Gr word is rendered
“Prince,” the RVm of the former passage giving
“Author.” In the Risen and Ascended Christ the
various conceptions thus expressed are found to
blend. (2) xtAtapxos, chiliarchos, the Lat tribunus
malitum of which there were six to a legion, com-
manding the six cohorts of which it was com-
posed. In its lit. acceptation it would be ‘‘com-
mander of a thousand,”’ and it is so used in Acts 22
28 where it designates the commander of the Rom
garrison in Jerus, consisting of a cohort, and is
rendered ‘‘chief captain” (Jn 18 12; Acts 21 31;
22 24; 24 22). It is used more vaguely in the
sense of ‘military officer’ in Mk 6 21; Rev 6
15; 19 18. (3) ozparnyés, stratégds, used only
by St. Luke in the NT, and almost exclusively of
(a) officials in charge of the Temple (Lk 22 4.52;
Acts 4.1; 6 24.26). The captain of the Temple
had the superintendence of the Levites and priests
who were on guard in and around the Temple, and
under him were strat@goi, who were also captains of
the Temple police, although they took their instruc-
tion from him as their head. He was not only a
priest, but second in dignity only to the high priest
himself; (b) the exception to St. Luke’s general
usage is where the word is used of the chief author-
ities in civil affairs at Philippi; where ‘‘the magis-
trates,’ as the word is rendered (Acts 16 20f),
called themselves ‘‘praetors’’ (stratégot). In the
case of Paul and Silas they placed themselves in
peril of removal from their office by ordering them
to be beaten, being Romans and uncondemned.
(4) orparoreddpy ns, stratopeddrchés, the captain of
the guard to whom Julius of the Augustan band
(according to the TR, Acts 28 16) delivered St.
Paul and his fellow-prisoners. The word has dis-
appeared from RV, but the passage in which it
oceurs has attestation which satisfies Blass, Sir
William Ramsay, and other scholars. It was
supposed that this was the captain of the Praetorian
guard, but Mommsen and Ramsay believe him to be
the princeps peregrinorum castrorum. See Av-
GusTAN Bann; Army, RoMAN. T. Nicou


CAPTIVE, kap’tiv (2, shebh2, 7123, galah; aty-
pédwrtos, aichmdlotos and its derivatives): The fre-
quent references in the OT to captives as men forci-
bly deported (from the Heb root MAW, shabhah) or
inhabiting a land foreign to them (from Heb 723,
galah) reflect the universal practice of the ancient
world. The treatment of captives was sometimes
barbarous (2 S 8 2) but not always so (2 K 6 21.
22). See further under Assir and War.

Figurative: Except in Job 42 10 the fig. use of
the idea is confined to the NT, where reference is
made to the triumphal reign of the Lord Jesus (Lk
4 18; Eph 4 8), or, on the other hand, to the power
of the devil (2 Tim 2 26), or of false teachers (3 6);
cf also Rom 7 23; 2 Cor 10 5. See Captivity.

F, K. Farr


CAPTIVITY, kap-tiv'i-ti (M253, galah, m3,
galath, OVW, shbhath, WIND, shibhyah; peroixecta,
metoikesta) :


I. Orrus Norraern Kincpom (rae Work or AssYRia)
1. wee Campaigns of Shalmaneser II, 860-
825 BC
2. Of Rimmon-nirari III, 810-781 BC
3. Of Tiglath-pileser III, 745-727 BC
4. Of Shalmaneser IV, 727-722 BC—Siege of
Samaria
5. Samaria Captured hy Sargon, 722 BC
6. Depopulation and Repopulation of Samaria
7. The Ten Tribes in Captivity
Or Jupan (rae WorRK OF THE CHALDABAN Power)
Southern Kingdom and House of David
1. Break-up of Assyria
2. Downfall of Nineveh, 606 BC
3. Pharaoh Necoh's Revolt


II.


Captivity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


570


4. Defeat at Carchemish, 604 BC
5. The New Babylonian Empire under Nehuchad-
rezzar, 604-562 BC :
The Mission_of Jeremiah, 626-580 BC
: Herel and Punishment of Jehoiakim, 608-597


6
7. Siege and Surrender of Jerusalem under Jehoia-
chin, 597 BC
8. First_Deportation, 597 BC
The Baskets of Figs
9. The Ministry of Mzekiel, 592-570 BC
0. Jeremiah's Ministry in Jerusalem, 597-588 BC
1. Zedekiah’s Rehellion and Siege of Jerusalem,
588-586 BC
Jeremiah ‘‘ Falling Away to the Chaldaeans”’
12. Destruction of Jerusalem, 586 BC ‘
Flight, Capture, and Punishment of Zedekiah
13. Second Deportation of Inhabitants, 586 BC
14. Third Deportation, 581 BC
(1) Number and Quality of Exiles
2) The Residue Left
edaliah, Governor of Judah
1) Jeremiah and the Flight to Egypt
3 Descendants of the Fugitives, 471-411 BC
16. The Exiles in Bahylon: Their Social Condition,
464-405 BC
17. The Rise and Development of Judaism
18. The Return by Permission of Cyrus, 538 BC
19. Rebuilding of the Temple, 536 BC
Completed 515 BO r
20. eae and Lahors of Ezra and Nehemiah,
445
21. Modern Theories of the Return
22. Importance of the Period Ezra- Nehemiah
LirrraturE
I. Of the Northern Kingdom.—The captivity
of the Northern Kingdom was the work of the
great Assyr power having its seat
1. Western at Nineveh on the Tigris. The em-
Campaigns pire of Assyria, founded nearly 2000
of Shalman- BC, had a long history behind it
eser I, when its annals begin to take notice
860-825 BC of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah.
The reign of Shalmaneser II (860-
825 BC) marks the first contact between these
powers. This is not the Shalmaneser mentioned
in 2 K 17 and 18, who is the fourth of the name
and flourished more than a cent. later. Shal-
maneser II was contemporary during his long reign
with Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, Ahaziah and Joash,
kings of Judah; with Ahab, Ahaziah, Jehoram
and Jehu, kings of Israel; with Hazael and Ben-
hadad II, kings of Syria at Damascus, and with
Mesha, king of Moab. The Assyr authorities for
his reign are an inscription engraved by himself
on the rocks of Armenia; the Black Obelisk
brought by Layard from Nimroud, now in the
British Museum; and the texts engraved on the
bronze gates of Balawdt, discovered by Hormuzd
Rassam in 1878, and recognized as the swinging gates
of Shalmaneser’s palace. From these authorities we
learn that in his 6th year he encountered the com-
bined forces of Damascus, Hamath, Israel, and other
states which had united to oppose his progress west-
ward, and completely routed them in the battle of
Karkar (854 BC). The danger which threatened the
western states in common had brought Syria and
Israel together; and this isin accord with the Scrip-
ture narrative which tells of a covenant, denounced
by God’s prophet, between Ahab and Benhadad (1K
20 34 ff), and mentions a period of three years when
there was no war between Syria and Israel. The
defeat of the allies seems, however, to have broken
up the confederacy, for, soon after, Ahab is found,
with the aid of Jehoshaphat of Judah, attempting
unsuccessfully, and with fatal result to himself, to
recover from the weakened power of Syria the city
of Ramoth-gilead (1 K 22). In another cam-
paign to the West, which likewise finds no record
in Scripture, Shalmaneser received the tribute of
Tyre and Sidon, and of “Yahua of Khumri,” that
is, of Jehu, of the land of Omri, as Israel is called
on the monuments.
The next Assyrian monarch who turned his arms
against the West was Rimmon-nirari III (810-781


BC), grandson of Shalmaneser II. Although he
is not mentioned by name in Scripture, his presence

and activity had their influence upon
2. Of Rim- contemporary events recorded in 2 K.
mon-nirari He caused Syria to let go her hold of
I, 810-781 Israel; and although he brought Israel
BC into subjection, the people of the

Northern Kingdom would rather have
a ruler exercising a nominal sovereignty over them
in distant Nineveh than a king oppressing them in
Damascus. Hence Rimmon-nirari has been taken
for the saviour whom God gave to Israel, ‘so that
they went out from under the hand of the Syrians”
(2 Ik 13 5; cf ver 28).

With the death of Rimmon-nirari in 781 BC, the
power of Assyria received a temporary check, and
on the other hand the kingdom of Judah under
Uzziah and the kingdom of Israel under Jeroboam
II reached the zenith of their political prosperity.
In 745 BC, however, a usurper, Pul, or Pulu,
ascended the throne of Assyria, and reigned as
Tiglath-pileser III. It is by the former name that
he is first mentioned in the Scripture narrative
(2 K 15 19; 1 Ch 5& 26),-and by the latter that
he is mentioned on the monuments. That the two
names belong to one man is now held to be certain
(Schrader, COT, I, 230f).

Tiglath-pileser was one of the greatest. monarchs
of antiquity. He was the first to attempt to con-

solidate an empire in the manner to
3. Of Tig- which the world has become accus-
lath-pileser tomed since Rom times. He was not
II, 745-727 content to receive tribute from the
BC kings and rulers of the states which

he conquered. The countries which
he conquered became subject provinces of his em-
pire, governed by Assyr satraps and contributing
to the imperial treasury. Not long after he had
seated himself on the thronc, Tiglath-pileser, like
his predecessors, turned his attention to the West.
After the siege of Arpad, northward of Aleppo, the
Assyr forces made their way into Syria, and putting
into operation the Assyr method of deportation
and repopulation, the conqueror annexed Hamath
which had sought the alliance and assistance of
Azariah, that is Uzziah, king of Judah. Whether
he then refrained from molesting Judah, or whether
her prestige was broken by this campaign of the
Assyr king, it is not easy to say. In another cam-
paign he certainly subjected Menahem of Israel
with other kings to tribute. What is stated in a
word or two in the Annals of Tiglath-pileser is
recorded at length in the Bible history (2 K 16
19 ff): “There came against the land Pul the king
of Assyria; and Menahem gave Pul a thousand
talents of silver, that his hand might be with him
to confirm the kingdom in his hand. And Menahem
exacted the money of Israel, even of all the mighty
men of wealth, of each man 50 shekels of silver, to
give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria
turned back, and stayed not there in the land.”
In the reign of Pekah, under his proper name of
Tiglath-pileser, he is recorded to have raided the
northern parts of Israel, and carried the inhabitants
away into the land of Assyria (2 K 15 29). We
next hear of Ahaz, king of Judah, appealing to the
Assyrians for help against “these two tails of
smoking firebrands,” Rezin_ of Syria and Pekah,
the son of Remaliah (Isa 7 4). To secure this
help he took the silver and gold of the house of the
Lord, and sent it as a present to the king of Assyria
(2 K 16 8). Meanwhile Tiglath-pileser was ‘set~-
ting out on a new campaign to the West. He
carried fire and sword through Syria and the neigh-
boring lands as far as Gaza, and on his return he
captured Samaria, without, however, razing it to
the ground. Pekah having been slain by his own


571


people, the Assyr monarch left Hoshea, the leader
of the conspiracy, on the throne of Israel as the
vassal of Assyria.
In 727 BC Tiglath-pileser III died and was suc-
ceeded by Shalmaneser IV. His reign was short
and no annals of it have eome to
4, Of Shal- light. In 2 K 17 and 18, however,
maneser IV, we read that Hoshea, relying upon
727-722 BC help from the king of Egypt, thonght
the death of Tiglath-pileser a good
opportunity for striking a blow for independence.
It was a vain endeavor, for the end of the kingdom
of Israel was at hand. The people were grievously
given over to oppression and wickedness, which the
prophets Amos and Hosea vigorously denounced.
Hosea, in particular, was ‘‘the prophet of Israel’s
decline and fall.” Prophesying at this very time
he says: ‘As for Samaria, her king is eut off, as
foam upon the water. The high places also of
Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be destroyed: the
thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars;
and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and
to the hills, Fall on us” (Hos 10 7.8; cf vs 14.15).
No less stern are the predictions by Isaiah and
Micah of the doom that is to overtake Samaria:
“Woe to the crown of pride of the drunkards of
Ephraim, and to the fading flower of his glorious
beauty, whieh is on the head of the fat valley of
them that are overcome with wine” (Isa 28 1).
“For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for
the sins of the house of Israel. What is the trans-
gression of Jacob? is it not Samaria? . . . . There-


the chastising forces of his sovereign.
prisoner outside Samaria and was most likely carried
away to Nineveh. Meanwhile the land was over-
run and the capital doomed to destruction, as the
prophets had declared.
Not without a stubborn resistance on the part
of her defenders did ‘the fortress cease from
Ephraim” (Isa 17 3). It was only
6. Samaria after a three years’ siege that the


Captured Assyrians captured the eity (2 K 17
by Sargon, 5). If we had only the record of the
122 BC Hebrew historian we should suppose


that Shalmaneser was the monarch to
whom fell the rewards and honors of the capture.
Before the surrender of the city Shalmaneser had
abdicated or died, and Sargon, only once mentioned
in Scripture (Isa 20 1), but one of the greatest of
Assyr monarchs, had ascended the throne. From
his numerous inscriptions, recovered from the ruins
of Khorsabad, we Icarn that he, and not Shalman-
eser, was the king who completed the conquest of
the revolted kingdom and deported the inhabitants
to Assyria. “In the beginning [of my reign],”
says Sargon in his Annals, “the city Samaria [I
took] with the help of Shamash, who secures victory
to me [. . . . 27,290 people inhabiters of it] I took
away captive; 50 chariots the property of my
royalty, which were in it I appropriated. nee
the eity] I restored, and more than before I caused
it to be inhabited; people of the lands conquered
by my hand in it [I caused to dwell. My governor
over them I appointed, and tribute] and imposts
just as upon the Assyrians I laid upon them.”
The Assyr Annals and the Scripture history support
and supplement each other at this pomt. The
sacred historian describes the deportation as follows:
“The king of Assyria took Samaria, and carried
Israel away into Assyria, and placed them in Halah,
and on the Habor, the river of Gozan, and in the
cities of the Medes .... because they obeyed
not the voice of Jeh their God, but transgressed


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Captivity


his covenant, even all that Moses, the servant of
Jeh, commanded, and would not hear it, nor do

it” (2 K 17 6.7; 18 11.12). The re-
6. Depopu- population of the conquered territory


lation and is also described by the sacred histori-
Repopula- an: “And the king of Assyria brought
tion of men from Babylon, and from Cuthah,
Samaria and from Avva, and from Hamath


and Sepharvaim, and placed them in
the cities of Samaria instead of the children of
Israel; and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in
the cities thereof” (2 K 17 24). The fact that
Sargon introduced foreign settlers taken in war into
Samaria is attested by inscriptions. That there
were various episodes of deportation and repopu-
lation in connection with the captivity of the
Northern Kingdom appears to be certain. We
have seen already that Tiglath-pileser III deported
the population of the northern tribes to Assyria
and placed over the depopulated country governors
of his own. And at a time considerably later, we
learn that Sargon’s grandson Esarhaddon, and his
great-grandson Ashur-bani-pal, “the great and
noble Osnappar,”’ imported to the region of Samaria
settlers of nations conquered by them in the East
(Ezr 4 2.10). Of the original settlers, whom a
pees carried away by the king of Assyria but
rought back to Bethel, taught ‘the law of the god
of the land,” it is said that ‘‘they feared Jehovah,
and served their own gods, after the manner of the
nations from among whom they had been carried
away” (2 K 17 33). The hybrid stock descended
from those settlers is known to us in later history
and in the Gospels as the Samaritans.
We must not suppose that a clean sweep was made
of the inhabitants of the Northern Kingdom. No
doubt, as in the Bab captivity, “the
7. The Ten poorest of the land were left to be


Tribes in vinedressers and husbandmen” (2 K
Captivity 25 12). The numbers actually de-

ported were but a moiety of the whole
population. But the kingdom of the Ten Tribes


was now at an end. Israel had become an Assyr
province, with a governor established in Samaria.
As regards the Golah—the eaptives of Israel in the
cities of the Medes—it must not be supposed that
they became wholly absorbed in the population
among whom they were settled. We can well
believe that they preserved their Israelitish tra-
ditions and usages with sufficient elearness and
tenacity, and that they became part of the Jewish
dispersion so widespread throughout the East.
It is quite possible that at length they blended with
the exiles of Judah carried off by Nebuchadrezzar,
and that then Judah and Ephraim became one
nation as never before. The name Jew, therefore,
naturally came to include members of what had
earlier been the Northern Confederacy of Israel as
well as those of the Southern Kingdom to which it
properly belonged, so that in the post-exilic period,
Jehudi, or Jew, means an adherent of Judaism
without regard to local nationality.

IL Of the Southern Kingdom (Judah).—The eap-
tivity of Judah was the work of the great Chaldaean
power seated at Babylon on the Euphrates. While
the Northern Kingdom had new dynasties to rule
it in quick succession, Judah and Jerus remained
true to the House of David to the end. The
Southern Kingdom rested on a firmer foundation,
and Jerus with its temple and priesthood secured
the throne against the enemies who overthrew
Samaria for nearly a cent. and a half longer.

Sargon, who captured Samaria in 722 BC, was
followed by monarchs with a great name as con-
querors and builders and patrons of lit., Sennacherib,
Esarhaddon, Ashurbanipal. When Ashurbanipal
died in 625 BC, the dissolution of the Assyr Empire


Captivity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


572


was not far off. Its hold over the West had greatly
slackened, and the tributary peoples were breaking
out into revolt. Bands of Scythians,
1. Break-up a nomad Aryan race, from the region
of Assyria between the Caucasus and the Caspian,
were sweeping through the Assyr Em-
pire as far as Pal and Egypt, and the prophecies of
Jeremiah and Zephaniah reflect their methods of
warfare and fierce characteristics. They were driven
back, however, at the frontier of Egypt, and appear
to have returned to the North without invading
Judah. ;

From the North these hordes were closing in

upon Nineveh, and on all sides the Assyr power

was being weakened. In the ‘‘Burden
2. Downfall of Nineveh,’ the prophet Nahum
of Nineveh, foreshadows the joy of the kingdom of
606 BC Judah at the tidings of its approaching

downfall: “Behold, upon the moun-
tains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings,
that publisheth peace! Keep thy feasts, O Judah,
perform thy vows; for the wicked one shall no more
pass through thee; he is utterly cut off” (Nah 1
15; ef 3 8-11). The Medes regained their inde-
pendence and under their king, Cyaxares, formed
an alliance with the Chaldaeans, who soon after-
ward revolted under the leadership of Nabopolas-
sar, viceroy of Babylon. Rallying these various ele-
ments to his standard Nabopolassar laid siege to
the Assyr capital, and in 606 BC, Nineveh, which
had been the capital city of great conquerors, and
had “multiplied [her] merchants above the stars of
heaven” (Nah 3 16), fell before the combined forces
of the Medes and Chaldaeans, fell suddenly and
finally, to rise no more. Of the new Bab Empire
upon which the Chaldaeans now entered, Nebuchad-
rezzar, whose father Nabopolassar had associated
him with him on the throne, was the first and most
eminent ruler.

That the people of Judah should exult in the
overthrow of Nineveh and the empire for which it
stood we can well understand. Jerus
herself had by God’s mercy remained
unconquered when Sennacherib nearly
a cent. before had carried off from the
surrounding country 200,150 people
and had devastated the towns and fortresses near.
But the hateful Assyr yoke had rested upon Judah
to the end, and not upon Judah only but even upon
Egypt and the valley of the Nile. In 608 BC
Pharaoh Necoh revolted from his Assyr suzerain
and resolved upon an eastern campaign. He had
no desire to quarrel with Josiah of Judah, through
whose territory he must pass; but in loyalty to his
Assyr suzerain Josiah threw himself across the path
of the Egyp invader and perished in the battle of
Megiddo. The Pharaoh seems to have returned to
Egypt, taking Jehoahaz the son of Josiah with
him, and to have appointed his brother Jehoi-
akim king of Judah, and to have exacted a heavy
tribute from the land.

But he did not desist from his purpose to win an
eastern empire. Accordingly he pressed forward

till he reached the Euphrates, where


3. Pharaoh
Necoh’s
Revolt


4. Defeat he was completely routed by the Bab
at Car- army under Nebuchadrezzar in the
chemish, decisive battle of Carchemish, 604 BC.
604 BC The battle left the Chaldaeans undis-


uted masters of Western Asia, and
Judah exchanged the yoke of Assyria for that of
Babylon.

So far as cruelty was concerned, there was little
to choose between the new tyrants and the old
oppressors. Of the Chaldaeans Habakkuk, who flour-
ished at the commencement of the new Empire,
says: ‘They are terrible and dreadful... .. Their
horses also are swifter than leopards, and are more


fierce than the evening wolves; and their horse-
men spread themselves: yea, their horsemen come
from far; they fly as an eagle that hast-
5. The Neweth to devour” (Hab 1 7.8 ARVm).
Babylonian Over Western Asia, including Judah,
Empire Nebuchadrezzar since the battle of Car-
under chemish was supreme. It was vain
Nebuchad- for Judah to coquet with Egypt when
rezzar, 604- Nebuchadrezzar had a long and power-
562 BC ful arm with which to inflict chastise-
ment upon his disloyal subjects.

The mission of Jeremiah the prophet in this crisis
of the history of Judah was to preach obedience
and loyalty to the king of Babylon, and moral
reformation as the only means of escaping the
Divine vengeance impending upon land and people.
He tells them in the name of God of the great
judgment that was to come at the hand of the
Chaldaeans on Jerus and surrounding peoples. He
even predicts the period of their subjection to Chal-
daean domination: ‘And this whole land shall be a
desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations
shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years”
(Jer 25 11). This preaching was unpalatable to
the partisans of Egypt.and to those who believed
in the inviolability of Jerus. But with stern rebuke
and with symbolic action he proclaims the doom of
Jerus, and in the face of persecution and at the risk
of his life, the prophet fulfils his ministry.

Jehoiakim, who was first the vassal of Pharaoh
Necoh, and then of Nebuchadrezzar, was in cor-

ruption and wickedness too faithful
6. Revolt a representative of the people. Jere-
and Punish- miah charges him with covetousness,
ment of the shedding of innocent blood, op-
Jehoiakim, pression and violence (Jer 22 13-19).
608-597 BC The fourth year of Jehoiakim was the

first year of Nebuchadrezzar, who,
fresh from the victory of Carchemish, was making
his sovereignty felt in the western world. The
despicable king of Judah became Nebuchadrez-
zar’s vassal and continued in his allegiance three
years, after which he turned and rebelled against
him. But he received neither encouragement nor
help from the neighboring peoples. ‘‘ Jehovah
sent against him bands of the Chaldeans; and bands
of the Syrians, and bands of the Moabites, and
bands of the children of Ammon, and sent them
against Judah to destroy it, according to the word
of Jehovah, which he spake by his servants the
prophets” (2 K 24 2). The history of the latter
part of Jehoiakim’s reign is obscure. The Heb
historian says that after a reign of eleven years
he slept with his fathers, from which we infer that
he died a natural death. From Daniel we learn
that in the third year of Jehoiakim, Nebuchadrezzar
came up against Jerus and besieged it, and carried
off, along with vessels of the house of God, members
of the seed royal, and of the nobility of Judah, among
whom was Daniel the prophet. That Jehoiakim
was included in what seems to be a first instalment
of the captivity of Judah is expressly affirmed
by the Chronicler who says: “ Against him
[Jehoiakim] came up Nebuchadnezzar. ... and
bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon”
(2 Ch 36 6). However the facts really stand, the
historian adds to the record of the death of Jehoi-
akim and of the succession of Jehoiachin the sig-
nificant comment: “And the king of Egypt came not
again any more out of this land; for the king of Baby-
lon had taken, from the brook of Egypt unto the
river Euphrates, all that pertained to the king of
Egypt” (2 K 24 7).

Jehoiachin who succeeded Jehoiakim reigned
only three months, the same length of time as his
unfortunate predecessor Jehoahaz (2 K 23 31).
The captivity of Jehoahaz in Egypt and the cap-


573


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Captivity


tivity of Jehoiachin in Babylon are lamented in a
striking elegy by Ezekiel, who compares them to
young lions, the offspring of the mother


7. Siege lioness Israel, which learned to catch
and Sur- their prey and devoured men, but were
render of taken in the pit of the nations and
Jerusalem put in rings, so that their roar was
under no more heard in the mountains of
Jehoiachin, Israel (Ezk 19 1-9). Nebuchadrezzar
597 BC came in person while his servants were


besieging Jerus, and Jehoiachin sur-
rendered at discretion. So the king and his mother
and his servants and his princes and his officers
were carried off with the mighty men of valor,
even ten thousand captives. ‘None remained,
save the poorest sort of the people of the Jand.
He carried out thence all the treasures of the
house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the king’s
house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold,
which Solomon king of Israel had made in the
temple of Jehovah, as Jehovah had said. And

all the men of might, even seven thou-
8. First sand, and the craftsmen and the smiths
Deportation,a thousand, all of them strong and
597 BC apt for war, even them the king of

Babylon brought captive to Babylon.
And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah, Jehoi-
achin’s father’s brother, king in his stead, and
changed his name to Zedekiah’ (2 K 24 10-17).
From Jehoiachin dates the carrying away into Baby-
lon, the year being 597 BC. The unfortunate
monarch lived in exile in Babylon 38 years, and
seems to have retained the respect and loyalty of
the exiles among whom he dwelt.

It was with reference to the deportation of the
princes and craftsmen and smiths that Jeremiah
had his vision of the baskets of figs—one containing
figs very good, like the first ripe figs; the other very
bad, so bad they could not be eaten (Jer 24 1-3).
The good figs were the captives of Judah carried
away into the land of the Chaldaeans for good; the,
bad figs were the king Zedekiah and his princes
and the residue of Jerus, upon whom severe judg-
ments were yet to fall till they were consumed from
off the land (vs 4-10).

Among the captives thus carried to Babylon and
placed on the banks of the Chebar was the priest-

prophet Ezekiel. Five years after the
9. The captivity he began to have his wonder-
Ministry of ful “visions” of God, and to declare
Ezekiel, their import to the exiles by the rivers
692-570 BC of Babylon. To the desponding cap-

tives who were engrossed with thoughts
of the kingdom of Judah, not yet dissolved, and of
the Holy City, not yet burned up with fire, Ezekiel
could only proclaim by symbol and allegory the
destruction of city and nation, till the day when the
distressing tidings reached them of its complete
overthrow. Then to the crushed and despairing
captives he utters no lamentations like those of
Jeremiah, but rather joyful predictions of a rebuilt
city, of a reconstituted kingdom, and of a renovated
and glorious temple. :

Although the flower of the population had been
carried away into Babylon and the Temple had

been despoiled of its treasures, Jerus
10. Jere- and the Temple still stood. To the
miah’s Min- inhabitants who were left behind, and


istry in to the captives in Babylon, Jeremiah
Jerusalem, had a message. To the latter he
597-588 BC offered counsels of submission and


contentment, assured that the hate-
ful and repulsive idolatries around them would
throw them back upon the law of their God, and
thus promote the work of moral and spiritual re-
generation within them. “Thus saith Jeh, I will
give them a heart to know me, that I am Jehovah:


and they shall be my people, and I will be their
God; for they shall return unto me with their whole
heart’ (Jer 24 5.7). To ‘the residue of Jerus”
his counsels and predictions were distasteful, and
exposed him to the suspicion of disloyalty to his
people and his God. None of his warnings was more
impressive than that symbolically proclaimed by the
bands and bars which the prophet was to put upon
his neck to send to the kings of Edom and Moab
and Ammon and Tyre and Sidon, who seem to have
had ideas of forming an alliance against Nebuchad-
rezzar. Zedekiah was also urged to submit, but still
entertained hopes that the king of Babylon would
allow the captives of Judah toreturn. He even him-
self went to Babylon, perhaps summoned thither by
his suzerain (Jer 51 59). With an Egyp party in
Jerus urging an alliance with Egypt, and with a
young and warlike Pharaoh on the throne, Hophra
(Apries), Zedekiah deemed the opportunity favor-
able for achieving independence, and entered into
an intrigue with the Egyp king. So Zedekiah

rebelled against the king of Babylon (2 K 24 20).
It was a bold throw, but Nebuchadrezzar would
brook no such disloyalty from his vassals. He
marched at once to the West, and com-


11. Zede- mitted to Nebuzaradan the task of
kiah’s Re- capturing Jerus, while he himself es-
hellion and tablished his headquarters at Riblah,
the Siege in Syria, on the Orontes. Meanwhile
of Jerusa~- the Pharaoh with his army crossed
lem, 588- the frontier to the help of his allies,
586 BC and compelled the Chaldaeans to raise


the siege of Jerus and meet him in the
field (Jer 37 5). But here his courage failed him,
and he retired in haste without offering hattle.
Nebuzaradan now led back his army and the siege
became closer than before.

During the breathing-space afforded by the with-
drawal of the Chaldaeans, Jeremiah was going out
of the city to his native Anathoth, some 4 miles
to the N.E. across the ridge, on family business
(Jer 37 11-15). His departure was observed, and
he was charged with falling away to the Chaldaeans,
and cast into an improvised dungeon in the house
of Jonathan the scribe. While there the king sent
for him and asked, “Is there any word from Je-
hovah?” And Jeremiah answered fearlessly, ‘“There
is. Thou shalt be delivered into the hand of the
king of Babylon.” For a time Jeremiah, by the
favor of Zedekiah, enjoyed after this a greater
measure of freedom; but as he continued to urge in
hearing of all the people the duty of surrender, his
enemies vowed that he should be put to death,
and had him cast into a foul empty cistern, where
he ran the risk of being choked or starved to death.
Once again the king sought an interview with the
prophet, giving him private assurance that he would
not put him to death nor allow his enemies to do
so. Again the prophet counseled surrender, and
again he was allowed a measure of freedom.

But the end of the doomed city was at hand.
In the 11th year of Zedekiah, 586 BC, in the 4th

month, the 9th day of the month, a
12. De- breach was made in the city (Jer 39
struction of 1.2), and the final assault completed
Jerusalem, the work that had been done by
586 BC months of famine and want. Zede-

kiah and his men of war do not seem
to have waited for the delivery of the last assault.
They fled from the city by night “by the way of the
king’s garden, through the gate betwixt the two
walls,” and made eastward for the Arabah. But the
army of the Chaldaeans pursued them, and over-
took Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho. They took
him prisoner and brought him to Nebuchadrezzar
at Riblah, where the king of Babylon first slew the
son of Zedekiah, and then put out his eyes. With


Captivity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


574


the sons of the captured monarch were slain all the
nobles of Judah. This time neither city nor temple
nor palace was spared. Nebuzaradan ‘burnt the
house of Jeh, and the king’s house; and all the
houses of Jerus, even every great house, burnt he
with fire’ (2 K 25 9). His soldiers, too, broke
down the walls of Jerus round about. The treasure
and the costly furnishings of the Temple, in so far
as they had escaped the former spoliation, were
carried away to Babylon. The ruin of Jerus was
complete. The Book of Lamentations utters the
grief and shame and penitence of an eyewitness
of the captures and desolation of the Holy City:
“Jehovah hath accomplished his wrath, he hath
poured out his fierce anger; and he hath kindled
a fire in Zion, which hath devoured the founda-
tions thereof. The kings of the earth believed
not, neither all the inhabitants of the world, that
the adversary and the enemy would enter into
the gates of Jerus. Woe unto us! for we have
sinned. For this our heart is faint; for these things
our eyes are dim; for the mountain of Zion, which
is desolate: the foxes walk upon it” (Lam 4 11.12;
5 16.18).
“So Judah,” says the prophet who had been
through the siege and the capture (if not rather the
editor of his prophecies), ‘was carried
13. Second away captive out of his land” (Jer


Deporta- 52 27). The statements of the num-
tion of In- bers carried away are, however, con-
habitants, flicting. In Jer (52 28-30) we read of
586 BC three deportations: that of 597 BC


when 3,023 Jews were carried off; that
of 586 BC when Nebuchadrezzar carried off 832
persons; and one later than both in 581 BC, when
Nebuzaradan carried away captive of
14. Third the Jews 745 persons—a total of 4,600.
Deporta- In 2 KX 24 15.16 it is said that in 597
tion, 581 BC Nebuchadrezzar carried to Babylon
8,000 men. Dr. George Adam Smith
taking all the data together estimates that the very
highest figures possible are 62,000 or 70,000 men,
women and children, less than half of the whole
nation (Jerusalem, II, 268-70). In 597 BC, Nebu-
chadrezzar carried off the princes and nobles and
craftsmen and smiths, leaving behind the poorest
sort of the people of the land (2 K 24 14). In
586 BC Nebuzaradan carried off the residue of the
people that were left in the city, but he “left of the
poorest of the land to be vinedressers and husband-
men” (2 K 26 12). ‘They were, as the Bib. nar-
ratives testify, the poorest of the land, from whom
every man of substance and energy had been sifted;
mere groups of peasants, without a leader and with-
out a center; disorganized and depressed; bitten by
hunger and compassed by enemies; uneducated and
an easy prey to the heathenism by which they were
surrounded. We can appreciate the silence which
reigns in the Bible regarding them, and which has
misled us as to their numbers. They were a neg-
ligible quantity in the religious future of Israel:
without initiative or any influence except that of a
dead weight upon the efforts of the rebuilders of
the nation, when these at last returned from Baby-
lonia”’ (Jerusalem, II, 269-70).
Over those who were left behind, Gedaliah was
appointed governor, with his residence at Mizpah,
where also a Bab contingent remained


i5. Geda- on guard. Jeremiah had the choice
liah, Gov- of being taken to Babylon or of re-
ernor of maining in Judah. He preferred to
Judah remain with the residue of the people


under the care of Gedaliah. With the
murder of Gedaliah by Ishmael, a traitorous scion
of the royal house, who in turn had to flee and made
good his escape, it looked as if the last trace of the
former kingdom of Judah was wiped out. Against


the counsel of Jeremiah, the remnant, led by Johanan
the son of Kareah, resolved to take refuge in Egypt
and insisted that Jeremiah and his friend Baruch
should accompany them. It is in Egypt, amid
disappointment and misrepresentation which he
had to endure, that we have our last glimpse of
the prophet of the downfall of Judah. Of the
descendants of those settlers in Egypt remarkable
remains have been discovered within the last few
years. They consist of Aram. papyri which were
found at Assouan, the ancient Syene, and which
belong to a time not more than a cent. after the
death of Jeremiah. The documents are accounts
and contracts and deeds of various kinds, from
which we gather that in the 5th cent. BC there were
Jews keeping themselves apart as they do still,
worshipping Jeh, and no other God, and even having
a temple and an altar of sacrifice to which they
brought offerings as their fathers did at Jerus before
the destruction of the Temple. These papyri give
us valuable glimpses of the social condition and

religious interest of the settlers. See Dispersion.
Of the Jewish captives carried off by Nebuchad-
rezzar and settled by the rivers of Babylon, we
learn something: from the prophecies


16. The of Daniel which are now generally
Exiles in believed to belong to the Macca-
Babylon bean period, and much from the


prophecies of Ezekiel, from the Psalms
of the Captivity, and from the Second Isaiah,
whose glowing messages of encouragement and com-
fort were inspired by the thought of the Return.
From Haggai and Zechariah we see how the work
of rebuilding the Temple was conceived and carried
out. Of the social condition of the Exiles an inter-
esting revelation is given by the excavations at
Nippur. From cuneiform tablets, now in the Im-
perial Ottoman Museum at Constantinople, pre-
served among the business archives of the wealthy
firm of Murashu, sons of Nippur, in the reign of
Artaxerxes I and Darius II (464-405 BC), there
can be read quite a number of Jewish names. And
the remarkable thing is that many of the names are
those known to us from the genealogical and other
lists of the Books of K and Ch and Ezr and Neh.
Professor Hilprecht (The Babylonian Expedition,
IX, 13 ff) infers from an examination of these that
a considerable number of the Jewish exiles, carried
away by Nebuchadrezzar after the destruction of
Jerus, were settled in Nippur and its neighborhood.
Of this fact there are various proofs. The Tal-
mudic tradition which identifies Nippur with
Calneh (Gen 10 10) gains new force in the light
of these facts. And ‘‘the river Khebar in the land
of the Chaldeans,” by which Ezekiel saw his vision,
is now known from inscriptions to be a large navi-
gable canal not far from Nippur (ib, 27.28).
The influence of the Captivity as a factor in the
development of Judaism can hardly be overesti-


mated. “The captivity of Judah,”
17. The says Dr. Foakes-Jackson (Biblical
Rise and History of the Hebrews, 316) “is one
Develop- of the greatest events in the history
ment of of religion... .. With the captivity
Judaism the history of Israe] ends, and the his-


tory of the Jews commences.” Placed
in the midst of heathen and idolatrous surround-
ings the Golah recoiled from the abominations of
their neighbors and clung to the faith of their
fathers in the God of Abraham. Exposed to the
taunts and the scorn of nations that despised them,
they formed an inner circle of their own, and culti-
vated that exclusiveness which has marked them
ever since. Being without a country, without a
ritual system, without any material basis for their
life as a people, they learned as never before to
prize those spiritual possessions which had come


575


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Captivity


down to them from the past. They built up their
nationality in their new surroundings upon the
foundation of their religion. Their prophets, Jere-
miah and Ezekiel, had encouraged and stimulated
them with the assurance of spiritual blessings, and
the promise of restoration. For their whole social
and domestic and spiritual life there was needed
some steady and continuous regulative principle or
scheme. The need of this threw their leaders and
thinkers back upon the Law of Moses. The rabbi
and the scribe took the place of the sacrificing priest.
The synagogue and the Sabbath came to occupy
a new place in the religious practice of the people.
These and other institutions of Judaism only at-
tained to maturity after the Return, but the Cap-
tivity and the Exile created the needs they were
meant to supply. While the prophets were clear
and explicit in setting forth the Captivity, they
were not less so in predicting the Return. Isaiah
with his doctrine of the Remnant, Micah, Zepha-
niah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and others gifted with the
vision of God, cheered the nation, each in their
day, with the hope of restoration and return, not
for Judah only but for Israel ag well. Vineyards
were to be planted again upon the mountains of
Samaria as well as in the valleys of Judah. Jere-
miah had even predicted the length of the period of
the Exile, when he declared that the inhabitants
of the land should serve the king of Babylon for

seventy years (Jer 25 12; 29 10).
It was in Cyrus, who brought about the fall of
Babylon and ended the New Babylonian Empire
in 539 BC, that the hopes of the exiles


18. The came to be centered. He was “the
Return by battle-axe’”’ with which Jeh was to
Permission shatter Babylon (Jer 51 20), and ashe
of Cyrus, proceeded _on his path of victory the
538 BC unknown Seer whom we call the Second

Isaiah welcomed him as the liberator of
his people. ‘Thus saith Jehovah... . of Jerus,


She shall be inhabited; and of the cities of Judah,

They shall be built, and I will raise up the waste

places thereof; that saith to the deep, Be dry, and

I will dry up thy rivers; that saith of Cyrus, He is

’ my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even

saying of Jerus, She shall be built; and of the temple,
Thy foundation shall be laid” (Isa 44 26-28).

Within a year of the entry of Cyrus into Babylon

an edict was issued (2 Ch 36 22.23; Ear 1 1 ff),

granting permission to the exiles to

19. Rebuild- return and build a house for the Lord


ing of the in Jerus. He also brought forth the
Temple, vessels of the Temple which Nebuchad-
536 BC rezzar had carried away and handed

them over to Sheshbazzar, the prince
of Judah; and Sheshbazzar brought them with


him when they of the Captivity were brought up
from Babylon unto Jerus. ;

Particulars of the Return are given in the Books
of Ezr and Neh, and in the prophecies of Haggai
and Zechariah. Of the exiles 42,360 returned under
Sheshbazzar, besides slaves; and under Jeshua the
son of Jozadak the priest, and Zerubbabel, the son
of Shealtiel, first an altar was built and then the
foundations of the Temple were laid. In conse-
quence of the opposition of the Samaritans, who
were refused any share in the restoration of the
Temple, the work of rebuilding was greatly hindered,
and came to a stop. It was then that Haggai and
Zechariah urged the resumption of the work and
partly by denouncing the niggardliness of the people
and partly by foreshadowing the glorious future in
store for the Temple, hastened forward the enter-
prise. At length in the month Adar, in the 6th
year of Darius (515 BC) the work was completed
and the Passover celebrated within the courts of
the restored Sanctuary (Ezr 6 15-18).


_ For some decades the history is silent, and it was
in 458 BC that Ezra set out for Jerus taking 1,800
Jews along with him. He found that


20. Re- the returned Jews had become allied
forms and in marriage with the people of the
Labors of land and were in danger of losing their
Ezra and racial characteristics by absorption
Nehemiah among the heathen (Ezr 9). It was


due no doubt to his efforts and those of
Nehemiah, supported by the searching and power-
ful utterances of Malachi, that this peril was


ta 4


Terra-Cotta Cylinder Containing the History of the Cap-
ture of Babylon by Cyrus the Great.


averted. Thirteen years later (445 BC) Nehemiah,
the cupbearer of Artaxerxes, having heard of the
desolate condition of the Holy City, the place of
his fathers’ sepulchers, obtained leave of his master
to visit Jerus. With letters to the governors on the
route and to the keeper of the king’s forest, he set
out, and came safely to Jerus. Having himself
inspected the walls he called the people to the work
of repairing the ruins, and despite the taunts and
calumny and active hostility of the Sam opposi-
tion he had the satisfaction of seeing the work
completed, the gates set up and the city repeopled.
Nehemiah and Ezra then gathered the people


Captivity Epistles pire INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Care, Careful


576


together to hear the words of the Law, and at a
solemn convocation the Law was read and explained
tothe assembly. Thereafter a covenant was entered
into by the people that they would observe the Law
of Moses and not intermarry with the heathen nor
traffic on the Sabbath, but would pay a third of a
shekel annually for the services of the Temple and
would bring first-fruits and tithes (Neh 10 28 ff).
The course of the history as here set forth has
been disputed by some modern scholars, who hold
that there was no return of the exiles
21. Modern under Cyrus and that the rebuilding of
Theories of the Temple was the work of the Jews
the Return who remained behind in Judah and
Jerus (#B, art. ‘Ezra-Nehemiah’’).
This view, held by the late Professor Kosters of
Leyden and supported by Professor H. P. Smith
and other scholars, proceeds largely upon the
rejection of the historical character of the Book of
Ezr-Neh. The historical difficulties which are
found in the book are by no means such as to war-
rant us in denying the fact of the Return and the
work of Ezra in connection with Nehemiah. As
regards the Return, the course of the narrative is
too well supported by documents which bear upon
them the stamp of historical truth to be rashly dis-
puted. Moreover, it seems highly improbable
that an enterprise requiring such energy and skill
and faith should have been undertaken, without
stimulus from without, by the residue of the people.
We have already seen how little initiative was to
be expected of the poorest of the people; and the
silence of Haggai, on the subject of the Return, is
no argument against it. That the Judaism of Pal
required invigoration by an infusion of the zeal
and enthusiasm which grew up in the Judaism of
Bab, is manifest from the story of the Captivity.
From the age of Nehemiah and the period im-
mediately preceding it came influences of the utmost
moment forthe future. “Within these
22. Impor- hundred years,’ says the late Dr. P.
tance of the Hay Hunter in After the Exile (I, xvi),
Period “the teaching of Moses was established
Ezra- as the basis of the national life, the
Nehemiah first steps were taken toward the forma-
tion of a canon of Scripture. Jewish
society was moulded into a shape which succeeding
cents. modified, but did not essentially change.
During this period the Judaea of the days of Our
Lord came imto being. Within this period the
forces which opposed Christ, the forces which
rallied to His side, had their origin. This cent.
saw the rise of parties, which afterward became
sects under the names of Pharisees and Sadducees.
It laid the foundation of Rabbinism. It fixed the
attitude of the Jews toward the Gentiles. It put
the priesthood in the way to supreme authority.
It gave birth to the Samaritan schism.”
Figurative uses. See Cartive.


Lirerature.—Schrader, COT, I; McCurdy, HPM,
I, 281 ff, II, 249 ff, III; C. F. Burney, Notes on Heb
Text of Bks of Kings; Foakes-Jackson, Bib. Hist of the
Hebrews, 260-412; G. A. Smith, Jerusalem, II, 223-
349; Cambridge Biblical Essays, 93-135; P. Hay Hunter,
The Story of Daniel aud After the Exile; EB, art. ‘' Ezra-
Nehemiah"'; Nicol, Recent Archaeology and the Bible,
239-78; H. P. Smith, OT Hist, 219-412; Kittel, Hist of
the Hebrews, II, 329 ff.
T. Nicou


CAPTIVITY EPISTLES. See Purtemon.
CAR. See PaLanguin.


CARABASION, kar-a-ba’zi-on (PoPaclov, Rha-
bastén, KapaBaclwv, Karabasion; Marimoth): One
of the sons of Baani (1 Esd 9 34) who had
married foreign wives, during the captivity. The
name is allowed to be corrupt; it seems to be repre-
sented by Meremoth in the list of Ezr 10 36.


-before King Ahasuerus (Est 1 10).


CARAVAN, kar’a-van, kar-a-van’ (TTS, ’drah):
This word is not found in AV, but RV employs
it three times, viz. in Job 6 18.19 (‘orhdth), where
AV renders “‘paths” (ver 18) and “‘troops”’ (ver 19);
in Isa 21 13 (drhdth), where AV and EV give
“travelling companies,” and in Ezk 27 25 (sharoth),
where AV gives a totally different tr. The Heb text
in Ezk is dubious, but in Isa and Job “caravan”
is undoubtedly a correct rendering of the Heb
(ef also Gen 87 25). The inhabitants of Pal
were familiar with the caravans—the goods trains
of the Sem world—which traveled between Baby-
lon and Syria on the one hand to Arabia and on the
other to Egypt. The main routes between these
countries passed through Canaan. Isaiah refers to
“caravans of Jedanites’—a trading Arab. tribe
who conveyed their wares to Babylon. Job
compares his would-be friends to a deceitful brook,
full in the rainy season, but dry in summer, which
entices caravans to turn aside from the main route
in the hope of a plentiful supply of water, but
which fails the thirsty travelers when they need it
most. T. Lewis

CARAVANSARY, kar-a-van’sa-ri. See Inn.

CARBUNCLE, kar’bun-k’].
crous.


See Stones, Pre-


CARCAS, kér’kas (0392, karkas): One of seven
chamberlains, ordered to summon Queen Vashti
The Targ alle-
gorizes the first five of the names.


CARCASS, CARCASE, kar’kas: The dead body
of a beast; used sometimes in a contemptuous way
of the dead body of a human being. The use of
the word as applied to a living body is not found in
either OT or NT. (1) It ocenrs as a tr of the Heb
738, pegher,in Gen 165 11; this Heb word is also
tr? “dead body” in Nu 14 29; 1S 17 46; Isa
34 3; 66 24; Ezk 6 5; 48 7.9, and “corpse”
in Nah 83. (2) The Heb M>2), nebhélah, is
also tr’ “carcass” in Lev 6 2; 11 8.11; Jer 16
18, but as “dead body” in Dt 28 26 (“body,”
Josh 8 29; 1 K 18 22.29; 2 K 9 37); Isa 5 25;
Jer 7 33; 16 4; 19 7. (3) In Jgs 14 8 the word
mB, mappélah, from 2D), naphal, “to incline”
or “fall,” is also trd “carcass.” (4) In Mt 24 28
the word “‘carcase”’ (not ‘“‘carcass’’) is used to render
the Gr rréua, ptéma, the reference probably being
here to the dead body of an animal For the
body of a human being the Gr is tr? “corpse”
(Mt 14 12; Mk 6 29; 16 45), and ‘dead bodies”
(Rev 11 8.9). W.N. Srearns


CARCHEMISH, kar’ke-mish (WDD, karke-
mish; Kappels, Charmets, Kapxapels, Karchamets) :
An exceedingly ancient Hittite city on the banks of
the Euphrates, identified with Jerablus (Hicrapolis)
about 23 hours from Aleppo, between Birejik and
Membij. The Assyr form of the name is Kargamis
or Gargamis, but its meaning is doubtful, the inter-
pretation “Fort of the god Chemosh” having been
suggested before it was known that the Assyr-Bab
form of Chemosh was not Kamish or Gamish, but
Kammusu (Kammosu). Systematic excavations
on the site have apparently only just been made,
those undertaken by Consul J. Henderson, after
the death of G. Smith the Assyriologist, having
been mainly devoted to the excavation of sculptures,
etc. The site has vast walls and palace-mounds
about 8,000 ft. in circumference.

, The earliest occurrence of the name is in an adjec-
tival form, namely, Karkamisa, “Carchemishite,”


577


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA (2?tivity Epistles


Care, Careful


applied to a vase or measure of 200 ga, in a list
of property at Sippar in the reign of Ammi-saduga
(cr 1900 BC). Later on, the Egyp
1. Evidence poet known as Pentaur refers to the
of the people of Carchemish (Qarqamesa) as
City’s Early forming, with the men of Arvad,
Existence Aleppo and Gozan, part of “the host
of the miserable king of the Hittites’
(Hattu-sil), who fought against Rameses II at the
battle of Kadesh. The first Assyr king to mention
Carchemish is Tiglath-pileser I (cir 1268 BC),
who states that he plundered “from the neighbor-
hood of the land of Subu [the Shuhites] as far as
Carchemish of the land of Hattu”’ in one day.
Later, the city attracted the attention of the
Assyr king ASéSur-nasir-apli, who started on the 8th
of Iyyar, about the year 870 BC,
2. Its Later to the conquest of the district, and
History received tribute from the son of Bit-
Bahiani; and, a little later, from
Sangara of Carchemish, who is described as king of
the Hittites. This tribute consisted of 20 talents
of silver, various objects of gold, 100 talents of
copper, 250 talents of iron, furniture, chariots and
horses—an enormous treasure. Shalmaneser II,
son of A&Séur-nasir-4pli, also took tribute from the
king of Carchemish here referred to. On the first
occasion when the two monarchs met, Sangara
was in alliance with the Sam’alians, Patinians, and
Til-Bursip. After the capture of Sazabé (858 BC),
a strong city of Sangara of Carchemish, all the
opposing princes submitted. The tribute paid
by the Hittite king on this occasion is depicted on
strip F of the bronze coverings of the gates of
Balawat, which has four representations of the
place—two in the upper and two in the lower row
of reliefs. The Kurkh monolith states that the
tribute consisted of ‘2 talents of gold, 70 talents
of silver, 80 talents of bronze, 100 talents of iron,
30 talents of purple stuff, 500 weapons, his daughter
with a dowry, and 100 daughters of his great men,
500 oxen, and 5,000 sheep.” <A yearly tax was also
imposed. The reliefs show two long trains of
tribute-bearers, that in the lower row escorting
the princess, who, apparently accompanied by her
father, goes to meet the Assyr king. Saméi-Adad,
Shalmaneser II’s son, merely mentions Carchemish
as being on the western limits of his empire.
In the time of Tiglath-pileser IV, the city was
ruled by King Pisiri(s), who paid tribute as an


Assyr vassal. On the accession of
3. Tiglath- Sargon of Assyria, however, Pisiris
pileser IV tried to throw off the Assyr yoke,
Receives and made alliance with Meta of
Its Tribute, Moschi (Mesech) and other rulers,
and Sargon but was taken prisoner in the opera-
of Assyria tions which followed. In the sub-
Incorpo- sequent plundering of the city, those
rates It who suffered most were the inhabitants


of the city who had been most active
against Assyria. These were carried captive, and
their places filled, as was the custom, by Assyr
settlers. The city’s importance under Assyr rule
continued, the ‘mana of Carchemish” being one
of the standard weights in use at Nineveh. After
incorporation into the Assyr empire it was ruled
by Assyr governors, one of whom, Bél-émuranni,
was eponym for the year 691 BC (reign of Sen-
nacherib). The OT gives later details. In the
time of Josiah, Pharach Necoh marched to fight
against the city, and the Jewish king went out to
meet him, but lost his life at Megiddo (2 Ch
35 20 ff). Four years later (605 BC), the Egyp
king was himself defeated by Nebuchadrezzar
under the walls of the city (Jer 46 2) in the battle
which decided the fate of Western Asia.


The art of Carchemish was that of the Hittite
nation to which the city belonged, but it was
strongly influenced by the style of
4. Sculp- the Assyrians, and exhibits a manner-
ture and ism if anything more pronounced. The
Inscriptions inscriptions found on the site are in
Found at the usual Hittite style—boldly carved
Carchemish natural objects and implements in
relief arranged in  boustrophedon-
bands between division-lines. It is not improbable,
however, that cuneiform was also used, and texts
in Phoen characters may, by chance, befound. The
patron-deity of the city was the Asiatic goddess
Atargatis, whose worship, when the place lost its
importance, was removed to the new Hierapolis
now represented by the ruins of Membij.
T. G. PIncHEs

CARE, kar, CAREFULNESS, kar’fddl-ness,
CAREFUL, kar’f60l1: The Eng. word ‘“‘care” has
such a variety of meanings, and so many Heb and
Gr words in the Bible are tr¢ by this Eng. expression
and its compounds, that it is difficult: to organize
them into a single brief article. We may doso, how-
ever, by remembering that into our word are really
woven two strands, one Teutonic and one Lat.
The former element implies a measure of trouble
or sorrow, as the pain from a blow, a throb, a dis-
tress in the mind; the latter, from Lat cura, implies
a stretching forward, attention to some person or
thing. We can often discern these two senses side
by side in the Bible, and sometimes they almost
run into one another. This is so esp. in the AV.
We can treat the subject best by keeping separate,
as far as possible, these two senses.

I. In the Sense of Anxiety, Solicitude.—In the
OT several words are tr’ “care,” in this sense.
“Thy father hath left off caring for
the asses,” concern about them lit.
‘matters of the asses’ ("J2"1, dibhré,
18 10 2). ‘They shall eat bread
by weight, and with care” (38, d’dghah, “care-
fulness’ RV; ‘fearfulness’ ARV, Ezk 4 16).
The same word is rendered carefulness (AV and
RV; ‘“fearfulness,”’ ARV, Ezk 12 18-19); and
“fear” (AV; “carefulness,” RV and ARV, Josh 22
24). Again, “heaviness” (AV, RV and ARV),
but “care” (RVm and ARVm, Prov 12 25). Once
more, “sorrow” (AV, RV and ARV), but ‘“‘care”
(RVm and ARVm, Jer 49 23). There is also the
word MII, hdradhah, “trembling,” “fear,” ‘anx-
iety.” It isrendered “trembling” (Gen 27 33 AV).
But “thou hast been careful for us with all this
care” (‘‘showed us all this reverence,” RVm, ARVm,
2K 4 13).

In the NT care, in the sense of anxiety, is the
meaning given to pépmva, mérimna, the condition
of being drawn mentally in different directions,
distraction of mind. ‘Care of the world” (Mt 13
22; Mk 4 19; Lk 8 14, “c. of this life,’ Lk 21
34); “care of all the churches” (2 Cor 11 28)
(“anxiety,” RV and ARV); “casting all your
care upon him” (‘‘anxiety,” RV, ARV, 1 Pet 5 7).
Also in the Apoc, “My heart faileth for care”
(1 Mace 6 10); “Care bringeth old age before
the time” (Sir 30 24). To these may be added
the adj. amérimnos, “I would have you without
carefulness” (AV; “free from cares,” RV and ARV,
1 Cor 7 32).

In the OT (ANT, da@agh, “to have concern or
anxiety for’). “Not be careful in the year of

drought” (Jer 17 8). (29 DAW, sam
2. Verbs _ lébh, “to set the heart upon’’), “If we
flee away, they will not care for us”

(“set their heart upon us” AVm, 2 8 18 38).
In the NT (nepyuvdw, merimndo), ““Thou art care-


1. Sub-
stantives


Careah
Carmi


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


578


ful and troubled” (“anxious’” RV and ARV, Lk 10
41). ‘He that is unmarried careth for things that
belong to the Lord”’ (‘‘is careful for,’”? RV and ARV,
1 Cor 7 32-34). ‘Members should have the same
care one for another” (1 Cor 12 25). “Who will
naturally care [ARV “care truly] for your state”
(Phil 2 20). “Be careful for nothing” (‘in nothing
be anxious,” RV and ARV, Phil 4 6). The Apoc
has “careful” (Bar 3 18) and the RV has “be not
careful overmuch,” where a distinction is plainly
made between care in the sense of anxiety and of
attention, for a person cannot be too attentive, but
he may be too anxious (2 Esd 2 27).

The impersonal vb. (uéde, mélei), though not
quite so strong as merimnad, always implies a
degree of concern higher than is felt in mere atten-


tion. “Carest thou not that we perish?” (Mk 4
38). “Carest not for anyone’ (AVY “no man,”
Mt 22 16; Mk 12 14).. ‘Dost thou not care


that my sister did leave me to serve alone?” (Lk 10
40). “Careth not for the sheep” (Jn 10 13).
“Cared for the poor” (Jn 12 6). “‘Gallio cared for
none of these things” (Acts 18 17). ‘Care not
for it”’ (1 Cor 7 21). “He careth for you” (1 Pet
5 7). “Doth God care for oxen?” (better, ‘Is it
for the oxen that God careth?” RV and ARV, 1 Cor
9 9).

H In the Sense of Attention.—In the sense of

attention, with the flavor of earnestness added from

the original Teutonic meaning of the
1. Sub- word care, we have the tr of srovd%,
stantives spoudé, ‘‘speed,’” ‘earnest care.”
“What carefulness it wrought in you”
(“earnest care,” RV, ARV, 2 Cor 711). “Our
care for you in the sight of God” (“earnest care,”
RV, ARV, 2 Cor 7 12). “Put the same care into
the heart of Titus” (“earnest care,” RV, ARV,
2 Cor 8 16). We have also ¢poveiv, phronein, the
infin. used as a subst. ‘Your care for me hath
flourished” (‘‘thought,” RV, ARV, Phil 4 10). Also
gpovris, ores “thought” (“care’ ARV, Wisd 6
17; 7 4).

“‘A land which Jehovah thy God careth for”
(WIT, darash, “seek after’) (“‘seeketh after,” RVm,
ARVm, Dt 11 12). ‘No man careth
for my soul” (“sought”? AVm, Ps 142
4; MUO, hdshah). ‘We are not care-
ful to answer” (AV, AVm, ARVm; “We have no
need to answer,” RV, ARV, Dnl 3 16). Inthe NT
éripehéouat, eprmeléomat, ‘Take care of him” (Lk
10 34.35). “‘Tlow shall be take care of the church
of God?” (1 Tim 3 5). ¢povrifw, phrontizé, “to be
thoughtful or mindful of,” “may be careful to main-
tain good works” (Tit 3 8). G. H. TRevrer


CAREAH, ka-ré’a. See Karean.
CAREFUL, CAREFULNESS. See Cane.


CAREFULLY, k4r’fdol-i: The same two strands
of anxiety and of attention appear in this word
as in care. Several words in the Heb and Gr are
thus rendered in the Eng. VSS. ‘‘Anxiously” is
the thought in ‘The inhabitants of Maroth’ waited
carefully for good” (mem, halah, “to be in pain,”
“was grieved” AVm, “waiteth anxiously” RV,
ARV, “is in travail” RV¥Vm, ARVm, Mic 1 12).

In the sense of attentively, the Heb emphatic
expression, the infinite absolute with the finite
vb. is rendered “carefully” in, “Thou shalt care-
fully hearken” (lit. “hearing, thou shalt hear,’’
“diligently hearken” RV, ARV, Dt 16 5). The
same Heb is rendered ‘diligently hearken” AV;
“hearken diligently” RV, ARV (Dt 11 18; 28 1).

In the NT omovéawrépws, spoudaiotérds, “I sent
him the more carefully” (“diligently RV, ARV,


2. Verbs


Phil 2 28). The vb. (éxtyréw, ekzétéd, “I seek out,”
is tr’ ‘seek carefully”: ‘‘though he sought it care-
fully with tears” (‘‘diligently” RV, ARV, He 12 17).

RV adds others (dxp86w, akribéd, “I ascertain
exactly’’), “learned of them carefully” RV (“dili-
gently” AV; “exactly” ARV, Mt 2 7.16). The
adv. akribés, “search out carefully” RV_ (‘‘dili-
geutly” AV; “exactly” ARV, Mt 2 8). ‘Taught
carefully” RV _ (‘“diligently’ AV; “accurately”
ARV, Acts 18 25). ‘More carefully” RV (‘‘more
perfectly’ AV, ‘more accurately” ARV, Acts 18
26). ’Erirxoréw, episkopéd, ‘I oversee,” is rendered
‘look carefully” (RV, ARV, “look diligently” AV,
He 12 15).

In the Apoc merimnda is tr4 “carefully,” as “We
should carefully think of thy goodness” (‘‘ponder”
RV, Wisd 12 22). G. H. Trever


CARELESS, k4r’les, CARELESSLY, kAr’les-li:
These words always mean, ‘‘without anxiety,”
the confidence springing from a sense of security.
There is both the vb. MO, batah, “he trusted,”
and the noun M03, betah, “Ye careless daughters”
(RVm “confident”) (Isa 32 9-11). People dwelt
careless (“in security” RV, ARV, Jgs 18 7); ‘‘care-
less Ethiopians” (Ezk 30 9). ‘Thou that dwellest
carelessly” (‘‘sittest securely” RV, ARV, Isa 47
8). “Thou that dwellest carelessly” (‘‘securely”’
RV, ARV, “confidently” AVm, Ezk 39 6). ‘The
city that dwelt carelessly” (Zeph 215). ARV
and RV add M13, baedh, “he despised,” using the
participle in ‘‘He that is careless of his ways shall
die,” “despiseth” AV, ARVm, RVm (Prov 19 16).

G. H. Trever

CAREM, kéa’rem (Kapép, Karém): A city of
Judah interpolated by the LXX (Josh 16 59).
Probably Brru-HaccHEREM (q.V.).


CARIA, ka’ri-a (Kapla, Karta): A country in
the 8.W. of Asia Minor which extended on the N.
to Lydia, on the E. to Phrygia, on the S. to Lycia,
and the W. to the Aegean Seca. Its borders, however,
like those of most of the ancient countries of Asia
Minor, were never definitely fixed; hence the diffi-
culty presented by the study of the political divi-
sions. The general surface of the country is rugged,
consisting of mountainous ridges running across
it, and terminating as promontories jutting into the
sea. Its history consists chiefly of that of its prac-
tically independent cities of which Miletus (Acts
20 15-20) and Cnidus (Acts 27 7) are the chief.
For some time previous to 168 BC it had lost its
independence, and belonged to the island of Rhodes,
but in that year Rome made it again free. Accord-
ing to 1 Mace 16 23, Caria was one of several
places to which the Rom senate in 139-138 BC
sent letters in favor of the Jews, a fact showing
that its population was mixed. Its coast. cities,
however, were peopled chiefly by Greeks. In 129
BC Caria became a part of the Rom province of
Asia, and from that date its history coincides with
that of the province. Though Paul and others of
the apostles traversed Caria in their missionary
journeys, only its cities are mentioned by name in
that connection, E. J. Banks


CARITES, kar’i-téz ("9, kar7, “one ready,”
“life-guardsman”): A body of troops mentioned in
2 K 11 4.19 (AV “‘captains”). Instead of CHERE-
THITES (q.v.), the Kethibh of 2 S 20 23 offers the
reading Carites.


CARMANIANS, kir-ma/ni-anz.
NIANS.


Sec Carmo-


CARME, kar’mé. Sec Cuarme.


579


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Careah
Carmi


CARMEL, kar’ mel (2273, or, with art., DOID0,
karmel, ‘fruit garden,” or ha-karmel; Jos, 6 Képpn-
dos, ho Kdrmélos, Kapphdvov épos, Karmélion éros):

QA beautifully wooded mountain range run-
ning for about 13 miles in a south-easterly direction
from the promontory which drops on the shore of
the Mediterranean near Haifa, at the southern
extremity of the plain of Acre, to the height of el-
Mahrakah which overlooks the plain of Esdraelon.
On the top of the promontory, at a height of 500
ft. the monastery of St. Elias stands. From this
point there is a gradual ascent until the greatest
height is reached at Hsftyeh (1,742 ft.), the peak at
el-Mahrakah being only some 55 ft. lower. The
mountain—usually named with the art., “the
Carmel”—still justifies its name, ‘‘the garden with
fruit trees.”? The steep slopes on the N. and E.,
indeed, afford little scope for cultivation, although
trees and brushwood grow abundantly. But to the
8. and W. the mountain falls away to the sea and the
plain in a series of long, fertile valleys, where the
“texcellency” of Carmel finds full illustration today.
There are a few springs of good water; but the main
supply is furnished by the winter rains, which are
caught and stored in great cisterns. The villages
on the slopes have a look of prosperity not too often
seen in Syria, the rich soil amply rewarding the toil
of the husbandmen. Oak and pine, myrtle and
honeysuckle, box and laurel flourish; the sheen of
fruitful olives fills many a hollow; and in the time
of flowers Carmel is beautiful in a garment of many
colors. Evidences of the ancient husbandry which
made it famous are found in the cisterns, and the
oil and wine presses cut in the surface of the rock.
There is probably a reference to the vine culture
here in 2 Ch 26 10. In the fig. language of Scrip-
ture it appears as the symbol of beauty (Cant 7 5),
of fruitfulness (Isa 35 2), of majesty (Jer 46 18),
of prosperous and happy life (ib, 50 19). The
languishing of Carmel betokens the vengeance of
God upon the land (Nah 1 4); and her decay, utter
desolation (Am 1 2; Isa 33 9).

Roughly triangular in form, with plains stretch-
ing from its base on each of the three sides, the

mountain, with its majestic form and


Asylum massive bulk, is visible from afar.
and Sanc- Its position deprived it of any great
tuary value for military purposes. It com-


manded none of the great highways
followed by armies: the passes between Esdraelon
and Sharon, to the E. of Carmel, furnishing the most
convenient paths. But the mountain beckoned
the fugitive from afar, and in all ages has offered
asylum to the hunted in its caves and wooded glens.
Also its remote heights with their spacious outlook
over land and sea; its sheltered nooks and em-
bowering groves have been scenes of worship from
old time. Here stood an ancient altar of Jeh (1 K
18 30). We may assume that there was also a
sanctuary of Baal, since the worshippers of these
deities chose the place as common ground for the
great trial (1 K 18). The scene is traditionally
located at el-Mahrakah, ‘the place of burnt sacri-
fice,” which is still held sacred by the Druzes. A
Lat chapel stands near, with a great cistern. A
good spring is found lower down the slope. Just
below, on the N. bank of the Kishon stands the
mound called Tell el-kissts, ‘(mound of the priest.”
From the crest of Carmel Elijah descried the coming
storm, and, descending the mountain, ran before the
chariot of Ahab to the gate of Jezreel (1 K 18 42 ff).
Under the monastery on the western promontory is
a cave, said to be that of Elijah. An older tradition
locates the cave of the prophet at ed-Deir, near
‘Ain es-Sth. It may have been the scence of the
events narrated in 2 K 19 ff. Elisha also was a


familiar visitor to Mt. Carmel. It was within the
territory allotted to Asher; in later times it passed
into the hands of Tyre (BJ, III, iii, 1).

(2) A city of Judah, in the uplands near Hebron,
named with Maon and Ziph (Josh 15 55). Here
Saul for some reason not stated set up a monument
or trophy (1S 15 12; lit. “hand”). It was the


Carmel! of Judah.


home of Nabal the churlish and drunken flock-
master, whose widow Abigail David married (1 8
25); and also of Hezro, one of David’s mighty men
(28 23 35; 1 Ch 11 37). It is represented_by
the modern el-Karmil, about 10 miles to the 8.E.
of Hebron. Karmil isthe pronunciation given me
by several natives this spring. There are consider-
able ruins, the most outstanding feature being a
square tower dating from the 12th cent., now going
swiftly to ruin. There are also caves, tombs and
a large reservoir. W. Ewina


CARMELITE, kar’mel-it (2073, karmli;
Kapptdwos, Karmélios, Kappndtrns, Karmélites):
A native of the Judaean Carmel. Those who
are thus named are Nabal, the husband of Abigail
(1 § 30 5, etc), and Hezro (AV Hezrai), one of
David’s mighty men (2 8 23 35). In 2538
LXX reads tés Abigaias tés Karmélias, ‘‘of Abigail
the Carmelitess” (1 8 27 3; 1 Ch 3 1). See fol-
lowing art., CARMELITESS.


CARMELITESS,  kar’mel-it-es, _kéir-mel-i’tes
(SAID, karmelith; Kappadva, Karmilia): A
name applied only to Abigail, the wife of Nabal, and


subsequently of David, a native of Carmel in Judah
(1S 27 3; 1 Ch 3 1).


CARMI, kar’mi ("273,
“noble’’):

(1) A son of Reuben who came to Egypt with
Jacob (Gen 469; Ex 6 14; 1 Ch 5 3). Also
the name of a family of which Carmi was the head
(Nu 26 6).

(2) A Judahite (1 Ch 2 7), son of Zabdi, ac-
cording to Josh 7 1, and father of Achan, who is
given the name of “Achar” in 1 Ch 27. This
last form “Achar” is preferred to the usual “Achan”
in order to bring out the play on the Heb word for
“troubler.? The Heb runs S870? 7259 “DY,
‘akhar ‘okhér yisra’ él, “Achar, the troubler of Israel.”
As regards the phrase “the sons of Carmi” (1 Ch
2 7), Carmi is probably to be taken as the son of
Zimri (=Zabdi, Josh 7 1). The Tg, however, has
“Carmi who is Zimri.” The LXX identifies Zimri
and Zabdi.

(3) In 1 Ch 4 1, Carmi, elsewhere called son of
Zabdi or Zimri, is made son of Judah; but Well-
hausen correctly changes “Carmi” to ‘“Chelubai”
(ef 1 Ch 2 9). Horacs J. Wor


karmi, ‘fruitful,’


Carmonians
Caspin, Caspis


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


580


CARMONIANS, kar-md’ni-anz; AV Carmani-
ans: A people mentioned in one of the visions
—an horrible vision’ (2 Esd 15 30 ff)—of the
“Apocalypse of Esdras.” Their country, Carmania,
was an extensive province of Asia lying between
Parthia and Ariana and the N. side of the Pers
Gulf, and extending to Drangiana and Gedrosia
on the E. and to the river Bagradas and Persis on
the W. It is frequently mentioned by the ancient
writers, among others by Strabo and Arrian, who
describe the inhabitants as closely resembling the
Medians and Persians in manners and customs. In
the passage cited they are intended to denote a
fierce and warlike people, being described as “raging
in wrath as wild boars of the wood”’ and associated
with the “dragons of Arabia.” J. HurcHison


CARNAIM, kar-na‘im, kar’nd-im (Kapvelv, Kar-
nein, 1 Macc 6 26, Kapvalv, Karnain, vs 43f, ré
Kdpviov, 46 Kdrnion, 2 Macc 12 21.26): One of
the strong cities besieged and captured by Judas
Maccabaeus in his campaign E. of the Jordan
(1 Macc 5 26.43f). In the temple of Atargatis,
which was situated here, those who fled from the
city were put to death. It is apparently identical
with Ashteroth Karnaim. It is called Carnion in
2 Mace 12 21,


CARNAL, kar’nal: In the OT there is an ex-
pression which indicates sexual intercourse (N23
DIT, shikhebhath zera‘, “lying of seed,’ Lev 18
20; 19 20; Nu 6 13). In the NT the words
rendered “carnal” are derived from cdpé, sdrks,
‘flesh.’”’? This refers to the flesh as opposed to the
pneima, “spirit,” and denotes, in an ethical sense,
mere human nature, the lower side of man as apart
from the Divine influence, and therefore estranged
from God and prone to sin; whatever in the soul
is weak and tends toward ungodliness (see FLEsH).
Thus one may be carnal (cdpxivos, sdérkinos), sold
under sin (Rom 7 14). Christians may be carnal
(sarkinos, 1 Cor 3 1; sarkikés, 1 Cor 3 3); the lower
side of their being is dominant and not the spirit,
hence they fall into sins of envy and strife. The
weapons of the Christian warfare are not carnal, not
merely human (of the flesh RV, ARV), but spiritual
(2 Cor 10 4); ‘not after the law of a carnal com-
mandment” (He 7 16); “The carnal mind is enmity
against God” (‘‘mind of the flesh” RV, ARV, Rom
8 7). So, “to be carnally minded is death” (‘mind
of the flesh’ RV, ARV, Rom 8 6). There are “car-
nal ordinances,” in contrast to the spiritual ones of
the gospel (He 9 10); ‘Minister unto them in carnal
things,” those that pertain to the body in contrast
to spiritual things (Rom 15 27; 1 Cor 9 11). The
same expressions are elsewhere rendered ‘‘fleshly’’
(2 Cor 1 12; 33 RV “hearts of flesh”; 1 Pet 2 11).

Is there any difference between sarkinos and
sarkikos? The former more definitely denotes the
material of which an object is made. It may ex-
press with emphasis the idea of sarkikos, the spiritual
given up as it were to the flesh. See Man (THE
Natural). G. H. TREviERr


CARNION, kar’ni-on.


CAROUSINGS, ka-rouz‘ingz (mérows, pédiois,
dative pl. of pétos): This word is found only in ARV
and once only (1 Pet 4 3). The AV_ translates
it “banquetings.” It is one of the gentile excesses
of fleshly indulgence against which the Christians
are warned by Peter.


CARPENTER, kAr’pen-tér (U7), hdrash; rékrev,
tékt6n): This word, which is a general word for a
graver or craftsman, is tr? ‘carpenter’ in2 K 22 6;


See CaRNAIM.


2 Ch 24 12; Ezr 3 7; Isa 41 7. The same word
is rendered “craftsman” in the ARV of Jer 24 1
and 29 2 and “smith” in the ARV of Zec 1 20.
In 286 11; 2K 1211; 1 Ch 141; and Isa
44 13, hdrash occurs with ‘ég (wood), and is more
exactly tri “carpenter” or “worker in wood.”
Tekton, the corresponding Gr word for artificer,
is tr’ “carpenter’ in Mt 13 55 and Mk 6 38.
See Carvine; Crarts.


CARPUS, k&r’pus (Kdpwos, Kdrpos): A name
but once mentioned in the NT (2 Tim 4 18),
“the cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus.”
These words were written from the dungeons,
where Paul was confined during his second imprison-
ment. The name, common enough in Paul’s day,
signifies “fruit”? (Young) or “wrist” (Davis). The
words indicate that Paul must have been very
well acquainted with the family of Carpus. He was
presumably one of his converts; and the apostle
must have lodged with him and also have had con-
siderable confidence in him, since he committed to
his care not only the comparatively valueless
“cloak,’”’ but esp. the priceless “books and parch-
ments.” It is idle to attempt to find out the
identity of Carpus, but one cannot help wondering
what were the contents of these books and parch-
ments for which the apostle longed in his bitter
second imprisonment. Henry E. Dosker


CARRIAGE, kar’ij ("D, belt, WIAD, kbhuddah,
OND) , nest’ah; emoxevardpevor, episkeuasdmenot;
RV “We took up our baggage”; ARVm “made
ready”): Oneor the other of the above words occurs
in six different places and all have been tr! in the
AV by “carriage” in its obsolete meaning (Jgs 18
21; 1S 17 22 [twice]; Isa 10 28; 461; Acts 21
15). In the RV and ARV these are tr? by the
more modern expressions “goods,” “baggage,” or
“the things that you carried.” In 1S 17 20 AVm
“place of the carriage’ occurs as the equivalent of
“trench.” The Heb ma’galah may mean ‘the place
of wagons” as trtin RV, asit is not at all improbable
that the encampment was surrounded by the baggage
train. James A. Patcu


CARRY, kar’i (R103, nasa’, 402, nahagh): The
EV rendering of a number of Heb and Gr words, and
it has several shades of meaning, of which the fol-
lowing are the most important:

(1) ‘To take up,” “to bear,” “to transport from
one place to another,” as, “to carry away handker-
chiefs” (Acts 19 12), “‘to carry a corpse’ (Gen
50 13), and “to be carried away by the wind”
(Dnl 2 35).

(2) “To cause to go” or “come,” “to lead,” “to
drive,” as, ‘to be carried away to Babylon” (2 K
20 17), ‘‘to be carried away to Pilate” (Mk 16 1),
“to carry away cattle” (Gen 31 18), and “to carry
away daughters’ (Gen 31 26).

(3) “To uphold,” or “sustain,” “and even to hoar
hairs will I carry you” (Isa 46 4).

(4) “To bear,” or “endure,” as, “to carry sor-
rows” (Isa 53 4).

(5) “To overwhelm,” “to bear away,” ‘to
ae as, “to carry away as with a flood” (Ps
90 5).

(6) “To influence,” “to move,’ as, “to carry away
with dissimulation” (Gal 2 18), ‘to carry away with
error” (2 Pet 3 17), “to be carried away by strange
teachings” (He 13 9). A. W. Fortune


CARSHENA, kir’shé-na, kar-shé’na (R]U72,
karshena@’): The first named among the “seven
princes of Persia and Media” under Ahasuerus
(Est 1 14). See Princes, THE Steven.


581


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Carmonians
Caspin, Caspis


CART, kart ("1292, ‘dghalah): The Heb word
has been tr‘ in some passages “cart,” and in others
“wagon.”’ In one ver only has it been tr¢ “chariot.”
The context of the various passages indicates that a
distinction was made between vehicles which were
used for carrying baggage or produce and those
used for carrying riders (chariots), although in their
primitive form of construction they were much the
same (cf Eng. “cart” and “carriage’’).


Egyptian Cart (with Two Wheels).


Carts, like “chariots” (q.v.), were of Assyr origin.
They were early carried to Egypt where the flat
nature of the country readily led to their adoption.
From Egypt they gradually found their way among
the people of the Palestinian plains. In the hills
of Judaea and Central Pal, except where highways
were built (1 S 6 12), the nature of the country
prevented the use of wheeled vehicles. 1S 6
7.8.10.11.14 show that the people of the plains used
carts. The men of Kiriath-jearim found it easier
to carry the ark (15 7 1). Their attempt to use
a cart later (28 6 3.6; 1 Ch 18 7) proved dis-
astrous and they abandoned it for a safer way
(25 6 18).


Modern Cart.


That carts were used at a very early date is
indicated by Nu 7 3.7.8. That these vehicles
were not the common mode of conveyance in Pal
is shown in Gen 45. Pharaoh commanded that
Joseph’s brethren should return to their father with
their beasts of burden (46 21) and take with them
Egyp wagons (45 19.21; 46 6) for bringing back
their father and their families. The very unusual
sight of the wagons was proof to Jacob of Joseph’s
existence (46 27). ;

Bible descriptions and ancient Bab and Egyp
pictures indicate that the cart was usually two-
wheeled and drawn by two oxen. ;

With the Arabian conquests and subsequent ruin
of the roads wheeled vehicles disappeared from Syria
and Pal, History is again reveating itself. ‘The


Circassians, whom the Turkish government has
settled near Caesarea, Jerash (Gerasa) and Amman
(Philadelphia), have introduced a crude cart which
must be similar to that used in OT times. The two
wheels are of solid wood. A straight shaft is joined
to the wooden axle, and to this a yoke of oxen is
attached. On the Philistian plains may be seen
carts of present-day Egyp origin but of a pattern
many cents. old. With the establishment of govern-
ment roads during the last 50 years, European
vehicles of all descriptions are fast coming into the
country.

One figurative reference is made to the cart
(Isa 5 18), but its meaning is obscure.

James A. PatcH

CARVING, karv’ing: Carving, or engraving, was
extensively used among the peoples of Bible lands.
There were no materials used in the arts which
were not subjected to the graver’s skill. Carved
objects of wood, stone, ivory, clay, bronze, gold,
silver and glass discovered today show how skilful
the ancient carvers were. Carving was principally
done in bas-relief, although Ex 28 11 shows that in-
cised lines were also used. The signets and scarabs
are examples of this class of carving. Several Heb
words have been tr “carved” in the AV. Pesel or
pstl is found in Jgs 18 18; 2 Ch 33 7.22; 343.4;
hakah in 1 K 6 35. The tr “graven’’ appears in
the RV of all these passages. In 1 K 6 29.32.35,
kala‘ appears; in 1 K 6 18.32, mikla‘ath; in1 K 6
29 and Ps 746, pittwh; in Ex 31 5; 36 33, haro-
sheth (sée CaRPENTER); hdfabhah in Prov 7 16 is
better tr? “striped” as in the RV. For further
notes on carving, see Crarts. James A. Parco


CASDIM, kaz’dim. See CHEseEp.


CASE, kas: Ordinarily to describe the circum-
stances or condition of things; sometimes, jurid-
ically (atrla, aitia, Mt 19 10; Acts 26 14), as that
for which a reckoning has to be given, as frequently
the Lat rés. In Ex 6 19, ‘“‘they were in evil case,”
is interpreted by RV as ‘‘were set on mischief.”


CASEMENT, kas’ment.


CASIPHIA, ka-sif’i-a, ka-sif-@’a (S7DOD, kdgiph-
ya’): An unidentified place in North Babylonia,
near the river Ahava, 10 which Ezra sent for ‘“‘min-
isters for the house of our God” (Ezr 8 17). Some
have thought the name to be connected with
keseph, ‘silver’? or y.’ ULXX renders argu-
vid tov tépou, as in 1 Esd 8 45, “the place of the


treasury.”

CASLUHIM, kas’li-him, kas-li/’him (B"TeOD,
kaslihim; Xacpwvelp, Chasmonieim): The name
of a people mentioned in Gen 10 14; 1 Ch 1 i2as


See Houss.


‘descended from Mizraim. The parenthesis should


probably follow Caphtorim. From them, it is said,
sprang the Patiistines, which see.


CASPHON, kas’fon. See CaspHor.


CASPHOR, kas’for (AV Casphon; Kacgap, Kas-
phér, 1 Mace 6 26; Xacdhdv, Chasphin, Xarpdd,
Chasphoth, ver 36; Koomelv, Kaspetn, 2 Macc 12
13): A city E. of the Jordan captured by Judas
Maccabaeus (1 Mace 6 36). It is probably identi-
cal with Caspis of 2 Macc 12 13. It was a fortress
of great strength, with a lake near it. This has led
some to think it may be represented by el-Muzérib,
an important station on the pilgrim route to Mecca.
The ancient name of this city, however, has not
been discovered. See ASHTAROTH.


CASPIN, kas’pin, CASPIS, kas’pis. See Cas-
PHOR.


Cassia
Cattle


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


582


CASSIA, kash’a: Two Heb words, (1) MIP,
kiddéh, which is mentioned, along with myrrh,
cinnamon, calamus and olive oil, as one of the in-
gredients of the “holy anointing oil” (Ex 30 24);
it was, too, one of the ;
wares in which Vedan and
Javan traded with Tyre
(Ezk 27 19); it is identi-
fied in the Pesh and the Tg
with (2). (2) MUxp,
kect‘ath (plur. only, prob-
ably referring to the strips
of bark), a word from which
is derived the Gr xacla,
kasta, and hence cassia
(Ps 45 8). It is probable
that both (1) and (2) re-
fer to Cassia lignea, the
inner bark of Cinnamomum
cassia, a plant growing in
eastern Asia closely allied
to that which yields the cinnamon of commerce.
It is a fragrant, aromatic bark and was probably
used in a powdered form. Both as an ingredient in
ungnents and as one of the perfumes at funerals,
cassia, like cinnamon, was much used by the Romans.
The cassia of Scripture must be clearly distinguished
from the entirely distinct Cassia lanceolata and C.
obovata which yield the familiar senna. The proper
name Kezian (q.v.) is the sing. form of k¢t‘oth.

E. W. G. MastermMan

CAST: In general “to throw,” with various
degrees of violence; usually, with force, but not so
necessarily, as e.g. in “cast a net,” “cast lots.”
When applied to molten metal, as in Eng., first,
“to let run into molds,” with reference to their
descent by gravity, and, then, ‘to form,” as in Ex
25 12, etc. Usually in the NT for Séddw, bald, but
not always. Thus, in Lk 1 29 “cast in her mind’
means “considered” (dteAoyliero, dielogizeto); “cast
reproach” for Gr velé:gov, dnetdizon, “reproached”
(Mt 27 44); “casting down” for xaéapéw, kathat-
ré6,” “demolishing” (2 Cor 10 4); ‘‘casting all anx-
iety upon” (1 Pet 5 7), a still stronger term, as in
Lk 17 2 AV; Acts 27 19. As a fundamental Gr
word, it is compounded with many prepositions,
“about,” “away,” “down,” “forth,” “in” “nto,”
“off,” “out,” “yp,” “pon.”


Cassia—Cinnamomum
cassia.


“Cast down” in 2
Cor 4 9 AV is used in a military sense of one pros-


trated, but not killed in battle. Cf Ps 42 5 with.


RVm. “Castaway” of AVin 1 Cor 9 27, isin RV
“rejected”? (cf He 6 8), ddé«uos, adékimos, i.e. what
the application of a test shows to be counterfeit, or
unfit; tr? “reprobate” in Rom 1 28; 2 Cor 13 5.
6.7, etc. H. E. Jacoss


CASTANETS, kas’ta-nets, kas-ta-nets’ (O°V2772 ,
mna‘an‘tm): Are mentioned in 2 § 6 5 among the
musical instruments upon which David and the
house of Israel played at the time of the bringing
up of the ark out of the house of Abinadab. This
word is incorrectly tr4 “cornets” in the AV. The
castanet was probably about the same kind of
instrument as the Egyp sistrum, and the RV has
“sistra”’ in the margin of 28 65. The sisirum
was a loop-shaped metal frame through which were
passed loose rods at the ends of which were rings.
The instrument was held by a long handle and was
rattled during songs and dances. It was used in
Egypt in religious worship or to scare away evil
influences. There is only the one reference to this
instrument in the Bible. A. W. FortTuns


CASTAWAY, kast’a-w4 (48dx.pos, addkimos, from
dokimdzo, “I test,” “I approve after testing,” hence
approved after being tested): This word is rendered
“castaway” only in AV: “I myself should be a cast-


away” (“rejected RV, ARV, 1 Cor 9 27). But
the same word occurs a number of times usually tr4
L “reprobate” (Rom 1 28; 2 Cor 13 5-7; 2 Tim 3
8; Tit 1 16); “rejected” (He 6 8).


CASTLE, kas”. See FortiricaTion.


CASTOR, kas’tér, AND POLLUX, pol’uks. See
Dioscur1; ASTRONOMY.


CAT (atdoupos, ailouros): The only mention of
this animal isin Bar 6 22. It is not mentioned in
the canonical Scriptures, though Bochart (Hieroz.,
862) gives ‘‘wild cats’ as the equivalent of giyim
in Isa 18 21; 34 14; Jer 60 39; Ps 74 19, where
EV gives “wild beasts of the desert.” Mention is,
however, made of cats, cathod, in the Welsh Bible
(Isa 84 14). The only mention of the catta in clas-
sical Lat writers is in Martial x1ii.69. How the cat
was regarded in Egypt is described in Herod. 11.66
and Rawlinson’s notes. In Bar 6 22 cats are men-
tioned with “bats, swallows and birds” as sitting
with impunity on the images of the heathen gods
which are unable to drive them off. See also Zo-
OLOGY. J. Hutcuison


CATECHIST, kat’é-kist, CATECHUMEN, kat-
é-kii’men (karnx (fev, katéchizein, ‘to resound,” “‘to
teach,” “to instruct”): A catechist is a teacher
who instructs his pupils in the elements of his own
religion. In the OT he teaches them the rudiments
of OT truth; in the NT he teaches the principles
of the Christian faith. A catechumen, one whom
the catechist instructs or catechizes, in preparation
for the ceremony of baptism.

The words are derived from xarnyelvy, katé-
chein, meaning ‘‘to give a sound,” ‘to answer,”
‘to echo.” Classically it was used of the sounding
down of rushing water, of the falling of music from
a ship to the sea. Then it came to signify the
sounding down of words of command or instruction.
The preposition kaié strengthens the meaning, bring~
ing out more emphatically the back or return sound,
the echo, the answer. So it came to mean familiar
verbal instruction, a free informal discussion be-
tween teacher and pupil. Luke informs Theophilus
(Lk 1 4) that he intends to give him asuccinct and
orderly account of those things which he had pre-
viously received by word of mouth (peri hén katé-
chéthés). See also the Gr in Acts 18 25 and 21 21;
Rom 2 18; 1 Cor 14 19; Gal 6 6. In all these
passages the Gr vb. is “catechised.”’ :

We do not find in the NT an organized catechu-
menate, such as we find in the 3d and 4th cents.
The apostles preached mainly to synagogue-in-
structed Jews who were familiar with the law and
the prophets and the Psalms, or to Gentiles who had
learned from the Jews and had become “‘proselytes”
(q.v.). The first apostolic preaching and teaching
was to convince the hearers that Jesus was the
promised Messiah, the Saviour of the world As
believers multiplied, the contrast between them
and those who rejected the teaching became more
and more marked. Opposition, scorn and perse-
cution became more bold and bitter. The Chris-
tians were compelled to set forth and defend their
beliefs more clearly. They had to meet and answer
keen and persistent objections. And so the neces-
sity for clear, systematic and organized teaching
grew more and more into the form of an ordered
catechumenate. The Apos Consts, from the latter
part of the 3d cent., show the institution in a fair


state of development. A Jew, pagan, or heretic
of good moral standing, upon application to the
deacon, presbyter, or bishop, was admitted into the
state of catechumen by the sign of the cross and the
imposition of hands (Sch-Herz s.v.).


583


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Cassia
Cattle


The basis for the Christian catechumenate we
find in the great commission (Mt 28 19.20). The
aim of this commission was to make disciples, i.e.
believing followers. The means for this discipling
are baptizing and teaching. The result of using
the means is that those who have become disciples
are to observe all things whatsoever Christ has
commanded.

Jesus Himself at twelve years of age had become
a child of the law, a catechumen. He increased in
wisdom and learned obedience. He became the
great Catechist instructing His disciples, other
private individuals and the multitudes. See an ex-
ample of His catechizing in Mt 16 13 ff.

Paul was a master in method. See examples
of use of the modern pedagogical method of ap-
perception in Acts 14 14ff; 17 16ff; 19 8.9.
The catechetical method is frequently found in the
epistles (see 1 Cor 31.2; He & 11.14; 6 1.2;
1 Pet 2 2; 1 Jn 2 13), and so the idea of religious
nurture and instruction is found all through the
NT. The catechist and the catechumen are there.
It was not something new in the NT. Its roots
lie back and run through the OT. The narrative
of God’s first communication with man, inside
the gates of Eden, concerning commandment, law,
gin, its consequences, its remedy, takes a cate-
chetical form. The importance of systematic in-
struction, both public and private, is emphasized
throughout the OT and NT, although it might not
always take the form of catechizing in the modern
pedagogical sense. In the patriarchal age the
father was the prophet, the teacher, the catechist,
in his house, which often included several families
with their servants (see Gen 18 19). Matthew
Henry explains thus: ‘‘Abraham not only took
care of his children, but his whole household, in-
cluding his servants, were catechized” (see also
Ex 12 26; Dt6 1-9; Josh 46.7; 2415; Ps
$4 11). Priests and Levites in addition to their
gacerdotal functions were catechists (instructors)
among the people (Lev 10 11; Dt 33 10; 2 Ch
15 3; Ezk 44 23). In later times the synagogues
had regular instruction in the law and the prophets.
See Envcation; Instruction; TEACHER.

G. H. GerRBERDING


CATERPILLAR, kat’ér-pil-ér (0°07, hasil [Ps
78 46; Joel 1 4, etc]; P27, yelek [Ps 105 34 AV,
ARV “grasshopper”; Jer 61 14.27 AV; elsewhere
“canker-worm’’]): A name given to a larval stage of
the Locust (q.v.).


CATHOLIC, kath’é-lik, EPISTLES (émotoAat
xafodtkal, epistolat katholikat): In distinction from
the apostolic or Pauline epistles which were ad-
dressed to individual churches or persons, the term
“catholic,” in the sense of universal or general, was
applied by Origen and the other church Fathers to
the seven epistles written by James, Peter, John
and Jude. As early as the 3d cent. it came to
be used in the sense of “encyclical,” “since,” as
Theodoret says, “they are not addressed to single
churches, but generally [kathélou] to the faithful,
whether to the Jews of the Dispersion, as Peter
writes, or even to all who are living as Christians
under the same faith.” Three other explanations
of the term have been given, viz. (1) that it was
intended to indicate a common apostolic authorship
(only a few support this view); (2) that it signifies
that the seven epistles were universally received as
genuine; (3) that it refers to the catholicity of their
doctrine, i.e. orthodox and authoritative versus
heretical epistles whose teachings were in harmony
with Christian truth. By some misconception of
the word “catholic” the Western Church interpreted
it as signifying “canonical” and sometimes called


these epistles epistolae canonicae. That it was orig-
inally used in the sense of “general” epistles is now
commonly received.

This is evident from their form of address. St.
James wrote to all Jews, ‘‘of the Dispersion,” who
had embraced the Christian faith. In_his first
epistle St. Peter addressed the same Christians,
including also gentile converts, resident in five
provinces of Asia Minor: “elect who are sojourners
of the Dispersion.’”’? His second epistle is to all
Christians everywhere. St. John’s first letter was
evidently written to a cycle of churches and in-
tended for universal use. St. Jude also had in
mind all Christians when he said ‘“‘to them that
are called beloved in God,” etc. The seeming ex-
ceptions are 2 and 3 Jn, addressed to individuals,
but included with the catholic epistles as properly
belonging with St. John’s first epistle and of value
to the general reader. The character and contents
of these seven epistles are treated under their
various heads. The letters of St. James and St.
Jude belong to the Judaic school of Christianity;
those of St. Peter to a broad and non-partisan type
of faith that both includes and mediates between
the Judaists and Paulinists. St. John’s letters were
written after the internal doctrinal controversies of
the church had ceased, and the pressure of opposi-
tion and error from without tended to unite his
“Tittle children” in a new community of love and
spiritual life. Dwicut M. Pratr


CATHOUA, ka-thi’a (Kalovd, Kathoud; B, Kova,
Koud): Head of a family of temple-servants who
returned from the captivity with Zerubbabel
(1 Esd 6 30); corresponds to Giddel in Ezr 2 47.


CATTLE, kat”] (WWama, bhémah, “a dumb
beast”; MPA, mikneh, “a possession,” from TP,
kanah, “to acquire” [cf Arab. kana’, “to acquire,”
and Gr xrfvos, kténos, “beast,” and pl. xrvea,
kténea, “flocks,” from xrdopa, kidomai, “to ac-
quire,” flocks being both with the Homeric peoples
and with the patriarchs an important form of
property; ef Eng. “‘fee”]; JN, ¢a’n, “small cattle,”
“sheep” or goats [ef Arab. da’n, “sheep’’]; YP, seh,
a single sheep or goat [cf Arab. shah]; mee’,
mla@khah, “property,” from 7D , l@akh, “to min-
ister’ [cf Arab. maladkah and mulk, “property,”
from malak, “to possess”); S™VQ, mer’, “fatling’”’
[1 K 19]; Opéppa, thrémma [Jn 4 12], “cattle,”
ie. “that which is nourished,” from tpépw, tréphd,
‘to nourish’; “Wp, bakar, “kine,” “oxen” [cf
Arab. bakar, “cattle’]; “WWW, shor, WW, tor [Dnl
4 25], tatpos, tavros [Mt 22 4], “ox” or “bull”;
Bods, bovis, “ox” [Lk 18 15]; MeN, ’eleph, only in
pl, DDeN, ’dlaphim, “oxen” [Ps 8 7]): From the
foregoing and by examination of the many refer-
ences to “cattle,” “kine” or “oxen,” it is apparent
that there are important points of contact in deriva-
tion and usage in the Heb, Gr and Eng. terms.
It is evident that neat cattle were possessed in
abundance by the patriarchs and later Israelites,
which is far from being the case in Pal at the present
day. The Bedawin usually have no cattle. The
fellahin in most parts of the country keep them in
small numbers, mostly for plowing, and but little
for milk or for slaughtering. Travelers in the Holy
Land realize that goat’s milk is in most places easier
to obtain than cow’s milk. The commonest cattle
of the fellahin are a small black breed. In the
vicinity of Damascus are many large, fine milch
cattle which furnish the delicious milk and cream
of the Damascus bazaars. For some reason,
probably because they are not confined and highly


Cattle
Cease


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


584


fed, the bulls of Pal are meek creatures as compared
with their European or American fellows.

In EV the word ‘“‘cattle” is more often used in a
wide sense to include sheep and goats than to denote
merely neat cattle. In fact, bakar, which distinc-
tively denotes neat cattle, is often rendered “herds,”
as ¢0’n, lit. “sheep,” is in a large number of instances
tr? “flocks.” A good illustration is found in Gen
32 7: “Then Jacob... . divided the people
[Sam] that were with him, and the flocks [¢d’n], and
the herds [bakar], and the camels [g*mallim], into
two companies [mahdnoth].” For the last word
AV has “drove’ in Gen 33 8, RV “company.”


Cattle.


Next to ¢6’n, the word most. commonly rendered
“flock” in EV is ‘édher, from root “to arrange,’’ “to
set in order.” ‘EHdher is rendered “herd” in Prov
27 23, and in Joel 1 18 it occurs twice, being
rendered ‘‘herds of cattle,” ‘edhré bakar, and ‘flocks
of sheep,’ ‘edhré ha-¢o’n. Mikneh is rendered
“flock” in Nu 32 26, “herd” in Gen 47 18, and
“cattle” in a large number of passages. Other
words rendered “flock” are: mar'tth (. ra‘ah
[Arab. ra‘a], “to pasture’), once in Jer 10 21;
‘ashterath ¢6’n, “flocks of thy sheep,” RV ‘young of
thy flock,” in Dt 7 13, ete, ‘ashta@rdth being pl. of
‘ashtéreth, or Ashtoreth; hasiph, once in 1 K 20 27:
“The children of Israel encamped before them [the
Syrians] like two little flocks of kids,” hastph sig-
nifying “something stripped off or separated,” from
root hdsaph, “to strip” or “to peel,” like the Arab.
kati', “flock,” from root kata‘, “to cut off’; olury,
poimné (Mt 26 31): “The sheep of the flock shall
be scattered,” and (Lk 2 8): “keeping watch by
night over their flock’; wolumov, potmnion (Lk 12


32): “Fear not, little flock,” and (1 Pet 5 2): “Tend
the flock of God which is among you.”

Figurative: Not only poimné and poimnion but
also ‘édher and ¢d’n are used fig. of God’s people;
e.g. Isa 40 11: “He will feed his flock [‘édher] like
a shepherd”; Zec 10 3: “Jeh of hosts hath visited
his flock [‘édher], the house of Judah”; Isa 65 10:
“And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks” (¢6’n); Jer
23 2: “Ye have scattered my flock” (¢6’n); Ezk
34 22: “Therefore will I save my flock’’ (¢é’n); Mic
7 14: “Feed... . the flock (¢6’n] of thy heritage.”

The wild ox or wild bull, RV “antelope” (é’6 or
ia’ of Dt 14 5 and Isa 51 20), is considered by the
writer to be probably the Arabian oryx, and in this
he is in agreement with Tristram (NHB). Tristram
however thinks that the unicorn (rém or r°’ém), RV
“wild ox,” was the aurochs, while the present writer
believes that this also may well have been the oryx,
which at the present day has at least three names


| in Arab., one of which, bakar-ul-wahsh, means


‘wild ox.”? See ANTELOPE.


Our domestic cattle are believed by some of the best
authorities to be of the same species as the ancient Euro-
pean wild ox or aurochs, Bos taurus, which is by others
counted as a distinct species under the title of Bos primi-
genius. The aurochs was widely spread over Europe in
Rom times, but is now extinct. Some degenerate wild
cattle are preserved in some British parks, but these ac-
cording to Lydekker in the Royal Natural History are
probably feral descendants of early domestic breeds.
Tristram cites the occurrence in the Dog River bone
breccia of teeth which may be those of the aurochs, but
this is a deposit accumulated by prehistoric man of an
unknown antiquity to be variously estimated according
to the predilections of the geologist at a few thousands or
a few score of thousands of years, and is far from proving
that this animal existed in Pal in Bible times or at any
time.

The European bison (Bos or Bison bonassus) is thought
by some to be the wild ox of the Bible. This is a forest-
dwelling species and is now confined to the forests of
Lithuania and the Caucasus. It was formerly more
widely distributed, but there is no certain evidence that
it ever lived as far 8. as Pal, and there have probably
never existed in Pal forests suitable to be the haunts of
this animal.

About the Sea of Tiberias and the Jordan valley and
in the plain of Coele-Syria there exist today Indian
buffaloes (Bos bubalus), some feral and someina state of
domestication, which are believed to have been intro-
duced in comparatively recent times. See Breast; Car.

Aurrep Ety Day

CAUDA, ké’da (KatSa, Katida; also called
Kaaitéa, Klaida; AV Clauda; the modern Gr name
Gaudho supports the form Cauda): An island 23
miles W. of Cape Matala. It is a small island, and
can never have supported a large population, or
have been of any importance. Its elevation to the
rank of a bishopric in Byzantine times must have
been due to its association with the voyage of St.
Paul. The ship with Paul on board was driven
under the lee of Cauda (Acts 27 16); in the calm
water south of the island the crew succeeded in
hauling in the boat, undergirding the ship and
slackening sail. W. M. Caper


CAUL, kél:

(1) PUY, yothereth (Ex 29 13), the large lobe
or flap of the liver, which is usually mentioned to-
gether with the kidneys and the fat as the special


portions set aside for the burnt offering (Lev 3
4.10.15; 49; 74; 8 16.25; 9 10.19).

(2) VAQ, s*ghdr (from the root sdghar, “to
inclose,” “shut up’), Hos 13 8, lit. the inclosure
or covering of the heart, the caul or pericardium,
or perhaps the chest as surrounding the heart. It
must not be forgotten, however, that the expres-
sion may be taken in the sense of “mailcoat of the
heart,” i.e. hardened heart, which is shut to the
influence of God’s grace. So Luther and many
modern translators and commentators.

H. L. E, Luerine


585


CAUSE, kés: In both AV and RV “for this cause”


of MRT “WBZ, ba'abhur z20’th=“in order that”,
“to the end that”; so also in Dnl 2 12 for Dap7>s
m7, kol-k*bhel dendh, and in 2 Ch 82 20 AV
for mgrm$y | ‘al-zo’th, where RVS read “because
of.” In the NT the word is used adverbially in the
tr of several Gr phrases: &vexa robrov, héneka tovilou
(Mt 19 5; Mk 10 7); && rofro, did torto, In 12
27; Rom 1 26; 13 6; 159 (RV “therefore’’);
1 Cor 11 30; 1 Thess 2 18; 2 Thess 2 11; 1 Tim


1 16; He 9 15; eds rovro, eis tovito, Jn 18 37 (where |


AV varying the phraseology reads “to this end,”
“for this cause”); 1 Pet 46 AV; rovrov xdpcv, tow-
tou chdrin, Eph 3 14. Unusual renderings occur,
as “for his cause” (= “because of”), 2 Cor 7 12; as
=“‘affair,”’ “thing,” obs. in AV 1 K 12 15; 2 Ch
10 15, where the word occurs as a paraphrase of
a0), nesibbah (=“turn of affairs”). In 1S 26
31 (AV, RV) ‘causeless” (=without cause ARV)
occurs arbitrarily in adv. sense.
W. N. Srearns

CAUSEWAY, kéz’wa (more correctly CAUSEY,
k6’zi): This word occurs in 1 Ch 26 16.18 for the
Heb m0", mésillah; LXX racrogopiov THs dvaBd-
sews, pastophorion tés anabdseds. In 2 Ch 9 11 the
word is tr? “‘terraces’” (LXX dvaBdoes, anabdseis).
Cf BDB, s.v., where mibon, mésilloth, is an error
for MMPS, mis‘adhoth (1 K 10 12). In all the
above passages reference is made to a series or flight
of steps leading up into the temple. The word also
signifies a prepared, traveled road, asin Nu 20 19;
Jgs 20 311.45; 18 6 12; 2S 20 12f; 2 K 18 17
(isa 36 2); Isa 7 3; 11 16; 19 23; 33 8; 40 3;
49 11; Jer 31 21.

Figurative: In Isa 59 7 the word (m¢sillah)
occurs in a fig. sense, so also in Jgs 5 20; Prov 16
17. W. N. Srearns


CAVE, kav (19%, m*“drah [cf Arab. magharah],
“iN, hor (Job 30 6 AV}, nina, mehilloth (Isa
219]; orh, opé [He 11 38], omfdaov, spélaion
[Jn 11 38]; hdr, more often rendered “hole,” is
akin to Arab. khaur, “gulf” or “inlet,” but is also
related to m*drah [cf also Arab. ghaur “low-land,”
esp. of the Jordan valley and Dead Sea]. M-hilloth
[r. halal, “to pierce” (cf Arab. khall, ‘‘to pierce’’)]


Cave in Lebanon Converted into a Shrine.


occurs only in Isa 2 19, where AV has “caves”
and translates m*‘aroth in the same ver by “holes.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


C < ' about.
(AV ‘cause’’) occurs in Ex 9 16 as the rendering |


In RV these words are very properly changed '


Cattle
Cease


Spélaion is a common Gr word for ‘“‘cave’’;
opé means rather “hole’’): In Pal as in other lime-
stone countries, caves are of frequent occurrence,


Natural Bridge at Lebanon.


and not a few of large size are known. Water from
the rain and snow, seeping down through cracks,
enlarges the passages through which it goes by dis-
solving away the substance of the rock. Just as
upon the surface of the land the trickling streams
unite to form brooks and rivers, so many subter-
ranean streams may come together in a spacious
channel, and may issue upon the surface as a bold


aa os p =
Stream Issuing from Cave at ‘Afla, Lebanon.


spring. The cave of the Dog River near Beirii
and that of ’Afka (perhaps Aphek [Josh 13 4]) in
Lebanon are excellent. examples of this. Not in-
frequently after forming a cave the stream of water
may find some lower outlet by a different route,
leaving its former course dry. In some cases the
hinder part of the roof of the cave may fall in,
leaving the front part standing as a natural bridge.
Numerous shallow caves, esp. in the faces of cliffs,
are formed not by seeping water, but by atmos-
pheric erosion, a portion of a relatively soft stratum


| of rock being hollowed out, while harder strata


above and below it are but little worn away. Many
of the hermits’ caves originated in this way and
were artificially enlarged and walled up at the mouth.
The principal caves mentioned in the Bible are
those of MacureLaH, MaxxepaH and ADULLAM
(q.v.). See DEN. ALFrepD Exiy Day


CEASE, sés: A remarkable array of 20 Heb and
6 Gr words is so tr’. In the AV 15 of the former


Cedar
Censer


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


586


and 3 of the latter are used only once with this
rendering. The originals most frequently in use are
27, hadhal, ‘to leave off’; MAW, shabhath, “‘to
rest from” (labor) ; Tavouat, paiomat, “to make
to cease.”” Few words illustrate better the fertility
of the Heb in expressing limitless shades of meaning,
impoverished by the use of one Eng. word. This
extensive variety is, however, well expressed by
“cease”: i.e. stop, come to an end, e.g. ceasing of
tears (Jer 14.17); work (Ear 4 24); grinders
(Eccl 12 3); thunder (Ex 9 29); the wicked (Job
3.17); anger (Ps 87 8). The significance of
shabhath lies in its being the Heb for Sabbath, im-
plying complete cessation: as of manna (Josh 6 12);
strife and ignominy (Prov 22 10); occurs with
negative to show the ceaseless Providence of God
in Nature: ‘summer and winter . . . . shall not c.”
(Gen 8 22). Inthe NT it illustrates Christ’s power
over Nature; wind and raging sea ceased (Lk 8 24);
over a sinner’s heart: ‘not ceased to kiss my feet’’
(Svarelrw, dialetps) (Lk 7 45); devotion of the
early disciples, ‘‘ceased not to teach and to preach
Jesus as the Christ’? (Acts 5 42); the eternity and
blessedness of the believer’s sabbatic rest (drodcrw,
apoletpo) (He 4 10 AV). Dwicut M. Pratr


CEDAR, sé’dar, sé’dér (TIN, ’erez, from Heb root
meaning “‘to be firm’; «éSpos, kédros): The ’erez
was in almost all the OT references the true cedar,
Cedrus libant, but the name may have been applied
in a loose way to allied trees, such as Junipers and
pines. In Nu 24 6—‘‘as cedar-trees beside the
waters’”—the reference must, as is most probable,
be purely poetical (see ALous) or the ’draztm must
signify some other kind of tree which flourishes
beside water.


Cedar is twice mentioned as a substance for


ritual cleansing. In Lev 14 4 the cleansed leper
was sprinkled with the blood of a


1. Cedar ‘clean bird” into which had been put
for Ritual ‘‘cedar-wood, and scarlet, and hyssop.”’
Cleansing In Nu 19 6 “‘cedar-wood, and hyssop,


and scarlet”’ were to be cast into the
holocaust of the red heifer. (For the symbolical
meaning see CLEAN.) Here it is very generally
considered that the cedar could not have been the
wood of Cedrus libant, which so far as we know
never grew in the wilderness, but that of some
species of juniper—according to Post, Juniperis
phoenicea, which may still be found in the wilder-
ness of Edom.
Cedar trees are everywhere mentioned with ad-
miration in the OT. Solomon made the cedar the


first of trees (1 K 4 33). They are
2. Cedar the “glory of Lebanon” (Isa 36 2;
Trees in 60 13). The most boastful threat of
the OT Sennacherib was that he would cut

down the tall cedars of Lebanon (Isa
387 24). They were strong, as is implied in—


‘The voice of Jehis powerful; ....
The voice of Jeh breaketh the cedars;
Yea, Jeh breaketh in pieces the cedars of Lebanon”
(Ps 29 4.5).


The cedars are tall—“whose height was like the
height of the cedars’—(Am 29; 2 K 19 23);
majestic (2 K 14 9), and excellent (Cant 5 15).
The Assyr power is compared to—‘‘a cedar in
Lebanon with fair branches, and with a forest-like
shade, and of high stature; and its top was among
the thick boughs... . its stature was exalted
above all the trees of the field; and its boughs were
multiplied, and its branches became long” (Ezk 81
3-5). They are in particular God’s trees—
“The trees of Jeh are filled with moisture,
rate of Lebanon, which he hath plantcd’' (Ps


Doubtless as a reminiscence of this the Syrians
today call the cedar ‘ars er rubb, “the cedar of the
Lord.” The growth of the cedar is typical of that
of the righteous man (Ps 92 12).

That cedars were once very abundant in the
Lebanon is evident (1 K 6 9-18; 10 27). What
they contributed to the glory and beauty of that
district may be seen in Zec 11 1-2:

“Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour
thy cedars.
Wail, O fir-tree, for the cedar is fallen, because the


glorious [R Vm] ones are destroyed:
Wail, O ye oaks of Bashan, for the strong forest is come
wn."


Cedars of Lebanon at the Besherri Grove.


The wood of the cedar has always been highly
prized—much more so than the sycamore (1 K 10
27; Isa 910). David had a house
8. Cedar of cedar built for him by Hiram, king
Timber of Tyre (2 8 5 11), and he prepared
“cedar-trees without number” for the
temple which his son was to build (1 Ch 22 4).
Cedar timber was very much used in the construc-
tion of Solomon’s temple and palace, the trees being
cut in the Lebanon by Sidonians by orders of the
king of Tyre—“Hiram gave Solomon timber of
cedar and timber of fir according to all his desire”
(1 K 6 6-10). One of Solomon’s most important
buildings was known as ‘‘the house of the forest of
Lebanon” (1 K 72; 1017; 2 Ch 916), on
account of the source of its materials. While cedar
was well adapted for beams (1 K 6 9; Cant 1 17),
boards (Cant 8 9), pillars (1 K 7 2) and ceilings
(Jer 22 14), it was suited as well for carved work,
such as idols (Isa 44 14.15). It was also used for
ships’ masts (Ezk 27 5).
The Cedrus libani still survives in the mountains
of Syria and flourishes in much greater numbers
in the Taurus mountains. ‘‘There are
4, Cedars groves of cedars above el-Ma‘asir,
in Modern Bartk, ‘Ain Zehaltah, Hadith, Be-
Syria sherri, and Str? (Post, Flora, 751).
Of these the grove at Begherri is of
world-wide renown. It consists of a group of about
400 trees, among them some magnificent old patri-
archs, which lies on the bare slopes of the Lebanon


587


some 6,000 ft. above the sea. Doubtless they are
survivors of a forest, which here once covered the
mountain slopes for miles. The half a dozen
highest specimens reach a height of between 70 and
80 ft., and have trunks of a circumference of 40 ft.
or more. It is impossible to estimate with any
certainty their age, but they may be as much as
800, or even 1,000, years old. Though magnifi-
cent, these are by no means the largest of their kind.
Some of the cedars of Amanus are quite 100 ft.
high and the Himalayan cedar, Cedrus deodara, a
variety of Cedrus libani, reaches a height of 150 ft.
The impressiveness of the cedar lies, however, not so
much in its height and massive trunk, as in the
wonderful lateral spread of its branches, which often
exceeds its height. The branches grow out hori-
zontally in successive tiers, each horizontal plane
presenting, when looked at from above, the appear-
ance of a green sward. The leaves are about an
inch long, arranged in clusters; at first they are
bright green, but they change with age to a deeper
tint with a glaucous hue; the foliage is evergreen,
the successive annual growths of leaves each lasting
two years. The cones, 4 to 6 in. long, are oval or
oblong-ovate, with a depression at times at the apex;
they require two years to reach maturity and then,
unlike other conifers, they remain attached to the
tree, dropping out their scales bearing the seeds.

The wood of the cedar, specially grown under the
conditions of its natural habitat, is hard, close
grained, and takes a high polish. It is full of resin
(Ps 92 14) which preserves it from rot and from
worms. Cedar oil, a kind of turpentine extracted
from the wood, was used in ancient times as a pre-
servative for parchments and garments.


E. W. G. MasTerMsn
CEDRON, sé’dron. See Kinron.
CEILAN, sé’lan. See Kinan.


CEILED, séld, CEILING, sél’/ing (AV and ERV
Cieled, Cieling; the Heb words for ‘‘ceiled” are
MEM, hippah, 729, saphan, OW, sahiph; for
“ceiling,” JRO, sippun): Ceiling occurs only in
1K 615. it comes from the root séphan, mean-
ing “to cover.” It has its common meaning of the
upper surface of a room; there is, however, some
doubt of the text. Ceiled is found in 2 Ch 3 5
((hippah]; Jer 22 14; Hag 1 4 [saphan in both];
Ezk 41 16 [sahiph]), the text of the last passage
being doubtful. In none of these cases does “‘ceiled”
refer to the upper surface of a room, but to the
covering or paneling of the inner walls of a house
with cedar or other costly wood. This is in accord-
ance with a common early use of the Eng. word,
Grorce Ricker BERRY


CELEBRATE, sel’é-brat: Of the three Heb
words so rendered pon, halal, ‘‘to praise,” is pre-
eminently significant. It is an onomatopoetic
word meaning “to give a clear, sharp sound,” as
in vocal rejoicing, celebration. Its equivalent in
Ethiopic is ellell, Ger. hallen, Eng. halloo, and ap-
pears in the great choral word Hallelujah of the
Heb religion. Passing into Christian use it has
become the term most expressive of majestic praise.
Pss 113-118 and 136 are called Hallel psalms.
Found in Hezekiah’s psalm of praise for his mir-
aculous recovery: ‘‘Death cannot celebrate thee”
(Isa 38 18). 33%, haghagh, root meaning “to move
in a circle,” hence “to keep a festival” by sacred
leaping and dancing; “celebrate [RV “‘keep’’] a
feast” (Lev 23 41); M2W, shabhath, “to rest,” ie.
keep or observe a holy day; “celebrate [RV “keep”’]


your sabbath” (Ley 23 32).
Dwicut M. Pratr


no longer frequent.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Cedar
Censer


CELESTIAL, sé-les’chal (érovpdvios, epourdnios,
“above the sky,’ “heavenly’”’): Peculiar to Paul’s
majestic argument on the resurrection: celestial vs
terrestrial bodies (1 Cor 15 40) with reference pos-
sibly to sun and moon, etc, but more probably to the
bodies of angels in distinction from those of beasts
and mortal men (cf Christ’s words, Mt 22 30;
Lk 20 36); including also doubtless in the apostle’s
thought the resurrection-body of Jesus and of the
saints already taken into glory. Light is thrown
on its meaning by the rendering of the same
Gr original as “heavenly places” (Eph 1 3.20; 2
6; 810); ‘heavenly’ (1 Cor 15 48). Hence
“celestial”? as used by Paul indicates the soul’s
continued life beyond the grave, the spiritual body
of the redeemed in heaven, who, in Christ, have put
on immortality. Dwicut M. Pratr


CELLAR, sel’ér, sel’ar (kpiary, kriépté; VEN,
’ocar): Krupté is found only in Lk 11 33, and is
rendered ‘“‘cellar’’ in RV; AV has “secret place.”
In this passage it doubtless means a cellar beneath
a house. Etymologically the Gr word means ‘‘a
covered place,” and in classical Gr its usage includes
vaults and crypts as well as cellars. It seems evi-
dent that it was only the larger houses in Pal in
which cellars were used with any frequency. It is
shown by the excavations that in rebuilding a town
which was in ruins the old houses were sometimes
utilized as cellars for the new. ’d¢dr, is rendered
cellar only in 1 Ch 27 27f. It is an erroneous
rendering, the correct meaning being stores, or sup-
ples, of wine and oil. Gzrorce Ricker Berry


CELOSYRIA, sé-lo-sir’i-a. See ComLE-syRia.


CENCHREAE, sen’kré-é (Keyxpeal, Kegchreat,
WH Kenchreat; AV incorrectly Cenchrea): A sea-
port of Corinth on the eastern side of the isthmus
(see Corinto). Here according to Acts 18 18, St.
Paul had his hair shorn before sailing for Syria, since
he had a vow. A local church must have been
established there by St. Paul, since Phoebe, the
deaconess of Cenchreae, was intrusted with the
Epistle to the Romans, and was commended to them
in the highest terms by the apostle, who charged
them to ‘‘assist her in whatsoever matter she may
have need” (Rom 16 1.2).


CENDEBAEUS, sen-de-bé’us (KevdeBatos, Ken-
debatos; AV Cendebeus): A general of Antiochus
VII who was appointed “captain of the seacoast”
of Pal (1 Mace 16 38 ff) after the defeat of Try-
phon by Antiochus 138 BC. He fortified Kedron
and harassed the Jews in various ways. As Simon
Maccabaeus was too old to attack C. in person he
sent his two eldest sons, Judas and John, who de-
feated him with great loss at Modin (1 Macc 16
1-10).


CENSER, sen’sér: In AV censer is used as a tr
of two Heb words, viz. MEN2, mahtah, and NEPA,
miktereth. The former word is generally rendered
“censer,’’ sometimes “‘firepan,”’ and in three cases
(Ex 256 38; 387 28; Nu 4 9) “snuffdish’” It
denoted a bowl-shaped vessel used for different
purposes, viz. (1) a censer, in which incense was
burnt (Lev 10 1); (2) a firepan, made of bronze,
used in connection with the altar of burnt offering
(Ex 27 3); (3) a snuffdish, ie. a receptacle to
hold pieces of burnt_lamp-wick removed by the
tongs or snuffers (Ex 26 38). Probably in all
these cases the same kind of vessel was meant, viz.
a bowl-shaped utensil with a handle, not unlike a
saucepan. The other Heb word (derived from the
same root as the word for ‘‘incense’’) denoted a
vessel for conveying incense (Ezk 8 11; 2 Ch 26


eens THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 588
19). The Gr word Oumaripiov, thumiatérion, by | Gesenius, Heb Grammar, tr Collins-Cowley, 357, 3).


which the LXX rendered miktereth, is used_also
in He 9 4, where AV gives “censer,” but ARV is


Censers.
1. Throwing incense on flame. 2. Balls of incense burning.


aa. Boxes for
holding incense.—Rosellini. 3,4. Censers of different forms.—Wil-
kinson. 5. Box or cup for incense.— Wilkinson. 6,7. Head of handle
and pan of censers in bronze.—Brit. Mus.


probably more correct, viz. “altar of incense” (see
Commentaries s.v.). Cf also Rev 8 3.5, where
MBavwrés, libandtés, properly the adj. of ‘“frank-
incense,” is tr? ‘‘censer.” T. Lewis


CENSUS, sen’sus.


CENTURION, sen-ti’ri-un: As the name implies,
éxarovTapxys or -os, hekatonidrchés or -os; Kevtv-
plwv, kenturidn, Lat centurio, was the commander
of a hundred men, more or less, in a Rom legion.
St. Matthew and St. Luke use the Gr word while
St. Mark prefers the Lat form, as he does in the case
of other words, seeing that he wrote primarily for
Rom readers. The number of centurions in a legion
was 60, that being at all epochs the number of centu-
ries, although the number varied in the cohort or
speira. The ordinary duties of the centurion were
to drill his men, inspect their arms, food and clothing,
and to command them in the camp and in the field.
Centurions were sometimes employed on detached
service the conditions of which in the provinces are
somewhat obscure. Men like Cornelius and Julius
(Acts 10 1; 27 1) may have been separated from the
legion to which they properly belonged for the dis-
charge of special duties. They and other centurions
mentioned in the Gospels and the Acts (Mt 8 5;
Mk 16 39.44.45; Lk 23 47) are represented by


See Davin; QuiIRINIUS.


the sacred writers in a favorable light. See Aucus-
TAN Banp. Nicou

CEPHAS, sé’fas. See Peter (Simon).

CERAS, s@‘ras (Kupds, Kérds; RV KERAS
[q.v.]).

CERTAIN, sér’tin, CERTAINLY,  sér’tin-li,


CERTAINTY, sér’tin-ti: The rendering of some
Heb words and forms expressive of what is defi-
uitely settled or determined.

(1) Tr of the Heb 7152, nakhon, “to be estab-
lished” or “‘fixed,” as in Dt 13 14 (Heb 15); 17 4;
18 23 28 (cf Ex 16 4, “a certain rate every day’
AV). In the NT it is the rendering of dogarjs,
asphalés, dogédeu, asphdleia, from ‘a’ privative
and sphallein, ‘to shake” or “move”; as in Lk 1
4, “the certainty of those things’ =actual circum-
stances; Acts 21 34; 22 30; 25 26.

(2) The word “‘c.” ig also employed in the OT
to bring out the force of the absolute infinitive form
used with the finite vb. to express emphasis or to
strengthen the idea of the main vb. (Kautzsch-


Such usage occurs in Gen 18 10; Josh 9 24; Lev
6 19; 24 16; 1 S 20 3AV; 1K 2 387; Jer 26 15;
36 29; 42 19.22; 44 17.

(3) The word “c.” is also made auxiliary to bring
out the force of such expressions as the Heb 2X",
yadcabh, “to be firm,” asin Dan 2 8; alsoin the NT,
of the vb. dorarety, astatetn, asin 1 Cor 4 11, “have
no certain dwelling-place.’

(4) Mention might be made also of “c.” as the
rendering of sundry words, as FN, ’akh, in Lam 2
16; "3, 2, in Ex 3 12; and dSerws, 6ntds, in Lk
23 47, all being expressions for what is sure, beyond
doubt. W. N. Sr#arns


CERTIFY, sér’ti-fi: Occurs in (1) 28 16 28
(TIN, haggidh, ‘to show,” “announce,” -from 733,
naghadh); (2) Ezr 4 14.16; 5 10; 7 24 WN, ho-
dha‘, “to make known,” from 97), y*dha‘; Aram. for
7), yadha‘); (8) Est 2 22 AV (WAX, ’amar, “to
say,” “tell,” so RV); and (4) Gal 1 11 AV (yrwpitw,
gnorizé, “‘to make to know,” so RV). In the EV,
accordingly, the word has not the strong, specific
sense of “to make certain,” but only the broader
sense of “to make to know.” Cf Ps 39 5 (Prayer
Book version), ‘‘that I may be certified how long I
have to live.”


CETAB, sé'tab. See Keras.


CHABRIS, ka’bris (’ABpis, Abris, KaBPpels,
Chabreis): Son of Gothoniel, one of the three rulers
of Bethulia in the time of Judith (Jth 6 15; 8 10;
10 6).


CHADIAS, ki’di-as, THEY OF (RV CHADIA-
SAI, ka’di-a-si; A, XaSdco, Chaddsai; B, of Xa-
Sido, hot Chadidsat): The inhabitants of the city
here referred to returned with Zerubbabel, along
with the Ammidioi (1 Est 5 20). The name is not
found in Ezr and Neh. The Chadiasai have been
taken for the people of Kadesh and the Ammidioi
for the people of Humtah (Josh 15 54). Possibly
the place is identical with Kedesh of Josh 15 23.


CHAEREAS, ké’ré-as (Kopéas, Chairéas; AV
Chereas): Brother of Timotheus, the Ammonite
leader against Judas Maccabaeus (1 Macc 6 6).
He held the fortress of Gazara (the “Jazer’’ of 1
Macc 6 8) to which Timotheus fled from Judas.
The latter pursued him and captured the fortress
after a vigorous siege. In the slaughter which
followed the two brothers, Ch. and Tim., were killed
(2 Mace 10 32.37).


CHAFE, chaf (7A, mar, “bitter”; hence bitter
of soul, deadly, destructive, ferocious, “as a bear
robbed of her whelps’’): Occurs only in 2 S 17 8;
used by Hushai to characterize David’s supposedly
fierce mood at the time of Absalom’s armed rebellion.


CHAFF, chaf: Four different words have been
tr? “chaff” in the OT:

(1) 713, mac, is found in Job 21 18; Ps 1 4;
ep Isa 17 18; 29 5; 41 15; Hos 13 3; Zeph


(2) WLM, hdshash, occurs in two vs (Isa 5 24 and
33 11). Cf “hashish,” an Arab. word which, as
commonly used, denotes grass either standing or
cut, green or dry, although, strictly speaking, dry
or cut grass alone. In RV Isa 5 24 the tr is “dry
grass.”

(3) jBm\, tebhen, is tr? “chaff” in AV (Jer 23 28).
The same word is rendered “straw” in RV (cf
Arab. tzbn).


589


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Census
Chaldea


(4) “HN, ’ar, a Chald word, occurs in Dnl 2 35.

In the NT 4xupov, dchuron,-is found in Mt 3 12
and Lk 3 17.
_ In the process of winnowing, as it has been car-
ried on in the Hast for thousands of years, the grain
is tossed into the air so that the wind may cause
a separation of chaff and straw. The light husks
from the wheat and fine particles of straw are dis-
persed by the wind in the form of a fine dust; the
heavier straw which has been broken into short
pieces by the threshing process falls near at hand
on the edge of the threshing-floor, while the grain
falls back upon the pile. In Syria and Pal, that
which falls near at hand as cut straw is called
tibn. This word occurs in the Arab. tr of Mt 3 12
and Lk 3 17. This straw is ordinarily saved and
fed as “roughage” to the animals. It could easily
be gathered and burned, as indicated in the above-
mentioned vs, while the chaff is blown away beyond
recovery, a strong figure to depict complete anni-
hilation (Job 21 18; Isa 29 5; 41 16; Hos 13 3,
Dnl 2 35). See AgricutruRE; Srraw; Win-
NOWING, James A. PatcH


CHAIN, chan, CHAINS, chanz:
used by the Hebrews:

(1) As ornaments: JPEN, ’ec'adhah, TD"),
netiphah, Pi , ‘dndk, M37, rabhidh, VIW IW, shar-
sherah, P11, ratték. As ornaments for the person
they were worn about the ankles (Nu 31 50; Isa
3 20) and about the neck (Cant 4 9; Ezk 16 11).
They were used as ornaments for the ephod and
breastplate of the high priest (Ex 28 14; 39 15).
These chains were of pure gold. Solomon placed
chains before the oracle in the temple (1 K 6 21),
and these were also of pure gold. They were used
as ornaments for graven images (Isa 40 19) and
around the necks of prized animals. This was true
of the camels taken from the Midianites by Gideon
(Jgs 8 21.26).

(2) As marks of distinction: 2%, rabhidh,
FINI. PPP) hdmanekh (hamntkh): That
seems to be true of the chain which Pharaoh placed
about the neck of Joseph (Gen 41 42), and of the
one which the king of Babylon promised to the wise
men (Dnl 6 7). :

(8) As means of confining prisoners: MUM),
nthdsheth; ddvots, hdlusis: A number of passages
that were tr? “chains” in the AV are tr? ‘“fetters”’ in
the RV (see Jgs 16 21; 2S 3 34). Among the
Romans the prisoner was chained to one or two
guards (Acts 12 6.7; 21 33; Eph 6 20; 2 Tim
1 16). These chains were perhaps made of copper
or an alloy of copper and tin.

(4) Asa figurative expression: PY, ‘dndk. The
Psalmist likens pride to a chain about the neck
(78 6), and in Prov it is stated that the young man
who hears the instruction of his father and forsakes
not the law of bis mother shall find that they are
chains about his neck (19). In Rev 20 1 the
angel is described as descending with a great chain
in his hand. According to the AV Peter speaks
of the fallen angels as having been delivered into
“chains of darkness” (2 Pet 2 4), ceipd, seird, and
Jude speaks of them as being reserved in “everlast-
ing chains” (Jude ver 6, RV “‘bonds”), Serpbs, des-
més. See also PuntsHments. A. W. ForTUNE


Chains were


CHAIR, char. See Seat; Seats, CHIEF.


CHALCEDONY, kal-sed’6-ni, kal'sé-d6-ni. See
Srongs, Precious.


CHALCOL, kal’kol. See Cancot.


CHALDEA, kal-dé’a, CHALDEANS, kal-dé’anz
(BD TWD, kasdim, DW PW, 'ereg kasdim; XadSala,
Chaldaia, KadS8aiou, Chaldaioi):

. Geographical Position

Seats of the Chaldeans

. Originally Sumero-Akkadian

History of the Chaldean Tribes

. Merodach-baladan and Sargon of Assyria
Sazubu

. Musézib-Marduk

. Merodach-baladan’s Son

. Na’id-Marduk


Palia fe
. Nabd-bél-umati and Others
His Tragic End
11. The Chaldeans Forge Ahead
12. Nabopolassar’s Revolt against Assyria
13. The Chaldeans as Learned Men


“Kasdim,” “land of Kasdim” or “the Chal-
deans,” is the usual designation, in the OT, for the
land and the people (Jer 50 10; 51 24; 24 5; 26
12). The corresponding Gr form with | for s follows
the Assyr-Bab Kaldu, mat Kaldt, ‘Chaldean, land
of the Chaldeans.” Kasdim is possibly connected
with the name of Kesed (Kesedh), nephew of
Abraham (Gen 22 22), and may he derived from
the Assyr-Bab root kasadu, “to capture,” suggesting
that the Chaldeans were originally tribes of nomadic
plunderers (cf Job 1 17).

In its widest acceptation, Chaldea is the name of
the whole of Babylonia, owing to the fact that the
- & Chaldeans had given more than one

. Geo-


~
COBNME Rw m


king to the country. In the strict
graphical sense, however, their domain was the
Position tract at the N.W. end of the Pers Gulf,


which was often called by the Assyro-
Babylonians mat Témtim, ‘the Land of the Sea,” a
province of unknown extent. When these tribes
migrated into Babylonia is uncertain, as is also
their original home; but as they are closely related
to the Aramaeans, it is possible that their first settle-
ments lay in the neighborhood of the Aramaean
states bordering on the Holy Land. Tiglath-
pileser IV (742 BC) speaks of the ra’asant or chiefs
of the Kaldu, and the mention of numerous Ara-
maean tribes in Babylonia itself shows that their
example of settling there soon found imitators, as
did the Anglo-Saxons when they invaded Britain.
Among the Chaldean tribes in Babylonia may be
mentioned Bit Amukk4ni, whose capital was Sapia;
Btt Yakin, which furnished the dynasty to which
Merodach-baladan II belonged; and probably also
Bit Dakkuri, as all three lay near the Pers Gulf.
Sargon of Assyria excludes Bit-Amukkani and Bit-
Dakkuri, and speaks of “the whole of the land of
Chaldea, as much as there is; the land of Bit-
Yakini, on the shore of the Salt River [the Pers
Gulf], to the border of Tilmun” (the island of
Bahrein and the adjacent mainland) (Pavement
Inscr., TV, ll. 82, 83, 85, 86). It was probably the
influence of the Babylonians among whom they
settled which changed these nomads into city-
dwellers. Sennacherib refers to 75 (var. 89) strong
cities and fortresses of Chaldea, and 420 (var.
800) smaller towns which were around them; and
there were also Chaldeans (and Aramaeans) in Erech,
Nippur (Calneh), Kis, Hursag-kalama, Cuthah, and

probably Babylon.
The “land of the sea” (mdt Tamtim) is mentioned
in the chronicle of the early Bab kings (rev. 14) as
being governed by Ka-gamil, contem-


2. Origi- porary of Samsu-titana (cir 1900 BC),
nally Su- but at that period it was apparently
mero- one of the original Sumero-Akkadian
Akkadian states of Babylonia. It is doubtful


whether, at that early date, the Chal-
deans had entered Babylonia and founded settle-
ments there, though the record mentions Aramaeans
somewhat later on.


Chaldea
Chambers in S.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


590


One of the earliest references to the Chaldeans
is that of Shalmaneser II of Assyria, who, on invad-
ing Babylonia in the eponymy of Bél-

8. History bunaya (851 BC), captured the city
of the Chal- Baq4ni, which belonged to Adini of
dean Tribes the Chaldean tribe of Dakuri. After
plundering and destroying the place,
Sbalmaneser attacked Enzudi, the capital, where-
upon Adini submitted and paid tribute. On this
occasion YAkini, of “the Land of the Sea,” also paid
tribute, as did MuSallim-Marduk, son of Amuk-
kani (the Bit-Amukka@ni mentioned above). The
next Assyr ruler to mention the country is Adad-
nirari III (810 BC), who speaks of all the kings of the
Chaldeans, which evidently refers to the various
states into which the Chaldean tribes were divided.
Later on, Sargon of Assyria, in his 12th year, de-
cided to break the power of Merodach-baladan,
who had made himself master of Babylon. To
effect this, be first defeated the Gambuhans, who
were the Chaldean king’s supporters, and the Elam-
ites, his allies over the border. The Chaldean,
however, did not await the Assyr king’s attack, but
escaped to Yatburu in Elam, leaving considerable
spoil bebind him. Though extensive operations
were carried out, and much booty


4. Mero- taken, the end of the campaign seems
dach-bala- only to bave come two years later,
dan and when Dtr-Yakin was destroyed by
Sargon of fire and reduced to ruins. In the
Assyria “Annals of Hall XIV” Sargon claims

to have taken Merodach-baladan
prisoner, but this seems doubtful. Merodach-


baladan fled, but returned and mounted the throne
again on Sargon’s death in 705 BC. Six months
later Sennacherib, in bis turn, attacked him, and
be again sought safety in flight. A Chaldean chief
named Sizubu, however, now came forward, and
S proclaimed himself king of Babylon,

6. Sfizubu but bemg defeated, be likewise fled.
Later on, Sennacherib attacked the


Chaldeans at Nagitu and other settlements in-


Elamite-territory which Merodach-baladan and his
followers had founded. After the death of Mero-
dach-baladan, yet another Chaldean, whom Sen-
nacherib calls likewise Sizubu, but whose full name
was Musézib-Marduk, mounted the
6. MuSézib- Babylonian throne. This ruler ap-
Marduk plied for belp against Sennacherib of
Assyria to Umman-menanu, the king
of Elam, who, taking the bribe which was offered,
supported him with an armed force, and a battle
was fought at Halulé on the Tigris, in which Sen-
nacherib claims the victory—probably rightly.
Mufsgézib-Marduk reigned 4 years, and was taken
prisoner by bis whilom ally, Umman-menanu, who
sent him to Assyria.
In the reign of Esarhaddon, Nabd-zér-napiSti-
IfSir, one of the sons of Merodach-baladan, gathered
an army at Larsa, but was defeated


7. Mero- by the Assyrians, and fled to Elam.
dach- The king of that country, however,
baladan’s wishing to be on friendly terms with .
Son Esarbaddon, captured him and put


him to death. This prince had a
brother named Na’id-Marduk, who, not feeling
himself safe in the country which had acted treach-
erously toward his house, fled, and made submission

to Esarhaddon, who received him
8. Na’id- favorably, and restored to him the
Marduk dominion of the ‘and of the Sea.”

This moderation secured the fidelity
of the Chaldeans, and when the Elamite Urtaku
sent inviting them to revolt against their suzerain,
they answered to the effect that Na’id-Marduk was
their lord, and they were the servants of the king


of Assyria. This took place probably about 650
BC, in the reign of Esarhaddon’s son ASsur-bant-
Apli (see OSNAPPAR).
Hostility to Assyria, however, continued to exist
in the tribe, Palta, grandson of Merodach-baladan,
being one of the prisoners taken by
9. Palia AxSur-bant-Apli’s troops in their oper-
ations against the Gambulians (a
Babylonian, and perhaps a Chaldean tribe) later
on. It was only during the struggle of Sama’-Sum-
uktn (Saosduchimos), king of Babylon, ASSur-bani-
Apli’s brother, however, that they took sides against
Assyria as a nationality. This change was due to
the invitation of the Bab king—who may have
been regarded, rather than ASSur-bani-Apli, as their
overlord. The chief of the Chaldeans was at that
time another grandson of Merodach-baladan,
Nabi-bél-Sumati, who seized the As-
10. Nabé-  syrians in his domain, and placed them
bél-Sumati in bonds. The Chaldeans suffered,
with the rest, in the great defeat of
the Bab and allied forces, when Babylon and the
chief cities of the land fell. Mannu-ki-Babfli of
the Dakkurians, Ea-Sum-ikiSa of Bit-Amukkani,
with other Chaldean states, were punished for their
complicity in Samas-Sum-ukin’s revolt, while
Nabi-bél-Sumiti fled and found refuge at the court
of Indabiga’, king of Elam. A&S8ur-bant-Apli at
once demanded his surrender, but civil war in Elam
broke out, in which Indabigas was slain, and Umman-
aldis mounted the throne. This demand was now
renewed, and Nabd-bél-Sumati, fearing that he
would be surrendered, decided to end his life. He
therefore directed his armor-bearer to dispatch
him, and each ran the other through with his sword.
The prince’s corpse, with the head of his armor-
bearer, were then sent, with some of the Chaldean
fugitives, to Assyria, and presented to the king.
Thus ended, for a time, Chaldean ambition in Baby-
lonia and in the domain of eastern politics.
With the death of A&SSur-bani-4pli, which took
place about 626 BC, the power of Assyria fell, his
successors being probably far less


11. The capable menthan he. This gave occa-
Chaldeans sion for many plots against the Assyr
Forge empire, and the Chaldeans probably
Ahead took part in the general movement.


; In the time of Saracus (Sin-Sarra-
iskun of Assyria, cir 620 BC) Busalossor would
seem to have been appointed general of the forces
in Babylonia in consequence of an apprehended
invasion of barbarians from the sea (the Pers Gulf)
(Eusebius, Chronicon, book i). The new general,
however, revolted against the Assyrians, and made
himself master of Babylonia. As, in other cases,
the Assyrians seem to have been exceedingly faith-
ful to their king, it has been thought possible that |
this general, who was none other than


12. Nabo- Nabopolassar, the father of Nebuchad-
polassar’s rezzar, was not really an Assyrian, but
Revolt a Babylonian, and probably a Chal-
against dean. This theory, if correct, would
Assyria explain. how Babylonia, in its fullest


sense, obtained the name of Chaldea,
and was no longer known as the land of Shinar
(Gen 10 10). The reputation of Merodach-bala-
dan, the contemporary of Hezekiah, may have been
partly responsible for the change of name.

It was not in the restricted sense, but as a syno-
nym of Babylonian, that the name Chaldean ob-
tained the signification of “wise man.” That the
Chaldeans in the restricted and correct sense were
more learned than, or even as learned as, the Baby-
lonians in general, is unlikely. Moreover, the native
inscriptions give no indication that this was the
case. The Babylonians in general, on the other


591


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Chaldea


Chambers in Ss.


hand, were enthusiastic students from very early


times. From their inscriptions, it ig certain that

. among their centers of learning may
13. The be classed Sippar and Larsa, the chief
Chaldeans seats of sun-worship; Nippur, identi-


as Learned fied with the Calneh of Gen 10 10;
Men Babylon, the capital; Borsippa in the
neighborhood of Babylon; Ur of the
Chaldees; and Erech. There is, also, every prob-
ability that this list could be extended, and will
be extended, when we know more; for wherever
an important temple existed, there was to be found
also a priestly school. ‘‘The learning of the Chal-
deans” (Dnl 14; 22; 47; 5 7.11) comprised
the old languages of Babylonia (the two dialects
of Sumerian, with a certain knowledge of Kassite,
which seems to have been allied to the Hittite;
and other languages of the immediate neighbor-
hood); some knowledge of astronomy and astrology;
mathematics, which their sexagesimal system of
numeration seems to have facilitated; and a certain
amount of natural history. To this must be added
a store of mythological learning, including legends
of the Creation, the Flood (closely resembling in all
its main points the account in the Bible), and
apparently also the Temptation and the Fall.
They had likewise a good knowledge of agriculture,
and were no mean architects, as the many cele-
brated buildings of Babylonia show—compare not
only the descriptions of the Temple of Belus (res
BaBeEL, TowErR or) and the Hanging Gardens, but
also the remains of Gudea’s great palace at Laga’
(Tel-loh), where that ruler, who lived about 2500
BC, is twice represented as an architect, with
plan and with rule and measure. (These statues
are now in the Louvre.) That thei architecture
never attained the elegance which characterized
that of the West, is probably due to the absence
of stone, necessitating the employment of brick
as a substitute (Gen 11 3). See Basytonia;
SHINAR. T. G. Pincues


CHALKSTONE, choék’stén (TA "3A , ’abhnéghir
[cf Eben-ezer, WIT JAN, 'ebhen ha-‘ezer, “stone of


the help,” 1S 7 12]): InIsa 27 9 wehave: ‘“There-
fore by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be forgiven,
and this is all the fruit of taking away his sin: that
he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalkstones
that are beaten in sunder, so that the Asherim and
the sun-images shall rise no more.” ’Abhné-ghir is
compounded of ’ebhen, “stone,” which occurs in
many passages, and gir or gir, “lime” (cf Arab. j7r,
“gypsum” or “quicklime’”’), which occurs only here
and in Dn] 6 5: “wrote... . upon the plaster
{gir] of the wall of the king’s palace.” Nearly all
the rock of Pal is limestone. When limestone is
burned, it is converted into lime, which is easily
broken into pieces, and, if allowed to remain open
to the air, becomes slaked by the moisture of the
atmosphere and crumbles into dust. The reference
is to the destruction of the altar. It may mean
that the altar will be burned so that the stones will
become lime, or, more probably, that the stones of
the altar will be broken as chalkstones (i.e. lumps
of quicklime) are broken. There is no doubt that
lime was known to the Egyptians, Assyrians and
Hebrews, though clay, with or without straw, was
more commonly used in building. Even bitumen
(“slime”) appears to have been used for mortar.
See Ciay; Lime; SLIME. ALFRED Eity Day


CHALLENGE, chal’enj: Only in Ex 22 9, where
AV has taken Heb ’dmar, ‘‘say,’”’ in the sense of
“claim.” RV “whereof one saith, This is it,” points
more definitely to the idea of identification of the
stolen personal property.


CHALPHI, kal’fi (Xaddt, Chalphi; AV Calphi):
Father of Judas, who, along with Mattathias,
steadily supported Jonathan at the battle of Gen-
nesar when the hosts of Demetrius’ princes were
routed (1 Macc 11 70).


CHAMBER, cham’bér (the tr of the following Heb
words: VW], hedher, MBN, huppah, YX), yacir,
D3, yacur, MDW, lishkah, ADDO}, nishkah, T7>T,
‘dliyah, voy, céla‘, and the Aram. word mby 5
‘tlith): For the most part the word chamber is the
expression of an idea which would be adequately
expressed by the Eng. word ‘‘room,” in accordance
with an earlier use of the word, now little employed.
For the arrangement of rooms in a Heb house, see
House. Hedher is a word of frequent occurrence,
and designates a private room. Huppdh is tr
“chamber” only in Ps 19 5, where it is used in con-
nection with “bridegroom,” and means a bridal
chamber. The same Heb word used of the bride
in Joel 2 16 is rendered ‘‘closet.” Ydgi2* and
yaa are found only in 1 K 6 5.6.10 (AV only in
all the passages), yd¢u*' being the reading of K*thibh
and yagi‘ of Keré in each case. Here the meaning
is really “story,” as given in RV, except in ver 6,
where doubtless the text should be changed to read
ha-céla‘, ‘the side-chamber.” Lishkah, a frequent
word, and the equivalent nishkah, infrequent, are
used ordinarily of a room in the temple utilized for
sacred purposes, occasionally of aroom in the palace.
‘Aliyah and the equivalent Aram. ‘illith signify “a
roof chamber,” i.e. a chamber built on the flat roof
of a house. (éd‘, when used of a chamber, desig-
nates a side-chamber of the temple. It is usually
rendered _‘‘side-chamber,” but “‘chamber’ in 1 K
6 5.8 (AV), where RV has “side-chamber.”’

GrorcE Ricker BERRY

CHAMBER, ROOF. See CHAMBER.


CHAMBERING, cham’bér-ing: Tllicit inter-
course; the rendering in EV since Tyndale of
xolrats, kottais (lit. “beds,” Rom 13 13). The Gr
usage is paralleled in classic authors and the LXX;
like the Eng. participle, it denotes repeated or
habitual acts. The word is not recorded elsewhere
in Eng. lit. as vb. or participle in this sense; in
Othello, iii, 3, a chamberer is an intriguer, male
wanton, in Byron, Werner, IV, 1, 404, a gallant or
carpet knight, and in Chaucer, Clerk’s Tale, 766, a
concubine.


CHAMBERLAIN, chiam’bér-lin: In the OT the
word rendered chamberlain, OQ, sdris, is more
properly “eunuch,” an officer which oriental
monarchs placed over their harems (Est 1 10.12.15;
Q 3.14.21; 441; 6 2.14; 79; 2 K 23 11). This
officer seems also to have had other duties. See
under Eunucw. Inthe NT (1) ofxovduos, oikonémos,
lit. manager of the household, apparently the ‘‘treas-
urer” as in RV “Erastus the treasurer of the city
saluteth you” (Rom 16 23). Cf adapted use as
applied to Christian apostles and teachers, bishops,
and even to individual members; in which cases,
rendered “stewards” (1 Cor 4.1; Tit 17; 1 Pet 4
10). (2) In Acts 12 20, “‘Blastus the king’s chamber-
lain’ (ho ept tot, kotténos tou basiléos, “he who is over
the king’s bed-chamber”), not treasure-chamber,
ag above; here praefectus cubiculo, or chief valet de
chambre to the royal person, a position involving
much honor and intimacy.

Epwarp Bacay PoLtLarp

CHAMBERS IN THE HEAVENS. See As-
tTronomy; Drau or Awaz.


CHAMBERS IN THE SOUTH. See Astron-
omy; Sours, CHAMBERS OF.


Chambers, etc
Change


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


592


CHAMBERS OF IMAGERY, im’8j-ri, im'é-jér-i
(FD, maskith): The reference (Ezk 8 12) is to
chambers in the temple where the elders of Israel
were wont to assemble and practise rites of an
idolatrous character. What the imagery consisted
of, we may gather from ver 10: symbolic repre-
sentations of beasts and reptiles and ‘detestable
things.” It is thonght that these symbols were of
a zodiacal character. The worship of the planets
was in vogue at the time of the prophet among the
degenerate Israelites.


CHAMELEON, ka-mé'lé-un (95, koh, RV
LAND CROCODILE [Lev 11 30]; N’AWIM, tin-
shemeth, AV mole, RV CHAMELEON [Lev 11 30)):

K6*h, which in theAVisrendered “chameleon” and
in the RV “land crocodile,” means also ‘‘strength”
or “power,” as in Gen 4 12; 15 29; Ps 22 15;
Isa 40 29, and many other passages. The LXX
has xapuadtéwr, chamailésn, but on account of the


Chameleon—Chamaeleo vulgaris.


ordinary meaning of the word, kd¢h, it has been
thought that some large lizard should be under-
stood here. The desert monitor, Varanus griseus,
one of the largest of lizards, sometime attaining the
length of 4 ft., is common in Pal and may be the
animal here referred to. The name “monitor” is
a tr of the German warnen, “to warn,” with which
has been confused the Arab. name of this animal,
waran or waral, a word of uncertain etymology.

_ The word tinshemeth in the same verse is rendered
in AV “mole” andin RV “chameleon.” The LXX
has dorddat, aspdlax (=spdlax, ‘‘mole”). Tin-
shemeth also occurs in the lists of unclean birds in
Lev 11 18 and Dt 14 16, where it is rendered:
AV “swan”; RV “horned owl’; LXX sropupluy,
porphurton (i.e. “coot” or, acc. to some, “heron’”);
Vulg cygnus, “swan.” It appears to come from the
root nasham, “to breathe”; cf n’shamah, “breath”
(Gen 2 7; Job 27 3 AV, etc). It has therefore in
Lev 11 30 been referred to the chameleon on ac-
connt of the chameleon’s habit of puffing up its
body with air and hissing, and in the other passages
to the pelican, on account of the pelican’s great
pouched bill.

The common chameleon is abundant in Pal, being
found also in North Africa and in Spain. The other
species of chameleons are found principally in Africa and

adagascar. It is not only a harmless but a decidedly
useful creature, since it feeds upon insects, esp. flies. Its
mode of capturing its prey is most interesting. It slowly
and cautiously advances until its head is from 4 to 6 in.
from the insect, which it then secures by darting out its
tongue with great rapidity. The pigment cells in its skin
enable it to change its color from pale yellow to bright
green, dark green and almost black, so that it can har-
monize very perfectly with its surroundings. Its peculiar
toes and prehensile tail help to fit 1t for its life in the
trees. Its prominent eyes with circular lids, like iris
dlaphragms, can be moved independently of each other,


*


and add to its striking appearance. See Lanp Croco-
DILE; Moxue; Swan; Hornep Ow; PELICAN.
ALFRED Ey, Day
CHAMOIS, sham’i, sha-mwa’, sha-moi’ (797,
zemer; KapndomdpSadts, kamélopdrdalis): Occurs
only once in the Bible, ie. in the list of clean
animals in Dt 14 5. Gesenius refers to the vb.
zamar, “to sing,” and suggests the association of
dancing or leaping, indicating thereby an active
animal. M’Lean in £B cites the rendering of the
Tgs disa’, or “wild goat.” Now there are two wild
goats in Pal. The better known is the ibex of the
8., which may well be the ya‘él (EV “wild goat’’;
Job 39 1; Ps 104 18; 1 S 24 2), as well as the ’akko
(EV “wild goat,” Dt 14 5). The other is the pa-
sang or Pers wild goat which ranges from the N.E.
of Pal and the Syrian desert to Persia, and which


From Roy. Nat. Hist., by permission.


Chamois: Persian Wild Goat or Pasang—Capra aegagrus.
(This may be the zemer, EV chamois, of Dt 14 5.)


may be the zemer (EV “chamois’). The accom-
panying illustration, which is taken fromthe Royal
Natural History, shows the male and female and
young. The male is distinguished by its larger
horns and goatee. The horns are in size and cur-
vature very similar to those of the ibex (see Goat,
sec. 2), but the front edge is like a nicked blade
instead of being thick and knotty as in the ibex.
Like the ibex it is at home among the rocks, and
climbs apparently impossible cliffs with marvelous
ease.

Tristram (NHB) who is followed by Post (H DB)
suggests that zemer may be the Barbary sheep
(Ovis tragelaphus), though the latter is only known
to inhabit the Atlas Mountains, from the Atlantic
to Tunis. Tristram supports his view by reference
to a kebsh (“‘ram’’) which the Arabs say lives in the
mountains of Sinai, though they have apparently
neither horns nor skins to ‘show as trophies, and
it is admitted that no European has seen it. The
true chamois (Rupicapra tragus) inhabits the high
mountains from the Pyrenees to the Caucasus, and
there is no reason to suppose that it was ever found
in Syria or Pal. Aurrep Ety Day


CHAMPAIGN, sham-pan’, sham’pin (M377,
‘érabhah, TPA, bik‘ah): A champaign is a flat
open country, and the word occurs in Dt 11 30 AV
(RV “the Arabah”) as a tr of ‘érabhah, for which
AV has in most places “the plain,” and RV “the
Arabah,” when it is used with the art. and denotes


503


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Chambers, etc
Change


a definite region, ie. the valley of the Jordan from
the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea (Dt 2 8; 3 17;
449; Josh 3 16; 8 14; 1116; 12 1.3.8; 25
229; 47; 2 K 14 25; 26 4; Jer 39 4; 52 7),
and also the valley running southward from the
Dead Sea to the Gulf of Akabah (Di 11). Ezk
47 8 has for ha-‘drabhah “the desert,”” AVm “plain,’’
RV “the Arabah.” The pl. is used in Josh 5 10;
2 K 26 5, ‘the plains of Jericho,” and in Nu 22 1
and 26 3, “the plains of Moab.” Elsewhere
‘érabhah is rendered in EV “desert”’ or ‘‘wilderness”
(Job 24 5; 39 6; Isa 33 9; 35 1.6; 40 3; 41 19;
613; Jer 26; 176; 650 12). At the present
day, the Jordan valley is called the Ghaur (cf Heb
‘ar, ‘to dig,” m*arah, ‘‘cave,”’ and Arab. magharah,
“cave’). This name is also applied to the deltas
of streams flowing into the Dead Sea from the E.
which are clothed with thickets of thorny trees and
shrubs, i.e. Ghaur-ul-Mezra‘ah, at the mouths of
Wadi-Kerak and Wadi-Beni-Hammad, Ghaur-us-
Safiyeh, at the mouth of Wadi-ul-Hisa. The name
“Arabah” (Arab. al-‘Arabah) is now confined to
the valley running southward from the Dead Sea
to the Gulf of Akabah, separating the mountains
of Edom from Sinai and the plateau of at-Tth.
See ArasBaH.

Ezk 37 2AVm has “champaign” for bik‘ah,
which is elsewhere rendered ‘‘vale” or “valley.”
Bik'‘ah seems to be applied to wide, open valleys,
as: “the valley of Jericho” (Dt 34 3), ‘the valley
of Megiddo” (2 Ch 35 22; Zec 1211), “the
valley of Lebanon” (Josh 11.17). If Baal-Gad
be Ba‘albek and ‘“‘the valley of Lebanon” be Coele-
syria, the present name of Coele-syria, al-Bika‘
(pl. of buk‘ah, ‘a low, wet place or meadow”), may
be regarded as a survival of the Heb bik‘ah.

Aurrep Exy Day

CHAMPION, cham’pi-un (D"J30 WN, "ish ha-
bénayim): In 1 8 17 4.23 this unusual expression
occurs in the description of Goliath. It means lit.
“the man of the two spaces,” “‘spaces,’’ or “space
between,” and is perhaps to be explained by the
fact that there was a brook flowing through the
valley separating the two armies. In 1S 17 51
the word champion is the rendering of the Heb
gibbor, ‘mighty man.” ;


CHANAAN, ka’nan, ka’na-an (Xavadv, Chana-
én) Chanaanite, kA’nan-it, AV in the Apoc (Jth 5
3.16) and NT (Acts 7 11; 18 19) forRV CANAAN,
CANAANITE (q.v.).


CHANCE, chans: The idea of chance in the sense
of something wholly fortuitous was utterly foreign
to the Heb creed. Throughout the whole course
of Israel’s history, to the Heb mind, law, not chance,
tuled the universe, and that law was not something
blindly mechanical, but the expression of the per-
sonal Jeh. Israel’s belief upon this subject may be
summed up in the couplet,

‘The lot is cast into the la


But the whole disposing thereof 1s of Jeh’’
(Prov 16 33).


A number of Heb and Gr expressions have been tr4
“chance,” or something nearly equivalent, but it is
noteworthy that of the classical words for chance,
cuvrvxte, suntuchia, and rixn, tuiché, the former
never occurs in the Bible and the latter only twice
in the LXX.

The closest approach to the idea of chance is
found in the statement of the Philis that if their
device for ascertaining the cause of their calamities
turned out a certain way they would call them a
chance, that is, bad luck (W]P'2, mikreh, 1S 6 9).
But note that it was a heathen people who said
this. We have the same Heb noun and the vb.,


from which the noun is taken, a number of times,
but variously rendered into Eng.: Uncleanness that
“chanceth him by night” (Dt 23 10). ‘Her hap
was to light on the portion of the field” (Ruth 2 3).
“Something hath befallen him” (1 S 20 26). ‘One
event happeneth to them all” (Eccl 2 14.15); “that
which befalleth the sons of men” (‘“‘song of men are
a chance,’ ERVm)(Eccl 3 19). “There is one event -
to the righteous and to the wicked” (Eccl 9 2.3).
Here the idea certainly is not something independent
of the will of God, but something unexpected by
man.

There is also Np , kara’, “If a bird’s nest: chance
to be before thee in the way” (Dt 22 6). Both
the above Heb words are combined in the statement
“As I happened by chance upon Mount Gilboa”
(2816). “And Absalom chanced to meet the
servants of David” (“met the servants,” 18 9, AV).
“And there happened to be there a base fellow’
(2 8 20 1).

We have also Y4B, pegha‘, “Time and chance
happeneth to them all,’’ meaning simply occur-
rence (Eccl 9 11). ‘‘Neither adversary, nor evil
occurrence” (1 K 6 4).

In the NT we have cvyxupla, sugkuria, “‘coinci-
dence,’”’ a meeting apparently accidental, a coinci-
dence. “By chance a certain priest was going down
that way” (Lk 10 31). Also ef réxou, ed ttichot. “It
may chance of wheat, or of some other kind,” i.e.
we cannot tell which (1 Cor 15 37). ‘It may be”
(1 Cor 14 10).

If we look at the LXX we find tuché used twice.
‘‘And Leah said, (Hn tuché] With fortune” (‘‘a troop
cometh,” AV; “fortunate,” RV; “with fortune,”
RVm, Gen 30 11). Note, it was no Israelite, but
Leah who said this. ‘‘That prepare a table for
Fortune, and that, fill up mingled wine unto Destiny”
(‘fate,” Isa 65 11). In this passage tuché stands
for the Heb "3'2, m*ni, the god of destiny, and
Fortune is for Gad, the old Sem name for the god
of fortune found in inscriptions, private names, etc.
Note here, however, also, that the prophet was
rebuking idolatrous ones for apostasy to heathen


. divinities.


We have also in the Apoc, ‘these things which
have chanced,” RV ‘‘to be opened unto thee” (2 Esd
10 49). See also Gap; Ment.

Georcze Henry TREVER

CHANCELLOR, chan’sel-ér: The rendering in
Ezr 4 8.9.17 of the Heb DYN7>TR, be'al totem;
LXX Bdad, Béal (9), Badydp, Balgém (17), the latter
being an incorrect tr of Heb ¥. In 1 Esd 2 16.25,
BeédreGuos, Beéltethmos (cf Ezr 4 8) occurs as a cor-
ruption, doubtless of DZW7IP2, be‘al tem. The
term in question designates an Assyr office, viz. that
of the “master or lord of official intelligence,” or
“postmaster” (Sayce).


CHANGE, chanj: A word which seeks to express
the many shades of meaning contained in 13 varia-
tions of 9 Heb words and 5 Gr. These signify, in
turn, “to change,” “to exchange,” “to turn,” “‘to
put or place,” “to make other” i.e. “alter,” “to
disguise oneself.”’ non , hdlaph, and its derivatives,
occurring often, indicates “to pass away,” hence
alter, renew, e.g. (1) “changes of raiment” (Gen
45 22; Jgs 14 12.13.19); (2) “changed my wages
ten times’ (Gen 31 7.41); (8) heavens changed
“as a vesture’ (Ps 102 26); (4) “changes and
warfare’ (Job 10 17), i.e. relays of soldiers as
illustrated in 1 K 6 14 (RVm “host after host is
against me”); (5) “till my change come” (RV
“release”), ie. death (Job 14 14); (6) “changed
the ordinances” (ARV ‘violated the statutes’’), i.e.
disregarded law (Isa 24 5); (7) change of mind


Change, etc
Chariot


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


594


(Hab 1 11 AV). Used also of change of character,
FEM, haphakh: (1) of leprosy, “changed unto white”
(Lev 18 16); (2) fig. of the moral life, “Can the
Ethiopian change his skin?” (Jer 13 23); so also
“2, mtr, and derivatives, “changed their gods”
and “their glory,” ete (Ps 106 20; Jer 2 11; Hos
4 7). Other words used to indicate change of
» name (2 K 24 17); of day and night (Job 17 12);
of times and seasons (Dnl 2 21); of countenance
(Dnl 7 28); of behavior (1 8 21 13); God’s un-
changeableness, “I, Jeh, change not’”’ (Mal 3 6).

In the NT the word has to do chiefly with
spiritual realities: (1) uerarlOnus, metatithémt, of the
necessary change of the priesthood and law under
Christ (He 7 12); (2) 4\d\drro, alldttd, of His chang-
ing the customs of Moses (Acts 6 14); (8) of moral
change, e.g. debasement (Rom 1 23.25.26); (4) of
bodily change at the resurrection (1 Cor 15 51.52;
peracxnuatitw, metaschématizd, Phil 3 21 AV); (5)
ueTaBdddw, metabdlld, of change of mind in presence
of a miracle (Acts 28 6); (6) of the change to come
over the heavens at the great day of the Lord (He
1 12; cf 2 Pet 3 10.12).

Figurative uses indicated separately in the course
of the article. Dwicur M. Prarr


CHANGE OF RAIMENT, ra’ment.


CHANGER, chan’jér («odAvBiorrhs, kollubistés,
“money-changer,”’ and so rendered Mt 21 12; Mk
11 15): A banker or other person who changes
money at a fixed rate. Indignant at the profane
traffic in the temple Jesus “poured out the chan-
gers’ money” (Jn 2 15). So used only here. For
fuller treatment see BANK; Money-CHANGERS.


CHANNEL, chan’el (P"DN, “aphik [r. PDN,
’aphak, “to hold or contain,” “to be strong”; ef
Arab. ’afak, “to overcome,’ and ‘afk, “preémi-
nent”); MSBW, shibbaleth [r. 52W, shabhal, “to go,”
“to go up or grow,” “‘to flow”; cf Arab. ’asbal, “to
flow,” “to rain,” “to put forth ears’; sabalat, “an
ear of grain’’; sabil, ‘‘a road,” ‘‘a public fountain”’]):
In Job 12 21; 40 18; 4115 we have ’aphik in
the sense of “strong” (but cf 40 18, RV “tubes”
[of brass]).
“stream,” ‘channel’ or Shib-
bdleth (in the dialect of Ephraim sibbéleth [Jgs 12
6]) means ‘‘an ear of grain” (Gen 41 5ff; Ruth
22; Isa 17 5) or “a flood of water” (Ps 69 2.15;
Isa 27 12). In 2S 22 16 (cf Ps 18 15) we have:

“Then the channels of the sea appeared,
The foundations of the world were laid bare,
By the rebuke of Jeh,
At the blast of the breath of his nostrils."

This is reminiscent of “fountains of the deep”
(Gen 711; 8 2; Prov 8 28). It is a question
how far we should attribute to these ancient writers
a share in modern notions of oceanography, but
the idea seems to be that of a withdrawal of the
water of the ocean, and the laying bare of submarine
declivities and channels such as we know to exist
as the result of erosion during a previous period of
elevation, when the given portion of ocean floor was


See Dress.


and.
The fact that many streams of Pal flow only dur-
ing the rainy season seems to be referred to in Job
6 15; and perhaps also in Ps 126 4. See Broox;
River. Atrrep Eiy Day


CHANT (O78, parat): Occurs only once in AV
in Am 6 5, and the meaning of the Heb is uncer-
tain. Pdrat corresponds to an Arab. root meaning
to anticipate. It may therefore signify to improvise,
to sing without care or preparation. RV “‘to sing
idle songs” suits the context. See Driver, Joel and

mos.


CHANUNEUS, ka-nun’é-us (Kavovvaios, Chanou~
natos; AV Channuneus): A Levite in the list of
1 Esd 8 48, probably corresponding to ‘Merari”’
in Ezr 8 19.


CHAPEL, chap’el (WU, mikdash, ‘a holy
place”; RV SANCTUARY, q.v.): “It is the king’s
chapel” (Am 7 13 AV), an expression indicative of
the dependence of this sanctuary on the court.


CHAPHENATHA, ka-fen’a-tha (Kadevad, Cha-
phenathd; AV Caphenatha): A name apparently
given to part of the eastern wall of Jerus or a fort
in that neighborhood which is said (1 Mace 12 37)
to have been repaired by Jonathan Maccahbaeus.
The place cannot now be identified. Various
speculations have been made as to the origin of
the name, but they can hardly be said to throw any
light on the passage cited.


CHAPITER, chap’i-tér. See ARCHITECTURE;
Jacuin AnD Boaz; Txmpze, II, 4.


CHAPMAN, chap’man (pl. DIN WIN, ’anshé
ha-tavtm): Word used only once in AV (2 Ch 9
14, ARV “the traders”; cf also 1 K 10 15 RV,
where the Heb uses the same expression). The Eng.
word means “merchant”; cf the vb. ‘to chaffer,”
and the Germ. Kaufmann. The Heb means “‘those
who go about” as merchants.


CHAPT (MM, hathath): The Heb term hathath
means “broken,” “terrified” or ‘‘dismayed.’’ This-
term as it occurs in Jer 14 4 is rendered ‘“‘chapt’’
in EV, “cracked” in ARV, and “dismayed” in
RVm. Inasmuch as the Heb term means “broken,”
it is not incorrectly rendered ‘“‘chapt”’ or ‘‘chapped,”
which means to be cracked open.


CHARAATHALAN, kar-a-ath’a-lan (Xapaa0a-
Adv, Charaathalén; AV Charaathalar [1 Esd 5 36)):
Most probably a corruption of the text. The names
“Cherub, Addan, and Immer” in the lists of Ezr 2
59 and Neh 7 61 are presented in the text cited as
“Charaathalan leading them, and Allar.”


CHARACA, kar’a-ka.


CHARASHIM, kar’a-shim (O°U20, hérashim,
“craftsmen’’). See Gr-HARASHIM.


CHARAX, kar’ax (els rév Xapaxa, cis tén Chd-
raka; AV Characa, kar’a-ka; Xdpat, Chdrax): A
place mentioned only in 2 Macc 12 17. It lay E.
of the Jordan and is said to be 750 stadia from
Caspis, and to be inhabited by Jews called Tubieni,
that is, of Tobie (Tob) in Gilead (1 Mace 5 9.13;
2 Macc 12 17). There is no clue as to the direc-
tion in which Ch. lay from Caspis. Possibly Kerak
(Kir-moab), in post-Bib. times called Charaméba
and Moboucharax, may represent the place. It
lay about 100 miles 8. of el-Mezerib, S.E. of the
Dead Sea.


CHARCHEMISH, kar’ke-mish. See CarcHE-
MISH.


CHARCHUS, kar’kus. See Barcus.


CHAREA, ka’ré-a (Kapéo, Charéa): Head of a
family of temple-servants (1 Esd 5 32); called
“Harsha” in Ear 2 52; Neh 7 54.


CHARGE, chirj, CHARGEABLE, chiar’ja-b’l
(from Lat carrus, “a wagon,” hence “to lay or put
a load on or in,” “‘to burden, or be a burden”): .

Figurative: (1) of a special duty (NVAwR,
mishmereth, “thing to be watched”’), “the ¢c. of Jeh”


See CHarax.


595


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Change, etc
Chariot


(Lev 8 35), the injunctions given in Ex 29; “the
c. of the tabernacle’ (Nu 1 53); “the c. of the sons
of Gershon” (3 25); (2) of the burden of expense
(TA3, kabhédh, “to be, or make heavy”; dddzavos,
addépanos, “without. expense’’), “lest. we be charge-
able unto thee”’ (2 8 13 25 AV, RV “‘burdensome”’);
“The former governors... . were c. unto the
people” (Neh 5 15m “‘aid burdens upon”); “that
. . « « 1 may make the gospel without c.” (1 Cor
9 18; see CHaRcEs); (3) of oversight, care, custody,
“Who gave him 4 ec. over the earth?” (Job 34
13); “to have the c. of the gate’ (2 K 7 17); “c.
of the vessels of service” (J Ch 9 28); “cause ye
them that have c. [NIIRB, p*kuddath, “inspectors’’]
over the city’ (Ezk 9 1); “who had the e. of all
her treasure’ (Acts 8 27 AV, RV ‘‘was over’);
(4) of a command, injunction, requirement, ‘He
gave him ac.” (Gen 28 6); “His father charged the
people with the oath” (1S 14 27); “Jesus strictly
{m “sternly”] charged them” (Mt 9 30); “I charge
you by the Lord” (1 Thess 5 27 AV, RV “adjure’’);
“having received such ac.” (Acts 16 24, rapayyeNla,
paraggelia, ‘‘private or extra message’); “This c. I
commit unto thee” (1 Tim 1 18); (5) of blame,
responsibility, reckoning, “Lord, lay not this sin
to their c.”’ (Acts 7 60); “nothing laid to his c.”
(23 29); ‘Who shall lay anything to the c. of God’s
elect?’ (Rom 8 33). M. O. Evans


CHARGER, chir’jér (ARV “platter’): A word
which meant in the older Eng. speech a flat dish
or platter. It is used in the Bible as the tr (1) of
MP, k“arah, which in Nu 7 19 AV (RV “platter”’)
and repeatedly in that chapter denotes one of the
gifts made by the several princes at the dedication
of the tabernacle; (2) of SonaN , dghartal, a word
of uncertain derivation used in Ezr 1 9 (AV) twice
to designate certain temple vessels which might
better be called “‘libation bowls’; (8) of mivaé,
pinaz, used Mt 14 8.11; Mk 6 25.28 (EV) for
the dish in which the head of John the Baptist was
presented. Davip Foster Estes


CHARGES, chir’jiz (8aravéw, dapandd, “‘to
spend”): “Be at charges for them” (Acts 21 24,
AV “with them’’), i.e. pay the sacrificial expenses
of these poorer Nazirites (cf Jos, Ant, XIX, xvi, 1).


CHARIOT, char’i-ot (227%), merkabh, M3279,
merkabhah, ‘“‘riding-chariot,” 337, rekhebh, ‘“war-
chariot”; &ppa, hdrma):

1. Chariots of Reypt "
2. “of the Canaanites ,

; “ of Solomon and Later Kings
4, “of the Assyrians

5. “ _of Chaldaeans, Persians, Greeks
6. In the NT


oo


7. Figurative Use
LITERATURE


It is to the chariots of ancient Egypt that refer-
ence is frst made in Scripture. Joseph was honored
by being made to ride in the second

1. Chariots chariot of King Pharaoh (Gen 41 43).
of Egypt Joseph paid honor to his father on his
arrival in Goshen by meeting him in

his chariot (Gen 46 29). In the state ceremonial
with which the remains of Jacob were escorted to
Canaan, chariots and horsemen were conspicuous
(Gen 60 9). In the narrative of the departure of
the Israelites from Egypt and of Pharaoh’s futile
attempts to detain them the chariots and horsemen
of Pharaoh figure largely (Ex 14 17.18.23.25; 15 4.
19). It was with the Hyksos invasion, some cents.
before the Exodus, that the horse, and subsequently
the chariot, were introduced for purposes of war
into Egypt; and it may have been the possession of
chariots that enabled those hated shepherd warriors
to overpower the native Egyptians. The Egyp


chariot was distinguished by ita lightness of build.
It was so reduced in weight that it was possible for
a man to carry his chariot on his shoulders without
fatigue. The ordinary chariot was made of wood
and leather, and had only two occupants, the fight-
ing man and his shield-bearer. The royal chariots
were ornamented with gold and silver, and in the
battle of Megiddo Thothmes III is represented as
standing in his chariot of electrum like the god: of
war, brandishing his lance. In the battle the vic-
torious Egyptians captured 2,041 horses and 924
chariots from the Syrian allies.


Egyptian War-Chariot.


The Canaanites had long been possessed of horses
and chariots when Joshua houghed their horses
and burnt their chariots with fire at
2. Chariots the waters of Merom (Josh 11 6.9).
of the The chariots of iron which the Canaan-
Canaanites ites could manoeuvre in the plains and
valleys proved a formidable obstacle
to the complete conquest of the land (Jgs 1 19).
Jabin had 900 chariots of iron, and with them he
was able to oppress the children of Israel twenty
years (Jgs 4 3). The Philis of the low country
and the maritime plain, of whom we read in Jgs
and 8, were a warlike people, were disciplined and
well armed and their possession of chariots gave
them a great advantage over the Israelites. In the
war of Michmash they put into the field the incred-
ible number of 30,000 chariots and 6,000 horsemen,
only in the end to suffer a grievous defeat (1 8 13
5; 14 20). In the battle of Gilboa, however, the
chariots and horsemen of the Philis bore down all
opposition, and proved the destruction of Saul and
his house. Of these chariots there have come down
to us no detailed description and no representation.
But we cannot be far wrong in turning to the chariot
of the Hittites as a type of the Canaanite and Phili
chariot. It is not from the monuments of the
Hittites themselves, however, but from the repre-
sentations of the Kheta of the Egyp monuments,
that we know what their chariots were like. Their
chariotry was their chief arm of offence. The Hittite
chariot was used, too, for hunting; but a heavier
car with paneled sides was employed for war. The
Egyp monuments represent three Hittites in each
car, a practice which differed from that of Egypt
and attracted attention. Of the three, one guided
the chariot, another did the fighting with sword and
lance, and the third was the shield-bearer.


Chariot
Charm


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


596


The Israelites living in a mountainous country
were tardy in adopting the chariot for purposes of
war. David houghed all the chariot
3. Chariots horses of Hadadezer, king of Zobah,
of Solomon’ and “reserved of them for a hundred
and Later chariots” (28 8 4), and Adonijah
Kings prepared for himself chariots and
horsemen with a view to contest the
throne of his father (1 K 1 5). But Solomon was
the first in Israel to acquire chariots and horses on
a national scale, and to build cities for their ac-
commodation (1 K 9 19). In MT of the OT we
read that Solomon had agents who received droves
of horses from Egypt, and it is added: “And a
chariot came up and went out of Egypt for 600
shekels of silver, and_a horse for 150; and so for
all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of
Syria, did they bring them out by their means”
(1 K 10 29). On the strength of a warrantable
emendation of the text it is now proposed to read
the preceding (ver 28): ‘And Solomon’s import of
horses was from Musri and from Kué; the king’s
traders received them from Kué at a price”—where
Musri and Kné are North Syria and Cilicia. No
doubt it was Egypt out of which the nation was
forbidden by the Deuteronomic law to multiply
horses (Dt_17 16), but on the other hand the state-
ment of Ezk (27 14) that Israel derived horses,
chargers and mules not from Egypt but from
Togarmah—North Syria and Asia Minor—agrees
with the new rendering (Burney, Noies on Hebrew
Text of the Books of Kings, in loc.). From Solo-
mon’s time onward chariots were in use in both
kingdoms. Zimri, who slew Elah, son of Baasha,
king of Israel, was captain of half his chariots
(1 K 16 9). It was when sitting in his chariot in
disguise beside the driver that Ahab received his
fatal wound at Ramoth-gilead (1 K 22 34). The
floor of the royal chariot was a pool of blood, and
‘they washed the chariot by the pool of Samaria”
(vs 35.38). It was in his war-chariot that his serv-
ants carried Josiah dead from the fatal field of
Megiddo (2 K 23 30). The chief pieces of the
Heb chariot were (1) the pole to which the two
horses were yoked, (2) the axle—resting upon two
wheels with six or eight spokes (1 K 7 33)—into
which the pole was fixed, (83) a frame or body open
behind, standing upon the axle and fitted by a
leather band to the pole. The chariots of iron of
which we read (Jgs 4 3) were of wood strengthened
or studded with iron. Like that of the Hittite, the
Heb chariot probably carried three men, although
in the chariot of Ahab (1 K 22 34) and in that of
Jehu (2 K 9 24 f) we read of only two.


Assyrian Chariot.


In the later days when the Assyrians overran the
lands of the West, the Israelites had to face the
chariots and the hosts of Sennacherib

4, Chariots and of the kings (2 K 19 23). And
of the they faced them with chariots of their
Assyrians own. An inscription of Shalmaneser
II of Assyria tells how in the battle

of Karkar (854 BC) Ahab of the land of Israel had


put into the field 2,000 chariots and 10,000 soldiers.
But the Assyr chariotry was too numerous and
powerful for Israel. The Assyr chariot was larger
and heavier than the Egyp or the Heb: it had usually
three and sometimes four occupants (Maspéro, Life
in Ancient Egyptand Assyria, 322). When weread
in Nahum’s prophecy of “chariots flashing with
steel,”’ “rushing to and fro in the broad ways” (Nah
2 3.4), itis of the Assyr chariots that we are to think
being hastily got together for the defence of Nineveh.
In early Bab inscriptions of the 3d millennium
before Christ there is evidence of the use of the
war-chariots, and Nebuchadrezzar in

5. Chariots his campaigns to the West had char-
of Chal- iots as part of his victorious host (Jer


daeans, 47 3). It was the Persians who first
Persians, employed scythed chariots in war; and
Greeks we find Antiochus Eupator in the


Seleucid period equipping a Gr force
against Judaea which had 800 chariots armed with
scythes (2 Mace 13 2).

In the NT the chariot is only twice mentioned.
Besides the chariot in which the Ethiopian eunuch
was traveling when Philip the evangel-
6. Inthe ist made up to him (Acts 8 28.29.38),
NT there is only the mention of the din
of war-chariots to which the onrush
a ae in Apocalyptic vision is compared (Rev
In the fig. language of Scripture, the chariot has
a place. It is a tribute to the powerful influence
of Elijah and Elisha when they are
separately called “the chariots of Israel
and the horsemen thereof” (2 K 2 12;
13 14). The angelic hosts are declared
to be God’s chariots, twice ten thousand, thousands
upon thonsands (Ps 68 17). Butchariots and horses
themselves are a poor substitute for the might of
God (Ps 20 7). God Himself isrepresented as riding
upon His chariots of salvation for the defence of His
people (Hab 3 8). In the Book of Zec, the four
chariots with their horses of various colors have an
apocalyptic significance (Zec 6). In the worship of
the host of heaven which prevailed in the later days
of the kingdom of Judah, “‘the chariots of the sun”
(see art.) were symbols which led the people into
gross idolatry and King Josiah burnt them with fire
(2 K 23 11).
Literatuns.—Nowack, Heb Arch., 1, 3661; Garstang,
Land of the Hittites, 3631; Masp6éro, Struggle of the Nations


and Life in Ancient Egypt and Assyria; Rawlinson, Five
Great Monarchies, II, 1-21.
T. Nicon


CHARIOTS OF THE SUN (w9wO niap7,
mark*bhoth ha-shemesh): These, together with
“horses of the sun,’”’ are mentioned in 2 K 23 11.
They are said to have stood in the temple, a gift
of the kings of Judah. Josiah removed the horses
from the precincts of the temple and burned the
chariots. Among the Greeks, Helios was endowed
with horses and chariots. Thus the course of the
sun as he sped across the skies was understood b
the mythological mind of antiquity. The Bab
god Shamash (=Heb Shemesh) ieee had _ his
chariot and horses as well as his charioteer. The
cult of the sun and other heavenly bodies which
was particularly in vogue during the latter days
of the Judaean monarchy (cf 2 K 23 5; Ezk 8
16f; Dt 173; Jer 8 2) seems to have consti-
tuted an element of the Canaanitish religion (cf the
names of localities like Beth-shemesh and the like).
The chariots of the sun are also referred to in En
72 5.37; 76 4, and Gr Apoc of Bar 6.

Max L. Marcous

CHARITABLY, char'i-ta-bli (kara dyéanv, katd
agdpén): The RV, which substitutes “love” for
“charity” regularly, removing the latter word from


7. Figura-
tive Use


597


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Chariot
Charm


the vocabulary of Scripture, makes a like change
in Rom 14 15, the only occurrence of “charitably”
in AV; RV “in love.” See Cuaniry.


CHARITY, char'i-ti (dyn, agdp2):
A New Word

A New Ideal

An Apostolic Term
Latin Equivalents
English Translation
Inward Motive
Character

. Ultimate Ideal

. Almsgiving

. Tolerance.

In AV in 26 places from 1 Cor 8 1 onward. The
same Gr word, which appears in the NT 115 times,
is elsewhere tr’ by “love.”

The subst. agapé is mainly, if not exclusively, a
Bib. and ecclesiastical word (see Deissmann, Bible

Studies, 198 ff), not found in profane
1. A New writings, although the vb. agapdn,
Word from which it is derived, is used in
_ classical Gr in the sense of “love,
founded in admiration, veneration, esteem, like the
Lat diligere’”’ (Grimm-Thayer), rather than natural
emotion (Lat amare). It isa significant evidence of
the sense of a new ideal and principle of life that
permeated the Christian consciousness
2. A New of the earliest communities, that they
Ideal should have made current a new word
to express it, and that they should de-
rive that word, not from the current or philosophical
language of Gr morality, but from the LXX.

In the NT the word is apostolic, and appears

first and predominantly in the Pauline writings.
It is found only twice in the Synoptics


SOWNOMAWNH


Rr


3. An (Mt 24 12; Lk 11 42), and although
Apostolic it is in both places put in the mouth of
Term the Saviour, it can easily be understood


how the language of a later time may
have been used by the narrator, when it. is considered
that these gospels were compiled and reduced to
writing many years after the spread of the Pauline
epistles. The word is not found in Jas, Mk or Acts,
but it appears in Paul 75 times, in Jn 30 times, in
Pet 4 times, in Jude twice and in He twice. Jesus
Christ gave the thing and the spirit in the church,
and the apostles (probably Paul) invented the term
to express it. When Jerome came to translate the

Gr testament into Lat, he found in that
4, Latin language no word to represent agapé.
Equivalents Amor was too gross, and he fell back

on dilectio and caritas, words which,
however, in their original meanings were too weak
and colorless to represent agapé adequately. No
principle seems to have guided him in the choice
of the one word or the other in particular places.
Caritas in Eng. became “charity,” and was taken

over by the Eng. translators from the
6. English Vulg, though not with any regularity,
Translation nor as far as can be judged, according

to any definite principle, except that
it is used of agapé only in man, never as it denotes a
quality or action of God, which is always tr’ by
“love.” When agapé is tr’ by “charity” it means
either (1) a disposition in man which may qualify
his own character (1 Cor 8 1) and be ready to
go forth to God (1 Cor 8 3) or to men; or (2) an
active and actual relation with other men, generally
within the church (Col 3 14; 1 Thess 3 6; 2 Thess
13; 1 Tim 1 5; 4 12; 1 Pet 4 8; 6 14), but also
absolutely and universally (1 Cor 13). In the earlier
epistles it stands first and unique as the supreme
principle of the Christian life (1 Cor 13), but in the
later writings, it is enumerated as one among the
Christian virtues (1 Tim 2 15; 2 Tim 2 22; 3 10;
Tit 22; 2 Pet 17; Rev 219). In Paul’s psalm


of love (1 Cor 18) it is set forth as an innermost
principle contrasted with prophecy and knowledge,

faith and works, as the motive that
6. Inward determines the quality of the whole
Motive inner life, and gives value to all its

activities. If a man should have all
gifts of miracles and intellect, and perform all the
works of goodness and devotion, “and have not love,
it profiteth nothing,” for they would be purely ex-
ternal and legal, and lacking in the quality of moral
choice and personal relation which give life its value
(vs 1-3). Love itself defines men’s relation to men
as generous, tolerant and forgiving. ‘Love suffereth
long, and is kind; love envieth not” (ver 4). It
determines and defines a man’s own character and


personality. It is not boastful and
7. Char- arrogant, but dignified, pure, holy,
acter courageous and serene. Evil cannot


provoke it nor wrong delight it. It
bears cheerfully all adversity and follows its course
in confident hope (vs 4-7). It is final virtue, the
ultimate ideal of life. Many of life’s activities cease

or change, but “love never faileth.”
8. Ultimate To it all other graces and virtues are
Ideal subordinated. “Now abideth faith,

hope, love, these three; and the greatest
of these is love” (vs 8-13). In one passage only in
the NT (3 Jn ver 6) agapé seems to have a meaning
that comes near to the later, ecclesiastical meaning

of charity as almsgiving. With the
9. Alms- _— growing legalism of the church and the
giving prevalence of monastic ideals of moral-
ity, caritas came to mean the very
opposite of Paul’s agapé—just “the giving of goods
to feed the poor,” which “without love profiteth
nothing.’’ At present the word means either liber-
ality to the poor, or tolerance in judging the actions
of others, both qualities of love, but
very inadequate to express its totality.
The Revisers have therefore accurate-
ly dropped the word and substituted
“love” for it in all passages. It is interesting to
note that in Welsh the reverse process has occurred:
cariad (from Lat caritas) was used throughout to
translate agapé, with the result that in both religious
and ordinary speech the word has established itself
so firmly as almost to oust the native word ee

. REES

CHARM, charm: Definition —The word charm
is derived from the Latin carmen, “a song,’ and
denotes strictly what is sung; then it comes to
mean a magical formula chanted or recited with a
view to certain desired results. Charm is distin-
guished from amulet in this, that the latter is a
material object having as such a magical potency,
though it is frequently an inscribed formula on it
that gives this object its power (see AMULET). The
word charm stands primarily for the incantation,
though it is often applied to an inscribed amulet.

A charm may be regarded as having a positive
or anegative effect. In the first case it is supposed
to secure some desired object or result (see Amu-
LET). In the second, it is conceived as having the
power of warding off evils, as the evil eye, the in-
flictions of evil spirits and the like. In the last, its
negative meaning, the word “countercharm’’ (Ger-
man, Gegenzauber) is commonly used.

Charms are divisible into two general classes
according as they are written (or printed) or merely
spoken:

(1) Written charms.—Of these we have examples
in the phylacteries and the m‘*zizdh noticed in the
art. AMULET. In Acts 19 13-20 we read of written
charms used by the Ephesians, such as are else-
where called é¢éo1a ypduuara (ephésia grdmmaia).
Such magical formulae were written generally on
leather, though sometimes on papyrus, on lead, and


10. Toler-
ance


Charme


Chedorlaamer HE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 598
even on gold. Those mentioned in the above pas- CHASE, chias. See Huwntina.

sage must have been inscribed on some very valuable

material, gold perhaps, or they could not have cost CHASEBA, kas’é-ba (XaceBdé, Chasebd): The


£2,000 (=50,000 drachmas). Charms of the kind
have been dug up from the ruins of Ephesus. In
modern Egypt drinking-bowls are used, inscribed
with passages from the Koran, and it is considered
very lucky to drink from such a “lucky bowl,’ as it
is called. Parts of the Koran and often complete
miniature copies are worn by Egyptians and esp. by
Egyp soldiers during war. These are buried with
the dead bodies, just as the ancient Egyptians in-
terred with their dead portions of the Book of the
Dead or even the whole book, and as the early
Abyssinians buried with dead bodies certain magical
texts. -Jos (Ant, VIII, ii, 5) says that Solomon
composed incantations by which demons were ex-
orcised and diseases healed.

(2) Spoken charms are at least as widespread
as those inscribed. Much importance was attached
by the ancients (Egyp, Bab, etc) to the manner
in which the incantations were recited, as well as
to the substance of the formulae. If beautifully
uttered, and with sufficient frequency, such in-
cantations possessed unlimited power. The stress
laid on the mode of reciting magical charms necessi-
tated the existence of a priestly class and did much
to increase the power of such a class. The binding
force of the uttered word is implied in many parts
of the OT (see Josh 9 20). Though the princes
of Israel had promised under false pretences to
make a covenant on behalf of Israel with the Gibeon-
ites, they refused to break their promise because the
word had been given. The words of blessing and
curse were believed to have in themselves the power
of self-realization. A curse was a means of des-
truction, not a mere realization (see Nu 22-24,
Balaam’s curses; Jgs 5 23; Job 31). Ina similar
way the word of blessing was believed to insure its
own realization. In Gen 48 8-22 the greatness of
Ephraim and Manassceh is ascribed to the blessing of
Jacob upon them (see further Ex 12 32; Jgs 17 2;
28 21 3). Itisno doubt to be understood that the
witch of Endor raised Samuel from the dead by the
recitation of some magical formula (1 8 28 7 ff).

The uttering of the tetragrammaton was at a very
early time (at latest 300 BC) believed to be magi-
cally potent, and hence its ordinary use was for-
bidden, so that instead of Jeh, the Jews of the time,
when the earliest part of the LXX was tr’, used
for this Divine name the appellative ’ddhénai=
“Lord.” Inasimilar way among the Jews of post-
Bib. and perhaps of even Bib. times, the pronun-
ciation of the Aaronic blessing (Nu 6 24-26) was
supposed to possess great efficacy and to be a means
of certain good tothe person or persons involved.
Evil spirits were exorcised by Jews of Paul’s day
through the use of the name of the Lord Jesus (Acts
19 13). In the Talm (P¢séhim 110a) it is an in-
struction that if a man meets a witch he should say,
“May a pot of boiling dung be stuffed into your
mouth, you ugly witch,” and her power is gone.

For literature see AMULET.

T. Wirron Daviss

CHARME, kar’mé (so RV; AV Carme; Xappi,
Charmé): A Gr-transliteration of Heb hérim. The
name of a priestly family in the list of those who
returned from the Exile (1 Esd 5 25=Harim in Ezr
2 39=Neh 7 42).


CHARMIS, kir’mis (Xdppes, Chdrmeis, Xappels,
Charmeis, A, XoApels, Chalmeis): The son of Mel-
chiel, one of the three elders or rulers of the town of
Bethulia (Jth 6 15; 8 10; 10 6).


CHARRAN, kar‘an (Xaspav, Charrhdn): Gr form
of Haran (q.v.) (Acts 7 2.4).


name of a family of temple-servants in the list of

those who returned from Babylon (1 Esd_6 31).

uae name is not given in the || passages in Ezr and
eh.


CHASTE, chist,
Crimes; MarriacE.


CHASTENING, chis’’n-ing, CHASTISEMENT,
chas’tiz-ment: These two words corresponding to
Heb 1072, musGr, and Gr ratdeia, paideia, are
distinguished in Eng. use, in that “chastisement”
is applied to the infliction of pain, either as a pun-
ishment or for recalling to duty, while ‘‘chastening”’
is a wider term, indicating the discipline or training
to which one is subjected, without, as in the other
term, referring to the means employed to this end.
The narrower term occurs in RV but once in the
NT and then in its verbal form, Lk 23 16: “TI will
therefore chastise him.’’ AV uses it also in He
12 8


CHASTITY, chas’ti-ti. See


The meaning of the word paideia grows with the
progress of revelation. Its full significance is un-
folded in the NT, when reconciliation through Christ
has brought into prominence the true fatherhood
of God (He 12 5.10). In the OT, where it occurs
about 40 times, the radical meaning is that simply
of training, as in Dt 8 5: “As a man chasteneth
his son, so Jeh thy God chasteneth thee.” But,
as in a dispensation where the distinguishing fea-
ture is that of the strictest justice, retributive
punishment becomes not only an important, but a
controlling factor in the training, as in Lev 26 28:
“T will chastise you seven times for your sins.”
In this sense, it is used of chastisements inflicted by
man even unjustly: “My father chastised you with
whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions”
(1 K 12 11). As, therefore, the thought of the
suffering inflicted, or that of the end toward which
it is directed, preponderates, the Psalmist can pray:
“Neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure’ (Ps
6 1), and take comfort in the words: ‘Blessed is
the man whom thou chastenest”’ (Ps 94 12). Hence
it is common in both AV and RV to find the Heb
miusar, and Gr paideia tr? as “instruction.” Tllustra-
tions are most numerous in Prov.

In the NT the Gr paideia is used with a variety
similar to its corresponding Heb in the OT. Ex-
amples of the fundamental idea, viz. that of “train-
ing,’ are found in such passages as Acts 7 22;
22 3, where Moses and Paul are said to have been
“instructed,” and 2 Tim 3 16, where Scripture is
said to be “profitable .... for instruction” (cf
1 Tim 1 20; 2 Tim 2 25; Tit 2 12; Rom 2 20).
A similar, but not identical, thought, is found in
Eph 6 4: “Nurture them in the chastening and
admonition of the Lord.’ But when paideia is
described as bringing pain, the mystery of suffer-
ing, which in the OT is most fully treated in the
Book of Job, at last finds its explanation. The
child of God realizes that he cannot be beneath
God’s wrath, and hence that the chastening which
he endures is not destructive, but corrective (1 Cor
10 18; 11 32; 2 Cor 69; Rev 3 19). In He
12 5-11, such consolation is afforded, not, as in the
above passages, by incidental allusions, but by a
full argument upon the basis of Prov 3 11f, an
OT text that has depth and richness that can be
understood and appropriated only by those who
through Christ have learned to recognize the Om-
nipotent Ruler ‘of heaven and earth, as their loving
and considerate Father. On the basis of this
passage, a distinction is often drawn between
punishment and chastisement; the former, as an


599


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Charme
Chedorlaomer


act of justice, revealing wrath, and the latter, as
an act of mercy, love. Since to them that are in
Christ, Jesus, there is no condemnation (Rom 8 1)
they can suffer no punishment, but only chastise-
ment. Where there is guilt, there is punishment;
but where guilt has been removed, there can be no
punishment. There being no degrees of justifica-
tion, no one can be forgiven in part, with a partial
guilt still set to his account for which he must yet
give a reckoning, either here or hereafter. If, then
all the mghteousness of Christ belongs to him, and
no sin whatever remains to be forgiven, either in
whole or in part, all life’s sorrows are remedial
agencies against danger and to train for the king-
dom of heaven. H. E. Jacozs


CHATTER, chat’ér (FDL, ¢aphaph): This word,
which means to “peep,” “twitter,” or “chirp,” as
small birds do, is tr’ “chatter” only in Isa 38 14,


“Like a swallow or a crane, so did I chatter.” See
Currp.
CHAVAH, ka’va (LXX Zo, Zoé): A _ trans-


literation of the Heb 1317, hawwah or havvadh, which
means “‘life giver,” “living,” and appears in our
Eng. VSS as Eve (Gen 3 20 AVm).


CHEBAR, ké’bar (1139, k*bhar, ‘joining’ [Young],
“length” [Strong]; XeBdp, Chobdér): The river by
the side of which his first vision was vouchsafed to
Ezekiel (1 1). It is described as in ‘‘the land of the
Chaldaeans,” and is not, therefore, to be sought in
northern Mesopotamia. This rules out the Habor,
the mod. Chabour, with which it is often identified.
The two names are radically distinct: V124 could
not be derived from "32. One of the great Bab
canals is doubtless intended. Hilprecht found
mention made of (n@ru) kabaru, one of these canals
large enough to be navigable, to the E. of Nippur,
“in the land of the Chaldaeans.” This “great
canal” he identifies with the mod. shatt en- Nil, in
which probably we should recognize the ancient
Chebar. Ewine


CHECK (1078, misar): Occurs in Job 20 3 AV,
“T have heard the check of my reproach” (RV “the
reproof which putteth me to shame’’), i.e. a check
or reproof, such as that which closes the last speech
of Job (ch 19), and intended to put Zophar to shame.


CHECKER-WORK, chek’ér-wirk (NETWORK)
(MAW, s*bhakhah): This was a kind of ornamenta-
tion used on the tops of the pillars of Jachin and
Boaz before the porch of the Temple (1 K 7 17).
Its exact form is not known. See Tempe. For
“a broidered coat” (Ex 28 4 AV), RV gives “a coat
of checker work.” See BRomEeRED; EMBROIDERY.


CHEDORLAOMER, ked-or-l4-0’mér, ked-dr-la’o-
mér (WAYDITD, kedhorla'smer; XoBoddoyspop, Cho-
dollogémor) :

1. Was He the Elamite King Kudur-labgumal ?
Kudur-lahgumal and the Babylonians

The Son of Eri-Ekua

Durmab-ilani, Tudbul(a) and Kudur-labmal

The Fate of Sinful Rulers

The Poetical Legend

Kudur-labgumal's Misdeeds

The Importance of the Series

The name of the Elamite overlord with whom
Amraphel, Arioch and Tidal marched against Sodom
and Gomorrah, and the other cities of the plain
(Gen 14 1ff). The Gr (LXX) form of the name is
Chodollogomor, implying a different vocalization, the
assimilation of r with J, and the pronunciation of ‘o as
gho (Codorlaghomer). This suggests that the Elam-
ite form, in cuneiform, would be Kudur-lagamar,


DONO OR obo


the second element being the name of a god, and the
whole therefore meaning “servant of La‘omer’’ (La-
gamar), or the like. A Bab deity worshipped at
Dilmu, Legamal, may be the same as the Elamite
Lagamar. This name is not found in the cuneiform
inscriptions, unless it be, as is possible, the fancifully-
written Kudur-lah(gujmal (or Kodorlahgomal) of three
late Bab legends, one of which is in poetical form.
Besides this Elamite ruler, two of these tablets
mention also a certain Eri-Aku or Eri-Akua, son of
Durmaf-ilani, and one of them refers to T'udpulla]
or Tidal. See Eri-axu, 4.
Objections have been made to the identification
of Chedorlaomer with the Kudur-lah[gu]mal of these
texts, some Assyriologists having flatly
1. Was He denied the possibility, while others ex-
the Elamite pressed the opinion that, though these


King names were respectively those with
Kudur- which they have been identified, they
lahgumal? were not the personages referred to in


Gen 14, and many have refrained from
expressing an opinion at all. The main reason for
the identification of Kudur-lah[gu]mal|[?} with Che-
dorlaomer is its association with the names Eri-Eaku
and Tudhul[a] found on two of the documents. No
clear references to the expedition against the Cities of
the Plain, however, have been found in these texts.

The longer of the two prose compositions (Brit.
Mus., Sp. II, 987) refers to the bond of heaven
[extended?] to the four regions, and


2. Kudur- the fame which he (Merodach’) set
lahgumal _for [the Elamites] in Babylon, the city
and the of [his] glory. So [?the gods], in their


Babylonians faithful (or everlasting) counsel, de-
creed to Kudur-lahgumal, king of Elam,
[their favor?]. He came down, and [performed]
what was good to them, and exercised dominion in
Babylon, the city of Kar-DuniaS (Babylonia).
When in power, however, he acted in a way which did
not please the Babylonians, for he loved the winged
fowl, and favoured the dog which crunched the bone.
“What(?) king of Elam was there who had (ever)
[shown favor to?] the shrine of E-saggil?” (E-sagila,
the great temple of Belus at Babylon). A letter from
Durmab-ilani son of Eri-Ekua (?Arioch)
3. The Son is at this point quoted, and possibly
of Eri-Ekua forms the justification for the sentences
which had preceded, giving, as they do,
reasons for the intervention of the native ruler. The
mutilation of the inscription, however, makes the
sense and sequence very difficult to follow.
The less perfect fragment (Sp. II, 2) contains,
near the beginning, the word fammu, and if this
be, as Professor F. Hommel has sug-
4, Durmab- gested, part of the name Hammurabi
ilani, Tud- (Amraphel), it would in all probability
hul(a) and place the identification of Kudur-
Kudur- labgumal(?) with Chedorlaomer be-
lahmal yond a doubt. This inscription states,
that Merodach, in the faithfulness of
his heart, caused the ruler not supporting [the
temples of Babylonia] to be slain with the sword.
The name of Durmab-ilani then occurs, and it .
seems to be stated of him that he carried off spoil,
and Babylon and the temple E-saggil were inun-
dated. He, however, was apparently murdered
by his son, and old and young [were slain] with the
sword. Then came Tudhulla] or Tidal, son of
Gazza[ni?], who also carried off spoil, and again
the waters devastated Babylon and E-saggil. But
to all appearance TudbullaJ, in his turn, was over-
taken by his fate, for ‘‘his son shattered his head
with the weapon of his hands.” At this point there
is a reference to Elam, to the city Abbéa(?), and
to the land of Rabbatu™, which he (? the king of
Elam) had spoiled. Whether this refers to some
expedition to Palestine or not is uncertain, and


Cheek
Chemosh


probably unlikely, as the next phrase speaks of
devastation inflicted in Babylonia. But an unto-
ward fate overtook this ruler likewise,
5. The Fate for Kudur-labmal (=lahgumal), his
of Sinful son, pierced his heart with the steel
Rulers sword of his girdle. All these refer-
ences to violent deaths are apparently
cited to show the dreadful end of certain kings,
“lords of sin,’ with whom Merodach, the king of
the gods, was angry.
The third text is of a poetical nature, and refers
several times to “the enemy, the Elamite’’—ap-
parently Kudur-labgu[mal]. In this


6. The noteworthy inscription, which, even in
Poetical its present imperfect state, contains
Legend 78 lines of wedge-written text, the

destruction wrought by him is related
in detail. He cast down the door (of the temple)


of Istar; entered Du-mab, the place where the
fates were declared (see BABEL, BaBYLoNn), and
told his warriors to take the spoil and the goods of
the temple. He was afraid, however, to proceed

to extremities, as the god of the place


7. Kudur- “flashed like lightning, and shook the
Jahgumal’s [holy] places.” The last two para-
Misdeeds_ graphs state that he set his face to


go down to Tiamtu (the seacoast; see
CHALDEA), whither Ibi-Tutu, apparently the king
of that district, had hastened, and founded a pseudo-
capital. But the Elamite seems afterward to have
taken his way north again, and after visiting Bor-
sippa near Babylon, traversed “the road of dark-
ness—the road to Me&ku” (?Mesech). He de-
stroyed the palace, subdued the princes, carried
off the spoil of all the temples and took the goods
{of the people] to Elam. At this point the text
breaks off.
Where these remarkable inscriptions came from
there ought to be more of the same nature, and if
these be found, the mystery of Chedor-


8. The laomer and Kudur-lahgumal will prob-
Importance ably be solved. At present it can only
of the be said, that the names all point to
Series the early period of the Elamite rulers


called Kudurides, before the land of
Tiamtu or Tamdu was settled by the Chaldaeans.
Evidently it was one of the heroic periods of Baby-
lonian history, and some scribe of about 350 BC
had collected together a number of texts referring
to it. All three tablets were purchased (not ex-
cavated) by the British Museum, and reached that
institution through the same channel. See the
Journal of the Victoria Institute, 1895-96, and Pro-
fessor Sayce in PS BA (1906), 193 ff, 241 ff; (1907),
7 ff. T. G. Pirncuss


CHEEK, chtk, CHEEKBONE, chék’bon:

(1) "N12, Lehi; cvaydv, siagon, “the jaw,’’ “jaw-
bone,” “side of the face.” The Heb word denotes
originally freshness and rounded softness of the
cheek, a sign of beauty in youth and maiden (Cant
1 10; 6 18). The oriental guards with jealous care
his cheek from touch or defilement, therefore a stroke
on the cheek was, and is to this day, regarded as an
act of extreme rudeness of behavior, a deadly affront.
Our Saviour, however, teaches us in Mt 5 39 and
Lk 6 29 that even this insult is to be ignored and
pardoned.

Jawbones of animals have been frequently used
as tools and weapons among primitive people. We
see this sufficiently proven from cave deposits in
many parts of the world, and from recent eth-
nological researches, esp. in Australia. In the light
of this evidence it is interesting to note that Samson
used a jawbone of an ass with success against his
enemies the Philis (Jgs 15 15).


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


600


(2) Mpa, malkosh (Ps 22 15), is a dual form
indicative of the two jaws, to which a parched
tongue seems to cleave.

(3) MPS, mthall**ah (Job 29 17), better “cheek
teeth” (q.v.). H. L. E. Luerime


CHEEK TEETH (nvana, mthall*‘ah, transposed
from myn, malta’ah [only in Ps 58 6], lit. “the
biter,” “crusher,” “molar,” “jaw-teeth,” “great
teeth” [Job 29 17m; Joel 1 6)).

Figurative: The word is used as a synonym of
reckless strength and cruelty.


CHEER, chér, CHEERFULNESS, chér’f6dl-nes:
The Eng. word “cheer” meant (1) originally face,
countenance (Gr «dpa, kdra, “head,” through OFr.
chere, ‘“‘face’’), (2) then the expression on the face,
esp. (3) the expression of good spirits, and finally
(4) good spirits, without any reference to the facial
expression. The noun “cheer” in EV is only found
with adj. “good” (except 1 Esd 9 54, ‘great cheer’’),
the word not having quite lost its earlier neutral
character (any face expression, whether joyous or
otherwise). In OT, 370, tbh, is tr4 “cheer,” “let
thy heart cheer thee” (see Goop); MAW, samath,
“to rejoice” is so tr’ in Dt 24 5, “shall cheer his
wife’ (AV “cheer up his wife’), and Jgs 9 13,
‘wine, which cheereth God [’ééhim] and man.”
The phrase “of good cheer” occurs in OT in Job
9 27 (AV “comfort”); in Apoc, 1 Esd 9 54;
Wisd 18 6; Bar 4 5.30; Sir 18 32 AV (RV “‘lux-
ury”); in NT for Gr euthuméd, evithumos, in Acts
27 22.25.36, and for tharsé6 in Mt 9 2.22 (AV
“comfort”); 14 27; Mk 6 50; 10 49 (RV; ‘“com-
fort” in AV); Jn 16 33; Acts 23 11. “Cheer”
as vb. trans. occurs in Eccl 119; Deut 24 5;
Jgs 9 13.

Cheerful occurs in Prov 15 13.15 (AV “merry’’);
Zec 8 19; 917 AV; Gir 30 25; 2 Cor 9 7.

Cheerfully, Acts 24 10.

Cheerfulness, Rom 12 8. D. Miauu Epwarps


CHEESE, chéz. See Foon; Mrix.


CHELAL, ké'lal (55, lal, “perfection”): One
of the b’né Pakath-Mo’abh who took “strange
wives’ (Ezr 10 30).


CHELCIAS, kel’si-as. See Hexxias; Hiixian.


CHELLIANS, kel’i-anz: The people of ‘“‘Chellus”
(Jth 2 23) (q.v.).


CHELLUH, kel’i. See Cumexuar.


CHELLUS, kel’us (XeAdods, Chellotis), a place
named (Jth 1 9) among those W. of the Jordan to
which Nebuchadnezzar sent his summons. It is
mentioned along with ‘‘Kades,” and as it lay N.
of the “children of Ishmael” it may with some
probability be taken as lying S.W. of Jerus. It

as been conjectured that it may be Chalutzah
(Reland, Pal, 717), a place under the form Elusa
well known to the ancient geographers.


CHELOD, ké'lod (Xedcov8, Cheleorvid, Kedeodd,
Cheleowl): In Jth 1 6 it is said that “many nations
of the sons of C. assembled themselves to the battle.”
They are mentioned as obeying the summons of
Nebuchadnezzar to his war against Arphaxad. No
very probable suggestion has been made as to the
meaning of Chelod.


CHELUB, ké‘lub:
(1) a3, kelabh, father of Mehir (1 Ch 4 11);
the name is probably a variation of Caleb. Well-


601


hausen (De gentibus et familtiis Judaeis) reads 35>
JUNG 3a, kalebh ben hezrén.

(2) Father of Ezri (1 Ch 27 26), one of the
officers of David. See GmnnraLocy.


CHELUBAI, ke-loo’bi1 (2793, k‘lubhay): An-
other form of Caleb used in 1 Ch 2 9; cf 2 18.42.
Caleb is here described as the brother of Jerahmeel,
and son of Hezron, a remote ancestor, instead of as
the son of Jephunneh. See Cauzs.


CHELUHI, kel’66-hi cmb , kelahi, Kt.; amDD,
kelaha, Keré; RVm Cheluhu; AV Chelluh): Men-
tioned in the list of persons with foreign wives (Ezr
10 35=1 Esd 9 34).


CHEMARIM, kem’a-rim (O02, kemarim, a pl.
whose sing. kémer is not found in the OT): Occurs
only once in the text of EV (Zeph 1 4, AV Che-
marims), though the Heb word is found also in
2 K 23 5 (EV “idolatrous priests’) and Hos 10
5 (EV “priests,” EVm, however, having “Che-
marim” in both places). Some regard the word as
an interpolation in Zeph 1 4, since the LXX omits
it and its presence disturbs the parallelism. The
word, which is of Aram. origin (kumra, priest), is
used in the OT only in an unfavorable sense, its
origin and associations naturally suggesting Syr
affinities. In the Syr, however, no such connotation
is involved. In the Pesh version of the OT it is
used indifferently of idolatrous priests and of priests
of Jeh, while in the same version of the NT it is
used of the Levitical priests and of Our Lord (e.g.
He 2 17; 31; 4 14.15, and often) and in Acts
19 35 it is the rendering of nedkéros (RV “temple-
keeper,” AV “worshipper”’). The question of the
root idea of the word remains unsettled. The
traditional supposition, which finds some support
even among modern scholars, is that the verbal
form means “to be black,” the priests being sup-
posed to have been clad in black. But it is doubt-
ful whether the root had this meaning. Another
conjecture takes the root to mean “to be sad,” the
priest being a man of a sad countenance, an ascetic.
Cheyne would relate the word to the Assyr kum-
maru, having the sense of “a clean vesture.” It is
at all events probable that the priests, both in
Israel and in the surrounding nations, employed
white vestments, rather than black, when in the
performance of their official functions. According
to Mish, Middath, v.4, a Levitical priest who had
become disqualified for service put on black gar-
ments and departed, while the others put_on white
garments and went in and ministered. The refer-
ence to the Baal worship in 2 K 10 22 seems more
congruous with this view; hence probably black-
robed priests (Chemarim) of Baal and the unfaith-
ful priests of Jeh shall be cut off together. G, A.
Smith (BT 'P, II, 56) reads “the priestlings with the
priests.” J. R. Van Pair


CHEMOSH, ké’mosh (WAP, kemash; Xapds,
Chamés):
Moabites the People of Chemosh
Solomon and Chemosh Worship :
Josiah Putting Down Chemosh Worship
Chemosh and Ammonites
Moabite Stone
Mesha'’s Pa aug OT
Chemosh in the Inscription
Parallels between Inscription and OT Record
Ethical Contrast
ITERATURE


The national God of the Moabites, as Baal of the
Zidonians, or Milcom (Moloch, Malcam) of the Am-
monites. The Moabites are apostrophized in an
old Heb song as the “people of Chemosh” (Nu 21
29). Jeremiah in his oracle of doom upon Moab


1
2.
3.
4,
5.
6.
1
8.
9.
L


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Cheek
Chemosh


has recourse to the same old song and calls the
people “‘the people of Chemosh.” The impotence
__ of the god to deliver his people is de-
1. Moabites scribed by the prophet: in figures repre-
the People senting him as going into captivity with
of Chemosh them, his priests and princes together,
and Moab is to be ashamed of him as
Israel was of the Golden Calf of Bethel, which did
not avail to save the Northern Kingdom from the
conquering Assyr power (Jer 48 7.13.46).
For Chemosh, ‘the abomination of Moab,” as
for Moloch, “the abomination of the children of
Ammon,” Solomon, under the in-
2. Solomon fluence of his idolatrous wives, built


and Che- a high place in the mount before Jerus
mosh (1 K 11 7). It was natural that they
Worship should desire to worship still after


the manner of the gods of their native
land, but although the effect of all this was seen in
the moral and spiritual deterioration of Solomon
himself there is no indication that the immoralities
and cruelties associated with such worship were
then practised in Jerus. In the days of Ahaz and
Manasseh, even as early as the days of Abijam of
Judah, they were (1 K 16 12.13). Josiah found
these abominations of alien worship, which had been

introduced by Solomon and added to


3. Josiah by Ahaz and Manasseh, flourishin
Putting when he came to the throne. Move
Down by the prohibitions of the Book of
Chemosh the Law (Dt 12 29-31; 18 10), Jo-
Worship siah pulled down and defiled the high


places and the altars, and in order to
make a clean sweep of the idolatrous figures, “‘he
brake in pieces the pillars,” or obelisks, “and cut
down the Asherim,” or sacred poles, “and filled
their places with the bones of men” (2 K 23 1-20).
There is one passage where Chemosh is desig-
nated the god of the Ammonites (Jgs 11 24).
Jephthah is disputing the right of the
4, Chemosh Ammonites to invade territory which
and | belongs to Israel because Jeh has
Ammonites given it to them by conquest. And he
asks: ‘Shouldst thou not possess the
territory of those whom Chemosh, thy god, dispos-
sesses, and we the territory of all whom Jeh, our
god, dispossesses?’ It may be that he is called here
the god of the Ammonites by a mere oversight of
the historian; or that Moab and Ammon being
kindred nations descended from a common ancestor,
Lot, Chemosh may in a sense belong to both.
We notice, however, that Jephthah’s argument in
meeting the claim preferred by the king of Ammon
passes on to Israel’s relation to the Moabites and
makes mention only of well-known Moabite cities.
Chemosh is accordingly named because of his asso-
ciation with Moab, the cities of which are being
spoken of, although strictly and literally Milcom
should have been named in an appeal addressed as
a whole to the Ammonites (vs 12-28; cf Moore ad
loc.).
The discovery of the Moabite Stone in 1868 at
Dibon has thrown light upon Chemosh and the
relations of Moab to its national god.
5. Moabite The monument, which is now one of
Stone the most precious treasures of the
Louvre in Paris, bears an inscription
which is the oldest specimen of Sem alphabetic
writing extant, commemorating the successful
effort made about 860 or 850 BC by Mesha‘, king
of Moab, to throw off the yoke of Israel. We
know from the OT record that Moab had been
reduced to subjection by David (2.8 8 2); that
it paid a heavy tribute to Ahab, king of Israel
(0K 3 4); and that, on the death of Ahab,
Mesha‘ its king rebelled against Israelite rule
(2 K 8 5). Not till the reign of Jehoram was any


Chemosh
Cherubim


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


602


effort made to recover the lost dominion. The king
of Israel then allied himself with the kings of Judah
and Edom, and marching against Moab by the way
of the Red Sea, inflicted upon Mesha‘ a defeat so de-
cisive that the wrath of his god, Chemosh, could be
appeased only by the sacrifice of his son (2 K 8 6ff).
The historical situation described in the OT nar-
rative is fully confirmed by Mesha*’s inscription.
There are, however, divergences in
6. Mesha‘’s detail. In the Book of K the revolt
Inscription of Mesha*‘ is said to have taken place
and the after the death of Ahab. The in-
OT scription implies that it must have
taken place by the middle of Ahab’s
reign. The inscription implies that the subjec-
tion of Moab to Israel had not been continuous
from the time of David, and says that ‘Omri, the
father of Ahab, had reasserted the power of Israel
and had occupied at least a part of the land.
lt is with what the inscription says of Chemosh
that we are chiefly concerned. On the monument
the name appears twelve times.
7. Chemosh Mesha‘ is himself the son of Chemosh,
inthe In- and it was for Chemosh that he built
scription
ment was found. He built it because
among other reasons Chemosh had made him to
see his desire upon them that hated him. It was
because Chemosh was angry with his land that
‘Omri afflicted Moab many days. ‘Omri had
taken possession of the land of Medeba and Israel
dwelt in it his days and half his son’s days, but
Chemosh restored it in Mesha‘’s days. Mesha*‘
took ‘Ataroth which the king of Israel had built
for himself, slew all the people of the city, and made
them a gazing-stock to Chemosh and to Moab.
Mesha‘ brought thence the altar-hearth of Dodo,
and dragged it before Chemosh in Kerioth. By
command of Chemosh, Mesha‘ attacked Nebo and
fought against Israel, and after a fierce struggle he
took the place, slaying the inhabitants en masse,
7,000 men and women and maidservants, devoting
the city to ‘Ashtor-Chemosh and dragging the altar
vessels of Jeh before Chemosh. Out of Jahaz, too,
which the king of Israel had built, Chemosh drove
him before Mesha‘. At the instigation of Chemosh,
Mesha‘ fought against Horonaim, and, although the
text is defective in the closing paragraph, we may
surmise that Chemosh did not fail him but restored
it to his dominions.
Naturally enough there is considerable obscurity
in local and personal allusions. Dodo may have
been a local god worshipped by the
8. Parallels Israelites E. of the Jordan.
between Chemosh may be a compound divinity
Inscription of a kind not unknown to Sem my-
and OT thology, Ashtor representing possibly
Record the Phoen Ashtoreth. What is of
importance is the recurrence of so
many phrases and expressions applied to Chemosh
which are used of Jeh in the OT narratives. The
religious conceptions of the Moabites reflected in
the inscription are so strikingly like those of the
Israelites that if only the name of Jeh were substi-
tuted for that of Chemosh we might think we were
reading a chapter of the Books of K._ It is not in
the inscriptions, however, but in the OT narrative
that we find a reference to the demand of Chemosh
for human sacrifice. “He took his eldest son,”
says the Heb annalist, “that should have reigned
in his stead, and offered him for a burnt-offering
upon the wall. And there was great wrath against
Israel: and they departed from him, and returned
to their own land” (2 K 3 27). This appears to
indicate that the Israelites had to give up their
purpose to fasten the yoke of bondage again upon
Mesha' and that they returned empty-handed to


the high place upon which the monu-,


Ashtor- .


their own land. But this fortunate result for Moab
was due to the favor of Chemosh, and in particular
to the human sacrifice by which he was propitiated.

If we find in these representations of Chemosh in
the OT narrative and in Mesha*‘’s inscription a

striking similarity to the Heb concep-
9. Ethical tion of Jeh, we cannot fail to notice
Contrast the lack of the higher moral and
spiritual elements supplied to the
religion of Israel by the prophets and indeed from
Moses and Abraham downward. ‘“Chemosh,”
says W. Baudissin, ‘‘is indeed the ruler of his people
whom he protects as Yahweh the Israelites, whom
he chastises in his indignation, and from whom he
accepts horrible propitiatory gifts. But of a God
of grace whose long-suffering leads back even the
erring to Himself, of a Holy God to whom the offer-
ing of a pure and obedient heart is more acceptable
than bloody sacrifices, of such a God as is depicted
in Israel’s prophets and sweet singers there is no
trace in the Moabite picture of Chemosh. While
Mesha‘ is represented as offering up his own son in
accordance with the stern requirements of his re-
ligion, OT law-givers and prophets from the be-
ginning condemned human sacrifice”? (RE, art.
“Kemosh”’).

Literature.—RE’, art. “Kemosh"’; Cooke, Tezi-Book
of North-Semitic Inscriptions, ‘‘ Moabite Stone,"’ 1-14; W.
Robertson Smith, Prophets of Israel, 49 ff; Sayce, HCM,
364 ff.

T. Nicou

CHENAANAH, ké-na’a-na (73923, kena‘dnah,
fem. form of “Canaan,”’ though others explain it as
“toward Canaan’’): The name of two men:

(1) The fourth-named of the seven sons of Bil-
ham, son of Jediael, of the tribe of Benjamin, a
leading warrior in the time of David (1 Ch 7 10).

(2) Father of the false prophet Zedekiah, who
encouraged Ahab against Micaiah (1 K 22 11.24;
2 Ch 18 10.23).


CHENANI, ké-na’ni (933, kenani, “planted’’):
One of the names mentioned in Neh 9 4, in con-
nection with the constitution of “congregation.”
If the names represent houses or families, eight
Levitical houses probably sang some well-known
psalm on this occasion. If they are names of indi-
vidual representatives, they were probably deputed
to recite or chant some special prayer in order to
lead the worship of the people.


CHENANIAH, ken-a-ni’a (179522, kenanyahi,
and "322, kenanyah, lit. “established by God”):
Chief of the Levites who was over “‘the songs,” or
“the carrying” (viz. “of the ark’’) from the house of
Obed-edom to Jerus (1 Ch 15 22.27; 26 29).


CHEPHAR-AMMONI, ké-far-am’6-ni (AV Che-
phar-haammoni; "37a “22, k*phar hd‘amméni;
B, Keherpa kat Movel, Kepheird kat Monet; A, Ka-
pnpapply, Kaphérammin, “village of the Ammon-
ites”): A place in the territory of Benjamin (Josh
18 24). It may be identical with Kefr ‘Ana, a
ruined site about two miles to the N.E. of Bethel.


CHEPHAR-HAAMONI, ké-far-ha-am’6-ni.
CHEPHAR-AMMONI.


CHEPHIRAH, ke-fira (DDN, ha-k*phirah;
B, Kadepé, Kapheird [Josh 9]; A has Chepheird,
B has kat Pepa, kai Pheird [Josh 18)): One of
the cities of the Hivites who by guilé made alliance
with Israel (Josh 9 17). It was in the lot of Ben-
jamin (18 26), and was reoccupied after the return
irom Babylon (Ezr 2 25; Neh 7 29). It is repre-
sented by the modern Kefireh, to thé S.W. of Gibeon,
and N. of Karyat el--Anab. It stands on high
ground, with many ancient remains.


See


603


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Chemosh
Cheruhim


CHERAN, ké’ran (]}9, keran): A Horite clan-
name, occurring in the genealogy of Seir, the Horite
(Gen 36 26), and in the | list in 1 Ch 1 41. Dill-
mann derives it from kar, “a lamb.”


CHERETHITES, ker’é-thits (n>, "20,
keréthim, ha-k*réthi; KedeOl, Cheletht “executioners,”
“life-guardsmen’’): A people in South Pal whose
territory bordered upon that of Judah (1 8 30 14).
Yn ver 16 this land is apparently identified with that
of the Philis. In Ezk 26 16 the Philis and the
Cherethites are threatened together; while in Zeph
2 5 the Cherethites are evidently the dwellers in
“the land of the Philis,” “the inhabitants of the sea-
coast.” LXX in both Ezk and Zeph renders the
name ‘‘Cretans.”” The translators may have been
“guided only by the sound.” But Zeus Cretagenes
in Gaza suggests a connection with the island of
Crete. See, however, Caputor. It may be taken
as certain that the Cherethites were a Philiclan. In
conjunction with the Pelethites they are frequently
named as forming the guard of David (2 S 8 18, etc).
Tt was the custom of many ancient monarchs to have
a guard of foreign mercenaries. W. Ewine


CHERISH, cher’ish (j20, sdkhan; 04m,
thdlpd): Sdkhan, ‘‘to act the friend,” “to be useful,”
is tr4 “cherish” (1 K 1 2.4); thalpd, “to warm,” “‘to
make warm,” “to foster’ (Eph 6 29), said of the
regard the husband should have for his wife, even
as his own flesh which he “nourisheth and cherish-
eth, even as Christ also the church,” and in 1
Thess 2 7, of Paul amongst his converts, “as when a
nurse cherisheth her own children.”


CHERITH, ké’rith, THE BROOK (n> Sm,
nahal ktrith; Kepappovs Xoppa0, Cheimdrrhous Chor-
rhéth): The place where Elijah hid and was miracu-
lously fed, after announcing the drought to Ahab


; ade, tH


Traditional Site of Brook Cherith.


(1 K 17 3). It is described as being “before,”
that is “east,” of Jordan. It cannot therefore be
identified with Wady el-Kelt, to the W. of Jericho.
The retreat must be sought in some recess of the
Gilead uplands with which doubtless Elijah had been
familiar in his earlier days.


CHERUB, ké’rub (2173, keriibh; XKepouB, Che-
rotib, Xapot®, Charoub): A place in Babylonia from
which people whose genealogies had fallen into con-
fusion went up at the return from exile (Ezr 2 59;
Neh 7 61); unidentified. In 1 Esd 5 36 we read
“Charaathalan leading them, and Allar,”’ a phrase
that seems to have arisen through confusion of the
names in the passages cited above.


CHERUBIC, che-ré0’bik, FORMS IN THE CON-
STELLATIONS. Sce Astronomy.


CHERUBIM, cher'ti-bim, cher’66-bim (O°2772,
Kribhim, pl. of cherub, 3793, k*ribh): Through
the influence of the Sept, “cherubim” was used in
the earlier Eng. VSS, also as a sing., hence the pl.
was made to sound ‘“cherubims.” The etymology
of the word cannot be ascertained.

In Gen 3 24 the cherubim are placed by God,
after the expulsion of Adam from the garden of

Eden, at the east thereof, together
1. As with the flaming sword “to keep the
Guardians way of the tree of life.’ In their
of Paradise function as guardians of Paradise the

cherubim bear an analogy to the
winged bulls and lions of Babylonia and Assyria,
colossal figures with human faces standing guard
at the entrance of temples (and palaces), just as
in Egypt the approaches to the sanctuaries are
guarded by sphinxes. But the Bab colossi go by
the name of lamassu, or shedu; no designation at
all approaching the Heb k‘rébh has so far been
found in the Assyr language. Nor are thus named
the winged figures, half human and half animal,
which in Bab and Pers art are found on both sides
of the “sacred tree.” Thus a Bab origin of the
Heb cherubim is neither proved nor disproved. If
we look for further analogies which, of course, do
not indicate a borrowing on the part of the He-
brews, we may mention the fabulous griffins (ypdres,
gripes), usually represented as having the heads
and wings of an eagle and the body and hind quar-
ters of a lion; they were believed by the Greeks to
inhabit Scythia, and to keep jealous watch over the
gold of that country.

If we read between the lines of the Paradise
account in Gen (cf 3 8), the garden of Eden, the

primeval abode of man, reveals itself


2. The as more than that: it was apparently
Garden as the dwelling-place of God. In the
the Abode polytheistic story of the creation of


of the Gods the world and early life of man, which,

while in several respects analogous (cf
3 22), is devoid of the more spiritual notions of
Hebraism, the garden was the abode of the gods
who alone had access to the tree of life from the
fruit of which they derived theirimmortality. Adam,
before the fall, is conceived as a superhuman being;
for while he is forbidden to taste of the fruit of the
tree of knowledge, the way to immortality is open
to him; for it is only after transgressing the Divine
command that he merits death and becomes mortal.
The choice of immortal innocence and mortal knowl-
edge lay before him; he elected death with knowl-
edge.
The mythical elements of the Paradise story are
still more patent in Ezk 28 13 ff, where the fall of

the king of Tyre is likened to that of


3. The primeval man. The garden issituated
Cherubim on a holy mountain of Elohim(=God
as Attend- to Ezekiel, but gods in the primitive
ants of the source), the ‘mountain of assembly’ of
Deity Isa 14 13, high above the stars in the


recesses of the North. Itis a wonderful
place, adorned with all manner of precious stones,
There man, perfect from the day he was created,
resplendent with beauty, excelling in wisdom, walks


Cherubim
Chicken


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


604


among the fiery stones, like a cherub with out-
stretched wings. The cherubs are apparently the
attendants of the Deity, beauteous angels, of whom
man was to be one: but he fell from glory and was
hurled from the sanctuary which he had polluted.
Some of the angelic attendants of the Deity within
are placed in Gen without, to do service as guardians

of the unapproachable holy garden.
As attendants of God, they bear the throne upon
which He descends from His high abode. Thus
in the description of a theophany in


4. As Ps 18, we read:

Bearers “‘He bowed the heavens also,and came down;
of the And thick darkness was under his feet.
Throne And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly;


Yea, he soared upon the wings of the wind”’

(vs 9 and 10).
Hence the Lord, or, as the fuller title goes, the Lord
of Hosts, is repeatedly styled ‘‘He that sitteth
[throned] above the cherubim” (Ps 80 1; 99 1; 1S
4 4, and elsewhere). There is certainly no trace
here of bull figures: bulls do not fly. The under-
lying conception is, it seems, rather that of the storm
cloud. Cf Ps 104 3:

““Who maketh the clouds his chariot;
Who walketh upon the wings of the wind.”’

The Heb for “chariot”? is 2157), r°khiibh, a sort of
inverted ktribh.

But the function of the cherubim as bearers and
movers of the Divine throne is brought out most
clearly in the vision of Ezekiel (ch 1,


5. Inthe with which cf ch 10). In ch 1 the
Vision of | prophet designates them as “‘living
_ Ezekiel creatures” (hayydth); but upon hearing


God’s words addressed to the ‘‘man
clothed in linen” (10 2) he perceives that the
living creatures which he saw in the first vision
were cherubim (ver 20); hence in 9 3 the chariot
or throne, from which the glory of God went up,
is spoken of asaccherub. The following is a descrip-
tion in detail of the cherubim as seen by Ezekiel.
They are represented as four living creatures, each
with four faces, man, lion, ox (replaced in the ||
ch by cherub), and eagle (1 10; 10 14), having the
figure and hands of men (1 5.8), and the feet of
calves (ver 7). Each has four wings, two of which
are stretched upward (ver 11), meeting above
and sustaining the “firmament,” that is, the bottom
of the Divine throne (1 22; 10 1), while two are
stretched downward, conformable the one to the
other, so as to cover their bodies (1 11.23). In
appearance, the living creatures resemble coals of
fire (cf 10 2.6f, where the “man clothed in linen”
is bidden fill both his hands with coals of fire from
between the cherubim), burning like torches, the
fire flashing up and down among the creatures, a
bright fire out of which lightning goes forth (1 18).
Thus the creatures run and vanish as the appear-
ance of a flash of lightning (ver 14). The cherubim
do not turn as they change direction, but always
go straight forward (1 9.17; 10 11), as do the wheels
of the cherubic chariot with rings full of eyes round
about (1 18; 1012). The cherubim represent
the spirit, or will, in the wheels: at the direction
of the spirit, the wheels are lifted up from the
bottom and the chariot moves upward (1 191;
10 16f). The cherubim are thus the moving force
of the vehicle.
Ezekiel’s cherubim are clearly related to the
seraphim in Isaiah’s inaugural vision (Isa 6). Like
the cherubim, the seraphim are the
6. Relation attendants on God as He is seated
to Seraphim upon a throne high and exalted; they
and Other are also winged creatures: with twain
Angels they cover their faces, and with twain
they cover their feet, and with twain
they fly. Like the Levites in the sanctuary be-


low, they sing a hymn of adoration: ‘Holy, holy,
holy, is Jeh of hosts: the whole earth is full of his
glory.” In the Book of Enoch, the cherubim,
seraphim, and ophannim (wheels), and all the
angels of power constitute the “host of God,” the
guardians of His throne, the singers of praise
ascribing blessedness to “the Lord of Spirits,” with
the archangel Gabriel at their head (see 20 7;
40; 61 10f; 71 7). And so in the Jewish daily
liturgy the seraphim, ophannim, and “living crea-
tures” constitute the heavenly choir who, the elect
ministers of the Living God, ready to do the will
of their maker with trembling, intone in sweet
harmony the Thrice-holy. In the Talm, the cheru-
bim are represented as having the likeness of
youths (with afanciful etymology, 277-++3, k°+-rabh,
“like a youth’; Sukk 5b; Hag 13b), while, accord-
ing to the Midr, they have no definite shape, but
appear indifferently as men or women, or as spirits
and angelic beings (Gen rabbd’ 21).
The ‘four living creatures’ of Rev 4 6 ff are
clearly modeled upon Ezekiel, with supplementary
: touches from Isaiah. Full of eyes
7. In Rev 4 before and behind, they are in the
midst of the throne, and round about
it. One resembles a lion, the other a calf, and the
third a man, and the fourth a flying eagle. Hach
of the creatures has six wings. ‘They have no
rest day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, is the
Lord God, the Almighty, who was and who is and
who is to come.”
In the temple of Solomon, two gigantic cherubic
images of olive-wood plated with gold, ten cubits high,
stood in the innermost sanctuary (the


8. Orna- d*bhir) facing the door, whose wings,
mental five cubits each, extended, two of them
Cherubim meeting in the middle of the room to
in the constitute the throne, while two ex-
Temple of tended to the walls (1 K 6 23-28;
Solomon 8 6.7; 2 Ch 3 10-138; 57.8). The


Chronicler represents them as the
chariot of the Lord (1 Ch 28 18). There were also
images of the cherubim carved on the gold-plated
cedar planks which constituted the inner walls of the
temple, and upon the olive-wood doors (1 K 6 29.35;
2 Ch 8 7); also on the bases of the portable lavers,
interchanging with lions and oxen (1 K 7 29-36).
According to the Chronicler, they were also woven
in the veil of the Holy of Holies (2 Ch 3 14).

Ezekiel represents the inner walls of the temple
as carved with alternating palm trees and cherubim,
each with two faces, the lion looking


9. In the on one side, the man on the other
Temple of (Ezk 41 18-25).
Ezekiel In the Tabernacle, there were two


cherubim of solid gold upon the golden

slab of the “lid,” or “mercy-seat,” facing each
other, with wings outstretched above, so as. to con-
stitute a throne on which the glory of

10. In the the Lord appeared, and from which He
Tabernacle spake (Ex 25 18-22; 37 7-9; Nu 7
t 89; He 9 5). There were also cheru-
bim woven into the texture of the inner curtain of
the Tabernacle and the veil (Ex 26 1.31; 36 8.35).
There were no cherubim in the temple of Herod, but
the walls were painted with figures of them (see Talm
Yéma’ 54a). In the times of Jos no one knew what
a Scriptural cherubim looked like (Ant, VIII, iii,


LiteratureE.—BDB, s.v.; KAT, 529 f, and refer-
ences; commentaries on Gen and Ezk.


Max L. Marcous
CHERUBIM. The cherubic forms in the con-
stellation figures. See Astronomy, IT, 8.


CHESALON, kes‘a-lon (J1503, kesalon; Xac-
Adv, Chaslén, Xavarav, Chasalén): One of the cities


605


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Cherubim
Chicken


on the N. boundary of Judah (Josh 15 10). In
the 4th cent. it was a ‘very large village.” It is
now Keslé, 2,087 ft. above sea-level, a small village
perched on a mountain ridge to the S. of Wady el
Humar. See PEF, III, 25, 26; Sh XVII.


CHESED, ké’sed, kes'ed (OD, kasdim;
Xdoflas, Chdszad): One of the sons of Nahor and
Mileah (Gen 22 22); was probably the father of
the Casdim. The early Bab form Ka&du appears in
Assyr as Kaldu or KaldQ. EV follows the Assyr
and Gr style of writing the name and uses Chaldees
or Chaldaeans instead of Casdim. The Chaldaeans
dwelt in the lower valley of the Euphrates, at the
head of the Pers Gulf. Abram came from Ur of
the Chaldees (Gen 11 28.31; 15 7; Neh 9 7). In
Job 1 17 the Casdim are described as invading the
land of Uz, the eldest brother of Chesed (Gen 22
21.22). In the days of Nebuchadrezzar the Casdim
overran Syria and Pal and carried the people of
Judah in successive deportations into captivity (2 K
24.1f10ff; 26 1ff). In Dnl 2 2.5 the Casita
are named with the magicians and astrologers as a
learned class, skilled in interpretations. Casdim is
sometimes used in Heb for the land of Chaldaea
(Ezk 28 15f; 11 24). Jon Ricuarp Samprry


CHESIL, ké’sil, kes’il (703, kegil; A, Xacelp,
Chaseir): A town in the extreme S. of Judah named
with Eltolad, Hormah and Ziklag (Josh 15 30).
The name does not occur again. In Josh 19 4 it
is replaced by Bethul (LXX Ba:6#A, Baithél), and
in 1 Ch 4 30 by Bethuel. “Chesil” may have
arisen from a misreading of the text.

CHESNOUT, ches’nut. See Caestnut.

CHEST, chest (78, ’dran, O°T22, g*ndzim;
KiBords, kibdtés):

(1) The ark of the covenant in OT is invariably
denoted by the word ’arén, elsewhere rendered AV
and RV “chest.” See Arx.

(2) ’Arén is also the word rendered ‘‘coffin” (Gen
60 26: “and he was put in a coffin in E.”). See
CorFIn.

(3) In K and Ch (2 K 12 9.10; 2 Ch 24 8.10.
11) ’arén stands uniformly for a money chest. It
is the “chest” that Jehoiada, the priest, placed in
the court “beside the altar” and “bored a hole in
the lid of” that the priests might “put therein all
the money that was brought into the house of Jeh”
(2 K 12 9); and “the chest” that King Joash com-
manded to be made and set ‘without at the gate of
the house of Jeh” to receive ‘‘the tax that Moses the
servant of God laid upon Israel’’ (2 Ch 24 8.10.11).
One feature is common to the thing meant in all
these applications—the c. was rectangular in shape,
and, most probably in every instance, made of wood.

(4) Jos (Ant, VI, 1.2) uses the equivalent of the
word to denote the “coffer” (1S 6 8ff EV), or
small chest, in which the princes of Philistia de-
posited the gold mice.

(5) In NT times the “chests” that were pro-
vided in the court of the women, in the temple of
Herod, to receive the various kinds of money gifts
had the exceptional shape of a trumpet Gif Sheka-
lim, vi.5 may be trusted)—wide at the bottom and
gradually narrowing toward the top, hence called
MDW, shopharath. It was into these that the
Master was watching the multitude casting in their
money when He saw the poor widow cast in her two
mites (Mk 12 41.42). Lutes

(6) In Ezk 27 24, where the prophet is giving
an inventory of the merchandise of Tyre, another
word entirely is used (g¢ndzim), and it is rendered
in AV and RV “chests” (“chests of rich apparel,


bound with cords and made of cedar”). Accord-
ing to Cornill, Davidson, Smend and others this
rendering is without sufficieut support (see DB and
comm. in loc.). Gso. B. Eacnur


CHESTNUT, chesnut, TREE. See Puanze TREE.


CHESULLOTH, ke-sul’éth (mibeaa, ha-k¢gul-
lath; B, Xacadd6, Chasaldth, A, ’Axeradd6, Ache-
saléth): A town on the border of Zebulun (Josh
19 18), the same as Chisloth-tabor (19 12). It is
represented by the modern village Iksa@l on the
non edge of Esdraelon, cir 3 miles W. of Mt.

‘abor.


CHETH, khath. See Hera.


CHETTIIM, ket’i-im, ket-’im (O°MD, kitttm).
See Kirrim.


CHEW, chéo, chi, CUD (773 M92, mataleh
gérah, lit. “bringing up” [ARVin], i.e. “chewing the
cud,” from gdrar, “to roll,” “ruminate”’): One of
the marks of cleanliness, in the sense of fitness for
food, of a quadruped, given in Lev 11 3 and Dt
14 6, is the chewing of the cud. Among the ani-
mals considered clean are therefore included the
ox, the sheep, the goat, the hart, the gazelle, the
roebuck, the wild goat, the pygarg, the antelope
and the chamois. Several of the forbidden animals
are expressly named in the passages, e.g. the camel,
the rock-badger, the hare and the swine. In addi-
tion to the distinctions between clean and unclean
animals mentioned in the Bible, the Talm points
out that the clean animals have no upper teeth,
that their horns are either forked, or if not forked
they are clear of splinters, notched with scales and
round, and that certain portions of the meat of
clean animals tear lengthwise as well as across.
Many theories have been advanced as to the reasons
for the distinctions with regard to the chewing of the
cud and the cloven hoof. See Jew Enc, s.v.
“Clean.” The most obvious is that ruminating ani-
mals and animals without claws were apparently
cleaner-feeding animals than the others.

NatHan Isaacs

CHEZIB, ké’zib. See Acuzip (1).


CHICKEN, chik’’n, chik’in (AS cicen or cfcen;
Lat Gallus ferrugineus; adexrpvdv, alekiruén, masc.
and fem.): A barnyard fowl of any age. The
record is to be found in the books of the disciples,
but Jesus is responsible for the only direct mention
of chickens in the Bible. Mt 23 37, contains this:
“OQ Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killeth the prophets,
and stoneth them that are sent unto her! how often
would I have gathered thy children together, even
as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings,
and ye would not!” Luke’s version of the same
scene says: ‘Even as a hen gathereth her own
brood under her wings” (13 34). There is no
reference to chickens in the OT sufficiently clear to
specify our common domestic bird. The many
references to “fatted fowl’’ in these older records,
in accordance with the text and the history of the
other nations, were pigeons, guineas, ducks, geese
andswans. The importation of peafowl by Solomon
is mentioned. The cock and hen are distinctive
birds and would have been equally a marvel worth
recording had they been introduced at that time.
From the history of the bird in other countries it
is a safe estimate to place their entrance into Pal
between five and six hundred years BC. That
would allow sufficient time for them to increase and
spread until they would be well known and common
snough to be used effectively in the ministry of
Jesus Christ. Every historical fact and indication


Chide
Children of Eden THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


606


points to the capture and domestication of the
red jungle fowl in Burmah. The Chinese records
prove that they first secured imported fowl from
the West in 1400 BC. Their use for food dated
from 1200 to 800 BC, in the Book of Manu, but it
was specified that only those that ran wild were to
be eaten. From these countries they were im-
ported to Greece and Italy, and from there carried
south into Pal. Homer (A 10; cf also alektruén,
P 602) names a man Cock, aléktér, which seems
to indicate that he knew the bird. Pindar gives
them sight mention; Aristophanes wrote of them
as ‘Pers birds,” which indicates that they worked
their way westward by importation. I cannot find
them in the records of Aristotle, but Aristophanes
advanced the idea that not the gods, but the birds
were rulers of men in ancient times, and compared
the comb of the cock with the crown of a king, and
pointed out that when he ‘merely crows at dawn
all jump up to their work” (Aves, 489-90). They
were common in Italy in the days of Pliny, who was
ten years old at the time of the crucifixion of Christ.
Pliny gave many rules for raising chickens, proving
that much was known of their habits in his time.
Yet so credulons was he and so saturated with
superstition, that, mixed with his instructions for
preserving eggs, brooding and raising chickens, is
the statement that on account of the fighting power
of the cocks the lions feared them. He wrote that
a man named Galerius in the time of the consuls,
Lepidus and Catulus, owned a barnyard fowl that
spoke. He names Lenius Strabo as the first man
to devise a “coupe” to keep fowl in and ‘“‘cram”
them to fatness. He gave the laws governing the
use of fowl at table and recorded that in Egypt
eggs were hatched in manure beds, which is conclu-
sive proof that birds had been carried across the
Mediterranean several cents. previous. The records
of Babylon, 600 BC, contain figures undoubtedly
intended for cocks, and they were reproduced in
marble in Lycia at that time. In all these repro-
ductions the birds have the drooping tail of the wild,
and there is no record of the date at which they


erected the tail, lifted the head and assumed the


upright bearing of today.
GENE STRATTON-PORTER
CHIDE, chid: Only in the OT, translating Heb
3", ribh, a word which is more frequently rendered
“strive.” Since in Gen 31 36; Jgs 8 1; Ps 108
9, the strife is one of words, it means in these pas-
sages, ‘‘scold,” or “sharply censure,” and is applied
either to mutinons protests and reproaches of in-
feriors to a superior, or, as in the last of these pas-
sages, to rebukes administered by a superior to
inferiors.


CHIDON, ki’don, THE THRESHING-FLOOR
OF (77> 73, goren kidhon; LXX B, omits;
A has Keds, Cheilé): The place where Ue per-
ished because he touched the ark (1 Ch 18 9).
In 2S 6 6 it is called the threshing-floor of Na-
chon. No name resembling either of these has
been discovered.


CHIEF, chéf: The Eng. word isin AV of OT the
tr of some 17 different Heb words, most frequently
of ré’sh, “head,” sar, “prince,” and ré’shith, “be-
ginning. The principal changes made by RV are:
(1) Heb béth ’abh, “house of a father,” being recog-
nized as a technical term denoting a subdivision
of a tribe, ré’sh is rendered lit. “head,” when it
occurs in connection with this phrase, so that ‘chief
fathers” (Num 31 26) and “chief of the fathers”
(Ezr 15) become “heads of fathers’ houses’;
(2) Heb ndghidh and nds?’ are more accurately tr
“prince” in such passages as 1 Ch 5 2; Nu 8 32;
(3) the misinterpretations which brought about the


%


tr “chief” for *agiltm, “corners,”’ Isa 41 9, and for
ma‘dleh, “ascent,” in 2 Ch 32 33, are corrected.

In the NT “chief” i is in, most of its appearances
the tr of Gr préios, “first”; the RV reads “first” for
AV “chief,” “chiefest, ” in Mt 20 27; Mk 10 44;
Acts 16 12. The reading i in the latter passage is a
difficult one, but the AV “Philippi, which is the
chief city of that part of Macedonia,” seems to
imply a political authority which Philippi did not
possess; RV “a city of Macedonia, the first of the
district.” Gr drchon, “prince,” “ruler,” is rendered
by AV “chief,” by RV “prince,” in Lk 11 15; AV
“chief Pharisees,’ RV “rulers of the Pharisees,” in
Lk 14 1.

The original meaning of “chief” having been
weakened, the comparative and superlative were
admitted into English, the latter only appearing in
AV or RV: 15 2 29; Cant 5 10; 2 Cor 11 5, etc.

On “chief of Asia” (Acts 19 31 AV) see ASIARCH,

F, K. Farr

CHIEF FRIENDS, GOOD, MEN. See Frienps,

Cur; Goon, Carer; Carer.


CHIEF MUSICIAN, mi-zish’an.


CHIEF SEATS, chéf séts (mpwroxaeSpla, prd-
tokathedria): It was one of the reproaches urged
by Our Lord against the scribes and Pharisees that
they loved the chief seats in the synagogues (Mt
23 6; Mk 12 39; Lk 11 43; 20 46). These were
special seats set in front of the ark containing the
Scriptures and of the reader’s platform, and facing
the congregation. They were specially reserved for
those who were held in the highest honor in the con-
gregation. There were seventy-one such seats in
the great synagogue of Alexandria, which were
occupied by the members of the great Council in
that city (see SyNaGoGuE).

J. Macartney WiLson

CHILD, child, CHILDREN, chil’dren (j2, bén,
“son,” mene yeledh, “child”, "Wi, na‘ar, “lad”;
téxvov, téknon, mwaSlov, paidion): The Hebrews
regarded the presence of children in the family as
a mark of Divine favor and greatly to be desired
(Gen 15 2; 30 1; 18 111.20; Ps 127 3; Lk 1
7.28). The birth of a male child was esp. a cause
for rejoicing (Ps 128 3, Heb); more men, more de-
fenders for the tribe. If there were no sons born
to a household, that family or branch became lost.
If the wife proved childless, other wife or wives
might be added to the family (Gen 16 f). Further,
each Jewish mother, at least in later times, hoped


See ASAPH.


that her son might prove to be the Messiah. ‘The


custom of Levirate marriage, which was not limited
to the Heb people, rested on the principle that if a
man died childless his brother should marry his
widow, the children of such union being considered
as belonging to the brother whose name and line
were thus preserved from extinction (Dt 25 5;
Gen 88 26; Mt 22 24).

Children were sometimes dedicated to God, even
before their birth (1 5 111). Names often were
significant: Moses (Ex 2 10); Samuel (1 8 1 20);
Ichabod (4 21; cf Gen 30) (see Proper Names).
The firstborn son belonged to God (Nu 8 44 ff).
The ceremony of redeeming the firstborn occurred
on the thirtieth day. Friends of the family were
invited to a feast, the rabbi also being present.
The child was placed in the hands of the priest.
The father carried some gold or silver in a cup or
vessel. The priest asked the mother whether this
was her firstborn, and, on being answered in the
affirmative, claimed the child as Jehovah’s. The
father offered the redemption money, which was
accepted in exchange for the child (cf 1 Pet 1 18).
See Frrstporn. Other stages in the life of the
child were celebrated with fitting ceremonies. In


607


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Chide


Children of Eden


the fourth year, in Pal, on the second day of the
Passover occurred the ceremony of the first cutting
of the boy’s hair, the friends sharing the privilege.
Sometimes, as in the case of the wealthy, the weight,
of the child in currency was given as a donation to
the poor. In common with the custom of other
eastern peoples, male children were circumcised (Gen
17 12), the rite being performed on the eighth day.

Early education was cared for in the home, the
children growing up more or less with the mother
(Prov 6 20; 311; 2 Tim15; 3 14.15), and
the girl continuing with her mother until her mar-
riage. In wealthier families tutors were employed
(1 Ch 27 32). Schools for children are first. men-
tioned by Jos (Ant, XV, x, 5). According to the
Talm the first school for children was established
about 100 BC, but in the time of Jesus such schools
were common. Children were taught to read and
to write even in families of moderate means, these
arts being widely diffused as early as 600 BC, if not
earlier (Isa 8 1; 1019). Great stress was laid
on the Torah, i.e. the law of Moses. Boys were
trained also in farming, the tending of cattle, and
in the trades. The religious training of the boy
began in his fourth year, as soon as he could speak
distinctly. The religious life of the girl also began
early. In later times at least children took part
in the Sabbath and Passover festivals and
attended synagogue and school regularly.

Children were subject to the father (Neh-5 5
marks the extreme), who in turn was bound to
protect them, though he himself had the power of
life and death (Lev 18 21; 20 2 ff). Respect for
and obedience to parents were stoutly upheld by
public opinion (Ex 20 12; Dt 6 16; cf Prov 6 20;
Mic 7 6; Dt 21 18-21; Ex 21 15).

Both the OT and NT afford abundant evidence
of the strength of the bond that bound the Heb
family together (Gen 21 16; 2S 18 33; 1K 38
23 ff; 2K 419; Isa 84; Job 295; Mt 19
13; 20 20; Mk 9 24; Lk 2 48; Jn 4 47; He
213; 11 23). The gift of a son from Jeh was the
height of joy; the loss of a child marked the depth
of woe. A hint occurs in the custom of naming a
man as the father of his firstborn son (HDB, I, 382),
or even the use of the father’s name as a surname
(Bar-jonah, Bartimaeus) and such continues in
Syria at the present day. This idea is further
instanced in the use, in both OT and NT, of the
terms to express the relation between God and
men (Ex 4 22; Dt 14 1; 32 6; Jer 3 4; Zec 12
10; Mal 1 6). See also Famity ReLATIONSHIPS;
Sons.


Lirerature.—Benzinger, Hebrdische Archdologie, 2d
ed, 1907, 112-23; for rabbinical lore, Friedenberg in
Jew Enc, IV, 27 f.


oys


W. N. Stearns

Figurative: Child is the EV rendering of the Gr
réxvov, téknon. , The corresponding Heb words
(JB, bén, and ay yeledh, are usually tré “son,”
but they have practically the same significance in
the fig. use of the term. Child is used fig. to
describe: ,

(1) An affectionate greeting. Jesus addressed
the sick of the palsy as “child” (Mk 2 5 RVm).

(2) The disciples, or followers, of a teacher.
Jesus addressed His disciples as children (Mk 10
24). Paul referred to Timothy as his child (1 Tim
1 2), and also to Onesimus (Philem ver 10). John
also designated the disciples to whom he was writing
as his children (2 Jn ver 4). b
“children” or “sons” is common in the OT (see
1K 20 35; 2K 23.5.7; 4 38). As a term of
special endearment, disciples are sometimes called
‘Kittle children” (rexvle, teknia). Jesus thus ad-
dressed His disciples when He was speaking about
His departure (Jn 13 33). Paul thus addressed


The same use of,


the Galatians (Gal 4 19), and that was a favorite
expression with John (see 1 Jn 2 1; 4 4; 5 21).
A term that was even more endearing was paidia,
which means “little ones” or “babes.” Jesus used
this term once in addressing His disciples after His
resurrection (Jn 21 5), and John also used this
term occasionally in saluting those to whom he was
writing (1 Jn 2 18).

(3) Those who belong to God. Children of God
is a common expression in both the OT and the NT.
It is based on the relation between parents and
children, and in general describes God’s affection
for His own, and their dependence upon Him, and
moral likeness to Him. The term is sometimes
used of those who are disloyal to God, and they are
designated as “rebellious children” (see Isa 30 1).
See CHILDREN orf Gop.

(4) Those who belong to the devil. Those who
are like the devil in thought and action are desig-
nated as “children of the devil” (1 Jn 3 10).

(5) One’s relation to something to which he
belongs, or by which he is dominated in his affection
for it. Thus we have (a) the children of a city or
country (see Jer 2 16; Mt 23 37), and this des-
ignates those who belong to that particular city or
country; (b) children of wisdom (Mt 11 19 AV;
Lk 7 35), and these are the ones whose lives are
dominated by wisdom. WH adopted érgon for
teknon in Mt 11 19, but this seems to be without
any good reason; (c) children of obedience (1 Pet
1 14), and these are the ones who are eager to


obey; (d) children of light (Eph 5 8), and this


fesenetes those whose souls are illumined by the
aight.

(6) Those who are liable to some particular fate.
Thus we have (a) children of cursing, or those who
are exposed to cursing (2 Pet 2 14), and (bd)
children of wrath or those who are exposed to
wrath (Eph 2 3).

(7) Moral likeness or spiritual kinship (Gal 3 7
AV; cf Jn 8 39; ‘‘the children of Abraham”).
See secs. (3), (4). A. W. Fortune


CHILD-BEARING, child’bar-ing: Only in 1 Tim
2 15: “She shall be saved through her [m ‘‘the’’]
child-bearing” (84 tijs texvoyovlas, did tés tek-
nogonias). The reference is to the calling of woman
as wife and mother, as her ordinary lot in life, and
to the anxieties, pains and perils of maternity, as
the culmination and representation of the penalties
woman has incurred because of the Fall (Gen 3 16).
“She shall be saved by keeping faithfully and simply
to her allotted sphere as wife and mother” (Dum-
melow). The preposition dia is not used here
instrumentally, as though child-bearing were a
means of her salvation, but locally, as in 1 Cor 3
15, ‘saved so as through fire,’ where life is saved
by rushing through the flames. The explanation
by reference to the incarnation, with an appeal to
Gal 4 4, favored by Ellicott and_ others, seems
very mechanical. H. E. Jacors


CHILDHOOD, child’hdéd, GOSPELS OF THE.
See APocRYPHAL GOSPELS.


CHILDREN OF EDEN, é'd’n (71¥ "23, bené
‘edhen): In 2 K 19 12; Isa 37 12 “the children of
Eden that were in Telassar’’ are mentioned in con-
nection with “Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph”’ as
having been destroyed by the Assyrians who were
before the time of Sennacherib. The expression,
“the c. of E. that were in T.,’”’ undoubtedly referred
to a tribe which inhabited a region of which Telas-
sar was the center. Telassar means “the hill of
Asshur” and, according to Schrader, it was a name
that might have been given to any place where a
temple had been built to Asshur. Inasmuch as


Children of God THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


608


Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph were in Mesopo-
tamia it would seem probable‘ that “the c. of E.
that were in T.” belonged to the same locality.
The “ec. cf E.” is quite probably to be identified
with the Bit ‘Adini of the inscriptions and this
referred to a district on the middle Euphrates.
According to the inscriptions Gezan, Haran,
Rezeph, and Bit ‘Adini were destroyed by Sen-
nacherib’s forefathers, and this is in accord with the
account in 2 K and Isa.

The “Eden” of Ezk 27 23 is usually taken as
the name of a place in Mescpotamia with which
Tyre had commercial relations, and probably belongs
to the region of “‘the c. of E.,” discussed above.

Some writers think the “Beth-eden” of Am 1 5
RVm [ARV “Aven’’] is to be identified with the
Bii ‘Adini of the inscripticns and hence with “the
c. cf E.,” but this is doubtful. This was perhaps
in Syria in the neighborhced of Damascus.


A, W. Fortune
CHILDREN OF GOD:


Introduction: Meaning of Terms
I. OT Teacuine "
1. Mythological Survivals
2. Created Sonship
8. Israel's Collective Covenant Sonship
4. Individual and Personal Relation
5. Universalizing the Idea
II. NT Teacuino
1. Physical and Limited Sonship Disappears
2. As Religious Experience, or Psychological Fact
(1) Filial Consciousness of Jesus
(2) Communicated to Men
. As Moral Condition, or Ethical Fact
. As State of Being, or Ontological Fact
(1) Essence of Christ's Sonship
(2) And of Men’s
5. As Relation to God, or Theological Fact
(1) Eternal Generation
(2) The Work of Grace


Children (Sons and Daughters) of God (133
and DVN mdz, bend and benath ’élohim, lit. “sons
and daughters cf God”; rTéxva God,
tékna theot, and viol cot, huiot
theo): sc AV; but RV translates the
latter Gr phrase more accurately
“sons of God.” Yekna contains the idea of origin
or descent, but also that of personal relation, and is
often used metaphorically of “that intimate and
reciprocal relaticnship formed between men by the
bonds of leve, friendship, trust, just as between
parents and children” (Grimm-Thayer). Huitoi,
too, conveys the ideas of origin, and of personal
relation, but the latter in the fuller form in which it
appears in mature age. “The difference between
huios and teknon appears to be that whereas teknon
denctes the natural relationship of child tc parent,
huios ivaplies in addition to this the recognized status
and legal privileges reserved for sons” (Sanday and
Headlam, cn Rom 8 14). This difference obtains,
however, only in a very general sense.

The above phrases denote the relation in which
men are conceived to stand to Ged, either as de-
riving their being from Him and depending upon
Him, or as standing in that personal relation of
intimate trust and love toward Him which consti-
tutes the psychological fact of sonship. The exact
significance of the expression depends upon the
conception of Ged, and particularly of His Father-
hood, to which it corresponds. It therefore attains
to its full significance only in the NT, and its mean-
ing in the OT differs considerably, even though it
marks stages of development up to the NT idea.

I. OT Teaching.—The most primitive form of
the idea appears in Gen 6 1-4, where the sons of

Ged by marrying the fair daughters of


po


Meaning
of Terms


1. Mytho- men become the fathers of the giants.
logical These were a subordinate order of
Survivals Divine beings or demi-geds, and the


title here may mean ne more, although
it was probably a survival of an earlier idea of the


actual descent of these gods from a higher God.
The idea of a heavenly court where the sons of
God come to present themselves before Jeh is
found in quite late it. (Jcb 1 6; 21; 38 7; Ps
29 1; 89 6). In all these cases the phrase implies
a certain kinship with God and dependence upon
Him on the part of the Divine society arcund Him.
But there is no evidence to show whether the idea
of descent of gods from Ged survived to any extent,
ner is there any indication of a very close personal
relationship. Satan is unsympathetic, if not hostile.
In one obviously polytheistic reference, the term
implies a similarity of appearance (Dnl 3 25). In
a secondary sense the titles ‘“‘gods,’’ and “‘sons of the
Most High” are given tc magistrates, as exercising
Ged’s authority (Ps 82 6).
The idea of creation has taken the place of that of
procreation in the OT, but without losing the sense
ef sonship. ‘Saith Jeh, the Holy One
2. Created of Israel, and his Maker: Askme....
Sonship concerning my scons, and concerning
the work cf my hands” (Isa 45 11).
Israel acknowledges the absclute sovereignty of
God as her Father and Maker (Isa 64 8). Israel’s
Maker is also her Husband, and by inference the
Father of her children (Isa 54 5). Since all Israel
has one Father, and ene Ged created her, the tribes
owe brotherly conduct to one ancther (Mal 2 10).
Jeh upbraids His sons and daughters whom He as
their Father bought, made and established. ‘He
forsook God who made him, and lightly esteemed
the Rock of his salvation. .... Of the Rock that
begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten
God that gave thee birth” (Dt 32 6.15.18 ff). These
passages reveal the transiticn from the idea cf original
creation to that of making and establishing Israel as
anation. All things might be described as children
of God if creation alone brought it to pass, but Is-
rael stands in a unique relation te Ged.
The covenant relation of God with Israel as a
nation is the chief form in which man’s scnship
and God’s fatherhood appear in the


8. Israel’s OT. “Israel is my son, my firstborn”
Collective (Ex 4 22); ‘When Israel was a child,
Covenant then I loved him, and called my son
Sonship ont of Egypt” (Hos 11 1). And to


he children ef Ged invelves the obliga-
tion to be a hely people (Dt 14 1.2). But Israel
has proved unworthy of her status: “I... . have
brought up children, and they have rebelled against
me” (Isa 1 2.4; 301.9). Yet He will have pity
upon them: “for I am a father to Israel, and
Ephraim is my firstborn” (Jer 31 9.20). Israel’s
unworthiness does not abolish the relation on Ged’s
side; she can therefore return tc Him again and
submit to His will (Isa 63 16; 64 8); and His pity
exceeds a mother’s love (Isa 49 15). The filial
relation of Israel to God is summed up and sym-
beolized in a spécial way in the Davidic king: “T.
will be his father, and he shall be my son” (2 8 7
14=1 Ch 17 13; cf 1 Ch 22 10; 28 6; Ps 2 7).
God’s fatherhood te collective Israel necessarily
tends to develop into a personal relation of father
and son between Him and individual


4. Individ- members of the nation. The children
ual and of Israel, whatever their number, shall
Personal _be called “the sons of the living God”
Relation (Hes 110). Jeh’s marriage relation


with Israel as a nation made individual
Israelites His children (Hos 2 19.20; Jer 3 14.22; cf
Isa 60 1; Ezk 16 20.21; 23 37), and God’s owner-
ship of His children, the individual members of the
nation, is asserted (cf Ps 127 3). Chastisement
and pity alike God deals forth as Father to His
children (Dt 1 31; 8 5; Ps 108 18), and these are
intimate personal relations which can only cbtain
between individuals.


609


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Children of God


In another direction the idea of God as the father
of Israel tends to be modified by the inclusion of the
Gentiles. The word “first-born” ‘(in
5. Univer- Ex 4 22 and Jer 31 9.20) may be
salizing the only an emphatic form of expressing
Idea sonship, or it may already suggest
: the possibility of the adoption of the
Gentiles. If that idea is not present in words, it is
an easy and legitimate inference from several pas-
sages, that Gentiles would be admitted some day
into this among the rest of Israel’s privileges (Isa
19 25; 65 1; Zec 14 16).
If, NT Teaching.—As the doctrine of Divine
fatherhood attains its full spiritual and moral sig-
nificance in the NT, so does the
1. Physical experience and idea of sonship. All
and Limited traces of physical descent have dis-
Sonship appeared. Paul’s quotation from a
Disappears heathen poet: ‘For we are algo his off-
Pine spring” (Acts 17 28), whatever its origi-
nal significance, is introduced by the apostle for the
purpose of enforcing the idea of the spiritual kin-
ship of God_and men. The phrase “Son of God”
applied to Christ by the Rom centurion (Mt 27
54; Mk 16 39) may or may not, in his mind, have
involved the idea of physical descent, but its utter-
ance was the effect of an impression of similarity
to the gods, produced by the exhibition of power
attending His death. The idea of creation is as-
sumed in the NT, but generally it is not prominent
in the idea of sonship. The virgin birth of Jesus,
however, may be understood as implying either the
creative activity of the Holy Spirit, or the commu-
nication of a preéxistent Divine being to form a new
human personality, but the latter idea also would
involve creative activity in the physical realm
(ef Lk 3 38: “Adam [son] of God”). The limi-
tations of the OT conception of sonship as national
and collective disappear altogether in the NT;
God is father of all men, and of every man. In
potentiality at least every man and all men are
sons of God. The essence of sonship consists in a
persona} experience and moral likeness which places
man in the most intimate union and communion
with God.

(1) The filial consciousness of Jesus —Divine son-
ship was first realized and made manifest in the con-

sciousness of Jesus (Mt 11 27). For
2. As Re- Him it meant unbroken personal know-
ligious ledge of God and communion with Him,
Experience, and the sense of His love for Him and
or Psycho- of His satisfaction and delight in Him
logical Fact (Mt 3 17; 175; Mk 1 11; 9 7; Lk

3 22; 9 35). Whether the “voice out
of the heavens saying, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased” was objective or not, its
message always dwelt in the filial consciousness of
‘Jesus. The Father’s love was to Him a source of
knowledge and power (Jn 6 20), the reward of His
self-sacrifice (10 17) and the inspiration of His love
for men (16 9). : ae na

Sonship meant for Him His Messianic mission
(Mt 16 16.17). It involved His dependence on the
Father and His obedience to Him (Jn 5 19.30;
8 29), and a resulting confidence in His mission
(5 36; 10 36.37). It filled Him with a sense of
dignity, power and glory which the Father gave
Him, and would yet give in larger measure (Mt
26 63.64; 16 27; Jn 17 5). ;

(2) Communicated to men—Jesus communicated
His own experience of God to men (Jn 14 9) that
they also might know the Father’s love and dwell
in it (Jn 17 26). Through Him and through Him
alone can they become children of God in fact and
in experience (Jn 1 12; 14 6; Mt 1i 27). It is
therefore a distinctively Christian experience and
always involves a relation of faith in Christ and


moral harmony with Him. It differs from His
experience in one essential fact, at least in most
men. It involves an inner change, a change of
feeling and motive, of ideal and attitude, that may
be compared to a new birth (Jn 3 3). Man must
turn and return from disobedience and alienation
through repentance to childlike submission (Lk
16 18-20). It is not the submission of slaves, but
the submission of sons, in which they have liberty
and confidence before God (Gal 4 6), and a heritage
from Him for their possession (Gal 4 6.7; Rom 8
17). It is the liberty of self-realization. As sons
they recognize their kinship with God, and share
his mind and purpose, so that His commands be-
come their pleasure: “For this is the love of God,
that we keep his commandments: and his com-
mandments are not grievous’ (1 Jn 6 3). They
have boldness and access to God (Eph 2 18; 3-12).
With this free union of love with God there comes a
sense of power, of independence of circumstances,
of mastery over the world, and of the possession of
all things necessary which become the heirs of God
(Mt 6 26.32; 7 11). “For whatsoever is begotten
of God overcometh the world” (1 Jn 6 4). They
learn that the whole course and destiny of creation
is for the “revealing of the sons of God” (Rom
8 19.21).
Christ’s sonship involved His moral harmony
with the Father: “I have kept my Father’s com-
mandments, and abide in his love”
3. As Moral (Jn 15 10; 8 53). He accomplished


Condition, the work which the Father gave Him
or Ethical to do (Jn 17 4; 5 19), “becoming
Fact obedient even unto death, yea, the


death of the cross’? (Phil 2 8). And
sonship makes the same demand upon men. The
peacemakers and those who forgive like God are
His children (Mt 6 9.45; Lk 6 35). “For as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, these (and
these only] are sons of God" (Rom 8 14). God
will be Father to the holy (2 Cor 6 18). The test
and mark of the children of God is that they do
righteousness and love the brethren (1 Jn 3 10).
They are blameless and harmless, without blemish,
in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation
(Phil 2 15). Therefore their idea} of life is to be
‘Gmitators of God” and to walk in love even as
Christ did (Eph 5 1). Sonship grows to its con-
summation as the life grows in the likeness of Christ,
and the final destiny of all sons is to be ever like
Him (1 Jn 3 2).

Sonship is properly and primarily a relation, but

it may so dominate and transform the whole of a

man’s life, thought and conduct as to
4. As State become his essential being, the most
of Being, or comprehensive category under which
Ontological all that he is may be summed up.
Fact (1) Essence of sonship in Christ.—

It is so that the NT comprehends the
person of Christ. Everything that He did, He
did.as God’s son, so that He is the Son, always and
ever Son. In the beginning, in the bosom of the
Father, He is the OnLy BecotTen (q.v.) Son (Jn 1
1.18). He is born a Son of God (Lk 1 35). He
begins life in the things of His Father (Lk 2 49).
His whole life is that of the beloved Son (Mt 3 17;
17 5). As Son of God He dies (Mt 26 63; Lk
22 70; Mt 27 40.43; cf Jn 6 18). In His resur-
rection He was declared to be the Son of God with
power (Rom 1 4); as Jesus the Son of God He is
our great high priest in heaven (He 4 14), and in
the glory of His father He will come to judge in the
last day (Mt 16 27).

(2) Men’s sonship—Unlike Him, men’s moral
sonship is neither eternal nor universal. Are
they therefore sons in any sense always and every-
where? All children are heirs of the kingdom of


Children of God THT INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


God and objects of the Father’s care (Lk 18 16;
Mt 18 10). But men may turn away from the
Father and become unworthy to be called His
sons (Lk 15 13.19). They may become children of
the devil (1 Jn 3 10; Jn 8 44), and children of
wrath (Eph 2 3). Then they lose the actuality,
but not the potentiality, of sonship. They have not
the experience or character of sons, but they are
still moral and rational beings made in the image of
God, open to the appeal and influence of His love,
and able to “rise and go to their Father.” They
are objects of God’s love (Jn 15 13; Rom 5 8) and
of His gracious search and seeking (Lk 15 4; Jn 11
52). But they are actual sons only wheu they are
led by the Spirit of God (Rom 8 14); and even so
their sonship will only be consummated in the
resurrection (Rom 8 23; Lk 20 36).

In the relation of father and son, fatherhood is

original and creative. That does not necessarily
mean priority in time.
5. As Rela- (1) Eternal generation.—Origen’s doc-
tion to God, trine of the eternal generation of Christ,
or Theologi- by which is meant that God and Christ
cal Fact always stood in the relation of Father
and Son ¢9 one another, is a just in-
terpretation of the NT idea that the Son ‘was in
the beginning with God” (prés tén Theén). But
Jesus was conscious of His dependence upon the
Father and that His sonship was derived from
Him (Jn § 19.36). Still more manifest is it that
men derive their sonship from God. He made
them for Himself, and whatever in human nature
qualifies men to become sons of God is the free gift
of God. But men in their sin and disobedience
could not come to a knowledge of the Father, had
He not “sent forth his Son... . that we might
receive the adoption of sons’ (Gal 4 4.5): “Be-
hold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed
upon us, that we should be called children of
God” (1 Jn 3 1); “God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten son” (q.v.) who gave
men “the right to become children of God, even
to them that believe on his name” (Jn 3 16; 1 12).
It is not the children of the flesh but the children
of the promise who are children of God (Rom 9 4).
The mere act of birth does not constitute men into
children of God, but His covenant of free grace
must be added. God being essentially Father made
men and the universe, sent His Son and His Spirit,
“for the revealing of the sons of God.” But they
can only know the Father, and realize their sonship
when they respond to His manifestation of fatherly
love, by faith in God and obedience to Him.

(2) The work of grace—The question whether
sonship is natural and universal or conditional upon
grace working through faith, does not admit of a
categorical answer. The alternatives are not strict
antitheses. God does all things as Father. To
endow man with rational and moral nature capable
of his becoming a son was an act of love and grace,
but its whole purpose can be communicated only
in response to faith in Christ. But a natural son-
ship which is not actual is meaningless. A man’s
moral condition and his attitude toward God are
the most essential elements of his nature, for a
man’s nature is just the sum total of his thoughts,
acts and states. If these are hostile or indifferent
to God, there is nothing left that can have the real-
ity or bear the name of son. For if the word son
be used of mere creaturehood and potentiality, that
is to give it a meaning entirely different from NT
usage. All men by nature are potential sons,
because God has made them for sonship and does
all things to win them into their heritage. Men
may be sons of God in a very imperfect and ele-
mentary manner. The sharp transitions of Pauline
and Johannine theology are rather abstract dis-


610


tinctions for thought than actual descriptions of
spiritual processes. But Paul and John also con-
template a growth in souship, “till we all attain
unto the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a fullgrown man, unto
the measure of the stature of the Fuipess of Christ”
ph 4 13). See Sons or Gop.

or lit. and further discussion, see special arts. on
Apoption; Gop; Jesus Curist. T. REEs


CHILDREN OF ISRAEL, iz’ra-el Grniy? "33,
bené yisra@’él): A very common term in both the
OT and the NT, and it refers to the Israelites as
the descendants of a common ancestor, Jacob,


- whose name was changed to Israel (see Gen 32


24-82). It was customary to designate the mem-
bers of the various tribes as the children of the one
from whom the tribe originated (see Nu 1 20-43;
Ezr 2 3-61), and it was natural that the people
who boasted of Israel as their ancestor should be
designated as his children. The first reference to
the descendants of Jacob is found in the account
of the changing of Jacob’s name to Israel, and the
purpose is to connect them with the experience in
Jacob’s life which led to the change in his name:
“Therefore the children of Israel eat not the sinew
of the hip, which is upon the hollow of the thigh,
unto this day: because he touched the hollow of
Jacob’s thigh in the sinew of the hip.” At the
time when this was written “the c. of I.” was a
term that was commonly applied to the Israelites.
In 2 K 17 34 they are called “the children of
Jacob,” and this occurs in connection with the
account of the changing of Jacob’s name to Israel
and is intended to connect them closely with their
father Jacob, who was favored of God.

After a time, it is quite likely that the term
“ec. of I.” lost its peculiar significance and was simply
one of the popular terms designating the inhabitants
of Pal, but at first it was intended to connect these
people with their ancestor Jacob whose name was
changed to Israel. The Jews of the NT times con-
nected themselves with Abraham rather than with
Jacob (see Jn 8 39; Rom 97; Gal 3 7, réxva,
tékna, or viol "ABpadu, huiot Abradm).

A. W. Fortune

CHILDREN OF THE BRIDECHAMBER. See
BRIDECHAMBER, SONS OF THE.


CHILDREN OF THE EAST, ést (O7p "33,
bené kedhem): A term which in a general way desig-
nated the inhabitants of the country E. of Pal.
The Hebrews thought of their own country as
occupying the central place, and of the other parts
of the world in relation to this. They spoke of the
“queen of the south” (Mt 12 42), and of the ‘‘king
of the south” (Dnl 11 5.6). They spoke of people
coming from “the east and the west” and sitting
down with the patriarchs (Mt 8 11).

The term “children of the east’? seems to have
been applied to the inhabitants of any part of the
country E. of Pal. It is stated that Jacob, when
he fled from Esau, ‘‘came to the land of the children
of the east”? (Gen 29 1), and the place to which he
came was Haran in Mesopotamia. In Jer 49 28
the inhabitants of Kedar are called “the children
of the east,” and in later Jewish lit. Kedar is identi-
fied with the Arabs (see Kepar). Job was desig-
nated as “the greatest of all the children of the
east”? (Job 1 3), and the land of Uz was mentioned °
as his home (Job 1 1). While it is impossible abso-
lutely to locate the land of Uz, it must have been
on the edge of the desert which was E. of Pal. The
children of the east seem to have been famous for
their wisdom. It is said that “Solomon’s wisdom
excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east’’
(1 K 4 30), and ‘‘Wise-men from the east”? came to


611


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Children of God
Chios


Jerus seeking the one that was born king of the
Jews (Mt 2 1).

Many of the inhabitants of the east country were
regarded as descending from Abraham (see Gen
25 6), and hence they were related to Israel.

ae _ A.W. Forruns

CHILEAB, kil'é-ab (AN93', kil’abh; Aadouvié,
Dalowid, ‘restraint of father”): A son of David,
born to him at Hebron. His mother was Abigail,
whom David married after the death of her hus-
band Nabal, the Carmelite (2 8 3 3). In the cor-
responding account (1 Ch 3 1) heis called “Daniel,”
the meaning of which name (“God is my judge”)
points to its having been given in order to com-
memorate God’s judgment upon Nabal (1 S 25 39;
cf Gen 30 6). Some suppose that he bore both
names, but the LXX reading here Dalouia (1 Ch
Damniél), and the identity of the last three letters
of the Heb word “‘Chileab” with the first three of
the following word, seems to indicate that the text
of Samuel is corrupt. ' Horace J. Woir


CHILION, kil’i-on Fm>, kilyén, ‘‘pining,” ‘“‘wast-
ing away”): One of the two sons of Elimelech and
Naomi, ‘“‘Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Beth-
lehem-judah” (Ruth 1 2). With his mother and
brother he came into Moab and there both married
Moabitish women, Orpah being the name of Chili-
on’s wife and Ruth that of the wife of Mahlon (4 9.
10). Both died early and Orpah remained in Moab
while Ruth accompanied Naomi back to Bethlehem.
When Boaz married Ruth he “bought all that was
Elimelech’s, and all that was Chilion’s, and Mahlon’s,
of the hand of Naomi” (4 9).  W. L. WaLkrr


CHILMAD, kil’mad (723, kilmadh; Xappév,
Charmén): A city or district mentioned after Sheba
and Asshur as supplying merchandise to Tyre
(Ezk 27 23). By changing m into w (common in
Assyr-Bab) this has been compared with Kal-
wadha near Bagdad (G. Smith, TS BA, 1, 61; De-
litzsch, Paradies, 206), but the identification seems
improbable. Though regarded as the name of a
country in the LXX and the Vulg (Charman;
Chelmad), there is some doubt whether this view of
the word is correct. The Tg substitutes Madhai,
“Media,” and on this account Mez (Stadt Harran,
24) amends to Kél Madhai, “all Media.” The
absence of the copula “and” has caused others to
further modify the vocalization, and by reading
kelimmidh instead of Chilmad, the sense ‘‘Asshur
was as the apprentice of thy trading’ (Kimhi,
Hitzig, Cornill) is obtained, but is not satisfactory.
Probably both text and tr are susceptible of im-
provement. T. G. PIncHEs


CHIMHAM, kim’ham (D792, kimham [2 8 19
37.38] or WHAD, kimhan [28 19 40] or oma,
kemohem (Jer 41 17 Kt.]; this reading, however, may
probably be safely ignored): One of the sons of
Barzillai the Gileadite, who supported David while
the latter was in exile in Mahanaim (2 § 19 37).
After the death of Absalom, Barzillai was invited
to spend the remainder of his life with the king;
but he refused, and sent his son Chimham in his
stead. From the mention of ‘‘the habitation of
Chimham, which is by Beth-lehem” (Jer 41 17 AV),
it has been inferred that Chimham received a grant
of land from David’s patrimony at Bethlehem,
which retained his name for at least four cents.
It has been suggested that his name was probably
Ahinoam (D92°T28 , ’éhind‘am).

‘ Horace J. Woir

CHIMNEY, chim’ni. See House.

CHINNERETH, kin’é-reth (11922, kinnereth
[Dt 3 17; Josh 19 35, etc]) or CHINNEROTH,


kin’é-roth (N73, kindroth; B, Kevepé6, Keneréth,
A, Xeveps®, Chenerdih [Josh 11 2]): Taking the
order in which the towns are mentioned, this city
seems to have lain N. of Rakkath (? Tiberias). It
may have occupied the site of el-Mejdel, at the
S.W. corner of the plain of Gennesaret. From this
city the sea took its OT name (Nu 34 11, etc).


CHIOS, ke’os, ki’os (Xlos, Chios): An island
belonging to Turkey in the Aegaean Sea, S. of
Lesbos, and very near the mainland of Asia Minor.
St. Paul’s vessel passed it on his last voyage to
Jerus (Acts 20 15). The channel here is very
picturesque. From St. Luke’s expression, ‘‘we
came the following day over against Chios,” it has
been conjectured that they were becalmed; more
probably it simply means that, because of the dark
moon, they lay at anchor for the night on the Asian
coast opposite the island (HDB, s.v.). Herod, when
on his way to Agrippa at the Bosphorus, ‘continued
many days at Chios” and conferred many royal
benefactions upon the inhabitants (Jos, Ant, XVI, ii,


2).

The soil is sterile (though well cultivated), the
climate mild. Earthquakes are frequent. In the
mountains (highest 4,000 ft.) beautiful blue marble
with white veins, and excellent potter’s clay, were
quarried in antiquity. In modern times large
quantities of ochre are mined. The chief industry
is the culture of the silkworm, the cocoons being
sent to Lyons. Oranges, lemons, almonds, brandy,
anise, mastich and leather are also exported. The
inhabitants, who are almost entirely Greeks, num-
ber about 60,000. The capital, Castro, has a
population of 15,000. The place where Homer is
said to have collected his pupils around him is still

ointed out to the traveler at the foot of Mt.

pos, near the coast. It is in reality (probably)
a very old sanctuary of Cybele, the Mother of the
Gods. The tragic poet Ion, the historian Theo-
pompus and the sophist Theocritus were natives of
Chios. The Chians were especially famous for their
skill in telling stories, and for their levity. A familiar
proverb says that “it is easier to find a green horse
than a sober-minded Sciot’”’ (Conybeare and Howson,
XX, 549).

The oldest inhabitants of the island were Leleges,
Cretans and Carians, who were conquered by the
Tonians. The latter made Chios one of the most
flourishing states in Ionia. When the Persians
overran Asia Minor and oppressed the Gr colonies,
the Chians showed a Pan-Hellenic spirit. They sur-
rendered, however, to Cyrus in 546 BC. Never-
theless, 46 years later they joined in the rebellion
of Aristagoras against the Persians. In the naval
engagement off the island Lade they fought with
100 ships and displayed great bravery. Again
they fell into the power of Persia; but after the
battle of Mycale (479) the Chians joined the
Athenian confederacy. In 412 they sided with the
Peloponnesians, in the 19th year of the war which
Athens had been waging against Sparta and her
allies. For this act of treason the Athenians dev-
astated the island. At the end of the war the
Chians revolted from Sparta and, after the battle
of Naxos (376), became an ally of Athens once more.
Oppressed now by Athens, as she had been by
Sparta, Chios made an alliance with Thebes in
363 and defended herself successfully against . the
Athenian general, Chares; and in 355 Athens was
forced to recognize the island’s independence.
Later the Chians became friends of the Romans
and in the war with Mithridates were obliged to
surrender their ships to the Pontic king and in
addition pay him 2,000 talents.


In 1307 AD Turkish pirates subjugated and lald
waste the island. The Turks themselves became mas-


Chirp
Choose, Chosen


ters of Chios in 1566. In the war of the Gr revolution
the Chians joined the Greeks (Feh. 1821) but were over-
powered hy the Turks. The Pasha decreed that the
island should be utterly devastated; 23,000 Chians were
massacred and 47,000 sold into slavery. Only 5,000
escaped. A second attempt to regain their freedom was
made in 1827, but met with failure. When _the kingdom
of Greece was established two years later, Chios was not
included. On April 3, 1881, the island was visited by
a terrible earthquake, the city of Castro being almost
entirely destroyed.


LireraturEe.—Conyheare and Howson, The Life and
Epistles of St. Paul; W.M. Ramsay, St. Paul the Travel-
ler; G. H. Gilbert, The Student's Life of Paul (chiefly
concerned with the chronology and order of events in
Paul’s life); Eckenhrecher, Die Insel Chios (1845);
Pauli, id (in the Mitteilungen der Geogr. Gesellschaft in
Hamburg, 1880-81).

J. E. Harry


CHIRP, chérp ("DY , ¢dphaph): “Chirp” occurs
in the AVm and RVm of Isa 29 4, ‘“Thy voice shall
be as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the
ground, and thy speech shall whisper [m, ‘‘chirp”’]
out of the dust.’’ The reference is to “the sounds
made by wizards and ventriloquists, who imitated
the chirping of the bats which was supposed to
proceed from the lower world’”’; hence for “peep” of
AV in Isa 8 19 we have “chirp’—“wizards, that
chirp and that mutter.”

Figurative: We have also in Isa 10 14 RV, ina
fig. allusion to young birds, ‘“‘chirped” instead of
“peeped.” See CoatTer. W. L. WaLKeRr


CHISLEU, kis’li, CHISLEV, kis’lev. See Kis-
LEV.


CHISLON, kis’lon, kiz‘lon (50D,  kislon,
“strength’’): A prince of Benjamin, the father of
Elidad (Nu 34 21).


CHISLOTH-TABOR, kis-loth-ta’bor,
See CHESULLOTH.


CHITLISH, kit’lish an , kithlish, ‘separa~
tion”; AV Kithlish, ERV “Chithlish,” kith’lish):
An unidentified town named with Lahman and
Gederoth in the Shephelah of Judah (Josh 15 40).


CHITTIM, kit’im. See Kirrm.


CHIUN, ki’un: Thus Heb 71", kiyzn, is trans-
literated in Am 6 26 AV. The vowels represent
an assimilation to some such word as shikkic,
“detestable thing,” or gillal, “idol” (properly “a
filthy thing’), in consonance with the well-known
habit of the punctuators (cf Joa, molekh, Molech
with the vowels of bésheth, MW2, “shame”). The
Syr VS has preserved the correct vocalization;
apparently also the Sept, albeit the consonants
have suffered corruption (so particularly in the Gr
MSS of Acts 7 43). There can be no doubt that
we should vocalize J", kéwén=the Assyr Kai(a)-
wanu=Kaiamanu by which at least in late Bab
Saturn was indicated. The passage in Amos refers
to the Saturn worship which appears.to have been
in vogue in the prophet’s days. The Israelites shall
carry with them into exile the images of their gods
(render with the m of RV: “Yea, ye shall take up,”
etc). The received vocalization is as old as Aquila
and Symmachus. Max L. Mareouis


CHIUN, ki’un (Am 6 26 AV): Called in Acts
7 43 “Rephan” (‘Peppév, Rhemphdn), the planet
Saturn. See ASTROLOGY.


CHLOE, klo’é (XA6n, Chl6é, “a tender shoot’’):
A woman, presumably a Christian, mentioned only
in 1 Cor 111. She was a resident either of
Corinth or of Ephesus. Paul had been informed
by some of her household, probably Christian
slaves, of the dissensions in the church at Corinth.
Nothing more is known of her.


kiz’lotb-.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


612


CHOBA, ko’ba, CHOBAI, ko’ba-i (KoBd, Chabd,
Jth 4.4; Xofat, Chobai, 15 4f): A place named
along with Jericho, Aesora, and the valley of Salem
(Jth 4 4; 15 4f). Reland’s (Pal, 721) suggestion
of Choabis, which the Peutinger Tables give as 12
Rom miles from Scythopolis, seems probable. It
may be identical with el-Mekhubby, about 11 miles
from Beisén (Scythopolis), and 3 miles from Tubas.


CHOENIX, ke’niks (xetwé, choinix): A Gr dry
measure, almost equal to one quart. Mentioned in
the NT only in Rev 6 6, where RVm would read
“choenix” instead of the indefinite tr “measure.”
The ver is then obviously a threat of famine.


CHOICE, chois.


CHOKE, chok (avlye, pnigd, and its compounds):
Is used in its primary sense of ‘‘to strangle,” or “to
suffocate,’ in describing the fate of the swine (Lk
8 33 AV). The RV has “drowned,” but “choked”
is the correct rendering of the Gr word.

Figurative: It is used in the sense of ‘‘to strangle”
“smother,” “suffocate,” as if by depriving of
breath, in describing the fate of ‘the young grain
growing in the midst of thorns (Mt 13 7). The
fig. is carried a little farther still in describing the
way the word, planted in the heart, is overcome by
the care of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches
(Mt 13 22). A. W. Fortune


CHOLA, ko’la (KoAd, Chédlé; AV Cola): This
names occurs only with that of Chobai (see CHoBa)
in Jth 15 4. It may be identical with the modern
Ké@un, between el-Mekhubby and Beisan.


CHOLER, kol’ér: Lit. ‘“‘bile,’’ is used in the sense
of a disease (xodépa, choléra) (Sir 31 20; 37 30), and
in the sense of bitter anger (179, mdrar) (Dnl 8 7;
11 11 EV, ARV “anger’’).


CHOOSE, chooz, CHOSEN, cho’z’n (1193 , bahar,
SIP, kabhal, NDB, bara’, TB, barah; éhéyo, ck-
lég6):

I. In tae OT
1. Human Choice


2. God Chooses King of Israel
a5 God Chooses Jerusalem
5.


See CnoosE; WILL.


Election of Israel
Jehovah's Grace
(1) An Act of Sovereignty
(2) For Mankind’s Sake
Il. In_taze NT
1. Various Meanings
2. Of God’s Free Grace
3. Ultimate Antinomies
4. Election Corresponds to Experience
The words denote an act of comparison of two or
more objects or persons, the preference and selection
of one, or of a few out of a larger number for a
certain purpose, function, position or privilege.
i. In the OT.—For_ bahar and its derivatives:
men choosing wives (Gen 6 2); Lot choosing the
cities of the Plain (Gen 13 11); often
1. Human of kings and generals choosing soldiers
Choice for their prowess (e.g. Ex 17 9; Josh
83; 15 13 2; 28109; 171). The
word bahar is often used for “young men,” as being
choice, in the prime of manhood. The most im-
portant uses of bahar are these: of Israel choosing
a king (1 8 8 18; 12 13); of moral and religious
choice: choosing Jeh as God (Josh 24 15.22), or
other gods (Jgs 6 8; 10 14); the way


2. God of truth (Ps 119 30); to refuse the evil
Chooses and choose the good (Isa 7 15.16); cf
King of David's choice of evils (2 S 24 12). A
Israel leading idea is that of God choosing


: Moses as leader (Nu 16 5.7; 17 5); the
Levites to the priesthood (1 S 2 28; 2 Ch 29 11);
Saul as king (1 S 10 24), David (28 6 21; 1K


613


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Chirp
Choose, Chosen


11 34), Solomon (1 Ch 28 5). All this follows from
the theocratic idea that God rules personally over
Israel as His chosen people. A more important,
but still subsidiary, idea is that of Jeb choosing
Jerus as the place of His habitation and worship
(Dt 12 5; and 20 other times, Josh 9 27; 1 K 8
44.48; Ps 132 13; Zee 1 17; 2 12; 3
3. God 2). This was the ruling idea of Josiah’s
Chooses reformation which was instrumental in
Jerusalem putting down polytheistic ideas and
idolatrous practices in Israel, and was
therefore an important factor in the development
of Heb monotheism; but it was an idea that Heb
monotheism had to transcend and reject to attain
its full growth. ‘The hour cometh, when neither
in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship
the Father” (Jn 4 21).
But the fundamental idea of choosing, which
governs all others in the OT, is that of God choosing
Israel to be His peculiar people. He
4. Election chose Abraham, and made a covenant
of Israel with him, to give him the land of
Canaan (Neh 9 7 ff): “For thou art
a holy people unto Jeh thy God: Jeh thy God hath
chosen thee to he a people for his own possession,
ahove all peoples that are upon the face of the earth
. .. . because Jeh loveth you, and because he would
keep the oath which he sware unto your fathers”
(Dt 7 6-8). Historically this idea originated in
the old conception of Jeh as the tribal God of Israel,
hound to her by natural and indissoluble ties (see
Gop). But as their conception of Jeh became more
moral, and the idea of His righteousness predomi-
nated, it was recognized that there was no natural
and necessary relation and harmony between Israel
and Jeh that accounted for the favor of a righteous
God toward her, for Israel was no better than her
neighbors (Am 1, 2). Why then was Jeh Israel’s
God, and Israel His people? It was by an act of free
choice and sovereign grace on God’s


5. Jeho- part. “You only have I known of all
vah’s the families of the earth” (Am 3 2). In
Grace Hos the relation is described under the


figure of a marriage tie. Jeh is Israel’s
husband: and to realize the force of the figure, it is
necessary to recall what ancient and oriental mar-
riage customs were. Choice and favor were almost
entirely made by the hushand. The idea of the
covenant which Jeh out of His free grace made
with Israel comes to the forefront in Dt and Jer.
Because He loved her, and for no other reason, He
has chosen Israel to be His peculiar people. In Isa
40-66 the idea is carried farther in two directions:
(1) Jeh’s gracious choice of Israel rests ultimately
on His absolute sovereignty: “‘(O Jacob my serv-
ant, and Israel, whom I have chosen: thus saith
Jeh that made thee, and formed thee from the
womb” (44 1.2; cf Isa 29 16; Jer 18 6; Isa 64
8). For Israel’s deliverance Cyrus and his world-
empire are in Jeh’s hands as clay in the potter’s
hands (Isa 45 9.10). (2) ‘Israel is elect for the
sake of mankind.” This is the moral interpretation
of a choice that otherwise appears arbitrary and
irrational. God’s purpose and call of salvation
are unto all mankind. ‘Look unto me, and he
ye saved, all the ends of the earth; for I am God,
and there is none else” (Isa 45 22). And Israel is
His servant, chosen, the messenger He sends, ‘‘to
bring forth justice to the Gentiles” (Isa 42 1.19;
43 10.12). ‘The idea is further developed in the
conception of the Servant oF JEH (q.V.) as the faith-
ful few (or one) formed “from the womb to be his
servant, to bring Jacob again to him,” “for a light
to the Gentiles,” God’s “salvation unto the end of
the earth” (Isa 49 1-6; 52 13—63 12) (cf Isaiah’s
doctrine of the Remnant: Shearjashub; also, the
righteous, the godly, the meek, in Pss; and see


Skinner, Isaiah, II, xxx ff). As the conception of
personality and of individual relation and respon-
sibility to God developed from Ezk onward, together
with the resulting doctrine of personal immortality,
the conditions were prepared for the application of
the idea of election to individuals (cf Ps 65 4).

Coérdinate with the idea of God choosing Israel
runs the complementary idea that Israel should prove
faithful to the covenant, and worthy of the choice.
God has chosen her, uot for any merit in her, but
of His free grace, and according to His purpose of
salvation, but if Israel fails to respond by faithful
conduct, fitting her to be His servant and messen-
ger, He may and will cast her off, or such portion
of her as proves unworthy. See Oehler, OT Theol.,
I, 256 ff, 287 f.

Three other Heb words expressing choice in minor
matters are: kdbhal, for David’s choice of evils (1
Ch 21 11); bara’, to mark out a place (Ezk 21 19),
to select singers and porters for the temple (1 Ch
9 22; 16 41); barah, to choose a man to represent
Israel against Goliath (1 S 17 8).

Il. In the NT.—The whole conception of God,
of His relation to Israel, and of His action in history

indicated ahove, constituted the reli-
1. Various gious heritage of Jesus Christ and His
Meanings disciples. The national conciousness

had to a considerable extent given
place to that of the individual; and salvation ex-
tended beyond the present life into a state of bless-
edness in a future world. But the central ideas
remain, and are only modified in the NT in so far
as Jesus Christ becomes the Mediator and Agent of
God’s sovereign grace. Hklegd and its derivatives
are the words that generally express the idea in the
NT. They are used (1) of the general idea of
selecting one out of many (Lk 14 7); (2) of choos-
ing men for a particular purpose, e.g. of the church
choosing the seven (Acts 6 5); of the choice of
delegates from the Council of Jerus (Acts 15 22.25;
ef 2 Cor 8 19), cheirotoné6; choose by vote (RV
“appoint”’) (cf Acts 10 41), procheirotonés; (3) of
moral choice (Mk 13 20): “Mary hath chosen the
good part” (Lk 10 42); (4) of Christ as the chosen
Messiah of God (Lk 23 35; 1 Pet 2 4 AV); (5) of
Christ choosing His apostles (Lk 6 13; Jn 6 70;
13 18; 15 16.19; Acts 1 2.24); Paul (Acts 9 15; ef
22 14 AV), procheirizomai; Rufus (Rom 16 13); and
Paul chose Silas (Acts 16 40), epilégo; (6) of God
(a) choosing Israel (Acts 13 17; cf Rom 9 11),
(6) choosing the Christian church as the new Israel
(1 Pet 29 AV), (c) choosing the memhers of the
church from among the poor (Jas 2 5), the foolish,
weak and despised (1 Cor 1 27-28), (d) choosing
into His favor and salvation a few out of manv:
“Many are called, but few are chosen” (Mt 20 16
[omitted in RV]; 22 14); God shortens the days of
the destruction of Jerus “for the elect’s sake, whom
he chose”’ (Mk 13 20).

In Eph 146 every phrase tells a different

phase of the conception: (1) God chose (and fore-

ordained) the saints in Christ before the
2. Of God’s foundation of the world; (2) according
Free Grace to the good pleasure of His will; (3)

unto adoption as sons through Jesus
Christ unto Himself; (4) to be holy and without
blemish before Him in love; (5) to the praise of the
glory of His grace; (6) which He freely bestowed on
them in the Beloved. Andin Rev 17 14, the trium-
phant church in heaven is described as “called
and chosen and faithful.” God’s sovereign choice
governs the experience and testing of the saints at
every point from beginning to end.

Thus in the NT as in the OT (1) God’s covenant
of grace is free and unconditional. It is unto all
men, now as individuals rather than nations, and
without distinction of race or class. It is no less


Chop
Christ, Exalt. of


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


614


free and sovereign, because it is a father’s grace.
(2) Israel is still a chosen race for a special purpose.
(8) The church and the saints that constitute it are
chosen to the full experience and privileges of son-
ship. (4) God’s purpose of grace is fully revealed
and realized through Jesus Christ.
This doctrine raises certain theological and
metaphysical difficulties that have never yet been
satisfactorily solved. (1) How can
3. Ultimate God be free if all His acts are pre-
Antinomies ordained from eternity? This is an
antinomy which indeed lies at the
root of all personality. It is of the essence of the
idea of personality that a person should freely
determine himself and yet act in conformity with
his own character. Every person in practice and
experience solves this antinomy continually, though
he may have no intellectual category that can
coérdinate these two apparently contradictory prin-
ciples in all personality. (2) How can God be just,
if a few are chosen and many are left? And (3)
How can man be free if his moral character proceeds
out of God’s sovereign grace? It is certain that
if God chose all or left all He would be neither
just nor gracious, nor would man have any vestige
of freedom. The doctrine describes accurately (a)
the moral fact, that some accept salvation and
others reject it; (0) the religious fact


4, Election that God’s sovereign and wuncondi-
Corre- tional love is the beginning and cause
sponds to. of salvation. The meeting-point of
Experience the action of grace, and of man’s liberty

as a moral and responsible being, it does
not define. Nor has the category as yet been dis-


covered wherewith to construe and coérdinate these
two facts of religious experience together, although
it is a fact known in every Christian experience
that where God is most sovereign, man is most free.
For other passages, and the whole idea in the NT,
see ELECTION. T. Rees


CHOP (W718, pdras):

Figurative: This word, meaning “to cut in pieces,”
“to distribute,” often tr‘ “spread,” is rendered
“chop” in Mic 3 3, they “chop them in pieces, as for
the pot,” fig. for the destruction of God’s people
through the cruel exactions of their rulers.


CHORASHAN, kér-ash’an, ké-ra’shan.
ASHAN.


CHORAZIN, ké-ra’zin (Xopativ, Chorazin, Mt
11 21; Xwpativ, Chérazin, Lk 10 183; WH Xo-
patelv, Chorazein): A city whose name appears
only in the woe pronounced against it by Christ
(Mt 11 21; Lk 10 13). Its appearance there, how-
ever, shows that it must have been a place of some
importance, and highly privileged by the ministry
of Jesus. It was already deserted in the time of
Eusebius, who places it 2 miles from Capernaum
(Onom, s.v.). We can hardly doubt that it is
represented by the extensive ruins of Kerdazeh, on
the heights to the north of Tell Him. It is utterly
desolate: a few carved stones being seen among
the heaps. There are traces of a Rom road which
connected the ancient city with the great highway
between north and south which touched the lake
shore at Khan Minyeh. W. Ewina


CHORBE, kér'bé (XopBé, Chorbé; AV Corbe):
Head of a family which returned with Zerubbabel
(1 Esd 6 12). The name apparently corresponds
to Zaccai in Ezr 2 9 and Neh 7 14.


CHOSAMAEUS, kos-a-mé’us (A, Zlwov Kora-
patos, Simon Chosamatos; B, Xecdpoos, Chosdma-
os): Occurs in 1 Esd 9 32 as the name of one of the
sons of Annas. But in the || passage (Ezr 10 31)


See Cor-


the name is simply Shimeon, followed by “Benjamin,
Malluch, Shemariah,” which are omitted in 1 Esd.
The LXX of Ezr 10 31 has Zeuew», Semedn, followed
by the three omitted names. The difference may
have arisen from a mistake of a copyist, or from
the use of an imperfect MS.


CHOSEN, ché’z2’n.


CHOZEBA, ké-zé'ba (N2TD , kozebha’,
ceitful”): Same as Acuzip and CHEzr (q.v.).


CHRIST AS KING, PRIEST, PROPHET. See
under several titles; also CHrisT, OFFICES OF.


CHRIST, JESUS. See Jesus Curist.


CHRIST, THE EXALTATION, egz-6l-ta’shun,
OF:
I.


See CHooseE.
“de-


Tue REsvuRRECTION

1. Its Glorification of Christ

2. Resurrection Body—Identity, Change, Present
Locality

. 3. The Agent of the Resurrection

II. Ascension oF Our Lorp

1. Its Actuality

2. General Doctrine

3. Lutheran Doctrine :

4. Relation to Doctrine of Existence-Form

5. Necessity


-IlI. Exattration To THE RicHT Hanpv or Gop


1. Its Significance
2. Its Essential Necessity
IV. Tue Seconp ADVENT
1. Reality
2. Judgment
This term is given to that condition of blessed-
ness, glory and dominion into which Our Lord
entered after the completion of His earthly career
of humiliation and suffering, and which is to be
rc arded as the reward of His meritorious obedience,
and the issue of His victorious struggle, and at the
same time the means of His prosecution and com-
pletion of His work as Redeemer and Saviour of the
world. The classic passage of Scripture, rich in sug-
gestion, and the source of much controversy in the
development of Christian theology, is Phil 2 5-11.
The word “exalted” of ver 9, irepvpiw, huperup-
866, occurs only in this place in the NT and, like
its Lat representative, is hmited to ecclesiastical use.
Cf Rom 14 9; Eph 1 19-23; 1 Pet 3 21.22.
Christ’s Exaltation includes His Resurrection,
Ascension, Session at the right hand of God, and
Advent as Judge and Consummator of the world’s
redemption.
I. The Resurrection.—The historic place and
validity of this event will be found under other
heads; our concern is with the event
1. Its Glori- as it relates to the glorification of Our
fication of Lord. (1) It revealed His power
Christ over death. (2) It confirms all His
claims to Divine Sonship. (8) It
attests His acceptance and that of His work by
God. (4) It crowns the process of the redemption of
the world. (5) It forms the beginning of that new
creation which is life eternal, and over which
death can have no power. (6) It is the entrance
of the Son of God into the power and glory of the
New Kingdom, or the restored Kingdom of the
Sovereign Ruler of the Universe. The following
Scriptures among many others may be consulted:
Rev 118; Acts 2 24; Rom 14; 1 Cor 16 20;
Jn 5 25; Rom 4 25; Rom 6 4.5; Col 2 12; Phil
3 10; Rom 6 9.
An interesting and important question arises in
connection with Christ’s exaltation, relating to the
nature of the body of the risen Lord.
2. Christ’s It was clearly identical with that of
Resurrec- His natural life. It was recognized
tion Body by the marks which were upon it:
Lk 24 39.40; Jn 20 24-29. It re
ceived food: Lk 24 43 (cf 24 30; Jn 21 12.13;


615


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Chop
Christ, Exalt. of


Acts 10 41). Nevertheless it was changed. After
the resurrection, it was not at once recognized:
Jn 20 15; 21.7; Lk 24 31. It appeared under
apparently new conditions of relation to material
substance: Jn 20 19; Lk 24 36. It suddenly
became visible, and as suddenly vanished. These
facts suggest what reverently may be surmised as to
its exalted condition. The apostle’s declaration as
to the resurrection-body of the redeemed furnishes
some hints: 1 Cor 15 35-49; cf Phil 3 21. We
may cautiously, from the history of the resurrection
and the Pauline doctrine, conclude, that Our
Lord still possesses a human body. It is of material
substance, with new properties. It occupies space.
It was seen by Paul, by Stephen, by the seer of the
Apocalypse. It is glorious, incorruptible, spiritual.
By whom was the resurrection effected? It is
referred by some Scriptures to God. See Ps 16 10
(ef Acts 2 27.31); and the distinct affir-


3. The mation by Peter (Acts 2 32). Paulde-
Agent of clares that Christ was “raised... .
the Res- through the glory of the Father” (Rom
urrection 64). InEph 1 19.20, it was the mighty


power of God which was wrought in
Christ “when he raised him from the dead.” Else-
where it is ascribed to Christ Himself. He declared:
“Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it
up” (Jn 2 19). InJn 10 17.18, Our Lord declares:
“JT lay down my life, that I may take it again. No
one taketh it away from me, but I lay it down of
myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again.” The efficient agent is said,
according to the generally received reading of Rom
8 2, to have been the Spirit of God, and thus the
resurrection is referred to each person of the God-
head. The doctrine of the Lutheran church refers
the act to the human power of the Lord Himself,
which by incarnation had been endowed with attri-
butes of Deity. This view consists with their teaching
of the omnipresence of the body of Jesus (see below
on the section ‘‘Ascension”).
Il. The Ascension of Our Lord.—The exalta-
tion of Christ consisted further in His ascension.
Some have held that the resurrection
1. Its and ascension of Jesus ought to be
Actuality regarded as aspects of the same event.
But Mary saw the risen Lord, though
she was forbidden to touch Him, for “I am not yet
ascended unto the Father: but go unto my brethren,
and say to them, I ascend,” ete (Jn 20 17). This,
compared with the invitation to Thomas to touch
Him, eight days later, suggests something in the
ascension added to that which the resurrection
implied, and the general thought of the church has
consistently regarded the latter as a further step
in the exaltation of the Lord. The


2. General fact of ascension is recorded in Mk
Doctrine 16 19, and Lk 24 50.51, and with
of the greater detailin Acts 1 9-11. Accord-
Church ing to these accounts, the ascension


was seen by the disciples, and this
suggests that heaven is a locality, where are the
angels, who are not ubiquitous, and where Christ’s
disciples will find the place which He declared He
was going to prepare for them (Jn 14 2). Heaven
is also undoubtedly referred to as a state (Eph 2 6;
Phil 3 20), but Christ’s body must be in some place,
and where He is, there is Heaven. ;
This is certainly the doctrine of the church in
general, and seems to be consistent with the Scrip-
tural teaching. But the Lutherans
3. Lutheran have maintained that the ascension
Doctrine of the Lord merely involved a change
of state in the human nature of Christ.
He possessed during His life on earth the Divine
attributes of omnipresence, omnipotence and omnis-
cience, but He voluntarily abstained from their


exercise. But at His ascension He returned to the
full use of these powers. The ascension is Christ’s
return to immensity. The community of natures
gave these Divine qualities to the humanity of
Jesus, which Luther dented involved its ubiquity,
and that as He was at the right hand of God, and
God was everywhere, so Christ in His human person-
ality was in no specific place but everywhere. This
omnipresence is not of the infinite extension of the
body of the Lord, but He is present as God is every-

where present in knowledge and power.
Another theory of the ascended humanity of the
Lord depends upon the conception of the Son of
God laying aside at incarnation the


4. Theory ‘“existence-form of God,’ and while
of Laying affirming that’ Christ’s body is now in
aside the a definite place, it procceds to hold that
Existence- at the ascension the accidental and
Form of variable qualities of humanity were
God laid aside, and that He dwells in heaven

as a glorified man. Ebrard says:


“He has laid aside forever the existence form of God,
and assumed that of man in perpetuity, in which
form by His Spirit He governs the church and the
world. He is thus dynamically present to all
His people.” This form of doctrine seems to involve
as the result of the incarnation of the Son of God
His complete and sole humanity. He is no more
than a man. The Logos is no longer God, and as
the ascension did not involve the reassumption of
the ‘“existence-form of God,’”’ Christ in glory is only
a glorified man.
The ascension was necessary, in conformity with
the spiritual character of the kingdom which Christ
founded. Its life is that of faith,
5. Its not sight. A perpetual life of even
Necessity the resurrected Christ on earth would
have been wholly inconsistent with
the spiritual nature of the new order. The return
of Christ to the special presence of God was also
part of His high-priestly service (see CHRIST,
Orrices or) and His corporal absence from His
pecele was the condition of that gift of the Spirit
y which salvation was to be secured to each believer
and promuliated throughout the world, as declared
by Himself (Jn.16 7). Finally, the ascension
was that physical departure of the Lord to the place
which He was to prepare for His people (Jn 14 2.3).
The resurrection was this completion of the objec-
tive conditions of redemption. The ascension was
the initial step in the carrying out of redemptive
work in the final salvation of mankind.
II. Exaltation Completed at the Right Hand
of God.—The term “the right hand of God” is
Scriptural (Acts 7 55.56; Rom 8 34;
1. Its Eph 1 20; He 1 3; 1012; 12 2;
Significance 1 Pet 3 22) and expresses the final
step in the Lord’s exaltation. Care
must be taken in the use of the expression. It is
a figure to express the association of Christ with
God in glory and power. It must not be employed
as by Luther to denote the relation of the body of
Christ to space, neither must it be limited to the
Divine nature of the Logos reinstated in the con-
ditions laid aside in incarnation. Christ thus
glorified is the God-man, the theanthropic person,
Divine and human. This exaltation is based upon
the essential glory of the Son of God, who “being
the brightness of his glory and the


2. ItsEs- express image of his person ... . sat
sential down on the right hand” (He 1 3 AV).
Necessity It is the claim which the Lord makes


for Himself in His prayer (Jn 17 4.5),
and is thus specifically declared in Phil 2 6-11:
“God highly exalted Him.” But in His glory
Christ received the power universal and Divine.
In Eph 1 20-22 His supreme dignity and power are


Christ, Exalt. of


Chrct, Ofkccs et THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


616


affirmed “far above... . every name,” “all things
. ... under His feet” (cf He 2 8; 1 Cor 15 27;
1 Pet 3 22). Christ at the “right hand of God’
is the highly suggestive picture of His universal
dominion asserted by Himself (Mt 28 18): “Ail
authority hath been given unto me in heaven and
onearth.” It is vain to speculate upon the relation
of Christ’s nature in this exalted state. We cannot
distinguish between the human and Divine. We
can only believe in, and trust and submit to the
One Glorified Person who thus administers the king-
dom in perfect harmony with its Divine laws in all
the ages, and His own revelation of the will of God,
as given to man in His own earthly career: pitiful,
tender, serving, helping, restoring, saving, trium-
phant. The exaltation is for His mediatorial and
finally saving work. He is the Head of His church;
He is the Lord of angels and men; He is the Master
of the ages.

IV. The Second Advent.—The exaltation of
Christ is to be completed by His coming again at
the close of the dispensation, to complete His
redemptive work and judge the world, and so to
establish the final Kingdom of God. This belief
has found a place in all the ecumenical symbols.
Theology has ever included it initseschatology. It
is clear that the apostles and the early church ex-
pected the second coming of the Lord as an immedi-
ate event, the significance of which, and especially
the effect of the nonfulfilment ot which expectation,
does not fall within the province of this article to
consider. The various theories of the Parousia,
the different ideas as to the time and the form of
the second Advent, do not concern its relation to
the exaltation of the Lord. Whenever and how-
ever He may return; whether He is ever coming to
the church and to the world, His visible or His
spiritual presence, do not affect the fact that He
has been exalted to the position of ultimate Lord
and final judge of men. We may therefore define
this crowning condition of exaltation as:

(1) An advent, real, personal and visible. We
must guard against the extremes of limiting this

advent on the one side to a final
1. Reality particular event, on the other to those

critical and catastrophic movements
in world history which have led to the extension of
God’s kingdom and a virtual judgment of men. The
Lord is ever coming, and also He will return. See
Acts 111; Lk 17 24; Mt 24 30; 25 31; Lk 19
12; Mt 13 40.41.49: Lk 188; Jn 5 28.29: 6
40.54; 2122: Acts 3 20; 2 Thess 110; He 9
28; Jas 5 8; Jude ver 14; 1 Jn 2 28; Rev 1 7.
The reality and visibility of the advent depend upon
the personal and abiding relation of the Lord to the
world-redemption. Christianity is not merely a
spiritual dynamic drawn from a series of past events.
It is the living relation of the complete humanity
of the redeemed to the God-man, and must therefore
be consummated in a spiritual and material form.
The ultimate of Christianity is no more docetic
than was its original. A reverent faith will be
satisfied with the fact of the glory whenever it shall
arrive. Theform and time are unrevealed. Prepa-
ration and readiness are better than speculation
and imaginary description.

(2) The Judgment is clearly taught by Scripture.
Our Lord declares that He is appointed Judge (Jn 5


22; 9 39). Paul teaches that we must
2. Judg- “all stand before the judgment-seat of
ment God” (Rom 14 10). Here again there


is the suggestion of the judgment which
is ever being made by the Lord in His office as
Sovereign and Administrator of the kingdom; but
there is also the expectation of a definite and final
act of separation and discernment. Whatever may
be the form of this judgment (and here again a wise


and reverent silence as to the unrevealed is a be-
coming attitude for the believer), we are sure that
He who will make it, is the glorified Word incarnate,
and it will be the judgment of a wisdom and justice
and love that will be the complete glory of the Christ.
See also ASCENSION; JUDGMENT; Parousia; RESUR-
RECTION. Lu. D. Bevan


CHRIST, HUMANITY OF. See Humanity or
Curist.


CHRIST, INTERCESSION OF. Sce IntTEr-
CESSION OF CHRIST.


CHRIST, OFFICES, of’is-is, OF:


General Titles of Our Lord
I. Curist’s Mepiation EXPRESSED IN THE SPECIFIC
OFFICES
History of the Theory
II. Tuer Tareeroip OFFICE IN THE OT
aoe Failure of the Offices to Secure Their Desired
nds
Ill. Tus Proper
The Forecast_of the True Prophet
IV. Curist THE PROPHET
1. Christ’s Manner of Teaching
2. Christ as Prophet in His Church
V. Tue PriestHoop or CHRist
1. Judaic Priesthood
. Sacrificial Relations of Christ in the Gospels
eg Ethical Teaching Affected by Sacrificial
eas
. Mutual Confirmations of the Synoptics
The Dual Outgrowth of Sacrifice, the Victim
and Sacrificer
Christ's Priesthood in the Apostolic Ministry
and Epistles
The Crowning Testimony of the Epistle to the
Hebrews
8. Christ's Relation to Sin Expressed in Sacrificial
Terms
VI. Curist’s Kinety Orrice
- ‘The Breakdown of the Secular Monarchy
VII. THe Messianic Basis or THE THREEFOLD OFFICE
LITERATURE


oF THE LorD

This term has been used by theologians to de-
scribe the various characters of Our Lord’s redemp-
tive work. Many appellative and
General metaphorical titles are found in
Titles of Scripture for Christ, designative of
Our Lord His Divine and human natures and
His work: God (Jn 20 28); Lord
(Mt 22 43.44); Word (Jn 1 1.14); Son of God
(Mt 817; Lk 1 35; Col 1 15; 1 Jn 5 20);
Firstborn from the dead (Col 1 18); Beginning of
the Creation of God (Rev 3 14); Image of God
(2 Cor 4 4); Express Image of His Person (He 1 3
AV); Alpha and Omega (Rev 1 8; 22 13); Sonof
Man (Mt 8 20; Jn 1 51; Acts 7 56); Son of
David (Mt 9 27; 219); Last Adam (1 Cor 15
45.47); Captain of Salvation (He 2 10m); Saviour
(Lk 2 11; Jn 4 42; Acts 6 31); Redeemer (Isa
59 20; Tit 2 14); Author and Perfecter of Faith
(He 12 2); Light of the World (Jn 8 12); Lamb of
God (Jn 1 29.36); Creator of all things (Jn 1 3.10);
Mediator (1 Tim 2 5); Prophet (Dt 18 15; Lk
24 19); Great High Priest (He 4 14); King (Lk
1 33; Rev 17 14; 19 16); Way, Truth and Life (Jn
14 6). These and many others express the media-
torial office of the Lord. As mediator, He stands
between God and Man, revealing the Father to
man, and expressing the true relation of man to
God. The term (Gr pecirys, mestiés), moreover,
signifies messenger, interpreter, advocate, surety
or pledge in Gal 3 19.20, where a covenant is
declared to be assured by the hand of one who
intervenes. Thus the covenant is confirmed and
fulfilled by Him who secures that its stipulations
should be carried out, and harmony is restored where
before there had been difference and separation
(1 Tim 25; He 86; 915; 12 24). Thus is
expressed the purpose of God to redeem mankind

by mediation.


NO oR gow


617


Christ, Exalt. of
THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Christ, Offices of


I. Christ’s Mediation Expressed in the Specific
Offices.—In presenting a systematic idea of this
Redemptive Work of Christ by Mediation, Christian
thought gave to it a harmonious character by choos-
ing the most general and familiar titles of the Lord
as the most inclusive categories expressive of the
mode of Redemption. These were prophetic,
priestly and regal.

The first trace of this division is found in Euseb.
HE, I, 3, and his Demonstratio Evangelica, IV, 15.

It was accepted very largely in the Gr
Historical church, and continues to be used by
Review of Russian ecclesiastical writers. The
the Theory Rom church has not so generally fol-
bee lowed it, though it is found in the
writings of many Rom theologians. The earlier
reformers, especially Lutheran, ignored it. But
Gerhard employed it and the Lutheran theologians
followed his example, although some of these repudi-
ated it, as Ernesti, Déderlein and Knapp. Calvin
employed the division in his Institutes, II, 15. It
was incorporated in the Heidelberg Catechism and
has been adopted by most theologians of the Re-
formed church and by Eng. and American divines.
In Germany most theological writers, such as De
Wette, Schleiermacher, Tholuck, Nitzsch, Ebrard,
adopt it, affirming it as expressive of the essential
quality of the work of redemption, and _the most
complete presentment of its contents. The justi-
fication of this position is found in the important
place occupied in the progress of revelation by those
to whom were intrusted the duties of teaching and
leading men in relation to God in the offices of priest,
prophet and king. Even the modern development
of Christian thought which extends the view of
Divine dealing with man over the entire race and
its religious history, not excluding those who would
find in the most recent conditions of the world’s
life the outworking of the will of God in the pur-
poses of human salvation, cannot discover any
better form of expressing Christ’s relation to man
than in terms of the prophetic, the priestly and the
governmental offices. The prophet is the instru-
ment of teaching: the priest expresses the ethical
relation of man to God; while the king furnishes
the typical form of that exercise of sovereign author-
ity and Providential direction which concerns the
practical life of the race.

Hl. The Threefold Office as Presented in the OT.
—From the close relation which Jesus in both His
person and work bore to the OT dispensation, it is
natural to turn to the preparatory history of the
early Scriptures for the first, notes of these media-
torial offices. That the development of the Jewish
people and system ever moved toward Christ as
an end and fulfilment is universally acknowledged.
The vague and indeterminate conditions of both the
religious and national life of Israel manifest a definite
movement toward a clearer apprehension of man’s
relationship to God. Nothing is more clear in
Israel’s history than the gradual evolution of official
service both of church and state, as expressed in
the persons and duties of the prophet, the priest and
the king. The early patriarch contained in him-
self the threefold dignity, and discharged the three-
fold duty. As the family became tribal, and the
tribe national, these duties were divided. The
order of the household was lost for a while in the
chaos of the larger and less homogeneous society.
The domestic altar was multiplied in many “high
places.” Professional interpreters of more or less
religious value began to be seers, and here and there,
prophets. The leadership of the people was occa-
sional, ephemeral and uncertain. But the men of
Divine calling appeared from time to time; the
foundation work of Moses was built on; the regular
order of the worship of Jeh, notwithstanding many


lapses, steadily prevailed. Samuel gave dignity
to his post as judge, and he again beheld the open
vision of the Lord; he offered the appointed sacri-
fices; he established the kingly office; and although
he was not permitted to see the family of David
on the throne, like Moses he beheld afar off the
promised land of a Divinely appointed kingdom.
With the accession of the Davidic house, the three
orders of God’s service were completely developed.
The king was seated on the throne, the priest was
ministering at the one altar of the nation, the
prophet with the Divine message was ever at hand
to teach, to guide and to rebuke.
Notwithstanding this growth of the special
institutions—prophet, priest and king—the religious
and national condition was by no
The Failure means satisfactory. The kingdom was


of the divided; external foes threatened the
Threefold existence of the nation; idolatry was
Offices to not extinguished, and the prophets who
Secure were true to Jeh were compelled to
Their warn and rebuke the sins of the rulers
Desired and the people, and even to testify


Ends against the priests for their unfaithful-

ness to the truth and purity of the re-
ligion which they professed. The best hopes of Israel
and the Divine promises seem thus to be contradicted
by the constant failure of the people to realize their
best ideals. Hence slowly arose a vague expectation
of reform. The idea of the better condition which
was coming grew ever more distinct, and settled
down at length to Israel’s Messianic hope, expressed
in various forms, finally converging to the looking
for of one who should in some mysterious way gather
into himself the ideas which belonged especially to
the three great offices.

I. The Prophet.—In this art. we are concerned
only with the offices as they tend to their fulfil-
ment in Christ. For the more general treatment
of each office, reference must be made to the special
arts.

The first appearance of the idea of the special
prophet of Jeh is in Dt 18 15. Moses had been

sent by the people to hear the Lord’s


The Fore- words on their behalf (Ex 20 19;
cast of the Dt 5 27); and this incident in the
True later passage of Dt 18 15-22 is con-
Prophet nected with the promise of a prophet,


while at the same time reference is
made to the general fact of prophecy and the con-
ditions of its validity and acceptance. Here we
find the germ of the expectation of the Prophet,
which occupied so large a place in the mind of
Israel. In the act of the people sending Moses to
receive the word, and Jeh’s promise to send a
prophet. whom they would accept, we see also the
suggestion of a distinction between the first dis-
pensation and the latter. The Divine promise
was to the effect that what was given by Moses
God would consummate in a prophetic revelation
through a person. The conception of this person-
ality is found in the second part of Isa (40-66).
Jsaiah’s mission was vain, Isa 49 4, but the coming
one shall prevail, 49-53 (passim). But the success
of this servant of Jeh was not to be only as a prophet,
but by taking on himself the penalty of sin (63 5),
and by being made an offering for sin; and as
Mighty Victor triumphing over all foes (53 10-12),
the dignities of whose kingship are set forth in
various parts of the prophetic writings. Thus the
general effect of the course of the earlier revelation
may be summed up in this prophetic ministry with
which has been combined a priestly and a royal
character. It was an ever-advancing manifestation
of the nature and will of God, delivered by inspired
men who spake at sundry times and in divers man-
ners, but whose message was perfected and extended


Christ, Offices of THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


618


by Jesus Christ (He 1 1), who thus became the
Prophet of the Lord.

IV. Christ, the Prophet.—Christ’s ministry illus-
trates the prophetic office in the most extensive and
exalted sense of the term. He was designed and
appointed by the Father (Isa 61 1.2; ef Lk 4 16-
21; Mt 17 5). In 1 Cor 1 30, Christ is declared
to be made to us wisdom. His intimate knowledge
of God (In 1 18; Mt 11 27; Jn 16 15), the quali-
ties of His teaching dependent upon His nature,
both Divine and human (Jn 3 34); His authority
(Jn 1 9.17.18; Lk 4 18-21); His knowledge of
God (Mk 12 29; Jn 4 24; Mt 11 25; Jn 17 11.
25; Mt 18 35)—these all peculiarly fitted Christ
to be the Revealer of God. Besides His doctrine
of God, His ministry included the truth concerning
Himself, His nature, claims, mission, the doctrine
of the Holy Spirit, and the religious life of man. He
taught as none other the foundation of religion, the
facts on which it was based, the essence of Divine
service, the nature of sin, the grace of God, the
means of atonement, the laws of the kingdom of
God and the future state. By the acknowledgment
of even those who have denied His Divine nature
and redemptive work, He has been recognized as the
Supreme Moral Teacher of the world. His claim to
be the Prophet is seen in that He is the source of the
ever-extending revelation of the eternal. His own
words and works He declared were only part of the
fuller knowledge which would be furnished by the
system which He established (Lk 9 45; 18 34; Jn
12 16; 14 26; 15 26; 16 12.13.14).

How remarkable was His method of teaching!
Parable, proverb, absolute affirmation, suggestion,

allusion to simple objects, practical life
1. Christ’s —these all made His teaching powerful,
Manner of easily understood, living; sometimes
Teaching His action was His word—and all with

a commanding dignity and gracious
winsomeness, that was felt by His Tienes and has
ever been recognized (Mt 7 29). So perfect and
exalted was the teaching of Jesus that many have
supposed that revelation ceased with Him, and the
immediate followers whom He especially inspired
to be His witnesses and interpreters. Certainly in
Him the prophetic ministry culminated.

An important aspect of Christ’s prophetic office

is that of His relation to the church as the source,

through the instrumentality of His
2. Christ as Spirit, of ever-enlarging knowledge of
Prophet in Divine truth which it has been able
His Church to gain. This is the real significance

of the claim which some churches make
to be the custodians and interpreters of the tradition
of faith, with which has also gone the theory of
development—not as 2 human act but as a ministra-
tion of the Lord through His Spirit, which is granted
to the church. Even those who hold that all
Divine truth is to be found in the sacred Scriptures
have yet maintained that God has much truth still
to bring out of His word by the leading and direc-
tion of the Spirit of Jesus. The Scripture itself
declares that Christ was the light which lighteth
every man that cometh into the world (Jn 1 9).
He Himself promised that the Spirit which He would
give would guide His followers into all truth (Jn
16 13). The apostles claimed to receive their
teaching and direction of the church from the Lord
(1 Cor 11 23). The testimony of Jesus is definitely
declared to be the spirit of prophecy (Rev 19 10).
Indeed, all the apostolic writings in almost every
Iine affirm that what they teach is received from the
Spirit, who is the Spirit of the Lord.

V. The Priesthood of Christ.—For the history
of the development of the priesthood of Israel on
which Our Lord’s High-Priesthood is ideally based,
reference must be made to the art. esp. dealing


with that subject. The bearings of that institution
upon the work of Jesus as Redeemer alone fall
under this section. Judaism like all
1. Judaic religions developed an extensive sys-
Priesthood tem of priestly service. As the moral
sense of the people enlarged and be-
came more distinct, the original simplicity of sac-
rifice, especially as a commensal act, in which the
unity of the celebrants with each other and with
God was expressed, was expanded into acts regularly
performed by officials, in which worship, thanks-
giving, covenant and priestly expiation and atone-
ment were clearly and definitely expressed. The
progress of sacrifice may be seen in the history of the
OT from Cain and Abel’s (Gen 4 3.4), Noah’s
(Gen 8 20), Abraham’s covenant (Gen 15 9-18)
etc, to the elaborate services of the Mosaic ritual
set forth in Lev, the full development of which is
found only in the later days of Israel. When
Christ appeared, the entire sacerdotal system had
become incorporated in the mind, customs and lan-
guage of the people. They had learned more or less
distinctly the truth of man’s relation to God in its
natural eharacter, and esp. in that aspect where man
by his sin had separated himself from God and laid
himself open to the penalty of law. The conception
of priesthood had thus grown in the consciousness of
Israel, as the necessary instrument of mediation be-
tween man and God. Priestly acts were performed
on behalf of the worshipper. The priest, was to secure
for man the Divinefavor. This could only be gained
by an act of expiation. Something must be done in
order to set forth the sin of man, his acknowledg-
ment of guilt, the satisfaction of the law, and the
assurance of the Divine forgivenéss, the restored
favor of God and finally the unity of man and God.
That the work of Christ partook of the nature
of priestly service is already indicated by refer-
ences in the Gospels themselves. He
2. Sacri- was called “Jesus; for it is he that shall
ficial Rela- save his people from their sins” (Mt 1
tions of 21). Salvation from sin, in the habit of
Christin thought at which the Jew had arrived,
the Gospels must have expressed itself most clearly
in the symbolic signification of the
sacrifices in the temple. Thus in the very name
which Our Lord received His priesthood is sug-
gested. The frankincense of the Magi’s offering is
not without its mystical meaning (Mt 2 11). Some
may find in the Baptist’s words, “baptize you in
the Holy Spirit and in fire’ (Mt 3 11), a suggestion
of priestly action, for the understanding of John’s
declaration must be found in the conventional
ideas of the Jewish thought of the period, determined
as they undoubtedly were by the history of priestly
service in the past and the fully developed ritual of
the temple. The baptizing of the proselyte was not
necessarily a priestly act, as indeed we cannot be
certain that the baptism was always necessary at the
introduction of a proselyte into the Jewish church.
But the association of circumcision with the initia-
tion of the proselyte certainly introduced the priest,
and the sprinkling of the congregation by the priest
was a familiar part of his official duties. It is quite
probable therefore that John’s use of the expression
carried with it something of the sacerdotal idea.
The spirit of Our Lord’s teaching, as seen in the
Sermon on the Mount, ete, as it reflects the thought
of the Galilean ministry, may be re-
3. Christ’s garded as prophetic rather than priestly.
Ethical till the end of the teaching was
Teaching righteousness, and it was impossible
Affected by for a Jew to conceive of the securing of
Sacrificial righteousness without some reference
Ideas to priestly administration and influence.
The contrast of the effect of Christ’s
teaching with that of the scribes (Mt 7 29) keeps


619


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Christ, Offices of


us in the vicinity of the law as applied through the
sacerdotal service of which the scribes were the inter-
preters and teachers, and surely therefore a hint of
Our Lord’s relation to priesthood may have found
its way into the minds of His immediate hearers.
He was careful to recognize the authority of the
priest (Mt 8 4).

_ The doctrine of sacrifice emerges somewhat more
distinctly in the reference to the cross, which Our
Lord associates with the thought of finding life by
losing it (Mt 16 24.25), and when the taking up
the cross is interpreted by following Christ, and this
hint is soon followed by Christ’s distinct reference
to His coming sufferings (Mt 17 9.12), more defin-
itely referred to in vs 22.23. Now the object of the
work of the Lord takes clearer form. The Son of
Man is come to save that which was lost (Mt 18 11
ARVm). As the time of the catastrophe drew nearer,
the Lord became still more distinct in His references
to His coming death (Mt 20 18.19), and at length
declares that “the Son of man came... . to give
his life a ransom for many” (Mt 20 28). Our
Lord’s quotations (Mt 21 42; 23 39) concerning the
rejected “corner stone,’ and the Blessed One “‘that
cometh in the name of the Lord” (Ps 118 22.26),
are drawn from a psalm filled with the spirit of the
priestly service of the temple, and in their reference
to Himself again illustrate the ever-increasing recog-
nition of His priesthood. He also uses the official
term ‘Christ’? (Messiah, the anointed one) more
frequently (Mt 24 5.23.24). On the eve of the be-
trayal and trial the crucifixion is clearly foretold (Mt
26 2); andthe death (26 12). The full significance
of the death is asserted at the institution of the Lord’s
Supper. The bread is “my body,” the wine is ‘my
blood of the new covenant,” and it is declared to be
“poured out for many unto remission of sins” (Mt
26 26-28 m).

A similar succession of ideas of Our Lord’s
priestly work may be found in the other gospels
(see Mk 1 8.44; 8 29; see below on
the significance of the term Christ;
8 31.34; 9 9.10). The inability of the
disciples to understand the life that
was to follow death here is indicated
—the truth of the gospel of death and
resurrection so closely bound up with the concep-
tion of sacrifice, where the blood is the life which
given becomes the condition of the new union
with God, being thus revealed by Christ as the
initial doctrine to be continuously enlarged (9 31;
10 21.33.34.45; 11 9; 12 10; 13 21.22; 14 8.22-
25.61.62). In Lk the priestly ‘“‘atmosphere’”’ is intro-
duced in the earliest part of the narrative, the his-
tory of Zacharias and Elisabeth giving emphasis
to the setting of John’s own mission (Lk 1). The
name Jesus (Lk 1 31); the special relation of the
new kingdom to sin, necessarily connected with
sacrifice in the mind of a priest, found in Zacharias’
psalm (Lk 1 77.78); the subtle suggestion of the
Suffering One in the ‘“‘also” of 2 35 AV (ARV omits)
shows that the third Gospel is quite in line with
the two other Synoptics (ee also Lk 3 3; 5 14).
The claim to forgive sins must have suggested
the sacrificial symbol of remission (Lk 5 24; 9 23;
13 35; 14 27; 18 31; 20 14; 22 19.20; 24 7.26.
46.47). In the Fourth Gospel, we have the word
of the Baptist, “Behold, the Lamb of God” (Jn 1
29.36), where Christ’s relation to sin is distinctly
expressed (see Lams or Gop)—the baptism in the
Spirit (1 33). It is highly probable that the
apostle John was the “other” of the two disciples,
(1 40) and, having heard the Baptist’s words, is
the only evangelist who records them, thus intro-
ducing from his personal knowledge the sacrificial
idea earlier into his history than_the Synoptics.
Christ declares that He will give His life for the


4. Mutual
Confirma-
tion of the
Synoptics


life of the world (6 51). The entire passage (vs
47-65) is suffused with the conception of “‘Lfe for
life,” one of the elements constituting the conception
of the sacrificial act. In 8 28 (cf 314; 12 32) Christ
predicts His crucifixion. The Good Shepherd gives
His life for the sheep (10 15). In vs 17.18, Christ
claims the power to lay down His life and to take it

again. He is the sacrifice and the Sacrificer.
Here appears for the first time the double rela-
tion of Christ to the sacrificial idea, worked out in
the later thought of the church into


5. The the full significance of Our Lord’s
Dual Out- priestly office. In 11 25.26 Christ is
growth of the source of life, and life after death.
Sacrifice, It is hardly possible that this concep-
Victim and tion should not have, even if remotely
Sacrificer suggested, some reference to the sig-


nificance of sacrifice; for in the sac-
rifices the Divine claim for the blood, as specially
to be set apart as the Divine portion, was ever pres-
ent. God ever claimed the blood as His; for to
Him the life was forfeited by sin. And moreover
He alone possesses life and gives it. Of that for-
feit and that Divine sovereignty of life, sacrifice
is the expression. This is fully realized and made
actual in Christ’s life and death for man, in which
man shares by His unity with Christ. Man at once
receives the penalty of sin in dying with Christ,
and rises again into the new life which Our Lord
opened, and of which He is the ceaseless energy and
power through the spirit of God. The emergence
of this idea is illustrated by the evangelist in the
sayings of Caiaphas, where as the high priest of
the nation he gives, though unconsciously, a sig-
nificant expression to the truth that it was ‘‘expedi-
ent” that Jesus ‘should die for the nation and for
the children of God everywhere scattered’ (11 47-—
52). Here the symbolic significance of sacrifice is
practically realized: death in the place of another
and the giving of life to those for whom the sacri-
fice was offered. The vitalizing power of Christ’s
death is asserted in the discourse following the visit
of the Greeks (12 24-33). The idea of life from the
dying seed is associated with the conception of the
power of attraction and union by the cross. The
natural law of life through death is thus in harmony
with the gift of life through sacrifice involving death.
That sacrifice may be found much more widely
than merely in death, is shown by the law of service
illustrated in thé washing of the disciples’ feet (13
14-17); and this is declared to spring out of love
(15 13). For the priestly ideas of Our Lord’s prayer
(Jn 17) see INTERCESSION; INTERCESSION OF CHRIST;
PRAYERS OF CHRIST.
Christ’s priestly office finds illustration in the
Acts of the Apostles, in the apostolic declaration
of Christ’s Messianic office, not only
6. Christ’s Lord, but also Christ the Anointed
Priesthood One (Acts 2 36). Peter’s reference
in the Apos-to the stone which completed the


tolic Min- temple, the service of which was essen-
istry and _ tially sacrificial, as the Symbol of
Epistles Christ, the Crown of that Spiritual


Temple (Acts 4 11); Philip’s applica-
tion of the passage in Isa of the sheep led to the
slaughter (Isa 53 7.8) to Our Lord (Acts 8 32.35);
Peter’s discourse to Cornelius, culminating in the
remission of sins through Christ (Acts 10 43)—
all indicates the steady growth in the apostolic
ministry of the conception of Our Lord’s priestly
office. The idea takes its most distinct form in
Paul’s sermon at Antioch (Acts 13 38.39). The
necessity of Christ’s death and resurrection was the
essence of Paul’s message (Acts 17 3). And in the
address to the elders, the church is declared to have
oe by God with His own blood (Acts


Christ, Offices of THF INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


620


As the epistles express the more elaborated
thought of the apostolic ministry, the sacrifice of
Our Lord naturally finds more definite exposition,
and inasmuch as He was both active and passive
in the offering of Himself, the conception of sacri-
fice branches into the twofold division, the object
offered, and the person offering. It must never be
forgotten, however, that the thought of Christ’s
sacrifice even when thus separated into its two great
divisions necessarily involves in each conception
the suggestion of the other: God setting Him forth
as a propitiation through faith in His blood (Rom
3 25). He was delivered for our offences and raised
for our justification (Rom 4 25). Through Him
we have access to the conditions of justification and
peace (Rom 5 2). Christ died for the ungodly,
and we are justified by His blood (Rom 6 8.9).
The conception of life both as forfeit from man and
gift by God, expressed by sacrifice, runs through the
reasoning of Rom 8 (see esp. 11.32-34, where Christ
who died for man rises from the dead, and becomes
the intercessor; the victim and the High Priest
are thus united in the Lord, and thus He becomes
full expression and supplier of the love of God which
is the perfect life). In 1 Cor 1 23 Paul affirms
the preaching of the cross as the center of his
message. The subject of his teaching was not
merely Christ, but Christ and Him crucified (1 Cor
22). In 1 Cor 5 7 Christ is declared to be the
Passover, and sacrificed for us (1 Cor 10 16-18).
The manifestation of the death of the Lord by the
bread and wine is given in the account of the insti-
tution of the Supper (1 Cor 11 26). In 1 Cor
15 3 Christ is said expressly to have died for our
sins. Christ’s sacrifice lies at the basis of all the
thought of the Galatian epistle (1 4; 2 20; 3 13).

In Eph we have the definite statement of re-
demption through the blood of Christ (Eph 1 7).
Christ’s humiliation to the cross is given in Phil 2
8; community with Christ’s death, one of the impor-
tant elements of sacrifice, in Phil 3 10.11. For-
giveness, the essence of redemption, is declared to
be through the blood of Christ (Col 1 14). Peace
is secured through the blood of the cross, and recon-
ciliation (Col 1 20); the presentation of us in
Christ’s flesh through death, holy and unblamable
and unreprovable to God (Col 1 22). The com-
munity of sacrifice sets forth the oneness of believers
with Christ (Col 3 1-4). Christ is declared to be
the one Mediator between God and man, who gave
Himself a ransom for all (1 Tim 2 5.6).

The chief source of the priestly conception of Our
Lord is the Epistle to the He. Christ is declared

to have by Himself purged our sins


7. The (He 1 3); to taste of death for every
Crowning man (He 2 9); that He might be a
Testimony merciful and faithful High Priest to
of the make reconciliation for the sins of the
Epistle people (He 217; cf He 83 1); the
to the community of sacrifice (He 3 14); our
Hebrews great High Priest has passed into the


heavens (He 4 14); His pitifulness
(4 15); the authority and power of Christ’s priest-
hood fully set forth (He 5). Christ was made a
High Priest after the order of Melchizedek (He 5 6).
The priesthood of Christ being of the order of Mel-
chizedek is more excellent than the Aaronic priest-
hood (He 7). Christ’s priesthood being eternal, that
of the Aaronic is abolished (He 8). Christ’s high-
priesthood is made effectual by His own blood;
and He entered once for all into the holy place,
and has become the Mediator of 1 New Covenant
(He 9 11-15). Christ is forever the Ce eas
tive of man in heaven (He 9 24-28). Christ by
the sacrifice of Himself forever takes away sin,
and has consecrated the new and living way to
God (He 10). He is the Mediator of the New


Covenant (He 12 24). The entire Epistle is steeped
in the conception of Christ’s priesthood. 2

In 1 Pet 1 2 the sacrificial element appears in
the “sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.’’ The
sufferings of the Lord were prophesied, the spirit of
the Anointed One signifying what the prophets
desired to know (1 11); the redemption by the
precious blood of Christ is of “a lamb without
blemish and without spot” (1 19); the priesthood
of believers was through Christ (2 5), who carried up
our sins in his body to the tree (2 24 RVm).

In the Johannine writings we have the cleansing
from sin by the blood of Jesus Christ (1 Jn 1 7).
Christ is said to have laid down His life for us (1 Jn
3 16). The sacrifice as well as the teaching of
Christ is insisted on in the coming by blood as well
as by water (5 6).

The appearance of Christ in Rev 1 13 is high-
priestly; His robe is the talar, the high-priestly
garment. The sacrificial place of Christ is indicated
by “a Lamb .. . . asthoughit had been slain” (Rev
5 6.9.12). The repeated title of Christ throughout
the Apocalypse is The Lamb.

This review of the Scripture teaching on priest-
hood clearly indicates the development of thought

which led to the affirmation of Our


8. Christ’s Lord’s priestly office. He came to
Relation to put away sin. The doctrine of sin
Sin Ex- was intimately associated with the
pressed in priestly service of the temple. The
Sacrificial sacrifices were in some cases sin offer-
Terms ings, and in these there ever appeared,


by the function of the blood which is
the life, the fatal loss of life by sin, the punishment
of which was the withdrawal of the Divine gift
of life. The life was always in the sacrifice reserved
for God. It was natural therefore when Christ
appeared that His work in taking away sin should
have been interpreted in the light of sacrificial
thought. We find the idea steadily developed in
the NT. He was the sacrifice, the Lamb of God.
The question as to who offered the sacrifice was
answered—Himself. Then He became in the
conception of apostolic teaching, esp. emphasized
in the Epistle to the He, the priest as well as the
sacrifice. This was at length completely defined
in the theology of the church, and has generally
been accepted as setting forth an important aspect
of Our Lord’s redemptive work.
VI. Christ’s Kingly Office.—The association of
rule with the redemption of mankind was early
found in Divine revelation. It is
The Break- in the Protevangelium of Gen 3 15;
down of the covenant with Abraham contains
the Secular it (Gen 22 17.18); the blessing of
Monarchy Jacob reflects it (Gen 49 10). After
the successive attempts to establish a
visible and earthly monarchy, its settlement in the
family of David was associated with Divine pre-
monitions of continued and gracious royalty (2 8
7 18-29; 23 1-7; Pss 2,45, 72,110). ‘The failure
of the earthly monarchy and the fatal experiences
of the kingdom turned the thought of the devout,
esp. guided by pene testimony, to a coming
king who should restore the glory of the Davidie
house and the people of Israel. Here and there the
conception appears of the more extended reign of
the Coming One, and the royal authority finds a
growing place in the prophetic Scriptures (Isa 2
1-4; 96.7; 11 1-10; 42 1-4; 62 13-15: 53 12;
60; Jer 23 5.6; 30 18-24; Dnl 2 44; 7 9-14.27;
Mic 6 1-4; Zee 3). The postexilic conception
of the king became one of the supreme and most
active ideas in the Jewish mind. The reign of the
Messiah was to be earthly, and all nations were to
be subject to the Jew. The Jews of Pal seem to
have retained the more patriotic and the more


621


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Christ, Offices of


Christian


material form of the idea (see 1 Mace 14 41),
while the Egyptian and dispersed Jews began to
regard the more spiritual character of the coming
Messiah. References to the future blessedness of
Israel under the restored royalty do not appear so
largely in the Apoc writings which it must be re-
merobered reflect: chiefly their Egyp-Jewish sources.
Still there are some passages of interest (Bar 4
21—5; Tob 13; Ecclus 36 18.19; 36 11-16; 47
11.22), In the NT we have references to the strong
expectation of the restored royalty and kingdom
(Jn 149; 6 15; 12 12-15; Acts 16). Christ’s
kingship was speedily recognized by those who saw
His works of power, and acknowledged His authority.
He Himself clearly claimed this authority (Mt 22
43-45; Jn 18 36.37). It was however not a king-
dom based upon material and external power and
rule, but on the foundation of truth and righteous-
ness. The Kingdom of Heaven or of God is famil-
jar to every reader of the words of Jesus. It was
thus He described the new order which He had come
to establish, of which He was to be the Lord and
Administrator; not an earthly dominion after the
fashion of this world’s kingdoms; it was to be the
rule of mind and of spirit. It was to be extended
by ethical forces, and the principle of its authority
was centered in Christ Himself. It was to be devel-
oped on earth but perfected in the future and eternal
life. Some divines have distinguished Christ’s regal
power as that of nature, that of grace, that of
glory. Many believe that there is to be a personal
visible reign of Christ upon the earth. Some hold
that this will be produced by His advent prior to an
age of millennial glory. Other views regard the
advent as the close of earthly conditions and the
final judgment.

VIL The Messianic Basis of the Threefold Office
of the Lord.—That the developments of Jewish
thought centered round what may conveniently
be called the idea of the Messiah is plain to any stu-
dent of the OT and other Jewish writings. They
sprang from the ethical and theological ideas of this
people, interpreted by and expressed in their polit-
ical and religious forms, and continually nurtured
by their experiences in the varied course of their
national life. The essence of Messianic belief was
a personal deliverer. Jewish history had always
been marked by the appearance and the exploits
of a great man. The capacity of the production
of exceptional and creative individuals has been the
characteristic of the race in all its ages. A judge,
a lawgiver, a teacher, a seer, a king—each had
helped, or even saved the people in some critical
period. Each had added to the knowledge of God,
whether received or rejected by the people. The
issues of such service had remained, enshrined in
a growing lit., or made permanent, in a finally cen-
tralized and unified ritual, recorded in chronicle
and lyric. The hope of Israel at one time did not
take the completely personal form; indeed, it is
probably easy to exaggerate the Messianic element
as we look back from the perfect realization of it,
in the Christian revelation and history. Much
that has been called Messianic has been the result
of reading into the OT what has been derived from
Christian thought and experience. Zeph has been
described as a picture of Israel’s restoration and
triumph. Yet apparently it has no reference to
the personal element. Still the “Messiah begins
to appear in the prophetic writings (see above),
esp. in the royal elements of His office. It is at
this point that the meaning of the term is to be con-
sidered. “Jeh’s anointed” is found as applied to
a king, and is familiar in this use in the OT.
But anointing belonged to the priesthood and to the
prophetic order, if not actually, at least metaphor-
ically, as setting apart (see 1 K 19 16; Ps 106


/ 15; Isa 61 1).


And the word Messiah (Christ)
the Anointed, came to be used for that conception
of a person, perhaps first employed definitely (Dnl 9
24-26), who should be the Deliverer of the Jews and
even still more widely, a Redeemer. In the age
immediately preceding the Christian, the idea had
taken possession not only of the Jews, but also of
the Samaritans (Jn 4 25); and was not altogether
unknown in gentile thought; e.g. Sib Or, 111.97;
Virgil Hcl. iv. It involves certainly the prophetic
and royal offices and, in the idea of a Suffering
Servant, was closely allied to the objects of the
sacrificial order. :

The claim of Jesus to be the Christ, and the
recognition of this claim by His followers and apos-
tles, gave a new meaning to the teaching of the
OT, and the writings lying outside the canon, but
which were familiar to the people. Especially was
the suffering and death of the Lord and its relation
to sin the occasion of a new understanding of the
Mosaic and later-developed sacrificial system. Jesus
as the Offerer of Himself perfected the function of
the priest, as He became the Lamb of God who
taketh away the sins of the world. He thus com-
pleted the threefold ministry of the Messiah as the
Prophet who reveals, the Priest who offers and
intercedes, the King who rules. In Him the offices
are commingled. He rules by His sacrifice and His
teaching; He reveals by His Kingship and His
offering. The offices spring from both His person
and His work, and are united in the final issue of the
salvation of the world. See also EXALTATION oF
Crist; INTERCESSION OF CHRIST.

Lireraturs.—Enseb., HE, 1,3; Aug., De civ. Det, x.
6; Catech. Council of Trent; Calvin, Instit., II, 15;
Heidelb. Catech, Ans. 31 and Reformed Liturg; Thanks-
giving aft. Inft. Bapt.; J. Gerhard, Loci Theolog; pene,
Catechism.; Ernesti, De officio Christ? tripltcz; app,
Theology, sec. 107; Ebrard, Herzog Realencyc., S.v. Fur-
ther discussion is found in the standard theologies, as Pye
Smith, First Lines, and Scrip. Testim. to the Messiah; Hodge,
Shedd, Weiss, Bib. Theol. of the NT, Van Oosterzee,
Christian. Dogmatics. See also Higginson, Ecce Messias;
Moule’s brief but suggestive statement in Outlines of
Christian Doctrine; Ritschl, A Critical History of the Chris-


tian Doctrine of Justification and Reconciliation, esp.
Introduction; Dorner, The Development of the Doctrine of


the Person of Christ.
Lu. D. Bevan
CHRIST, PERSON OF. See Person or Curist.


CHRIST, TEMPTATION OF. See TrEmpra-
TION oF CuRIsT.


CHRISTIAN, kris’chan, kris’ti-an (Xpioriavds,
Christiands) :
. Historicity of Acts 11 26
. Of Pagan Origin
The Christian Attitude to the Name
Was Christian the Original Form?
The Christians and the Empire :
. Social Standing of the Early Christians
. Christian Self-Designations
LITERATURE


The word Christian occurs only three times in the
NT (Acts 11 26; 26 28; and 1 Pet 4 16). The
first passage, Acts 11 26, gives the


Noompone


1. Histo- _ origin of the term, ‘“The disciples were
ricity of called Christians first in Antioch.” The
Acts 11:26 older generation of critical scholars dis-


puted the historicity of this statement.
It was argued tbat, had the term originated so early,
it must have been found far more frequently in the
records of early Christianity; sometimes also that
the termination -ianus points to a Lat origin. But
there is general agreement now that these objec-
tions are groundless. The historicity of the Lukan
account is upheld not only by Harnack, but by the
more radical Knopf in Die Schriften des NT, edited
by Johannes Weiss. In early imperial times, the
adjectival termination ~ianos was widely diffused
throughout the whole empire. Originally applied to


Christian
Christianity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


622


the slaves belonging to the great households, it had
passed into regular use to denote the adherents
of an individual or a party. A Christian is thus
simply an adherent of Christ. The name belongs,
as Ramsay says, to the popular slang, as indeed sect
and party names generally do. It is only after a
considerable interval, and very often under protest,
that such names are accepted as self-designations.
The name, then, did not originate with the
Christians themselves. Nor would the Jews have
applied it to the followers of Jesns,
2. Of Pa- whose claim to be the Christ they
gan Origin opposed so passionately. They spoke
of the Christians as “‘the sect of the
Nazarenes” (Acts 24 5); perhaps also as ‘“‘Gal-
ileans,” a term which the emperor Julian attempted
later vainly to revive. The word must have been
coined by the heathen population of Antioch, as the
church emerged from the synagogue, and a Chris-
tianity predominantly gentile took its place among
the religions of the world.
Perhaps the earliest occurrence of Christian as
a self-designation is in Did 12 4. In the Apolo-
gists and Ignatius on the other hand


3. The the word is in regular use. 1 Pet
Christian simply takes it over from the anti-
Attitude to Christian judicial procedure of the law
the Name courts, without in any way implying

that the Christians used it among them-
selves. There is every probability, however, that it


was the danger which thus began at an early date to
attach to the name which commended it to the
Christians themselves asa title of honor. Deissmann
(Licht vom Osten, 286) suggests that Christian means
slave of Christ, as Caesarian means slave of Caesar.
But the word can scarcely have had that fulness of
meaning till the Christians themselves had come to
be proud of it.

According to tradition, Luke himself belonged
to Antioch. In Acts 11 27.28 Codex D reads
“There was much rejoicing, and when we had as-
sembled, there stood up,” etc. In view of the
greater authority now so frequently accorded to the
so-called Western text, we cannot summarily dis-
pose of such a reading as an interpolatiou. If the
historian was not only an Antiochene, but a mem-
ber of the original gentile Christian church, we have
the explanation alike of his interest in the origin of
the name Christian, and of the detailed precision
of his information.

In all three NT passages the uncorrected Codex


x reads “Chrestian.”’ We know from many

sources that this variant was widely
4. Was current in the 2d cent. Blass in his
Christian ed of Acts not only consistently reads
the Origi- Chrestian, but conjectures that Chres-
nal Form? tian is the correct reading in Tacitus


(Annals, xv.44), the earliest extra-
Biblical testimony to the word. The Tacitus MS
has since been published in facsimile. This has
shown, according to Harnack (Mission and Expan-
sion, ET, I, 418, 414), that “Chrestian” actually
was the original reading, though the name ‘‘Christ”’
is correctly given. Harnack accordingly thinks
that the Lat historian intended to correct the
popular appellation of cir 64 AD, in the light of his
own more accurate knowledge. ‘The common
people used to call them ‘Chrestians,’ but the real
name of their founder was Christ.”’ Be this as it
may, a confusion between “Christos” and the fa-
miliar Gr slave name ‘‘Chrestos”’ is more intelligible
at an early date than later, when Christianity was
better known. There must have been a strong
tendency to conform the earlier witnesses to the
later, familiar, and etymologically correct, usage.
It is all the more remarkable, therefore, that &* re-
tains “‘Chrestian.”” On the whole it seems probable


| Cf Pliny’s report to Trajan (Epistles,


that this designation, thongh bestowed in error, was

the original one.
The fuller discussion of this subject more ap-
propriately falls under the arts. dealing with the
relation of the church and empire.


5. The Suffice it here to say that Paul ap-
Christians parently hoped that by his acquittal
and the the legal position of Christianity as
Empire a religio licita would be established


throughout the empire, and that 1 Pet
belongs to a time when the mere profession of Chris-
tianity was a crime in the eyes of the state, but that
in all probability this was a new position of affairs.
That early Christianity was essentially a move-
ment among the lower non-literary classes has been
rightly emphasized—above all by
6. Social Deissmann. This is a circumstance
Standing of of the utmost importance for the
the Early correct understanding of the early
Christians history of our faith, though probably
Deissmann in some degree exaggerates
and misplaces the significance. Is it correct to
say, for example, that “primitive Christianity
was relatively indifferent to politics, not as Chris-
tianity, but as a movement of the humbler folks,
whose lot on the whole had certainly been lightened
by the Empire” (Licht vom Osten, 254)? Very
probably however the difficulties of the Pauline
gentile mission were appreciably increased by the
fact that he touched a lower social stratum than
that of the original Jewish Christianity of Pal.
No class more resents being associated in any way
with the ‘submerged masses” than the self-respect-
ing peasant or artisan, who seems to have formed
the backbone of the Pal church. The apostle had
consequently to fight against social, no less than
racial and religious, prejudices.
The Christians originally called themselves
“Disciples,” a term afterward restricted to personal
hearers of the Lord, and regarded as a
7. Christian title of high distinction. The ordinary
Self-Desig- self-designations of the apostolic age


nations are “believers” (Acts 5 14; 1 Tim
4 12), “saints” (Acts 9 13.32.41; Rom
17), “brethren” (Acts 6 3; 10 23, etc), ‘‘the


elect” (Col 3 12; 2 Tim 2 10), “the church of
God” (Acts 20 28m), ‘servants [slaves] to God”
(Rom 6 22; 1 Pet 2 16). The apostolic authors
refer to themselves as “servants [slaves] of Christ
Jesus” (Phil 11). Other expressions are occa-
sionally met with, of which perhaps the most
significant is: Those “that call upon the name of
the Lord” (Acts 9 14; Rom 10 12.13; 1 Cor 1 2).
, 97): “They
affirmed that .... they had been wont to assemble
and address a hymn to Christ as to a god.”


LitzRATURE.—The most recent discussion of the names
of Christian believers. including ‘‘Christian,'’ is in Har-
nack's Mission and Hxpansion of Christianity, ET (2d
ed, 1908), I, 399 ff. See also EB, HDB, DCG, with
the lit. there cited. _On the social status of the early
Christians, cf Orr's Neglected Factors in the Study of the
Early Progress of Christianity; on the religious signifi-
cance of the name, see CHRISTIANITY.

; _ , Youn Dicxre

CHRISTIANITY, kris-chan’‘i-ti, kris-chi-an’i-ti,
kris-ti-an’i-ti (Xpuoriavopés, Christianismés):

I. In_Principte anp Essence

1. Early Use of Term

2. NT Implications: Messiahship—Resurrection—
Redemption
Pauline Summaries

3. Did Jesus Claim to Be Christ ?

4. The Resurrection
Its Evidence

5. Two Contrasted Estimates of Our Lord’s Person
(1) The Non-Believing Estimate—not Truly

Historical
(2) The Believing Estimate—Relation to Ex-
erience
6. Christianity an Experience of Salvation
7. Jesus and the Gospel


623


8. NT Types cf Dectrines


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Christian
Christianity


3. Nat ; rene Bue Nea cd ingless. They have sought, accordingly, to escape
ee ae istic Interpretations—the Religio-Historic the difficulty y denying that Jesus r egar ded Him-


Il. Historica, anp Docrrinau
ad fines ef Christ"' and ‘“‘The Christian Re-
igion
ea The Histcrical Jesus Is Supernatural
Essence of Christianity in Redempti
2. Medern Definitions i oe
2 Schlelermacher
2) Ritschl
lace in Historical Religions
33 This Place Unique
(2) Universality of Christianity
a) Islam
bP Buddhism
‘a The Abselute Religion
4) Religion of Redemption
4. Deveiopment and Influence
(1) Expansien of Christianity
a) Apostolic Age
b) Succeeding Period
c) Modern Missions
(2) Doctrinal Shaplng
3} Gnosticism
6) Monarchianism
‘ Arianism
d) Sin and Grace
(e) Person ef Christ
The Atonement
a) Tho Reformaticn
kh) Lutheran and Reformed
(3) Its Influence
(a) The Ancient Werld
(b) The Modern Werld
(c) Testimony of Professor Huxley
LIrERATURE


I. In Principle and Essence.—Unlike “Christian”


(AV), the term “Christianity,” so far as is known,
was first used by the Christians them-


1. Early —_ selves, but does not occur in the NT.
Use of It is exactly parallel to Judaism (“the
Term Jews’ religion”), found not only in


Gal 1 13.14, but in 2 Macc 2 21,
etc. Our earliest authority for the word ‘“Christian-
ism” is Ignatius of Antioch. Christian is now a title
of honor, and the Christian’s glory is “‘to live accord-
ing to Christianism” (Ignatius, Ad magnes, 10).

While, however, the name is foreign to the NT,
the NT is by universal consent our most important
source of information regarding the


2. NT Im- thing. Christianity arose out of the life
plications: and work of Jesus of Nazareth, who
Messiah- claimed to be “the Christ.’”’ During
ship—Res- Jesus’ lifetime this claim was admitted


wrection— by a circle of adherents, in whose view,
Redemp- = afterwards, it was triumphantly vindi-
tion cated by His resurrection from the dead.

By resurrection He “was declared to
be the Son of God with power’ (Rom 1 4). With
this was united from the first the recognition of
Christ as the God-sent Redeemer, through whom
has come to the world forgiveness, reconciliation
with God and Divine spiritual power.

Pauline summaries.—One of the oldest summaries
of Christianity is that of Paul in 1 Cor 16 3.4:
“For I delivered unto you first of all that which
also I received: that Christ died for our sins accord-
ing to the scriptures; . . . . and that he hath been
raised on the third day according to the scriptures.”
Of similar purport are the apostle’s words in 2 Cor
65 18.19: “God, who reconciled us to himself through
Christ, and gave unto us the ministry of reconcil-
iation; to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling
the world unto himself, not reckoning unto them
their trespasses.”” From this reconciliation springs
the new life of believers (Rom 6; 2 Cor 5 14-17).

More recently some have denied that Jesus
advanced any such claim to hatvseeneu but always


upon purely arbitrary and subjective

- 3. Did Je- grounds. On the one hand these
sus Claim writers have been profoundly impressed
to Be the by the grandeur of Jesus’ character;
Christ? on the other they have looked upon


the claim to stand in such a unique
relation to God and man as unfounded or mean-


self as the Anointed of the Lord (thus, e.g. Wrede).
Sometimes they have gone the length even of affirm-
ing that Jesus was not so regarded by His personal
disciples. Divine honors were accorded Him only
gradually, as the memory of what He actually was
faded away, and an idealization begotten of Chris-
tian faith took its place. The notion of Messiah
is merely a piece of Jewish folklore. This position
in its distinctively modern form has been answered,
it seems to us, with absolute conclusiveness, by
Professor James Denney in his Jesus and the Gospel.
In a historical point of view, nothing in Jesus’
life is more certain than that He regarded Himself
as the-Christ, the culmination and fulfilment of the
Divine revelation given to Israel. This conviction
of His is the point round which His whole message
revolves. The most recent NT theology, that,
e.g. of Dr. Paul Feine (1910), rightly starts from
Jesus’ Messianic consciousness, and seeks to under-
stand His whole teaching in the light of it. _Doubt-
less, like everything else which Jesus touched, the
concept of Messiahship becomes transmuted and
glorified in His bands. Our Lord was in no way
dependent upon current beliefs and expectations
for the content of His Messianic consciousness.
But is it likely that His followers, without His
authority, would have attributed Messiahship to
one so utterly unlike the Messiah of popular fancy?
The NT proves not only that the Christians from
the very outset were fully persuaded, on what
they regarded as adequate grounds


4. The in history and experience, that their
Resurrec- Lord had risen from the dead, but also
tion that this conviction mastered them,

giving direction and purpose to their
whole lives. Historical Christianity was erected on


the foundation of a Risen Lord.

Its evidence.—On this point Professor Denney
says (Jesus and the Gospel, 111): ‘The real histor-
ical evidence for the resurrection is the fact that
it was believed, preached, propagated, and produced
its fruit and effect in the new phenomenon of the
Christian church, long before any of our gospels
were written. .... Faith in the resurrection was
not only prevalent but immensely powerful before
any of our NT books were written. Not one of
them would ever have been written but for that
faith. It is not this or that in the NT—1t is not the
story of the empty tomb, or of the appearing of Jesus
in Jerus or in Galilee—which is the primary evi-
dence for the resurrection: it is the NT itself. The
life that throbs in it from beginning to end, the life
that always fills us again with wonder, as it beats
upon us from its pages, is the life which the Risen
Saviour has quickened in Christian souls. The
evidence for the resurrection of Jesus is the existence
of the church in that extraordinary spiritual vitality
which confronts us in the NT. This is its own ex-
planation of its being.”

The best Christian thought of our day has no
more difficulty than had the apostles in holding

and establishing what Principal For-


5. Two syth fitly calls ‘the superhistoric
Contrasted finality of Christ.” In the very
Estimates nature of the case, wherever the prob-
of Our lem of Our Lord’s person has been
Lord’s seriously faced, there have always
Person been two distinct estimates of His


value, that of assured faith, based
upon personal experience of His redemptive power,
and that of mere externalism.

(1) The latter or non-believing estimate has no
more right now to call itself “historical” or “sci-
entific,” than it had, nearly nineteen hundred
years ago, to crucify the Lord of glory. The priests


Christianity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


624


doubtless thought that they understood Jesus better
than the ignorant, deluded Galileans. Yet the
boldest champion of ‘‘the religio-historic method”
would scarcely claim that theirs was the correct
judgment. As a matter of fact, the so-called criti-
cal school are no more free from presuppositions
than is the most thoroughgoing traditionalist. Nor
have they a monopoly either of historical knowledge
or of critical acumen. No truths are accessible
to them which are not equally available for the
Christian believer. No proof exists, beyond their
own unsupported assertions, that they are better
interpreters of the common truth. On the other
hand, that whole range of experience and conviction
in which the Christian believer finds the supreme
assurance of the truth of his religion is to them a


sealed book. Surely, then, it is the height of absurd-’


ity to maintain that the external, non-believing,
estimate of Our Lord’s person is hkely to be the
more correct one. From the standpoint of Chris-
tian faith, such an external estimate is necessarily
inadequate, whether it finds expression in a mechan-
ical acceptance of the whole ecclesiastical Chris-
tology, or in the denial that such a person as Jesus
of Nazareth ever lived.

(2) The believing estimate of Our Lord’s person
is the essence of Christianity as a historical religion.
But according to the NT this estimate ig itself
Divinely inwrought and Divinely attested (Mt 16
17; 1 Cor 12 8; 1 Jn 4 2.3). It presupposes
the perfect objective self-manifestation of God in
Jesus Christ on the one hand, and the subjective
appropriation of this revelation by faith on the
other. No argument against the reality of the
revelation can be built upon the fact, generally
acknowledged by Christian theologians nowadays
that the Deity of Our Lord and the supernatural
origin of our religion can neither be proved nor
disproved independently of one’s personal attitude
to Christianity. This follows necessarily from the
nature of the apprehension of Divine truth. Spirit-
ual things are spiritually discerned. There can
be no impersonal knowledge of religious, any more
than of ethical and aesthetic, truth. In these
realms another’s knowledge has no real meaning
for anyone till he has felt its power and tested it in
his own experience. Evangelical Christians do
not accept the Deity of the Lord as the cardinal
article of their religious faith on any merely external
authority whether of Scripture or of tradition, or
even of His own recorded words apart from experi-
ence of Christ. They accept it precisely as they
accept the authority of Scripture itself, because
of the witness of the Spirit with their spirits. The
combined testimony of Scripture and tradition is
confirmed in their religious life, when by receiving
Jesus as Our Lord and Saviour they experience the
Christian power. This power is the great experi-
enced reality in the light of which alone the other
realities become intelligible. ‘One thing I know,
that, whereas I was blind, now I see” (Jn 9 25).
“Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words
of eternal life’ (Jn 6 68).

The true church of Christ consists of all who have
experienced the power of Christ, delivering them

from the guilt, the stain, and the
6. Chris- dominion of sin and bringing the peace
tianityan of God into their souls. Nothing
Experience less than this is either the gospel of
of Salvation Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,

or the historic faith of Christendom,
or a religion adequate to human need. The
Christian doctrine is partly the assertion of the
reality of this power, partly its interpretation.
Facts of history and theological propositions are
vital to our faith, just in proportion as they are
vitally related to this power. The Christian essen-


tials are those elements, historical and dogmatic,
without which Christianity would lose in whole or
in part its living power to reconcile sinful man to the

all-righteous, loving God.
Thus Jesus Himself belongs to His gospel. He
is the heart and core of it. Christianity is both a
rule of life and a doctrine. But in


7. Jesus its inmost nature and being it is
and the neither an ethic, nor a theology, but a
Gospel religion—a, new relation to God and


man, Divinely mediated through Jesus
Christ in His life, death and resurrection. As
many as receive Him, to them gives He the right to
become children of God, even to them that believe
on Hig name, who are born not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God
(Jn 112). He brings man to God by bringing
God to man, and the power of God into man’s
sin-stained life.
It can scarcely be claimed that NT Christianity
was in a theological point of view absolutely homo-


geneous. Various types can be dis-
8. NT tinguished with more or less clearness;
Types of even the ordinary reader feels a differ-
Doctrines ence of theological atmosphere between


e.g. Rom and Jas. This is inevitable,
and need occasion no perplexity to Christian
faith. All theology is partly interpretation—the
relation of universal and eternal reality to personal
thought. Hofmann rightly says that genuine
Christian faith is one and the same for all, but that
everyone must have his own theology, if he is to
have any at all. In all genuine serious thought
there is a personal element not precisely the same
for any two individuals. It is possible to find in
the NT foreshadowings of all the great distinctive
types of historic Christianity. But the essential
purpose of the NT is to make Christ real to us,
to proclaim reconciliation to God through Him,
and to convey the Christian power to our lives.
The NT everywhere exhibits the same Christ, and
bears witness to the same redeeming, life-trans-
forming power.

The attempt has often been made to explain
Christianity as the natural product of contemporary
forces intellectual and religious—most
9. Natural- recently by the so-called “religio-
istic Inter- historic school.” But at most they
pretations— have only shown that the form in
the Religio- which the religious concepts of primi-
Historic tive Christianity found articulate
School expression was to some extent in-
fluenced ab extra, and that the earliest
Christiana were in their general intellectual out-
look the children of their own time. They have
not proved that the distinctive content of Chris-
tianity was derived from any external source.
They have not even realized what they have to
prove, in order to make good their contention.
They have done nothing to account for the Christian
power on their principles.


Joan DickiE

Il. Historical and Doctrinal.—In its historical
and doctrinal relations, developments, and influence,
and its connection with the successive phases of
human thought, Christianity presents many points
of interest, only the more prominent of which can
here briefly be touched upon.

A convenient starting-point is the well-known
distinction of Lessing (Fragment in Works, XI,


625


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Christianity


242 ff) between “the religion of Christ” and “the
Christian religion” —a distinction which still ex-
actly marks the attitude to Christianity


1. “Reli- of the modern so-called “historical”
gion of school. By “the religion of Christ”
Christ’ is meant the religion which Christ
and “The Himself acknowledged and practised
Christian as man; by “the Christian religion”
Religion” is meant the view which regards Christ


as more than man, and exalts Him
as an object of worship. From this standpoint
the problem for the historian is to show how the
religion of Christ came to develop into the Christian
religion—in modern speech, how the “Jesus of
history” became the “Christ of faith.”

(1) The historical Jesus is supernatural —It has
already been pointed out (under I above) that the
view of Jesus on which the assumed contrast rests
is not one truly historical. The fallacy lies in
regarding the Jesus of history as simply a man
among men—holier, diviner in insight, but not
essentially distinguished from the race of which He
was a member. This is not the Christ of apostolic
faith, but as little is it the picture of the historical
Jesus as the Gospels actually present it. There,
in His relations alike to God and to man, in His
sinlessness, in His origin, claims, relation to OT
revelation, judgeship of the world, in His resurrec-
tion, exaltation, and sending of the Spirit, Jesus
appears in a light which it is impossible to confine
within natural or purely human limits. He is
the Saviour who stands over against the race He
came to save. It is the same fallacy which under-
lies the contrast frequently sought to be drawn
between the religious standpoints of Christ and Paul.
Paul never for an instant dreamt of putting himself
on the same plane with Christ. Paul was sinner;
Christ was Saviour. Paul was disciple; Christ was


Lord. Paul was weak, struggling man; Christ was:


Son of God. Jesus achieved redemption; Paul ap-
propriated it. These things involved the widest
contrasts in attitude and speech.

(2) Essence of Christianity in redemption.
Though, therefore, Christ, in His relations of love
and trust to the Father, and perfection of holy
character, necessarily ever remains the Great
Exemplar to whose image His people are to be
conformed (Rom 8 29), in whose steps they are to
follow (1 Pet 2 21), it is not correct to describe
Christianity simply as the religion which Christ
practised. Christianity takes into account also the
work which Christ came to do, the redemption He
achieved, the blessings which, through Him, are be-
stowed on those who accept Him as their Saviour,
and acknowledge Him as their Lord. Essentially
Christianity is a religion of redemption; not, there-
fore, a religion practised by Jesus for Himself, but
one based on a work He has accomplished for others.
Experimentally, it may be described as consisting,
above all, in the joyful consciousness of redemption
from sin and reconciliation to God through Jesus
Christ, and in the possession of a new life of sonship
and holiness through Christ’s Spirit. Everything in
the way of holy obedience is included here. This,
at least, reduced to its simplest. terms, is undeniably
what Christianity meant for its first. preachers and
teachers, and what historically it has meant for the
church ever since. :

Definitions of Christianity are as numerous as
the writers who treat of the subject; but one or two

definitions may be glanced at as illus-
2. Modern trative of the positions above assumed.
Definitions As modern types, Schleiermacher and

Ritschl may be selected in preference
to writers of more conspicuous orthadoxy.

(1) Schleiermacher, in his Der Christliche Glaube,
has an interesting definition of Christianity. Chris-


tianity he speaks of as “a form of monotheistic
faith, of the teleological order of religion (i.e. in
which the natural is subordinated to the moral),
the peculiarity of which, in distinction from other
religions of this type, essentially is, that in it every-
thing is referred to the redemption accomplished
through Jesus of Nazareth” (sec. 11). As, in
general, Schleiermacher’s merit is recognized to lie
in his bringing back, in a time of religious decay,
the person of Christ to a central place in His religion,
so here his true religious feeling is manifested in his
fixing on the reference to redemption by Christ as
the distinctive thing in Christianity.

(2) Ritschi’s definition is more complicated, and
need not here be cited infull (cf his Justif. and Recon,
II; ET, 13). The important point is that, like
Schleiermacher, Ritschl gives, together with the idea
of the kingdom of God, an essential place to the idea
of redemption in the conception of Christianity.
“Christianity,” he says, ‘so to speak, resembles
not a circle described from a single centre, but an
ellipse which is determined by two foci” (Jb., 11).
The idea of the kingdom of God furnishes the tel-
eological, the idea of redemption the religious, ele-
ment in Christianity. There is truth in this; only it
is to be remembered that the kingdom of God, as
representing the end, can only, in a world of sin, be
brought into existence through a redemption. Re-
demption, therefore, still remains the basal concep-
tion.

In the enlarged view of modern knowledge,
Christianity can be no longer regarded in isolation,

but is seen to take its place in the long
3. Place in series of historical religions. It ap-
Historical pears, like these other religions, in a
Religions _ historical context; has, like some of

them, a personal founder; claims, as
they also do, or did, the allegiance of multitudes
of the population of the world; presents in externals
(e.g. the possession of Scriptures), sometimes in
ideas, analogies to features in these religions. For
this reason, an influential modern school is disposed
to treat’ Christianity, as before it, the religion of
Israel, as simply one of these historical religions—
“nothing less, but also nothing more’”—explaining
it from the inherent laws of religious development,
and rejecting the idea of any special, authoritative
revelation. Sacred books are pitted against sacred
books; moral codes against moral codes; Jesus
against founders of other religions; gospel stories
against legends of the Buddha; ideas like those
of the virgin birth, the incarnation, the resurrection,
against seeming parallels on other soils. For
examination of the principal of these alleged re-
semblances, see CoMPARATIVE RELIGION.

(1) This place unique—Here it is desirable to look
at the place of Christianity in the series of historical
religions in certain of its wider aspects. The
uniqueness of Christ’s religion, and justification of
its claim to a special, Divine origin, will only appear
the more clearly from the comparison. In general,
it need only be remarked that no other religion in
the world has ever even professed to present a
plain, historically developed, progressive revelation,
advancing through successive stages in the unfald-
ing of a Divine purpose of grace, till it culminates
in the appearance of a person, life, character and
work, like that of Jesus Christ; not in one single
instance.

(2) Universality of Christianity —A distinction
is commonly made between national and univer-
sal religions, and Christianity is classed as one
of the three universal religions—the other two being
Buddhism and Mohammedanism (cf e.g. Kuenen’s
Hibbert Lectures on National Religions and Uni-
versal Religions). There is certainly agreement
in the fact that the two religions named with Chris-


Christianity


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


626


tianity are not “national” religions; that they are
“universal,” in the sense in which Christianity is,
may he denied. Neither Buddhism nor Moham-
medanism has any fitness to hecome a religion for
the world, nor, with all their remarkable extension,
have they succeeded in establishing themselves,
as Christianity has done, in East and West, in
Old World and in New. Mohammed boasted that
he would plant his religion wherever the palm tree
grew (Palgrave), and this still marks very nearly
the range of its conquests. It is not a revivifying
influence, but a blight on all higher civilization. It
degrades woman, perpetuates slavery, fosters
intolerance, and brings no real healing for the
spiritual woes of mankind. Buddhism, again,
notwithstanding its wide spread in China and neigh-
boring lands, has in it no real spring of moral
progress, and is today withering up at the root. Its
system of “salvation’”—attainment of Nirvana—
is not for the many hut the few. It has not a
message for all men alike. Buddha does not pro-
fess that all can accept his method, or ought to be
asked to do so. For the multitude it is impossible
of attainment. In practice, therefore, instead of
one, he has three codes of duty—one for the laity,
who continue to live in the world; one for the
monks, who do not aspire to Arahatship or saint-
hood: and one for those who would reach the goal
of Nirvana. These last are very few; only two
cases are specified, besides Buddha himself, of
success in this endeavor. In contrast with these
Christianity approves itself as a strictly universal
religion—the only religion of its kind in the world.
In its doctrines of the one God and Father, and of
the brotherhood of all mankind; its teaching on uni-
versal need through sin, and universal provision for
salvation in Christ; its gospel of reconciliation
addressed to all; its pure spirituality in worship
and morality; its elevating and emancipating tend-
ency in all the relations of human life, it approves
itself as a religion for all sections and races of man-
kind, for all grades of civilization and stages of
culture, appealing to that which is deepest in man,
capable of being understood and received by all,
and renewing and blessing each one who accepts
and obeys it. The history of missions, even among
the most degraded races, in all parts of the glohe,
is the demonstration of this truth. (On the uni-
versalism of Christianity, cf Baur, Church Hist
of the First Three Cents., I, Pt 1.)

(3) The absolute religion —It is the custom, even
in circles where the full supernatural claims of
Christianity are not admitted, to speak of Christ’s
religion as, in comparison with others, ‘‘the absolute
religion,” meaning by this that in Christianity the
true idea of religion, which in other faiths is only
striven after, attains to complete and final expres-
sion. Hegel, e.g. speaks of Christianity as the
“Absolute or Revealed Religion” in the sense that
in it the idea is discovered of the essential unity of
God and man (thus also T. H. Green, E. Caird,
etc); others (e.g. Pfleiderer) in the meaning that
it expresses the absolute “principle” of religion—a
Divine sonship. Christianity also claims for itself,
though in a more positive way, to he the ahsolute
religion. It is thefinal and perfect revelation of God
for which not only revelation in Israel, but the whole
providential history of the race, was a Divinely
ordained preparation (Gal 4 4). It is absolute
in the sense that a larger and fuller revelation
than Christ has given is not needed, and is not
to be looked for. Not only in this religion is all
truth of Nature about God’s being, attributes and
character, with all truth of OT revelation, purely
gathered up and preserved, but in the person and
work of the incarnate Son a higher and more com-
plete disclosure is made of God’s Fatherly love and


gracious purposes to mankind, and a redemption is
presented as actually accomplished adequate to all
the needs of a sinful world. Mankind can never
hope to attain to a higher idea of God, a truer idea
of man, a profounder conception of the end of life,
of sin, of duty, a Diviner provision for salvation,
amore perfect satisfaction in fellowship with God,
a grander hope of eternal life, than is opened to it
in the gospel. In this respect again, Christianity
stands alone (cf W. Douglas Mackenzie, The Final
Faith, a Statement of the Nature and Authority of
Christianity as the Religion of the World).

(4) Religion of redemption—A third aspect in
which Christianity as a historical religion is some-
times regarded is as a religion of redemption. In
this light a comparison is frequently instituted
between it and Buddhism, which also in some sort
is a religion of redemption. But the comparison
brings out only the more conspicuously the unique
and original character of the Christian system.
Buddhism starts from the conception of the inherent
evil and misery of existence, and the salvation it
promises as the result of indefinitely prolonged
striving through many successive lives is the
eternal rest and peace of non-heing; Christianity,
on the other hand, starts from the conception that
everything in its original nature and in the intent
of its Creator is good, and that the evil of the world
is the result of wrong and perverted development—
holds, therefore, that redemption from it is possible
by use of appropriate means. And redemption
here includes, not merely deliverance from existing
evils, but restoration of the Divine likeness which
has been lost by man, and ultimate hlessedness of
the life everlasting. Dr. Boyd Carpenter sums up
the contrast thus: “In Buddhism redemption comes
from below; in Christianity it is from above; in
Buddhism it_comes from man; in Christianity it
comes from God” (Permanent Elements in Religion,
Intro, 34).

Christianity, as an external magnitude, has a
long and chequered history, into the details of

which it is not the purpose of this art.
4. Devel- to enter. Ecclesiastical developments
opment and are left untouched. But a little may
Influence he said of its outward expansion, of

the influences that helped to mould
its doctrinal forms, and of the influence which it
in turn has exercised on the thought and life of the
peoples into whose midst it came.

(1) Expansion of Christianity—From the first
Christianity aimed at being a world-conquering
principle. The task it set before itself was stu-
pendous. Its message was not one likely to com-
mend it to either Jew or Greek (1 Co 1 23).
It renounced temporal weapons (in this a contrast
with Mohammedanism); had nothing to rely on
but the naked truth. Yet from the beginning (Acts
2) it had a remarkable reception. Its universal
principle was still partially veiled in the Jewish-
Christian communities, but with Paul it freed itself
from all limitations, and entered on a period of rapid
and wide diffusion.

(a) The apostolic age: It is the peculiarity of
the Pauline mission, as Professor W. M. Ramsay
points out, that it followed the great lines of Rom
communication, and aimed at establishing itself in
the large cities—the centers of civilization (Church
in Roman Empire, 147, etc). The Book of Acts
and the Epistles show how striking were the results.
Churches were planted in all the great cities of
Asia Minor and Macedonia. In Rome Tacitus
testifies that by the time of Nero’s persecution (64
AD) the Christians were a “great multitude”
(“ingens multitudo” [Annals xv.44]).

(b) Succeeding period: Our materials for esti-
mating the progress of Christianity in the post-


627


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Christianity


apostolic age are scanty, but they suffice to show
us the church pursuing its way, and casting its spell
alike on East and West, in centers of civilization
and dim regions of barbarism. In the last. quarter
of the 2d cent. great churches like those of Carthage
and Alexandria burst into visibility, and reveal
how firm a hold the new religion was taking of the
empire. Deadly persecution could not stop this
march of the church to victory. From the middle
_ of the 3d cent. there is no question that it was pro-
gressing by leaps and bounds. This is the period
in which Harnack puts its great expansion (Ez-
pansion, II, 455, ET). On the back of the most
relentless persecution it had yet endured, the
Diocletian, it suddenly found itself raised by the
arms of Constantine to a position of acknowledged
supremacy. By this time it had penetrated into
all ranks of society, and reckoned among its ad-
herents many of noblest birth.

(c) Modern missions: It is unnecessary to trace
the subsequent course of Christianity in its con-
quest of the northern nations. For a time the zeal
for expansion slumbered, but, with the revival of
the missionary spirit at the close of the 18th cent.,
a new forward movement began, the effects of which
in the various regions of the heathen world are only
now beginning to be realized. It is impossible to
read without a thrill what was accomplished by the
pioneers of Christian missions in the South Seas and
other early fields; now the tidings of what is being
done in India, China, Japan, Korea, Africa and
elsewhere, by Christian preaching and education,
awaken even more astonishment. Countries long
closed against the gospel are now opened, and the
standard of the cross is being carried into all. The
church is arousing to its missionary obligations as
never before. Still, with all this progress, im-
mense obstacles remain to be overcome. Including
all the populations of nominally Christian lands
the adherents of the Christian religion are reckone
to amount only to some 560,000,000, out of a total
of over 1,600,000,000 of the population of the world
(Hickmann). This looks discouraging, but it is
to be remembered that it is the Christian peoples
that represent the really progressive portion of the
human race.

(2) The doctrinal shaping of Christianity has
taken place largely as the result of conflict with op-
posing errors. First, as was inevitable, its conflict
was waged with that narrowest section of the Jew-
ish-Christian community—the Ebionites of early
church history—who, cleaving to circumcision,
disowned Paul, and insisted that the Gentiles
should observe the law (Gal 5 13.14; see Exron-
ives). These, as a party of reaction, were soon
left behind, and themselves fell under heretical
(Essenian) influences.

(a) Gnosticism: A more formidable conflict
was that with Gnosticism—the distinctive heresy
of the 2d cent., though its beginnings are already
within the apostolic age (cf Lightfoot, Colossians).
This strange compound of oriental theosophy and
ideas borrowed from Christianity (see Gnosticism)
would have dissolved Christ’s religion into a tissue
of phantasies, and all the strength and learning
of the Church were needed to combat its influence.
Its opposition -was overruled for good in leading to
a fixing of the earliest creed (see APOSTLES CREED),
the formation of an authoritative NT canon (see
Brie; Canon), and the firm assertion of the reality
of Christ’s humanity. roe

(b) Monarchianism: Christianity had now entered
the world of Gr thought, and ere long had contests
to sustain within its own borders. First came as-
saults (3d cent.) on the idea of the Trinity in what
are known as the Monarchian heresies—the asser-
tion that the Father Himself was incarnate and


suffered in Christ (Patripassianism), or that the
Trinity consisted only in ‘‘modes” of the Divine
self-revelation (Sabellianism).

(c) Arianism: These were hardly repelled when
a yet greater danger overtook the church in the
outbreak (318 AD) of the violent Arian controversy,
the Son Himself being now declared to be a creature,
exalted, before all worlds, but not truly of the nature
of God. The commotion produced by this contro-
versy led to the summoning of the first ecumenical
council—that of Nicaea (325 AD), and the framing
of the Nicene Creed, affirming the full deity of the
Son. A like controversy about the Spirit (the
Macedonian, 4th cent.), led to the confirming of
this creed, and adoption of additional clauses, at
the Council of Constantinople (381 AD).

(d) Sin and grace: The doctrine of the Trinity
was now settled, but new controversies speedily
sprang up—in the West on sin and grace (Pelagius
and Augustine) (411-18 AD), and in the East in the
long series of controversies known as the Chris-
tological, bearing on the right apprehension of the
person of Christ (4th to 7th cents.): as against Pe-
lagius, who denied original sin, and affirmed man’s
natural ability to keep the whole law of God,
Augustine vindicated the complete dependence of
man on the grace of God for his salvation.

(e) Person of Christ: And as against errors succes-
sively denying the reality of a human soul in Jesus
(Appollinarianism), dissolving the unity of His per-
son (Nestorianism, condemned at Ephesus, 431 AD),
or conversely, fusing together the Divine and human
into one nature (Kutychianism, Monophysitism),
the church maintained, and embodied in a Creed at
Chalcedon (451 AD), the integrity of the two natures,
Divine and human, in the one Divine person of the
Lord. These decisions are upheld by all branches
of the church—Gr, Lat, Protestant.

(f) The atonement: The mediaeval scholastic
period made one great advance in the attempt of
Anselm in his Cur Deus Homo (1089) to lay deep
the foundations of a doctrine of atonement in the
idea of the necessity of a satisfaction for human
sin: Abelard, on the other hand, denied the need
of satisfaction, and became the representative of
what are known as moral theories of the atonement.
It was reserved for the Protestant Reformers, how-
ever, to bring this doctrine to its true bearing, as
furmshing the ground for man’s free justification
before God in his union with Christ, who had made
full satisfaction for his guilt. There have been many
theories of atonement, but the idea that Christ has
“satisfied Divine justice’ is too firmly imbedded
in all the Reformation creeds, and has too profound
a Scriptural support, to be removed.

(g) The 16th cent. Reformation, on its outward
side, was a revolt against the errors and corruptions
of the papacy, but in its positive aspect it may be
described as the reassertion of the sole mediator-
ship of Christ (as against priestly intervention),
the sole authority of Scripture (as against tradition),
and justification by faith alone (as against salvation
by works of merit). The schism meant a separation
of the great Protestant communities and nations
from the church of Rome, which, by its claim of
papal supremacy, had already separated from itself
the great Gr communion.

(hk) Lutheran and Reformed: Withiu Protestant-
ism itself a difference of genius between the Swiss
and German Reformers, with divergences of view
on the sacraments, led to the formation of two main
types—the Lutheran (German) and the Reformed
(Swiss)—and between these two, as respects theol-
ogy and church order, later Protestantism has
mostly been divided. Luther represented the one;
Calvin for long was the chief name in the other.
With the rise of Arminianism and other forms of


Christianity
Chronicles


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


628


dissent from the peculiarities of Calvinism, the
aspect of Protestantism became more variegated.
Of the later divisions, producing the numerous
modern sects which yet own allegiance to the
common head (Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Metho-
dists, Baptists, Congregationalists, etc), it is not
necessary here to speak. The unity of spirit re-
vealed in creed, worship and combined endeavors
in Christ’s service goes deeper than all outward
differences.

(8) Its influence——Christianity preaches a king-
dom of God, or supremacy of God’s will in human
hearts and human affairs, by which is meant, on
its earthly side, nothing less than a complete recon-
struction of society on the two great bases of love
to God and love to man—‘‘Thy will be done, as in
heaven, so on earth” (Mt 6 10). The influence of
Christianity is paramount in all the great advances
that have been made in the moral and social amel-
ioration of the state of mankind.

(a) The ancient world: It was so undoubtedly
in the ancient world. The world into which Chris-
tianity came was one fast sinking into dissolution
through the weight of its own corruptions. Into
that world Christianity brought a totally new idea
of man as being of infinite dignity and immortal
worth. It restored the well-nigh lost sense of
responsibility and accountability to God; breathed
into the world a new spirit of love and charity, and
created that wealth of charitable and beneficent
institutions with which Christian lands are now
full (Lecky speaks of it as ‘‘covering the globe with
countless institutions of mercy, absolutely unknown
in the whole pagan world,” Hist of Morals, II, 91);
set up a new moral ideal and standard of integrity
which has acted as an elevating force on moral
conceptions till the present hour; restored woman
to her rightful place as man’s helpmeet and equal;
created the Christian home; gave the slave an
equal place with his master in the kingdom of God,
and struck at the foundations of slavery by its
doctrines of the natural brotherhood and dignity
of man; created self-respect, and a sense of duty
in the use of one’s powers for self-support and
the benefit of others; urged to honest labors; and
in a myriad other ways, by direct teaching, by the
protest of holy lives, and by its general spirit,
struck at the evils, the malpractices, the cruelties
of the time.

(b) The modern world: Despite many failures,
and gross backslidings in the church itself, these
ideas, implanted in the world, and liberating other
forces, have operated ever since in advancing the
progress of the race. They exist and operate far
beyond the limits of the church. They have been
taken up and contended for by men outside the
church—by unbelievers even—when the church
itself had become unfaithful to them. None the
less they are of Christian parentage. They lie at
the basis of our modern assertion of equal rights,
of justice to the individual in social and state
arrangements, of the desire for brotherhood, peace
and amity among classes and nations. It is Chris-
tian love which is sustaining the best, purest and
most self-sacrificing efforts for the raising of the
fallen, the rescue of the drunkard, the promotion
of enlightenment, virtues, social order and happi-
ness. Itis proving itself the grand civilizing agency
in other regions of the world. Christian missions,
with their benign effects in the spread of education,
the checking of social evils and barbarities, the crea-
tion of trade and industry, the change in the status
of women, the advance in social and civilized life,
generally, is the demonstration of it (see Dennis,
Christian Missions and Social Progress).

(c) Testimony of Huxley: Professor Huxley
will not be regarded as a biased witness on behalf


of Christianity. Yet this is what he writes on the
influence of the Christian Scriptures, and his words
may be a fitting close to this article: “Through-
out the history of the western world,” he says,
“the Scriptures, Jewish, and Christian, have been
the great instigators of revolt against the worst
forms of clerical and political despotism. The
Bible has been the Magna Charta of the poor, and
of the oppressed; down to modern times no state
has had a constitution in which the interests of the
people are so largely taken into account, in which’
the duties, so much more than the privileges, of.
rulers are insisted upon, as that drawn up for Israel
in Dt and Lev; nowhere is the fundamental truth
that the welfare of the State, in the long run, de-
pends upon the uprightness of the citizen so strongly
laid down. Assuredly the Bible talks no trash about
the rights of man; but it insists upon the equality of
duties, on the liberty to bring about that righteous-
ness which is somewhat. different from struggling for
‘rights’; on the fraternity of taking thought for one’s
neighbor as for one’s self.”.

Lirzerature.—See works cited in Part I above; also
Kuenen, Hibhert Lectures for 1882, National Religions
aud Universal Religions; W. M. Ramsay, The Church
in the Roman Empire; M. Dods, Mohammed, Buddha,
and Christ; on early expansion of Christianity, Harnack,
Mission and Expansion of Christianity, and Orr, Neg-
lected Factors in the Study of the Early Progress of Chris-
tianity; on the essence of Christianity, W. Douglas
Mackenzie, The Final Faith; on the influence of Chris-
tianity, C. L. Brace, Gesta Christi; Ublhorn, Christian
Charity in the Ancient Church; C. Schmidt, Social Re-
sults of Harly Christianity; Lecky, History of European
Morals; Dennis, Christian Missions and Social Progress;
Reports of World Miss. Conference, 1910.


JAMES ORR
CHRISTOLOGY, kris-tol’o-ji. See Person or
CHRIST.
CHRISTS, krists. See Curists, Fause; MEs-
SIAH.


CHRISTS, FALSE, féls (Wevddexpiorrot, pseudéd-
christot): In His discourse on the last things,
uttered by Him on the Tuesday of the
1. Christ’s week of His Passion, Jesus solemnly
Warnings forewarned His disciples that many
would come in His name, saying “I am
the Christ,” who would deceive many; that there
would arise false Christs and false prophets, who
would show great signs and wonders, so as to lead
astray, if possible, even the elect; that, therefore, if
any man said to them, ‘Lo, here is the Christ,’’ or
“Lo, there,” they were not to believe it (Mt 24
5.11.23-25; Mk 18 6.21-23; Lk 21 8).
The warning was needed. De Wette, Meyer,
and others have, indeed, pointed out that there is
no historical record of anyone expressly
2. Early claiming to be the Christ prior to the
Notices destruction of Jerus. This, however,
is probably only in appearance (cf
Lange, Comm. on Mt 24 3). Edersheim remarks:
“Though in the multitude of impostors, who, in
the troubled time between the rule of Pilate and
the destruction of Jerus, promised Messianic
deliverance to Israel, few names and claims of this
kind have been specially recorded, yet the hints
in the NT, and the references, however guarded,
in the Jewish historian, imply the appearance
of many such seducers” (Jesus ihe Messiah, V,
ch vi; in 1906 ed, II, 446). The revolts in this
period were generally connected with religious pre-
tensions in the leaders (Jos, BJ, II, xiii, 4—“de-
ceived and deluded the people under pretense of
Divine inspiration’), and, in the fevered state of
Messianic expectation, can hardly have lacked, in
some instances, a Messianic character. Judas of
Galilee (Acts 5 37; Jos, Ant, XVIII, i, 1,6; BJ, II,
viii, 1) founded a numcrous sect (the Gaulonites)


629


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Christianity
Chronicles


by many of whom, according to Origen (Hom on
Lk, 25), he was regarded as the Messiah (cf
DB, 8.v.). The Theudas of Acts 6 36, “giving
himself out to be somehody,” may or may not be
the same as the Theudas of Jos (Ant, XX, v, 1),
but the latter, at least, made prophetic claims and
deluded many. He promised to divide the river Jor-
dan by a word. Another instance is the “Egyp-
tian” for whom Paul was mistaken, who had made
an “uproar” (Acts 21 38; RV “sedition’”’)—one
of a multitude of “impostors and deceivers,” Jos
tells us, who persuaded multitudes to follow them
into the wilderness, pretending that they would
exhibit wonders and signs (Ant, XX, viii, 6).
This Egyptian was to show them that, at his com-
mand, the walls of Jerus would fall down (BJ, II,
xiii, 5). Of another class was the Samaritan Dosi-
theus, with whom Simon Magus was said to be
connected (see refs to Eusebius, Origen, Hippolytus,
Clementine writings, etc,in DB,s.v.). Heis alleged
to have been regarded as “the prophet like unto
Moses,’’ whom God was to raise up.
The most celebrated case of a false Christ is
that of Bar-Cochba (to give the name its usual
form), the leader of the great insur-
3. Bar- rection under Hadrian in 132 AD (Eus.,
Cochba HE, IV,6; for Jewish and other authori-
ties, see the full account in Schirer,
HJP, 1, 2, pp. 297 ff, ET). The insurrection was
on a scale which it required the whole force of the
Rom empire to put down (cf Schiirer). The leader’s
own name was Simon, but the title, ‘“Bar-Cochba”’
(“son of a star’), was given him with reference to
the prophecy in Nu 24 17 of the star that should
come out of Jacob. Rabbi Akiba, the most cele-
brated doctor of his time, applied this prophecy,
with that in Hag 2 6.7, to Simon, and announced
him as the Messiah. He is commonly known in
Jewish lit. as Barcosiba, probably from his birth-
place. Immense multitudes flocked to his standard,
and the Christians in Pal were severely persecuted.
Coins were issued in his name. After tremendous
efforts the rebellion was crushed, and Jerus was
converted into a Rom colony (Aelia Capitolina),
which Jews were forbidden to enter.
Among the Jews themselves, in later times,
many pseudo-Messiahs have arisen. An interesting
account of some of these is given by


4, Jewish Mr. Elkan Adler in his Introduction
Pseudo- to the volume, Aspects of the Heb
Messiahs Genius (London, Rontledge, 1910).


“Such there had been,” this writer says,
“from time to time ever since the destruction of
the Temple.” Inthe 16th and 17th cents., however,
the belief in pseudo-Messiahs took new and remark-
able shapes. Among the names mentioned is
that of David Reubeni, or David of the tribe of
Reuben (1524), who ultimately fell a sacrifice to
the Inquisition. Under his influence a Portuguese
royal secretary, Diego Pires, adopted the Jewish
faith, changed his name to Solomon Molko, and
finally proclaimed himself the Messiah. In 1529
he published some of his addresses under the title
of The Book of Wonder. He was burned at the
stake at Mantua. “Other Kabbalists, such as
Tsaac Luria and Chajim Vital and Abraham Shalom,
proclaimed themselves to be Messiahs or forerunners
of the Messiah, and their works and MSS are still
piously studied by many oriental Jews.” The
chief of all these false Messiahs was Sabbatai
Zevi, born at Smyrna in 1626. “His adventures,”
it is said, “created a tremendous stir in western
Europe.” He ultimately became an apostate to
Islam; notwithstanding which fact he had a line
of successors, in whom the sect of Donmeh, in
Salonica, continue to believe. Another mentioned
ig Jacob Frank, of Podolia, who revealed himself


in 1755 as the Holy Lord, in whom there dwelt
the same Messiah-soul that had dwelt in David,
Elijah, Jesus, Mohammed, Sabbatai Zevi, and his
followers. Jewish lit. in the 18th cent. is full of
controversial writing connected with Sabbatianism.
As a special source of information on modern false
Messiahs among the Jews, Lange mentions the serial
Dibhré ’emeth, or Words of Truth (Breslau, 1853-
54). James ORR


CHRONICLES, kron’‘i-k’ls, BOOKS OF ("137
DAN, dibheré ha-yamim, “The Words of the Days”;
LXX Ilapadctropévwr, paraleipoménin):

The Name

. The Position of Chronicles in the OT

Two Books, or One?

The Contents

Sources Biblical and Extra-Biblical

Nehemiah’s Library

. The Way of Using the Biblical Sources

. Additions by the Chronicler

. Omissions by the Chronicler

10. The Extra-Biblical Sources

11. The Object in Writing the Books of Chronicles

12. The Text

13. Critical Estimates

14. Date and Authorship

15. Evidence as to Date and Authorship
Arguments for a Later Date

16. Truthfulness and Historicity

633 Alleged Proofs of Untruthfulness

2) Truthfulness in the Various Parts

17. The Values of the Chronicles

LItvERATURE

The analogy of this title to such Eng. words as

diary, journal, chronicle, is obvious. The title is

one which frequently appears in the
1. The Heb of the OT. It is used to denote
Name the records of the Medo-Pers monarchy
(Est 2 23; 6 1; 10 2), and to denote
public records, either Pers or Jewish, made in late
postexilian times (Neh 12 23), and to denote public
records of King David (1 Ch 27 24). Butits most
common use is to denote the Judahite and Israelite
records referred to in the Books of K as sources (1 K
14 19; 15 7 and about 30 other places). The refer-
ences in K are not to our present Books of Ch, for
a large proportion of them are to matters not men-
tioned in these. Either directly or indirectly they
refer the reader to public archives.

As applied to our present Books of Ch this title
was certainly not intended to indicate that they are
strictly copies of public documents, thongh it may
indicate that they have a certain official character
distinguishing them from other contemporary or
future writings. The Gr title is Paraletpomenén,
“Of Things that have been Left Untold.” Some
copies add “concerning the kings of Judah,” and
this is perhaps the original form of the title. That
is, the Gr translators thought of Ch as a supplement
to the other narrative Scriptural books. Jerome
accepted the Gr title, but suggested that the Heb
title would be better represented by a derivative
from the Gr word chrénos, and that this would fit
the character of the book, which is a chronicle of
the whole sacred history. Jerome’s suggestion is
followed in the title given to the book in the Eng.
and other languages. ;

In most of the VSS, as in the Eng., the Books of
Ch are placed after the Books of K, as being a later

account of the matters narrated in


OWNIIAWIO


2. The K; and Ezr and Neh follow Ch as
Position of being continuations of the narrative.
Chronicles In the Heb Bibles the Books of Ezr
inthe OT and Neh and 1 and 2 Ch are placed


last. By common opinion, based on
proof that is entirely sufficient, the three books con-
stitute a single literary work or group of works, by
one author or school of authors. It is convenient
to use the term ‘“‘the Chronicler” to designate the
author, or the authors if there were more than one.


Chronicles


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


630


It is the regulation thing to say that 1 and 2 Ch
were originally one book, which has been divided


into two. The fact is that Ch is
3. Two counted as one book in the count
Books, or which regards the OT as 22 or 24
One? books, and as two books in the count


which regards the whole number of
books as 39; and that both ways of counting have
been in use as far back as the matter can be traced.
Both ways of counting appear in the earliest Chris-
tian lists, those of Origen and Melito, for example.
1 Ch closes with a summary which may naturally
be regarded as the closing of a book.

With respect to their contents the Books of Ch
are naturally divided into three parts. The first

part is preliminary, consisting mostly
4. The of genealogical matters with accom-
Contents panying facts and incidents (1 Ch
1-9). The second part is an account
of the accession and reign of David (1 Ch 10-29).
The third part is an account of the events under
David’s successors in the dynasty (2 Ch).

The genealogies begin with Adam (1 Ch 1 1)
arid extend to the latest OT times (1 Ch 9; cf Neh
11, and the latest names in the genealogical lines,
eg. 1 Ch 3 19 ff). The events incidentally men-
tioned in connection with them are more numerous
and of more importance than the casual reader
would imagine. They are some dozens in number.
Some of them are repeated from the parts of the
OT from which the Chronicler draws as sources—
for example, such statements as that Nimrod was a
mighty one, or that in the time of Peleg the earth
was divided, or the details concerning the kings of
Edom (1 Ch 1 10.19.43 ff; cf Gen 10 8.25; 36
31 ff). Others are instances which the Chronicler
has taken from other sources than the OT—for
instance, the story of Jabez, or the accounts of the
Simeonite conquests of the Meunim and of Amalek
(1 Ch 4 9.10.38-43).

The account in Ch of the reign of David divides
itself into three parts. The first part (1 Ch 10-21)
is a series of sections giving a general view, includ-
ing the death of Saul, the crowning of David over
the twelve tribes, his associates, his wars, the bring-
ing of the ark to Jerus, the great Davidic promise,
the plague that led to the purchase of the thresh-
ing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite. The second part
(1 Ch 22—29 22a) deals with one particular event
and the preparations for it. The event is the mak-
ing Solomon king, at a great public assembly (1 Ch
23 1; 28 1ff). The preparations for it include
arrangements for the site and materials and labor
for the temple that is to be built, and the organ-
izing of Levites, priests, singers, doorkeepers, cap-
tains, for the service of the temple and the kingdom.
The third part (1 Ch 29 226-30) is a brief account
of Solomon’s being made king “a second time”
(ef 1 K 1), with a summary and references for the
reign of David.

The history of the successors of David, as given
in 2 Ch, need not here be commented upon.

The sources of the Books of Ch classify them-
selves as Biblical and extra-Biblica]. Considerably

more than half the contents come
6. Sources from the other OT books, especially
Biblical and from § and K. Other sources men-
Extra- tioned in the Books of Ch are the
Biblical following:
(1) The Book of the Kings of Judah
and Israel (2 Ch 16 11; 26 26; 28 26; 32 32).

(2) The Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah
(2 Ch 27 7; 35 27; 36 8).

, e The Book of the Kings of Israel (2 Ch 20
4).

(4) The Book of the Kings (2 Ch 24 27).

It is possible that these may be four variant forms


of the same title. It is also possible that they may
be references to our present Books of K, though in
that case we must regard the formulas of reference
as conventional rather than exact.

(5) The Book of the Kings of Israel (1 Ch 9 1),
a genealogical work.
at The Midr of the Book of the Kings (2 Ch 24


),
(7) The Words of the Kings of Israel (2 Ch 33
18), referred to for details concerning Manasseh.

Observe that these seven are books of Kings, and
that the contents of the last three do not at all
correspond with those of our Biblical books. In
the seventh title and in several of the titles that
are yet to be mentioned it is commonly understood
that “Words” is the equivalent of “acts” or ‘‘his-
tory”; but it is here preferred to retain the form
“Words,” as lending itself better than the others
to the syntactical adjustments.

(8) The Words of Samuel the Man of Vision and
the Words of Nathan the Prophet and the Words
of Gad the Seer (1 Ch 29 29) are perhaps to be
counted as one work, and identified with our Books
of Jgs and S.

(9) The Words of Nathan the Prophet (2 Ch 9
29; cf 1 K 11 41-53). Source concerning Solomon.

(10) The Prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite (2
Ch 9 29; cf 1 K 11 29 ff; 14 2 ff, etc). Solomon.

(11) The Visions of Jedo the Seer (2 Ch 9 29;
ef | K 13). Solomon.

(12) The Words of Shemaiah the Prophet (2 Ch
12 15; cf 1 K 12 22 ff). Rehoboam.
(13) “Shemaiah wrote’ (1 Ch 24 6). David.

(14) Iddo the Seer in Reckoning Genealogies
(2 Ch 12 15). Rehoboam.

(15) ‘The Words [The History] of Jehu the son
of Hanani, which is inserted in the Book of the
Kings of Israel” (2 Ch 20 34; cf 1 K 16 1.7.12).
Jehoshaphat. ;

(16) “The rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and
last, did Isaiah the Prophet, the son of Amoz,
write’ (2 Ch 26 22; cf Isa 1 1; 6).

(17) “The Vision of Isaiah .... in the Book
of the Kings of Judah and Israel” (2 Ch 32 32;
ef 2 K 18-20; Isa 36-39, etc). Hezekiah.

(18) The Words of the Seers (2 Ch 33 19m).
Manasseh.

(19) References to “Lamentations,” and to “Jer-
emiah,’’ etc (2 Ch 35 25). Josiah.

(20) The Midr of the Prophet Iddo (2 Ch 13
22). Abijah.

These numbers, from 12 to 20, are referred to as
works of prophets. At first thought there is plausi-
bility in the idea that the references may be to the
sections in S and K where these several prophets
are mentioned; but in nearly all the cases this ex-
planation fades out on examination. The Chronicler
had access to prophetic writings not now known to
be in existence. 7

(21) Liturgical writings of David and Solomon
(2 Ch 35 4; ef Ezr 3 10). Josiah.

(22) Commandments of David and Gad and
Nathan (2 Ch 29 25). Hezekiah.

(23) The Commandment of David and Asaph and
Heman and Jeduthun (2 Ch 36 15). Josiah.

(24) Chronicles of King David (1 Ch 27 24).

(25) Last Words of David (1 Ch 23 27).

Add to these many mentions of genealogical works,
connected with particular times, those for example
of David, Jotham, Jeroboam II (1 Ch 9 22; & 17),
and mentions of matters that imply record-keeping,
from Samuel and onward (eg. 1 Ch 26 26-28).
Add also the fact that the Chronicler had a habit,
exhibited in Ezr and Neh, of using and quoting
what he represents to be public documents, for
example, letters to and from Cyrus and Artaxerxes
and Darius and Artaxerxes Longimanus (Ezr 1 1;


631


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Chronicles


6 3; 4 7.17; 6 6; 6 6; 7 11; Neh 27). Itisno
exaggeration to say that the Chronicler claims to

have had a considerable library at his command.
If such a library as this existed we should per-
haps expect to find some mention of it somewhere.
Such a mention I think there is in the


6. Nehe- much discussed passage in 2 Macc 2
miah’s 13-15. It occurs in what purports to
Library be a letter written after 164 BC by,


; the Maccabean leaders in Jerus to
Aristobulus in Egypt. The letter has a good deal
to say concerning Nehemiah, and among other
things this: “And how he, founding a snes
gathered together the books about the kings and
prophets, and the [books] of David, and letters of
kings about sacred gifts.’ It says that these
writings have been scattered by reason of the war,
but that Judas has now gathered them again, and
that they may be at the service of Aristobulus and
his friends.

This alleged letter contains statements that seem
fabulous to most modern readers, though they may
not have seemed so to Judas and his compatriots.
Leaving out of view, however, the intrinsic credi-
bility of the witness, the fitting of the statement
into certain other traditions and into the phenomena
presented in Chronicles is a thing too remarkable
to neglect. In the past, men have cited this pas-
sage as an account of the framing of a canon of
Scripture—the canon of the Prophets, or of the
Prophets and the Hagiographa. But it purports
to be an account of a library, not of a body of
Scripture; and its list of contents does not appear
to be that of either the Prophets or the Hagiog-
rapha or both. But it is an exact list of the
sources to which the author (or authors) of Ch and
Ezr and Neh claim to have access—“books about
the kings” (see above, Nos. 1-7), “and prophets”
(Nos. 8-20), “and of David’’ (Nos. 21-25 ff), “and
letters of kings about sacred gifts” (those cited in
Ezr and Neh). The library attributed to Neh
corresponds to the one which the Chronicler claims
to have used; and the two independent pieces of
evidence strongly confirm each the other.

The method in which the Biblical sources are
used in Ch presents certain remarkable features.

As a typical instance study 1 Ch 10


7. The in comparison with 1 S 31. In verses
Way of 1-12 the passage in Chronicles is just
Using the a transcription, with slight changes, of
Biblical the passage in S. A large part of Ch
Sources is thus made up of passages tran-


scribed from S and K. The alterna-
tive is that the Chronicler transcribed from sources
which had earlier been transcribed in S and K, and
this alternative may in some cases be the true one.
This phenomenon is interesting for many reasons.
It has its bearings on the trustworthiness of the
information given; a copy of an ancient document
is of higher character as evidence than a mere report
of the contents of the document. It has a bearing
on questions concerning the text; are the texts
in K and Ch to be regarded as two recensions? It
is especially interesting as illustrating the literary
processes in usé among the writers of our Scriptures.
It is sometimes said that they used their sources
not by restating the contents as a modern compiler
would do, but by just copying. It would be more
correct to say that they do this part of the time.
In I Ch 10 the copying process ceases with the
12th ver. In vs 13 and 14 the Chronicler con-
denses into a sentence a large part of the contents
of 1S; one clause in particular is a condensation
of 18 28. So it is with other parts. 1 Ch 1 1-4
is abridged from Gen 5 at the rate of a name for a
section; so is 1 Ch 1 24-27 from Gen 11 10-26.
In the various parts of Ch we find all the methods


that are used by any compiler; the differentiating
fact is simply that the method of transcribing is
more used than it would be by a modern compiler.

In the transcribed passages, almost without ex-
ception, there has been a systematic editorial revi-
sion. Words and clauses have been pruned out, and
grammatical roughness smoothed away. Regularly
the text in Chronicles is somewhat briefer, and is
more fluent than in S or K. If we give the matter
careful attention we will be sure that this revi-
sional process took place, and that it accounts for
most of the textual differences between Ch and the
earlier writings, not leaving many to be accounted
for as corruptions.

Of course the most significant changes made by
the Chronicler are those which consist in additions

and omissions. It is a familiar fact
8. Addi- that the added passages in Ch which
tions by the bulk largest are those which deal with
Chronicler the temple and its worship and its

attendants—its priests, Levites, musi-
cians, singers, doorkeepers. Witness for example
the added matter in connection with the bringing
of the ark to Jerus, the preparations for the temple,
the priests’ joining Rehoboam, the war between
Abijah and Jeroboam, the reforms under Asa and
Jehoshaphat, details concerning Uzziah, Hezekiah’s
passover, the reform of Manasseh, the passover of
Josiah (1 Ch 15-16, 22-29; 2 Ch 11 13-17; 13; 14;
15; 17; 19; 20; 26 16-21; 29-31; 33 10-20; 35).
It has been’ less noticed than it should be that while
the Chronicler in these passages magnifies the cere-
monial laws of Moses, he magnifies those of David
yet more.

Next in bulk comes the added genealogical and
statistical matter, for example, the larger part of
the preliminary genealogies, details as to David’s
followers, Rehoboam’s fortified cities and family
affairs with details concerning the Shishak inva-
sion, Asa’s military preparations and the invasion
by Zerah, with numbers and dates, Jehoshaphat’s
military arrangements, with numbers, Jehoram’s
brothers and other details concerning him, Uzziah’s
army and his business enterprises (1 Ch 2-9; 12;
27; 2 Ch 11 5-12.18-23; 12 3-9; 14 3-15; 17
I-5.10-19; 21; 26 6-15).

The Chronicler is sometimes spoken of as inter-
ested in priestly affairs, and not in the prophets.
That is a mistake. He takes particular pains to
magnify the prophets (e.g. 2 Ch 20 20; 36 12.16).
He uses the word “prophet’’ 30 times, and the two
words for “seer” (hdzeh and rd’eh) respectively 5
and 11 times. He gives us additional information
concerning many of the prophets—for example,
Samuel, Gad, Nathan, Ahijah, Shemaiah, Hanani,
Jehu, Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah. He has taken pains
to preserve for us a record of many Prophets con-
cerning whom we should otherwise be ignorant—
Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, Jedo (2 Ch 9 29), Iddo,
the Oded of Asa’s time, Jahaziel the son of Zechariah,
Eliezer the son of Dodavah, two Zechariahs (2 Ch
24 20; 26 5), unnamed prophets of the time of Am-
aziah (2 Ch 26 5-10.15.16), Oded of the time of
Ahaz (2 Ch 28 9). ‘

In addition, however, to the materials that can
be thus classified, it is the method of the Chronicler
to preserve interesting incidents of all kinds by
working them into his narrative. When he reaches
Jair in his genealogical list, he finds himself in
possession of a bit of information not contained
in the older writings, and he inserts it (1 Ch 2
21 ff). He is interested to keep alive the memory
of the “families of scribes which dwelt at Jabez”
(1 Ch 2 55). He has found items concerning
craftsmen, and concerning a linen industry, and a
potters’ industry, and he connects these with names
in his list (1 Ch 4 14.21.23). He has come across


Chronicles


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


632


a bit of a hymn in the name of Jabez, and he at-
taches the hymn to his list of names as an annota-
tion (1 Ch 4 9.10). There are matters concerning
the sickness and the burial of Asa, and concerning
the bad conduct of Joash after the death of Jehoiada,
and concerning constructions by Hezekiah (2 Ch
16 12.13; 24 15-27; 32 27-30), that seem to the
Chronicler worth preserving, though they are not
recorded in the earlier writings. The fruits of the
habit appear, in many scores of instances, in all
parts of the Books of Ch.
As the Books of Ch thus add matters not found
in the older books, so they leave out much that is
contained in the Books of S and K.
9. Omis- Here, however, the question should
sions by the rather be as to what the Chronicler
Chronicler has retained from his sources than as
to what he has omitted. He writes
for readers whom he assumes to be familiar with
the earlier books, and he retains so much of the
older narrative as seems to him necessary for
defining the relations of his new statements of fact
to that narrative. From the point where the history
of David begins he has omitted everything that is
not strictly connected with David or his dynasty—
the history of northern Israel as such, the long nar-
ratives concerning the prophets, such distressing
affairs as those of Amnon and Absalom and Adonijah
and the faithlessness of Solomon, and a multitude of
minor particulars. We have already noticed his
systematic shortening of the passages which he
transcribes.
. There are two marked phenomena in the parts
of Ch which were not taken from the other canonical
books. They are written in later


10. The Heb of a pretty uniform type; many
Extra- parts of them are fragmentary. The
Biblical Heb of the parts that were copied
Sources from 8 and K is of course the classical


Heb of those books, generally made
more classical by the revision to which it has been
subjected. The Heb of the other parts is pre-
sumably that of the Chronicler himself. The dif-
ferenceis unmistakable. An obvious way of account-
ing for it is by supposing that the Chronicler treated
his Scriptural sources with especial respect, and his
other sources with more freedom. We will presently
consider whether this is the true account.

There are indications that some of the non-
Biblical sources were in a mutilated or otherwise
fragmentary condition when the Chronicler used
them. Broken sentences and passages and con-
structions abound. In the tr® these are largely
concealed, the translators having guessed the mean-
ings into shape, but the roughnesses are palpable
inthe Heb. They appear less in the long narratives
than in the genealogies and descriptive passages.
They are sometimes spoken of as if they were char-
acteristic of the later Heb, but there is no sense in
that.

For example, most of the genealogies are incom-
plete. The priestly genealogies omit some of the
names that are most distinguished in the history,
such names as those of Jeholada and two Azariahs
(2 K 119, etc; 2 Ch 26 17; 3110). Many of
the genealogies are given more than once, and in
variant forms, but with their incompleteness still
palpable. There are many breaks in the lists. We
read the names of one group, and we suddenly find
ourselves in the midst of names that belong to
another group, and with nothing to call attention
to the transition. The same phenomena appear
in the sections in 1 Ch 23 2—27. These contain
a succession of matters arranged in absolutely sys-
tematic order in classes and subclasses, while many
of the statements thus arranged are so fragmentary
as to be hardly intelligible. The most natural


explanation of these phenomena assumes that the
writer had a quantity of fragments in writing—
clay tablets, perhaps, or pottery or papyrus, or
what not, more or less mutilated, and that he copied
them as best he could, one after another. A
modern writer, doing such work, would indicate the
lacunae by dots or dashes or other devices. The
ancient copyist simply wrote the bits of text one
after another, without such indications. In regard
to many of the supposable lacunae in Ch scholars
would differ, but there are a large number in regard
to which all would agree. If some one would print
a text of Ch in which these should be indicated, he
would make an important contribution to the in-

telligibility of the books.
On the basis of these phenomena what judgment
can we form as to the purposes for which the books
of Ch were written? There are those


11. The who find the answer to this question a
Object in very simple one. They say that the
Writing the interests of the writer were those of
Books of the temple pricsthood, that it seemed
Chronicles to him that the older histories did not


emphasize these interests as they ought,
and that he therefore wrote a new history, putting
into it the views and facts which he thought should
be there. If this statement were modified so as
not to impugn the good faith of the Chronicler, it
would be nearly correct as a statement of part of
his purpose. His purpose was to preserve what he
regarded as historical materials that were in danger
of being lost, materials concerning the temple-
worship, but also concerning a large variety of
other matters. He had the historian’s instinct for
laying hold of all sorts of details, and putting them
into permanent form. His inspiration from God
(we do not here discuss the nature of that inspira-
tion) led him this way. He wanted to save for
the future that which he regarded as historical fact.
The contents of the book, determined in part by
his enthusiasm for the temple, were also determined
in part by the nature of the materials that were
providentially at his disposal. There seems also
to have been present in his consciousness the idea
of bringing to completion the body of sacred writings
which had then been accumulating for centuries.

As we have seen, the Gr translators gave to the
Books of Ch a title which expressed the idea they
had of the work. They regarded it as the pres-
entation of matters which had been omitted in the
earlier Scriptures, as written not to supersede the
older books, but to supplement them, as being,
along with Ezr and Neh, a work that brought the
Scriptures up to date, and made them complete.

The text of the Books of Ch has been less care-
fully preserved than that of some other parts of the

OT. Witness for example the numbers
12. The 42 and 8 for the ages of Ahaziah and
Text Jehoiachin (2 Ch 22 2; cf 2 K 8 26;
2 Ch 86 9; cf 2 K 248). There is
no proof, however, of important textual corruption.
As we have seen, the fragmentary character of cer-
tain parts is probably in the main due to exactness
in following fragmentary sources, and not to bad
text; and the differences between S or K and Ch, in
the transcribed passages, are mostly due to intended
revision rather than to text variations.

In critical discussions less semblance of fair play
has been accorded to Ch than even to most of the

other Scriptures. It is not unusual
13. Critical to assume that the Chronicler’s refer-
Estimates ence to sources is mere make-believe,

that he “has cited sources simply to
produce the impression that he is writing with
authority.” Others hurry to the generalization
that the Books of K mentioned in Ch (see Nos. 1-7
above) are all one work, which must therefore have


633


been an extensive Midr (commentary, exegetical
and anecdotal) on the canonical Books of K; and
that the references to prophetic writings are to sec-
tions in this Midr; so that practically the Chronicler
had only two sources, the canonical books and this
midrashic history of Israel; and that “it is impos-
sible to determine’ whether he gathered any bits
of information from any other sources.

Into the critical theories concerning Ch enters a
hypothesis of an earlier Book of K that was more
extensive than our present canonical books. And
in recent publications of such men as Biichler, Ben-
zinger and Kittel are theories of an analysis of Ch
into documents—for example, an earlier writing
that made no distinction between priests and
Levites, or an earlier writing which dealt freely
with the canonical books; and the later writing
of the Chronicler proper.

What we know in the matter is that three sets
of authors combined in producing the Books of
Ch—first, the men who produced the canonical
sources, second, the men who produced the other
sources, and third, the man or men who directly
or indirectly put the contents of these sources
together into the book which we have. We have
no means of knowing what most of the intermediate
processes were, and it is superlatively useless to
guess. It is gratuitous to say that the mention
of sources in Ch is not made in good faith. It is
probable that among the sources were Midrashim
that were nearly contemporaneous. It is exceed-
ingly improbable that none of the sources mentioned
were genuine and ancient. All probabilities agree
to the effect that the returned exiles and their near
descendants were likely to study the ancient his-
tory of their race, and to gather materials for that
purpose. As we have seen, the phenomena of the
book indicate the presence of an antiquarian mo-
tive which was sure to be interested in genuine
items of evidence from the remote past.

The current opinion sixty years ago was that the
Books of Ch and the whole OT were completed

about 404 BC, near the time when
14. Date Artaxerxes Mnemon succeeded Darius
and Nothus. The statement now fashion-
Authorship able is that the Books of Ch were com-

pleted not later than about 250 BC,
and this constantly degenerates into the statement
that they were written about 250 BC or later. Jn
fact, they were completed within the lifetime of Ne-
hemiah, not later or not much later than 400 BC.

In discussing this we cannot ignore the fact that
Ch and Ear and Neh are one work, or, if you prefer,
one series. The closing vs of 2 Ch duplicate the
opening vs of Ezr. This is not, probably, an in-
advertent repetition. The Books of Ch were written
later than the other parts of the series. The closing
vs are the Chronicler’s notification to his readers
that he has brought up the earlier history to the point
at which he had previously begun the narrative in
Ezr.

The testimony concerning Ezra and the ‘‘men of
the Great Synagogue” and Nehemiah and their
work on the Scriptures does not deserve the con-
tempt with which some persons treat it. We
know nothing concerning the Great Synagogue as an
organization, but we know much concerning the
succession of men, from Daniel to Simon the Just,
who are called the men of the Great Synagogue.
The old traditions do not say that Ezra was the
founder of the succession, but they make him the
typical person in it. Two bits of tradition are not
necessarily inconsistent if one attributes work to
Ezra which the other attributes to the men of the
Great Synagogue. The regulation remark that
tradition attributes Biblical work to Ezra and not
to Nehemiah is untrue. Nehemiah was one of the


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Chronicles


men of the Great Synagogue, and prominent as
such. He is introduced to us as a handsome boy,
a king’s favorite, coming to Jerus in 444 BC. In
433 BC he returned to the king. After an unknown
interval of time he came back to Judaea, and pre-
sumably spent the remainder of his long life there,
dying some years or some decades after 400 BC.

The placing of the work of the Ch at the close of
the Heb Scriptures is in itself of the nature of testi-

mony. The men who placed it there
15. Evi- testify thereby to their belief that
dence as to these are the latest writings of the OT
Date and aggregate. We are familiar with the
Authorship testimony of Bdbh@ Bathr@ to the
effect that most of the later books of
the OT were due to the men of the Great Synagogue
and to Ezra, but that Nehemiah completed the
Books of Ch. We cannot avoid including the Ch
among the 22 books which Jos says were written
before the death of Artaxerxes Longimanus (C'Ap, I,
8). Of course the limit of time here really intended
by Jos is not the death of Artaxerxes, but the life-
time of men who were contemporary with him—
that of Nehemiah, for example. We have already
noted the testimony concerning Nehemiah’s library
(2 Mace 2 18-15). The time when the library was
being gathered was the most likely time for it to
be used as the Chronicler has used it. Add the
recapitulation in Ecclus (44-49), which mentions
Nehemiah latest in its list of OT worthies.

Internal marks, also, justify the conclusion that
the work of the Chronicler was complete before
Nehemiah died. The abundant presence of Pers
words and facts, with the absence of Gr words and
facts, seems conclusive to the effect that the work
was done before the conquests of Alexander rendered
the Gr influence paramount. In some of the sec-
tions (e.g. Ezr 7 28 ff; Neb passim) Ezra and Ne-
hemiah speak in the first person. The whole work
makes the impression of being written up to date.
The latest situation in Ch is the same with that in
Neh (1 Ch 9; cf Neh 11 3—12 26). The latest
event mentioned is the differentiating of the Samari-
tan schism. A certain enrolment was made (Neh
12 22-26) in the reign of Darius, up to the high-
priesthood of Johanan (elsewhere called Jonathan
and John), but including Jaddua the son of Johanan
in the high-priestly succession. Ezra and Nehe-
miah were still in office (Neh 12 26). This enrol-
ment naturally connects itself with the expulsion
of Jaddua’s brother Manasseh for marrying into the
family of Sanballat (Neh 13 28; Jos, Ant, XI,
7-8). Jaddua belongs to the fifth generation from
Jeshua, who was high priest 538 BC. Jos says that
Sanballat held a commission from Darius. He
mentions a certain Bagoas, “general of another
Artaxerxes’ army,” as in relations with the high
priest John.

Arguments for a later date—Jos, however, ap-
parently regards the Darius who commissioned
Sanballat as the last of the kings of that name, and
says that Jaddua was contemporary with Alex-
ander the Great, thus dating the Samaritan schism
a little before 331 BC. All scholars reject these
statements when they are used for dating the Sa-
Maritan schism, but some scholars eagerly accept
them for the purpose of proving the late date of the
last books of the Heb Bible. The argument never
was valid, and it is completely exploded by the
Aram. papyri recently discovered in Egypt, which
show that Bagoas and the high priest Johanan and
the sons of Sanballat were contemporaries in 407
BC, the 17th year of Darius Nothus, and for some
years earlier.

Dr. Driver (LOT, ed 1897, 518) expresses an
opinion very commonly held concerning the
Chronicles: “‘The only positive clue which the


Chronicles


Chronicles ¢ or THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


634


book contains as to the date at which it was com-
posed is the genealogy in 1 Ch 3 17-24,....
carried down to the sixth generation after Zerub-
babel. This would imply a date not earlier than
about 350 BC.” Turn to the passage and do your
own arithmetic on it. Jeconiah was born 614 BC
(2 K 24 8). If as an average each of the sons
in the succession was born when his father was
about 25 years old, that would bring the first birth
in the 6th generation from Zerubhabel to about
414 BC, and not 350 BC. This is not an improbable
showing. :

Dr. Driver suggests, however, that in ver 21 we
should follow the Gr reading instead of the Heh.
This would give us: ‘And the sons of Hananiah:
Pelatiah, and Jeshaiah his son, Rephaiah his son,
Arnan his son, Obadiah his son, Shecaniah his son.”
The meaning here is ambiguous. It may be
understood to be that each of the six men named
after Hananiah was the son of the man named before
him (cf vs 10-14, or 1 Ch 6 20-30.50-53); or as
counting the six as the sons of Hananiah (cf 3 16;
7 20.21, etc). Understanding it in the first of
these two ways the number of generations after
Zerubbahel would be increased toeleven. So many
generations before the early decades of the 4th cent.
BC would be exceptional, though not impossible.
But the statement that there were 11 generations is
weak, being based on a conjectural interpretation of
an unproved text emendation, and standing uncon-
firmed in opposition to credible proof.

“The Books of Ch are a tendency writing of little
historical value”; ‘‘a distorted picture in the interest,

of the later institutions of postexilic
16. Truth- Judaism’; ‘some ancient facts, having
fulness and trickled down through oral or written
Historicity tradition, are doubtless preserved.

.... They are few indeed compared
with the products of the imagination, and must
he sifted like kernels of wheat from a mass of chaff.”
These statements, taken at random from the book
that happeus to be handiest, fairly represent the
opinion held by many. They regard the Ch as a
fabrication made in the interest of a religious
party, a fabrication in which the history has been
intentionally falsified.

A principal motive for this opinion is to dis-
credit the testimony of Ch against certain critical
theories, the said testimony being more full and
detailed than that in § and K and the prophets.
But on the whole question the testimony of Ch
is to the same effect with that of the other books.
The testimony of the other books supports that of
the Ch. The diserediting of Ch is part of a theory
which denies the historical trustworthiness of prac-
tically all parts of the OT and NT.

(1) Alleged proofs of untruthfulness —Against the
Ch it is alleged that they sometimes contradict
the older books; but nearly all the instances are
capable of satisfactory solution. The large numer-
als in Ch, for example those concerning the armies
of David, Abijah, Jeroboam, Asa, Zerah, Jehosha-
phat, Amaziah, Uzziah, are adduced as extrava-
gant and imeredible. Most of the difficulty in
connection with such numbers, whether in Ch or
Ex or Nu or Jgs or 8, disappears when we observe
that they clearly belong to an artificial way of
counting. These numbers are given in even
thousands or even hundreds (even fifties or tens in
a very few instances), which would not be the case
if the hundreds and thousands were merely nnmeri-
cal. It is alleged that the Chronicler views the
glories of the past as on a larger scale than that
in which they are presented in the earlier books, but
this is not uniformly the case. On the basis of
these allegations the Chronicler is charged with an
extravagance that is inconsistent with sober truth-


fulness, but this charge follows the fate of the
others. It is said that the Chronicler lacked trust-
worthy sources, but that is a thing to be proved,
not taken for granted, and we have seen that it is
improbable. It is alleged that the text is in such
bad shape as to render the contents unreliable.
This may be halanced against _the counter conjec-
ture that, since the Books of Ch have not been so
often copied as the Books of K, their text is in the
transcribed passages to be preferred to that of K.
In fine, the reasons alleged against the historicity
of Ch dwindle on examination, though there remain
some problems that cannot be so easily disposed of.

(2) Truthfulness in the various parts.—Different,
parts of the Ch have their own separate problems
of historicity. Take the genealogies, for example.
If anyone had fabricated them, he would not have
put them into their present fragmentary form, in
which they have no story interest, and are of no
direct use to anybody. On the other hand it is
reasonable to account for their present form by the
hypothesis that the writer used such materials as
he had. This hypothesis is not derogatory to the
inspiration of the writer. Deity saw fit to have
these materials placed in the Scriptures, and to this
end He influenced men of different generations
throngh providential leadings and through impul-
ses of the Spirit. No one thinks that the Spirit-
guided man who put the genealogies in their final
form received them as miraculous revelations. He
received them as the product of effort in study—
his own efforts and those of his predecessors. He
is entitled to be counted as truthful if he used good
judgment and fidelity in selecting and recording his
materials.

Similar statements would be true in regard to
the other statistical matter, and in regard to the
many incidents that are mentioned in connection
with the genealogies and other matters. To think
of them as inventions by the Chronicler is not con-
gruons with human experience. They are too brief
and broken to have interest’ by themselves as
stories. You can assign no possible reason that
one could have for inventing them. They bear
the marks of being genuine antiquarian discoveries.
The final writer believed that he had come across
facts which would be of interest if put into connec-
tion with the history as currently narrated. These
matters are much more reasonably accounted for
as facts than as inventions. And furthermore,
a good many of them, first and last, have been
corroborated by exploration. Take, for example,
Manaaseh’s being carried to Babylon by the cap-
tains of the king of Assyria, or the account of Uz-
ziah’s military greatness (2 Ch 33 11; 26 6 ff), or
the references to industries in 1 Ch 4 14-23 (cf
aay 1905, 243, 328; or Bible Sidelights from Gezer,

Possibly on a different footing is such a passage as
the account of Abijah and Jeroboam (2 Ch 13 3-
18). It says that Abijah had 400,000 men and
Jeroboam 800,000, of whom 500,000 were slain in the
battle. One might plausibly argue that these num-
bers were intended as a notice to the reader that he
is to understand the story, not as fact, but as a work
of the imagination, a rehgious parable, a midrashic
narrative sermon, taken from the Midr of Iddo (ver
22). Whether or no one finds this argument con-
vincing, anyone can see that it does not accuse the
Books of Ch of being untruthful, If the passage is
a parable it is true in the sense in which it was in-
tended to be understood. A similar case is the
account of Jehoshaphat’s peril from the invading
nations and his wonderful rescue (2 Ch 20).

On still a different footing are such narratives
as those concerning the bringing up of the ark, the
first making of Solomon king, the reforms under


635


Chronology of OT


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Cbronicles


Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah. These are
sober narratives, with nothing in them to suggest
flights of the imagination. Probably no one doubts
that the Chronicler intended them to be under-
stood as historical fact. If one is under bondage
to the modern tradition which dates Dt from the
time of Josiah and the priestly laws from after the
exile, he must needs count these parts of Ch as
falsified history; but if he is free from that bondage
he will see no strong reason for counting them so.
In fine men are correct when they say that the
greatest values of the Books of Ch he in their


availability for vividly illustrating
17. The the great truths of religion. They are
Values of correct’ when they assign great value


the to these books as depicting the ideas
Chronicles of the time when they were written.

But they are none the less of great
value as repeating from the other Scriptures the
outline of the history of the religion of Jeh, and pre-
senting additional material for the filling in of that
outline.


LirerarurEe.—Among the older commentaries on Ch
see that of Keil in the Keil-Delitzsch series, published _in
Eng. in 1872; that of Zéckler in the Lange series, 1876;
that of Barker in the Pulpit Commentary, after 1880.
Among more recent works, from the Toit of view which
denies the historicity of Ch, see R. Kittel in the Poly-
chrome Bible, 1895, and Curtis and Masden in the
International Critical Commentary, 1910. A brilliant
characterization from that point of view is that hy
Torrey, ‘‘The Chronicler as Editor and as Independent
Narrator’ in AJSZ, January, 1909, and subsequent
numbers. On the other side see Beecher, Reasonable
Biblical Criticism, 1911, chs xviii and xxii; ‘‘Is the Chroni-
cler a Veracious Historian?’’in Bible Student Waa
1899 and subsequent numbers), is a defense of the his-
toricity. works on OT Introduction discuss the
questions concerning Ch. In view of the many proper
names in Ch, sucha book as Gray, Studies in Heb Proper
Names, hasits uses. For the chronological facts, especi-
ally in connection with the closing of the OT history, see
Beecher, Dated Events of the OT,1907. For the Egyp
papyri see Dret Aramdische Papyrusurkunden aus Hle-
phantine, Sachau, Berlin, 1907, or the Appendix to Toff-
teen, Historic Exodus. Also ppreogtne art. in AJSL,
April, 1911. As to light on the Ch from explorations,
see “The Excavations of Gezer, 1902-5, and 1907-9,”
PEF; or Bible Sidelights from the Mounds of Gezer, 1906.
For other books see the lists in #B and HDB.


Wiuuis J. Brecaer
CHRONOLOGY, kré-nol’é-ji, OF THE OLD
TESTAMENT: :


I. Inrropuctony 2
1. Difficulties of the Subject
2. Plan of Treatment :
3. Bible to Be Regarded as Highest Authorlty
Il. THe AGES BETWEEN THE TESTAMENTS
III. Persian Peniop .
BABYLONIAN PERIOD
AssYRIAN PrERrop AND JupDAH AFTER Fa. oF
SAMARIA
VI. Pszxiop or Divipep Kinepom
1. Causes of Variation in Systems
2. Some Important and Pivotal Dates.
3. Difficulties to Be Removed
4. Overlappings


VII. From tee Disruption To THE Exopus
Indications of Overlapping
VIII. From tee Exopvus To Birta of AHRAHAM


Main Points at Issue
IX. From ABRAHAM TO THE CREATION
A Suggested Interpretation
LireRAtTURE


L. Introductory.—For evident reasons the student


of Biblical chronology must meet many difficul-
ties, and must always be severely
1. Difficul- handicapped. First of all, the OT


ties of the is not purely nor intentionally a book
Subject of history. Nor does it present a

formulated system of chronology, its
many numbers and dates being used principally
with a view to the spiritual facts and truths with
which the authors were concerned. We are not,
therefore, to expect. to find a perfectly arranged
order of periods and dates, though happily for us
in our investigation we shall indeed find many
accurately dated events, frequent consecutions of


events, and orderly successions of officials; as, for
example, the numerous genealogical tables, the
succession of judges and the lists of kings.

Furthermore, there-is not to be found in the OT
one particular and definitely fixed era, from which
all of its events are dated, as is the case in Christian
history. The points of departure, or reckoning, are
found to vary in different periods of the advancing
history; being at one stage the Creation, at an-
other the migration of Abraham, or the Exodus,
or again the disruption of the kingdom. Ordina-
rily dates and all time-allusions are comparative,
ie. they are related to the reign of some contem-
porary monarch, as the vision of Isaiah “‘in the year
that king Uzziah died” (Isa 6 1), or to some un-
usual occurrence, historical or natural, as the great
earthquake (Ami11; Zec 14 5). Only occa-
sional reference is found to some event, which marks
an era-beginning; such as the Exodus (Jgs 11 16.
26; 1 K 6 1). ;

The general lack of uniformity among writers
on Bib. chronology contributes further toward
increase of the already perplexing confusion. It is
almost possible to say that no two writers agree;
and proposed harmonies are with each other most
inharmonious. The two arts. on OT chronology
in a recent work (Murray, Illus. Bible Dictionary,
1908), for example, are several hundred years apart
at certain points. Wide diversity of opinion exists
about the most prominent events, such as the call
of Abraham and the age of his famous contem-
porary Hammurabi, the year of the Exodus, and
the beginning of Solomon’s temple. Naturally
there is less variance of opinion about later dates,
some of which, e.g. the fall of Samaria and the
destruction of Jerus, may be considered as fixed.
A like wide range of opinion prevails among archae-
ologists with regard to events in contemporaneous
history, the difference between Goodspeed and
Hommel in the dates of early Bab history being
five hundred years, and the beginning and extent
of the Hyksos period in Egypt varying in different
“authorities” by hundreds of years. Nor should
the difference in the various and total numbers
of the Heb, Samaritan and LXX texts of the pre-
Abrahamic ages be left out of sight in any state-
ment of the difficulties attending the discussion of
this subject.

These difficulties, and others as serious, have
determined the plan of this article. The usual

method of development has been to
2. Plan of begin with the sources of OT history,
Treatment and to follow its course downward.

While such a system may have its
advantages, there is, however, this serious disad-
vantage connected with it: that the least certain
dates are confessedly those at the beginning of the
records, and the use of them at the foundation
renders the whole structure of the discussion more
or less uncertain. Archaeology and comparative
history have done much to fix dates from the Exodus
downward, bringing these later cents. by discovery
and translation almost into the position of attested
history. But the ages before the Exodus, and par-
ticularly before Abraham, still lie from the very
nature of the case in great obscurity. And thus
any system beginning with the indistinct early
past, with its compacted numbers and their un-
certain interpretation, is much like a chain hung
on thin air. The writer purposes, therefore, begin-
ning with certain familiar, important and pivotal
dates, to gather around and relate to these the
events and persons of the OT. Such accepted
dates are: the completion of the Second Temple
in 516, the fall of Jerusalem in 586, the fall of
Samaria in 721, tribute to Shalmanezer II from
Jehu in 842, and from a member of Omri’s dynasty


Chronology of OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


in 854. Such OT events as mark the beginning of
eras are the Disruption, Solomon’s temple, the
Exodus and Abraham’s Call. The material and
the plan, then, almost necessarily require that we
begin at the end of the history and work logically
backward to the earlier stages, at which we may
hope to arrive with firm ground under our feet for
the disposition of the more uncertain problems. It
is hoped that on this plan the system of chronology
will not be mere speculation, nor a personal theory,
but of some certainty and affording some assurance
in days of wild assertion and free manipulation.

It should be remembered that this is a study of
Bible chronology, and therefore full value will be

given to the explicit and positive
3. The statements of the Bible. Surely the
Bible to Be time has come, when all fair-minded
Regarded men should recognize that a clear
as Highest and straightforward declaration of the
Authority Sacred Scriptures is not to be sum-
marily rejected because of its apparent
contradiction by some unknown and irresponsible
person, who could stamp clay or chisel stone. It
has been all too common that archaeological and
critical adventurers have doubted and required
accurate proof of every Bible statement, but have
been ready enough to give credence to any state-
ment from ancient pagan sources. We assume, as
we have every reason to do, the trustworthiness of
the Bible records, which have been corroborated in
countless instances; and we shall follow their guid-
ance in preference to any other. The help of con-
temporaneous history and the witness of archaeology
can be used to advantage, but should not be
substituted for the plain facts of the Scriptures,
which are full worthy of our trust and regard. The
province of a chronology of the Bible is properly
to present in system the dates therein given, with
an honest effort to harmonize the difficulties, using
the external helps, but ever regardful of Scripture
authority and rights.

Il. The Ages between the Testaments.—Between
the coming of Christ and the end of OT history
there lie in round numbers four hundred years. But
while these were extra-Biblical ages, they were neither
harren nor uneventful years; for in them will be found
much of the highest value in the development of
Jewish life, and in the preparation for the Messiah.
And thus they have their proper place in Bible
chronology (see BETwEEN THE TESTAMENTS). The
birth of Tesus could not have been later than 4 BC,
since Herod the Great died in April of that year.
Herod became king of Judaea in 87 BC. Pal had
been conquered and Jerus entered by the Romans
under Pompey in 56 BC, the Jews coming in this
way under the power of Rome. The Rom age was
preceded by the government of priest-kings, with
which the Idumaean Antipater became identified by
marriage, so that Herod, whom Rome made king,
was both Jew and alien.

The period of the Maccabees, which ended in
39 BC with the removal of Antigonus by the Romans
in favor of Herod, began 168 BC with Judas.
Antipater, who had been appointed procurator of
Judaea in 47, was assassinated in 43 BC. The
period of the Seleucidae stretches from its close
with the regency of Antiochus VII in 128 back to
its founder, Seleucus, 312 BC. The most notable
of these monarchs from the Jewish point of view
was Antiochus Epiphanes, who reigned from 175
to 164, and in 168 gave occasion to the rise of the
Maccabees by his many acts of impiety and oppres-
sion, particularly the desecration of the Jerus
temple. In 203 BC Antiochus the Great, who had
become king of Syria in 223, took Jerus, and later,
in 198, annexed Judaea to Syria. Previous to this
Judaea had been an Egyp dependency, as after the


636


death of Alexander the Great, 323 BC, and the
division of his empire, it had been annexed by
Ptolemy Soter to Egypt. Ptolemy Philadelphus,
becoming king 280 BC, encouraged the tr of the
Heb Scriptures into Gr, the result being the LXX
version, and all it meant by way of preparation
for the spread of Christianity. Alexander’s defeat
of Darius III, or Codomannus, at Arbela ‘in 331
brought the Pers empire to an end, fulfilling the long-
cherished ambition of the Greeks for mastery of
Asia. The long reign of the Biblical king of Persia,
Artaxerxes Longimanus, extended from 465 to
424 BC, and in reaching his reign we find ourselves
in the region of the OT history. Reversing the
order of this brief review and setting out from OT
point of view, we have the following table for the
cents. between the Testaments:


Death of Artaxerxes I, and succession of
Darius tll? s.cccas cone con oe een ie ee ee 424

Accession of Darius ITI, last of Pers monarchs 336

Alexander succeeds Philip as king of Mace-


COMA Peete ee catia itis sane sear senieiee Go 336
Alexander visits Jerus..............00cce eee 332.
Battle of Arbela and overthrow of Persia..... 331


Death of Alexander and division of his empire 323
Ptolemy Soter attaches Judaea to Egypt..... 320
Seleucid era begins with accession of Seleucus I 312


Ptolemy Philadelphus reigns in Egypt........ 283
Traditional date of beginning of LXX version

cir 250
Antiochus the Great, king of Syria .......... 223
He annexes Judaea to Syria ................ 198
Antiochus Epiphanes ascends the throne... .. 175
He makes Jason high priest, removing Onias.. 174
Desecration of Temple by Ant. Epiph........ 168


Resistance of Mattathias and rise of Maccabees 168
Judas Maccabaeus victorious............... 166


Judas dies, succeeded by Jonathan.......... 160
Jonathan slain, succeeded by Simon......... 143
Simon becomes high priest... . . 142
Succeeded by John Hyrcanus............... 135
Aristobulus I becomes high priest............ 106
Alexander Jannaecus............... 0 cee eee 105
Jerus taken by Pompey..................0. 63
Antipater appointed procurator of Judaea.... 47
Antipater murdered.............0000000 eee 43
Antigonus, last Maccabean, put on throne... 40


Slain by Herod, who becomes king of Judaea.. 37


Augustus made Rom emperor....... . $l
Restoration of Temple begun............... 19
Birth of Jesus Christ in Bethlehem ........ cir =5
Death of Herod the Great..............000. 4


Ill. The Persian Period.—Entering now the last
period of OT history, which may be called the Pers
period, we find that the activities of Ezra, Nehe-
miah and other Jewish leaders are dated by the
regnal years of the kings of Persia (e.g. Hag 1 1;
Zec 11; Ezr 11; Neh 2 1); and consequently
the difficulties in the chronology of this period are
not great. Recently a fanciful effort has been made
to place the events narrated in Esther, Ezra and
Nehemiah in the time of the Bab Captivity, claim-
ing Scripture warrant from the occurrence of these
names, with Mordecai, in Ezr 2 2 and Neh 7 7;
but altogether without success (see Prince of Judah,
or Days of Nehemiah Redated). These names were
doubtless of common occurrence, and their appear-
ance among those returning with Zerubbabel is not
sufficient to affect the historical evidence for the
accepted dates of Ezra and Nehemiah. The at-
tempt to move back these dates into the 6th cent.,
to associate Nehemiah with Daniel and Mordecai and
to place his work before Zerubbabel may be dis-
missed as pure fancy and impossible of reconcilia-
tion with the OT narrative.

Artaxerxes I began his reign, which gives date


637


to Ezra and Nehemiah, in 465 BC. In his 7th
year, 458, Ezra went from Babylon to Jerus by the
king’s decree (Ezr 7 7), taking back with him the
vessels of the Temple and much besides for the
worship at Jerus, accompanied also by a great
company of returning Jews. Nehemiah followed
from Shushan in the 20th year of the king (Neh
1 1), having heard of and being distressed by the
partial failure of Ezra’s efforts. Under his’ wise
and courageous leadership, the city walls were
speedily restored, and many reforms accomplished.
He returned after twelve years (433) to the service
of the king in Shushan (Neh 13 6), but in a short
time, hearing evil tidings from Jerus, went back
to complete his reforms, and apparently spent the
rest of his life in that work. Although the Bible
is silent, such is the testimony of Jos. ‘The Book of
Mal, reflecting the difficulties and evils of this time,
is evidently to be placed here, but not with exact-
ness, as it might have been written as early as 460
or as late as 420.

The period from the return under Ezra (458) back
to the completion of the Temple in the reign of
Darius I (516) is, with the exception of incidental
references and the assignment of undated books
and incidents, practically a blank. Here belong,
we believe, the Book of Est, possibly Mal, some
of the Pss, and those social and religious tend-
encies among the returned exiles, which made the
vigorous reforms of Ezra and Nehemiah so neces-
sary. But the OT does not draw the curtain from
the mystery of that half-century, that we may know
the happenings and watch the development. Be-
yond this blank we come again to explicit dates.
The second temple, begun with the Return under
Zerubbabel, was completed in the 6th year of
Darius, i.e. 516. The building of it, which had been
early abandoned for selfish reasons, was resumed
in the 2d year of Darius under the exhortation of
the prophets Haggai and Zechariah (Hag 1 1;
Zec 11). Darius the Great began his reign in
521. Cambyses succeeded Cyrus in 527. Baby-
lon was taken by the Persians in 538, and shortly
after the Jews, under the edict of Cyrus, began
their return to Jerus, reaching their destination by
536 at the latest. Cyrus overthrew Lydia in 545,
the Medes five years earlier, and must have come
to the Pers throne not later than 555. His con-
quest of Asia Minor opened the contest between Per-
sia and Greece for supremacy, to be continued by
Darius and Xerxes, resulting finally at Arbela
(331) in Gr triumph under Alexander, and the
inauguration of a new age.

The table for the Pers period of OT history,
following the stream upward, is therefore as follows:


Death of Artaxerxes I...........-..0.0005- 424
Nehemiah comes second time to Jerus....... 432
Nehemiah returns to Persia (Neh 136)...... 433
First coming of Neh and repairing of walls ... 445
Book of Malachi, possibly..............-. cir 450
Return of Ezra and his company............ 458
Accession of Artaxerxes I...........-..6--. 465
Events of Book of Esther................ cir 480
Accession of Xerxes (Ahasuerus)...........- 486
Defeat of Darius at Marathon.............. 490
Completion of the Temple..............-.-. 516
Ministry of Haggai and Zechariah........... 520
Darius Hystaspis becomes king............. 521
Death of Cyrus and accession of Cambyses... 527
Arrival of Jews in Jerus under edict of Cyrus... 536
Capture of Babylon by Persians............. 538
Croesus of Lydia defeated by Cyrus......... 545


Persia and Media united............... ... cir 550
Supremacy of Cyrus over Elam and Persia. . cir 556
Birth of Cyrus, supposed to be in........... 600


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Chronology of OT


IV. Babylonian Period.— Just preceding the
Pers is the Bab period of OT chronology, over-
lapping, of course, the former, and finally super-
seded by it in Cyrus’ conquest of Babylonia. This
period may properly be said to begin with the
death in 626 BC of Asshurbanipal, the last great
ruler of Assyria. At this time Nabopolassar had
been made governor of Babylonia, subject to
the supremacy of Assyria. With Asshurbanipal’s
death Nabopolassar became independent sovereign
of Babylonia, and shortly entered into league with
the Medes to overthrow the rule of Assyria, and
then to divide its empire between them. This
was accomplished in the fall of Nineveh (606)
which brought the end of the mighty Assyr empire,
the last king being Sinsharishkun (the historic
Saracus), a son of Asshurbanipal. Some years
before his death in 604 Nabopolassar associated
with him on the throne of Babylonia his son Nebu-
chadnezzar, most illustrious ruler of the new Bab
empire, and intimately connected with the history
of Judah in the last years of that kingdom. His
long reign came to an end in 562.

While the conflict, which brought Assyria to its
end, and the attendant confusion, were absorbing
the attention of Mesopotamian countries, Egypt
under a new and virile dynasty was reviving her
ambitions and intrigues for dominion in Asia.
Pharach-necoh II taking advantage of the confusion
and helplessness of Assyria invaded Pal in 609,
intending to march on through Pal to attack Meso-
potamia. King Josiah in loyalty to his Assyr
overlord opposed him, but was defeated and slain
at the battle of Megiddo, after a reign of 31 years;
apparently an unnecessary and foolish opposition
on Josiah’s part, as the plan of Necoh’s march
shows that Judah was not directly affected. After
the victory at Megiddo, Necoh continued his
march north-eastward, subduing Syria and hoping
to have a hand in Mesopotamian affairs. But in
606 or 607 BC he was defeated at Carchemish and
driven back to Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar, fresh
from victory over Nineveh. In the same year
Nebuchadnezzar marched against Egypt, receiving
the submission of Jerus as he passed through Pal,
and sending noble hostages back to Babylon, among
whom were Daniel and his three friends. The
death of his father and his endangered succession
recalled Nebuchadnezzar suddenly to Babylon,
where he became sole ruler in 604. Jt appears that
Necoh must have returned to Egypt after Megiddo
and before the battle of Carchemish, as he made
Jehoiakim king in place of Jehoahaz, whom he
carried captive to Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar’s vic-
tory at Carchemish and his march southward
brought Judah in close relations with Babylon,
and opened up the dramatic chapter of Jerusalem’s
fall and exile. These historic events fix the dates
of the last kings and the closing incidents of the
kingdom of Judah, as shown in the following table:


Fall of Babylon and death of Belshazzar ..... 538
Co-regency of Belshazzar with his father
(Dnl 8 1) 542
Accession of Nabonidus, father of Belshazzar... 555
Death of Nebuchadnezzar, and succession of
Evil-Merodach............0.- 0c seen eee 561
Jehoiachin released from prison (Jer 62 31)... 561
Last dated prophecy of Ezk (40 1) 572
Murder of Gedaliah and flight of Jews to Egypt 585
Fall of Jerus and Third Deportation......... 586


Beginning of Ezekiel’s prophetic activity
(HEY ells Ron. oe ne 59
Accession of Zedekiah, last king of Judah .... 597


Brief reign of Jehoiachin, his removal to Baby-
lon; Second Deportation of captives in-


cluding Ezekiel............-.. 20000 aue 597


Chronology of OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Revolt and death of Jehoiakim; invasion of


Nebuchadnezzar... . 2.0.0.0... 0.0000 eee 598
Death of Nabopolassar and accession of Neb-
wchadnez Zar ei wera whe ee sk eld eaondaee S 604


Nebuchadnezzar invades Pal; First Deporta-
tion, including Daniel................... 606
Battle of Carchemish and route of Necoh.....


Fall of Nineveh... 2.2.0.0... 000s cece eee ee 607
Jehoiakim made king by Necho............. 608
Death of Josiah and brief reign of Jehoahaz... 609
Accession of Pharaoh Necho................ 610
Nabopolassar, king of Bab on death of As-
shurbanipalee een aaa een Soe ees 626


V. Assyrian Period and Judah after Fall of
Samaria.—This section, which may for conven-
ience be treated as a division, is the chronology of
Judah under Assyria after the fall of the Northern
Kingdom in 721. As the Scripture time-references
are frequent and explicit, and the contemporaneous
Assyr records are full, and explicit also, the prob-
lems of this period are neither many nor insoluble.
One difficulty is found in the fact that the aggre-
gate years of the reigns of Hezekiah, Manasseh,
Amon and Josiah fall one or two years short of the
period between Hezekiah’s accession in 726 and
Josiah’s death in 609. But there is evidence of
anarchical conditions at the close of Amon’s reign
(2 K 21 23.24), and it is probable that at least a
year should be counted for the interregnum. The
chief difficulty is with the invasions of Sennacherib
in Hezekiah’s reign. The confusion is caused by the
apparent dating of Sennacherib’s famous and _dis-
astrous invasion of 701 in the 14th year of Heze-
kiah’s reign (2 K 18 13). Various attempts at
reconciliation have been made; one attempt has
been to place the beginning of Hezekiah’s reign in
715, which is out of the question entirely, as it dis-
regards the exact terms in which the beginning of
his reign is placed before the fall of Samaria (2 K
18 10). Another suggestion has been that 24th”
be read instead of ‘14th’; but this is pure conjec-
ture. There is a simple and satisfactory solution:
in the chapters which contain the record (2 K 18
and Isa 36) it is evident that two invasious are
described. Frequently in the Scriptures records
are topical rather than chronological, and just so
in this instance the topic is Sennacherib’s menace
of Judah, and the ultimate deliverance by Jeh.
The story includes two invasions: the first in the
14th year of Hezekiah (713) when Sennacherib led
the armies of his father Sargon, the end of which,
so far as Jerus was concerned, was the payment of
tribute by Hezekiah, as is accurately stated in
2K 18 16. The second invasion, the description
of which begins with the following ver (17), was the
more serious, and is probably identified as that of
701, when Sennacherib had become king. The
necessary insertion of a paragraph indicator be-
tween vs 16 and 17 satisfies every demand for
harmony.

From 609 BC, the year of Josiah’s death, we
count back 31 years to the beginning of his reign
in 639; he attained his majority in the 8th year
(632; 2 Ch 34 3); the reformation in his 12th
year, at the time of the Scythian irruption, would
fall in 628 (2 Ch 34 3); in the following year
Jeremiah began to prophecy; and in Josiah’s 18th
year (621) the temple was cleansed and the Book
of the Law found (2 Ch 34 8). Allowing a year
of confusion, Amon began his short reign in 642,
and Manasseh his long reign of 55 years in 697,
Hezekiah’s reign of 29 years dating back to 726.
Some fixed important dates of contemporaneous
history are: death of Asshurbanipal, Assyria’s last
great king, in 626, with the consequent independence
of Babylon and beginning of the 2d Bab empire.


638


Asshurbanipal’s long reign began in 668 on the
death of his father Esarhaddon; who succeeded his
father Sennacherib in 681. Sargon usurped the
Assyr throne in 722, and died in 705. Shalmanezer
IV, successor of Tiglath-pileser [1I, reigned for the
brief space between 727 and 722. In Egypt the
XXvVth, or Ethiopian Dynasty, was in power from
cir 720 to 667, two of its kings, So and Tirhakah,
having mention in the OT (2 K 17 4; 19 9; Isa
87 9), and after this the XX VIth (a native) Dynas-
ty appeared, Pharaoh-necoh being one of its kings.
The dates of this period we may summarize in the
following table:


Death of Josiah after reign of 31 years........
Pharaoh-necho begins to reign..............
Josiah purifies temple; Book of the Law found 621
Death of Asshurbanipal, and revival of Babylon 626


Jeremiah enters upon his ministry........... 627
Reformation in 12th year of Josiah.......... 628
Scythian invasion of Western Asia........ cir 630
Majority of Josiah; good beginning of actual
Pi) 720 ee er Rr ee ere see 632
Josiah proclaimed king at 8 years of age...... 639
Assassination of Amon; ensuing confusion.... 640
Death of Manasseh...............002220005 642


Manasseh carried to Babylon............. cir 650


Asshurbanipal succeeds Esarhaddon......... 668
Esarhaddon invades Egypt...............-. 670
Probable settlement of foreigners in Samaria... 672
Assassination of Sennacherib................ 681
Death of Isaiah, probably about............ 680
Death of Hezekiah and accession of Manasseh. 697
Sennacherib’s campaign against Egypt, siege of
Jerus, and his disastrous rout............ 701
Sargon dies and Sennacherib succeeds........ 705
Embassy of Merodach-baladan to Hezekiah.. 711
Sickness of Hezekiah.................0004. 712
First invasion of Pal by Sennacherib....... cir 713
Sabako, or So, is king of Egypt............. 715
Palestine invaded by Sargon; Ashdod taken
(lsas20 lee were aay oe fed 720
Fall of Samaria; end of Northern Kingdom... 721


Sargon takes Assyr throne................. 722


Revolt of Hoshea, and siege of Samaria begun. 724
Hezekiah’s reign begins.................055 726
Shalmanezer IV succeeds Tiglath-pileser III.. 727


VI. Periad of Divided Kingdam.—The most
complex, but most interesting, problems of OT
chronology are found in the period of the Divided
Kingdom. In the lit. of this period are found a
larger number of dates and historical references than
in that of any other. We have the assistance of
several important sources and factors in arranging
these dates: (1) The || records of the kingdoms of
Israel and Judah serve as checks to each other,
since the accession and death of the kings in each
nation are fixed by reference to reigns of those of
the other. Many other events are similarly re-
lated. (2) The history of the two kingdoms, or
parts of it, at least, is given in three || authorities:
the Books of K, of Ch, and of the Prophets. (8)
The Assyr records are fullest and are practically
continuous in this period, the limu lists extending
unbroken from 893 to 650 BC.

But while this apparently should be the most
satisfactory field for the chronologist, it has been

found impossible to arrive at anything
1. Causes approaching certainty, and  conse-
of Variation quently there is considerable diver-
in Systems gence among individuals and schools.

One cause of variation is the difference
between the Assyr royal lists and the total of the
OT numbers for this period, the OT aggregate
being 51 years greater then the Assyr lists. Two
common methods of harmonizing this difference
have been adopted: (1) to accept the OT aggregate


639


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Chronology of OT


as correct and to assume that the 51 years have
been omitted from the Assyr lists (see W. J. Beech-
er, Dated Events of OT, 18, 19); (2) to harmonize
the OT numbers with the Assyr lists by taking into
account the overlapping of reigns of kings who
were, for brief periods, associated on the throne.
Instances of such overlapping are the co-regency
of Uzziah and Jotham in Judah (2 K 16 5), and
possibly the reign of Pekah contemporaneously
with Menahem and Pekahiah in Israel (2 K 15
23-28). The latter method yields the most satis-
factory results, and will be adopted in this article.
The chief point of difference will be the age of
Solomon and the foundation-laying of the Temple.
This may be found according to the former method
by adding 51 years to the dates as given below.
That the method of following the aggregate of the
OT numbers must assume arbitrarily that there
have been omissions from the Assyr lists, and that
it also must resort to some overlapping and ad-
justment of the numbers as they are given in the
text, are sufficient reasons against its adoption.
And in meeting the difficulties of this period it
should always be borne in mind that the OT is not
a book of annals merely, and that dates are given
not for any special interest in them, but to correlate
and emphasize events. Ordinarily dates are given
with reference to local situations and contemporary
persons, and not as fixed by some great epoch-
marking event; e.g. Uzziah’s reign is fixed not with
reference to the Disruption nor the Temple building,
but by relation to his Israelite contemporary,
Jeroboam IT. :
However, there are some fixed dates, which are
so by reason of their international significance,


and upon these we may rest with
2. Some reasonable assurance. Such are the
Important fall of Samaria (721 BC); the acces-


and Pivotal sion of Tiglath-pileser III (745);
Dates tribute paid to Shalmaneser II by
Jehu in 842, and by Ahab, or one of
his dynasty, in 854; and the invasion of Judah by
Pharaoh-shishak in the fifth year of Rehoboam
(1 K 14 25). There are also certain coincident
dates, fixed with fair accuracy, in the || history of
the two kingdoms, which serve both as starting-
points and as checks upon each other. The most
prominent of these are: the beginning of Heze-
kiah’s reign, 5 years before the fall of Samaria
(2 K 18 10); the synchronism of the reigns of
Jeroboam IL and Jotham (1 Ch 6 17), Jotham’s
accession being used as a basis of calculation for
the reigns of Israelite kings (2 K 16 30); the
coincidence of the end of the Omri Dynasty and
the death of Ahaziah, king of Judah (2 K 9), Jebu
and Athaliah therefore beginning their reigns at
the same time; and, primarily, the division of the
kingdom and the synchronous beginning of the
reigns of Jeroboam I and Rehoboam. Using these
fixed dates and coincidences, we must find the sum-
maries of the reigns of Israelite and Jewish kings
between 721, the 9th year of Hoshea and the 6th
of Hezekiah, and 843, the beginning of the reigns
of Jehu and Athaliah, to be 122 years each; and
likewise the summaries from 843 back to the Dis-
ruption to be the same. i
The most serious difficulties are found near the
end of the period, when conditions in the Northern
Kingdom were becoming anarchical,
3. Difficul- and, also evident coregencies, the
ties to Be extent of which is not evident, oc-
Removed curred in the Southern Kingdom.
Pekah is said to have reigned 20
years (2 K 16 27); and yet Menahem paid tribute
to Assyria in 738, and he was succeeded for two
years by his son Pekahiah, from whom Pekah seized
the kingdom. This would allow Pekah only 6.


years of sovereignty. The explanation lies in the
context in the confusion which followed the death
of Jeroboam, Pekah established his authority over
the section E. of the Jordan, and to that year the
numbers in 2 K 16 27.32; 2 K 16 1 refer. Uzziah
was leprous the last 16 years of his life, and Jotham
his son was over the kingdom (2 K 16 5). The
length of Jotham’s reign was just 16 years, not
additional to the 16 of the coregency, as this would
result in the absurdity of making him coregent at
the age of 9 years (2 K 16 33). Therefore nearly
his whole reign is included in the 52 years of his
father. For some reason Ahaz was associated with
his father Jotham before the death of the latter,
since the 16 years of his reign plus the 5 of Hezekiah
before the fall of Samaria bring his accession before
the death of Uzziah and Jotham, i.e. in 741. So
that for approximately 6 years the three reigns were
contemporaneous. That these 6 years may not be
accounted for by a coregency with Hezekiah at the
other end of Ahaz’ reign is evident from the age of
Hezekiah at his accession (2 K 18 2), and from the
radical difference in the policy of the two kings. Isa
7 1 may suggest that Uzziah and Jotham died about
the same time, and that Ahaz was regarded as suc-
ceeding both directly.

Another difficulty is found at the beginning of
Uzziah’s reign, where he is said to have succeeded
his father Amaziah at the age of 16, but is also
said to have accomplished certain notable things
after his father’s death (2 K 14 21.22). Evidently,
then, he became king before the death of Amaziah.
When did this coregency begin? No better time
is suggested than Amaziah’s ignominious defeat
by Jehoash of Israel in the 15th year of his reign,
after which the people arose and put Uazziah in his
place, Amaziah living on for 15 years (2 K 14 17),
so that 15 of Amaziah’s 29 years were contempo-
raneous with Uzziah. Further, in the last years
of Joash of Judah there may have been a coregency,
since he was ‘‘very sick’”’ in those years (2 Ch 24
25). Thus the totals of 146 years for the reigns of
the kings of Israel and of 165 for the reigns of the
kings qi Judah between 721 and 842 are reduced
to the*actual 121 by the overlappings, which are
suggested in the narrative itself.

For the first division of this period, from the rise
of Jehu, cir 843, to the division of the kingdom, the
totals of the reigns of the kings of
Israel is 98 years, and of the kings of
Judah is 95. But there must be some
overlappings. The interval between
Abab and Jehu, as shown by mention of them in the
Assyr records, is 12 years; but the two sons of
Ahab reigned 14 years, Ahaziah 2 and Jehoram 12.
Evidently the last year of Ahab, in which came the
defeat at Karkar, was the 1st of Ahaziah, and the
2d of Ahaziah, who suffered in that year serious
accident (2 K 1 2), was the first of Jehoram.
It is probable that the long reign of Asa closed with
Jehoshaphat as coregent (1 K 16 23), so the above
totals of both kingdoms must be reduced to some
extent, probably to 90 years, and the disruption
of the kingdom placed about 933 BC. _Shishak,
founder of the XXIId Dynasty, invaded Pal in the
5th year of Rehoboam (1 K 14 25), and in, or shortly
before, the 21st year of his own reign, so that he
must have become sovereign of Egypt about 950
BC. Jeroboam fled to Egypt after Solomon had
reigned more than 20 years, as is shown by the
connection of Jeroboam with the building of Millo;
and so Jeroboam’s flight must have been about the
beginning of Shishak’s reign. This is in accord
with the OT records, since the hostile Shishak
Dynasty must have arisen in the reign of Solomon,
the dynasty which was ruling at the beginning of
his reign having been in alliance with him. So


4. Over-
lappings


Chronology of OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


640


we place the accession of Shishak about 950, his
invasion of Judah in 929, and the Disruption in
933 BC.

An interesting instance of coregency in this
period is that of Jehoshaphat and Jehoram, for while
Ahaziah of Israel began to reign in the 17th year
of Jehoshaphat (1 K 22 51) and died in the 2d
year of Jehoram (2 Kk 1 17), the year of his death


since the precocious Jewish sovereigns attained
their majority at 15 years of age (cf 2 Ch 34 3).
The coregency for 2 years of Joash and Amaziah
(2 Ch 24 25) brings the aggregate years of the
reigns of the kings of both kingdoms down to the
accession of Jeroboam IT, three years before Uz-
ziah’s accession, into exact accord. Finally, the
difference of three years in the totals of reigns in


A HarMeny OF THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE NORTHERN AND SOUTHERN KINGDOMS


Israel BC Judah
Fall of Samaria; end ef Kingdom of Israel....... 721 6th year of Hezekiah (2 K 18 10)
Siege of Samaria begun; 7th year of Hoshea..... j 723 4th year of Hezekiah (2 K 18 9)
726 Accessien of Hezekiah (2 K 18 1)
Hoshea made king by AAelath: pileser (2K 17 1). 729 12th year of Ahaz, counting coregency
Death of Pekah (2 K 15 30)................... 730 20th year from beginning of Jotham’s coregency
Pekah and Rezin invade Taaak (Isa 7 1). 734 RS ee Apag relens alone (2 ene ee (6 1)
5 eath of Uzzia. ; vision of Isaia
2d year of Pekah over all Israel (2 K 15 32)... ates 735 aes reigns alone for short time
Pekah becomes king, killing Pekahiah (2 K 15 25.
OHS fh der aeeN eT en DONT aR ROE AR Ree ke Reet eo ecient CE PE NOt 736 52d year of Uzziah
Pekahiah succeeds; Menahem dies (2 K 15 22.23). 738 50th year of Uzziah
Menahem pays tribute to Assyria (2 K 15 19).... 741 Ahaz becomes coregent (2 K 15 30; 17 1)
Menahem kills Shallum and reigns @ K 15 13-17). 748 39th year of Uzziah
CE ee esis (2 K 15 ne ee 749 Regency of Jotham began (2 K 15 5.32)
ra ef political ce maior: ekah usurped author- L ft Uzziah (2 Ch 26 16-21)
ity in Gilead (2 K 15 8-16 ff)............. 750 Po ey AO ee
Hosea the Prophet (Hos 1 1)................ The great earthquake (Am 1 1; Zec 14 5)
Amos the Prophet (Am 1 1; 7 9.10)............ 752
764 Wai frees Judah from vassalage to Israel (2 K
1)
Jonah the Prophet (2 K 14 25; Jon 1 1)........ cir 775 Death of Amaziah (2 K 14 17; 2 Ch 25 2)
4th year of Jeroboam 11 (2 K 15 8)............ 787 Uzziah made king by the people (2 K 14 21. mi
Death of Joash; Jerohoam succeeds (2 K 14 16.23) 790 eerie defeat of Amaziah by Joash (2 K
8-14
803 Death of Joash (2 K 12 1.21)
Death of Jehoahaz (2 K 13.1)................. 804 Amaziah coregent (2 K 14 ‘1; 13 10; 2 Ch 24 25)
Joash becomes Oe tg 3 (2213 gl) icant scat 806 37th year of Joash
Death of Jehu (2 5.36 816
Jehoahaz Lean in 104 age of Jehu (2 K 13 1): 820 a year of vere hk i, 21)
verthrow 0: ial
7th year of Jehu... .. 0.6060. e cece e eee B87 | Te as iat
Jehu pays tribute to Assyria................... 842 ,
Jehu destroys dynasty ef Omri, and reigns (2 K 10 843 avo yeurns throne on death of Ahaziah (2 K
) ;
Jehoram slain by Jehu (2 K 9 24).............. 843 eee slain a by? aenu (2 K 9 27) in 1st year of
s reign 2
llth year of Jehoram.......................... 844 Ahaziah coregeut aE his father (2 K 9 29)
Sth year of Jehoram..........00-.0 cece eee 850 Death of Jehoshaphat; sole reign of Jehoram
Jeheram succeeds enone: fatal accident to Ahaz; (2 K 8 16)
death of Ahab (1 K 22 37; 2 K 1 2.17)..... 854 art aes of HeHOSEAPAST, and 2d of Jehoram (2 K
Battle of Karkar, tribute to ae Jehoshaphat nue Ahab against Syria (1 K 22 1 ff)
Coregency of Ahaziah (1 K 22°51)............. 855 Jehoram becomes coregent
Nahoth naaeet oud murdered by Jezebel (1K 211)) cir 856
Wears! WithtS ylides 4 2-eu. ce dia a eeeat a eco antoo ewe Get ee 867—857
Elijah the Bioahat appears (1 K 17 1).......... cir 870
4th°year of: Ahab see's eas ae es i A oe lee, 872 Asa dies and Jehoshaphat reigns alone (1 K_22 6
874 cuba aaa coregent in Asa's 39th year (2 Ch 16
Ahab succeeds on death of Omri (1 K 16 29).. 875 38th year of Asa
Omri builds Samaria, having over ces all opposi-
tion to his reign (1 K 16 23.24)............. 881 31st year of Asa
Zimri's brief reign after murder ot lai: people di-
vided between Omri and Tibni (1 K Vigue he abe 886 27th year of Asa
Elah succeeds on death of Baasha ¢ K 16 6.7). 887 26th year of Asa
Baasha begins building Ramah (1 K 15 17)...... 896 War with Baasha in the 17th year of Asa
Hanani the Prophet
898 be with caus Azariah the prophet (2 Ch 14
Baasha founds new dynasty (1 K 15 33)........ 910 3d year of Asa
Death of Jeroboam I, succession ef Nadab........ 911 2d year of Asa
20th year of J eroboaime.” Rigas eens els 913 Death of Abijah, succession of Asa (1_K us 9)
18th year of Jeroboam........ 0... cece ees 915 Rehoboam dies; Sapa Series qd K 15 1)
A 929 Invasion of Shishak qd K 14 2
Jeroboam king over Israel........... 0.20. eee 933 Rehoboam king over jadab


was also the 18th of Jehoshaphat, so that the father
and son reigned together about 5 years. It is evi-
dent also that Jehoshaphat ruled before his father’s
death, as the total of his reign is counted from
the coregency’s beginning (1 K 22 41), but certain
events are dated from his sole reign on the death
of Asa (1 K 22 51; 2K31). It is probable
that the 6 years of ‘Athaliah were included in the
40 years of the reign of Joash, the legitimate king.
The age of his son, Amaziah, at his accession (2 Ch
25 1) does not operate against this probability,


the two kingdoms from Jehu to the Disruption is
explained by the fact that in Israel the first year
of a king was coincident with the last of his prede-
cessor, whereas in Judah, certainly at the begin-
ning of this period, the first year of a king followed
the death of his predecessor; e.g. while Asa began
to reign in the 20th year of Jeroboam (1 K 16 9),
Jeroboam, who reigned 22 years, died three years
later in the second year of Asa (1 K 15 25). Ob-
servation of this principle in the accessions of the
first three kings after Jeroboam removes the differ-


641


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Chronology of OT


ence, the long numbers of the reign of Asa being
found to corroborate. The preceding table will
illustrate these facts of the records, as harmonizing
the dates of the two contemporaneous kingdoms.
VI. From the Disruption to the Exodus.—The
period now to be considered extends from the dis-
ruption of the kingdom back to the Exodus. The
reasons for combining the Biblical events within
these widely separated dates into one period of such
length are evident, viz. (1) the regular sequence of
the history; (2) the occurrence of comprehensive
numbers for the period as a whole, e.g. Jgs 11 26
and 1 K 6 1; the chronological data of the Book
of Jgs, which lead directly up to the developments
in the time of the united kingdom, e.g. the narrative
of Ruth preparing the way for the reign of David.
Characteristic of this period is the frequent occur-
rence of the general numbers 80, 40 and 20, which


(Acts 18 21), are given as 40 years each; and here
there may be some overlapping, Solomon, e.g.
becoming king before David’s death (1 K 1 43-
48). We are rather surprised to find that there is
no statement of the length of Samuel’s ministry,
such as its important place in the national life would
lead us to expect. The probable reason for this
is that his life was paralleled largely by the reign
of Saul and the administration of Eli. A period
of 40 years is assigned to Eli (1 S 4 18); the ag-
gregate of numbers given for the Judges is 410
years; Joshua ruled for 40 years (Jgs 2 8); and
finally the wilderness wanderings covered another
40-year period. The sum total of all these num-
bers is 670—far beyond the comprehensive reck-
onings of Jgs 11 26; 1K 61, and Acts 13 19.
It is evident from Jgs 10 7.8; 13 1 that the periods
of Ammonite and Phili oppression were either con-


Death of Solomon, followed by Disruption..............
Jeroboam a refugee in Egypt
Shishak rules Egypt.............-..4..
Foundation of Temple laid..............
Death of David, in coregency of Solomon

Solomon made king (1 K 1)

David reigns over all Israel... ......0.. 0... cee eee eee
David reigns over Judah
David anointed by Samuel.......... 0.0. c cece eee
Birth of David
Beginning of Saul’s reign; Samuel still judge
Samuel's administration (1 S 7 2.15) certainly..........
Eli began to judge...... Pe eaeneahipat ete none Esha io\ waaay ene cnetenayens so8
Samson Conve pa ae, with Eli; Jes 13 1) began........
Opereson by Philistines... .........-----+--- be
Abdon began to judge in Ephraim............
Elon began to judge in Zebul e:
Ibzan began to judge contemporaneous with Elon........
Jephthah’s judgeship. ........... 0.022 cece ce eee eens
Oppression by Ammonites (Jgs 12)
Jair began to judge (including oppression of Ammon).....
Tola began to judge... 1... eee eee eens
Abimelech’s usurpation........ 00.002. ccc ene ee
Gideon's judgeship, including Abimelech.
Oppression by Midian (Jgs 1)
Deborah and Barak co-judges
Oppression by Canaanites Jes 4
Period under Ehud and Shamgar
Oppression by Moab (Jes 3 14)
Othniel of Judah judges....... ep Moga cnc ciate ah ee
Oppression by Cushan-rishathaim (Jgs 3 8)...........-
Entrance into Canaan under Joshua............-....--
Death of Moses... 0. oe ce cette teens
Death of Aaron.......----.e seers a
Israel at Kadesh, 2d time ae
Israel at Sinai.............- a
Exodus from Egypt, led by Moses


Lone or Consecutive SHorreneD Nos., Syn-
NUMBERS CHRONIsMs RaecKONED
No. Years BC No. Years BC
a 933 ie 933
16 cir 948 16 cir 948
1 cir 949 1 cir 949
20 969 20 969
2 971 2 971
1 972 1 972
32 1004 32 1003
7 1011 7 1010
i 1024 nae 1023
cans : 1041 as 1040
40 1051 *39 1049
20 1071 20 1069
40 1111 39 1108
20 1131 (0) 1108
40 1171 0 we
8 1179 7 1115
10 1189 9 1124
8 1197 0 1124
6 1203 5 1129
18 1221 0 oat
22 1243 21 1150
23 1266 22 1172
3 1269 0 ee
40 1300 39 1211
7 1316 0 ene
40 1356 39 1250
20 1376 0 ie
80 1456 79 1329
18 1474 0 rns
40 1514 39 1368
8 1522 0 a
40 1562 40 1408
oe 1563 phe 1409
on 1564 a 1410
és 1564 ste 1410
Dyan 1601 ae 1447
40 { 1602 40 cir 1448
670 i 517


* One year will be subtracted from each long administration for overlapping with predecessor.


are not necessarily to be taken always as exact, but
possibly at times indicating a round, or generation,
number. In order to get the time limits of this
period, it is necessary to count back 37 years from
the end of Solomon’s reign in 933 BC, and this brings
us to that epoch-marking event, the laying of the
foundations of the Temple in 969 or 970, the 4th
year of his reign (1 K 6 1); and from this event we
are brought by the addition of the comprehensive
number 479, given in the same verse, back to the
year of the Exodus, approximately 1448 BC, making

the total length of the period about 516 years.
But the addition of the numbers given for the
various reigns and administrations of the period
yields a total which is much greater


Indications than 516, and therefore one must seek
of Over- in the text indications of overlapping,
lapping which will bring the narrative into


harmony with itself. The reigns of
Solomon (1 K 11 42), David (1 K 2 11) and Saul


temporaneous or very near together, and therefore
that the comprehensive number, 300 years, of Jgs
11 26, reaches from the entrance into Canaan under
Joshua down to the age of Samson, as well as of
Jephthah. The administrations of Ibzan, Elon
and Abdon (Jgs 12 8-13) should then be regarded
as practically synchronous with Jephthah and
Samson, and the number of their years should, in
part at least, be left out of account. The numbers
from Samson and Eli to Solomon are approximately
fixed, 20 to Samson, 40 to Eli, 40 to Saul and 40
to David; and their total accords with the 300
before Jephthah, and the 40 of wilderness wander-
ings in making up the grand total (1 K 6 1) from
Solomon to the Exodus. This proportion before
and after Jephthah, or Samson, and the Phili op-
pression, approximately 330 and 150 years, is in
agreement with the genealogies of Ruth 4 18-22;
18 14 3; 229; 1 Ch 2,6, 24. The shortening
therefore of the excessive aggregate of 670 years


Chronology of OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


642


must be sought in the records from Samson back
to Joshua. Assuming that the oppressions may
be synchronous with the administrations of pre-
ceding or succeeding judges, that Abimelech’s
abortive attempt to become king (Jgs 9) should
be included in Gideon’s 40 years, and that parallel-
ings are possible in the three judges just after Jeph-
thah (Jgs 12 8-13) and the two just before (Jgs
10 1-5), it.is possible to bring the detailed time-
references of the Books of Jgs into satisfactory
agreement with the comprehensive numbers. That
the period of the Judges is shorter than the aggre-
gate of the numbers assigned to each is further
indicated by the manner in which the brief narra-
tives at the end of the book—the migration of the
Danites, the sin and punishment of Benjamin—and
the Book of Ruth, bring the earlier generations
into close touch with the later; cf the genealogy
of David (Ruth 4 18-22).

The preceding table (p. 641) shows the dates of
events according to the longer reckoning, and also
according to the suggested shortening by taking into
account the possible synchronisms. It should be
remembered that these figures are not indisputable,
but merely tentative and suggestive.

VII. From the Exodus to the Birth of Abraham.
—The period of OT chronology now to receive
our attention is that which extends from the Exodus
in cir 1448 BC back to the call and migration of
Abraham. This may be called the period of the
patriarchal wanderings, the formative or infancy
period of the nation, and therefore of the highest
interest historically and religiously. But it is not
possible to fix its dates with indisputable accuracy,
since, with rare exceptions, the events of the OT
record are not related in their narration to eras
or definite persons of the contemporary nations;
and since also the chronology of these nations is
much in dispute among historians and archaeolo-
gists, with variations of hundreds of years.

The chief points at issue here for determination
of the chronological problems are the time of the

Exodus, the duration of Israel’s so-


Main journ in Egypt and the date of Ham-
Points at murabi. Considering these in their
Issue order: (1) As to the Exodus, opinions


have been divided among the X VIIIth,
XIXth and XXth dynasties as the time of the
Oppression and Exodus of Israel, and there are
plausible arguments for, and serious objections to,
each of these periods. When all things have been
considered it seems best to fix upon the XVIIIth
Dynasty as the age of the Oppression and Exodus,
Thothmes ITI as the Pharaoh of the Oppression, and
the years immediately following his death as the time
of the Exodus, for the following reasons: (a) This is
in harmony with the time-reckoning from the Temple
of Solomon back to the Exodus (1 K 6 1), and
fully satisfies the Biblical numbers for the inter-
vening period, as shown above; while either later
dynastic period would necessitate either unnatural
cramping or ruthless rejection of the Biblical num-
bers. To place the Exodus so late as Ramses III,
after 1200 BC, is in the light of the Biblical reck-
oning an evident absurdity. (b) In the XVIIIth
Dynasty we can look best for the Pharaoh “that
knew not Joseph,” as it was the leader of this
dynasty, Ahmes I, who conquered and drove out
the Hyksos, and left to his followers as a legacy
cordial hatred of the Asiatics. (c) Thothmes III was
a great builder, and the heavy tasks of the Hebrews
would fit well into his reign. He was also the
champion of Amon, the god of Thebes, having been
a priest of that god; therefore the religious signifi-
cance of the Exodus and the struggle preceding it
were most natural in his age. (d) An inscription
of Menephthah, son of Ramses II, indicates that


Israel was in Pal in his time, therefore he could not
have been the Pharaoh of the Exodus, nor his father
the oppressor. (¢) The objection that Pharachs
of the XIXth and XXth dynasties invaded and
claimed sovereignty over Pal is of little conse-
quence, since these invasions usually involved only
the sea-plain, and any city or district might secure
immunity and maintain its status quo by payment of
tribute. In later cents many foreign invasions
swept through Israel without disturbing the national
integrity. As for the objection that the cities
Ramses and Pithom indicate the age of Ramses II,
it is altogether probable that they were built long
before his time, and only restored by him. For
these reasons the earlier date is assigned to the
Exodus. (2) Whether the duration of the sojourn
in Egypt was 430 or 215 years will depend upon
the interpretation of the comprehensive 430, or
roundly 400, which is of frequent occurrence in the
Bible as indicating the extent of the period of the
Hebrews’ wanderings among, and oppression by,
the nations (Gen 16 13; Ex 12 40; Acts 7 6;
Gal 3 17). These passages have been, and may
properly be, interpreted as indicating the time of
the actual sojourn in Egypt, or the time from the
entrance of Abraham into Canaan to the Exodus.
Modern archaeological discoveries and the logical
conclusions from them, our better knowledge of the
history and conditions of contemporaneous Egypt,
the shortening of the Hyksos period, as by Meyer,
Mahler and Breasted, and the acceptance of a later
date for Hammurabi, all seem to favor the shorter,
or 215-year, view of the sojourn. The remaining
215 years cover the period from Jacob’s descent
into Egypt back to the migration of Abraham. The
shorter period is adopted here for the reasons
already given; but by the addition of 215 the dates
from the death of Joseph backward may be con-
formed to the theory of the longer period. (38) Ac-
cepting the almost universal and well-grounded
judgment that the Amraphel of Gen 14 is the
famous Hammurabi of the Ist Bab Dynasty, we
should have assistance in determining the date
of his Biblical contemporary Abraham, if the
opinions of scholars about the age of Hammurabi
were not so divergent. Goodspeed (Hist Bab.
and Assyr.) places his reign at 2297-2254 BC;
Hommel (art. on “Babylonia,” HDB) fixes the
probable date at 1772-1717, an astonishing diver-
gence of 500 years, and suggestive of the spend-
thrift manner in which chronologists are accus-
tomed to dispose of the past ages of man. The
difference in this instance is caused by the disposi-
tion of the IId Bab Dynasty, Goodspeed making
its more than 360 years follow the Hammurabi
Dynasty, and adding the years of the two; Hommel
on the other hand regarding the IId, or Southern,
Dynasty as_ contemporaneous with the Ist, or
Northern. But it is more probable that the truth
lies between these extremes, since the IId Dynasty
must have had some independent standing, and
must have ruled alone for a time, in order to secure
consideration as a dynasty. This moderate reck-
oning is now commonly adopted, Breasted placing
Hammurabi at 1900 BC, Davis (in DB) about
1975, and Pinches (in Murray’s Illus. B. Dict.)
later than 2000 BC. It is in accord with the Bible
numbers, as the following table shows, and does
not vary materially from the reckoning of Ussher,
which was based upon those numbers. Therefore
the age of Hammurabi and Abraham may be con-
sidered as about 1900 BC, or 2100, if one estimates
the sojourn in Egypt at 430 years. The former is
more reasonable. The Am Tab, preserving cor-
respondence of the 14th and 15th cents. between
the Pharaohs of the XVIIIth Dynasty and Pal and
Babylon, by showing the contemporary sovereigns


643


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Chronology of OT


of the empires of the Nile and the Euphrates, con-
tribute confirmation to the Biblical reckoning. It
is possible that increased knowledge of the Hittite
empire and its dealings with Egypt, Pal and Bab
may in the near future contribute further con-
firmation. The foregoing conclusions may be sum-
marized in the following table:


Addition of
215 Years
BC | for Longer
Sejeurn in
‘ Egypt
The Exedus frem Egypt..... cir 1448
Jehevah appeared te Meses at
HHOROD i Ganicer sei dierde kag 1449
Flight ef Meses frem Egypt... 1488
Birth ef Meses.............. 1528 mh Ged
Birth ef Aaren.............. 1532 Based
Death ef Levi (approximatien) 1570 1785
*Pessible date of Amram's birth 1587 rine
Death ef Jeseph............. cir 1594 1809
Death ef Jaceb, aged 147..... 1647 1862
*Birth ef Kehath. pessibly .... 1647 or
Jaceb and his sens ge dewn te
EBV Pbins- cis oee ies tars, oes ce 1664 1879
Joseph exalted ever Egypt, 10
years estimated fer 7 years
ef plenty and part ef years
ef famine................. 1674 1889
aoceph seld by his brethren... 1687 1902
Birth ef Benjamin, death ef
ache) ain se sultan s.o ne 1698
Jaceb left Paddan-Aram, meet-
ing with Wsau............. 1699 eres
Birth ef Joseph............. 1704 1919
tBirth ef Levi, prohahbly...... 1708 1923
Jaceh marries Leah and Rachel 1711 Maxine
His flight frem Hebren te
aan es ts ceib ht poneee ha lt 1718 Bi
Death ef.Ahbraham.......... 1780 1995
Birth ef Esau and Jaceh..... 1795 2010
Marriage ef Isaac and Rehekah 1815 sage
Death ef Sarah (Gen 24 67).. 1816 oe
Birth ef Isaac............... 1855 2070
Destruction ef Sedem and
Gemorrah..............0. cir 1856
Birth ef Ishmael............ 1869
Invasien hy Chederlaemer and
Amraphel...... BiAeie ure conte cir 1875 2090
Abraham's sejeurn in Egypt..| cir 1878 PRs
His migration frem Haran te
Canaan oot ainsi tae ee oe 1880 2095
Birth ef Sarah.............. 1939 eas
Birth of Abraham........... cir 1955 2170
Birth of his father Terah..... 2025 2240


* The age of Kohath at birth of Amram is estimated at 60 years; similarly
the age of Amram at Aaron's birth.


+1£ Joseph was born 6 years before Jacob returned from Paddan-Aram,
Levi was about 4 years older.

IX. From Abraham to the Creation.—One other
general period of OT chronology remains for con-
sideration: from the age of Abraham back to the
creation of the world, about which in the nature
of the case there can be no absolute certainty, and
in which there is neither reason nor need for inflexi-
ble accuracy. The system, or succession, of num-
bers in the early chapters of Gen (6 and 11 10-26)
has given rise, in the effort to explain these num-
bers, to several theories.

(1) The literal interpretation, the best known
advocate of which was Archbishop Ussher (d. 1656),
whose literal arrangement was introduced into the
margin of the AV after his death. This theory
takes the birth- and death-numbers just as they
are, and by addition of the time intervals between
the birth of the various patriarchs, together with
Adam’s age at the birth of Seth, shows that 1,656
years elapsed from the Creation to the Flood, and
290 years from the Flood to Abraham’s birth,
according to the MT. But it must be apparent
at the very outset, that, on the most liberal arrange-
ment of the numbers and the most conservative
geological and anthropological estimate, this reck-
oning is not sufficiently long to satisfy the known
facts of the age of the earth, of the life of man upon
the earth, and of established historic dates. Even


‘stretched to cover thousands of years.


the conservative system of Professor Breasted
(Anc. Egypt) places the first certain date of Egyp
history, viz. the introduction of the Sothic calendar,
as early as 4241 BC, which is more than two cents.
beyond Ussher’s beginning of the world. More-
over, at that time an astronomical basis of reckon-
ing time was in existence, implying an age of culture
already gone before. This difficulty was appre-
ciated by the earliest interpreters, as indicated by
the variations of the Sam and LXX texts, the
latter increasing the total of the age about 1,500
years and inserting a new name into the genealogical
list of Gen 11. An interesting commentary on the
literal method is that it makes Noah live until
Abraham was seventy years old, and prolongs the
life of Shem to within the lifetime of. Jacob.

(2) A second theory is the dynastic: that the
long number of a patriarch’s lifetime indicates the
era during which his house or dynasty prevailed,
to be followed by the long number of the next
dynasty; e.g. the 930 years of Adam were followed
by the 912 of Seth, and so on until the period is
But there
are evident objections to this view: it does not
account for the invariable origin of each succeed~
ing dynasty so near the beginning of its predecessor,
and it disregards the manifest plan of the inspired
author to narrate the descent of the human race
through families and not by eras or empires.

(3) By others it has been conjectured that the
units of time have been different in the ancient
ages of man; that originally the time-unit was the
lunar cycle, by which the 969 lunar cycles of Me-
thuselah’s life really should be reduced to a little
more than 80 years of more recent times; and that
in the days of Abraham a year measured from
equinox to equinox had superseded the lunar time-
measurement. It’ is possible that the LXX vari-
ations were based upon this idea, since it increased
the age at which evcry father begat a son to at
least 162 in the generations before the Flood. But
even this expedient would not remove all difficul-
ties from the physical side; nor have we the slightest,
indication of the points at which these radical
changes of the time-units were made. On the
contrary the decrease of man’s years seems to have
come by somewhat gradual process, and not by
sharp and tremendous breaks.

(4) Others have thought to meet the difficulties
by suggesting the omission of links in the chain
of descent, in accordance with Heb custom of
omitting inconsequential names from a genealogical
list. The omission by Matthew of certain names
from his genealogy of Jesus Christ, in order to pre-
serve his symmetrical scheme of fourteens (Mt
1 8), is an illustration in point. As corroborative
of this it might be urged that the LXX does insert
a name between Arpachshad and Shelah (Gen 11
12). It may be said confidently that whatever
theory of the genealogies before Abraham one may
adopt, it is altogether reasonable to suppose that
one name, or many, may have been omitted from
the line of descent.

The dates resulting from the literal and exact
interpretation of the genealogical lists of Gen 5
and 11 may be tabulated as follows:


Death of Eber... 0.0... cee cee eee 1716 BC
Death: of Shem. 4. csccotin eee 1745
Death of Shelah..........0.- 00000005 1777
Death of Arpachshad................. 1806
Death of Terah.............-...2005- 1820
Death of Serug........-.-.0.00+0.0+. 1854
Death Of Rev: sec 02 oes pee ae o Shee cow 1877
Death of Noah...................... 1885
Death of Nahor......... 0.0206 e eee 1907
Death of Peleg... 0.0.06... e cece eee 1907


Chronology of OT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Chronology of NT


644


Brrtuh oF ABRAHAM.................. 1955
Birth of Terah......... 0.0... ..0.000- 2025
Birth of Nahor.................2.000 2054
Birth of Serug...............00 00004, 2084
Birth Oi Rey ede ote ate tele demas 2116
Birth of Peleg............0.......... 2146
Birth. Ot Wber* ssccsuane sehen dees 2180
Birth of Shelah...............0.0004.. 2210


(Here LXX inserts Kainan with 130 years)
Birth of Arpachshad.................. 2245


Death of Methuselah................. 2245
Year of the Flood.................... 2245
Death of Lamech.................... 2250
Birth of Shem. .......... 0.00.02 eee 2345
Birthzot Noahs itech rege aan 4 2845
Death of Adam............-...00005- 2971
Birth of Lamech..................0.- 3027
Birth of Methuselah.................. 3214
Birth of Enoch............0...2...25- 3274
Birthsot: Jared was cece eee a dae a oe 3441
Birth of Mahalaleel................... 3506
Birth of Kenan.................+...- 8576
Birth of Enosh............-....-.0055 3666
Birth of Seth... ......00..0 0000. c eee 3771
Creation of Adam................00.. 3901


If the 130 years of Kaman, whom the LXX inserts
between Shelah and Arpachshad, be added, the
date for Adam’s creation is increased to 4031 BC.
The exhibit of this table is most interesting and
suggestive. Noah, Shem, Arpachshad, Shelah,
Eber, Peleg were contemporaries of Abraham.
Shem, Shelah and Eber were living after Jacob’s
birth. Adam, Enoch, Methuselah and Lamech
were contemporary; and Methuselah’s long life
came to an end in the year of the Flood.

These genealogical lists of the early chapters of
Gen appear therefore not to have been given as

an exact and exclusive system of
A Sug- chronology; but it is more probable
gested In- that they were written to present a
terpretation general, compact, or mere outline

statement of the origin, early experi-
ence and apostasy of the human race, given with-
out the purpose of recording every possible link
in the chain of descent, or every incident in the
early racial experience. There are many indica-
tions, or suggestions at least, that this is the sensi-
ble and Divinely intended interpretation, some of
which have been stated: the variant items and
summaries of the MT, LXX and Sam; the fre-
quent omission in Heb genealogies of one or more
generations, the third, or later, descendant being
truly regarded as a son; the age of the world; the
comparative antiquity of man; and the more an-
cient dates disclosed by archaeology. It should
be noticed further that the inspired writer gives
ten generations from Adam to the Flood, and ten
also from the Flood to Abraham, as if by the use
of the decimal, or representatively human, number
he would indicate to us that he is dealing with com-
prehensively complete numbers and not with those
that are minutely complete, arranging in symbolic
form the account of man’s descent. See ANnTenr-
LUVIAN PaTRIARCHS.

But while the age of man may be greater than the
mechanical and exact sum of the Gen numbers,
we should not be deluded into the belief that it is
so great as some anthropologists and geologists,
who are prodigal of their numbers, would have us
think. The numbers of Gen are much nearer the
facts than these dreary stretches and wastes of
time. The formation of the Nile and the Euphrates
valleys, which furnished historic man’s first home,
is quite recent, possibly not antedating 7000 BC;
the account of the Flood is the record of a great
cataclysm which came upon historic man within


these millenniums; we have the records of the
presence of intelligent man in these fertile and
recently formed centers without traces of his origin
and development in, and movement from, other
homes. Archaeology and ancient history bring
civilized man upon us with somewhat of sudden-
ness, well established in homelands of recent forma-
tion. Whence came these peoples whose great
works and thoughts are found near the beginning
of an era so clearly limited by history and geog-
raphy? If they came from elsewhere and devel-
oped tediously, why have they left no trail of their
movement and no trace of the evolution? So late
as the 3d millennium BC Mesopotamia was sparsely
settled, and Pal in the first half of the 2d millen-
nium was still thinly settled. It is a legitimate con-
clusion, then, that intelligent man’s life on the
earth does not extend far beyond the total of the
Bible numbers (see ANTEDILUVIANS; DELUGE).
At the same time it is far from necessary to force
a literal and exact interpretation on these numbers,
which were given rather to trace lineage, keep
relationships, show development under the Divine
purpose, and fix responsibility, than to mark par-
ticular years.


Literaturs.—uUssher, Chronologia Sacra; G. Smith,
Assyr Eponym Canon; Maspero, The Dawn of Civiliza-
tion; The Struggle of the Nations; The Passing of the
Empires; Goodspeed, A History of the Babylonians and
Assyrians; Breasted, Ancient Egypt; Hist of Egypt, Mes-
opotamia and Israelin Hist of World; Hommel, Ancient
Heb Tradition; L. W. King, Chronology of the Bab Kings;
Beecher, Dated Events of OT; Auchinloss, Chronology of
the Holy Bible; various commentaries; Driver, Bk of Gene-
sis; Skinner, Genesis; Moore, Comm. on Judges; G
Smith, ‘‘Isaiah'' in Expositer's Bible, etc. Magazines:
James Orr, ‘‘Assyr and Heb Chronology" in Presbyterian
Review, 1889; ‘Israel and the Exodus” in Expositor,
1897; J. D. Davis. ‘‘Chronology of the Divided King-
dom’’ in Presbyterian and Reformed Review, 1891. Bible
Dictionaries: J. D. Davis in Dict. of the Bible, West-
minster Press; Hommel, arts. on ‘‘ Assyria” and ‘‘ Baby-
lonia" in Of interest also, Franke Parker,
Chronology, 1858.


Epwarp Mack
CHRONOLOGY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT:


I. CHRONOLOGY OF THE LIFE oF JESUS
1. Birth of Jesus

(1) Death of Herod

(2) Census of Quirinius

(3) Star of the Magi

(4) Course of Abijah

(5) Day and Month

(6) Summary
. Baptism of Jesus
First_Passover
. Death of John the Baptist
. Length of Jesus' Ministry
. Death of Jesus
. Summary of Dates
LITERATURE


II, Curonoioer or tue ApostoLtic AGB
1. Paul's Conversion
2. Death of Herod Agrippa I
3. Famine under Claudius
4. Sergius Paulus
2 Edict of Claudius
7
8


NOOR obo


. Gallio

. Festus

. Relative Chronology of Acts

9. Pauline Epistles
10. Release and Death of Paul
11. Death of Peter
12. Death of James the Just
13. The Synoptic Gospels, etc
14. Death of John
15. Summary of Dates
LITERATURE


The current Christian era is reckoned from the
birth of Jesus and is based upon the calculations
of Dionysius (6th cent.). Subsequent investiga-
tion has shown that the Dionysian date is at least
four years too late. Several eras were in use in
the time of Jesus; but of these only the Varronian
will be used coérdinately with the Dionysian in
the discussion of the chronology of the life of Jesus,
753 A.U.C. being synchronous with 1 BC and 754
A.U.C. with 1 AD.


645


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Chronology of OT


Chronology of NT


I. Chronology of the Life of Jesus.—Jesus was | 124 f; Schiwrer, Theol. Zig, 1907, 683 £; and on the


born before the death of Herod the Great (Mt 2

‘ 1 ff) at the time of a census or enrol-
1. Birth of ment made in the territory of Herod in
Jesus - accordance with a decree of Augustus
_, when Quirinius (RV, Cyrenius AV)
was exercising authority in the Rom province of
Syria (Lk 2.1f). At the time of Jesus’ birth a
star led the Magi of the East to seek in Jerus the
infant whom they subsequently found in Bethlehem
(Mt 2 1ff). John the Baptist was six months
older than Jesus (Lk 1 36) and he was born in the
days of Herod (Lk 1 5; ef 2 1) after his father,
Zacharias, of the priestly course of Abijah, had been
performing the functions of his office in the temple.

(1) Death of Herod—The death of Herod the
Great occurred in the spring of 750/4.* He ruled
from his appointment in Rome _714/40 (Ant, XIV,
xiv, 4-5, in the consulship of Caius Domitius Cal-
vinus and Caius Asinius Pollio) 37 years, and from
his accession in Jerus after the capture of the city
717/37 (Ant, XIV, xvi, 1-3; BJ, I, xvii, 9; I, xviii,
1-8; Dio Cassius xlix.22; ef. Schirer, GJV%, I, 358,
n. 11) 34 years (Ant, XVIL, xviii, 1; BJ, 1, xxxiii,
7-8; ef Schiirer, op. cit., I, 415, n. 167 where it is
shown that Jos reckons a year too much, probably
counting from Nisan 1 and including partial years).
Just before Herod’s death there was an eclipse of
the moon (Ant, XVII, vi, 4). According to astro-
nomical calculations an eclipse was visible in Pal
on March 23 and September 15, 749/5, March 12,
750/4, and January 9, 753/1. Of these the most
probable is that of March 12, 750/4. Soon after
the eclipse Herod put to death his son Antipater
and died five days later (Ant, XVII, vii; BJ, I,
xxxili, 7). Shortly after Herod’s death the Passover
was near at hand (Ant, XVII, vi, 4—ix, 3). In this
year Passover (Nisan 15) fell on April 11; and as
Archelaus had observed seven days of mourning
for his father before this, Herod’s death would fall
between March 17 and April 4. But as the 37th
(34th) year of his reign was probably reckoned from
Nisan 1 or March 28, his death may be dated be-
tween March 28 and April 4, 750/4.

This date for Herod’s death is confirmed by the
evidence for the duration of the reigns of his three
sons. Archelaus was deposed in 759/6 (Dio Cas-
sius lv.27 im the consulship of Aemilius Lepidus
and Lucius Arruntius) in the 10th year of his reign
(Ant, XVII, xiii, 2; cf BJ, II, vi, 3 which gives
the year as the 9th). Antipas was deposed most
probably in the summer of 792/39 (Ani, XVIII,
vii, 1-2; ef XVIII, vi, 11; XIX, vin, 2; BJ, I,
ix, 6; Schiirer, op. cit., I, 448, n. 46 and 416, n. 167).
There are coins of Antipas from his 43d year (Mad-
den, Coins of the Jews, 121 ff). The genuineness of
a coin from the 44th year is questioned by Schtirer
but accepted by Madden. The coin from the 45th
year is most probably spurious (Schirer, op. cit.,
I, 417, n. 167). Philip died after reigning 37 years,
in the 20th year of Tiberius—August 19, 786/33-
787/34 (Ant; XVIII, iv, 6). There is also a coin
of Philip from his 37th year (Madden, op. cit., 126).
Thus Archelaus, Antipas and Philip began to reign
in 750/4.

(2) Census of Quirinius—The census or enrol-
ment, which, according to Lk 2 1f, was the occa-
sion of the journey of Joseph and Mary to Bethlehem
where Jesus was born, is connected with a decree
of Augustus embracing the Gr-Rom world. This
decree must have been carried out in Pal by Herod
and probably in accordance with the Jewish method
—each going to his own city—rather than the Rom
(Dig. 15, 4, 2; Zumpt, Das Geburtsjahr Christi, 195;
Kenyon, Greek Papyri in the British Museum, II,

*Tho alternative numbers are BC or AD, i.e. 750
A,U.C. =4 BC, ete.


other hand, Ramsay, Expositor, 1908, I, 19, n.).
Certainly there is no intimation of an insurrection
such as characterized a later census (Acts 5 37;
Ant, XVIII, i, 1; BJ, Ul, xvii, 7; ef Tac. Ann.
vi.41; Livy Epit. exxxvi, exxxvii; Dessau, Inscrip. lat.
Sel. no. 212, col. ii, 36) and this may have been due
in no small measure to a difference in method. Both
Jos and Luke mention the later census which was
made by Quirinius on the deposition of Archelaus,
together with the insurrection of Judas which ac-
companied it. But while Jos does not mention
the Herodian census—although there may be some
intimation of it in Ant, XVI, ix, 3; XVII, ii, 4;
ef. Sanclemente, De vulg. aerae emend., 438; Ram-
say, Was Christ Born at Beth, 178 ff—Luke
carefully distinguishes the two, characterizing the
census at the time of Jesus’ birth as “first,” ive.
first in a series of enrolments connected either with
Quirinius or with the imperial policy inaugurated
by the decree of Augustus. The Gr-Rom writers
of the time do not mention this decree and later
writers (Cassiodor, Isidor and Suidas) cannot be
relied upon with certainty as independent witnesses
(Zumpt, Geburtsjahr, 148 ff). Yet the geographical
work of Agrippa and the preparation of a breviarium
totius imperit by Augustus (Tac. Ann. i.11; Suet.
Aug. 28 and 101; Dio Cassius liii.30; lvi.33; ef
Mommsen, Staatsrecht, II, 1025, n. 3), together with
the interest of the emperor in the organization and
finances of the empire and the attention which he
gave to the provinces (Marquardt, Rém. Staatsver-
waliung, II, 211f; ef 217), are indirectly corrobora-
tive of Luke’s statement. Augustus himself con-
ducted a census in Italy in 726/28, 746/8, 767/14
(Mommsen, Res Ges., 34 ff) and in Gaul in 727/27
(Dio Cassius liii.22, 5; Livy Hpit. exxxiv) and had a
census taken in other provinces (Pauly-Wissowa,
Realencyc., s.v. “Census,” 1918 f; Marquardt, op.
cit., II, 213). For Egypt there is evidence of a
regular periodic census every 14 years extending
back to 773/20 (Ramsay, op. cit., 131 ff; Grenfell
and Hunt, Oxy. Papyri, I, 207 ff; Wilcken, Griech.
Ostraka, I, 444 ff) and it is not improbable that this
procedure was introduced by Augustus (Schiirer,
op. cit., I, 515). ‘The inference from Egyp to similar
conditions in other provinces must indeed be made
cautiously (Wilcken, op. cit., 449; Marquardt, op.
cit., 441); yet in Syria the regular tributum capitis
seems to imply some such preliminary work (Dvg. |.
15, 3; Appian, Syr., 50; Marquardt, op. cit., II, 200,
n. 2; Pauly-Wissowa, op. cit., 1921; Ramsay, op.
cit., 154). The time of the decree is stated only in
general terms by Luke, and it may have been as
early as 727/27 (Zumpt, op. cit., 159; Marquardt,
op. eit., IT, 212) or later in 746-8 (Huschke, Census,
34; Ramsay, op. cit., 158 ff), its execution in differ-
ent provinces and subject kingdoms being carried
out at different times. Hence Luke dates the
census in the kingdom of Herod specifically by con-
necting it with the administrative functions of
Quirinius in Syria. But as P. Quintilius Varus was
the legate of san just before and after the death
of Herod from 748/6-750/4 (Ant, XVII, v, 2;
XVII, ix, 3; XVI, x,land9; XVII, xi, 1; Tac.
Hist. v.9; and coins in Eckhel, Doctr. num. vet.,
III, 275) and his predecessor was C. Sentius Sa-
¢urninus from_745/9-748/6 (Ant, XVI, ix, 1; x,
8; xi, 3; XVII, i, 1; ii, 1; ili, 2), there seems to
be no place for Quirinius during the closing years
of Herod’s reign. Tertullian mdced_ speaks of
Saturninus as legate at the time of Jesus’ birth
(Adv. Marc., iv.9). The interpretation of Luke’s
statement as indicating a date for the census before
Quirinius was legate (Wieseler, Chron. Syn., 116;
Lagrange, Revue Biblique, 1911, 80ff) is inad-
missible. It is possible that the connection of the


Chronology of NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


646


census with Quirinius may be due to his having
brought to completion what was begun by one of
his predecessors; or Quirinius may have been com-
missioned especially by the emperor as legatus ad
census accipiendos to conduct a census in Syria and
this commission may have been connected tem-
porally with his campaign against the Homonad-
enses in Cilicia (Tac. Ann. ii.48; cf Noris, Ceno-
taph. Pis., 320 ff; Sanclemente, op. cit., 426 passim;
Ramsay, op. cit., 238). It has also been suggested
by Bour (L’Inscription de Quirinius, 48 ff) that
Quirinius may have been an imperial procurator
specially charged with authority in the matter
of the Herodian census. The titulus Tiburtinus
(CIL, XIV, 3613; Dessau, Inser. Lat. Sel., 918)—
if rightly assigned to him—and there seems to be
no sufficient reason for’ questioning .the conclusive-
ness of Mommsen’s defence of this attribution (cf
Liebenam, Verwaltungsgesch., 365)—proves that he
was twice legate of Syria, and the titulus Venetus
(CIL, Ili, 6687; Dessau, op. cit., 2683) gives evi-
dence of a census conducted by him in Syria. His
administration is dated by Ramsay (op. cit., 243) in
747/7; by Mommsen in the end of 750/4 or the
beginning of 751/3 (op. cit., 172 ff). Zahn (Neue
kirch. Zeitschr., 1893, IV, 633 ff), followed by Spitta
(Zeitschr. f. d. neutest. Wiss., 1906, VII, 293 ff),
rejects the historicity of the later census connected
by Jos with the deposition of Archelaus, basing his
view on internal grounds, and assigns the Lucan
census to a time shortly after the death of Herod.
This view however is rendered improbable by the
evidence upon which the birth of Jesus is assigned
to a time before the death of Herod (Mt 2 1 ff;
Lk 1 5; 2 1f); by the differentiation of the census
in Lk 2 1f and Acts 5 37; by the definite con-
nection of the census in Jos with Syria and the
territory of Archelaus (cf also the tit. Venet.);
and by the general imperial policy in the formation
of a new province (Marquardt, op. cit., II, 213).
Moreover there seems to be no adequate ground for
identifying the Sabinus of Jos with Quirinius as
urged by Weber, who regards the two accounts (Ant,
XVII, viii, 1 ff and XVII, iv, 5; XVIU, i, 2; ii, 1 ff
as due to the separation by Jos of || accounts of the
same events in his sources (Zeitschr. f. d. neutest.
Wiss., 1909, X, 307 ff)—the census of Sabinus-Qui-
rinius being assigned to 4 BC, just after the death of
Herod the Great. The synchronism of the second
census of Quirinius with the periodic year of the
Egyp census is probably only a coincidence, for it
was occasioned by the deposition of Archelaus; but
its extension to Syria may be indicative of its con-
nection with the imperial policy inaugurated by
Augustus (Tac. Ann. vi.41; Ramsay, op. cit., 161 f).

(3) Star of the Magi—The identification of the
star of the Magi (Mt 2 2; cf 2 7.9.16; Macrobius,
Sat., II, 4; Sanclemente, op. cit., 456; Ramsay, op.
cit., 215 ff) and the determination of the time of its
appearance cannot be made with certainty, although
it has been associated with a conjunction in 747/7
and 748/6 of Saturn and Jupiter in thesign of Pisces—
a constellation which was thought to stand in close
relation with the Jewish nation (Ideler, Handbuch d.
math. u. tech. Chron., IJ, 400ff). When the Magi came
to Jerus, however, Herod was present in the city; and
this must have been at least several months before his
death, for during that time he was sick and absent
from Jerus (Ant, XVII, vi, 1 ff; BJ, I, xxxiii, 1 ff).

(4) Course of Abijah—The chronological cal-
culations of the time of the service of the priestly
course of Abijah in the temple, which are made by
reckoning back from the time of the course of
Jehoiarib which, according to Jewish tradition, was
serving at the time of the destruction of Jerus by
Titus, are uncertain (Schiirer, op. cit., II, 337, n. 3;
cf Lewin, Fasti Sacri, 836).


(5) Day and month.—The day and month cf Jesus’
birth are also uncertain. December 25 was cele-
brated by the church in the West as early as the 2d
cent.—if the date in Hippolytus on Dan., IV, 23, be
genuine (cf Ehrhardt, Alichr. Lit., 1880-1900, 383);
but January 6 was celebrated in the East as the
anniversary both of the birth and of the baptism.
The fact that shepherds were feeding their flocks at
night when Jesus was born (Lk 2 8) makes it im-
probable that the season of the year was winter.

(6) Summary.—The birth of Jesus may therefore
be assigned to the period 747/7 to 751/5, before
the death of Herod, at the time of a census made by
Herod in accordance with a decree of Augustus
and when Quirinius was exercising extraordinary
authority in Syria—Varus being the regular legate
of the province, i.e. probably in 748/6. See Jesus
CarisT.

The Synoptic Gospels begin their description
of the public ministry of Jesus with an account
of the ministry of John the Baptist
(Mt 31ff; Mk11ff; Lk 31f;
ef Jn 1 19ff; 4 24; Jos, Ant, XVIII,
ii, 3) and Luke definitely dates the
baptism of Jesus by John in the 15th year of Tibe-
rius. Luke also designates this event as the be-
ginning of Jesus’ ministry, and by stating Jesus’
age approximately brings it into connection with
the date of His birth. If Luke reckoned the reign
of Tiberius from the death of Augustus, August 19,
767/14, the 15th year would extend from August
19, 781/28 to August 18, 782/29; and if Jesus was
about thirty years old at this time, His birth would
fall in 751/3 to 752/2—or sometime after the death
of Herod, which is inconsistent with Luke’s own
and Matthew’s representation. This indeed was
one of the common modes of reckoning the imperial
reigns.. The mode of reckoning from the assump-
tion of the tribunician power or from the designa-
tion as imperator is altogether unlikely in Luke’s
case and intrinsically improbable, since for Tiberius
the one began in 748/6 and the other in 743/11
(Dio Cassius lv.9; liv.33; Vell. ii.99; Suet. Tib. ix.11).
But if, as seems likely, the method of reckoning by
imperial years rather than by the yearly consuls was
not definitely fixed when Luke wrote, it is possible
that he may have counted the years of Tiberius
from his appointment in 764/11 or 765/12 to equal
authority with Augustus in the provinces (Vell. ii
121; Suet. Tt. xx.21; Tac. Ann.i3). This method
seems not to have been employed elsewhere (Lewin,
op. cit., 1143f; cf Ramsay, op. cit., 202f). The
coins of Antioch in which it is found are regarded as
spurious (Eckhel, op. cit., III, 276), the genuine coins
reckoning the reign of Tiberius from the death of
Augustus (ib, ITI, 278). If Luke reckoned the reign
of Tiberius from 764/11 or 765/12, the 15th year
would fall in 778/25 or 779/26, probably the latter,
and Jesus’ birth about thirty years earlier, i.e. about
748/6 or 749/5.

At the time of the first Passover in Jesus’ ministry
the Herodian temple had_been building 46 years


2. Baptism
of Jesus


(Jn 2 20). Herod began the temple
3. First in the 18th year of his reign (Ant,
Passover XV, xi, 1, which probably corrects


the statement in BJ, I, xxi, 1 that it
was the 15th year; ef Schiirer, op. cit., I, 369 f, n.
12). As Jos reckons from the accession of Herod
in 717/37, the 18th year would be 734/20 to 735/21
and 46 years later would be 780/27 to 781/28. The
interval impled in John between this Passover
and the beginning of Jesus’ ministry agrees well
with the Lucan dating of the baptism in 779/26.
The imprisonment of John the Baptist, which
preceded the beginning of Jesus’ Galilean work,
was continued for a time (Mt 112-19; Lk 7
18-35) but was finally terminated by beheading at


647


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Chronology of NT


the order of Herod Antipas. Announcement of
the death was made to Jesus while in the midst of
His Galilean ministry (Mt 14 3-12;
4. Death Mk 6 14-29; Lk 9 7-9). Jos reports
of John the that the defeat of Antipas by Aretas,
Baptist in the summer of 789/36, was popu-
larly regarded as a Divine punish-
ment for the murder of John (Ant, XVIII, v, 2).
But although Jos mentions the divorce of Aretas’
daughter by Antipas as one of the causes of hos-
tilities, no inference can be drawn from this or from
the popular ae enon of Antipas’ defeat, by
which the interval between John’s death and this
defeat can be fixed (Schiirer, op. cit., I, 443 f).
The Synoptic Gospels mention the Passion Pass-
over at which Jesus’ ministry was terminated, but
they contain no data by which the


6. Length interval between the imprisonment of
of Jesus’ John the Baptist and this Passover
Ministry can be fixed with certainty. Yet


indications are not wanting that the
interval consisted of at least two years. The Sab-
bath controversy broke out in Galilee when the
grain was still standing in the fields (Mt 12 1;
Mk 2 28; Lk 6 1) and the condition of the grass
when the Five Thousand were fed (Mt 14 15;
Mk 6 39; Lk 9 12) points to the springtime, the
Passion Passover marking the return of still another
springtime (cf also Lk 13 7; Mt 23 37). But
the Gospel of John mentions explicitly three Pass-
overs (2 23; 6 4; 11 55) and probably implies a
fourth (6 1), thus necessitating a ministry of at
least two years and making probable a ministry
of three years after the first Passover. The Pass-
over of 6 4 cannot be eliminated on textual grounds,
for the documentary evidence is conclusive in its
favor and the argument against it based on the
statements of certain patristic writers is uncon-
vincing (cf Turner, HDB, I, 407f; Zabn, Kom.,
IV, 708 ff). The indications of time from 6 4—
the Passover when the Five Thousand were fed in
Galilee—to 11 55—the Passion Passover—are defi-
nite and clear (7 2; 10 22). But the interval
between the first Passover (2 23) and the Galilean
Passover (6 4) must have been one and may have
been two years. The following considerations
favor the latter view: Jesus was present in Jerus
at a feast (6 1) which is not named but is called
simply ‘“‘a” or “the” feast of the Jews. The best
authorities for the text are divided, some supporting
the insertion, others the omission of the definite
art. before “feast.” If the art. formed part of the
original text, the feast may have been either Taber-
nacles—from the Jewish point of view—or Passover
—from the Christian point of view. If the art.
was wanting in the original text, the identification
of the feast must be made on contextual and other
grounds. But the note of time in 4 35 indicates
the lapse of about nine months since the Passover
of 2 23 and it is not likely that the Galilean _min-
istry which preceded the feeding of the Five Thon-
sand lasted only about three months. In fact this
is rendered impossible by the condition of the grain
in the fields at the time of the Sabbath controversy.
The identification of the feast of Jn 51 with
Purim, even if the art. be not genuine, is extremely
improbable; and if so, a Passover must have inter-
vened between 2 23 and 6 4, making the ministry
of Jesus extend over a period of three years and the
months which preceded the Passover of 2 23.
While the identification cannot be made with cer-
tainty, if the feast was Passover the subject of the
controversy with the Jews in Jerus as well as the
season of the year would harmonize with the Synop-
tic account of the Sabbath controversy in Galilee
which probably followed this Passover (cf the
variant reading in Lk 6 1).


Jesus was put to death in Jerus at the time of
the Passover when Pontius Pilate was procurator
of Judaea (Mt 27 2ff; Mk 15 1 ff;
6. Death Lk 23 1ff; Jn 18 20ff; 19 1ff; Acts
of Jesus 3 13; 4 27; 13 28; 1 Tim 6 18; Tac.
; Ann. xv.44), Caiaphas being the high
priest (Mt 26 3.57; Jn 1149; 18 13ff) and
Herod Antipas the tetrarch of Galilee and Perea
(Lk 23 7 ff). Pilate was procurator from 779/26
to 789/36 (Ant, XVIII, iv, 3; v, 3; cf Schiirer, op.
cit., I, 487, n. 141); Caiaphas was high priest from
771/18 to 789/36 (Ant, XVIII, ii, 2; iv, 3; cf
Schiirer, op. cit., II, 271) and Antipas was tetrarch
from 750/4 to 792/39. If the first Passover of
Jesus’ ministry was in 780/27, the fourth would
fall in 783/30. The gospels name Friday as the
day of the crucifixion (Mt 27 62; Mk 15 42;
Lk 23 54; Jn 19 14.31.42) and the Synoptic
Gospels represent this Friday as Nisan 15—the
day following (or according to Jewish reckoning
from sunset to sunset, the same day as) the day
on which the paschal supper was eaten (Mt 26
17 ff; Mk 14 12 ff; Lk 22 7 ff). But the Fourth
Gospel is thought by many to represent the paschal
meal as still uneaten when Jesus suffered (18 28;
cf 13 29); and it is held that the Synoptic Gospels
also contain traces of this view (Mt 26 5; Mk 14
2; 16 21; Lk 23 26). Astronomical calculations
show that Friday could have fallen on Nisan 14
or 15 in 783/30 according to different methods of
reckoning (von Soden, #B, I, 806; cf Bacon,
Journal of Biblical Literature, XXVIII, 2, 1910,
130 ff; Fotheringham, Jour. of Theol. Studies, Octo-
ber, 1910, 120 ff), but the empirical character of
the Jewish calendar renders the result of such
calculations uncertain (Schiirer, op. cit., I, 749 f).
In the year 783/30 Friday, Nisan 15, would fall
on April 7. There is an early patristic tradition
which dates the death of Jesus in the year 782/29,
in the consulship of the Gemini (Turner, HDB, I,
413 f), but its origin and trustworthy character are
problematical.
1. Birth of Jesus, 748/6.
2. Death of Herod the Great, 750/4.
3. Baptism of Jesus, 779/26.
4. First Passover of Jesus’ ministry,
780/27.
5. Death of Jesus, 783/30.
Lirrrature.—Schiirer, Geschichte des Jtidischen Volkes
im Zeitalter Jesu Christi, 3. und 4. Aufi., 1901-9, 3 vols,
Eng. tr of the 2d ed, in 5 vols, 1885-94; Ideler, Hand-
buch der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie,
1825-26, 2 vols; Wieseler, Chronologische Synopse der
Evangelien, 1843, Eng. tr; Lewin, Fasti Sacri, 1865;
Turner, art. ‘‘Chronology. of the NT" in HDB, 1900, I,
403-25; von Soden, art. ‘‘'Chronology"’ in Cheyne and
Black, 2B, 1899, I, 799-819; Ramsay, Was Christ Born
at Bethlehem? 1898; F.R. Montgomery Hitchcock, art.
“‘Dates" in DCG; Mommsen, Res Gestae Divi Augusti2.
II. Chronology of the Apostolic Age.— The
chronology of the apostolie age must be based on the
data in Acts and the epistolary lit. of the NT which
afford contacts with persons or events of the Gr-
Rom world. From the fixed points thus secured
a general outline of the relative chronology may be
established with reasonable probability.
Paul was converted near Damascus (Acts 9 3 ff;
22 5ff; 26 12ff; Gal 117). After a brief stay
in that city (Acts 9 19 ff) he went to
1. Paunl’s Arabia and then came again to Da-
Conversion mascus (Gal 1 17). When he left
Damascus the second time, he returned
to Jerus after an absence of three years (Gal 1 18).
The flight of Paul from Damascus (Acts 9 24)
probably terminated his second visit to the city.
At that time the ethnarch of Aretas, the king of the
Nabathaeans, acting with the resident Jews (Acts
9 23 f), guarded the city to seize him (2 Cor 11
32). Aretas IV succeeded Obodas about 9 BC,


7. Summary
of Dates


Chronology of NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


648


and reigned until about 40 AD. Damascus was
taken by the Romans in 62 BC and probably con-
tinued under their control until the death of Tibe-
rius (March 37 AD). Rom coins of Damascus exist
from the time of Augustus, Tiberius and Nero, but
there are no such coins from the time of Caligula
and Claudius (Schiirer, op. cit., I, 737; II, 153).
Moreover the relations of Aretas to Augustus and
Tiberius make it extremely improbable that he
held Damascus during their reign as part of his king-
dom or acquired it by conquest. The statement
of Paul however seems to imply Nabathaean control
of the city, and this is best explained on the suppo-
sition that Damascus was given to Aretas by Calig-
ula, the change in the imperial attitude being due
perhaps to the influence primarily of Agrippa and
possibly also of Vitellius (Steinmann, Aretas IV,
1909, 34 ff). But if Paul’s escape from Damascus
was not earlier than 37 AD, his conversion cannot
be placed earlier than 34 or 35 AD, and the journey
to Jerus 14 years later (Gal 2 1) not earlier than
50 or 51 AD.

Herod Agrippa I died in Caesarea shortly after

a Passover season (Acts 12 23; cf 12 3.19).

Caligula had given him the tetrarchy
2. Death of of Philip and of Lysanias in 37 AD—
Herod the latter either at this time or later—
AgrippaI with the title of king (Ant, XVIII,

vi, 10; BJ, II, ix, 6) and this was in-
creased in 40 AD by the tetrarchy of Antipas (Ané,
XVIII, vii, 1f; BJ, II, ix, 6). Claudius gave
him also Judaea and Samaria (Ant, XTX, v,1; BJ,
II, xi, 5) thus making his territory even more ex-
tensive than that of his grandfather, Herod the
Great. Agrippa reigned over ‘‘all Judaea” for three
years under Claudius (Ant, XIX, viii, 2; BJ, II,
xi, 6), his death falling in the spring of 44 AD, in
the 7th year of his reign. The games mentioned
by Jos in this connection are probably those that
were celebrated in honor of the return of Claudius
from Britain in 44 AD. There are coins of Agrippa
from his 6th year, but the attribution to him of
coins from other years is questioned (Schiirer, op.
cit., 560, n. 40; Madden, op. cit., 132).

The prophecy of a famine and its fulfilment under
Claudius (Acts 11 28) are associated in Acts with
the death of Herod Agrippa I (11 30;
12 23). Famines in Rome during the
reign of Claudius are mentioned by
Suetonius (Claud. xviii), Dio Cassius
(Ix.11), Tacitus (Annals xii.48), and
Orosius (vii.6). Jos narrates in the time of Fadus
the generosity of Helena during a famine in Pal
(Ant, XX, ii, 5), but subsequently dates the famine
generally in the time of Fadus and Alexander. The
famine in Pal would fall therefore at some time be-
tween 44 and 48 (Schiirer, op. cit., I, 567, n. 8).

When Paul visited Cyprus with Barnabas the
island was administered by Sergius Paulus (Acts
13 7 ff), a propraetor with the title
proconsul (Marquardt, op. cit., I, 391).
There is an inscription from Cyprus
(Cagnat, Inser. graec. ad res rom. pertin.,
III, 930) dating from the Ist cent., and probably
from the year 53 (Zahn, Neue kirch. Zeitschr., 1904,
XV, 194) in which an incident in the career of a
certain Apollonius is dated in the proconsulship of
Paulus (ért_Iavaou [dvé]urdérov, epi Parilou [anth|-
updétou). From another inscription (CIG, 2632),
dated in the 12th year of Claudius, it appears that
L. Annius Bassus was proconsul in 52. If the Julius
Cordus mentioned by Bassus was his immediate
predecessor, the proconsulship of Sergius Paulus
may be dated at some time before 51.

When Paul came to Corinth for the first time
he met Aquila and Priscilla, who had left Rome
because of an edict of Claudius expelling the Jews


3. Famine
under
Claudius


4. Sergius
Paulus


from the city (Acts 18 2). Suetonius mentions an
expulsion of the Jews from Rome by Claudius but
gives no date (Claud. xxv; ef Dio
6. Edict of Cassius 1x.6). Orosius however dates
Claudius the edict in the 9th year of Claudius
or 49 AD (Hist. vii.6, 15); and al-
though Jos, from whom he quotes, does not men-
tion this edict but records the favor shown by
Claudius to the Jews and to Herod Agrippa I (Ant,
XIX, v, 1-3; cf Dio Cassius 1x.6, 6, 9, 10; 8, 2),
it is not improbable that the date is approximately
accurate (Schiirer, op. cit., ITI, 62, n. 92).
During Paul’s first sojourn in Corinth the apostle
was brought before the proconsul Gallio (Acts 18
12). This could not have been earlier
6. Gallio than the year 44 when Claudius gave
Achaia back to the Senate and the
province was administered by a propraetor with
the title of proconsul (Dio Cassius 1x.24; Mar-
quardt, op. cit., I, 331f; Ramsay, Expos., 1897,
I, 207). Moreover the career of Seneca makes it
improbable that his brother would be advanced to
this position before 49 or 50 (Harnack, Chron., I,
237; Wieseler, Chron. d. apos. Zeitalters, 119).
There is a fragmentary inscription from Delphi
containing a letter from the emperor Claudius in
which mention is made of Gallio. The inscrip-
tion is dated by the title of the emperor which
contains the number 26. This is referred naturally
to the acclammatio as “imperator’’? and dated in
the year 52 before August, after which time the
number 27 occurs in the title of Claudian inscrip-
tions. Gallio may therefore have been proconsul
from the spring or summer of the year 51-52 or
52-53. The latter seems the more probable time
(cf Aem. Bourguet, De rebus Delphicis, 1905, 63 f;
Ramsay, Expos., 1909, I, 4671; Princeton Theo-
logical Review, 1911, 290f; 1912, 1389f; Deissmann,
Paulus, 1911, 159-177; Lietzmann, Zetischrift fiir
wissenschaftliche Theologie, 1911, 345-54).
When Paul had been for two years a prisoner in
Caesarea Felix was succeeded by Festus as proc-
urator of Judaea (Acts 24 27). The
7. Festus accession of Festus, which is placed
y Eusebius in the Church History in
the reign of Nero (HE, II, 22, 1), is dated in the
Chronicle in the version of Jerome in the 2d year
of Nero, 56 AD, and in the Armenian version in
the 14th year of Claudius, 54 AD. The excerpts
from the Chronicle in Syncellus apparently follow
the text underlying the version of Jerome, but state
simply that Festus was sent as successor of Felix
by Nero (ed. Schoene, II, 154). After his removal
from office Felix was tried in Rome, but escaped
punishment through the influence of his brother
Pallas, who, according to Jos, was in favor with
Nero at that time (Ant, XX, viii, 9). Pallas was
removed from office before February 13, 55 AD
(Tac. Ann. xiii.14, 1; cf 15, 1), but apparently
continued to have influence with the emperor; for
he fixed the terms of his removal and was permitted
to enjoy his fortune for several years (Tac. Ann.
xilil4, 1f; 23, 1-3). His death occurred in 62
AD (Tac. Ann. xiv.65, 1).. The trial of Felix
must therefore have occurred before 62; but it is
impossible to place it before the removal of Pallas,
for this would necessitate the removal of Felix in
54 AD, and this is excluded by the fact that the
first summer of Nero’s reign fell in 55 AD. But if
Eusebius reckoned the imperial years from Sep-
tember Ist after the accession (Turner, Jour. o
Theol. Studies, 1902, 120f; HDB, I, 418f), the
summer of the second year of Nero would fall
in 57. In any event the removal and trial of Felix
must have fallen after the removal of Pallas. The
date of the Eusebian Chronicle is thus without sup-
port from Tacitus or Jos, and its value depends on


649


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Chronology of NT


the character of the source from which it was ob-
tained—if there was such a source, for it is at least
possible that the definite date owes its origin solely
to the necessities imposed on Eusebius by the form
of the Chronicle. It is not unlikely that the error
of 5 years made by Eusebius in the reign of Agrippa
II may be the source of a similar error in regard to
Festus in spite of the fact that the framework of the
Chronicle is generally furnished not by the years
of the Jewish kings but by the imperial years
(Erbes in Gebhardt u. Harnack, Tezte und Unter-
suchungen, N.F., IV, 1, 1899; Die Todestage d.
Apos. Paulus u. Petrus; Turner, Jour. of Theol.
Studies, 1902, Ill, 120f; Ramsay, Pauline and
Other Studies, 1906, 350 ff). There is evidence
however in Acts 21 38 that Paul’s arrest could not
bave been earlier than the spring of 55 AD. For
Paul was supposed by the chief captain to be the
Egyptian who had led an insurrection that had been
suppressed by Felix during the reign of Nero (Ant,
XX, viii, 6; BJ, II, 13, 5). Thus the accession of
Festus, two years later (Acts 24 27), could not have
been earlier than 57 AD.

But if the summer of 57 AD is the earliest date
possible for the accession of Festus, the summer of
60 AD is the latest date that is possible. Albinus,
the successor of Festus, was present in Jerus in
October, 62 AD (Ant, XX, ix, 1ff), and while
the administration of Festus was probably shorter
than that of Felix (cf Ant, XX, vii, 9-11; BJ,
II, xiv, 1 with Ant, XX, vii, 1-8, 8; BJ, II, 12-13),
it is not likely that it lasted less than two years.
But as between 57 AD and 60 AD, probability
favors the latter. For greater justice is thus done
to the words of Paul to Felix: ‘“Forasmuch as I
know that thou hast been of many years a judge
unto this nation,’ ete (Acts 24 10). Felix was
appointed by Claudius in 52 AD (Tac. Ann. xii.
54; Ant, XX, v, 2) and was continued in office by
Nero. Most of the events of his administration are
narrated by Jos under Nero (Ant, XX, viii, 5 ff);
and although Tacitus mentions an administration
of Felix in Samaria when Cumanus was administer-
ing Galilee (Ann. xii.54), the omission‘of any direct
reference to Judaea, the unusual character of such a
double administration and the explicit statement of
Jos that Claudius sent Felix as successor of Cu-
manus, make it unlikely that Paul’s statement is to
be understood of an administration beginning earlier
than 52 AD. If Festus succeeded in the summer of
60 AD, Paul’s arrest would fall in 58 and the “many
years” of Felix’ administration would cover a period
of 6 years, from 52 AD to 58 AD (ef Schiirer, op.
cit., I, 5771, n. 38). Ramsay argues in favor of 57
AD as the year of Paul’s arrest and 59 AD as the
year of the accession of Festus (Pauline and Other
Studies, 1906, 345 ff). :

If Festus succeeded Felix in the summer of 60
AD, Paul would reach Rome in the spring of 61

D, and the narrative in Acts would

8. Relative terminate in 63 AD (28 30). Paul’s
Chronology arrest in Jerus 2 years before the ac-
of Acts cession of Festus (24 27) would fall
in the spring of 58 AD. Previous to

this Paul had spent 3 months in Corinth (20 3)
and 3 years in Ephesus (20 31; cf 19 10), which
would make the beginning of the third missionary
journey fall about 54 AD. There was an interval
between the second and the third journeys (18 23),
and as Paul spent 18 months at Corinth (18 11)
the beginning of the second journey would fall
about 51 AD. The Apostolic Council preceded
the second journey and may be dated about 50 AD
—14 years subsequent to Paul’s first visit to Jerus
(37 AD) in the third year after his conversion in
35 AD. The first missionary journey was made
after the visit of Paul and Barnabas to Jerus with


the alms from the church at Antioch (11 30; 12
25), about the time of the death of Herod Agrippa I,
and would fall between 44 AD and 50 AD. The
growth of the early church in Jerus previous to
Paul’s conversion would thus extend over a period
of about 5 years from 30 AD to 35 AD.
Ten of the thirteen Pauline epistles were written
during a period of about ten years between Paul’s
arrival in Corinth and the close of his
9. Pauline first Rom imprisonment. These epis-
Epistles tles fall into three groups, each pos-
sessing certain distinctive character-
istics; and although each reflects the difference in
time and occasion of its production, they all reveal
an essential continuity of thought and a similarity
of style which evidences unity of authorship. The
earliest group consists of the Thessalonian epistles,
both of which were written from Corinth on the
second missionary journey about 52 or 53 AD,
while Silas (Silvanus) was still in Paul’s company
and shortly after Paul’s visit to Athens (1 Thess
11; 3126; 2 Thess 11). The major epistles
belong to the third missionary journey. 1 Cor was
written from Ephesus about 55 AD; Gal probably
from Ephesus, either before or after 1 Cor, for Paul
had been twice in Galatia (Gal 4 13); 2 Cor from
Macedonia about 57 AD; and Rom from Corinth
about 57 or 58 AD. The imprisonment epistles
were written from Rome: Col, Eph and Philem
about 62 AD, and Phil about 63 AD.
When Paul wrote to Philemon (Philem ver 22)
and to the Philippians (Phil 2 24; cf 1 25), he
expected a favorable issue of his trial
10. Release in Rome and was looking forward to
and Death another visit to the East. Before his
of Paul arrest he had planned a journey to
Spain by way of Rome (Rom 16 28),
and when he bade farewell to the Ephesian elders
at Miletus (Acts 20 25) he must have had in mind
not only the dangers of his journey to Jerus, but
also his determination to enter another field of
labor. 1 Clement 5, the Muratori Canon and the
Apocryphal Acts of Peter (Zahn, Hinltg.2, I, 444 f)
witness to the Spanish journey, and the Pastoral
Epistles to a journey to the East and to another
imprisonment in Rome. The two lines of evidence
for Paul’s release are independent and neither can
be explained as derived merely from the statement
of Paul’s intention in Rom and in Philem and
Phil. The historical situation implied in the Pas-
toral Epistles can be charged with artificiality only
on the hypothesis that Paul was not released from
his firsts Rom imprisonment. The data of these
epistles cannot be fitted into any period of Paul’s
life previous to his imprisonment. But these data
are embodied in just those parts of the Pastoral
Epistles which are admitted to be Pauline by those
who regard the epistles as containing only genuine
fragments from Paul but assign the epistles in their
present form to a later writer. On any hypothesis
of authorship, however, the tradition which these
epistles contain cannot be much later than the first
quarter of the 2d cent. It is highly probable there-
fore that Paul was released from his first Rom im-
prisonment; that he visited Spain and the East; and
that he was imprisoned a,second time in Rome where
he met his death in the closing years of Nero’s reign,
ie. in 67 or 68 AD. According to early tradition
Paul suffered martyrdom by beheading with the
sword (Tert., De praescr. haer., xxxvi), but there is
nothing to connect his death with the persecution
of the Christians in Rome by Nero in 64 AD.
Little is known of Peter beside what is recorded
of him in the NT. The tradition of his bishopric
of 20 or 25 years in Rome (cf Harnack, Gesch. d.
altchr. Lit., 11; Die Chronologie, I, 243 f) accords
neither with the implications of Acts and Gal nor


Chronology of NT THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


650


with Paul’s silence in Rom. But 1 Pet was prob-
ably written from Rome (5 18; cf Euseb., HE,
1.15, 2) and the testimony to Peter’s
11. Death martyrdom (implied in Jn 21 18 f)
of Peter under Nero in Rome by crucifixion
(Tert., De praes. haer., xxxvi; cf 1 Clem
6 1ff) is early and probably trustworthy. Tradi-
tion also associates Peter and Paul in their Rom
labors and martyrdom (Dionysius in Euseb., HE,
ii.25, 8; Iren., Adv. haer., iii.1, 2; iii.3, 1). The
mention of the Vatican as the place of Peter’s
interment (Caius in Euseb., HE, ii.25, 6f) may
indicate a connection of his martyrdom with the
Neronian persecution in 64 AD; but this is not
certain. Peter's death may therefore be dated
with some probability in Rome between 64 and 67
AD. His two epistles were written at some time
before his death, probably the First about 64 and
the Second at some time afterward and subsequent
to the Epistle of Jude which it apparently uses.
(The arguments against the Rom sojourn and mar-
tyrdom of Peter are stated fully by Schmiedel in
the FB, s.v. “Simon Peter,” esp. col. 458 ff; on the
other hand cf Zahn, Hinleitung?, II, 17 ff, Eng. tr,
IL, 158 ff.)
James the Just, the brother of the Lord, was
prominent in the church of Jerus at the time of the
Apostolic Council (Acts 15 13 ff; Gal
12. Death 29; cf 119; 2 12) and later when
of James Paul was arrested he seems still to
the Just have occupied this position (Acts 21
18 ff), laboring with impressive devo-
tion for the Jewish people until his martyrdom
about the year 66 AD (Ant, XX, ix, 1; Euseb., HE,
1.23, 3 ff; "H RES, VIL, 581; Zahn, Binitg3, I, 76).
The Epistle of Jas contains numerous indications
of its early origin and equally clear evidence that it
was not written during the period when the ques-
tions which are discussed in the major epistles of
Paul were agitating the church. It is probably the
earliest book of the NT, written before the Apostolic
Council.
In the decade just preceding the fall of Jerus,
the tradition of the life and teaching of Jesus was
committed to writing in the Synoptic


13. The Gospels. Early tradition dates the
Synoptic composition of Matthew’s Gospel in
Gospels the lifetime of Peter and Paul (Iren.,


Adv. haer., iii.1, 1; Eusebius, HF,
v.8, 2 ff), and that of the Gospel of Mark either
just before or after Peter’s death (Clement in Euseb.,
HE, vi.14, 7; cf ii.15; and Irenaeus, Adv. haer.,
iii.11, 1; Presbyter of Papias in Euseb., HE, iii.
39, 15; cf also 2 Pet 115). The Lucan writings
—both the Gospel and Acts—probably fall also in
this period, for the Gospel contains no intimation
that Jesus’ prophecy of the destruction of Jerus had
been fulfilled (cf Lk 21 21; Acts 11 28), and the
silence of Acts about the issue of Paul’s frial is
best explained on the hypothesis of an early date
(Jerome, De vir. illustr., vii; Harnack, Neue Unter-
such. zur Apostelgesch., 1911; cf also Lk 10 7; 1
Tim 6 18). To this period belong also the Epistle
of Jude and the Epistle to the He (if addressed to
Jewish Christians of Pal; but later, about 80 AD,
if addressed to Jewish Christians of Rome [Zahn,
Einiig.2, II, 152]), the former being used in 2 Pet
and the latter in 1 Clem.
Early tradition connects John with Ephesus and
mentions his continuing in life until the time of
Trajan (Irenaeus, Adv. haer., 11.22, 5
14. Death ([Eusebius, HE, v.24]; iii.1, 1; v.30,
of John 3; v.33, 4; Clement in Eusebius, HE,
11.23, 5-19; Polycrates in Eusebius,
HE, iii.31, 3; v.24, 3; Justin, Dialogue, Ixxxi; cf
Rev 1 1.4.9; 22 8; Jn 21 22.23.24; 19 35). He
died probably about the end of the 1st cent. There


is another but less well-attested tradition of martyr-
dom based chiefly on the De Boor fragment of Papias
(Texte u. Unters., 1888), a Syr Martyrology of the 4th
cent. (Wright, Jour. of Sacred Lit., 1865-66, VIII,
56 ff, 423 ff), the Codex Coislinianus 305 of Georgius
Hamartolus. This tradition, it is thought, finds con-
firmation in Mk 10 35-40; Mt 20 20-23 (cf Bousset,
Theologische Rundschau, 1905, 225ff, 277ff). Dur-
ing the closing years of his life John wrote the
Revelation, the Fourth Gospel and the three Epistles.


Conversion of Paul .................... 35
Death of James, son of Zebedee......... 44
Death of Herod Agrippa I... . . 44

15. Sum- Famine under Claudius....... 44-48
mary of Epistle of James ....... before 50
Dates First missionary journey...... 45-49
Edict of Claudius............ 49-50


Proconsulship of Sergius Paulus. ... before 51


Apostolic Council..........-...0 se eue 50
Second missionary journey............. 50-53
1 and 2 Thess from Corinth............ 52/53
Proconsulship of Gallio.................. 52/53
Third missionary journey...........-.. 54-58
Paul in Ephesus..............00e ee euee 54-57
1 Cor and Gal from Ephesus............ 55-57
2 Cor from Macedonia................. 57
Rom from Corinth... ........0..000005 57/58
Arrest of Paul in Jerus................. 5
Accession of Festus—not before......... 57
probably2e0 008 se he See 60
First Rom imprisonment of Paul....... 61-63/4
Col, Eph, Philem, from Rome.......... 62
Phil from Rome................0.0000- 63
Release of Paul and journeys in West and
BS bine Reon CEE a oi etm Ge oa diye 64-67
1 Tim and Tit from Macedonia.......... 65-66
2 Tim from Rome..............2.00005 67
Death of Paulin Rome................ 67/8
Synoptic Gospels, Acts, Jude and He, before 67
1 and 2 Pet from Rome................ 64-67
Death of Peter in Rome................ 64-67
Death of James the Just.......... about 66
Fourth Gospel, Revelation, Epistles of
John from Ephesus............. before 100
‘Deathvof Joburg. 02's eee a Shee bales 98-100


LiteratvRe.—In addition to the lit. mentioned in sec.
8: Anger, De temporum in actis apostolorum ratione,
‘Wieseler, Chronologie des apos. Zeitalters, 1848:
Hoennicke, Die Chronologie des Lebens des Apostels
Paulus, 1903; Harnack, Gesch. d. altchr. Lit. bis Euseb.,
II, 1, Die Chronologie bis Iren., 1897;. Lightfoot, Bibli-
eee 1893; Zahn, Hinletiung, II, 1907 (Eng. tr,


W. P. ARMSTRONG
CHRYSOLITE, kris’o-lit. See Sronzs, Pre-
cIous.


CHRYSOPRASE, kris’ o-praz, CHRYSOPRASUS,
kn-sop’ra-sus. See Sronzs, Precious.


CHUB, chub (39D, kibh). See Cus.


CHUN, chun (j"), kin, ‘“founding”). See Cun.
CHURCH, chirch:


. Pre-Curistian History or tHE TERM

II. Irs Avorrion sy Jesus

Ill. Irs Use in tre NT
1. In the Gospels
2. In Acts
3. In the Pauline Epistles

IV. Tse Notes or THE Cxvurca
1. Faith
2. Fellowship
3. Unity
4. Consecration
5. Power :

V. ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH
1. The General and Prophetic Ministry
2. The Local and Practical Ministry


LITERATURE


651


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA Ghronology of NT


The word “church,” which is derived from
rvpiaxés, kuriakés, “of or belonging to the Lord,”
represents in the EV of the NT the Gr éxxdyala
ekklésia, Lat ecclesia. It is with the signification
of this word ekklésia as it meets us in the NT, and
with the nature of the socicty which the word is
there used to describe, that the present art. is
concerned.

I, Pre- Christian History of the Term.—Although
ekklésia soon became a distinctively Christian word,
it has its own pre-Christian history; and to those,
whether Jews or Greeks, who first heard it applied
to the Christian society it would come with sug-
gestions of familiar things. Throughout the Gr
world and right down to NT times (cf Acts 19 39),
ekklésia was the designation of the regular assembly
of the whole body of citizens in a free city-state,
“called out”? (Gr ek, “out,” and kaletn, “to call”)
by the herald for the discussion and decision
of pubhe business. The LXX translators, again,
had used the word to render the Heb kahal, which
in the OT denotes the “congregation” or com-
munity of Israel, esp. in its religious aspect as the
people of God. In this OT sense we find ekklésia
employed by Stephen in the Book of Acts, where
he describes Moses as “he that was in the church
[RVm “congregation’”] in the wilderness” (Acts 7
38). The word thus came into Christian history with
associations alike for the Greek and the Jew. To
the Greek it would suggest a self-governing demo-
cratic society; to the Jew a theocratic society
whose members were the subjects of the Heavenly
King. The pre-Christian history of the word had
a direct bearing upon its Christian meaning, for
the ekklésia of the NT is a “theocratic democracy”
(Lindsay, Church and Ministry in the Early Cents.,
4), a society of those who are free, but are always
conscious that their freedom springs from obedience
to their King.

il. Its Adoption by Jesus.—According to Mt
16 18 the name ekklesia was first applied to the
Christian society by Jesus Himself, the occasion
being that of His benediction of Peter at Caesarea
Philippi. The authenticity of the utterance has
been called in question by certain critics, but on
grounds that have no textual support and are made
up of quite arbitrary presuppositions as to the com-
position of the First Gospel. It is true that Jesus
had hitherto described the society He came to
found as the ‘kingdom of God” or the “kingdom
of heaven,” a designation which had its roots in
OT teaching and which the Messianic expectations
of Israel had already made familiar. But now when
it was clear that He was to be rejected by the
Jewish people (cf ver 21), and that His society must
move on independent lines of ita own, it was natural
that He should employ a new name for this new
body which He was about to create, and thus should
say to Peter, on the ground of the apostle’s believing
confession, “Upon this rock I will build my church.”
The adoption of this name, however, did not imply
any abandonment of the ideas suggested by the
conception of the kingdom. In this very passage
(ver 19) ‘“‘the kingdom of heaven” is employed in a
manner which, if it does not make the two expres-
sions church and kingdom perfectly synonymcus,
at least compels us to regard them as closely cor-
relative and as capable of translation into each
other’s terms. And the comparative disuse by the
apostolic writers of the name “kingdom,” together
with their emphasis on the church, so far from show-
ing that Christ’s disciples had failed to understand
His doctrine of the kingdom, and had substituted
for it the more formal notion of the church, only
shows that they had followed their Master’s guid-
ance in substituting for a name and a conception
that were peculiarly Jewish, another name whose


associations would enable them to commend their
message more readily to the world at large.

If, Its Use in the NT.—Apart from the pas-
sage just referred to, the word ekklésia occurs in the

Gospels on one other occasion only

1. In the (Mt 18 17). Here, moreover, it may
Gospels be questioned whether Our Lord is
referring to the Christian church, or
to Jewish congregations commonly known as syna-
gogues (see RVm) The latter view is more in
keeping with the situation, but the promise im-
mediately given to the disciples of a power to bind
and loose (ver 18) and the assurance ‘‘Where two
or three are gathered together in my name, there am
Tin the midst of them”’ (ver 20) are evidently meant
for the people of Christ. If, as is probable, the
ekklésia of ver 17 is the Christian ekklésia of which
Christ had already spoken to Peter, the words show
that He conceived of the church as a society pos-
sessing powers of self-government, in which ques-
tions of discipline were to be decided by the
collective judgment of the members.

In Acts the ekklésia has come to be the regular
designation for the society of Christian believers,

but is employed in two distinct senses.

2. In Acts First in a local sense, to denote the
body of Christians in a particular
place or district, as in Jerus (6 11; 8 1), in Antioch
(13 1; 15 22), in Caesarea (18 22)—a usage which
reappears in the Apocalypse in the letters to the
Seven Churches. Then in a wider and what may
be called a universal sense, to denote the sum total
of existing local churches (9 31 RV), which are thus
regarded as forming one body.

In the Pauline Epistles both of these usages are


frequent. Thus the apostle writes of ‘the church

of the Thessalonians” (1 Thess 1 1),
3. Inthe ‘the church of God which is at Cor-
Pauline inth” (1 Cor 12; 2 Cor11). In-
Epistles deed he localizes and particularizes


the word yet further by applying it to
a single Christian household or to little groups of
believers who were accustomed to assemble in pri-
vate houses for worship and fellowship (Rom 16
5; 1 Cor 16 19; Col 4 15; Philem ver 2)—an
employment of the word which recalls the saying
of Jesus in Mt 18 20. The universal use, again,
may be illustrated by the contrast he draws be-
tween Jews and Greeks on the one hand and the
church of God on the other (1 Cor 10 32), and
by the declaration that God has set in the church.
apostles, prophets, and teachers (12 28).

But Paul in his later epistles has another use of
ekklésia peculiar to himself, which may be de-
scribed as the ideal use. The church, now, is the
body of which Christ is the head (Eph 1 22f;
Col 1 18.24). It is the medium through which
God’s manifold wisdom and eternal purpose are
to be made known not only to all men, but to the
principalities and powers in the heavenly places
(Eph 3 9-11). It is the bride of whom He is
the heavenly Bridegroom, the bride for whom in
His love He gave Himself up, that He might
cleanse and sanctify her and might present her to
Himself a glorious church, a church without blem-
ish, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing
(6 25 ff). This church clearly is not the actual
church as we know it on earth, with its divisions,
its blemishes, its shortcomings in faith and love and
obedience. It is the holy and catholic church that
is to be when the Bridegroom has completed the
process of lustration, having fully ‘‘cleansed it by
the washing of water with the word.” It is the
ideal which the actual church must keep before it
and strive after, the ideal up to which it shall
finally be guided by that Divine in-working power
which is able to conform the body to the head,


Church
Church Govt.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


652


to make the bride worthy of the Bridegroom, so
that God may receive in the church the glory that
is His (Eph 3 21).
IV. The Notes of the Church.— Although a
systematic doctrine of the church is neither to be
found nor to be looked for in the
1. Faith NT, certain characteristic notes or
features of the Christian society are
brought before us from which we can form some
conception as to its nature. The fundamental
note is faith. It was to Peter confessing his faith
in Christ that the promise came, ‘Upon this rock
I will build my church” (Mt 16 18). Until Jesus
found a man full of faith He could not begin to
build His church; and unless Peter had been the
prototype of others whose faith was like his own,
the walls of the church would never have risen
into the air. Primarily the church is a society not
of thinkers or workers or even of worshippers, but
of believers. Hence we find that “behevers” or
‘Shey that believed” is constantly used as a syno-
nym for the members of the Christian society (e.g.
Acts 2 44; 4 32; 6 14; 1 Tim 4 12). Hence,
too, the rite of baptism, which from the first was
the condition of entrance into the apostolic church
and the seal of membership in it, was recognized
as preéminently the sacrament of faith and of con-
fession (Acts 2 41; 8 12.36; Rom 6 4; 1 Cor 12
13). This church-founding and church-building
faith, of which baptism was the seal, was much
more than an act of intellectual assent. It was a
ersonal laying hold of the personal Saviour, the
Berd of a vital union between Christ and the be-
liever which resulted in nothing less than a new
creation (Rom 6 4; 8 1.2; 2 Cor 6 17).
If faith in Christ is the fundamental note of the
Christian society, the next is fellowship among the


members. This follows from the very
2. Fellow- nature of faith as just described; for
ship if each believer is vitally joined to


Christ, all believers must stand in a
living relation to one another. In Paul’s favorite
figure, Christians are members one of another be-
cause they are members in particular of the body of
Christ (Rom 12 5; 1 Cor 12 27). That the Chris-
tian society was recognized from the first as a fel-
lowship appears from the name “the brethren,”
which is so commonly applied to those who belong
to it. In Acts the name is of very frequent occur-
rence (9 30, etc), and it is employed by Paul in the
epistles of every period of his career (1 Thess 4
10, etc). Similar testimony lies in the fact that
“the koindnia” (EV “fellowship”) takes its place
in the earliest meetings of the church side by side
with the apostles’ teaching and the breaking of bread
and prayers (Acts 2 42). See Communion. ‘The
koinonia at first carried with it a community of goods
(Acts 2 44; 4 32), but afterward found expression
in the fellowship of ministration (2 Cor 8 4) and
in such acts of Christian charity as are inspired by
Christian faith (He 13 16). In the Lord’s Supper,
the other sacrament of the primitive church, the
fellowship of Christians received its most striking
and most sacred expression. For if baptism was
esp. the sacrament of faith, the Supper was dis-
tinctively the sacrament of love and fellowship—
@ communion or common participation in Christ’s
death and its fruits which carried with it a commun-
ion of hearts and spirits between the participants
themselves.

Although local congregations sprang up wherever
the gospel was preached, and each of these enjoyed
an independent life of its own, the

3. Unity unity of the church was clearly recog-
nized from the first. The intercourse
between Jerus and Antioch (Acts 11 22; 16 2),
the conference held in the former city (15 6 ff),


the right hand of fellowship given by the elder
apostles to Paul and Barnabas (Gal 2 9), the un-
tiring efforts made by Paul himself to forge strong
links of love and mutual service between gentile and
Jewish Christians (2 Cor 8)—all these things serve
to show how fully it was realized that though there
were many churches, there was but one church.
This truth comes to its complete expression in the
epistles of Paul’s imprisonment, with their vision
of the church as a body of which Christ is the head,
a body animated by one spirit, and having one
Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father
of all (Eph 4 4ff; Col 118; 311). And this
unity, it is to be noticed, is conceived of as a visible
unity. Jesus Himself evidently conceived it so when
He prayed for His disciples that they all might be
one, so that the world might believe (Jn 17 21).
And the unity of which Paul writes and for which he
strove is a unity that finds visible expression. Not,
it is true, in any uniformity of outward polity, but
through the manifestation of a common faith in
acts of mutual love (Eph 4 3.13; 2 Cor 9).

Another dominant note of the NT church lay
in the consecration of its members. ‘Saints’ is
one of the most frequently recurring
designations for them that we find.
As thus employed, the word has in
the first place an objective meaning;
the sainthood of the Christian society consisted in
its separation from the world by God’s electing
grace; in this respect it has succeeded to the pre-
rogatives of Israel under the old covenant. The
members of the church, as Peter said, are ‘‘an elect
race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for
God’s own possession” (1 Pet 29). But side by
side with this sense of an outward and priestly con-
secration, the name “saints” carried within it the
thought of an ethical holiness—a holiness consisting,
not merely in a status determined by relation to
Christ, but in an actual and practical saintliness, a
consecration to God that finds expression in char-
acter and conduct. No doubt the members of the
church are called saints even when the living evi-
dences of sainthood are sadly lacking. Writing
to the Corinthian church in which he found so much
to blame, Paul addresses its members by this title
(1 Cor 1 2; cf 6 11). But he does so for other
than formal reasons—not only because consecration
to God is their outward calling and status as be-
lievers, but also because he is assured that a work
of real sanctification is going on, and must continue
to go on, in their bodies and their spirits which are
His. For those who are in Christ are a new cre-
ation (2 Cor 5 17), and those to whom has come
the separating and consecrating call (2 Cor 6 17)
must cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God (7 1). Paul looks upon the members of the
church, just as he looks upon the church itself,
with a prophetic eye; he sees them not as they are,
but as they are to be. And in his view it is “by
the washing of water with the word,” in other words
by the progressive sanctification of its members, that
the church itself is to be sanctified and cleansed,
until Christ can present it to Himself a glorious
church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing
(Eph 6 26.27).

Yet another note of the church was spiritual


4, Conse-
cration


power. When the name ekklésia was given by
Jesus to the society He came to found,
5. Power His promise to Peter included the
bestowal of the gift of power (Mt 16
18.19). The apostle was to receive the ‘power


of the keys,” ie. he was to exercise the privilege
of opening the doors of the kingdom of heaven to
the Jew (Acts 2 41) and to the Gentile (10 34—
38; 16 7). He was further to have the power of


653


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Church
Church Govt.


binding and loosing, i.e. of forbidding and permit-
ting; in other words he was to possess the functiona
of a legislator within the spiritual sphere of the
church. The legislative powers then bestowed upon
Peter personally as the reward of his believing
confession were afterward conferred upon the dis-
ciples generally (Mt 18 18; cf ver 1 and also vs
19.20), and at the conference in Jerus were exer-
cised by the church as a whole (Acts 16 4.22).
The power to open the gates of the kingdom of
heaven was expanded into the great missionary
commission, “Go ye therefore, and make disciples
of all the nations” (Mt 28 19)—a commission that
was understood by the apostolic church to be ad-
dressed not to the eleven apostles only, but to all
Christ’s followers without distinction (Acts 8 4
etc). To the Christian society there thus belonged
the double power of legislating for its own members
and of opening the kingdom of heaven to all be-
lievers. But these double functions of teaching
and government were clearly recognized as dele-
gated gifts. The church taught the nations because
Christ had bid her go and doit. She laid down laws
for her own members because He had conferred
upon her authority to bind and to loose. But
in every exercise of her authority she relied upon
Him from whom she derived it. She believed that
Christ was with her alway, even unto the end of
the world (Mt 28 20), and that the power with
paren she was endued was power from on high (Lk
4 49).

V. The Organization of the Church.—It seems
evident from the NT that Jesus gave His disciples
no formal prescriptions for the organization of the
church. In the first days after Pentecost they had
no thought of separating themselves from the re-
ligious life of Israel, and would not realize the need
of any distinct organization of their own. The
temple-worship was still adhered to (Acts 2 46; 3
1), though it was supplemented by apostolic
teaching, by prayer and fellowship, and by the
breaking of bread (2 42.46). Organization was a
thing of gradual growth suggested by emerging needs,
and the differentiation of function among those
who were drawn into the service of the church was
due to the difference in the gifts bestowed by God
upon the church members (1 Cor 12 28). At
first the Twelve themselves, a3 the immediate com-
panions of Jesus throughout His ministry and the
prime witnesses of the Christian facts and esp.
of the resurrection (cf Acts 1 21.22), were the
natural Jeaders and teachers of the community.
Apart from this, the earliest evidence of anything
like organization is found in the distinction drawn
by the Twelve themselves between the ministry
of the word and the ministry of tables (Acts 6
2.4)—a distinction which was fully recognized by
Paul (Rom 12 6.8; 1 Cor 117; 9 14; 12 28),
though he enlarged the latter type of ministry so
as to include much more than the care of the poor.
The two kinds of ministry, as they meet us at the
first, may broadly be distinguished as the general
and prophetic on the one hand, the local and prac-
tical on the other.

From Acts 6 1 ff we see that the Twelve recog-
nized that they were Divinely called as apostles

to proclaim the gospel; and Paul


1. The repeatedly makes the same claim for
General himself (1 Cor 117; 9 16; 2 Cor
and Pro- 36; 41; Col 1 23). But apostle-
phetic ship was by no means confined to the
Ministry Twelve (Acts 14 14; Rom 167; cf


Did 11 4 ff); and an itinerant min-
istry of the word was exercised in differing ways
by prophets, evangelists, and teachers, as well as
by apostles (1 Cor 12 28.29; Eph 4 11). The
fact that Paul himself is variously described as


an apostle, a prophet, a teacher (Acts 13 1; 14
14; 1 Tim 2 7; 2 Tim 1 11) appears to show that
the prophetic ministry was not a ministry of stated
office, but one of special gifts and functions. The
apostle carried the good tidings of salvation to the
ignorant and unbelieving (Gal 2 7.8), the prophet
(in the more specific sense of the word) was a
messenger to the church (1 Cor 14 4.22); and
while the teacher explained and applied truth that
was already possessed (He 6 12), the prophet was
recognized by those who had spiritual discernment
(1 Cor 2 15; 14 29; 1 Jn 4 1) as the Divinely
employed medium of fresh revelations (1 Cor 14
25.30.31; Eph 3 5; cf Did 4 1).
The earliest examples of this are the Seven of
Jerus who were intrusted with the care of the ‘daily
ministration” (Acts 6 1 ff). With the


2. The growth of the church, however, other
Local and needs arose, and the local ministry
Practical is seen developing in two distinct
Ministry directions. First there is the pres-


byter or elder, otherwise known as the
bishop or overseer, whose duties, while still local,
are chiefly of a spiritual kind (Acts 20 17.28.35;
1 Tim 3 2.5; Jas 5 14; 1 Pet 5 2). See Bisuop.
Next there are the deacon and the deaconess (Phil
11; 1 Tim 3 8-13), whose work appears to have
lain largely in house to house visitation and a prac-
tical ministry to the poor and needy (1 Tim 6
8-11). The necessities of government, of discipline,
and of regular and stated instruction had thus
brought it to pass that within NT times some of
the functions of the general ministry of apostles
and prophets were discharged by a local ministry.
The general ministry, however, was still recognized
to be the higher of the two. Paul addresses the
presbyter-bishops of Ephesus in a tone of lofty
spiritual authority (Acts 20 17 ff). And accord-
ing to the Did, a true prophet when he visits a
church is to take precedence over the resident
bishops and deacons (Did 107; 13 3). See
CxHuRCH GOVERNMENT.

Litzraturs.—Hort, The Christian Ecclesia; Lindsay,
The Church and the Ministry in the Early Cents., lects
I-V; Hatch, Bampton Lectures; Gwatkin, Early Church
History to AD 313; Késtlin, art. ‘‘Kirche’ in RE;
Armitage Robinson, art. ‘‘Church"’ in £B; Fairbairn,
Christ in. Modern Theology, 513-34; Dargan, Eccle-
siology; Denney, Studies in Theology, ch viii.

J. C. Lampert

CHURCH GOVERNMENT, guv’érn-ment:

I. Approacn TO SuBsect

1. The General Sense
2. The Local Sense
II, INTERNAL ORDER
1. Subjects of Admisslon
2. Definite Organizations
‘3. Ministers
(1) General
{33 Local
4, Ecclesiastical Functions
(1) Control of Membership
2) Selection of Officers, etc
8) Observations of Ordinances —
5. Independent (Autonomous) Organizations
It], Externat AvTHORITY
IV. Cooperative RELATIONS
LivERATURE

The object here sought is to discover what kind
of church government is mirrored in the NT. To
do this with perfect definiteness is, no doubt, quite
impossible. Certain general features, however,
may clearly be seen. a

I. Appraach to the Subject.—The subject is best
approached through the Gr word ekklesia, tr
“church.” Passing by the history of this word,
and its connection with the Heb words ‘edhah
and kahal (which the LXX sometimes renders by
éxxdnola, ekklésia), we come at once to the NT
usage. Two perfectly distinct senses are found,


viz. a general and a local.


Church Govt.
Cilicia


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


654


Christ is “head over all things to the church,
which is his body .. . . ” (Eph 1 22); “the gener-
al assembly and church of the firstborn


1. The who are enrolled in heaven’ (He 12
General 23). Here we have ‘‘church” in the
Sense broadest sense, including all the re-


deemed in earth and heaven, and in all
ages (see also Eph 1 22; 3 10; 5 22-27; Col 1 24;
He 12 23).

Here the Scripture passages are very numerous.

In some cases, the word is used in the sing., and in

others the pl.; in some it is used
2. The with reference to a specified church,
Local Sense and in others without such specifi-

cation. In all cases the sense is local.
In Acts 11 26, it is said that Paul and Barnabas
were “gathered together with the church,” where the
church at Antioch is meant. In Acts 14 23, Paul
and Barnabas are said to have “appointed elders
in every church,” that is, churches which they had
planted. In Rev 2 and 8 the seven churches of
Asia Minor are addressed. In Acts 16 5 we are
told that the churches ‘“‘were strengthened in the
faith.” On the local sense see, further, Acts 8 1;
15 4; 16 5; 20 17; Rom 16 4; 1 Cor 1 2; 6 4;
11 16; Gal 1 2.22, and many other places.

There are a few passages that do not seem exactly
to fit into either of the ahove categories. Such,
for example, are Mt 1817 and 1 Cor 12 28,
where it seems best to understand a generic sense.
Such, also, are passages like Acts 9 31, and 1 Cor
10 32, where a collective sense best suits the cases.

Church government in the NT applies only to
the local bodies.

HI. Internal Order.—With respect to the consti-
tution and life of these NT churches, several points
may be made out beyond reasonable doubt.

They were composed of persons who professed
faith in Christ, and who were believed to have been

regenerated, and who had been bap-
1. Subjects tized. See Acts 2 41.44.47 (RV “ad-


of Admis- ded to them”); 812; Rom 1 8;
sion 64; 109.10; 1Cori2; Colf
2.4; 1 Tim 6 12, and others, where


they are called ‘“‘saints,” ‘sons of God,” “faithful
brethren,” “sanctified in Christ Jesus.”

They are definitely and permanently organized
bodies, and not temporary and loose aggregations

of individuals. It is quite impossible,

2. Definite for example, to regard the church at
Organiza- Antioch as a loose aggregation of
tions people for a passing purpose. The
letters of Paul to the churches at Rome,
Corinth, Philippi, Thessalonica, cannot be regarded
as addressed to other than permanent and definitely
organized bodies.

They were served by two classes of ministers—
one general, the other local.

(1) General.—At the head of these is the “‘apos-
tle’ (1 Cor 12 28; Eph 4 11). His official rela-

tion to the churches was general. He

3. Minis- did not necessarily belong to the group
ters of the original Eleven. Besides Mat-
thias (Acts 1 26), Paul and Barnabas
(1 Cor 9 5.6), James, the Lord’s brother (Gal 1
19), Andronicus and Junias (Rom 16 7) are
reckoned as ‘“‘apostles.”? The one invariable and
necessary qualification of an apostle was that he
should have seen the Lord after the Resurrection
(Acts 1 22; 1 Cor 9 1). Another qualification
was to have wrought ‘‘the signs of an apostle’
(2 Cor 12 12; cf 1 Cor 9 2). He was to bear
witness to what he had seen and heard, to preach
the gospel of the kingdom (Acts 18; 1 Cor 1
17), to found churches and have a general care of
them (2 Cor 11 28). From the nature of his
chief qualification, his office was temporary.


Next comes the “prophet.’’ His relation to the
churches, also, was general. It was not necessary
that he should have seen the Lord, but it apper-
tained to his spiritual function that he should have
revelations (Eph 3 5). There is no indication that
his office was in any sense administrative. _ :

After the “prophet’’ come the “evangelist’’ and
“teacher,” the first, a traveling preacher, the
second, one who had special aptitude for giving
instruction. '

After the “teacher” and “evangelist” follow a
group of special gifts of “healing,” “helps,” ‘“gov-
ernments,” “tongues.” It may be that “helps”
and “governments” are to be identified with
“deacons” and “bishops,” to be spoken of later.
The other items in this part of Paul’s list seem to
refer to special charismata.

(2) Local—There were two clearly distinct
offices of a local and permanent kind in the NT
churches. Paul (Phil 1 1) addresses ‘all the
saints in Christ Jesus that are at Philippi, with the
bishops and deacons.” See BisHop; DEAcon.

The most common designation of the first of
these officers is “elder” (mpecBuirepos, preshiteros).
In one passage (Eph 4 11) he is called “pastor”
(romyr, poimén). In Acts 20 17-28, it becomes
clear that the office of elder, bishop, and pastor
was one; for there the apostle charges the elders
of the church at Ephesus to feed (pastor) the
church in which the Holy Spirit has made them
bishops (cf Titus 1 5.7; 1 Pet 6 1.2). _

The function of the elders was, in general, spirit~
ual, but involved an oversight of all the affairs of
the church (1 Tim 3 2; 6 17).

As to the second of the local church officers, it
has to be said that little is given us in the NT.
That the office of deacon originated with the ap-
pointment of the Seven in Acts 6 is not certain.
If we compare the qualifications there given by the
apostles with those given by Paulin 1 Tim 3 8-18,
it seems quite probable that the necessity which
arose at Jerus, and which led to the appointment
of the Seven was really the occasion for originating
the office of deacon in the churches. The work
assigned the Seven was secular, that is to say, the
“service of tables.’ They were to relieve the
apostles of that part of the work. A similar rela-
tion to the work of the elders seems to have been
borne by that of the deacons.

Again, they exercised the highest ecclesiastical
functions.

(1) They had control of membership—In Mt 18
17, Our Lord, by anticipation, lodges final action,

in the sphere of church discipline,


4. Eccle- with the church. When the church
siastical has taken action, the matter is ended.
Functions There is no direction to take it to


a higher court. In the church at
Corinth, there was a man who was guilty of an
infamous offence against purity. With regard to
the case, Paul urged the most summary discipline
(1 Cor 6 5). If the church should act upon the
judgment which he communicated to them, they
would act when “gathered together’; that is to
say, action would be taken in conference of the
church. In 2 Cor 2, a reference to the case shows
that they had acted upon his advice, and that the
action was taken by the majority (‘the many,”
the more, 2 Cor 2 6). In 2 Cor 2 he counsels
restoration of this excluded member now repentant.
Exclusion and restoration of members were to be
effected by a church. This, of course, carried with
it the reception of members in the first instance.

(2) They selected their officers and other servants.
—This was true in case of the Seven (Acts 6 3-13;
see other cases in Acts 16 22; 1 Cor 16 3; 2 Cor
8 1ff; Phil 2 25). Acts 14 23 and Titus 1 5


655


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Church Govt.
Cilicia


seem, at first, to offset the passages just given.
In one of these, Paul and Barnabas are said to
have “appointed” (xetporonjcavres, cheirotonésantes)
elders in the churches which they had planted.
But scholars of first quality, though themselves
adhering to Presbyterial or Episcopal forms of
church government, maintain that Paul and Bar-
nabas ordained the elders whom the churches
selected—that they “appointed” them in the usual
way, by the suffrages of the members of the churches
concerned. The word rendered “appoint” in Tit
15 (xarasrioys, katastésés) is more easily under-
stood as referring to ordination instead of selection.
_ (8) They observed the ordinances.—Paul gives direc-
tion (1 Cor 11 20-34) to the church at Corinth about
the observance of the Lord’s Supper. These direc-
tions are given, not to any officer or set, of officers,
but to the church. Ecclesiastically, of course, the
two ordinances are on the same level; and, if one
of them had been committed to the custody, so to

say, of the churches, so must the other.
The management of their business was in their
own hands. Paul wrote the church at Corinth:
“Let all things be done decently and


6. Inde- inorder” (1 Cor 14 40). Inthatcom-
pendent prehensive injunction, given toachurch,
(Autono- _is implied control of its affairs by the
mous) Or- church.

ganizations If, External Authority.—The in-


vestigation up to this point places us
in position to see that there is in the NT no warrant
for ecclesiastical grades in the ministry of the
churches, by which there may be created an ascend-
ing series of rulers who shall govern the churches
merged into one vast ecclesiastical organization
called ‘the church.” So, also, we are in position to
see that there is no warrant for an ascending series
of courts which may review any “case” that origi-
nates in a local church. We may see, on the con-
trary, that to each local church has been committed
by Christ the management of its own affairs; and
that He had endowed every such church witb ecclesi-
astical competency to perform every function that
any ecclesiastical body has a right to perform.

As the churches are not to be dominated by any
external ecclesiastical authority, so they are not
to be interfered with, in their church life, by civil
government. Jesus taught that Christians should
be good citizens (Mt 22 15-22); so did the apos-
tles (Rom 13 1-7; 1 Pet 2 13-16). Jesus also
taught the spirituality of His Kingdom: “My
kingdom is not of this world” (Jn 18 36). It
follows that only where the life of a church touches
the civic life of the community has the civil author-
ity any right to interfere.

IV. Coéperative Relations.—While each local
church, according to the NT, is independent of
every other in the sense that no other has juris-
diction over it, yet codperative relations were
entefed into by NT churches. Examples and in-
dications of that may be found in Rom 15 26.27;
2 Cor 8, 9; Gal 210; Rom 161; 3 Jn ver 8.
The principle of codperation effective in those casesis
susceptible of indefinite expansion. Churches may
properly coéperate in matters of discipline, by
seeking and giving counsel, and by respecting each
other's disciplinary measures. In the great, para-
mount business of evangelizing and teaching the
nations, they may coéperate in a multitude of ways.
There is no sphere of general Christian activity in
which the churches may not voluntarily and freely
codperate for the betterment of the world, the
salvation of humanity.

For other standpoints see Bissop; GOVERNMENT;
Ministry, etc.


Lrreraturs.—Hort, The Christian Ecclesia; Hatch,
Organization of the Hatly Christion Churches: Whitley.


Church, Ministry and Sacraments in the NT; Lindsay,
The Church and the Ministry in the Early Cents.; French,
Synonyms of NT; Vitringa, De Synagoga Vetere; Hol-
zinger, ZAW; Schiirer, HJ P,1I; Driver, LOT; Thayer,
NT Lez., and Cremer, Bib. Theol. Lez., 8.v., “ekklésia”
and ‘‘sunagdgé"; Neumann, Rém. Staat und die all-
emsine Kirehe; Ramsay, Church in Rom Emp.; Light-
oot, ‘‘ The Christian Mlnistry,’’ in Comm. on Philippians;
Harvey, The Church; Dage, Church Order: Hovey.
Religion and the State; Owen, Church Government;
Ladd, Principles of Church Polity; Dexter, Congrega-
tionalism; Hodge, Discussions in Church Polity; Abbey,
Eeclesiastical Constitutions; Hooker, Ecclesiastical Polity;
Jacob, Heclesiastical Polity; Bore, The Church and Tis


Ministry; Dollinger, The Church and The Churches;
Stanley, Lectures on the Hastern Church; Dargan,
Heclesiology.


E. J. Forrester
CHURCHES, chirch’iz, ROBBERS OF. See
Rossgers oF TEMPLEs.


CHURCHES, SEVEN. See ANGELS oF THE
SEvEN CHURCHES.


CHURL, chirl (29D or "53, kilay or kélay):
The Heb word occurs only in Isa 32 5.7, in the
latter ver in a form slightly modified so as to pro-
duce a pleasing assonance with the word immediately
following. The word probably means “crafty” or
“miserly,” both ideas being suitable to the context,
though “miserly”? accords with the setting in Isa
somewhat better.

In1 SS 25 3 the Heb kasheh which means “hard,”
“severe,” “rough,” is rendered “churlish.” In
Saxon, churl, as the name for the lowest order of
freemen, came to be used of persons boorish in man-
ner. The rough and ill-mannered Nabal is aptly
described as churlish. Joun Ricnarp SamMpry


CHUSHAN-RISHATHAIM, ki-shan-rish-a-
tha’im. See CusHAN-RISHATHAIM.


CHUSI, ki’si, kii’si (Kots, Chowis): A place only
named in Jth 7 18, as near Ekrebel on the brook
Mochmur. It was in central Pal, and has with
some probability been identified with Quzah, a
village 53 miles S. of Nablus and 5 miles W. of
Agrabeh (Hkrebel).


CHUZAS, kii’zas, chi’zas (Xovifis, Chouads;
AV Chuza): The steward of Herod Antipas. In
Lk 8 3 we read that his wife Joanna, “and Su-
sanna, and many others,’”’ ministered to Christ and
His disciples. See Joanna (Lk 24 10).


CICCAR, sik’ar (13>, kikkar, “circle’”’): Used
of the circle of the Jordan (Gen 13 10, Heb).
See PLain; CrTIEs oF THE PLAIN.


CIELED, séld, CIELING, sél’ing. See Crrtep,
CEILING.


CILICIA, si-lish’i-a (f Kudukla, hé Kilikia): An
important province at the S.E. angle of Asia Minor,
corresponding nearly with the modern Turkish vila-
yet of Adana; enfolded between the Taurus moun-
tains and the Mediterranean Sea, with the Amanus
range on the E. and Pamphylia on the W.; chief
rivers, the Pyramus, Sarus, Cydnus and Calycadnus.
The character of Cilician history has been largely
determincd by the physical features of the province.
It is divided ie nature into a mountainous part to
the W., called Tracheia, and a broad, alluvial plain,
hot and fertile, toward the E., termed Campestris or
Pedias. Cilicta has always been isolated from its
neighbors by land by its encircling mountains, save
for its'two famous mountain passes, the “Syrian
Gates,” which offer an easy road to Antioch and the
S., and the wonderful “Cilician Gates,”’ which open a
road to central and western Asia Minor. Through
these passes the armies and the pilgrims, the trade


Cinnamon
Cistern


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


and the travel of the cents. have made their way.
Alexander was one of the most renowned leaders
of such expeditions, and at Issus he met and shat-
tered the power of the Pers empire.

-The early settlers of Cilicia are held to have
been Sem Syrians and Phoenicians, but in the still
earlier days the inhabitants must have been Hit-
tites. While few Hittite remains have been brought
to light in Cilicia proper, the province was so sur-
rounded by Hittites, and such important works of
Hittite art and industry remain on the outskirts
of the province, as at Ivriz, Marash, Sinjirli and
Sakche Geuzi, that the intervening territory could
hardly fail to be overspread with the same civil-
ization and imperial power. See Professor John
Garstang’s The Land of the Hittites.

Cilicia appears as independent under Syennesis,
a contemporary of Alyattes of Lydia, 610 BC.
Later it passed under the Pers sway, but retained
its separate line of kings. After Alexander the
Seleucid rulers governed Cilicia from Antioch.
The disturbances of the times enabled the pirates
so to multiply and establish themselves in their
home base, in Cilicia, Tracheia, that they became
the scourge of the Mediterranean until their power
was broken by Pompey (67-66 BC). Cilicia was
by degrees incorporated in the Rom administration,
and Cicero, the orator, was governor (51-50 BC).

The foremost citizen of the province was Saul
of Tarsus (Acts 21 39; 22 3; 23 34). Students
or pilgrims from Cilicia like himself disputed with
Stephen (Acts 6 9). Some of the earliest labors
of the great apostle were near his home, in Syria
and Cilicia (Gal 1 21; Acts 15 23.41). On his
voyage to Rome he sailed across the sea which is
off Cilicia (Acts 27 5). Constantinople and An-
tioch may be regarded as the front and back door
of Asia Minor, and as the former was not founded
till the 4th cent., Asia Minor may be regarded as
fronting during apostolic days on Antioch. Cilicia
was intimately connected with its neighbor prov-
ince on the 8. The first Christian apostles and
evangelists followed the great highways, through the
famous mountain passes, and carried the religion of
Jesus to Asia Minor from Antioch as a base.

Armenians migrating from the N. founded a
kingdom in Cilicia under Ronpen which was ter-
minated by the overthrow of King Levon, or Leo,
by the conquering Turks in 1393. A remnant of
this kingdom survives in the separate Armenian
catholicate of Sis, which has jurisdiction over a
few bishoprics, and Armenians are among the most
virile of the present inhabitants of the province.

: G. E. Waits

CINNAMON, sin’a-mun (71432, kinndmén; xw-
vépepov, kinndmémon): Mentioned, like cassia, asa
perfume. In Ex 30 23 it is one of the ingredients
of the “holy anointing oil’; in Prov 7 17 it is, along
with myrrh and aloes, a perfume for a bed; in Cant
4 14 it is a very precious spice. Cinnamon is (Rev
18 13) part of the merchandise of “Babylon the
great.”

Cinnamon is the product of Cinnamomum zeylani-
cum, a laurel-like plant widely cultivated in Ceylon
and Java. It hasa profuse white blossom, succeeded
by a nut from which the fragrant oil is obtained.
The wood is the inner bark from branches which
have reached a diameter of from 2 to 3 inches; the
epidermis and pulpy matter are carefully scraped
off before drying. In commerce the cheaper Cassia
ligra of China is sometimes substituted for true cin-
namon, and it is thought by some authorities that
this was the true cinnamon of the ancients. See,
however, Cassia. E. W. G. MastermMan


CINNEROTH, sin’e-roth (M5729, kinnerath).
See CHINNERETH.


656


CIRAMA, si-ra’ma, sir’a-ma. See Krrama.

CIRCLE, sir’k’l: Is used with reference to the
vault of the heavens (3371, Atigh) in Isa 40 22,
and in a similar sense in Wisd 13 2 (RVm), “‘circle
of stars” (kvkdos dorpwv, kiklos dstron). It is also
used in the sense of surrounding territory, as in the
expression ‘‘circle of Jordan’? (Gen 13 10 RVm).
See also Crccarn; Astronomy, III, 1.


CIRCUIT, sfr’kit, ‘a going around’: Used to
represent several Heb words in several senses, e.g.
the sun’s orbit (IDIPM, “ekuphah), Ps 19 6; the
vault of the heavens (171, high), Job 22 14 AV;
the circuit of the winds (2°39, sabhibh), Eccl 1 6
(see Astronomy); Samuel’s visiting of communities
(320, sabhabh), 18716. In the RV the idea
of encircling or ‘fetching a compass’ (AV) is ex-
pressed by the phrase “to make a circuit” AON,
hdsébh), 2S 6 23; 2 K 39; and in the RVm it
indicates a plain (1320, ha-kikkadr), Neh 3 22.
The Gr perielthéntes is tr’ in the same way (Acts 28
13), but RVm reads “cast loose,” following the WH
reading perieléntes. Nataan Isaacs


CIRCUMCISION, sir-kum-sizh’un (070, mii,
ror , muloth; weprroph, pertiomé): The removal of
the foreskin is a custom that has prevailed, and
prevails, among many races in different parts of the
world—in America, Africa and Australia. It was in
vogue among the western Semites—Hebrews, Arabi-
ans, Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Egyptians,
but was unknown among the Semites of the Euphra-
tes. In Canaan the Philis were an exception, for
the term “uncircumcised” is constantly used in con-
nection with them. Generally speaking, the rite of
circumcision was a precondition of the enjoyment
of certain political and religious privileges (Ex 12
48; Ezk 44 9); and in view of the fact that in the
ancient world religion played such an important réle
in life, it may be assumed that circumcision, like
many other strange customs whose original signifi-
cance is no longer known, originated in connection
with religion. Before enumerating the different
theories which have been advanced with regard to
the origin and original significance of circumcision,
it may be of advantage to consider some of the
principal references to the rite in the OT.

In the acconnt of the institution of the covenant
between Yahweh and Abraham which P gives

Gen 17), circumcision is looked upon
1. Circum- as the ratification of the agreement.
cision in Yahweh undertook to be the God
the OT of Abraham and of his descendants.

Abraham was to be the father of a
multitude of nations and the founder of a line of
kings. He and his descendants were to inherit
Canaan. The agreement thus formed was _ per-
manent; Abraham’s posterity shonld come within
the scope of it. But it was necessary to inclusion
in the covenant that every male child should be
circumcised on the 8th day. A foreigner who had
attached himself as a slave to a Heb household
had to undergo the rite—the punishment for its
non-fulfilment being death or perhaps excommunica-
tion. According to Ex 12 48 (also P) no stranger
could take part in the celebration of the Passover
unless he had been circumcised. In the Book of Josh
(5 2-9) we read that the Israelites were circum-
cised at Gilgal (‘‘Rolling”’), and thus the “reproach
of Egypt” was “rolled away.” Apparently circum-
cision in the case of the Hebrews was prohibited
during the Egyp period—circumcision being a
distinctive mark of the ruling race. It is notice-
able that flint knives were used for the purpose.
This use of an obsolete instrument is one of many


657


Cinnamon
Cistern


proofs of conservatism in religion. According to
the strange and obscure account of the circum-
cision by Zipporah of her eldest son (Ex 4 25) the
performance of the rite in the case of the son appar-
ently possesses a vicarious value, for thereby Moses
becomes a “bridegroom of blood.” The marriage
bond is ratified by the rite of blood (see 4 below).
But it is possible that the author’s meaning is that
owing to the fact that Moses had not been circum-
cised (the “reproach of Egypt”) he was not fit to
enter the matrimonial estate (see 3 below).

The different theories with regard to the origin
of circumcision may be arranged under four heads:

i (1) Herodotus (i.37), in dealing
2. Theories with circumcision among the Egyp-
of Origin —_tians, suggests that it was a sanitary

_ Operation. But all suggestions of a
secular, i.e. non-religious, origin to the rite, fail to
do justice to the place and importance of religion in
the life of primitive man.

(2) It was a tribal mark. Tattooed marks fre-
quently answered the purpose, although they may
have been originally charms. The tribal mark
enabled one member of the tribe to recognize another
and thus avoid injuring or slaying a fellow-tribes-
man. It also enabled the tribal deity to recognize
a member of the tribe which was under his special
protection. A mark was placed on Cain to indi-
cate that he was under the special protection of
Yahweh (Gen 4 15). It has been suggested, in the
light of Isa 44 5 RVm, that the employer’s mark
was engraved (tattooed) on the slave’s hand. The
prophet represents Jews as inscribing on their hands
that they belong to Yahweh. The walls of Jerus are
engraved on Yahweh’s palms (Isa 49 16). On the
other hand “cuttings in the flesh” are prohibited in
Lev 19 28 because they were common in the case of
the non-Jewish religions. Such tattooed marks might
be made in conspicuous places when it was necessary
that they should be easily seen, but there might be
reason for secrecy so that the marks might be known
only to the members of the tribe in question.

(3) It was a rite which celebrated the coming of
age of the person. It signified the attainment of
puberty and of the right to marry and to enjoy full
civic privileges.

(4) As human sacrifices began to be done away
with, the sacrifice of the most easily removed por-
tion of the anatomy provided a vicarious offering.

(5) It was a sacramental operation. ‘The
shedding of blood” was necessary to the validity
of any covenant between tribes or individuals.
The rite of blood signifies the exchange of blood on
the part of the contracting parties, and therefore
the establishment of physical affinity between
them. An alliance based on blood-relationship
was inviolable. In the same way the tribal god
was supposed to share in the blood of the sacrificed
animal, and a sacred bond was established between
him and the tribe. It is not quite obvious why cir-
cumcision should be necessary in connection with
such a ceremony. But it may be pointed out that
the process of generation excited the wonder and
awe of primitive man. The prosperity of the tribe
depended on the successful issue of the marriage
bond, and a part of the body which had so much
to do with the continuation and numerical strength
of the tribe would naturally be fixed upon in con-
nection with the covenant of blood. In confirma-
tion of the last explanation it is urged that in the
case of the covenant between Jeh and Abraham
circumcision was the rite that ratified the agree-
ment. In opposition to (3) it has been urged that
among the Hebrews circumcision was performed
in infancy—when the child was 8 days old. But
this might have been an innovation among the
Hebrews, due to ignorance of the original signifi-


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


cance of the rite. If circumcision conferred upon
the person circumcised the right to the enjoyment
of the blessings connected with membership in the
tribe it was natural that parents should be anxious
that such an initiatory act should be performed
early in life. The question of adult and infant
baptism is capable of similar explanation. When
we examine explanations (2), (3), (4), (5), we find
that they are really different forms of the same
theory. There can be no doubt that circumcision
was originally a religious act. Membership in the
tribe, entrance upon the rights of citizenship, partici-
pation in the religious practices of the tribe—these
privileges are interdependent. Anyone who had
experienced the rite of blood stood within the scope
of the covenant which existed between the tribe
and the tribal god, and enjoyed all the privileges
of tribal society. It is easily understood why the
historian carefully relates the circumcision of the
Israelites by Joshua on their arrival in Canaan.
It was necessary, in view of the possible inter-
mingling of the conquerors and the conquered, that
the distinctive marks of the Abrahamic covenant
should be preserved (Josh 5 3).

In Jer 9 25 and Dt 30 6 we find the spiritual

significance of circumcision. A prophet like Jere-

miah was not likely to attach much
3. Spiritual importance to an external act like
Significance circumcision. He bluntly tells his

countrymen that they are no betterthan
Egyptians, Edomites, Moabites and Ammonites.
They are uncircumcised in heart. Paul uses the
term concision for this outward circumcision un-
accompanied by any spiritual change (Phil 3 2).
The question of circumcision occasioned a pro-
tracted strife among the early Christians, Juda~-
izing Christians argued for the necessity of circum-
cision. It was a reminiscence of the unrelenting
particularism which had sprung up during the pro-
longed oppression of the Gr and Rom period. Ac-
cording to their view salvation was of the Jews and
for the Jews. It was necessary to become a Jew
in order to become a Christian. Paul consented to
circumcision in the case of Timothy “‘because of the
Jews” (Acts 16 3). But he saw that a principle was
at stake and in most of his epistles he points out the
sheer futility of the contention of the Judaizers. (See
commentaries on Rom and Gal.)

In a few suggestive passages we find a fig. appli-
cation of the term. For three years after the settle-
ment in Canaan the “fruit of the land”
was to be considered as “uncircum-
cised” (Lev 19 23), i.e. it was the
property of the Baalim, the gods of
Pal. The fruit of the fourth year belonged to
Yahweh. Moses with characteristic humility de-
scribes himself as a man of “uncircumcised lips”
(Ex 6 30). Jeremiah charges his contemporaries
with having their ear uncircumcised (Jer 6 10) and
their heart (9 26). ‘An uncircumcised heart is one
which is, as it were, closed in, and so impervious
to good influences and good impressions, just as
an uncircumcised ear (Jer 6 10) is an ear which,
from the same cause, hears imperfectly; and uncir-
cumcised lips (cf Ex 6 12.30) are lips which open
and speak with difficulty” (Driver on Dt 10 16).

T. Lewis

CIS, sis (Kels, Keis): The form given in Acts 13
21 AV for Kish, the father of Saul the first king of
Israel (1 Sam 9 1 f).


CISAI, si’si-i.
CISTERN, sis’térn, WELL, POOL, AQUEDUCT:


Use of Terms 4. Public Cisterns

1. General 5. Pools and Aqueducts
2. Wells or Cylindrical Cisterns 6. Figurative Uses

3. Private Cisterns LIteRATURE


4. Figura-
tive Uses


See Kisrus.


Cistern


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


658


Several words are rendered by ‘“‘cistern,”’ ‘‘well,”’
“pool,” the relations of which in AV and RV are as
follows:


“Cistern,”’ "ND, bo'r (Jer 2 13, etc), or WO, bor
(2 K 18 31). The latter word is frequently in AV
trd ‘‘well.” RV in these cases changes

Use of te ‘cistern’ in text (Dt 6 11; 2 Ch 2


10; Neh 9 25) er m (18 19 22, etc).
The words R33 , gebhe’ (Isa 80 14), Ah,


gébh (Jer 14 3), rendered “pit’' in AV are
changed te ‘‘cistern'’ RV (the latter in ARV only). |

The proper Heb werd fer ‘' well”’ is aa , be’ér (seen in
Beer-sheba, ‘‘ well of the eath,"’ Gen 21 31), but other
terms are thus rendered in AV, as 727, ‘ayin (Gen
24 13.16, etc, and frequently), py". mayan (Jesh
18 15), “Ip: makér (Prov 10 11). In these cases
RV usually changes to ‘fountain’; in Ex 15 27,
however, it renders ‘ayin by ‘‘springs,” and in Ps 84 6,
ma‘'yan by ‘place ef springs."’

“Poel,” DAN, ‘dgham (1sa 14 23, etc; in AV, Ex 7
19; § 5, rendered ‘“‘pends"); more frequently m3.
berékhadh (2 3 2 13; 4 12, etc). In Ps 84 6 the ceg-
nate MD75, berakhah, is changed te ‘‘ blessing.”


In the NT ‘‘well” represents the twe words: mny%, pégé
(Jn 4 6.14; in RVm ‘‘spring"’; 2 Pet 2 17; RV renders
“springs''), and ¢dpéap, phréar (Jn 411.12). ‘‘Peel” is
xodunB7Opa, kolumbéthra, in In 5 2.4.7; 9 7.11.


The efforts made to supplement the natural
water supply, both in agricultural and in popu-
lated areas, before as well as after the

1. General Conquest, are clearly seen in the
innumerable cisterns, wells and pools

which abound throughout Pal. The rainy season,
upon which the various storage systems depend,
commences at the end of October and ends in the
beginning of May. In Jerus, the mean rainfall in
41 years up to 1901 was 25.81 in., falling in a mean
number of 56 days (see Glaisher, Meteorological
Observations, 24). Toward the end of summer,
springs and wells, where they have not actually
dried up, diminish very considerably, and cisterns
and open reservoirs become at times the only
sources of supply. Cisterns are fedfrom surface and
roof drainage. Except in the rare instances where
springs occur, wells depend upon percolation. The
great open reservoirs or pools are fed from surface
drainage and, in some cases, by aqueducts from
springs or from more distant collecting pools. In
the case of private cisterns, it is the custom of the
country today to close up the inlets during the
early days of the rain, so as to permit of a general


Terms


wash down of gathering surfaces, before admitting
the water. Cisterns, belonging to the common
natives, are rarely cleansed, and the inevitable scum
which collects is dispersed by plunging the pitcher
several times before drawing water. When the water
is considered to be bad, a somewhat primitive cure is
applied by dropping earth into the cistern, so as to
sink all impurities with it, to the bottom. The ac-
cumulation often found in ancient cisterns probably
owes some of its presence to this same habit.


It is necessary to include wells under the head of
cisterns, as there appears to be some confusion in the
use of the two terms. Wells, so called,
2. Wells were more often deep cylindrical reser-
voirs, the lower part of which was sunk
in the rock and cemented, the upper part being
built with open joints, to receive the surface per-
colation. They were often of great depth. Job’s
well at Jerus, which is certainly of great antiquity,
is 125 ft. deep (see PHF, “‘Jerus,” 371).


Fic. 2.—Reservoir at Gezer.


The discovery of “living water” when digging a
well, recorded in Gen 26 19m, appears to have
been an unusual incident. Uzziah hewed out many
cisterns in the valley for his cattle (2 Ch 26 9.10
RV), and he built towers, presumably to keep watch
over both cattle and cisterns. Isaac “digged again
the wells” which had been filled in by the Philis (Gen
26 18). Wells were frequently dug in the plain, far
from villages, for flocks and herds, and rude stone
troughs were provided nearby. The well was usually
covered with a stone, through which a hole was
pierced sufficiently large to allow of free access for
the pitchers. A stone was placed over this hole
(Gen 29 10) when the well was not in use. The
great amount of pottery found in ancient cisterns
suggests that clay pots were used for drawing water
(see Bible Sidelights, 88). Jog (Ant, IV, viii, 37)
elucidates the passage in Ex 21 33 requiring the
mouth of a “pit” or “well” to be covered with planks
against accidents. This would seem to apply to
wide-mouthed wells which had not been narrowed
over to receive a stone cover. It may have been a
well or cistern similar to these into which Joseph
was cast (Gen 37 24). In fact, dry-wells and cis-
terns formed such effective dungeons, that it is very
probable they were often used for purposes of
detention. From earliest times, wells have been
the cause of much strife. The covenant between
Abimelech and Abraham at Beersheba (Gen 21
32) was a necessity, no less pressing then than it is
now. The well, today, is a center of life in the East.
Women gather around it in pursuit of their daily
duties, and travelers, man and beast, divert their
course thereto, if needs be, for refreshment; and
news of the outer world is carried to and from the
well. It is, in fact, an all-important center, and
daily presents a series of characteristic Bible scenes.
The scene between Rebekah and the servant of
Abraham (Gen 24 11 ff) is one with frequent paral-
lels. The well lies usually at some little distance
from the village or city. Abraham’s servant made
his “camels to kneel down without the city by the
well of water at the time of the evening, the time
that women go out to draw water.” Saul and his
servant found young maidens going out of the city
to draw water (1 S 9 11). “Moses helped the
daughters of the priest of Midian at the well, which
was evidently at some distance from habitation
(ix 2 16 ff).

Private cisterns must be distinguished from publie


ARCHES OF ANCIENT AQUEDUCT AT ANTIOCH


659


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Cistern


cisterns or wells. They were smaller and were
sunk in the rocks within private boundaries,
; each owner having his own cistern
3. Private - (2 K 18 31; Prov 6 15), Ancient
Cisterns sites are honeycombed with these cis-
terns. A common type in Jerus seems
to have been bottle-shaped in section, the extended
bottom part’ being in the softer rock, and the nar-
row neck in the hard upper stratum. Many
irregularly shaped cisterns occur with rock vaults
supported by rock or masonry piers. Macalister
tells of the discovery at Gezer of a small silt catch-
pit attached to a private cistern, and provided with
an overflow channel leading to the cistern. It is
an early instance of a now well-known method of
purification. The universal use of cement render-
ing to the walls of the cisterns was most necessary
to seal up the fissures of the rock. The “broken
cisterns’ (Jer 2 13) probably refer to insufficiently
sealed cisterns.
Besides private cisterns there were huge public
rock-cut cisterns within the city walls. The great
water caverns under the Temple area at
4. Public Jerus show a most extensive system of
Cisterns water storage (see Recovery of Jerus, ch
vii). There are 37 of these described
in PEF, “Jerus,” 217 ff, and the greatest is an im-
mense rock-cut cavern the roof of which is partly
rock and partly stone, supported by rock piers (see
Fig.1, PEF). Itis43ft. deep with a storage capacity
of over two million gallons and there are numerous
access manholes. This cistern is fed by an aqueduct
from Solomon’s Pools about 10 miles distant by read,
and is locally known as Bahar el Kebir, the “Great
Sea.” One of the most recent and one of the most
interesting rock-cut reservoirs yet discovered is that
at Gezer. (See PEFS, 1908, 96 ff.) In this ex-
ample, the pool of spring water is reached by a great
rock-tunnel staircase which descends 94 ft. 6 in. from
the surface. The staircase diminishes in size as it
descends, and at its greatest, it is 23 ft. high and 12
ft. 10 in. wide (see section Fig. 2). These propor-
tions may seem unnecessarily large, but may be
accounted for by the necessity fer providing light at
the water level. As a matter of fact, the brink of
the pool receives the light from above. The work
dates back to pre-Israelite times.
Open pools were common in every city. They
were cut out of the rock and were built and ce-
mented at points where occasion


6. Pools demanded. They were often of great
and size. The pool outside Jerus known
Aqueducts as Birket ‘es Sultan measures 555 ft.X


220 ft.x36 ft. deep, and the so-called
Hezekiah’s Pool within the walls, is 240 ft.x 144 ft.


Xabout 20 ft. deep. The latter probably owes its:


Fro. 3.—Pools of Solomon.


origin to the rock-cut fosse of early Jewish date.
The Birket es Sultan, on the other hand, probably
dates from the time of the Turkish occupation.


They may, however, be taken as examples, which
if somewhat larger, are still in accord with the pool
system of earlier history. Pools were usually fed by


surface drainage, and in some cases by aqueducts
from springs at some distance away. They seem to
have been at the public service, freely accessible to
both man and beast. Pools situated outside the
city walls were sometimes connected hy aqueducts
with pools within the city, so that the water could
be drawn within the walls in time of siege. The
so-called Pools of Solomon, three in number (see
Fig. 3), situated about 10 miles by road from Jerus,
are of large proportions and are fed by surface
water and by aqueducts from springs. The water
from these pools is conveyed in a wonderfully
engineered course, known as the lower-level aque-
duct, which searches the winding contours of the
Judaean hills for a distance of ahout 15 miles, before
reaching its destination in ‘‘the great sea’’ under
the Temple area (Fig. 1). This aqueduct is still in
use, but its date is uncertain (see G. A. Smith,
Jerus, 131, where the author finds reason for
ascribing it to the period of Herod). The course
and destination of another aqueduct known as the
high-level aqueduct is less definite. These aque-
ducts are of varying dimensions. The low-level
aqueduct at a point just before it enters the Temple
area was found to measure 3 ft. highX2 ft. 3 in.
wide, partly rock-cut and partly built, and rendered
in smooth-troweled cement, with well-squared stone
covers (see PEF, Excavations at Jerus, 53 ff). There
are many remains of rock-cut aqueducts through-
out Pal (see Fig. 4) which seem to indicate their
use in early Heb times, but the lack of OT refer-
ences to these works is difficult to account for, unless
it is argued that in some cases they date back to
pre-Israelite times. The great tunnel and pool at
Gezer lends a measure of support to this hypothesis.
On the other hand, a plea for a Heb origin is also in
a measure strengthened by the very slight reference
in the OT to such a great engineering feat as the
cutting of the Siloam tunnel, which is doubtless the
work of Hezekiah. The pool of Siloam was origi-
nally a simple rock-cut reservoir within the walls,
and was constructed by Hezekiah (2 Ch 32 30).
It measures 75 ft.x71 ft. It is the upper pool of
Isa 7 3. A lower overflow pool existed imme-
diately beyond, contained by the city wall across
the Tyropcon valley. The aqueduct which sup-
plies the upper pool takes a tortuous course of about
1,700 ft. through the solid rock from the Virgin’s


Citadel
Citizenship


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


660


fountain, an intermittent spring on the E. slope of
the hill. The water reaches the pool on the 8.W.
of the spur of Ophel, and it was in the rock walls
of this aqueduct that the famous Siloam inscription
recording the completion of the work was discovered.
Herod embellished the upper pool, lining it with
stone and building arches around its four sides (see
PEF, Excavations at Jerus, 154 ff), and the pool was
most likely in this condition in the time of Christ
(Jn 9 6.7). There are numerous other pools, cis-
terns and aqueducts in and arcund Jerus, which pro-
vide abundant evidence of the continual struggle
after water, made by its occupants of all times (see
G. A. Smith, Jerus, ch v, vol I). See also Pit;
WELL, etc.
Good wives are described as cisterns (Prov 5 15
ff). ‘‘Theleft ventricle of the heart, which retains
the blood till it be redispersed through
6. Figura- the body, is called a cistern” (Eccl 12
tive Uses 6). Idols, armies and material objects
in which Israel trusted were ‘broken
cisterps’” (Jer 2 13, see above) “‘soon emptied of all
the ait and comfort which they possess, and cannot
fill themselves again.”


Litrraturs.—G. A. Smith, Jerusalem; PEF Memoirs,
Jerusalem vol; Wilson, The Recovery of Jerusalem; Mac-
alister, Bible Sidelights; PE FS; Bliss and Dickie, Excava-
tions at Jerusalem; Josephus.

Arca. C. Dicxre


CITADEL, sit’a-del (1 Mace 1 33; 3 45). See
FortTIFICATION,


CITHERN, sith’érn (kv@dpa, kithdra; 1 Macc 4
54 AV, kithdérais kat kinirais is tr’ “citherns and
harps’; RV “harps and lutes”; ef guitar, zither):
As 1 Macc was originally written in Heb, it is
natural to suppose that these two Gr words stand for
Heb n*bhalim and kinnoréth; but to this it may be
objected that kithara and kinura are not used else-
where together to represent two different instru-
ments. On the contrary we have either kinura kai
nabla or kithara kai psaltérion. The most probable
explanation of the unusual collocation of these two
words in 1 Macc is that kithara was a gloss meant
to explain the obsolescent kinura. See Music.

James Minuar
a CITIES, LEVITICAL. See Levrrrcan Cries;
ITY.


CITIES OF REFUGE. See Rerucs, Civizs or.


CITIES, sit’iz, OF THE PLAIN, plan, CICCAR
(JEW 722, kikkar ha-yardén): Included Sodom,
Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboiim and Zoar. The
locality is first referred to in Gen 13 10, where it
is said that Lot ‘‘lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the
Plain of the Jordan, that it was well watered every
where, before Jeh destroyed Sodom and Gomor-
rah, hke the garden of Jeh, like the land of Egypt,
as thou goest unto Zoar.” The word tr® plain is
kikkar, “circle.” In this ver, and in the 11th, as
well asin 1 K 7 46 and Mt 3 5, we have the full
phrase “‘circle of the Jordan.’ Elsewhere (Gen 13
12; 19 17.29; Dt 34 3; 2S 18 23) the word for
“circle” is used alone with the art. Until recently
the traditional view that this circle of the Jordan
was at the south end of the Dead Sea was univer-
sally maintained. The arguments in favor of this
view are: (1) The name of Sodom is preserved in
Jebel Usdum—Usdum having the same consonants
with Sodom; moreover, the name is known to have
referred to a place in that region as early as the
days of Galen (De Simpl. medic. Facult., 4.19) who
describes certain “salts of Sodom” from the moun-
tains surrounding the lake which are called Sodom.
(2) Zoar seems to have been represented in the
Middle Ages by a place which the Crusaders called
Segore, and Arab. writers Zoghar. Under the name


Zughar or Sughar the place is often referred to by
mediaeval Arabian geographers as situated 1° S. of
Jericho ‘“‘at the end of the Dead Sea” and as a
station on the route between the Gulf of Akabah and
Jericho, two days’ journey from Jericho. Ptolemy
(v.17.5) reckons Zoar as belonging to Arabia Petrea.
Eusebius (Onom, 261) describes the Dead Sea as
lying between Jericho and Zoar. Jos (Ant, I, xi, 4)
makes the Dead Sea extend 580 stadia “as far as
Zoar of Arabia” (Wars, IV, viii, 4). These references
would locate Zoar at the base of the mountains just
S.E. of the Dead Sea, and, as it was within easy
reach of Sodom, from which Lot fled, would fix the
Cities of the Plain in that locality. Jerome (Comm.
on Isa 15 5) says that Zoar was in the borders of
Moab.

On the other hand, it is maintained that the
“kikkar of the Jordan” lay N. of the Dead Sea for
the following reasons: (1) That is the region which
is visible from the heights of Bethel whence Abraham
and Lot looked down upon it (Gen 13 10), while
the south end of the lake is not visible. But it
may be answered that the phrase need not be
limited to the actual region in sight, but may have
included the whole known extension of the valley.
(2) Zoar was said to be in range of Moses’ vision
from the top of Pisgah (Dt 34 1-3), whereas the
south end of the Dead Sea is invisible from that
point, on account of intervening mountains. But
this description in Dt evidently is not intended to
be limited to the points which are actually visible,
but should be understood as describing the extreme
limits of the land some points of which are visible
in their near vicinity. Certainly the vision did
not comprehend all portions of Dan or Judah “unto
the hinder sea.”” The phrase from Jericho to Zoar
is like “from Dan to Beersheba.’’ The mountain
heights overlooking Zoar were certainly visible.
(3) In Gen 14 the four kings coming up from
Kadesh attacked the Amorites “that dwelt in
Hazezon-tamar”’ before reaching Sodom, and


-Hazezon-tamar is to be identified with Engedi.


On the other hand, it is possible that it is to be
identified with the Tamar of Ezk 47 19; 48 28,
and that this place lay 8.W. of the Dead Sea. Or,
if that explanation is not accepted, it is proper to
note that the course of this expedition led at first
a considerable distance S. of the Dead Sea through
Mt. Seir to El-paran, when “‘they smote all the
country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites.”
In accomplishing this they would naturally be
led along the highland to Hebron from which they
could easily descend to Engedi, whence they could
proceed without difficulty to the south end of the
Dead Sea. Besides, it is by no means certain
that there was not an easy passage along the
whole western shore of the Dead Sea at that time.
See Dean Sea. (4) It is argued that the region
at the south end of the Dead Sea could not be
described ‘‘asthe garden of the Lord,” etc. Neither,
for that matter, could the region around the north
end be so described in its present condition. But,
on the other hand, the region S. of the sea is
by no means as devoid of vegetation as is some-
times represented, while there are convincing argu-
ments to prove that formerly it was much more
extensive and fertile than now. To the fertility
of this area there is no more capable witness than
Professor Hull, though he is an ardent advocate
of the location of these cities at the north end of
the lake. This appears both in his original diary,
and in his more mature and condensed account
contained in his article on the Dead Sea in HDB,
where he writes, ‘When, in December, 1883, the
writer found himself standing on the edge of the
terrace overlooking the Ghér, he beheld at his feet
a wide plain stretching away northward toward


es


661 THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Citadel
Citizenship,


the margin of the Dead Sea, and to a large extent
green with vegetation and thickets of small trees.
To the right in an open space were seen several
large Bedawin camps, from which the shouts of
wild men, the barking of dogs, and the bellowing
of camels ascended. Numerous flocks of black
goats and white sheep were being tended by women
m long blue cloaks; and on the party of travelers
being observed, groups of merry children came
tripping up toward the path accompanied by a few
of the elders, and, ranging themselves in a line,
courteously returned salutations. Here the Arabs
remain enjoying the warmth of the plain till the
increasing heat of the summer’s sun calls them away
to their high pasture grounds on the table-land of
Edom and Moab. At a short distance farther
toward the shore of the lake is the village of Es-
Safich, inhabited by a tribe of felldhin called the
Ghawarneh, who by means of irrigation from the
Wady el-Hessi cultivate with success fields of wheat,
maize, dhurah, indigo and cotton, while they rear
herds of camels and flocks of sheep and goats. On
the produce of these fields the Arabs largely depend
for their supplies of food and raiment, which they
obtain by a kind of rude, often compulsory, barter.”


Lireraturse.—Authorities favoring the south end of
the Dead Sea: Dillmann, Genesis, 111f; Robinson, BRP»,
II, 187 ff; G. A. Smith, HGHL, 505ff; Baedeker-
Socin, Pal, III, 146; Buhl, GAP, 117, 271, 274; see also
esp. Samuel Wolcott, ‘‘Site of Sodom,” Bibliotheca
Sacra, XXV, 112-51. Favoring the north end: Sir
George Grove in various arts. in DB; Canon Tristram,
Land of Moab, 330 ff; Selah Merrill, Hast of the Jor-
dan, 232-39; W.M. Thomson, The Land and the Book.


Grorce FREDERICK WRIGHT
CITIES, STORE, stor. See Crry.


CITIMS, sit’imz. See Carrrm (1 Mace 8 5AV).


CITIZENSHIP, sit’i-zen-ship: All the words in
use connected with this subject are derived from
modus, polis, “‘city.”’ These words, with
the meanings which they have in the
Bible, are the nouns, Torys, polités,
“eitizen”; modrela, politeia, “citizen-
ship”; roAlrevya, politeuma, “commonwealth”; svp-
monirys, sumpolités, ‘“fellow-citizen”; and the verb,
modretw, politeid, “to behave as a citizen.” Each
will be considered more fully in its proper place.

(1) The word for citizen is sometimes used to indi-
cate little if anything more than the inhabitant of a

city or country. “The citizens of that
2. Civil country” (Lk 15 15); “His citizens
hated him” (Lk 19 14). Also the
quotation from the LXX, ‘They shall not teach
every man his fellow-citizen” (He 8 11; cf Jer 31
34). So also in the Apoc (2 Mace 4 50; 5 6; 9 19).

(2) Roman citizenship.—This is of especial interest
to the Bible student because of the apostle Paul’s
relation to it. It was one of his qualifications as
the apostle to the Gentiles. Luke shows him in
Acts as a Rom citizen, who, though a Jew and a
Christian, receives, for the most part, Justice and
courtesy from the Rom officials, and more than once
successfully claims its privileges. He himself
declares that he was a citizen of Tarsus (Acts 21
39). He was not only born in that city but had a
citizen’s rights in it. See Paut; Tarsus. ;

But this citizenship in Tarsus did not of itself
confer upon Paul the higher dignity of Rom citizen-
ship. Had it done so, Claudius Lysias would not
have ordered him to be scourged, as he did, after
having learned that he was a citizen of Tarsus
(Acts 21 39; cf 22 25). So, over and above this
‘Tarsian citizenship, was the Rom one, which availed
for him not in one city only, but throughout the Rom
world and secured for him everywhere certain great
immunities and rights. Precisely what all of these
were we are not certain, but we know that, by the


1. Philo-
logical


Valerian and Porcian laws, exemption from shame-
ful punishments, such as scourging with rods or
whips, and esp. crucifixion, was secured to every
Rom citizen; also the right of appeal to the em-
peror with certain limitations. This sanctity of
person had become almost a part of their religion,
so that any violation was esteemed a sacrilege.
Cicero’s oration against Verres indicates the almost
fanatical extreme to which this feeling had been
carried. Yet Paul had been thrice beaten with
rods, and five times received from the Jews forty
stripes save one (2 Cor 11 24.25). Perhaps it was
as at Philippi before he made known his citizenship
(Acts 16 22.23), or the Jews had the right to whip
those who came before their own tribunals. Rom
citizenship included also the right of appeal to the
emperor in all cases, after sentence had been passed,
and no needless impediment must be interposed
against a trial. Furthermore, the citizen had the
right to be sent to Rome for trial before the emperor
himself, when charged with capital offences (Acts 16
37; 2225-29: 25 11).

How then had Paul, a Jew, acquired this valued
dignity? He himself tells us. In contrast to the
parvenu citizenship of the chief captain, who seems
to have thought that Paul also must have purchased
it, though apparently too poor, Paul quietly says,
“But I was free born’? (AV; ‘a Roman born” RV,
Acts 22 28). Thus either Paul’s father or some other
ancestor had acquired the right and had transmitted
it to the son.

What more natural than that Paul should some-
times use this civic privilege to illustrate spiritual

truths? He doessoa number of times.
3. Meta- Before the Sanhedrin he says, in the
phorical and words of our Eng. VSS, “I have lived
Spiritual before Godin all good conscience”’ (Acts

23 1). But thistr does not bring out the
sense. Paul uses a noticeable word, politeud, ‘‘to live
asa citizen.” He adds, “to God” (r@ Gc@, 16 Thed).
That is to say, he had lived conscientiously as
God’s citizen, as a member of God’s commonwealth.
The day before, by appealing to his Rom citizen-
ship, he had saved himself from ignominious whip-
ping, and now what more natural than that he
should declare that he had been true to his citizen-
ship in a higher state? What was this higher
commonwealth in which he has enjoyed the rights
and performed the duties of a citizen? What but
the theocracy of his fathers, the ancient church,
of which the Sanhedrin was still the ostensible
representative, but which was really continued in
the kingdom of Christ without the national re-
strictions of the older one? Thus Paul does not
mean to say simply, “I have lived conscientiously
before God,” but ‘“I have lived as a citizen to God,
of the body of which He is the immediate Sover-
eign.” He had lived theocratically as a faithful
member of the Jewish church, from which his ene-
mies claimed he was an apostate. Thus Paul’s
conception was a kind of blending of two ideas or
feelings, one of which came from the old theocracy,
and the other from his Rom citizenship.

Later, writing from Rome itself to the Philippians,
who were proud of their own citizenship as members
of a colonia, a reproduction on asmall scale of the
parent, commonwealth, where he had once suc-
cessfully maintained his own Rom_ rights, Paul
forcibly brings out the idea that Christians are
citizens of a heavenly commonwealth, urging them
to live worthy of such honor (Phil 1 27 m).

A similar thought is brought out when he says,
“For our commonwealth [politeuma] is in heaven”
(Phil 8 20m). The state to which we belong is
heaven. Though absent in body from the heavenly
commonwealth, as was Paul from Rome when he
asserted his rights, believers still enjoy its civic


Citron
City


privileges and protections; sojourners upon earth,
citizens of heaven. The OT conception, as in Isa
60-62, would easily lend itself to this idea, which
appears in He 11 10.16; 12 22-24; 13 14; Gal
4 26, and possibly in Rev 21. See also Roms.


G. H. TREVER
CITRON, sit’run. See Apres.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


662


form a casing to the earthen ramparts, with which
the site was afterwards surrounded and which
served as a protection against the intrusion of ene-
mies. Later Sem intruders occupied the site, stone
houses were built, and high stone defence walls were
substituted for the earthen stone-cased ramparts.
These later walls were much higher and stronger


Fig. 1.—Teut SanDAHANNAR.


CITY, sit’i (WY, ‘ir, MIP, kirydh; wodts, pélis):
I. THe Canaanite City
1. Origin


He OObD
S
—
2
aR
io]
wa


. External Appearance
. General
wE City or THE JewisH Occupation
Tower
. High Place
. Broad Place
. Streets
5. General Characteristics
III. Store Cities
IV. Leviticau Cirius
LITERATURE


I. Canaanite City.—The development of the Can.
city has been traced by Macalister in his report on
the excavation at Gezer (PEFS, 1904,
108 ff). It originated on the slopes of
a bare rocky spur, in which the Neo-
lithic Troglodytes quarried their habitations out of
the solid rock, the stones therefrom being used to


cor


II.


|


Poe


1. Origin


than those of the Neolithic occupation and were the
walls seen by the Israelites when they viewed the
country of their promise.
“The people that dwell in the land are strong,
and the cities are fortified, and very great’? (Nu 13
28) was the report of the spicssent by
2. Extent Moses to spy out the land of Canaan,
to see “what cities they are that
they dwell in, whether in camps, or in strong-
holds” (Nu 18 19.20). The difficulties of the task
set before the advancing Israelites and their appre-
ciation of the strength of the cities, is here recorded,
and also in Dt 1 28: “The people are greater
and taller than we; the cities are great and forti-
fied up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the
sons of the Anakim there.” This asscssment of
greatness was based upon comparative ignorance of
such fortifications and the want of war experience
and the necessary implements of assault. It need
not, therefore, be supposed that the cities were


663.


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Citron
City


“great’’ except by comparison in the eyes of a Re | at the meeting-point of the meandering paths


dwelling and pastoral people. On the contrary,
most recent exploration has proved that they were
small (see Pére Vincent, Canaan, 27, n. 3, and
I, where comparative measurements of the
areas of ancient cities show that, in nine cities
compared, Tell Sandahannah [barely 6 acres] is
the smallest). Gezer measures approximately 22}
acres and Tell el-Hesy somewhat greater. By way
of illustration, it is interesting to note that the
Acropolis at Athens, roughly computed, measures
7% acres, while the Castle Rock at Edinburgh is
about 6 acres, or the same as the whole Seleucidan
city of Tell Sandahannah (see Fig. 1). The Acropo-
lis at Tell Zakariya measures about 2 acres or nearly
one-fourth of the area of the whole city (about 84
acres). It is unlikely that, Jebus (Jerusalem) itsclf
was an exception, although in Solomonic and later
times it extended to a far greater area.
Besides the walled cities there were ‘‘unwalled
[country] townsagreat many” (Dt 8 5), “villages,”
unfortified suburbs, lying near to and
3. Villages under the protection of the walled cities
and occupied by the surpluspopulation.
The almost incredible number of cities and their
villages mentioned in the OT, while proving the
clannishness of their occupants, proves,
4. Sites at the same time, their comparatively
small scale. Traces of similar popu-
lations that risc and fall are seen in China and
Japan today. As a little poem says of Karakura:


“Where were palaces and merchants and the blades
of warriors,

Now are only the cicadas and waving blades of
grass.”


“Cities that stood on their mounds” (Josh 11 13;
Jer 30 18) as at Lachish and Taanach are distin-
guished from those built on natural hills or spurs
of hills, such as Jebus, Gezer, Tell es Safi (Gath?),
Bethshemesh (see Vincent, Canaan, 26ff). The
Arab. name “Tell” is applied to all mounds of
ancient cities, whether situated on a natural emi-
nence or on a plain, and the word is common in the
geographical nomenclature of Pal. Sites were
chosen near a water supply, which was ever the
most essential qualification. For purposes of de-
fence, the nearest knoll or spur was selected.
Sometimes these knolls were of no great height
and their subsequent elevation is accounted for by
the gradual accumulation of debris from town
refuse and from frequent demolitions; restoration
being effected after a leveling up of the ruins of
the razed city (see Fig. 2: Tell el-Hesy, PEF,


Fig. 2.—Tell el-Hesy.


which shows a section of the Tell from which the
levels of the successive cities in distinct stratifi-
cation were recovered). Closely packed houses, in
narrow alleys, with low, rude mud, brick, or stone
and mud walls, with timber and mud roofs, burned
readily and were easily razed to the ground (Josh 8
1ff; 11 11).

It ae that, viewed from the outside, these
cities had the appearance of isolated forts, the sur-
rounding walls being strengthened at frequent in-
tervals, with towerg. The gates were approached
by narrow roads, which mounted the slopes of the


on the plain below (see Fig. 3). The walls of Tell ej-

Judeideh were strengthened by towers
5. External in the inside, and presented an un-
Appearance broken circuit of wall to the outside

view (see Fig. 4, PHF). Houses on
the wall (Josh 2 15; 2 Cor 11 33) may have been
seen from the outside; but it is unlikely that any


LS LS
Fia. 3.—Approaches to a City.


building within the walls was visible, except pos-
sibly the inner tower or stronghold. The whole
of the interior of the early Jerus (Jebus) was visible
from the hills to the E., but this peculiarity of
position is uncommon. Strong and high walls,
garrisoned by men-at-arms seen only through the
battlements, showed no weakness, and the gates,
with their narrow and steep approaches and pro-
jecting defence towers, looked uninviting traps (Fig.
5). The mystery of these unseen interiors could
therefore be easily conjured into an exaggeration
of strength. ,

The inhabitants of the villages (11133, bandth,

“daughters,” Nu 32 42m) held feudal occupation

and gave service to their lord of the
6. General city (ON, ’@m, “mother,” 2 8 20 19),

in defence of their own or in attacks
on their neighbor’s property. Such were the cities
of the truculent, marauding kings of Canaan,
whose broken territories lent themselves to the up-
keep of a condition, of the weakness of which, the
Israelites, in their solid advance, took ready ad-
vantage.

Ul. Jewish Occupation.—After the conquest, and
the abandonment of the pastoral life for that of
agriculture and general trade, the condition of the
cities varied but little, except that they were, from
time to time, enlarged and strengthened. Solo-
mon’s work at Jerus was a step forward, but there
is little evidence that, in the other cities which he
is credited with having put his hands to, there was
any embellishment. Megiddo and Gezer at least
show nothing worthy of the name. Greek influence
brought with it the first real improvements in city
building; and the later work of Herod raised cities
to a grandeur which was previously undreamt of
among the Jews. Within the walls, the main points
considered in the “layout” were, the Tower or
Stronghold, the High Placc, the Broad Place by the
Gate, and the Market-Place.

The Tower or Stronghold was an inner fort which
held a garrison and commander, and was pro-

visioned with “victuals, and oil and
1. The wine” (2 Ch 1111), to which the
Tower or defenders of the city when hard
Stronghold pressed betook themselves, as a last

resource. The men of the tower of
Shechem held out against Abimelech (Jgs 9 49) who
was afterward killed by a stone thrown by a wom-
an from the Tower of Thebes “within the city”
(Jgs 9 51.53). David took the stronghold of Zion,
“the same is the city of David” (2 8 6 7), whicb
name (Zion) was afterward applied to the whole
city. It is not unlikely that the king’s house was


City
Clasps


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


664


included in the stronghold. Macalister (PEFS,
1907, 192 ff) reports the discovery of a Canaanite
castle with enormously thick walls abutting against
the inside of the city wall. The strongholds at
Taanach and Tell el-Hesy are similarly placed; and
the Acropolis at Tell Zakartya lies close to, but inde-
pendent of, the city wall.


waet GATE


gate, the Broad Place had a defensive value, in
that it admitted of concentration against the forcing
of the gate. There does not seem to have been any
plan of either a Can. or early Jewish city, in which
this question of defence did not predominate. Open
areas Within the city were ‘‘waste places” (Isa 58
12) and were not an integral part of the plan.


Fig. 4.—Watts or TEL eJ-J upBIDER.


The High Place was an important feature in all
Can. cities and retained its importance long after
the conquest (1 S 9 12ff; 1 K 3 2;

2. The Am 7 9). It was a sanctuary, where
High Place sacrifices were offered and feasts were
held, and men did “eat before Jeh”’

(Dt 14 26). The priests, as was their custom,
received their portion of the flesh (1 S 2 12 ff).
The High Place discovered at Gezer (Bible Side-
lights, ch iii) is at a lower level than the city sur-
rounding it, and lies N. and 8. It is about 100 ft.
in length, and when complete consisted of a row of
ten rude undressed standing stones, of which eight
are still remaining, the largest being 10 ft. 6 in. high,
and the others varying to much smaller sizes. See
HicH Piace. ;
The Broad Place (Neh 8 1.3.16; Jer 5 1) seems


to have been, usually, immediately inside the city |


gate. It was not, in early Jewish
3. The cities, an extensive open area, but
Broad Place simply a widening of the street, and

was designated “broad” by comparison
with the neighboring alleys, dignified by the name
of street. It took the place of a general exchange.
Justice was dispensed (Ruth 4 2) and punishment
was administered. Jeremiah was put in ‘the stocks
that were in the upper gate of Benjamin” (Jer
20 2), proclamations were read, business was
transacted, and the news and gossip of the day were
exchanged. It was a place for all classes to congre-
gate (Job 29 7m; Prov 31 23), and was also
a market-place (2 K 71). In later times, the
market-place became more typically a market
square of the Gr agora plan, with an open area
surrounded by covered shelters. The present mar-
ket-place at Haifa resembles this. Probably it
was this type of market-place referred to in Mt
11 16; 20 3 and Lk 7 32; 11 43. The street in-
side the Damascus gate of Jerus today is, in many
ways, similar to the Broad Place, and retains many
of its ancient uses. Here, Bedouin and Fellahin
meet from the outlying districts to barter, to ar-
bitrate, to find debtors and to learn the news of
the day. Lying as it did immediately inside the


The streets serving these quarters were not laid
out on any fixed plan. They were, in fact, nar-
row, unpaved alleys, all seeming of
4. The equal importance, gathering themselves
Streets crookedly to the variouscenters. Hav-
ing fixed the positions of the City Gates,
the Stronghold and the High Place, the inhabitants
appear to have been allowed to situate themselves
the best way they could, without restriction of line
or frontage. Houses were of modest proportions
and were poorly built; planned, most often, in utter
disregard of the square, and presenting to the street
more or less dead walls, which were either topped
by parapets or covered with projecting wood and
mud roofs (see ARCHITECTURE, Fig. 1; Hovsr).


Fria. 5.—City Gate.


The streets, as in the present day in Pal, were
allocated to separate trades: “bakers’ street” (Jer
87 21), place ‘‘of the merchants’? (Neh 3 31.32
AV), “goldsmiths,” ctc. The Valley of the Cheese-
makers was a street in the Tyropceon Valley at
Jerus. ;

For a discussion of the subject of “cisterns,” see
the separate art. s.v.


665


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


City «
Clasps


The people pursued the industries consequent
upon their own self-establishment. Agriculture
claimed first place, and was their most

5. General highly esteemed occupation. The
Character- king’s lands were farmed by his sub-
istics jects for his own benefit, and consid-

, erable tracts of lands belonged to the
aristocracy. The most of the lands, however,
belonged to the cities and villages, and were allotted
among the free husbandmen. Various cereals were
raised, wheat and barley being most commonly
cultivated. The soil was tilled and the crops
reaped and threshed in much the same manner and
with much the same implements as are now used in
Syria. Cities lying in main trade routes developed
various industries more quickly than those whose
positions were out of touch with foreign traffic.
Crafts and trades, unknown to the early Jews, were
at first monopolized by foreigners who, as a matter
of course, were elbowed out as time progressed.
Cities on the seaboard of Phoenicia depended
chiefly on maritime trade. Money, in the form of
ingots and bars of precious metals, “weighed out”
(2 K 12 11), was current in preéxilic times, and
continued in use after foreign coinage had been
introduced. The first native coinage dates from
the Maccabean period (see Madden, Jewish
Coinage, ch iv). Slavery was freely trafficked in,
and a certain number of slaves were attached to the
households of the more wealthy. Although they
were the absolute property of their masters, they
enjoyed certain religious privileges not extended to
the “sojourners” or “‘strangers’’ who sought the pro-
tection of the cities, often in considerable numbers.

The king’s private property, from which he drew
full revenue, lay partly within the city, but to a
greater extent beyond it (1 S 8 15.16). In addi-
tion to his private property, he received tithes of
fields and flocks, “the tenth part of your seed.”
He also drew a tax in the shape of certain “‘king’s
mowings” (Am 7 1). Vassal kings paid tribute;
Mesha, king of Moab, rendered wool “unto the king
of Israel” (2 K 3 4).

See G. A. Smith, Jerusalem, I, chs v-x, for detailed
account of the conditions of Jewish city life. For
details of government, see E:per; Jupans; San-
HEDRIN.

IH. Store Cities.—These were selected by Solo-
mon and set aside for stores of victuals, chariots,
horsemen, ete (1 K 9 19). Jehoshaphat ‘‘built in
Judah castles and cities of store’ (2 Ch 17 12).
Twelve officers were appointed by Solomon to pro-
vision his household, each officer being responsible
for the supply in one month in the year (1 K 4 7).
There were also “storehouses in the fields, in the
cities, and in the villages” (1 Ch 27 25 AV).

IV. The Levitical Cities.—These were appor-
tioned 13 to the children of Aaron, 10 to Kohath,
13 to Gershen, 12 to Merari, 48 citiesin all (Josh 21
13 ff), 6 of which were cities of Refuge (Nu 36 6);
see Rerucz, Citres or. For further details see
ARCHITECTURE; House.


Literarure.—PEFS; Bliss and Dickie, Excavations
at Jerusalem; Macalister, Excavation_at Gezer; Bliss
and Macalister, Excavations in Pal; Sellin, Excavation
at Taanach; Schumacher, Fxzcavation at Tell Mutesellim;
Macalister, Bible Sidelights; G. A. Smith, Jerusalem;
Historical Geography of the Holy Land; Bliss, Mounds
of Many Cities; Vineent, Canaan.

Arca. C. Dick


CITY OF CONFUSION, kon-fi’zhun GAAP,
kiryath-toha): A name applied to Jerus (Isa 24 10
AV).


6


CITY OF DAVID. See Zion.


CITY OF DESTRUCTION, dé-struk’shun
(DIAN WY, ws ha-heres; LXX Bace&éx, Base-


dék): In his prediction of the future return of
Egypt to Jeh, Isaiah declares, ‘‘In that day there
shall be five cities in the land of Egypt that speak
the language of Canaan, and swear to Jeh of hosts;
one ghall be called The city of destruction” (Isa 19
18). The name ‘tr ha-heres, ‘the city of overthrow,”
is evidently a play upon ‘tr ha-heres, ‘city of the
sun,” a designation of Heliopolis (same meaning;
cf the name for this city, Beth-shemesh, Jer 43
13), in Egyptian, On (Gen 41 45), which last name
Ezekiel, by a similar play on sound, changes into
Aven. See On. Some codices, however, as the
RVm notes, read here ‘ir ha-heres, the actual name
of the city. JAMES ORR


CITY, GOLDEN. See Gotnen City.


CITY OF PALM TREES, pam’ tréz (B° Vana YY,
‘ir ha-t*mdrim). See Jericuo (Dt 34 3; Jgs 1 16;
3 13; 2 Ch 98 15).


CITY OF SALT. See Savt, City or.
CITY OF WATERS. See Ranpau.
CITY, ROYAL. See Raspau.


CITY, RULERS, rool’érz, OF: The EV render-
ing of the wodirdpya, politdérchai, of Thessalonica,
before whom Jason and the other Christians were
dragged by the mob (Acts 17 6.8). The term dis-
tinguishes the magistrates of a free Gr city from
the ordinary Rom officials. It primarily denotes
“rulers of the citizens,’ and hence was used only
of magistrates of free cities. The term seems to
have been confined largely to Macedonia, although
there have been found a few inscriptions else-
where in which it is used. The use of this term
well illustrates the accuracy of the author of the
Book of Acts, for while politarchai is not used by
classical authors, this form is attested by a number
of Macedonian inscriptions. Much work has been
done in this field in recent years and the results
throw light on the referencein Acts. Of theinscrip-
tions that have been found at least five belong to
Thessalonica (see art. by Professor Burton, in the
AJT of 1898, ‘‘The Politarchs’’).

“The rulers” of Philippi, before whom Pau! and
Silas were brought, is the EV rendering of dpxovres,
Grchontes, which is commonly used in the NT
(Acts 16 19). This istheordinary term for “rulers”
and is not the same as “rulers of the city.”

A. W. Fortune

CLAP: -An emphatic expression of joy, “They
clapped their hands [nakhah], and said, Long live
[AV “God save} the king’ (2 K 11 12); “Oh
clap your hands [é@ka*], all ye peoples” (Ps 47 1);
or exultation (séphak, Lam 2 15; maha’, Ezk 25
6; taka‘, Nah 3 19); or repudiation (séphak, Job
27 23; 34 37). ‘

Figurative: To denote Nature’s ‘‘sympathy”
with God’s people. ‘Let the floods clap [maha’]
their hands’ (Ps 98 8); ‘‘All the trees of the field
shall clap their hands’ (Isa 56 12; cf Jgs 5 20).


CLASPS, klasps (O22, keres): The word occurs
nine times in Ex 26, 36, and 39, which record the
specifications for the erection of the tabernacle
and their subsequent carrying out. In each of
these passages the AV renders “taches’—an early
Eng. word of French origin now embodied in our
“attachment.” 50 clasps or taches of gold were
ordered to be used in connecting together the two
sets of inner tapestry curtains (10 in number) of
the tabernacle (Ex 26 6), and 50 clasps of brass
(bronze) were similarly to be used in joining the
two sets of goats’ hair curtains (11 in number)


Clauda
Cleanse


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


666


which formed the outer covering (26 11). See
TaBERNACLE. As to the nature of the clasp itself,
it seems to have belonged to a double set of loops,
opposite to each other, to one of which in each set,
required to be of blue cord, a gold or brass button
or pin was attached, which, being inserted into the
loop opposite, kept the curtain in position (26 4-6).
A difficulty arises from the direction in Ex 26 33
that the veil which divided the ‘dwelling’ into
two parts—the holy place and the most holy—was
to be suspended “under the clasps.’”’ If the clasps
are supposed to be midway in the total length of
the tabernacle, this would make the two holy
places to be of equal size, contrary to the usual
assumption that the outer was twice the length of
the inner. The term ‘under’? must therefore be
used with some latitude, or the ordinary conception
of the arrangement of the curtains, or of the size of
the holy places will have to be revised (the dimen-
sions are not actually given in the description).


SHaw CaLpEcott
CLAUDA, klé’da.


See Caupa.

CLAUDIA, klé’di-a (KAavila, Klaudia): A
member of the Christian congregation at Rome,
‘who, with other members of that church, sends her
greetings, through Paul, to Timothy (2 Tim 4 21).
More than this concerning her cannot be said with
certainty. The Apostolical Constitutions (VII, 21)
name her as the mother of Linus, mentioned sub-
sequently by Irenaeus and Eusebius as bishop of
Rome. An ingenious theory has been proposed
upon the basis of the mention of Claudia an
Pudens as husband and wife in an epigram of Mar-
tial, that they are identical with the persons of the
same name here mentioned. A passage in the Agric-
ola of Tacitus and an inscription found in Chi-
chester, England, have been used in favor of the
further statement that this Claudia was a daughter
of a British king, Cogidubnus. See argument by
Alford in the Prolegomena to 2 Tim in his Gr Testa-
ment. Itis an example of how a very few data may
be used to construct a plausible theory. If it be
true, the contrast between their two friends, the
apostle Paul, on the one hand, and the licentious
poet, Martial, on the other, is certainly unusual.
Ifin2 Tim 4 21, Pudens and Claudia be husband
and wife, it is difficult to explain how Linus occurs
between them. See argument against this in Light-
foot, The Apostolic Fathers. H. E, Jacogs


CLAUDIUS, klé’di-us (KaAatéi0s, Klavidios):
Fourth Rom emperor. He reigned for over 13
years (41-54 AD), having succeeded Caius (Calig-
ula) who had seriously altered the conciliatory
policy of his predecessors regarding the Jews and,
considering himself a real and corporeal god, had
deeply offended the Jews by ordering a statue of
himself to be placed in the temple of Jerus, as
Antiochus Epiphanes had done with the statue of
Zeus in the days of the Maccabees (2 Macc 6 2).
Claudius reverted to the policy of Augustus and
Tiberius and marked the opening year of his reign
by issuing edictsin favor of the Jews (Ant, XIX, 5),
who were permitted in all parts of the empire to
observe their laws and customs in a free and peace-
able manner, special consideration being given to
the Jews of Alexandria who were to enjoy without
molestation all their ancient rights and privileges.
The Jews of Rome, however, who had become very
numerous, were not allowed to hold assemblages
there (Dio LX, vi, 6), an enactment in full corre-
spondence with the general policy of Augustus
regarding Judaism in the West. The edicts men-
tioned were largely due to the irtimacy of Claudius
with Herod Agrippa, grandson of Herod the Great,
who had been living in Rome and had been in some


measure instrumental in securing the succession
for Claudius. As a reward for this service, the
Holy Land had a king once more. Judaea was
added to the tetrarchies of Philip and Antipas;
and Herod Agrippa J was made ruler over the wide
territory which had been governed by his grand-
father. The Jews’ own troubles during the reign
of Caligula had given “rest”? (ARV “peace”) to the
churches ‘‘throughout all Judaea and Galilee and
Samaria” (Acts 9 31). But after the settlement
of these troubles, ‘Herod the king put forth his
hands to afflict certain of the church” (Acts 12 1).
He slew one apostle and ‘‘when he saw thatit pleased
the Jews, he proceeded to seize’ another (Acts 12
3). His miserable death is recorded in Acts 12
20-23, and in Ant, XIX, 8. This event which
took place in the year 44 AD is held to have been
coincident with one of the visits of Paul to Jerus.
It has proved one of the chronological pivots of the
apostolic history.

Whatever concessions to the Jews Claudius may
have been induced out of friendship for Herod
Agrippa to make at the beginning of his reign,
Suetonius records (Claud. ch 25) “Judaeos impul-
sore Chresto assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit,”’
an event assigned by some to the year 50 AD,
though others suppose it to have taken place some-
what later. Among the Jews thus banished from
Rome were Aquila and Priscilla with whom Paul
became associated at Corinth (Acts 18 2). With
the reign of Claudius is also associated the famine
which was foretold by Agabus (Acts 11 28).
Classical writers also report that the reign of
Claudius was, from bad harvest or other causes, a
period of general distress and scarcity over the whole
world (Dio LX, 11; Suet. Claud. xviii; Tac. Ann. xi.
4; xiii.48; see Mommsen, Provinces of the Rom
Empire, chix; and Conybeare and Howson, Life and
Epistles of St. Paul, I). J. Hurcaison


CLAUDIUS LYSIAS, klé’di-us lis’i-ags (KAav8v0s
Avolas, Klaidios Lystas): A chief captain who in-
tervened when the Jews sought to do violence to
Paul at Jerus (Acts 21 31; 24 22). Lysias, who
was probably a Greek by birth (cf 21 37), and who
had probably assumed the Rom forename Claudius
(23 26) when he purchased the citizenship (22 28),
was a inilitary tribune or chiliarch (ie. leader of
1,000 men) in command of the garrison stationed in
the castle overlooking the temple at Jerus. Upon
learning of the riot instigated by the Asiatic Jews, he
hastened down with his soldiers, and succeeded in
rescuing Paul from the hands of the mob. As Paul
was the apparent malefactor, Lysias bound him with
two chains, and demanded to know who he was, and
what wasthe cause of thedisturbance. Failing amid
the general tumult to get any satisfactory reply, he
conducted-Paul to the castle, and there questioned
him as to whether he was the “Egyptian,” an im-
postor that had lately been defeated by Felix (Jos,
BJ, Il, xiii, 5; Ant, XX, viii, 6). Upon receiving
the answer of Paul that he was a ‘Jew of Tarsus,” he
gave him permission to address the people from the
stairs which connected the castle andthetemple. As
the speech of Paul had no pacifying effect, Lysias
purposed examining him by scourging; but on
learning that his prisoner was a Rom citizen, he
desisted from the attempt and released him from
his bonds. The meeting of the Sanhedrin which
Lysias then summoned also ended in an uproar,
and having rescued Paul with difficulty he con-
ducted him back to the castle. The news of the
plot against the life of one whom he now knew to be
a Rom citizen decided for Lysias that he could not
hope to cope alone with so grave a situation. He
therefore dispatched Paul under the protection of
a bodyguard to Felix at Caesarea, along with a


667


THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA


Clauda
Cleanse


letter explaining the circumstances (23 26-30. The
genuineness of this letter has been questioned by
some, but without sufficient reason.) In this letter
he took care to safeguard his own conduct, and
to shield his hastiness in binding Paul. There is
evidence (cf Acts 24 22) that Lysias was also sum-
moned to Caesarea at a later date to give his tes-
timony, but no mention is made of his arrival there.
It is probable, however, that he was among the chief
captains who attended the trial of Paul before King
Agrippa and Festus (cf 25 22). For the reference to
him in the speech of Tertullus (see 24 7 RVm),
see TERTULLUS. C Kerr


CLAW, klé (MO4B, parsah, lit. “hoof’”’): One of
the marks of a “clean” animal is stated thus:
“Every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth
the cleft into two claws, ye shall eat’ (Dt 14 6 AV;
RV “hath the hoof cloven in two”). Sce Curw;
Cup. AV uses the word “claws” where RV sup-
plies “hoofs” in Zec 11 16, ‘‘and will tear their hoofs
in pieces,” as the sheep are being overdriven. In
the only other passage containing the word (Dnl
4 33) there is no Heb equivalent in the original—
“this nails like birds’ [claws].”’


CLAY, kla (WG, homer, SOT, hdsaph, UD, tit,
opran melet, "22, ‘abhi, NAVA, matabheh, DOI,
‘abhitt; mndés, példés, “wet clay,” “mud”): True
clay, which is a highly aluminous soil, is found in
certain localities in Pal, and is used in making pot-
tery. The Heb and Gr words, as well as the Eng.
“clay,” are, however, used loosely for any sticky
mud. In making mud bricks, true clay is not always
used, but ordinary soil is worked up with water and
mixed with straw, molded and left to dry in the
sun. Homer (cf hémar, “slime” or “bitumen’”) is
rendered both “clay” and “mortar.” TJ 7i is rendered
“clay” or “mire.” In Isa 41 25 we have: “He
shall come upon rulers as upon mortar [hdmer],
and as the potter treadeth clay” (fit), .In Nah
3 14, ‘‘Go into the clay [t#t], and tread the mortar
[homer]; make strong the brickkiln” (i.e. make the
walls ready to withstand a siege). Hdsaph is the
clay of the image in Nebuchadnezzar’s dream
(Dnl 2 33 ff). Melet occurs only in Jer 43 9,
where we find: AV, “Take great stones .... and
hide them in the clay in the brickkiln”; RV, “hide
them in mortar in the brickwork”; RVm, “lay
them with mortar in the pavement.” In Hab 2 6,
‘abhtit (found only here) is rendered in AV “thick
clay,” as if from ‘dbhi and tit, but RV has “‘pledges,”
referring the word to r. ‘abhat, “to give a pledge.”
In 1 K 7 46, ma‘dbheh ha-’ddhamah (cf 2 Ch 4 17,
‘abhi ha-’ddhamah) is the compact or clayey soil
in the plain of Jordan between Succoth and Zare-
than, in which Hiram cast the vessels of brass for
Solomon’s temple. In Jn 9 6.11.14, Thayer gives
“made mud of the spittle’; in Rom 9 21, “wet
clay.” Aurrep Exy Day


CLEAN, klén (Anglo-Saxon clene, ‘‘clear,”
“pure”): Rendering four Heb roots: 73, bar, etc,
“purify,” “select,” “make shining”; 41, zakh, etc,
“bright,” “clean,” “pure”; "2, nak, “free from,”
“exempt; “WI, taher, “clean,” “pure,” “empty,”
“bright” (?) the principal root, rendered ‘‘clean’’ 80
times (AV); occurring in all its forms in_various
renderings about 200 times; also one Gr root,
xabapés, katharés, etc, akin to castus, “chaste,” “free
from admixture or adhesion of anything that soils,
adulterates, corrupts’ (Thayer’s Lexicon). The
physical, ritual, ethical, spiritual, figurative uses
continually overlap, esp. the last four. ‘

The physical useisinfrequent: ‘(Wash . . . » with
snow water, and make my hands never so elean


(zakhakh, Job 9 30; figurative also); “clean prov-
ender” (hdmic, RV “savory”; RVm “salted”);
“Cleanse .... Inside of the cup and
1. Physical of the platter, that the outside thereof
may become clean also” (katharos, Mt
23 26); ‘arrayed in fine linen, clean [katharén] and
white” (Rev 19 8; ARV “bright and pure’).

The principal use was the ceremonial; applied
to persons, places or things, ‘‘undefiled,” “not caus-
ing defilement,” or ‘from which de-
filement has just been removed’’;
tahér, almost exclusively ceremonial,
being the chief Heb root. Katharos
(NT), or derivatives, has this use clearly in Mk 1
44; Lk 5 14: “Offer for thy cleansing the things
which Moses,” etc; He 9 13.22.23: “the cleanness
of the flesh,” etc. ‘‘Clean” is applied to animals
and birds: “of every clean beast” (Gen 7 2); “of all
clean birds” (Dt 14 11); (for list of unclean creatures
see Lev 1 4-20); to places: ‘‘Carry forth... .
unto a clean place” (4 12); to buildings: “Make |
atonement for the house; and it shall be clean”
(14 53); to persons: ‘‘A clean person shall take
hyssop” (Nu 19 18); to clothing: “garment... . |
washed the second time, and shall be clean’’ (Lev
18 58); and to objects of all sorts, free or freed
from defilement.

The ethical or spiritual meaning, either directly
or figuratively, is found in the OT chiefly in Job,

Pss, the Prophets, whose interest is
3. Ethical ethico-religious, rather than ritual, but
or Spiritual the predominant uses are found in the

NT: ‘Cleanse yourselves [barar], ye
that bear the vessels of Jeh”’ (Isa 52 11); ‘“How can
he be clean [z@khdh] that is born of a woman?”
(Job 25 4) (principally moral, perhaps with allu-
sion to the ceremonial defilement of childbirth);
“The fear of Jeh is clean” (Ps 19 9), that is, the
religion of Jeh is morally undefiled, in contrast to
heathen religions; ‘‘He that hath clean [naki]
hands, and a pure heart” (Ps 24 4); ‘Purify me
with hyssop, and I shall be clean” (tahér, Ps 51 7);
“Therefore said he, Ye are not all clean” (katharos,
Jn 13 11). Here, as in Ps 51 7 and many others,
the ritual furnishes a figure for the spiritual, illus-
trating the Divine purpose in the ritual, to impress,
prefigure and prepare for the spiritual. A some-
what similar figurative moral use is found in Acts
18 6: ‘Your blood be upon your own heads; I am
clean”’ (katharos, ‘guiltless,’ “unstained”’). See also
Unciean; PuriricaTion; DeriLeEMENnt.

Clean.—Adverb (in one case adj.): “utterly,”
“wholly”; usually rendering an intensive use of
the Heb vb. as Joel 1 7: ‘‘He hath made it clean
bare’ (lit. ‘stripping he will strip’); Zec 11 17:
“Arm .... cleandriedup”;Isa 24 19AV: “Earth
is clean dissolved.’’ Twice it renders a principal
vb.: Josh 3 17: ‘Passed clean over the Jordan” (lit.
“finished with regard to J.”); Lev 23 22 AV: “Shall
not make a clean riddance’ (lit. “‘shall not finish the
corners”; ARV “shalt not wholly reap’). Once it
renders a noun: Ps 77 8: “Is his lovingkindness
clean gone for ever?” (‘“‘end,” he-’a@phés, ‘‘has his
lovingkindness cometo an end?’’); and once anadvb.
“clean [8vrws, éntds, “actually,’”’ “really’’] escaped’
(2 Pet 2 18); but ARV, following the reading
“oligds,”’ ‘‘a little,’ “scarcely,”’ renders ‘just es-
caping.” Pmiipe WeENDELL CRANNELL


CLEANSE, klenz: ‘Make clean,” “purify” being
a frequent rendering of the original. It is found
often (ARV) instead of “purge,” “purify” (AV),
renders nearly the same roots, and has the same
overlapping phases, as ‘“‘clean.”
1. Physical


Physical cleansing, often figuratively
away [tamrtk] evil’ (Prov 20 30); ‘‘A hot wind


2. Cere-
monial


used: ‘Stripes that wound cleanse


Cleanse


Closet THE INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BIBLE ENCYCLOPAEDIA 668
.... Bot to winnow, nor to cleanse” (bdrar, Jer | forgiveness. In Eph 6 26, it is hard to determine
411); “Straightway his leprosy was cleansed’ | whether pardon or God-given holiness is predomi-


(katharizé, Mt 8 3).
In the ceremonial sense: (1) With a very strong
religious aspect: to purify from sin by making
atonement (hdata’); e.g. the altar, by
2. Cere- the sin offering (ix 29 36); the lep-
monial rous house (Lev 14 48-53); the people,
by the offering of the Day of Atone-
ment (Lev 16 30); the sanctuary, by the blood of
the sin offering (Ezk 45 18 ff). (2) To expiate
(kaphar, “cover,” ‘‘hide’’); sin (Gin this case blood-
guiltiness): ‘‘The land cannot be cleansed of the
blood” (AV Nu 35 33; ARV “no expiation can be
made for the land’). (8) To remove ceremonial
defilement, the principal use, for which the chief
root is tahér: ‘‘Take the Levites . . . . and cleanse
them’ (Nu 8 6); ‘‘and she shall be cleansed [after
childbirth] from the fountain of her blood” (Lev
12 7); ‘‘Cleanse it, and hallow it [the altar] from
the uncleannesses of the children of Israel’ (16 19),
etc. This use is infrequent in the NT, except
figuratively. Clear instances are Mk 1 44: ‘‘Offer
for thy cleansing [katharismés] . . .. for a testi-
mony unto them’ (also Lk 6 14); He 9 22.23:
“necessary therefore that the copies of the things
in the heavens should be cleansed with these.”
Physical, ritual, and figurative uses are combined
in Mt 23 25: ‘Ye cleanse the outside of the cup
and of the platter.” Acts 10 15: ‘What God
hath cleansed, make not thou common” uses the
figure of the ritual to declare the complete aboli-
tion of ceremonial defilement and hence of cere-
monial cleansing. For the elaborate system of
ceremonial cleansing see esp. Lev 12-17, also
arts. UNcLtEan; PunriricaTion. Its principal
agencies were water, alone, as in minor or indirect
defilements, like those produced by contact with
the unclean (Lev 15 5-18, etc); or combined with
a sin offering and burnt offering, as with a woman
after childbirth (12 6-8); fire, as with gentile
booty (Nu 31 23; by water, when it would not
endure the fire); the ashes of a red heifer without
spot, mingled with running water, for those defiled
by contact with the dead (Nu 19 2ff). For the
complex ceremonial in cases of leprosy, combining
water, cedar, hyssop, crimson thread, the blood and
flight of birds, the trespass offering, sin offering,
burnt offering, see Lev 14. Blood, the vehicle
and emblem of life, plays a large part in the major
cleansings, in which propitiation for sin, as well as
the removal of ceremonial defilement, is promi-
nent, as of the temple, altar, ete: ‘“‘According to the
law, I may almost say, all things are cleansed
with blood’? (He 9 22).
In the ethical and spiritual sense, using the sym-
bolism chiefly of 2. This embodies two phases:
(1) the actual removal of sin by the


8. Ethical person’s own activity, ‘“Wherewith
and shall a young man cleanse [zdkhah]
Spiritual his way?” (Ps 119 9); “Cleanse your


hands, ye sinners” (Jas 4 8); ‘Let us
cleanse ourselves from all defilement’’ (2 Cor 7 1);
(2) God’s removal of the guilt and power of sin, as
by discipline or punishment: ‘He cleanseth it”
(Jn 16 2, AV “purgeth’’); “I have cleansed thee”
(Ezk 24 13); or in forgiveness, justification, sancti-
fication. In these latter cases the exculpatory
idea is sometimes the prominent, although the
other is not absent: ‘I will cleanse [{@hér] them from
all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against
me; and 1 will pardon all their iniquities”’ (Jer 33
8); ‘Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and
cleanse [@hér, ‘‘declare me clean’’] me from my sin”
(Ps 61 2). “Cleanse [nakkéh; ARV “clear’’] thou
me from hidden faults” (Ps 19 12), while formally
to be understood “hold innocent,” really connotes


nant: ‘That he might sanctify it [the church], hav-
ing cleansed it by the washing of water with the
word.” In 1 Jn 1 7, the sanctificatory meaning
seems almost wholly to absorb the other: ‘The
blood of Jesus his Son cleanseth us [“is purifying,
sanctifying”’] from all sin’; but in ver 9 it is again
hard to determine the predominance: ‘‘He is faith-
ful and righteous to forgive us our sin, and to cleanse
us from all unrighteousness.’”’ The uncertainty lies
in that the second clause may not, as in our speech,
add a distinct idea, but may be Heb synonymous
parallelism. Perhaps it is not wise to seek too curi-
ously to disentangle the two ideas, since they can-
not be separated. God never “clears” where he
has not begun to ‘‘cleanse,” and never ‘‘cleanses”’
by the Spirit without ‘clearing’ through the blood.
Prinie WENDELL CRANNELL

CLEAR, klér, CLEARNESS, klér’nes (13, bar;
SiaPAéro, diablépd): Equivalent of several Heb and
Gr words for bright, unclouded, shining without ob-
struction, distinct, brilliant; ‘clearer than the noon-
day” (Job 11 17): “clear as the sun” (Cant 6 10);
“clear shining after rain’ (2 S 23 4); “clear heat in
sunshine” (Isa 18 4); “clear as crystal” (Rev 21
11). Advb. “clearly,” for distinctly (Mt 75; Mk 8
25; Rom 1 20). Noun, ‘‘clearness,” for brilliancy,
in Ex 24 10, ‘‘as the very heaven for clearness.”

From this physical, it is applied, in a moral sense,
to character, as spotless and free from guilt, or
charge, or obligation, ‘from oath’? (Gen 24 8);
‘from transgression” (Ps 19 13). Hence the vb.
“to clear’? means juridically to declare or prove
innocent, to vindicate (Gen 44 16; Ex 34 7; Nu
14 18; cf Adgnos, 2 Cor 7 11, RV “pure”). ‘Be
clear when thou judgest” (Ps 61 4) refers to the
proof and vindication of the righteousness of God.

H. E. Jacozns

CLEAVE, klév: Is used in the Bible in two differ-
ent senses:

(1) pa, baka’, “to split,” or “to rend.” We are
told that Ahraham ‘clave the wood for the burnt-
offering’ (Gen 22 3), and that “they clave the wood
of the cart” (1 8 6 14). The Psalmist speaks of
Jeh cleaving fountain and flood (74 15), and the
plowman cleaving the earth (141 7). For other ex-
aula see Jgs 15 19; Eccl 10 9; Ps 78 15; Hab


(2) Pat, dabhak; KodAdw, kolldd, “to adhere
to,” or “to join one’s self to.’ This meaning is the
reverse of the preceding. The Psalmist speaks of
his tongue cleaving to the roof of his mouth (137 6).
We are told that a man should cleave unto his
wife (Gen 2 24; Mt 19 5). It is said that Ruth
clave unto her mother-in-law (Ruth 1°14), and that
certain men clave unto Paul (Acts 17 34; cf 4 23;
11 23 m).

“Cleave” is also used in this sense to describe
one’s adherence to principles. Paul admonished the
Romans to cleave to that which is good (Rom 12
9). A. W. Forruns


CLEFT, kleft, CLIFF, klif, CLIFT, klift: The
first of these words, from cleave, ‘‘to split,” is a
crevice or narrow opening, as “‘of the ragged rocks’
(Isa 2 21); “under the clefts of the rocks” (Isa
57 5). “Clift” is an obsolete form of cleft, found
in AV Ex 83 22; Isa 57 5, butnotinRV. “Cliff,”
an abrupt, precipitous, towering rock, is not in RV, .
pata found in AV 2 Ch 20 16, RV ‘‘ascent,” Job


CLEMENCY, klem’en-si (émuel(keva, epieikeia, “fair-
ness,” ‘‘sweet reasonableness,” Acts 24 4): The Gr
word is rendered elsewhere “gentleness,” 2 Cor 10 1;
Tit 3 2, “meekness’; Jas 3 17; 1 Pet 2 18.


Hat


eee)


Smee eee re asec


Saeeee
